==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Sustainability versus resilience in supply chain network design
Author: Jakob Kaufmann Jespersen
Supervisor: Martin Philip Kidd
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Supply Chain Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Resilience in Supply Chain Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Sustainability in Supply Chain Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
The purpose of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Robustness or resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Resilience and Sustainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Modeling approach
13
3.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
Decision variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3
Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.4
Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.5
Variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.6
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Clustering - the classic K-means algorithm & the modiﬁed K-means algorithm
. .
17
3.5
Haversine distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
The ﬁnal algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6.1
Drill down analysis of the ﬁnal algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Computational experiments
22
4.1
Emissions Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Cost per freight tonne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Parameter tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.1
Increment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1
==PAGE:3==
4.3.2
Replications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.3
Number of starting clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.4
Multiplier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.5
Algorithm timelimit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results
27
5.1
Mixed Integer Program
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Sensitivity analysis of the Mixed Integer Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Randomness in the modiﬁes K-means algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Performance of the ﬁnal algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6
Sustainability versus resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Further research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
References
37
8
Appendix
39
8.1
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.2
Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
This section will introduce concepts, that are important to understand and why these concepts are
important for the ongoing research and how they relate to the real life practitioners. This section
will feature introductions to Supply Chain Management, resilience in Supply Chain Management,
sustainability in Supply Chain Management and what this theses aim to examine using these
concepts and clearly clarify the purpose of this thesis.
1.1
Supply Chain Management
According to [15] supply chain management became popular in the 1980s, because the companies
saw the beneﬁt of collaborating their supply chains in order to reduce the overall costs. The paper
identify 7 guidelines to what supply chain management are:
1. Link supply chain strategy to overall business strategy to align supply chain initiatives to
business objectives.
2. Identify supply chain goals and develop plans to assure every process is individually capable
of meeting supply chain goals.
3. Develop systems to listen to signals of market demand and plan accordingly, including changes
in ordering patterns and changes in demand due to customer promotions.
4. Manage the sources of supply by developing partnerships with suppliers to reduce the costs
of materials and receive materials as needed.
5. Develop customized logistics networks tailored to each customer segment.
6. Develop a supply chain information systems strategy that can support decision making at
all levels of the supply chain and oﬀers a clear view of the ﬂow of products.
7. Adopt cross-functional and cross-business performance measures that link every aspect of
the supply chain and include both service and ﬁnancial measures.
All though the paper is from 1997, using the seven statements describes supply chain manage-
ment well. The paper emphasises, that the supply chain management should be seen as one overall
goal, that contains all seven listings. If the paper were published today, there possible would be
some mentions about future trends as described by [6]. A common thing about the future trends is
digitization, which is not mentioned by the seven statements, but probably would be if the paper
would be published today.
Supply chain management is important for companies, because it can reduce the operating
costs, which would make the products of a company more of proﬁtable. Else the company could
decrease the sell price while maintaining the proﬁt to gain an advantage against its competitors.
The customer service is boosted, if the supply chain is optimized. The probability of running out
of stock is reduced with the right inventory management, which lead to better customer service
and reduction of the operating cost. The responsiveness of the supply chain is also improved with
a good conﬁguration of the supply chain.
1.2
Resilience in Supply Chain Management
The authors in [3] describe resilience in supply chain management as:
3
==PAGE:5==
”Supply chain resilience is deﬁned as the ability of a system to return to its original
state,within an acceptable period of time, after being disturbed.”
In [18] the concept of resilience in supply chain management became of interest in the mid to
late 1990s and early 2000s. And from there the number of published articles about resilience in
supply chains increase. In Figure 1 an overview of published articles about resilience in supply
chain can be seen.
Figure 1: Overview of published article about resilience in supply chain management
From this it clear to see the increasing interest of resilience in supply chain management in
the literature. Resilience in supply chain is costly. In the paper, they portray it as a trade oﬀ
between capabilities and vulnerabilities. In Figure 2 the zone of balanced resilience is displayed as
capabilities versus vulnerabilities.
Figure 2: Capabilities and vulnerabilities
From the plot the tradeoﬀbetween erosion of proﬁts and the exposure to risk can be seen. This
means, that a company should balance the exposure to risk and the proﬁt in order to be in the
zone of balanced resilience.
The resilience should be a priority for a company, because in case of a disruption, the company
should rely on resilience in order to fulﬁll the demand of the customers. This ability, the company
have to pay for, and this decision lies within the company, where the trade oﬀshould lie should be
decided by the company analysing the need for resilience.
4
==PAGE:6==
1.3
Sustainability in Supply Chain Management
The sustainability in supply chain can be described by three dimensions. Environmental perfor-
mances (planet), social performances (people) and economic performances (proﬁt). In Figure 3
the three dimensions are displayed.
Figure 3: Overview over the three dimensions of a sustainable supply chain
In the environmental dimension the emissions of the transport mode and warehouses could be
considered. The social performance of the supply chain could be considered as values and ethics
in the company or the customer service politic within the company. The economic performance of
the supply chain could be seen as the operating costs.
According to [22] the number of published articles have increased throughout the years from
1994 to 2007. In Figure 4 an overview of published articles from 1994 to 2007 can be seen.
Figure 4: Overview over the number of published articles within sustainability in supply chains
This suggest, that sustainability were a focus before resilience in supply chains and there is
an increasing focus for sustainability in supply chains. After 2007 the interest of sustainability in
supply chains must be further increased as a result of the awareness of global warming and climate
change etc.. As the awareness of the environmental issue is increasing, more and more companies
have initiated a green proﬁle in order to take responsibility towards the global environmental crisis.
5
==PAGE:7==
1.4
The purpose of this thesis
The purpose of this thesis is to examine the relationship the cost, resilience in the supply chain
and sustainability in the supply chain. An additional goal is to determine the right plant locations
for the customers given a certain resilience and sustainability level given a bunch of scenarios.
In this thesis operations research will be used to solve a model to optimality.
Operations
research is a widely known tool to optimize supply chains in order to minimize operation cost
or maximize proﬁt. Within the operations research plate many diﬀerent tools exists. In [1] Ford
manages to reduce overtime wages by 30% and premium freight charges by 40% by using operations
research in a supply chain management chase. This example is not uncommon using operations
research in supply chain management.
This thesis will be within supply chain management with a focus on a network design problem.
The data consists of a set of customers, that need to be allocated to the most optimal plant
according to their distance and weight given a certain resilience and emissions level. The resilience
level is created by allowing the plants to have unmet demand in their capacities, and the emissions
levels are created within a certain bound special to each model examined. Given the deﬁnition of
sustainability, this thesis only cover two of the three dimensions as portrayed in Figure 5, as this
thesis do not cover the social impacts of the problem.
Figure 5: Overview the sustainability dimensions covered by this thesis
Given the increased research interest in both sustainability and resilience in supply chain man-
agement, this thesis is very relevant. The increased focus on sustainability outside the research is
also a big plus for the relevancy of this thesis.
6
==PAGE:8==
2
Literature review
In this section the focus will be on the state-of-the-art solutions or descriptions available in the
literature and how they relate to this thesis. Several papers have been examined and analysed in
order to determine what is the current focus of researchers regarding resilience and sustainability
in network designs.
2.1
Robustness or resilience
Whereas resilience is more used word regarding the operations managements side of network de-
sign, robustness is more used when describing operations research. In [3] the author states, that
the deﬁnitions sometimes overlap, but comes up with two speciﬁc deﬁnitions of resilience versus
robustness.
• ”Supply chain resilience is deﬁned as the ability of a system to return to its original state,
within an acceptable period of time, after being disturbed.”
• ”Supply chain robustness is deﬁned as the ability of the supply chain to maintain its function
despite internal or external disruptions”
This subsection will go through papers describing both resilience and robustness deﬁnitions.
The authors in [16] examine robustness and complexity in logistical network designs. They
deﬁne robustness as the ratio between the amount of demand fulﬁlled in the base scenario without
any disruptions and the demand fulﬁlled, when a disruption happen in the network design. The
complexity is deﬁned as the ratio between the actual edges in the network versus the minimum
edges in order to connect all activity of the network. A Mixed Integer Linear Program is used to
solve the problem with a constraint on the minimum robustness of the model. The results state,
that if you increase the minimum robustness, the complexity of the network design increase as
well and the total cost increase as well. So the practitioners would have to pay extra to obtain a
more robust network, but also a more complex and less eﬃcient network. The examination of this
tradeoﬀis the backbone of the paper. This thesis looks at resilience a bit diﬀerent, but the idea
is still the same. There are scenarios, where a disruptions happens. And the need to cope with a
disruption in the network is basically the same for both this thesis and the paper.
In [14] they go through literature of Supply Chain Network design problems with a critical
review in order to identify shortcomings in the optimization models. They identify 7 shortcomings
as:
• SCN risk analysis
• SCN hazards modeling
• Scenario development and sampling
• Value-based SCN design models
• Modeling for robustness
• Modeling resilience and responsiveness
• Solution methods
As the paper states more work needs to be done in each of these subjects, but this thesis touch
across SCN hazards modeling, scenario development and sampling and modeling for robustness.
7
==PAGE:9==
This thesis does not focus of which disruption there occurs in the Supply Chain, but the disruption
could be denoted as a hazard disruption. This thesis creates future scenarios, where each of the
plants could be disrupted and the Supply Chain must handle them in order for the model to be
feasible. This accounts for the robustness as described by the authors. This means that this thesis
touch upon subjects, that the paper identify as shortcomings in the Supply Chain Network design
problems literature.
Another way to look at robustness in Supply Chain Network problem is by [8]. They create
scenarios, and their deﬁnition of robustness is, that all or all most all scenarios must be valid in
the solution of the model. If there exists a solution, that upholds all or all most all the scenarios,
the solution is called robust. This is called robust optimization. The paper concludes, that the
more robust a solution is, the more you have to pay. This thesis look at all the scenarios must be
valid and do not consider a constraint, that say all most all scenarios must be valid.
The paper [13] presents a network design model for the supply of blood disasters during and
after disaster in Tehran, Iran.
The paper introduces two deﬁnitions as model robustness and
solution robustness.
The model robustness is deﬁned as almost feasible for all scenarios and
solution robustness is close to optimal for all scenarios. This means, that solution robustness can
be denoted as the cost of the supply chain cost and model robustness is denoted as the under
fulﬁllment of blood. The result showed, that decreasing model robustness increased the solution
robustness, which basically means, that you have to pay extra money in order for the model to
be resilient.
This insight is very valuable for this thesis and the statement is a clear relevant
comparison for the thesis’ results, but the way they describe resilience is a bit diﬀerent from the
way resilience is deﬁned in this thesis.
The paper [9] looks at supply chain management as a node and edges structure. The robustness
is described as being proportional with the connections between horizontal and verticals nodes.
The means, that the supply chains is more robust with more nodes.
Almost the same approach is used by [10], where the authors look at the railway system in
China with the focus on resilience. They deﬁne resilience as the number of independent paths in
the railway system. According to their research there exists two independent path between all city
pairs in the railway network.
These papers all deﬁne resilience in a diﬀerent matter, but all the papers look at the ability of
the network to cope with risks. And all papers concludes, that there exists a cost, when making
the supply chain more resilient. Using this in the thesis, it is clear to see, that resilient is widely
used with varies deﬁnitions, but all papers introduce resilience as a networks’ ability to cope with
disruptions, which exactly is what the thesis also does.
2.2
Sustainability
In [7] an overview of papers involving optimizing sustainable supply chains are reviewed. The
papers deﬁnition of sustainable is including economic, social and environmental dimensions. The
paper have examined 83 references papers.
In Figure 6 the distribution of research focus on
sustainable supply chains according to the authors.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 6: Distribution of research focus in sustainable supply chains
From here it is clear to see, that the references papers mostly focus on the environmental
and economic dimensions. 10 references papers focus on all three. This thesis touch upon the
intersection between the environmental and economic dimensions.
The paper aims to identify
potential gaps in the research, and the paper say it could be a focus in future research to focus on
GHG emissions on both the transport links and in warehouse. The Mixed Integer Program in this
thesis accounts for the tradeoﬀbetween these two.
The paper [26] looks at a concrete case in the wine industry. The authors create a model,
where social, economic and environmental dimensions are considered. The OR-model is a multi
objective function. The environmental side of the objective function looks at the co2e generated
by the transport activities in the network. This is exactly what this thesis looks at and this thesis
also allow the co2e emissions from the plants to be considered. In the paper they create a set of
scenarios, and diﬀerent from this thesis they do not include the scenarios in the OR-model. They
try with diﬀerent instances as input to the model and deﬁne it as a scenario. This means, that the
scenarios are completely independent of each other, whereas the scenario included in an OR-model
can be related to each other. The paper states, that in a scenario, the optimal solution can save
15% on the cost, while cutting 2882 tonne of co2e emissions and maximizing social impacts.
In [19] they create a OR-model, where the goal is to minimize the overall costs, where a part
of the cost is the cost of the co2e emissions. Putting a price on the co2e emitted allow for the
minimizing of the co2e emissions. In this thesis the amount of co2e emitted is a constraint. The
paper state, that minimizing the co2e emitted and minimizing the logistics cost are a trade oﬀ. In
Figure 7 the trade oﬀis displayed.
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 7: Trade oﬀbetween cost and co2e emitted
The paper [21] include the sustainability in the supply chain as carbon prices in the model as
carbon credit. The OR-model is stochastic with a certain probability for each scenario to occur.
This allows for uncertainty in the carbon market prices. An interesting result of the paper is, that
at high carbon prices, it will dominate the overall costs. And the higher the carbon price is, the
greener the supply chain conﬁguration will be.
While the papers examined regarding sustainability so far have been focused on optimization,
other angles regarding current research about sustainability in supply chain are important.
In the paper [27], the author examines the trade oﬀbetween short term proﬁtability while
introducing a long term sustainability strategy. According to the paper environmental challenges
do not necessarily mean cost or other resource reduction. It may cause the company to look at
their supply chains with new eyes.
A study [5] about integrating sustainability in the day to day life of companies, suggest that
mainstream integration of sustainability has not occurred yet (as of 2010). According to the study
the main focus is still operations without any angles to environmental and social dimensions. It
is still unclear to the day-to-day life how to include environmental and social dimensions, because
these are multi-objectives, which means, that there do not exists a rule of thump on how to handle
these situations. On the other hand the study argue for lack of sustainability knowledge within
the company can lead to these procrastinations. And the study highlights the connection between
researchers and practitioners to be the bottleneck for sustainability research to be incorporated in
the day-to-day operations of companies.
A literature review has been conducted in [4] over a 20 year time frame. According to the
literature review, sustainability has become more popular to write about. The author argues for
some of the popularity to be a cause of the rising awareness of supply chain management along
with the broad conception of the importance of the environmental issues in today’s society.
A more quantitative literature review has been conducted in [2], where the focus lies with the
modeling approach towards sustainability in supply chains. The author found gaps in the intersec-
tions within social and environmental dimensions, and the need for stochastic model approaches,
as they would be more realistic. He argues for the upswing in papers published within sustainable
supply chain (as of 2014) and the need for more papers to be published in order to integrate the
sustainable supply chain management into the day-to-day operations within companies.
2.3
Resilience and Sustainability
The chapter ”Resilience and Sustainability in Supply Chains” from [28] argues for resilient supply
chains to also be sustainable supply chains. They deﬁne sustainability to be not only environmental
factors, but also include social and economic factors. This means, that both company stakeholders,
10
==PAGE:12==
the emissions and the actual cost are inﬂuencing the sustainability of the supply chains with the
deﬁnition of the book. The book deﬁne resilience as the supply chains ability to bounce back from
a disruption. According to the book resilient and sustainable supply chains have common success
factors. They state, that sustainable supply chains have less disruptions in the ﬁrst place, which
would lead to less necessity for risk management as a part of a resilient supply chain. With better
sustainable practices the workforce of a company is more keen to return to business as usual, if
the supply chain is more sustainable, which would lead to a more resilient supply chain. They
also argues for, if a disruption happen in the supply chain, having a sustainable mindset during
the disruption would create goodwill among the customers leading to a long term loyalty towards
the company’s products. This thesis deﬁne sustainability in a diﬀerent manner. This thesis deﬁne
sustainability the way the book would deﬁne environmental and economic factors. This means,
that the thesis only look at the environmental and economic factors, which the book state are just
a part of the term sustainability. This means, that the argument for a sustainable and resilient
supply chain not being mutually exclusive can lead to an interesting comparison with the results
of the model in the thesis.
The author in [11] investigates the sustainable and resilient factors in a supply chain through
a simulation study. The author test 3 hypothesises:
• Sustainable single sourcing enhances the ripple eﬀect.
• Lower inventory enhances sustainability but causes the ripple eﬀect.
• Upgrading major employers’ facilities in regions mitigates the ripple eﬀect and enhances
sustainability.
The results of the research can be seen in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Sustainability versus Resilience
Each line represents a hypothesis. Single sourcing would be a very sustainable choice, but the
supply chain would not be resilient. Multiple sourcing would lead to a more resilient supply chain,
but also a less sustainable supply chain. This is because of the possibility of backup facilities
with multisourcing. The more sourcing practices a company engage in, the less sustainable the
supply gets. A low number of warehouses would lead to a more sustainable supply chain, but a less
resilient supply chain. Increasing the number of warehouses would lead to a more resilient supply
chain, while decreasing the sustainability. This is because of the costly and environmental impacts
the more warehouses have compared to less warehouses, whereas more warehouses would lead to
a more resilient supply chain. Improving the structures of the building in the supply chain would
lead to less disruptions and a more resilient supply chain, while also increasing the sustainability
of the supply chain. Not upgrading facility buildings would lead to a less resilient and sustainable
supply chain. The paper could not consider the cost of the elements in the analysis, but only focus
on the relationship between resilience and sustainability. The thesis will focus on cost, resilience
and sustainability. The paper state, that sustainability and resilience is both contradictory and
complementary. The paper focuses on the inventory levels in the warehouses, whereas the thesis
11
==PAGE:13==
will focus on the costs outside the warehouses. The simulation study introduces a disruptions at
speciﬁc time at a speciﬁc warehouse, whereas the thesis will focus on disruptions in predeﬁned
scenarios.
In [12] a new framework is introduced as viable supply chains, which consists of three parts.
Agility, resilience and sustainability. The agility is deﬁned as ”dynamically adaptable and struc-
turally changeable value-adding network able to react agilely to positive changes”. The resilience
is the network ability to cope with disruptions and sustainability is deﬁned as being true to the
long-term sustainable goals set by the supply chain practitioners. The author emphasises, that the
research is going in the way of viability. In Figure 9 you can see the research history according to
Ivanov.
Figure 9: Research focus history
The author states, that the biggest impact of a viable supply chain is resilience. This means
that resilience still is a big part of the research. The paper draw an interesting perspective to the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, where resilience or viability is maybe more important than ever.
They introduce a framework for supply chain practitioners to use.
Going through the recent studies on both resilience and sustainability in supply chains, it it
clear to see, that resilience are modeled in many diﬀerent way, but basically means the same: it is
the ability to cope with a disruption. The thesis models this in diﬀerent matter, than the rest of the
mentioned papers, but with the same result. None of the mentioned papers put a cost on resilience,
and this thesis will aim to that. A sustainable supply chain has been described as 3 dimensions:
Social, environmental and economic. This thesis will lie within the intersection of environmental
and economic. This thesis will build upon some of the papers and combining method across papers
in order to create new insights not given in the mentioned papers.
12
==PAGE:14==
3
Modeling approach
This sections describes all modeling aspects of this thesis. It will give detailed information about
decision and choices of the modeling. It will act as a necessity for understanding the results. This
section will introduce a Mixed Integer Program, that will be a vital part of an algorithm, that
aims to get a good result fast. As an input to the Mixed Integer Program two diﬀerent centroid
clustering algorithms are introduced. Diﬀerent concepts, that are necessary for understanding the
Mixed Integer Program are introduced. And ﬁnally all concepts are combined in a ﬁnal algorithm.
3.1
Problem Statement
The problem is deﬁned by a set of customers with coordinates given in latitude and longitude.
The goal is to ﬁnd a set of plant locations to open in order to serve all demand subject to both
the plant capacity and unmet capacity. The focus is three objectives:
• The total cost: cost of opening the plants and the transportation cost from the customers to
the plant
• The total emissions
• The total amount of extra capacity needed (or unmet capacity) in case of a disruption. The
more total amount of extra capacity needed in the plants, the less resilient the supply chain
is.
Bounds will be set on both the emissions and the unmet capacity in the plants while minimizing
the cost.
3.1.1
Problem formulation
This subsection describes a network design model, that aims to minimize the overall cost for a
supply chain given a desired level for both sustainability and resilience in the supply chain given
by predeﬁned scenarios. The model aims to ﬁnd the best conﬁguration of plants serving customers
in order to minimize the cost and meet the sustainability and demand constraints. In Figure 10 is
a small representative network design example with 3 plants and 3 customers.
Figure 10: Small network design for 2 plants serving 3 customers
13
==PAGE:15==
The model considers a set of plants J index by j, a set of customers I indexed by i and a set of
scenarios S indexed by s. A scenario consists of a disruption of a plant. A set of plant locations,
that are disrupted in scenario s, are considered as Js. In real life there will be some limitation
with regard to the leadtime from the plant to the customer. This limitation are considered as a
set of plant locations, that cannot service customer i denoted by Ji.
For each unique pair of customer i and plant j there is a cost associated with the transport.
This cost is deﬁned by CTijs. There are scenarios, where the cost can vary across scenarios. An
example of this could be, when there is a disruption on a plant in a scenario, there is an extra
cost of reallocating the customer to new plants. In this case study the cost do not vary across
scenarios. As illustrated in Figure 10, not all available plants need to be opened. This means, that
a there must be a cost associated with a plant opening. The cost of opening a plant j is CPj. The
capacity of the plant j is denoted by CAPj and the demand of each customer i is denoted by Di.
The emissions eijs describes the amount of co2e emissions per unit transported from plant j to
customer i in scenario s. There could be examples, where the amount of co2e could vary across
scenarios. This could be, if there is a need for an express delivery by a diﬀerent transport mode,
but in this report the amount of co2e emissions do not vary across scenarios. EM is the total
amount of co2e emissions allowed in the base scenario. PEj denotes the amount of co2e emissions,
there are associated with a plant being opened.
The upper bound for the extra capacity needed is denoted by Z for all scenarios. This means,
that if a selected set of plants cannot fulﬁll a demand for all scenarios the extra capacity is needed
for all scenarios. It can thus be seen as a resilience parameter, where Z = 0 means, that enough
plants are selected to fulﬁll the demand for every customer in every scenario. This would means,
that the supply chain is fully resilient. M is a big number, that is needed in the model.
3.1.2
Decision variables
There are three types of decision variables in the model. xijs denotes the amount of shipments
shipped from plant j to customer i in a scenario s. The production in the plants are not considered
in the model with xijs only represent the transport. The model have a binary variable yj, which
is equal to 1, if plant j is opened and 0, if plant j is not used in the solution. The model allow for
unpenalized unmet capacity in the plants, this is denoted by zjs for plant j in scenario s.
3.1.3
Sets
• I: Set of customers indexed by i ∈I.
• J: Set of plant locations indexed by j ∈J.
• S: Set of scenarios indexed by s ∈S.
• Js: Set of plant locations, that are disrupted in scenario s.
• Ji: Set of plant locations, that cannot service customer i.
3.1.4
Parameters
• CTijs: Cost of transporting from plant j to customer i in scenario s.
• CPj: Cost of opening a plant j.
• CAPj: Capacity of plant j.
• Di: Demand for customer i.
14
==PAGE:16==
• eijs: Amount of co2e for shipment i per unit transported form warehouse j in scenario s.
• PEj: Amount of co2e emitted for plant j.
• Z: Max amount of extra capacity
• EM: Max amount of emission allowed.
• M: Big number M.
3.1.5
Variables
• xijs: Amount shipped from plant j to customer i in scenario s.
• yj: 1 if plant j is used.
• zjs: Amount of unmet capacity at plant j in scenario s.
3.1.6
Model
min
X
i∈I
X
j∈J
CTij0xij0 +
X
j∈J
CPjyj
(1)
s.t.
X
j∈J
xijs = Di
∀i ∈I, s ∈S
(2)
X
j∈J
zjs ≤Z
∀s ∈S\{0}
(3)
X
j∈J
zj0 ≤0
(4)
X
i∈I
xijs ≤yjCAPj + zjs
∀j ∈J, s ∈S
(5)
zjs ≤yjM
∀j ∈J, s ∈S
(6)
X
i∈I
X
j∈J
xij0eij0 + PEjyj ≤EM
(7)
xijs = 0
∀i ∈I, j ∈Js, s ∈S
(8)
xijs = 0
∀i ∈I, j ∈Ji, s ∈S
(9)
xijs ≥0
∀i ∈I, j ∈J, s ∈S
(10)
yj ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈J
(11)
zjs ≥0
∀j ∈J, s ∈S
(12)
Where (1) is the objective function, which minimize the cost. The cost consist of the cost of
shipments in the base scenario (s = 0) and the cost of opening plants. (2) ensures, that all the
demand for each customer is reached. (3) secures, that all unmet capacity are within an upper
bound, except for the base scenario. (4) makes sure, that there is no unmet capacity in the base
scenario. (5) ensures, that the amount of shipments going into each plant for each scenario can not
exceed the plants capacity and the unmet capacity. (6) makes sure, that if there is made unmet
capacity available for a plant, the plant is open. The big number M can at most be Z, because
of the upper bound for unmet capacity. (7) creates an upper bound the emissions. (8) make sure,
that disrupted plants can not send anything. (9) ensures, that a some customers can only be served
by certain plants. Constraints (10), (11) and (12) declare the type of variables.
15
==PAGE:17==
3.2
Resilience
Constraint (3) say that unmet capacity could be needed. When Z = 0 the Supply chain does
not need any extra capacity, which makes the supply the most resilient, because it can handle all
shipments even with a disruption. The zjs should be seen as an indicator of in which scenarios,
the capacity of the plants are not enough. This could lead to buy extra new capacity, outsource
capacity or neglect the demand or other solutions.
As an example a scenario is created with a disruption on one random plant in the model. The
unmet capacity is set to a level, which is the same as the plants capacity. In order for the supply
chain to be most resilient, it should be able to reallocate the customers for the disrupted plant to
other plant without using the unmet capacity.
The goal is to normalize the resilience to a scale of 0-1, where 1 is the most resilient and 0 is
the least. This normalization is represented in Equation (13).
r = Z −zl
Z
(13)
where zl is the actual level of extra capacity needed. r would be 1, if the supply chain is most
resilient and 0, if the supply chain is the least resilient.
3.3
Emissions
In order to compare the cost from emissions and resilience, a proper scale has to be invented. The
goal is to normalize the emission from a scale from 0-1. This means, we need to ﬁnd Emin and
Emax.
To get Emin, the model has to be modiﬁed. The emissions need to minimized, so the objective
functions becomes:
min
X
i∈I
X
j∈J
xij0eij0 + PEjyj
(14)
and the rest of the model is the same, except for constraint (7) is removed and Z = zl, which
would be the least resilient. The objective value becomes Emin.
Emax can be calculated as the largest value of amount of co2e emitted, when increasing the
unmet capacity in the model. So for diﬀerent instances of Z the emissions are calculated from the
solution ﬁle.
The normalized emission can be derived as in Equation (15).
ni = 1 −
em −Emin
Emax −Emin
(15)
where em is the actual emissions level. Where 1 represents the least amount of amount of co2e
emissions and 0 the most amount of co2e emissions.
16
==PAGE:18==
3.4
Clustering - the classic K-means algorithm & the modiﬁed K-means
algorithm
A prerequisite for the model is set of potential plant locations. In order to get the potential plant
locations, a clustering method is applied. There exists many clustering algorithm, but in this model
we consider the K-means algorithm. According to [24] the K-means algorithm can be described as
in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Basic K-means algorithm
Select K points as initial centroids;
while Centroids change do
Form K clusters by assigning each point to the closest centroid;
Recompute the centroid of each cluster;
end
This means, that the input to the algorithm is how many clusters, the data need to represent.
And the algorithm chooses the points closest to a centroid by taking the euclidean distance as in
Equation (16).
dist(q, p) =
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
(qi −pi)2
(16)
And the centroid of the ith cluster is deﬁned by Equation (17).
ci = 1
mi
X
x∈Ci
x
(17)
where mi is the number of objects in the ith cluster, Ci is the ith cluster and x is an object.
The algorithm tries to minimize the sum of squared errors between the centroid of the ith cluster
and an object. This deﬁnition is stated in Equation (18).
SSE =
K
X
i=1
X
x∈Ci
dist(ci, x)2
(18)
where K is the number of predeﬁned clusters. So the algorithm goes on until the centroid do
not change and all the points/object are assigned to a cluster. In Figure 11 a K-means clustering
is performed on the dataset.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 11: Result of K-means clustering with 15 cluster for the data set
where triangles represent a centroid for the cluster and circle represents objects in the clusters.
In this clustering algorithm the centroids can be all over the world. In reality one would restrict
certain areas (oceans, mountains etc.) for the centroids.
In the ﬁnal algorithm, the modiﬁed clustering algorithm will be used to identify regions in
a given solution from the Mixed Integer Program, that may be underrepresented. This is done
by ﬁxing the cluster centroids based on the Mixed Integer Program solution. The algorithm will
choose additional clusters along with the ﬁxed clusters in order to reach the chosen number of
clusters. Thus the new solution will always ﬁnd a just as good solution or a better solution. The
modiﬁed k-means algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Modiﬁed K-means algorithm
Get L points as ﬁxed centroids CL;
Select K −L points as initial centroids CI;
while CI change do
Form K clusters by assigning each point to the closest centroid;
Recompute the centroid of each cluster in CI;
end
Concatenate CL and CI as CT ;
The calculations within the clustering are as described in the original algorithm, but it diﬀers,
because it takes the set of chosen plants from the solution. This means that the algorithm only
updates the remainder of the centroids. If 20 clusters were to be calculated, and we have 12 ﬁxed
centroids, then the algorithm would only update the remaining 8 centroids. It is possible to have
the algorithm choose random choices of initial centroids.
It can also be used, if a person wanted a ﬁxed centroid to be a certain place. Imagine if you
had an established supply chain network ﬂow, and you had an interest in keeping the headquarters
as a plant or distribution center. The modiﬁed algorithm would allow you to ﬁxed the location of
the headquarters. In Figure 12 you can see an output of the algorithm with 20 cluster and 2 ﬁxed
centroids in New York and Copenhagen.
18
==PAGE:20==
Figure 12: Modiﬁed K-means algorithm - 15 cluster - 2 ﬁxed point in NY and CPH
Comparing this to Figure 11 one can clearly see the ﬁxed centroids.
3.5
Haversine distance
In Section 3.4 a euclidean distance is used for the distance. In reality the earth is almost round,
which means that there is a diﬀerence between distance calculating with the euclidean distance
and in the real world. So a more correct way is to assume, that Earth is a perfect sphere, which
in reality it is not, but a more realistic way than projecting onto a 2D-environment. According to
[20] the formula for calculating the haversine distance is portrayed in Equation (19)
d = 2r arcsin
s
sin2
φ2 −φ1
2

+ cos φ1 cos φ2 sin2
ψ2 −ψ1
2

(19)
where d is the distance between two point with longitude and latitude (ψ, φ). r is the radius
of the earth (6371 km). In reality the haversine distance would not be very realistic, because it is
not possible to travel in a straight distance, so there is some variation in the real distances driven,
that can not be captured by the haversine distance.
The k-means algorithm uses euclidean distance to calculate the distances between customers
and the centroids. Using euclidean distance require the earth to be ﬂat for the distance calculations
to be precise. According to NASA [17] the earth is a sphere, but not a perfect sphere. This means,
that the approximations of distances calculated using euclidean distance will be ﬂawed. The result
of this approximation will be, that maybe some customer are assigned to a plant, that in fact are
more distance than another plant.
The distance calculated by the haversine or the great circle formula assumes, that the earth is a
perfect sphere with radius 6371 kilometers. This approximation is better, than assuming that, the
earth is ﬂat, but in reality the distances will be a bit ﬂawed. And the distances here are calculated
in a beeline. This means the shortest distance between two points. In reality we know, that the
infrastructure of a given landscape has alot to say about how many kilometers, that the trucks
in reality drive. The straight line between two points does not care about mountains, oceans or
lack of roads. According to [23] the road distances between major American cities are about 18%
greater than the straight lines distances. So using this information, the distance will in fact be an
approximation of the distance actually driven.
In the Network design model we assume, that all facilities are the same, when in reality the
facilities can vary alot depending on, where you are in the world. This could inﬂuence the capacities
of the facility. The model also assumes, that cost of a freight tonne is the same all over the world.
19
==PAGE:21==
One could imagine the salaries vary across the globe. We also assume, that freight tonne could
be converted into a transportation cost using the mean.
This also creates some diﬀerences in
calculating the cost.
3.6
The ﬁnal algorithm
The idea behind the ﬁnal algorithm is to iterate between the modiﬁed k-means algorithm and the
Mixed Integer Program in order to ﬁnd a better solution using feedback from the solution from
the Mixed Integer Program from the previous iteration. The modiﬁed k-means algorithm ﬁnds a
set of potential plants, which could be both ﬁxed cluster from the previous iteration and normal
clusters. And the Mixed Integer Program uses the new set of plants to ﬁnd a better solution. This
way the customer belonging to the ”weak” part of the cluster centroids could ﬁnd a better cluster
centroid. In Algorithm 3 you can see the ﬁnal algorithm.
Algorithm 3: The ﬁnal algorithm
Select increment I;
Select number of replications R;
Select number of starting clusters N;
Select multiplier M;
j = 0;
i = 0;
while elapedTime < Timelimit do
if i = 0 then
No randomness in the modiﬁed K-means algorithm;
Get centroids from modiﬁed K-means algorithm;
Get C0 from solving the Mixed Integer Program with given centroids;
Get Fixed centroids from the solution containing the objective value C0;
i = i + 1;
else
randomness in the modiﬁed k-means algorithm;
for 1 ... R do
N = number of centroid ﬁxed·(M + j);
Get centroids from modiﬁed K-means algorithm with N clusters;
Get Cp from solving the Mixed Integer Program with given centroids;
Get Fixed centroids from the solution containing the objective value Cp;
end
Ci = min(Cp);
Get Fixed centroids from the best solution containing the objective value Ci;
if Ci−1 = Ci then
j = j + I;
else
j = j
end
i = i + 1;
end
end
return Ci
3.6.1
Drill down analysis of the ﬁnal algorithm
The ﬁnal algorithm starts with a starting iteration, where there do not exits randomness in the
modiﬁed k-means algorithm. The cluster centroids from the solution based on set of plants received
20
==PAGE:22==
with modiﬁed k-means algorithm without randomness is then ﬁxed into the next iteration. The ﬁnal
algorithm start with a choice of choosing increment, replications, starting clusters and multiplier.
The multiplier states how many additional clusters, along with the ﬁxed set of cluster from the
solution, the modiﬁed k-means algorithm shall calculate. The increment describes how much the
multiplier should increase, if cost do not change in the algorithm.
Replications describe how
many times a given instance is repeated. This makes sense due to randomness in the modiﬁed
K-means clustering algorithm. The starting clusters deﬁnes how many clusters there are created
in the modiﬁed K-means clustering algorithm. The binary variables in the Mixed Integer Program
denotes a certain plant in a solution. The solution chooses the optimal set of these in order to
minimize the cost, if the optimal solution is reached within a time limit, otherwise it will return a
solution. These chosen plants are used as a part of the input to the modiﬁed K-means clustering
in the next iterations, and the multiplier are multiplied with the number of chosen plants, and act
as a input the modiﬁed K-means clustering algorithm for the next iteration. If the model chooses
6 plants, and the multiplier is 4, then the modiﬁed K-means algorithm will ﬁnd 24 clusters in the
next iteration, whereas the 6 plant locations are ﬁxed in the modiﬁed k-means algorithm. j is the
temporary increment within the algorithm. It keep tracks of the increment steps. i denotes the
number of iterations.
The algorithm is given a certain timelimit to run within, because of the exponential growth of
constraints and variables as the number of clusters increase. The algorithm starts with an initial
iteration, where there is no randomness in the modiﬁed K-means algorithm. This is done, because
of comparison purposes. You would not be able to compare diﬀerent instances of parameters of
the algorithm, if the algorithm does not start from the same place. You would not be able to
compare convergence of the diﬀerent instances of parameters of the algorithm. It starts with the
given number of starting clusters N and solve the modiﬁed K-means clustering algorithm. One
can argue, that it actually is a normal K-means clustering algorithm, because it do not contain any
ﬁxed centroid from the previous iteration. From the K-means clustering algorithm a set of potential
plants are calculated as an input to the Mixed integer Program. Other input as Costmatrix and
EmissionMatrix are also calculated in this step. The chosen plants are then extracted from the
solution of the initial iteration.
From i > 1 iterations there is randomness in the modiﬁed K-means algorithm. The chosen
plants from the previous iterations are used as an input to modiﬁed K-means algorithm to create
N clusters as an input to the Mixed Integer Program and extract the chosen plants. Repeat this
set of actions R times. When the set of actions are repeated R times, then the algorithm chooses
the best solution as the iteration is solution. And if the cost of the previous iteration is the same
as the current iteration, j is added to the increment. And when the algorithm is ﬁnished, the
algorithm returns the cost of the latest iteration, which always will be the best solution.
In Appendix A 8.1 the output of a given algorithm can be found.
21
==PAGE:23==
4
Computational experiments
This section will describe the concepts in this thesis, who are thesis speciﬁc. This could be a way
to calculate the emissions, cost per freight tonne or parameter tuning of the ﬁnal algorithm. This
sections should be seen as a complementary to the Modelling section and a necessity in order to
understand the results.
4.1
Emissions Calculations
In order to get an amount of co2e emissions for a shipment, the following was derived:
Considering a shipment with distance in kilometers x and weight in kilograms y. One could
calculate the freight tonne as:
x · y · 0.001
(20)
and the amount of co2e as

y
25160

· (2.48 · (x · 0.33))
(21)
Where 25160 is the max weight on a truck, 2.48 is the emission factor and 0.33 is the liters of
fuel consumed per kilometer. One could look at the relationship between freight tonne and co2e.

y
25160

· (2.48 · (x · 0.33))
x · y · 0.001
= 0.03282
(22)
This means, that there exists a clear relationship between freight tonne (FT) and co2e, so we
can ﬁnd the amount of co2e by:
co2e = 0.03282 · FT
(23)
According to [25] the co2e is as a standard measurement carbon footprints. Greenhouse gases
emits warming as co2, so to get a combined score co2e is created.
The greenhouse gases as
calculated as how much co2 are necessary to emit the same amount of warming as the greenhouse
gases. This underlined furthermore in the article by following quote:
”in 2009, the UK released 474 million tonnes of CO2. But if you include its emissions
of methane, nitrous oxide and F-gases, the country’s total emissions work out at 566
million tonnes of CO2e. In other words, those extra gases added the equivalent of 92
million extra tonnes of CO2.”
4.2
Cost per freight tonne
In order for the model to have both cost of opening a plant and cost of the shipment, an average
cost per freight tonne has to be calculated. A case study is performed on 15319 shipment from
real life data. In Figure 13 a histogram over the shipments cost per freight tonne can be seen.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 13: Histogram of a case study with 15319 shipments
Much of the shipment have a relative small cost per freight tonne. An average cost per freight
tonne is calculated as A = 7.97428614784116. This number will be used in the model. One could
argue for the use of an distribution in order to ﬁt the real life data more realistically. Another
argumentation can be, that each dataset is diﬀerent, so the statement, that one number can convert
freight tonne into cost is a bit far-fetched.
One could calculate the cost of a shipment as:
CT = FT · 7.97428614784116
(24)
4.3
Parameter tuning
Parameter tuning aims to determine the best set of parameters for a given algorithm. There is
randomness in the algorithm. In Figure 14 you can see the result of the algorithm with only one
repeat of the algorithm.
Figure 14: Result of diﬀerent set of increment and replications with 1 repeat of the algorithm
The cost is indexed by the result of the algorithm with 100 starting clusters.
In the axes
the number of replications and number of increment is displayed. And the plot does not give a
deﬁnitely solution to which parameter is the best for the algorithm. In the column with 1 and 10
replications is better than 5 replications, which is contradicting. This must mean, that repeating
the algorithm only one time is not enough to cope with randomness in the algorithm.
23
==PAGE:25==
There are 4 diﬀerent parameters in the ﬁnal algorithm, that need tuning.
• Increment
• Replications
• Number of starting clusters
• Multiplier
4.3.1
Increment
The parameter increment determines, if a solution does not change, how much the multiplier,
which determines how big of a pool of clusters, the Mixed Integer Program contains in the next
iteration. Imagine that the increment is 1 and the multiplier is 4. If the solution does not change,
the multiplier would be incremented with 1 to 5.
4.3.2
Replications
Replications determines how many times a given instance is repeated within the algorithm. Because
of the randomness the algorithm will give diﬀerent set of pools of clusters for the Mixed Integer
Program, which would lead to diﬀerent results. The algorithm would then choose the best solution
with the solutions found by the replicated set of pools of clusters.
In Figure 15 the result of the algorithm is displayed with 1,3,6 and 10 replications and increment
of 1,2,3 and 4. And the algorithm is repeated 5 times to cope with randomness. The multiplier is
4 and the number of starting clusters is 20.
Figure 15: Result of diﬀerent set of increment and replications with 5 repeats of the algorithm
The result is still indexed by the algorithm with 100 starting clusters. According to the plot,
there is a tendency, that increasing the number of replications does not give a better solution. The
algorithm performs better with 1 or 3 replications instead of 6 or 10 replications. It is diﬃcult to
say something about the increment from this plot, because both an increment of 1,2 and 4 performs
better than an increment of 3 with 3 replications. This is contradicting.
In Figure 16 the result of the algorithm is displayed with 1,2,3 and 4 replications and increment
of 1,5,10 and 15. And the algorithm is repeated 10 times to cope with randomness. The multiplier
is 4 and the number of starting clusters is 20.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 16: Result of diﬀerent set of increment and replications with 10 repeats of the algorithm
From this ﬁgure it can be seen, that randomness still play a big part of the algorithm, and the
solutions are very close to each other. From min to max is 0.006, so it is very close. This means,
that not a deﬁnite choice of increment and replications can be selected as they all perform more
or less the same.
4.3.3
Number of starting clusters
The number of starting clusters deﬁnes the initial set of clusters in the ﬁrst clustering algorithm
of the algorithm. As we know the pool of clusters change within the algorithm, but a parameter is
how big of a pool of clusters is chosen initially. In Figure 17 the result of the algorithm is displayed
with diﬀerent instances of the parameter number of starting clusters. The algorithm has been run
with 1 replications, 1 increment and 4 as a multiplier.
Figure 17: Result of diﬀerent instances of starting clusters
According to the ﬁgure the algorithm performs better with a lower number of starting clusters.
As we know all plots have been related to 100 starting cluster, which means that the algorithm
performs better than that within the timelimit. From 10 to 50 starting clusters perform almost
the same.
4.3.4
Multiplier
The multiplier determines how many clusters to do in the next iteration. In the solution of the
Mixed Integer Program, the solution chooses a certain number of plants to serve the customers. If
the solution chooses to open 6 plants, the multiplier will choose M · 6, where M is the multiplier,
25
==PAGE:27==
as input to the next iteration. In Figure 18 diﬀerent instances of the multiplier is displayed. The
algorithm is run with 1 increment, 1 replication and 20 starting clusters.
Figure 18: Result of diﬀerent instances of multiplier
According the algorithm performs almost the, whether the multiplier is 2,3,4 or 5.
If the
multiplier is 1, the algorithm chooses the same number of clusters in the next iteration as the
number of chosen plants in the solution of the Mixed Integer Program. This could be seen as
a replication. And as we saw before increasing the number of replications does not improve the
performance of the algorithm, so it is very good, that the algorithm performs better with multiplier
above 1.
4.3.5
Algorithm timelimit
The algorithm runs during a timelimit. Tuning this parameter could inﬂuence the performance.
In Figure 19 the performances of the algorithm with diﬀerent timelimits are displayed.
Figure 19: Result of diﬀerent instances of the algorithm timelimit
According to the plot it almost does not matter, which timelimit are used. This means, that a
lower timelimit would allow the algorithm to be run more times.
From the parameter tuning it is clear to see, that randomness play a vital role in algorithm,
and the parameter tuning analysis does not give a deﬁnitely answer to which instances of the
parameters are the best for the algorithm, but it gave an indication to which intervals to choose
the parameters.
26
==PAGE:28==
5
Results
This section will build upon the Modelling section and the computational experiments, where the
result of all the theory will be presented.
5.1
Mixed Integer Program
The Mixed integer Program is basically a plant allocation problem. This means the solution will
ﬁgure out, which plants will serve each customers. In Figure 20 the number of shipments served
by which plants for a solution given no capacity for a plant.
Figure 20: Plant Allocation
From the solution, it is clear to see, that plant 4 is serving handles most of the shipments. This
means, that the customers must be distributed around plant 4.
Because of the Mixed Integer Programs exponential growth of constraints and variables, the
problem becomes much harder to solve with a large number of clusters. In Figure 21 the solution
time for the Mixed Integer Program versus the number of clusters is plotted.
Figure 21: Solution time for the Mixed Integer Program
As we can see in the plot the solution time increases exponentially over the number of starting
clusters. According to the plot, the solution time shows signs of randomness, but it is clear to see,
that the trend is increasing exponentially. It takes over an hour to solve the model with 82 starting
clusters. This is a very long time, so the question is, if it is possible to create an algorithm, that
can get a good solution fast.
27
==PAGE:29==
Another interesting thing to see is, how fast the cost converges. In Figure 22 you can see the
objective value of the Mixed Integer Program plotted versus the number of clusters.
Figure 22: Cost versus number of clusters in the Mixed Integer Program
Here we can see, that the objective value decreases as the number of clusters increases. This
means, that the cost decreases, if there is more potential plants available to the Mixed Integer
Program.
The binary variables in the Mixed Integer Program describes, if a potential plant is chosen
in the solution. In Figure 23 the chosen plants in the solution are plotted versus the number of
potential plants.
Figure 23: Number of chosen plants versus the number of potential plants
It is interesting to see the model only chooses relative small number of plants. This is a tradeoﬀ
to the cost of opening a plant and the capacity of the plant. If the cost of opening a plant was very
low, then the model would choose a high number of plants, because of the xijs variables would be
the only thing to be minimized. The capacity of the plants is also relevant in this case, because a
plant cannot handle more demand than allowed.
5.2
Sensitivity analysis of the Mixed Integer Program
As we saw in Figure 20 with the unconstrained plant capacity, one plant handled almost all
shipments. In Figure 24 the plant allocation with a plant capacity of 10000.
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 24: Plant Allocation with a plant capacity of 10000
With a plant capacity of 10000, the shipments are spread out among the plants. An interesting
thing with adding the capacity is the utilization of the capacity of each plant. It is clear to see,
that the utilization for plant 2, 4 and 6 are 100%. The average plant utilization is 75.2%. Setting a
plant capacity of 10000 increases the cost with 2.8%. In Figure 25 the plant allocation for a plant
capacity of 7500.
Figure 25: Plant Allocation with a plant capacity of 7500
This decrease in plant capacity result in an increase of cost of 8.2% compared to the uncon-
strained capacity. The model chooses more plants in order to answer the same demand. The
average plant utilization is 78.0%. In Table 1 the average utilization, increase in cost related to
the unconstrained capacity and number of chosen plant can be seen.
Plant capacity
Average Utilization
Cost increase
Number of plants chosen
10000
75.2%
2.8%
7
7500
78.0%
8.2%
9
6000
87.7%
13.1%
10
5000
87.7%
22.5%
12
4000
87.7%
36.0%
15
3000
92.3%
59.5%
19
2800
94.0%
67.6%
20
Table 1: Overview over the plant capacities, utilization, cost and chosen plants
The table clearly indicates, that decreasing the capacity of the plants will lead to more plants
being in the solution, increase in the overall cost, but the utilization will increase.
29
==PAGE:31==
Another parameter in great comparison to the capacity is the cost of opening a plant. The
capacity of a plant and the cost of opening a plant can be seen as a trade-oﬀ, that ultimately
decides how many plants should be opened in order to serve all the customers. In Figure 26 the
plant allocation with a cost of 1,000,000 for opening a plant.
Figure 26: Plant allocation with a cost of opening a plant of 1,000,000
As portrayed in the plot the model chooses to open 14 of the 20 plants available, which means
that the amount of goods served by each plants is low compared to a lower set of plants. In Figure
27 the plant allocation with a cost of 5,000,000 for opening a plant can be seen.
Figure 27: Plant allocation with a cost of opening a plant of 5,000,000
It is clear to see, that increasing the number of plants opened are decreasing, when increasing
the cost of opening a plant. In Table 2 the diﬀerent instances of cost of opening a plant can be
found.
30
==PAGE:32==
Cost of opening a plant
Average goods ﬂow
Cost comparison
Plant chosen
1,000,000
3,760
0.67
14
2,000,000
5,849
0.78
9
3,000,000
7,520
0.87
7
4,000,000
7,520
0.94
7
5,000,000
10,528
1.00
5
6,000,000
10,528
1.05
5
7,000,000
10,528
1.11
5
8,000,000
13,160
1,16
4
9,000,000
13,160
1,20
4
10,000,000
13,160
1,25
4
Table 2: Overview of diﬀerent instances of cost of opening a plant
Note than the baseline for the cost comparison is the instance with a cost of 5,000,000 for
opening a plant. And the average goods ﬂow is calculated by the demand divided by the number
of chosen plants. It is clear to see, that the number of plants quickly decreases. This means, that
the instance is more sensitive around 1,000,000 to 3,000,000 and is relative stable towards 3,000,000
to 10,000,000. The cost is also decreasing quickly in the more sensitive part.
In the Mixed Integer Program model in constrain (9), there is a constraint about, which cus-
tomers can be server by which plants. This constraint could for instance be a max distance from
the customer to the plant.
In Table 3 diﬀerent instances of the max distance from plant and
customers can be seen.
Max distance
Cost
11,000
1.04
11,500
1.02
12,000
1.02
12,500
1.02
13,000
1.02
13,500
1
14,000
1
14,500
1
Table 3: Overview over diﬀerent instances for max distance between customer and plant
Note that all the costs have been divided by the cost for a max distance of 14,500. It can be
seen, that a smaller max distance results in an increase of cost. And max distance from plant to
customer does not impact the number of plant chosen in solution.
The Mixed Integer Program also contains an emissions constraint. In Table 4 an overview of
diﬀerent instances of max emissions can be found.
31
==PAGE:33==
Max emissions
Emissions
Cost
Plants chosen
200,000
198,472
1
14
210,000
207,174
0.93
12
220,000
213,063
0.90
11
230,000
227,658
0.85
9
240,000
236,443
0.82
8
250,000
247,170
0.80
7
260,000
247,167
0.80
7
270,000
264,052
0.80
6
280,000
264,052
0.80
6
290,000
281,570
0.79
5
Table 4: Overview over diﬀerent instances of max emissions
Note that, the solution with max emissions 200,000 is used as a baseline for the rest of the
costs. From max emissions from 200,000 to 250,000 the cost decrease relative fast, which means
that this is the sensitive area. The solution change almost every time, the max emissions raises,
which means, that the emissions constraint is very inﬂuential towards the solution.
Max unmet capacity in the plant is denoted as the resilience in the supply chain. In Table 5
an overview of diﬀerent instances for unmet capacity in the plants are displayed. Note that the
capacity of 1 plants is set to 3,000.
Max unmet capacity
Cost
Plants chosen
0
1
19
250
0.996
19
500
0.993
19
750
0.989
19
1,000
0.985
19
1,250
0.982
19
1,500
0.978
19
1,750
0.956
18
2,000
0.952
18
2,250
0.949
18
2,500
0.945
18
2,750
0.941
18
3,000
0.937
18
Table 5: An overview over unmet capacity in the plants
According to the table the cost decreases as the unmet capacity increases. This means the
more resilient, the supply chain is, thus more expensive the operations are.
5.3
Clustering
Sum of squared errors is an indicator of how well K-means clustering algorithm is.
It can be
denoted as the distances to its centroids.
In Figure 28 the sum of squared errors versus the
number of clusters can be seen.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 28: Sum of squared errors
This plot show, how well an clustering algorithm performs. We can see, that the sum of squared
errors decreases as the number of clusters increases, but the interesting thing is the convergence.
With the clustering algorithm reaches around 20 clusters, then the sum of squared errors reach a
steady state. This is an indicator of, that the problem can be solved with a small set of potential
plants.
5.4
Randomness in the modiﬁes K-means algorithm
There could be randomness in the modiﬁed K-means clustering algorithm. In Figure 29 the ran-
domness can be seen with 5 iteration of the same instance.
Figure 29: Randomness in the K-means algorithm
It can be seen how the cost change with the increasing number of potential plants. The plot
also shows, that the randomness can generate a better solution in the lower number of potential
plants than in the higher number of potential plants. The black line corresponds to the optimal
solution with 82 potential plants. The plot suggest, that none of the solutions are as good as
the one with 82 potential plants. This plot indicates, that with smaller sets of potential plants a
relative good solution can be obtained. This randomness is obtained with only adding randomness
in the initial guess of the K-means algorithm.
33
==PAGE:35==
5.5
Performance of the ﬁnal algorithm
As we sat in the parameter tuning section, the ﬁnal algorithm aims to get a good solution much
fast than displayed in Figure 21. There the solution time was very high. So in order to compare
the solution obtained from the ﬁnal algorithm, we compare it to Figure 29. We know the algorithm
performs better, when the number of starting clusters is high. We know, that the optimal solution
from a set of potential plants of 82 is 82531701. The solution time for this results is 3500 seconds.
A good solution from the algorithm with a multiplier of 4, increment of 1 and 1 replication is
88061365. The solution time is 600 seconds for this result. The results obtained by the algorithm
is 6.7% higher than the result from the optimal solution from a set of potential plants of 82, but
the solution time is 583% faster than the result from the algorithm.
5.6
Sustainability versus resilience
The main focus of this thesis is looking at the resilience versus the sustainability in supply chains.
In Figure 30 the cost of diﬀerent instances of sustainability and resilience levels can be seen.
Figure 30: Sustainability versus resilience
The horizontal bands from the plot suggest, that increasing the sustainability level is costly,
but if the sustainability levels is increased, the resilience could be included for ”free”. This suggests
that, the sustainability is more costly than resilience according to the model.
The sustainability versus the resilience were also found by the ﬁnal algorithm, but the results
were inﬂuenced by randomness to much, in order to get anything meaningful out of. In Appendix
B (8.2) in Figure 31 and Figure 32 the results can be seen.
34
==PAGE:36==
6
Discussion
In this section the most important results, modeling approaches, limitations etc. will be discussed.
All thoughts will be reassessed and the purpose of this thesis, that was described in the introduction
will be answered. Comparisons to relevant research results will be discussed, and possible further
research on the matter will be stated.
The results showed, that the Mixed Integer Program is highly sensitive to the emissions and
less to the resilience. This could lead for the solution to be more expensive, if a higher emissions
level is used, whereas the resilience level cause little impact on the cost in the model. This context
can be visualized in Figure 30, where the horizontals bonds of the emissions level is the same across
the resilience levels. This shows, that if a given emissions level is reached, then a high resilience
level can be chosen for ”free”. The lesser impact of the resilience could be due to this thesis’
deﬁnition of resilience. The literature showed, that there exists many methods to model resilience.
In the literature examined for this thesis none of the methods corresponds to this thesis’ deﬁnition
of resilience. This would mean, that the cost of resilience is not direct comparable to the results
obtained in the examined papers. All though many deﬁnitions of resilience exists, there is also some
common factors. All deﬁnitions of resilience is deﬁned as its ability to cope with a disruption, and
the more resilient that a company is, the more you have to pay. This thesis’ deﬁnition of resilience
is to allow the most expensive shipments to be left out of the solution given a maximum level
for each scenario, and as Table 5 showed, this has a cost associated with it. So both common
factors of the deﬁnition of resilience is as expected in this thesis. The unmet capacity in the plants
can be seen as a identiﬁer for weak links in the supply chain. The most costly shipments will be
identiﬁed as these will lie within the unmet capacity variables. This way the practitioners could
ﬁnd alternatives ways to handle these shipments in order for the shipments to be proﬁtable or
more proﬁtable. This could be done by either outsourcing the expensive shipments or restructure
the supply chain, if the customer has a high potential, or the practitioner could simple not serve
the customer, if the shipment is too costly.
Additional to associate a cost with resilience and emissions, the purpose of this thesis was to
create a network design, to which the customers was assigned to the less costly plant. The results
showed, that the problem quickly became hard to solve due to the many constraints and variables.
This led to the creation of the ﬁnal algorithm. The results showed, that given a set of potential
plants, the solution almost choose a smaller set of plants, unless the capacity are set as low as
possible. This meant, that solving smaller sets of the problem could lead to a good solution much
faster than solving a model with a high set of potential plants. The ﬁnal algorithm allowed for a
connection between the Mixed Integer Program and the modiﬁed k-means algorithm, which meant,
that the solution only could be improved. The randomness in the modiﬁed k-means algorithm could
be lucky to ﬁnd a better solution fast, but would always converge towards a better solution within
the timelimit in the algorithm. The parameter tuning of the ﬁnal algorithm showed, that the
algorithm performed best in a certain intervals of the parameters of the model. The parameter
tuning suggest, that the ﬁnal algorithm prefer smaller sets of potential plants. Allowing the ﬁxed
centroids in the k-means algorithm could be crucial to a company, because one would imagine,
that moving certain buildings of a company would be against the wishes of the company. One
could simply lock the locations of these buildings in the modiﬁed k-means algorithm. This would
give the company an idea, where to place plants in order to best serve the additional customers.
If a practitioner were to combine the two methods examined in this thesis, one could determine
the resilience and emissions level from either the results of this thesis or use the method described
to ﬁnd the speciﬁc Emin and Emax, and use the ﬁnal algorithm to ﬁnd a good conﬁguration of the
supply chain in order to best serve the customers.
35
==PAGE:37==
6.1
Further research
The purpose of this thesis was to associate a cost to resilience and emissions, which has been
portrayed in Figure 30. This result was done one set of customers, but it could be interesting to
see, if the result change according to the data input.
In the Mixed Integer Program the capacities of the plants and, emissions, costs are the same for
each scenario. It could be interesting to see a diﬀerentiation in this across scenarios. An increased
focus on the diﬀerences in the world subject to both cost for transportation of shipments and
warehouse keeping. The cost was taking as a mean of real life shipments for a company, but if the
cost of a freight tonne could be more precise estimated, could that lead to interesting results.
The modiﬁed k-means algorithm is used in this thesis, but could other centroid clustering
algorithms be useful in the ﬁnal algorithm?
As discussed in the section with haversine distance, the haversine distance is a estimate for a
distance between two coordinates. Could other estimates for the distances be used? Maybe the
actual travelled distance could be used to estimate better result?
How this thesis calculate resilience and emissions could be diﬀerent, and that would lead to
a diﬀerent result. It could be interesting to see the results of other deﬁnition of resilience and
emissions in order to the see if Figure 30 change much. All experiments state, that the more
resilient and sustainable, the supply chain is, the more you have to pay, but maybe with other
deﬁnitions, the choice could be more selective with regard to the emissions and resilience levels.
36
==PAGE:38==
7
References
References
[1] Ada Y Barlatt, Amy Cohn, Oleg Gusikhin, Yakov Fradkin, Rich Davidson, and John Batey.
Planning and Scheduling in a Complex. (November 2013), 2012.
[2] Marcus Brandenburg, Kannan Govindan, Joseph Sarkis, and Stefan Seuring. Quantitative
models for sustainable supply chain management: Developments and directions. European
Journal of Operational Research, 233(2):299–312, 2014.
[3] Emma Brandon-Jones, Brian Squire, Chad W. Autry, and Kenneth J. Petersen. A Contingent
Resource-Based Perspective of Supply Chain Resilience and Robustness. Journal of Supply
Chain Management, 50(3):55–73, 2014.
[4] Craig R. Carter and P. Liane Easton. Sustainable supply chain management: Evolution and
future directions. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management,
41(1):46–62, 2011.
[5] Marisa P. De Brito and Erwin A. Van der Laan. Supply chain management and sustainability:
Procrastinating integration in mainstream research. Sustainability, 2(4):859–870, 2010.
[6] DHL. LOGISTICS TREND RADAR, 2020.
[7] Majid Eskandarpour, Pierre Dejax, Joe Miemczyk, and Olivier P´eton. Sustainable supply
chain network design: An optimization-oriented review. Omega (United Kingdom), 54:11–32,
2015.
[8] Kannan Govindan and Mohammad Fattahi. Investigating risk and robustness measures for
supply chain network design under demand uncertainty: A case study of glass supply chain.
International Journal of Production Economics, 183:680–699, 2017.
[9] Jihee Han and Kwangsup Shin.
Evaluation mechanism for structural robustness of sup-
ply chain considering disruption propagation. International Journal of Production Research,
54(1):135–151, 2016.
[10] W. H. Ip and Dingwei Wang. Resilience and friability of transportation networks: Evaluation,
analysis and optimization. IEEE Systems Journal, 5(2):189–198, 2011.
[11] Dmitry Ivanov. Revealing interfaces of supply chain resilience and sustainability: a simulation
study. International Journal of Production Research, 56(10):3507–3523, 2018.
[12] Dmitry Ivanov. Viable supply chain model: integrating agility, resilience and sustainability
perspectives—lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Opera-
tions Research, 2020.
[13] Armin Jabbarzadeh, Behnam Fahimnia, and Stefan Seuring. Dynamic supply chain network
design for the supply of blood in disasters: A robust model with real world application.
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 70(1):225–244, 2014.
[14] Walid Klibi, Alain Martel, and Adel Guitouni. The design of robust value-creating supply
chain networks: A critical review. European Journal of Operational Research, 203(2):283–293,
2010.
[15] Rhonda R Lummus and Robert J Vokurka. Deﬁning supply chain management : a historical
perspective and practical guidelines Introduction to supply chain concepts Deﬁnition of supply
chain. Industrial Management & Data Systems, Volume 99,(1):11–17, 1997.
[16] Yongyut Meepetchdee and Nilay Shah. Logistical network design with robustness and complex-
ity considerations. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management,
37(3):201–222, 2007.
37
==PAGE:39==
[17] NASA. What Is Earth?, 2017.
[18] Timothy J. Pettit, Keely L. Croxton, and Joseph Fiksel.
The Evolution of Resilience in
Supply Chain Management: A Retrospective on Ensuring Supply Chain Resilience. Journal
of Business Logistics, 40(1):56–65, 2019.
[19] Amar Ramudhin, Amin Chaabane, and Marc Paquet. Carbon market sensitive sustainable
supply chain network design. International Journal of Management Science and Engineering
Management, 5(1):30–38, 2010.
[20] Mr Reid. Haversine formula.
[21] Ahmad Rezaee, Farzad Dehghanian, Behnam Fahimnia, and Benita Beamon. Green supply
chain network design with stochastic demand and carbon price. Annals of Operations Research,
250(2):463–485, 2017.
[22] Stefan Seuring and Martin M¨uller. From a literature review to a conceptual framework for
sustainable supply chain management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16(15):1699–1710, 2008.
[23] Han Shih.
Facility Location Decisions Based on Driving Distances on Spherical Surface.
American Journal of Operations Research, 05(05):450–492, 2015.
[24] Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinberg, and Vipin Kumar. Introduction to Data Mining.
[25] The Guardian. What are CO2e and global warming potential (GWP)?
[26] Mohsen Varsei and Sergey Polyakovskiy. Sustainable supply chain network design: A case of
the wine industry in Australia. Omega (United Kingdom), 66:236–247, 2017.
[27] Zhaohui Wu and Mark Pagell. Balancing priorities: Decision-making in sustainable supply
chain management. Journal of Operations Management, 29(6):577–590, 2011.
[28] George A Zsidisin. Revisiting Supply Chain Risk.
38
==PAGE:40==
8
Appendix
8.1
Appendix A
Step
m u l t i p l i e r :
4
Increment :
1
Number of
r e p l i c a t i o n s :
1
Starting
i t e r a t i o n
with 20
c l u s t e r s
K−means modified
algorithm
f i n i s h e d :
11
i t e r a t i o n s
fo r
20
c l u s t e r s
The timelimit on the
s o l v e r
i s :
544.7165157794952
Start
Solving
The s o l ution
time was :
65.72458869999991
The o b j e c t i v e
Value
i s :
94156752.90808608
Number of
chosen
plants :
6
Number of
p o t e n t i a l
plants :
20
Number of
fixed
centroids
as
input
to
the
modified K−means algorithm :
6
I t e r a t i o n
1
Choosing 24
c l u s t e r s
with
m u l t i p l i e r
4
K−means modified
algorithm
f i n i s h e d :
6
i t e r a t i o n s
fo r
24
c l u s t e r s
The timelimit on the
s o l v e r
i s :
443.4175581932068
Start
Solving
The s o l ution
time was :
70.93936670000039
The o b j e c t i v e
Value
i s :
90626690.07229793
Number of
chosen
plants :
6
Number of
p o t e n t i a l
plants :
24
Number of
fixed
centroids
as
input
to
the
modified K−means algorithm :
6
I t e r a t i o n
2
Choosing 24
c l u s t e r s
with
m u l t i p l i e r
4
K−means modified
algorithm
f i n i s h e d :
8
i t e r a t i o n s
fo r
24
c l u s t e r s
The timelimit on the
s o l v e r
i s :
320.3997540473938
Start
Solving
The s o l ution
time was :
58.86401239999941
The o b j e c t i v e
Value
i s :
89252519.68175364
Number of
chosen
plants :
6
Number of
p o t e n t i a l
plants :
24
Number of
fixed
centroids
as
input
to
the
modified K−means algorithm :
6
I t e r a t i o n
3
Choosing 24
c l u s t e r s
with
m u l t i p l i e r
4
K−means modified
algorithm
f i n i s h e d :
13
i t e r a t i o n s
fo r
24
c l u s t e r s
The timelimit on the
s o l v e r
i s :
187.73601770401
Start
Solving
The s o l ution
time was :
71.09890440000072
The o b j e c t i v e
Value
i s :
88783658.98860693
Number of
chosen
plants :
6
Number of
p o t e n t i a l
plants :
24
Number of
fixed
centroids
as
input
to
the
modified K−means algorithm :
6
I t e r a t i o n
4
Choosing 24
c l u s t e r s
with
m u l t i p l i e r
4
K−means modified
algorithm
f i n i s h e d :
6
i t e r a t i o n s
fo r
24
c l u s t e r s
The timelimit on the
s o l v e r
i s :
75.86255860328674
Start
Solving
The s o l ution
time was :
65.39718540000013
The o b j e c t i v e
Value
i s :
88395487.0947552
Number of
chosen
plants :
6
Number of
p o t e n t i a l
plants :
24
39
==PAGE:41==
Number of
fixed
centroids
as
input
to
the
modified K−means algorithm :
6
The algorithm
has
f i n i s h e d
with the
best
solution :
88395487.0947552
8.2
Appendix B
Figure 31: Sustainability versus resilience with 5 repeats
Figure 32: Sustainability versus resilience with 15 repeats
40
