==PAGE:1==
A FSMD-based Framework for
Hardware Design and Analysis
Tobias Lindstrøm
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Writing software that works in embedded systems can be diﬃcult because an
embedded system often has physical limitations such as speed, memory, or area.
Therefore, people studying software should also be exposed to hardware. There
is no need to build the physical hardware for a software student therefore sim-
ulation should be preferred.
Additionally, it can also be more familiar to a
software student if the framework used provides a familiar interface such as a
programming language.
The purpose of this thesis is to design and implement an FSMD based framework
to be used, for designing and analyzing hardware, by bachelor students studying
software. First, the design for this framework is explored, then how it can be
implemented. Following this is the tests used to validate that the features of
the framework work as expected, along with larger experiments to verify that
the framework is capable of capturing such designs. After this, a comparative
discussion is had where the framework is compared against similar frameworks
and languages. Lastly, recommendations for future work are given.
The framework consists of two main components; a compiler for a custom C-style
language to be used for describing the designs, and a simulator for simulating the
designs. We explore the way to properly simulate FSMD models concurrently
and hierarchically, along with how their connections, as well as general simula-
tion settings, should be conveyed to the simulator. Furthermore, we create a
language for describing the models, including how a compiler for this language
should be constructed. Additionally, we semantics are deﬁned for detecting and
warning about inter-model combinational loops, as well as semantics for the
simulation settings and the compiler. A system for producing energy estimates,
==PAGE:4==
ii
as well as how simulations should be visualized, is also explored.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Det kan være svært at skrive software som virker i indlejrede systemer fordi
indlejrede systemer normalt har begrænsninger i forhold til deres hastighed,
hukommelse og størrelse. Derfor bør software studerende udsættes for og lærer
om hardware. Der er ikke noget behov for at en software studerende fysisk kan
bygge hardware, hvilket gør simulation til det åbenlyse valg. Desuden kan simu-
lation være nemmere for en software studerende at forstå, givet at det brugte
framework indeholder en kendt grænseﬂade så som et programmeringssprog.
Formålet med denne afhandling er at designe og implementere et FSMD base-
ret framework der kan bruges af software studerende på bachelor niveau til at
designe og analysere hardware. Til at starte med udforsker vi designet af dette
framework, efterfulgt af hvordan det kan implementeres. Bagefter gennemgår vi
de tests der er benyttet til at sikre at de forskellige funktioner virker som de
skal. Desuden gennemgår vi to størrer eksperimenter som viser at frameworket
kan bruges til andet end små eksempler. Derudover diskuterer og sammenligner
vi vores framework med andre lignende frameworks og sprog. Til sidst giver vi
et bud på mulige fremtidige tilføjelser.
Det skabte framework består af to hovedkomponenter; et programmeringssprog
lavet til at beskrive hardware designs med tilhørende kompiler, og en simulator
til at simulere disse designs. Vi udforsker hvordan man bedst kan simulere FSMD
modeller samtidigt og hierarkisk, og hvordan disse modeller kan sammenkobles,
samt hvordan dette og generelle indstillinger for en simulation kan beskrives
for simulatoren. Derudover skaber vi et sprog der bruges til at beskrive disse
modeller, samt en kompiler som kan oversætte dette sprog. Desuden deﬁnerer vi
en semantiks analyse der kan opdage og advare om inter-model kombinatoriske
==PAGE:6==
iv
løkker, samt semantik for simulations indstillinger og kompileren. Til sidst ska-
ber vi et system der kan give energi estimater for en simulation, samt et system
der kan bruges til at visualisere hvordan en simulation har forløbet.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulﬁlment of the re-
quirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis deals with the creation of a framework that can be used for designing
and analyzing hardware systems.
The thesis was supervised by Professor Jan Madsen and co-supervised by Post-
doc Luca Pezzarossa.
Lyngby, 03-January-2021
Tobias Lindstrøm
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jan Madsen and Luca Pezzarossa for their
valuable guidance, help and feedback. Without them this thesis would not have
been possible.
I would also like to thank my friends and familiy for their continued support
throughout my degree and for their help with looking through the thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Combinational circuits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
FSMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Modelling an FSMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Simulating a single FSMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Related Works
9
3.1
VHDL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Verilog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Gezel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Chisel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
SpecC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Design
13
4.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Simulating multiple models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1
Model I/O
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Simulation settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.3
Concurrent models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4.2.4
Hierarchical models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.5
Simulation composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Model interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.1
Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.2
Compiler
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Extended semantics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.1
Inter-model combinational loops
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.2
Simulation settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.3
Compiler semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.1
Reporting energy consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.2
Providing feasible estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Visualising the simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.7
Memory blocks and new expressions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Implementation
39
5.1
Concurrent Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Hierarchical Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.1
Merging hierarchy and concurrency . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Simulation Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Compiler
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.1
Lexer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.2
Parser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.3
Error recovery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.6
Visualisation of the Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.7
Memory blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.8
DataValue class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
Testing and Experiments
61
6.1
Unit Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
End to end testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.2.1
System Tester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.3
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3.1
An Experiment: Simulation of a small CPU . . . . . . . .
64
6.3.2
An Experiment: Simulation of an FSMD for pixel erosion
66
7
Discussion
69
7.1
Gezel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Chisel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.3
VHDL and Verilog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.4
Thesis Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.5
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
8
Conclusion
77
A Time schedule
81
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
An embedded system is a type of computer system that work within some larger
system, like a control system of a coﬀee maker or a hearth rate monitor. Em-
bedded systems often have limitations that other computer systems do not have,
such as processing speed, amount of memory or amount of power. Because of
these limitations, special hardware is usually made for the speciﬁc purpose of
the embedded system and regular software development ﬂows might be aﬀected
because of this. If the person developing the software does not have an un-
derstanding of how the hardware of the embedded system works then it might
prove diﬃcult for them to produce a program that functions as expected, or at
all. Because of this it is important that computer science students are exposed
to hardware and learn how it works.
Designing a hardware system and analyzing its beneﬁts and shortcomings pro-
vides practical experience with the ﬁeld. In order to know if a proposed design
works one would have to either build or simulate it. Not only is the process
of building the hardware largely irrelevant, in the scope of understanding hard-
ware for the sake of understanding software, it can also become rather expensive
since the design would have to be made in a trial and error fashion. Designing
hardware this way would most likely result in the need to build the hardware
many times. Thus the choice falls on simulation which can provide the addi-
tional beneﬁt of being familiar to a computer science student if the tool(s) used
for simulation resembles popular software languages and systems.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
We propose a framework for conducting this design and analysis through simu-
lation. The framework allows the user to describe a hardware design in a C-style
language, which should be familiar to a computer science student, and simulate
said design.
The results of said simulation will allow the user to determine
whether the hardware design that they have proposed, works as they expect.
The framework is capable of warning the user of errors in the design that would
cause the design not to function, such as combinational loops and connections to
unspeciﬁed components as well as errors that would cause the simulator to not
work. Additionally, the framework produces estimates of the amount of energy
used by the design, both on a cycle to cycle basis and in total throughout the
simulation, as well as information about which types of components, and how
many, were used. The estimates are based on conﬁgurable metrics provided by
the user.
This framework is primarily meant to be used in the course 02132 Computer
Systems at the Technical University of Denmark, which is a third semester
course for bachelor students with the software technology line. Because of this,
there has been a focus on making the framework easily approachable by such
a student, and consequently some design and implementation decisions are less
optimal for a wider audience.
This report is a detailed description of how this framework works, how it has
been implemented, and how it has been tested as well as the thoughts and
decisions that have gone into this. Additionally, existing tools and frameworks
are explored as well as how this framework measures up against them.
The report is divided into the following chapters, in order:
• Background; Information necessary for understanding the rest of the re-
port.
• Related works; An account of diﬀerent tools and frameworks that exist
around the problem area.
• Design; An explanation of the diﬀerent features, the problems they present
and the solutions to solve them.
• Implementation; An explanation of how important features are imple-
mented as well as highlights of interesting or elegant algorithms.
• Testing and experiments; A run down of the testing techniques used and
the experiments conducted to make sure that the framework functions as
expected.
• Discussion; A discussion of how the framework compares to similar frame-
works.
==PAGE:17==
3
• Future work; A list of features that would prove good additions to the
framework.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter presents the concepts necessary for understanding the rest of the
thesis.
2.1
Combinational circuits
A combinational circuit is a type of circuit that consists of a set of hardware
components, connected by wires, that each have inputs and outputs where the
outputs are dependant on at least one of the inputs. Examples of such hardware
components are: adders, subtractors, comparators and basic logic gates such as
And and Or gates. Combinational circuits are usually connected to registers
and thus comprise the register to register logic.
2.2
FSMD
FSMD stands for Finite State Machine with a Datapath and is an extension of
the regular deterministic FSM. This extensions allows for the modeling of mem-
ory and memory altering operations. A datapath is a collection of registers and
==PAGE:20==
6
Background
Figure 2.1: Finite state machine and datapath corresponding to the GCD al-
gorithm.
combinational logic components such as adders and subtractors. By combining
these two concepts, the FSM and the datapath, we get a concept capable of
doing speciﬁc register to register computations based on the state of the FSM
and the data in the registers of the datapath. An example of an FSM and a
datapath for a simple GCD algorithm can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1.
2.2.1
Modelling an FSMD
To be able to use the FSMD concept in software we need to be able to create
a model that represents it.
The datapath can be modelled as a set of data
variables that are either a register or a signal and a set of actions which in turn
are a set of assignment expressions. An assignment expression is an expression
that assigns a value to a data variable.
The value can either be a constant
value or an expression made up of data variables and operators such as addition
and multiplication. The FSM can be modeled mostly as normal with the small
change that instead of transitions depending only in input they also can depend
on the state of the datapath, and instead of setting outputs on transitions we
execute actions. An example of this, based on the same gcd algorithm as in
ﬁgure 2.1, can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 FSMD
7
Figure 2.2: FSMD model corresponding to the GCD algorithm.
Putting these two models together into one we get an FSMD which can be
formally deﬁned as a 7-tuple, (S, s0, I, O, M, T, A) where:
1. S is a set of all states
2. s0 ∈S is the initial state
3. I is a set of all input signals
4. O is a set of all output signals
5. M is a set of memory variables
6. A is a set of actions and T : S × I × M 7→S + A is a next state function
that maps; a state, the input and the memory to another state and a set
of actions to be executed.
How this speciﬁcally can be translated in software concepts can be seen in [Lin],
which is the report that I have written at DTU as part of a preliminary project
to this thesis that explored the modelling and simulation of a single FSMD.
2.2.2
Simulating a single FSMD
From the model of an FSMD it is possible to build a simulator that can simulate
a given FSMD on a cycle basis. Such a simulator was build in the, previously
==PAGE:22==
8
Background
Figure 2.3: An overview of the architecture of the simulator that this thesis is
built upon
mentioned, preliminary project and the resulting architecture can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.3. The architecture consist of four subcomponents where two of them
contain the core functionality and the other two are important helpers. The
two core subcomponents are the Simulator and the Semantic Analyzer. The
Simulator is the subcomponent responsible for running the actual simulation
of the FSMD model and the Semantic Analyzer is responsible for making sure
that the semantic rules that are deﬁned are kept and thus that the simulation
will not encounter any issues during the simulation. The helper subcomponents
are; the Programmatic Interface which allows the user to deﬁne FSMD models
using code, and the Memory Dumper which writes the values of the signals and
registers thought the simulation to a ﬁle such that the user can see how the
simulation went.
The simulation works by ﬁrst ﬁguring out which transition to take in the given
cycle. It does this by looking at the transitions that are possible to take in the
state the model is currently in and then it chooses the ﬁrst of these that has
its guards evaluate to true. When such a transition is found it executes all the
actions associated with that state and changes the current state of the model
to be the destination of the transition. Finally, at the end of the cycle it lets all
the registers carry through with updating their stored value as to emulate how
real hardware registers only update when the clock ticks.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Related Works
This chapter will present diﬀerent languages and frameworks, that already exist,
which can be used for designing and analyzing hardware. While all of these
languages allow the user to utilize the FSMD concept in their designs, some of
them are better than others at capturing it. Most of these frameworks will be
used as comparison points in the discussion chapter later on in the report.
3.1
VHDL
VHDL is a hardware description language of which a subset of the language
itself can be synthesized into hardware. VHDL is only a language standard,
which allows others to develop tools using a standardised language. Unlike the
product of this thesis, VHDL is not based on a model such as the FSMD, instead
a VHDL design consists of language constructs that mainly take inspiration from
languages such as ADA, mixed with hardware concepts such as timing. While
not based on FSMD it is still possible to utilize the FSMD concept by using
a register to keep the state and the switch statement to deﬁne the behaviour
in a given state. VHDL mixes control logic and combinational logic, like many
other languages [vhd00]. VHDL allows the user to write designs at multiple
levels of abstraction, including the register transfer level. Most of the tools that
simulate VHDL are proprietary and it is thus not possible to make sure if and
==PAGE:24==
10
Related Works
how certain features are implemented. There does exists open source VHDL
simulators though, such as GHDL [ghd]. GHDL does however not provide a
description of their implementation, thus if one wishes to ﬁgure out how a
speciﬁc feature works they would have to examine through the entire source
code.
3.2
Verilog
Verilog is, like VHDL, an IEEE standard hardware description language. Verilog
is more C-like than VHDL, less verbose and might be easier to learn, however,
Verilog is less extensible. Verilog, like VHDL allows the user to write designs on
multiple abstraction levels, including the register transfer level and has timing
constructs. Like VHDL, Verilog is not based on the FSMD concept but it is
possible to utilize it by using registers to capture states and the case construct
which works like a switch expression [Smi96] [ver06].
3.3
Gezel
Gezel is a hardware description language that allows for designing and simu-
lating hardware models. Gezel operates at the register transfer level and uses
FSMDs for modelling, just like the product of this thesis. Gezel has the pos-
sibility of co-simulating its models, which means that it is possible to inter-
face from a regular programming language, thus allowing for hardware/soft-
ware co-design. Besides simulating FSMD hardware models, Gezel contains a
translating tool that can translate the models in to a synthesizable subset of
VHDL [SC05] [Sch10]. Gezel was previously used, in the course 02132 Com-
puter Systems at DTU, as the language and tool for teaching students about
hardware design.
An example of the GCD algorithm, from the background chapter, written in
Gezel can be seen in listing 3.1.
Listing 3.1: The GCD algorithm, written in Gezel.
1
dp GCD(in a, b :ns(32); out c :ns(32)) {
2
reg x, y, res :ns(32);
3
4
always { $display("cycle=", $cycle, "␣a=", a, "␣b=", b); }
5
6
sfg a0 { x = a;
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Chisel
11
7
y = b; }
8
9
sfg a1 { x = x - y; }
10
11
sfg a2 { y = y - x; }
12
13
sfg a3 { c = res; }
14
15
sfg a4 { res = x; }
16
}
17
18
fsm GCD_ctl(gcd) {
19
initial s0;
20
state s1, s2, s3;
21
22
@s0 (a0) -> s1;
23
@s1 if(!(x == y)) then (a3) -> s2;
24
else if(x == y) then (a3) -> s3;
25
@s2 if(x > y) then (a1, a3) -> s2;
26
else if(x < y) then (a2, a3) -> s2;
27
else if(x == y) then (a4, a3) -> s3;
28
@s3 (a3) -> s3;
29
}
30
31
dp test_gcd {
32
sig a, b, c : ns(32);
33
use GCD(a, b, c);
34
always {
35
a = 88;
36
b = 24;
37
}
38
}
39
40
system S {
41
test_gcd;
42
}
3.4
Chisel
Chisel is a hardware construction language, written as a library for the Scala
programming language. Hardware designs can be written in Chisel and then
either; be translated into register transfer level Verilog designs that can then
by synthesized into physical hardware, or tested using test libraries provided by
the creators of Chisel. Like VHDL and Verilog, Chisel is not based on FSMDs
==PAGE:26==
12
Related Works
but it is possible to utilize the concept. Chisel adds concepts from traditional
software engineering such as object oriented and functional programming to the
world of hardware description languages which allow for a greater reuse of code
and components [BVR+12] [chi] [Sch19].
3.5
SpecC
SpecC is an extension to the ANSI-C language that adds constructs that allow
the user to create hardware designs. Being an extension to ANSI-C, it has a
potentially ﬂatter learning curve for existing programmers. While not limited to
it, SpecC enables the use of FSMDs, through a language construct called fsdm,
for modelling behaviour. Unlike the product of this thesis, but like VHDL and
Verilog, SpecC operates with an explicit clock as well as timings, leaving the
user to deal with potential race conditions of concurrent execution as well as
clock synchronization [DGG+].
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Design
This chapters presents the proposed design as well as the considerations and
decisions made while arriving upon said design.
Firstly the architecture of
proposed framework will be presented and then rest of the chapter will be sub-
divided into sections where each section will revolve around a speciﬁc part of
the design. This design is an expansion upon an existing piece of software. That
software is the product of a preliminary project that we did at DTU which re-
volved around modelling and simulating a single FSMD [Lin]. Because of this,
any references to the current design are that of the existing software while the
proposed design is the product of this thesis.
The proposed design consists of; the architecture of the design, the ability to
simulate multiple models both concurrently and in a hierarchy, a custom lan-
guage for describing models, the semantics that must be followed in order for
simulation to work and make sense, the ability to keep track of energy spent
by the components of ones design, how simulations should be visualized, as well
as expressions and data variable types that allow the framework to capture a
larger range of hardware designs.
==PAGE:28==
14
Design
Figure 4.1: An overview of the architecture of the framework. The directed
arrows signify directed data ﬂow.
4.1
Architecture
The overall architecture of the framework consists of two components: a com-
piler and a simulator. The compiler is responsible for compiling descriptions of
models into a format understandable by the simulator. The simulator is then
responsible for simulating the described models and producing ﬁles detailing the
ﬁnal and intermediary results throughout the simulation. A diagram showing
these components and their primary components can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
This architecture is an extension of the architecture in ﬁgure 2.3 not only in the
way of adding more components and subcomponents but also by adding more
features to the existing subcomponents.
The diﬀerent subcomponents are responsible for one or multiple features and
we will quickly go through them here. How these features are realized will be
presented in the rest of the chapter.
Compiler
The compiler consists of three primary subcomponents; the Lexer, the Parser
and the Translator.
The Lexer is responsible for reading the input ﬁle and
transforming into a token stream used by the Parser. The Parser then builds
an abstract syntax tree from this token stream using the rules of the language.
Finally, the Translator translates the abstract syntax tree into a format that
the simulator understands and writes it to a ﬁle.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Architecture
15
Simulator
The simulator consists of six primary subcomponents, four of which are extended
versions of the original architecture and two new ones. The new ones are the
Model Deserializer and the Value Change Dump Writer.
Model Deserializer
The Model Deserializer reads and deserializes a supplied model ﬁle, creating a
model as if it had been created through the Programmatic Interface.
Programmatic interface
The only diﬀerence between the Programmatic Interface in this architecture and
the old one is that it contains the new constructs that are added in the design;
namely, memory blocks, bit range expressions and unary minus expressions.
Memory Dumper
The Memory Dumper, like the Programmatic Interface, is an updated version
of the old one. In this version the Memory Dumper is also used to keep track of
how much energy has been spent in a given cycle and accumulative throughout
the whole simulation.
Simulator
The Simulator is the component that has received the most updates seeing as it is
one of the core subcomponents. In this architecture the simulator subcomponent
is capable of simulating multiple models concurrently and each of these models
have the possibility of being hierarchical. Additionally, it is possible to connect
the input and output signals of these models to each other. The simulator has
been changed such that it simulates named instances of models. This allows for
the simulation of multiples of the same model, as well as simulation groups. A
simulation group is a named group of models that can be used when describing
a simulation setup to make it easier to reuse subsystems, as well as getting an
overview of large systems.
==PAGE:30==
16
Design
VCDWriter
The VCDWriter is responsible for writing the Value Change Dump ﬁle of the
simulation which is a ﬁle that contains all the value changes that signals, reg-
isters and memory blocks go through, throughout the simulation. This ﬁle can
the be used by programs like GTKWave [gtk] to visualize the simulation.
Semantic Analyzer
With the Semantic Analyzer being the other core subcomponent it too has
received a few updates. With the expansion of the capabilities of the Simulator
and thus the kinds of systems it needs to support, the Semantic Analyzer has
been extended to include semantic analysis of the combinational loop problem
that this poses. Additionally, the Semantic Analyzer has been updated to also
analyze the settings ﬁle that the Simulator receives and creates the simulation
from.
4.2
Simulating multiple models
Simulating a single model is straight forward.
You simply ﬁgure out which
transition to take based on the state the model is currently in and its data, once
you know which transition to take you execute the actions of the transition
and you move on to the next cycle where you do it all over again. Things get
a little bit more complicated when you need to simulate multiple models and
questions like; "which model do you evaluate ﬁrst?", "what if multiple models
are dependant on each other?" and "how do you even describe how all the
models are connected?" as well as "how does the simulator know which models
to simulate?", needs to be answered.
With regards to the latter, the existing simulator takes a single model as a
parameter. This should be changed such that it instead takes a dictionary, that
maps names of models to model instances. This would allow the simulator to
not only know which types of models to simulate but also how many as well as
how to refer to them when reporting results or errors.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Simulating multiple models
17
4.2.1
Model I/O
In the current design, with there only being one model, simply setting input
signals to a certain value by calling a function on the simulator before the
simulation is run, makes sense.
Additionally, since there is only one model,
the output signals are merely read as results since there is nowhere else to
connect them to. However, with multiple models it should be possible to connect
the output of one model to the input of another one, otherwise, if there is no
connection between the models then they may as well be simulated alone in
their own simulation.
Connecting these signals could be achieved in the same way as setting input
signals currently is, but doing so would require for the program to be recompiled
every time a connection, or an input signal set to a value, needs to be changed.
Instead, we propose that an external ﬁle be read by the simulator, this ﬁle would
contain these connections and constant values. This will not only allow for the
model program to be compiled once and reused multiple times with diﬀerent
setups, but it will also completely remove the need of writing Java code if the
simulator is capable of loading in a model that has been serialized to a ﬁle.
There is only two diﬀerent ways to describe a connection, either it is an input
which has a connected output or the other way around. There is no need to have
both, if you have one of them you can simply infer the other since they both
contain the information about which input and which output is being referenced.
This information can simply be stored in a dictionary keyed with the name of
the input signal. There is a small caveat, and that is the possibility of setting an
input to a constant value instead of connecting it to an output. We can either
store these constant value connection in a separate dictionary or we can store it
together with the other connections and then having a boolean value indicating
whether the connection is a constant value or a connected output. Practically
there is no diﬀerence, but we propose the use of a single dictionary to avoid
overcrowding the external ﬁle with entries that needs to be ﬁlled out.
4.2.2
Simulation settings
The external ﬁle used to describe model I/O could be used to contain all settings
relevant for a simulation, such as; the name of the simulation, the number of
cycles to run, and which models should be a part of the simulation.
Doing it this way even allows for multiple of the same model to be used in
a simulation by letting the entries in this ﬁle be instances of a given model
==PAGE:32==
18
Design
instead of a list of which models to use. This ﬁle could then simply be fed to
the simulator instead of the single model it currently gets as described earlier.
The ﬁle obviously needs some kind of format and since the simulator already
deals with JSON ﬁles, in the form of memory dumps, it makes sense to let this
be a JSON ﬁle as well since it will not require much extra eﬀort with regards to
implementation.
4.2.3
Concurrent models
Having concurrent models will allow for a more realistic emulation of hardware.
Additionally, it will make it easier to create some complex systems given that
we can have multiple state machines to make up the logic of the system instead
of a single state machine that has to emulate having multiple states.
Having the possibility to connect model I/O already, as well as supplying the
simulator with the multiple models, leaves us with ﬁguring out how to run these
models concurrently. The obvious choice is to run each model in its own oper-
ating system thread and leave the concurrency to the operating system and the
CPU. However, not only does that require some sort of synchronization between
the diﬀerent threads, to make sure that all models execute the same cycle at the
same time, it also introduces the possibility of a lot of race conditions. Thus we
need to have one thread that runs the simulation one cycle at a time. We then
need to ﬁgure out which model do we execute ﬁrst and there are three cases we
need to consider:
1. When none of the models in the simulation have connected I/O. Since none
of the models are connected we can simply choose to start with whichever
model we want because the results of the execution will not impact the
following models.
2. When there is a chain of connected models without any loops, ie.
no
model has both its inputs and outputs connected to the same superset of
models. To choose an ordering we can simply start with the ﬁrst model
in the chain of connected models and work our way through them by
following the outputs.
3. When there is a chain of connected models and that chain contains one
or more loops, ie. a model has its inputs and output connected to one
or more models in the same part of the chain. This case is more tricky
than the previous two because it could mean that the inputs of a model
have not been set yet, when executing that model, because the model that
needs to set those inputs needs to have its own inputs set by the outputs of
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Simulating multiple models
19
the ﬁrst-mentioned model. For example, if model one has the expression
x = y + 1, where y is an input set by the output of model two. Model
two has a an expression y = z + 2, where y is the output setting y for
model one and z is an input set by another expression in model one. If
choosing to execute model one ﬁrst then y has not been set, and if choosing
to execute model two ﬁrst then z has not been set. This scenario might
be encountered because there is a combinational loop, which is something
we want to avoid, but how we will handle those will be discussed later.
In any case there is no way to choose an ordering of models, at least not
without manipulating the actions. An idea could be to split up the actions
of those kinds of models, such that the expressions that are dependant on
the looped input is executed separately at the end of the then unfolded
loop.
Unfortunately, the actions that a model executes, in a given cycle, are dependant
on which guard is fulﬁlled, which can, in turn, be dependant on an input signal.
This means that if a model, A, executes an action the result might be that
another model, B, will execute a diﬀerent action than it would have before A
executed its action. Thus it is not possible to know which action a model will
execute before the cycle is over. The reason why this is a problem is because it
means we are unable to tell beforehand which actions are going to be executed
and the proposed solutions to the cases rely on this knowledge. Instead we can
perhaps utilize the same approach as is done with the expressions that comprise
an action, that is, using dependency graphs.
4.2.3.1
Dependency graphs and merging
Actions, in the existing simulator, use dependency graphs both to ﬁgure out
if they uphold their semantics and to do the actual reordering of the expres-
sions. The way this works is that since there are no cycles in the graph, by
the semantics, and all the edges are directed, a dependency graph is a Directed
Acyclic Graph(DAG). By doing a topological sort of a DAG we can ﬁnd the or-
der in which the nodes are independent, in the sense that all their dependencies
are reached before they are reached. Thus since the nodes in the dependency
graph represent our expressions we have an order to execute them in, where an
expression will not be executed before its dependencies have been.
The overall problem to solve in all the three cases mentioned earlier is that some
expressions might be dependant on an input signal which is in turn dependant
on an action from another model. We could simply merge all of the actions
into one and re-order the expressions in that action using a dependency graph.
==PAGE:34==
20
Design
By doing this, there is no ordering of models and thus no models that need
to be executed before others, there are only expressions that might need to be
executed before others and since these are re-ordered there are no longer any
undeﬁned variables. However, this too has the issue that we need to know which
actions we are going to execute beforehand. It would be possible to simply re-
make the merged action whenever an expression causes a model to change its
mind about which action it should execute, but this is not free in regards of
speed and memory. A more optimal solution is to rely on the fact that real
electronics have a property called eventual consistency.
4.2.3.2
Eventual consistency
Eventual consistency, or stability, in electronics is the concept that, at some
point in time in a given clock cycle the circuit will reach a deterministic state.
This happens because; when the clock ticks, power goes to all the components,
some of these components might depend on each other and most of them have
an internal delay. Even though this delay is very short, it means that, for a
moment a component might use a wrong value and thus output a wrong value.
However, when the delays are overcome, the right values will propagate, and
eventually, the circuit will be stable and have a result. This result will be the
same every time because the delays and subsequent switching of values occur
for a much shorter time frame than the clock is high.
Mimicking this behavior of continuously supplying power to the components,
by continuously re-executing the models until we reach stability will thus give
us the same results as real electronics would. The questions are then how do
we know when we have reached stability and how do we make sure we only re-
execute the models that used wrong values. The answer to the ﬁrst question is
quite simple, we just keep track of the output signals of all the models and check
if a re-execution results in a change in the outputs. If no models have changed
outputs after the last re-execution then there is stability and we can move on
to the next cycle. This could result in an inﬁnite amount of re-executions, but
only if there is a combinational loop. Since we want to actively avoid these,
then it is not an inssue. The answer to the second question is sensitivity lists.
4.2.3.3
Sensitivity lists
The only reason for a model to re-execute is if one of its input values has changed.
Otherwise, the resulting outputs will just be the same since it is the only variable
that can change during a cycle, because registers do not get updated until the
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Simulating multiple models
21
cycle is over and signals need to depend on either registers, inputs or constants.
Additionally, it is possible that not all inputs are used in a given action. In
other words, there exists a set of inputs for a given action that when one of
them is updated , requires the action to re-execute. Furthermore, one or more
guards for the transitions in a given state of a model might depend on input
signals, in which case the model would also be sensitive to these. Adding these
together for a given model in a given state, gives us a set of input signals that
when changed should result in a re-execution of the model. This type of set is
called a sensitivity list and we can compute it by looking up all the input signals
that are a part of the right hand side of all expressions in all the actions that
can be taken in a given state as well as adding any inputs that are a part of the
guards.
4.2.4
Hierarchical models
Some components of a system might not need to produce results in every cycle,
this can be handled by setting up synchronization signals between the compo-
nents and having them be concurrent. However, this would result in the com-
ponent being supplied power and producing results in every cycle even though
other components would be aware that the results are not real data. It would
make more sense to let the component be a sub-component of the component
that needs to use it occasionally. This way it would be possible to control when
it should be in use. This does make the component more complex but the overall
system becomes less complex.
We can emulate this sub-component behavior by replacing the FSM part of our
FSMD with an HSM, which stands for Hierarchical State Machine. The way
an HSM works is by allowing a state to be a superstate with an associated
submachine[BL98]. When an HSM reaches a superstate it hands over control
to the submachine instead of following and executing its own transitions. With
the submachine in control, it is executed every cycle instead of its parent until
it reaches one of its designated end states. Once an end state is reached the
control is handed back to the parent, and it can resume executing the superstate
like it was a normal state. A state transition diagram depicting this handover
of control can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2.
Normally when you use HSMs the parent machine and its submachines all share
the same variables. However, this would mean that when writing the models,
the submachines’ actions will only work on a speciﬁc parent. Namely, one that
has the same signals and registers that the submachine uses. This then means
that to use a machine as a submachine for multiple parent machines, the parent
machines would need to have the same names for variables or they would have
==PAGE:36==
22
Design
Figure 4.2: Diagram showing the eﬀective state transitions of a parent and its
sub machine as it is done normally in an HFSMD. Red transitions
are taken before black and indicate hand over oﬀcontrol. The
dashed lines indicate the expansion of the content from the narrow
side to the wide side.
to add new speciﬁc variables for that submachine. Additionally, it means that
the machine can never be used as a standalone machine because it would have
no variables of its own. If a submachine were allowed to have its own variables
and they were simple merged with a parent machine’s then the parent machine
would never be able to be used without the submachine as it would need to have
actions that reference the sub machines registers to pass data to it and read its
results. Furthermore, all communication between parent and submachine would
have to be through registers since they do not execute actions in the same cycle,
and data in signals get wiped at the beginning of every cycle.
Therefore, to allow for greater reusability of machines, a few changes to the
handover of control need to be made. If the parent and submachine do not
share variables then they need to use their input and output signals. However,
since signals’ data is wiped at the beginning of a cycle, the action from the parent
machine that sets the input signals, as well as the action from the submachine,
would need to occur in the same cycle, with the parent action going ﬁrst and
followed by the sub action. The same needs to happen for the exit handoﬀ,
that is; the action from the submachine that sets the output signals during a
transition to an end state needs to happen before, but in the same cycle, as the
action from the parent model that reads the output signals. A state transition
diagram depicting this can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Model interface
23
Figure 4.3: Diagram showing the eﬀective state transitions of a parent and its
sub machine. The red transitions are the transitions that are ef-
fectively taken and the dashed black transitions are the transitions
deﬁned in the model descriptions. The dashed lines indicate the
expansion of the content from the narrow side to the wide side.
4.2.5
Simulation composition
When creating a very large system with a lot of model instances the simulation
settings ﬁle will most likely become very large and it might become diﬃcult
to navigate. There likely exist natural groupings of components in a very large
system, therefore it should be allowed for a simulation to consist of a composition
of multiple simulation groups. In practice this would mean that it would be
possible, when deﬁning a model instance, to choose between a model type or a
simulation group deﬁned in another simulation settings ﬁle. Additionally, this
would have the beneﬁt of allowing one to also reuse these simulation groups to
save even further on space.
4.3
Model interface
Currently to create a model that can be simulated, one has to use a program-
matic interface written in Java.
The interface is simple; the user adds the
diﬀerent constructs using a method called AddX where X is the type of con-
struct they wish to add. However, creating diﬀerent constructs, especially the
expressions used in actions and transition, is quite verbose due to their object-
oriented and polymorphic nature. For example, to do the simple assignment "a
= b + c" one must instantiate 5 nested objects, as can be seen in listing 4.1,
which is quite cumbersome.
==PAGE:38==
24
Design
Listing 4.1: The expression: a = b + c written in the programmatic interface
1
new AssignmentExpression(new RegisterReference("a"), new
AdditionExpression(new SignalReference("b"), new
SignalReference("c"));
Furthermore, since the targeted users of this framework are 3rd-semester com-
puter science students, the syntax of "a = b + c" already constitutes an expres-
sion in a C-style programming language.
This means that not only must the student spend time learning how FSMDs
work and which parts constitute one, they must also spend time learning a
more verbose and cumbersome syntax for something they already are familiar
with. The proposed solution is therefore to create a language with a simple non-
verbose C-style syntax that can be compiled into a format that the simulator
can understand and use. With this language, the learning curve should be less
steep since parts of it are already known.
4.3.1
Language
In a C-style language, a program consists of one or more classes that contain
variables and functions.
The execution of such a program is then done by
running a speciﬁc function and letting that function invoke others if necessary.
In our setting, we have FSMDs which are much like classes in that they contain
data variables (registers, memory blocks, and signals) and functions (actions).
The execution of an FSMD is a little diﬀerent though since actions can not
invoke other actions and there is no control logic inside of them. Instead, the
control logic is our transitions which are essentially conditional statements that,
based on the current state and data variables, chose which actions to execute.
To make our language look as much like a C-style language as possible we can
let classes be FSMDs and functions be actions. From this we have FSMDs that
contain data variables and actions. We also need to declare which states are
supposed to be a part of the FSMD. To make the language appear coherent
states should be declared in a similar way as data variables since the primary
information about them is their identiﬁer. It needs to be possible to declare
submachines as well though.
This can be done by adding a parameter to a
state identiﬁer. Additionally, exactly one of the states need to be declared as
the initial state. Since there is no way to do this using only syntax, semantics
will be needed as well. For the syntax part, a state identiﬁer followed by a star
marks that state as the initial state. The semantics will then have to make sure
that exactly one state is marked.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Model interface
25
With transitions being sort of like conditional statements it makes sense that
they sort of resemble them. The guards in a transition are essentially the condi-
tions in the conditional statement so it makes sense to encapsulate them like in
a conditional statement. However, unlike the conditions in a conditional state-
ment, it is perfectly ﬁne to have no guards therefore to signal that they are
optional, square brackets should be used instead of parentheses.
The actions are what needs to happen if the guards are met, much like the
body of a condition statement. However, the actions are already deﬁned like
functions so it makes sense to simply have a set of actions to execute. For this
a comma-separated list, of names, surrounded by parentheses should be used as
it is the traditional way to denote sets, in computer science.
All that is missing from the transition now is the origin and destination states.
Since it is only possible to follow a transition if the origin state of that transition
is the current state, the origin should be at the front of the declaration since
it makes it easier to get an overview of transitions active in a given state. The
destination should be next to the origin since that way it is quick to see where
a transition leads and thus manually following the program ﬂow is easier. To
drive home the point that a transition goes from one state to the other an arrow
"->" between them should be added.
An example of how this translates to a description of a model, using the same
GCD algorithm as in ﬁgure 2.2, can be seen in listing 4.2
Listing 4.2: A description of the GCD algorithm FSMD, written in our lan-
guage
1
FSMD GCD(in a, in b, out c) {
2
Registers: x, y, res;
3
States: s0*, s1, s2, s3;
4
5
Action always { Display("Cycle:␣%s,␣Register␣x:␣%s,␣y:␣%s,␣res:␣
%s", $cycle, reg x, reg y, reg res) }
6
Action a0 { x = a;
7
y = b; }
8
Action a1 { x = x - y; }
9
Action a2 { y = y - x; }
10
Action a3 { c = res; }
11
Action a4 { res = x; }
12
13
Transition s0 -> s1 (a0, a3);
14
Transition s1 -> s2 [!(x == y)] (a3);
15
Transition s1 -> s3 [x == y] (a3);
16
Transition s2 -> s2 [x > y] (a1, a3);
17
Transition s2 -> s2 [x < y] (a2, a3);
==PAGE:40==
26
Design
18
Transition s2 -> s3 [x == y] (a4, a3);
19
Transition s3 -> s3 (a4, a3);
20
}
From this informal discussion of how the language should look, we can create a
more formal speciﬁcation. This can be done using a pseudo grammar notation
without expansion rules, where; parenthesis indicate a group, the "|" symbol
indicates a choice between its left and right operands, the star symbol is the
Kleene star, square brackets indicate that the content is optional, the "\" symbol
before any of the mentioned symbols means that the symbol is instead parsed
as its character and identiﬁer means a combination of letters, digits, the "_"
symbol and the "$" symbol.
The speciﬁcation of this language written in said pseudo grammar notation can
be seen in listing 4.3.
Listing 4.3: Pseudo grammar for the proposed language
1
Fsmd fsmdName\(((in | out) parameter)*\) {
2
[Registers: identifier [=defaultValue] [(, identifier [=
defaultValue])*]
3
[Memory: identifier \(size\) [(, identifier \(size\))*]
4
[Signal: identifier [=defaultValue] [(, identifier [=
defaultValue])*]
5
[States: identifier [\*] [\(fsmdName\)] [, identifier [\*] [\(
fsmdName\)]*]
6
7
(Action actionName{
8
(assignmentExpression [;])*
9
})*
10
11
(Transition: origin -> destination [logicalExpression*] (
actionName*))*
12
}
4.3.2
Compiler
With the design for the language in place, we need to decide on how to create the
compiler. A compiler can traditionally be looked at as two parts; the front-end
and the back-end, where the front-end is the lexer, parser, and semantic analyzer
and the back-end does code generation, optimization and object linking.
Since we want our language to be translated to something that our simulator
can read and use we do not need the back-end part of the compiler.
This
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Model interface
27
leaves us with having to create a lexer, parser, and semantic analyzer.
The
purpose of the lexer is to tokenize our ﬁle, or string, containing something
written in our language. The parser then takes the token stream, ﬁgures out
which constructs they constitute, and creates an abstract syntax tree. With the
abstract syntax tree, the semantic analyzer can then ﬁgure out if the semantic
rules of the language are followed. Additionally, since we want the simulator to
read and use the output of the compiler we need something that can transform
the output of the parser into a suitable format. This could simply be by using
the programmatic interface or it could be a serialized version of a model. Which
one to choose depends mostly on whether or not the compiler and simulator are
going to be a single program or two separate ones.
The beneﬁt of having one program is that we can easily use the programmatic
interface to create the model, even while parsing it, which avoids having to
transform the parser output at all.
However, if someone wishes to use the
programmatic interface, then the compiler is still a part of the program even
though it is not used, bloating the size. Furthermore, if one wishes to compile
from a diﬀerent language, support for reading some intermediate language needs
to be added anyway and again the compiler would bloat the size of the program
without ever being used. Therefore, it makes the most sense, from a modular
standpoint, to have the compiler be its own program that takes in a ﬁle written
in the designed language and outputs a ﬁle in a format the simulator can read.
With the compiler being its own program and since the simulator already does
semantic analysis, doing semantic analysis in the compiler might seem like
overkill.
However, it might be an annoying user experience if the compiler
does not give any errors, and then when the simulator is used it does give er-
rors. Therefore, it might be advantageous if the compiler does some semantic
analysis as long as it is not too complex. Obvious mistakes like references to
registers, signals, states, or actions that have not been declared are easy to check
and should, therefore, produce error messages from the compiler.
4.3.2.1
Hand-written vs. generated
There are two ways that we can create the compiler that we need; we can write it
by hand or we can generate it from a grammar using a compiler compiler. While
a compiler compiler only enables us to generate the lexer, parser and abstract
syntax tree, these are exactly the components that we need, except for the
semantic analyzer. The main advantage of writing it by hand is the readability
of the code since code generation tools rarely have good naming conventions, do
not generate comments, and use tricks to optimize performance, thus if someone
needs to understand how the compiler works it is a lot easier if it is written by
==PAGE:42==
28
Design
hand. However, compilers are usually huge programs, and writing one by hand
can take a lot of time. Furthermore, if someone wants to change or update the
language they would need to understand how this huge program works.
This is the exact opposite of generated compilers, they are written using some
form of grammar that is much smaller than the compiler itself and thus one only
needs to understand how a grammar works to update it. It does however have
the downside of the actual compiler being diﬃcult to understand since the code
readability is bad.
To allow for people to easily change the language we have chosen to use a tool
to generate the compiler from a grammar.
4.3.2.2
Choosing a compiler compiler
A lot of compiler compilers exist but since the simulator is written in Java we
might as well use a java based compiler compiler, this narrows the ﬁeld. The
two most common Java compiler compilers are ANTLR and JavaCC. Where
ANTLR can generate compilers in multiple languages, including Java, JavaCC
only generates Java compilers. This has the side eﬀect that ANTLR generates
a compiler that needs a runtime library to run it, which means that not only
does users need to download the compiler they also need to download ANTLR
or at least its runtime[anta].
JavaCC on the other hand generates a stand-alone Java application which means
no extra runtime and no extra downloads for the user. Additionally, we found
that JavaCC is more accessible, primarily in its documentation and tutorials,
where most documentation of the newest version of ANTLR is only present in a
book that can be purchased from the developers. Furthermore, JavaCC comes
with a preprocessor called JJTree which allows one to annotate one’s grammar
and have it generate not only the lexer and parser but also an abstract syntax
tree[jav]. Finally, JavaCC seems to be more performant [antb], and because of
these reasons, we have chosen to go with JavaCC.
4.3.2.3
Writing the compiler in JavaCC
Using JavaCC consists of three steps: deﬁning the tokens that the lexer should
break the program into, deﬁning the expansion rules that make up the grammar
and thus the way the parser should parse the token stream from the lexer, and
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Model interface
29
ﬁnally annotate the expansion rules to make JJTree build the abstract syntax
tree in the way we want it to.
Lexer
The tokens that we deﬁne should be the keywords of our language
(fsmd, action, transition, etc.), the operators (plus, minus, etc), the separators
(comma, colon, etc.), and tokens for encapsulating; identiﬁers, such as the name
of an action or register, integer values, as well as strings. Additionally, we need
to make sure that the lexer discards comments and white spaces so that the
parser does not need to worry about those. In JavaCC this can be done using
regular expressions.
Parser
For the parser, we need to create expansion rules that match our
grammar. An initial rule is required to encapsulate the entire program. From
there we simply need to create rules for our constructs using the tokens deﬁned
in the lexing part. When dealing with our expressions we need to make sure
that the rules are deﬁned in such a way that the parser knows whether it is
dealing with an addition followed by a multiplication or the other way around,
this is known as precedence. Since we are building a C-style language and the
simulator supports all C operators it makes sense to use the same precedence
rules as C.
Abstract syntax tree
By default JJTree creates a node in the abstract syn-
tax tree every time it follows a rule, we do not want this behavior because it
generates a lot of intermediary nodes due to the way we have to deﬁne our
precedence rules. Additionally, JJTree names the node the same as the rule
which means that all of our constant values and identiﬁers get named Constant-
ValueReference and Identiﬁer instead of their actual values.
Luckily JJTree
provides us with the tools to ﬁx this, ﬁrst, it allows us to change the default of
creating every node to creating no nodes, and second, it allows us to annotate
the rules that we do wish to create nodes for[jjt].
This annotation can be conditional on the number of children a node has, which
allows us to make it such that only rules that are matched generate a node.
However, this only ﬁxed the ﬁrst issue.
To ﬁx the second issue we need to
save the value of the token inside of the node that JJTree generates such that
we can use it later. This same approach should be used to save the line and
column of constructs such that this information can be used when displaying
error messages. This makes it a lot easier to debug since the location of the
error is known.
==PAGE:44==
30
Design
4.3.2.4
Error recovery
Error recovery is important since it allows the parser to continue parsing even
though an error is found. This way we can report multiple errors throughout the
model if multiple are present such that the user does not encounter the annoying
experience of getting an error, ﬁxing it, and then getting a new unrelated error
that could just as easily have been reported the ﬁrst time around.
4.3.2.5
Translating the AST
We need to translate the generated Abstract Syntax Tree(AST) it into a format
that the simulator understands. The reasons for not simply giving the simulator
the AST is that to do so the simulator would need to know how the AST looks
like and for it to know that it needs the ﬁles that make up the AST.
The problem with this is that those ﬁles are generated by JavaCC and thus
might change every time an update is made to the language thus making the
simulator dependant on the compiler. Additionally, if someone wishes to create
another language and compile to the simulator they would have to adhere to this
format as well creating a dependency on the compiler instead of the simulator
which makes little sense. Therefore it should be the simulator that decides the
format that it wishes to read from.
In the simulator, an FSMD is, data-wise, a bunch of maps mapping identiﬁers
to corresponding objects. Therefore a simple serialization would be to encode
an FSMD as an object with these maps. This could be done in either JSON or
XML and since the simulator already uses a library for (de-)serializing JSON,
it too will be used here.
It might then be an idea to simply build the AST in a way such that it does
not need any transformations. This is possible, however, to do so it would have
to be done inside the grammar by explicitly setting which class every single
expansion rule creates as its corresponding node. We believe that this causes
unnecessary bloating of the grammar and makes it harder to understand how
the parsing works. Additionally, the compiler still needs to iterate over the AST
to do semantic checks so the only time saved would be the time it takes to
instantiate a node.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Extended semantics
31
4.4
Extended semantics
In the current simulator, there exist static semantic checks to make sure that
models are deﬁned in a way that makes sense from an electronics point of view
and that they can be simulated without issues. In this thesis, a lot of extra
features have been proposed and they too need to have semantics deﬁned such
that the models makes sense and the simulation can be done without issues.
4.4.1
Inter-model combinational loops
Inter-model combinational loops are like combinational loops between expres-
sions in a single action except they span multiple models. While we can ﬁgure
out if there exists a combinational loop in an action by building a dependency
graph and checking that for cycles, it is not as easy for inter-model loops. While
we could potentially merge the dependency graphs of diﬀerent actions and check
for cycles in those, the number of combinations of actions is exponential in the
number of models involved in the simulation. Additionally, even if the number
of combinations was small there is no way of knowing whether a given combina-
tion will occur during a simulation. This is because there is no way of knowing
if a guard will be fulﬁlled in a given cycle without executing all prior cycles.
Thus there is no way of knowing which actions will occur in a given cycle which
also makes it impossible to know whether a certain combination of actions will
occur. Therefore, the best we can do is give a warning that there is a potential
combinational loop and what is causing it, and if a loop is encountered then we
can say why and where.
Since there is a lot of combinations, ﬁguring out if there is a potential loop
should be done diﬀerently, or at least something needs to be done to lower the
number of combinations. Like discussed previously in section 4.2.3 there is 3
diﬀerent conﬁgurations of models. The ﬁrst two being unconnected models and
chains of models, which in neither case contains a loop and thus can not possibly
contain a combinational loop.
The third conﬁguration is that there is a loop. Not all loops are combinational
loops and in ﬁgure 4.4 3 types of loops that are not combinational can be seen
together. Only a loop that does not meet the criteria of those three types has
the possibility of being a combinational loop. In other words, only the kind
of loop where every single action, that is part of the loop, contains a direct
connection, that is no registers in between, between an input and output signal,
which are a part of the loop, can be combinational.
==PAGE:46==
32
Design
Figure 4.4: A diagram showing diﬀerent conﬁgurations of loops that are not
combinational loops.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Extended semantics
33
Thus if we can make sure that we are not dealing with any of those three types
of loops, by process of elimination, then there exists a combinational loop. The
question is then whether that loop will be encountered. This will be left up to
the user of the framework, making sure that the guards will never let it happen
or even decide if it is a risk worth taking.
We can do this by building a graph where; the nodes are the models in the
simulation, and the edges are their I/O connections. Then by doing a recursive
depth-ﬁrst search, where we keep track of which models we have already en-
countered, we will know if there exist any loops. Each loop that we encounter
should be saved such that we can check them against the criteria.
After ﬁnding the loops, we can go through them one by one and check if they
contain at least one direct connection between an input and an output signal, if
this is the case then the loop can not be of type one and three from ﬁgure 4.4.
We can even speed up the whole process up until this point, by marking all
direct connections between inputs and outputs in actions before we start and
only consider models that have at least one of such marks. That way we know
once we’ve found the loops that they are not of type one or three.
That leaves us with checking if the loop is of the second type, namely that the
inputs and output that are a part of the loop are the ones that have the direct
connection. We can do this by going through every loop and checking one model
at a time if any of its directly connected I/O has the input connected to the
previous model and the output connected to the next model. If this is true for
all the models then the loop is not of type two either.
At this point we are certain that there is a combinational loop between a certain
combination of actions and we can give a warning to the user that this is the
case. As discussed earlier, we can not know if the combination of actions well
ever be encountered and thus if the combinational loop will become an issue
and this must be conveyed in the warning as well.
4.4.2
Simulation settings
Since the external settings ﬁle is the only way to supply the simulator with its
settings, we need to make sure that such a ﬁle has been supplied, before doing
anything else. When the ﬁle is read to memory we need to check that the data
we are going to use is there, of the correct type, and makes sense. The number
of cycles the simulation should be run for is the ﬁrst thing to check since it is a
single ﬁeld and if not set properly it makes no sense to parse the rest since the
simulation will not run anyways. The other things we need to make sure are
==PAGE:48==
34
Design
correct are model types, simulation groups, if any are used, as well as the I/O
connections.
4.4.2.1
Model types and simulation groups
When adding a model instance to the simulation settings, either the type of
model to instantiate or the name of a simulation group must be supplied. The
simulator should have been supplied with a serialized dictionary of models which
we can use to look up if a referenced model type has a description. If simulation
groups are used they would have been supplied to the simulator together with the
simulation settings ﬁle and we can look up whether a group with the referenced
name exists.
4.4.2.2
Input bindings
Making sure that input bindings are proper is as simple as making sure that the
model the binding is being set up for has an input signal of the supplied name
as well as making sure that the other model exists and has an output signal of
the supplied name.
4.4.2.3
Memory mappings
Memory mappings are for initializing a memory block with data from an external
ﬁle thus the things we need to verify are; that the model for which the mapping
is being made has a memory block of the speciﬁed name, that the ﬁle exists,
that the data in the ﬁle has the format: ”⟨address⟩: ⟨value⟩”, without the
brackets, and that the memory block is large enough to ﬁt the data of the ﬁle.
4.4.3
Compiler semantics
The compiler should include semantic checks for all references to; registers,
memory, signals, actions, and states. This can be done at the same time as
translating the parsed ﬁle into a serializable form by making sure that register,
memory, and signal declarations are analyzed and converted before actions which
in turn should be analyzed and converted together with state declarations before
transitions are. That way the expressions in the actions will be able to lookup
variable declarations and transitions will be able to look up everything.
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Metrics
35
4.5
Metrics
When it comes to the eﬃciency of some hardware system it is not enough to
merely look at how many clock cycles it takes to solve a given problem. This is
especially true in the case of the current simulator since clock cycles are discrete
and thus every expression takes the same amount of time which most likely
is not true in the real world. Because of this, we need to be able to measure
something else to get a better level of comparison. In some hardware settings,
the amount of energy available to the system might be limited due to being run
by e.g. a battery. Thus adding the ability to measure how much energy one’s
model uses throughout the simulation will not only enhance the comparability
of models but also allow for people to ﬁgure out if a model would work in a
real-world setting with regards to energy restrictions.
4.5.1
Reporting energy consumption
In the current system, the model state keeps track of the values of registers and
signals and can provide a memory dump that displays these values throughout
the simulation on a cycle to cycle basis. Since we wish to display the energy
consumption on the same basis it makes sense to hook into the model state and
let it keep track of this as well.
Each type of expression would most likely spend a diﬀerent amount of energy
thus every individual expression should report their own energy consumption
to the model state. The amount of energy consumed by a hardware component
depends largely on the technology used in creating it.
Thus if we hardcode
the estimations in every expression it would require the user of the tool to
recompile the simulator if they wanted to know how well their model does based
on another technology. Therefore, the estimates should be separated from the
code by supplying a ﬁle that maps names of expressions to energy consumption
estimates, that way one can easily change out the numbers. To avoid having to
distribute a ﬁle with default values or require the user to supply their own no
matter what a set of default values could be hardcoded into the simulator such
that it has something to fall back on if no ﬁle is supplied.
Besides recording energy consumption on a cycle to cycle basis it might also
make sense to keep track of the total amount of energy spent throughout the
entire simulation. This can be done rather easily by simply carrying over the
measurements from a given cycle to the next, before clearing it.
==PAGE:50==
36
Design
4.5.1.1
Component separation
In hardware a signal can only have one value at a given moment in time, this
also means that a component cannot perform the same action multiple times
at the same moment in time. Thus if two expressions in an action perform the
same operation they must be performed by two diﬀerent components. Because
of this we should not simply add together the energy consumed by multiple
reports of the same expression in a given cycle. Instead, subsequent reports of
energy consumption, by a type of expression that has already been reported in a
given cycle, should be saved with a suﬃx equal to the number of reports given.
For example, if 3 additions are reported in a cycle the ﬁrst would be saved as
"Addition", the second as "Addition_2" and the third as "Addition_3". This
way not only do we get a better picture of how much energy is spent by diﬀerent
components in the system. We also get an estimate of how many of a diﬀerent
type of component is needed when building the hardware, which can help with
ﬁguring out the amount of area the system would take.
4.5.2
Providing feasible estimates
With a system in place that will allow one to simply add an energy consumption
estimate, of a component, to a ﬁle, the only thing missing is providing feasible
estimates. However, this is not as straightforward as it may seem. To provide
a real estimate one would have to do a gate-level simulation of either; every
component, to ﬁgure out its power characteristics and then guess based on
those, or the system as a whole. This however is out of the scope of this project
since the idea is to remain on the higher level of abstraction that is FSMDs and
the register transfer level.
This leaves us with one of two options.
Finding power characteristics of all
the components that the expressions in the model represent, or using unfeasible
numbers. If we take into account the fact that the primary user segment for this
framework are rather fresh computer science students, it might not matter that
much how feasible the actual numbers are, since they most likely will not be
physically building the systems anyway. However, what does matter is the ratios
between the diﬀerent components. If the rations between the components are
somewhat feasible then it would still be possible to compare diﬀerent models
with regards to eﬃciency, we would just lose the ability to predict whether
certain energy requirements are upheld.
==PAGE:51==
4.6 Visualising the simulation
37
4.6
Visualising the simulation
Reading a few values in a JSON ﬁle is easy when that ﬁle is not very large
and the format is straight forward. Thus for small simulations with few data
variables, it is ﬁne to rely on the memory dumps produced by the current design.
However, when the simulation has to run for hundreds or thousands of cycles,
has hundreds of data variables, or both, it becomes very diﬃcult to get an idea
of how the simulation has progressed. You can easily search for the value of
a speciﬁc variable in a speciﬁc cycle, but getting an overview becomes close to
impossible, at least in any sort of reasonable time frame. Therefore it makes
sense to either give the user control over which data variables should be a part
of the memory dump or provide an alternative.
Since the issue lies mainly in the diﬃculty of getting an overview of the progress
throughout the simulation, we propose to produce a visualization of the data
variables’ values throughout the simulation. This could be achieved by either
creating an application that can visualize our speciﬁc format or producing a new
ﬁle in a format supported by an existing application. However, there is little
to no value to gain from creating our own application except for not having to
produce a diﬀerent kind of output, but the time that takes versus creating a
whole new graphical application is very short. Additionally, if we create our own
application that uses our format it would not be useable by anybody else, at least
initially. Therefore we have chosen to use an existing format and application.
The format to use is called VCD which stands for Value Change Dump and is
not new, it is for example used by Gezel. Since the format is not new there
exist multiple diﬀerent applications for visualizing it, the application we will be
using and recommending is called GTKWave [gtk] which is open source and has
prebuilt binaries for all major operating systems.
It still might be purposeful to use the old memory dump system for debugging
and additionally it is where the cycle by cycle as well as accumulative energy
consumption data is output.
However, it makes sense to have an option to
disable the creation of memory dump ﬁles if the user does not need them. Addi-
tionally, an option to not produce the VCD ﬁle should be added in case the user
would rather use the memory dump or simply look at the produced memory
block result ﬁles.
==PAGE:52==
38
Design
4.7
Memory blocks and new expressions
In order for this framework to be able to simulate a wider range of hardware
designs, a few additions, to the types of variables and expressions present, need
to be made.
Memory blocks
Multi-word memory blocks allow for data sets to be read and written without
having to use many individual registers. Furthermore being able to initialize
memory blocks with data from external ﬁles allows for much more versatile
systems and simulations. It should therefore be possible to add memory blocks
of a ﬁxed size to models and to read and write to the individual addresses of
such in the same way as other variables. Furthermore, it should be possible to
specify a ﬁle to be read and used for initializing a speciﬁc memory block.
Bit ranges
Sort of tied to memory blocks is the need to read speciﬁc sub-ranges of bits
in a signal, register, or memory word. The reason for this is that it allows for
more multiple types of information to be conveyed in a single variable which in
turn makes initializing memory blocks, with data for external ﬁles, even more
powerful. An example of this would be CPU instructions where both the type
of the instruction as well as the data for the instruction could be encoded in
diﬀerent bit ranges of the same memory word. Therefore, we propose that an
expression be added that returns the decimal value of a given range of bits in
an expression.
Unary minus
The lack of a unary minus operator is a clear oversight in the current simulator
and should be remedied such that the sign of an expression can be ﬂipped if the
designer of a system wishes so. One could argue that multiplying with −1 yields
the same result but that adds an unnecessary operation when unary minus easily
can be added.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation of the various features developed
throughout the project, focusing on the challenges met and the solutions cre-
ated to overcome them. Only the important core features as well as especially
elegant algorithms will be presented.
5.1
Concurrent Models
The two things we need to implement from the design of simulating multiple
models are; executing all models in a non speciﬁc order and re-executing models
that have had their input changed, using sensitivity lists, until the cycle is stable.
A cycle is stable when there are no more models to re-execute because no (re-
)execution has caused any inputs to change.
In order to know which input have been changed we need to actually change
the inputs, we do this be ﬁguring out which output signals have changed after
a model is executed and then look up the input signals that those outputs
are connected to. We can ﬁnd out which output has changed by storing the
information in the model state. When an output value needs to be set, we can
check if it has already been set, in the current cycle, by storing outputs, that
==PAGE:54==
40
Implementation
have been set in the current cycle, in a set. If it has not been set in the current
cycle already then we can add it to a list of outputs that have changed. If it
has been set in the current cycle then we can check if the value we are trying
to set it to is diﬀerent than the one it currently is set to. If it is diﬀerent then
we can again add it to the list of outputs that have changed. Once we ask for
the outputs that have changed we can clear the list such that only outputs that
have changed since the last (re-)execution is returned. When the cycle ends we
clear both the list and the set to be ready for the next cycle. An example of
this system through the course of a cycle is this;
Model A executes an action that sets output B, it has not been set in the current
cycle so we add it to both the set and the list. When asking for the changed
outputs, B is returned and the list is cleared. Another model causes model A to
execute but this time B is not set so it is not added to the list and not returned
as a changed output. If model A is re-executed again and B is set through the
action then it will only be added to the list if it is set to a diﬀerent value than
it was last time, because it has already been set in the current cycle. This is
exactly the behaviour the design speciﬁes.
To actually carry out the execution of a cycle we have two options.
1. We execute all models while keeping track of the outputs signals that has
changed value. Then we re-execute any model that has a sensitive input,
which has been set by one of the tracked output signals. We can then keep
doing this until there are no changed outputs.
2. We have a queue of models to execute, initially in a cycle it should be
every model. When a model has executed, it adds any models back to the
queue that has sensitive inputs that are connected to the output signals
that the model has changed. This way we can keep executing the model
at the front of the queue and when the queue is empty we know that the
cycle is stable since no models have been added for re-execution.
In the end the two approaches are practically the same but we propose to use
the second because we think the code looks cleaner and because we don’t have to
check every model if they should be re-executed, after every round of executions.
Pseudo code for this chosen option can be seen in listing 5.1.
Listing 5.1: Pseudo code for executing multiple models concurrently using sen-
sitivity lists.
1
public void executeCycle(models) {
2
modelQueue = models
3
while(there is a model left in the queue) {
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Concurrent Models
41
4
currentModel = model at the front of queue
5
findAndExecuteTransition(currentModel, modelQueue)
6
}
7
8
followTransitions()
9
}
10
11
public void findAndExecuteTransition(model, modelQueue) {
12
transition = getNextTransitionForModel(model)
13
foreach(action in the transition) {
14
execute the action
15
}
16
17
changedOutputs = getChangedOuputsForModel(model)
18
foreach(changedOuput in list of changedOutputs) {
19
outputBinding = getOutputBindingForModel(model)
20
input = the input that is bound in the outputBinding
21
set value of input to value of output
22
if(input is sensitive for its model) {
23
add inputs model to the model queue if it is not already
24
}
25
}
26
}
In either case we have to wait with actually following the transitions for the
models, because if we follow a transition then we change the current state of
that model, and if we want to re-execute that model then it would do so from
that state instead of the state that it started the cycle in. It would be possible
to just save the state that models start in, at the beginning of the cycle, and
use that for re-executions. However, when using the ﬁrst approach it is more
clear that the transition which is followed is the one from the last re-execution
before the cycle becomes stable.
The missing piece is then to compute the sensitivity lists. We can either do
this before we start the simulation or we can do it lazily. Doing it lazily means
that we wait with computing a list until a call for that speciﬁc list is made. We
propose the second approach since it might be the case that not all states of a
model are reached in a given simulation and we will then have saved ourselves
from computing that sensitivity list as it is never needed.
Actually computing a sensitivity list is straight forward. Simply go through
all transitions that start in the state and add all the input signals that are a
part of the guards. After the inputs from the guards we can go through all
the actions of the transitions and add all the input signals that appear on the
right-hand side of all assignments, and every input signal that appear in any
==PAGE:56==
42
Implementation
display expression. Expressions already have a list of all references in both their
left and right-hand side so we can just iterate through those and see if any of
them are input signals.
5.2
Hierarchical Models
While the design for hierarchical models is quite simple, it is not that straight
forward to implement. Especially when you take into account that the simula-
tion needs to handle both hierarchy and concurrency. We start by going through
the implementation of just the hierarchy, and then afterwards the merging of
the two implementations.
When we execute a model we need to check if the current state is a super state,
because if it is then we need to execute the sub model instead. The submodel
itself might start in a super state which means we need to recursively check this
down the hierarchy and transfer control to the lowest model we reach. We can
do this by looping for as long as the current state is a super state and overwriting
the variables that keep track of the current model, with its submodel. Once we
are dealing with the correct model we can ﬁnd the transition that should be
taken and execute the associated actions. Depending on the destination of the
transition there are a few cases we need to handle.
In the design it was speciﬁed that when a model takes a transition to a super
state the model immediately hands over control and the submodel gets to ﬁnd
and execute a transition immediately as a continuation of the parent models
transition. Thus if the destination is a super state we handover control to the
submodel in the same manner as we did before and then we execute its cycle.
The other case is when the destination is an end state for the submodel. In
the design it is speciﬁed that when a submodel takes a transition that goes to
an end state it should hand control back to its parent and the parent should
immediately execute a transition going from the super state as a continuation
of the submodels transition. Thus if the destination is an end state and we are
indeed executing a submodel, we need to give control back to the parent and
execute its cycle.
This all is fairly straight forward however it will not work unless we keep track of
a few things. We need to keep track of some information regarding which model
is in control otherwise we do not know which model to execute when we start
a new cycle. We could just do the handover protocol each time but it is much
more eﬃcient to simply store the name of the model instance that is currently
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Hierarchical Models
43
active. Additionally, we also need to keep track of which model instance is the
parent of the submodel that is currently active such that it can give back control
at some point. Putting this together we get an algorithm like the one seen in
pseudocode in listing 5.2.
Listing 5.2: Psuedocode for simulating hierarchy.
1
activeModel = root of hierarchy
2
parentModel = none
3
4
executeHierarchy() {
5
model = activeModel
6
7
while(model is in superstate) {
8
parentModel = model
9
model = submodel of model in state
10
}
11
activeModel = model
12
13
destination = findAndExecuteTransitionForModel(model)
14
15
if(destination is a superstate) {
16
subModel = submodel of model in destination
17
activeModel = subModel
18
parentModel = model
19
executeHierarchy()
20
} else if(model is submodel && destination is an end-state) {
21
activeModel = parentModel
22
parentModel = none
23
executeHierarchy()
24
}
25
26
}
5.2.1
Merging hierarchy and concurrency
Merging the hierarchical and concurrent implementations by cherry picking the
important components from each almost yield a satisfactory solution. We will
start by going through how this is done and then address the resulting issues
and how to ﬁx them.
We start by replacing the single active model, of the hierarchical implemen-
tation, with a list and using that to initialize the queue, of the concurrent
implementation. This would then be followed by wrapping the hierarchical im-
plementation in a loop that runs as long as the queue has elements, as well
==PAGE:58==
44
Implementation
as using the ﬁndAndExecuteTransitionForModel function from the concurrent
implementation.
This implementation can be seen written in pseudocode in
listing 5.3.
Listing 5.3: Psuedocode merging the hiearchical and concurrent implemen-
tations. the ﬁndAndExecuteTransitionForModel function is the
same as in 5.1
1
activeModels = list of all concurrent model instances that are the
top of their respective hierarchies
2
parentLookUp = dictionary for looking up a parent of a specific
submodel
3
executeCycle() {
4
modelsToExecute = activeModels
5
while(modelsToExecute.peek() != null) {
6
model = modelsToExecute.poll()
7
8
executeCycleForModel(model)
9
}
10
11
followTransitions()
12
}
13
14
executeCycleForModel(model) {
15
activeModels.remove(model)
16
while(model is in superstate) {
17
subModel = submodel of model
18
parentLookUp.add(subModel, model)
19
model = subModel
20
}
21
activeModels.add(model)
22
23
destination = findAndExecuteTransitionForModel(model,
modelsToExecute)
24
25
if(destination is a superstate) {
26
subModel = submodel of model in destination
27
activeModels.remove(model)
28
activeModels.add(subModel)
29
parentLookUp.add(subModel, model)
30
executeCycleForModel(subModel)
31
} else if(model is submodel && destination is an end-state) {
32
activeModels.remove(model)
33
parentModel = parentLookup.get(model)
34
activeModels.add(parentModel)
35
executeCycleForModel(parentModel)
36
}
37
}
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Hierarchical Models
45
As mentioned, this leaves us with some problems, related to which model needs
to be in control and what happens when a model is re-executed.
The ﬁrst problem is that if an input of a parent model is changed then that model
will get re-executed, this is ﬁne if it happens in the cycle in which the parent
model is handing over control, because it might take a diﬀerent transition that
causes the sub model not to be given control after all, in which case it should
not be re-executed. However, if it happens in a later cycle while the submodel is
in control, then all of a sudden both the parent and the submodel are executed
meaning the parent model thinks the submodel is done and most likely tries to
read its results but they are wrong because the submodel has in fact not reached
an end-state and is still doing its calculations.
We could solve this problem by making it such that only active models may be
re-executed. This way a parent model will never be executed as a result of a
changed input when its submodel is active because they will not be active at
the same time. However, this means that a parent model can not be re-executed
in the cycle that it hands control to the submodel and even if the re-execution
would have caused it to take a transition that does not result in the superstate
being reached, the sub model would still be the active model.
Therefore, we instead need to have two active lists, on list that keeps track of
which models are the ones that need to be executed in the next cycle and one
that keeps track of every model that has begun an execution in the current
cycle. This way we can use the ﬁrst list to initialize the queue, and do not have
to go through the hierarchy trees every cycle, and we can use the second list to
make sure that parent models can be re-executed in the cycle they hand over
control, because they will have begun an execution, but not in a later cycle,
because they will not have been a part of the ﬁrst list and therefore they will
not be in the queue which means they won’t begin an execution and become a
part of the second list.
The second problem lies in the other type of handover scenario, when a submodel
gives back control because taking a transition will move it into an end-state. If
the submodel is re-executed and no longer takes a transition that moves it into
an end-state then the handover will still have happened and both models will
continue to be simulated in parallel with the parent thinking the submodel is
done.
This problem is a bit easier to solve. When a submodel hands control back to
a parent we can keep track of this such that we can later revoke it. Once a
cycle is stable only the models that have not had their control revoked should
follow their transitions. The models who have had their control revoked should
reset their registers to the values they were when the cycle started. This way
==PAGE:60==
46
Implementation
if a parent model has executed actions but the submodel was re-executed and
no longer reaches a ﬁnal state, the eﬀects of the actions and transition will not
take place.
5.3
Simulation Settings
The loading and deserialization of the external simulation settings ﬁle is not
diﬃcult since we will just be using google’s gson library. There are two things
that need to be handled however; output bindings and simulation groups.
Inferring output bindings
As discussed in the design for connecting model I/O there is no need for the
user to supply both input and output bindings since one can be inferred from
the other. Since it was chosen that input bindings would be the ones supplied,
we need to infer the output bindings. We can do this by going through every
model instance described in the simulation settings and for each instance go
through each of its input bindings. If an input binding is not a constant value
then we can create a new output binding were the owner of the output is the
model instance, the output signal is the name of the signal for which the current
input binding is made. The output binding should then be added to the model
instance corresponding to the owner from the current input binding, under the
name of the output signal from the current input binding.
This becomes a
nested foreach loop which can be seen as pseudocode in listing 5.4.
Listing 5.4: Pseudocode for inferring output bindings from input bindings.
1
foreach (model instance in simulation settings) {
2
foreach(input binding in model instance) {
3
if(input binding is not constant value) {
4
new output binding
5
with owner = model instance
6
and input signal = name of input binding
7
8
get model instance from owner of input binding
9
add output binding to dictionary of output bindings
10
with key = input signal from input binding
11
}
12
}
13
}
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Simulation Settings
47
Simulation groups
The underlying structure of simulation settings, at the time of simulation groups
being added, were that there is exactly one simulation settings object that hold
all the model instances as well as general settings. This leaves two approaches
to implementing simulation groups; either the system is changed to support
multiple ﬁles and some sort of nested look ups should be used when the simulator
wishes to get information ,or upon loading the simulation settings all simulation
groups are merged into one simulation settings ﬁle and the system remains as
it is.
We went with the second approach to avoid having to rewrite the existing system
as well as to cement the fact that the compositional hierarchy that simulation
group feature oﬀers is just syntactic sugar and that all the non hierarchical
models are concurrent.
It is assumed that all the simulation settings ﬁles, both the top level and the ones
for the simulation groups are supplied as space separated ﬁle names following
the option "-s" through the command line, and that the top level simulation
settings ﬁle is the ﬁrst one.
The algorithm then goes as follows:
• Read, deserialize and store the top level simulation settings ﬁle
• Read, deserialize and store the subsequent simulation group settings ﬁles
in a dictionary keyed with their simulation group name
• Loop through the model instances of the top level simulation settings ﬁle
– Check if there is a model of the type of the model instance.
∗If there is then go to the next model instance
∗Otherwise continue
– Check if there is a simulation group of the type of the model instance.
∗If there is not then give an error saying that there is no model
or simulation group of the supplied type.
∗Otherwise continue
– Remove the model instance from the top level simulation settings
that refers to the simulation group
– Add all the model instance from the simulation group settings ﬁle to
the top level simulation settings
==PAGE:62==
48
Implementation
• If any changes were made to the top level simulation settings loop through
the model instances again
Translating this algorithm into code is pretty straight forward, we just need to
keep in mind that it is not possible to alter a collection while iterating through
it, thus when we need to remove and add model instances we need to keep two
separate buﬀers for this and once the iteration through the model instances is
done we can do the alterations before we start again.
The reason we may go through the model instances multiple times is that a
model instance in a simulation group might itself be a simulation group. There
is a slight overhead to doing it this way instead of recursively doing it when
replacing a simulation group, but it is linear in the total amount of model in-
stances and will not be a bottleneck to the simulation. We have chosen described
approach because it is easier to get an understanding of what is going on.
5.4
Compiler
This section presents how the compiler for the language, that was designed, was
created using JavaCC and JJTree. Speciﬁcally, it explains how JavaCC and
JJTree are used, how the compiler is invoked, and how the lexer and parser
grammars were written as well as how error handling was created.
JJTree, the pre-processor of JavaCC which we are working with, compiles a .jjt
ﬁle into a .jj ﬁle along with some java classes that it uses to ﬁgure out the names
of the AST(Abstract Syntax Tree) nodes, amongst other things. JavaCC then
uses this .jj ﬁle to generate the lexer and parser classes. It is possible to specify
functions that can be used within the parser, inside the grammar. This allows
us to create a function inside the parser which takes a path to a ﬁle and returns
the AST representing the model written in said ﬁle.
With this function we
can parse any ﬁle by calling "Parser.parse(ﬁleName);". The function works by
creating a ﬁle input stream and giving it to the lexer such that it can tokenize
it, then the parser is started at the initial expansion rule.
5.4.1
Lexer
In JavaCC there exist 4 diﬀerent types of tokens: Token, Skip, Special and
More.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Compiler
49
Token is the regular kind and simply creates a token of the type, if its regular
expression is matched. This is used in all most all cases, especially in cases where
a speciﬁc character or word is used instead of a complex regular expression.
Tokens can be grouped together by encapsulating them in curly brackets and
separating them by "|". For example a token for capturing "+" or "-" looks like
this:
TOKEN: { <PLUS: "+" > | <MINUS: "-" > }
If "+" is encountered a PLUS token is created and if "-" is encountered a MINUS
token is created.
Skip tokens do not create any tokens but simply consumes the string if its
regular expression is matched, this is used in our case to skip comments and
white spaces. These look like the following:
SKIP: {" "|"\t"|"\n"|"\r"|"\f"}
SKIP: {<SINGLE_LINE_COMMENT:
"//" (~["\n","\r"])* ("\n"|"\r"|"\r\n")>}
SKIP: {<MULTI_LINE_COMMENT:
"/*" (~["*"])* "*" (~["*","/"] (~["*"])* "*" | "*")* "/">}
Special and More tokens are not used in this parser but their purpose is
to allow the use of something called lexical states instead of complex regular
expressions.
Additionally, if the name of a token starts with a pound (#) then it is an
internal-only token, which means that it can be used to create more complex
tokens, but it does not actually generate any tokens and thus cannot be used
in the parser. This functionality is used for creating the identiﬁer token as well
as the integer and string literal tokens. The identiﬁer token and the internal
tokens it uses can be seen here:
TOKEN: {
< #LETTER: ["_", "$", "a"-"z","A"-"Z"] >
|
< #DIGIT: ["0"-"9"] >
}
TOKEN: {
==PAGE:64==
50
Implementation
< IDENTIFIER: <LETTER> (<LETTER>|<DIGIT>)* >
}
5.4.2
Parser
The parser is made up solely of expansion rules. An expansion rule is written
in the form:
1
returnType ruleName(): { java declarations }
2
{ (expansion grammar | { java code })* }
where "java declarations" means any sort of declaration of variables needed in
latter java code, and java code is any code that the user wishes to execute. For
example, this could be setting the name or value of a token, or returning a value
which can be used by any expansion rules that call this one. Finally "(expansion
grammar | java code )*" means that any number of either expansion grammars
or java code blocks can be interleaved. An example of this is the expansion rule
for identiﬁers seen here:
1
void Identifier() #ID:
2
{ Token t; }
3
{ t=<IDENTIFIER> { jjtThis.setName(t.image); jjtThis.setCoords(
token.beginLine, token.beginColumn); } }
5.4.2.1
The expansion rules
There are quite a few expansion rules in the grammar and a lot of them, es-
pecially all the expression ones, look a lot alike. Additionally, some rules are
intermediary and thus simply used to make it easier to read or for error handling
purposes. Therefore every expansion rule is not going to be explained, only the
important ones as well as those that can be generalized.
The initial expansion rule
In this case, we have chosen to let the initial
expansion rule be a rule called start which in turn expands into 0 or more
FSMD expansion rules. The reason for the name is such that it is easier to
see that this is the entry point, the rule is a necessity however if we wish to
support multiple models per ﬁle, otherwise, we could let the FSMD expansion
rule be the initial rule. This initial rule is set to return a node such that we can
return the AST that we have created, this is done by marking the function as a
SimpleNode function and adding a return statement after the expansion.
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Compiler
51
FSMD rule
As per our designed grammar an FSMD is an FSMD if it is of
the form
FSMD Identifier() ( Parameters() ) { FSMDBody() }
where Identiﬁer is its name, Parameters is a comma separated list of input
and output signals that possibly have a default value and FSMDBody is 0 or
more variable, action or transition declarations.
Signals and Registers rules
Variable declarations, meaning signals or reg-
isters is of the form
VariableType: InitializableList() [;]
where VariableType is either Signals or Registers, InitializableList is a
comma-separated list of identiﬁers which can have a default value and [;] means
that it is possible to ﬁnish oﬀwith a semicolon.
Memory blocks rule
Declaring memory blocks is almost like signals and
registers but instead of a possible default value a size needs to be declared in
parenthesise. The rule is of the form:
Memory: Identifier() (Integer_Literal)
(, Identifier() (Integer_Literal))* [;]
where Identiﬁer is the name of the memory block, Integer_Literal is any
positive integer and [;] means that it is possible to ﬁnish oﬀwith a semicolon.
States rule
Declaring declaring states is almost like declaring data variables,
the diﬀerence is that one state must have a star "*" after their name, to indicate
the initial state, and they can take an identiﬁer of a model as a parameter to
indicate them being a superstate with a submodel.
The rule looks like the
following:
States: Identifier() [*] (M_Identifier())
(, Identifier() [*] (M_Identifier()))* [;]
==PAGE:66==
52
Implementation
where Identiﬁer is the name of the state, [*] is the optional star for being the
initial state, M_Identiﬁer is the name of the submodel, and [;] means that it
is possible to ﬁnish oﬀwith a semicolon.
Action declaration rule
Actions are just a list of expressions with a name,
however, the expressions can either be assignments or display expressions, thus
they are of the form
Action Identifier
{ ((AssignmentExpression | DisplayExpression) [;])+ }
where Identiﬁer is the name of the action and ((AssignmentExpression |
DisplayExpression) [;])+ is a list of 1 or more assignment and or display
expressions with optional semicolons in between.
Transition declaration rule
Transitions are declared in the following way
as described in the design section:
Transition Identifier -> Identifier [Guards] [ActionList] [;]
where the ﬁrst identiﬁer is the source state, the second identiﬁer is the des-
tination state, [Guards] is the optional inclusion of a list of guard boolean
expressions, [ActionList] is the optional inclusion of a list of action names to
execute upon taking the transition and [;] is the ability to ﬁnish of the declara-
tion with a semicolon.
Assignment expression rule
Assignment expressions are a little diﬀerent
in that the left-hand side of the expression must be a reference and are of the
form
Identifier (= LogicalOrExpression)+ [;]
where Identiﬁer is the identiﬁer of the signal or register that the assignment
is to assign a value, (= LogicalOrExpression)+ is one or more occurrences
of the equal sign followed by the expression with the highest precedence, the
logical or expression, and [;] is the ability to ﬁnish of with a semicolon.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Compiler
53
Display expression rule
Unlike other expressions, the display expression is
not a C-style operator thus it does not look quite like the other expressions. A
display expression is of the form
Display ( String , DisplayReference (, DisplayReference)* ) [;]
where String is the format that the display expression must display, Dis-
playReference is an identiﬁer preﬁxed with the type of register or signal that
it references or the special $cycle reference, (, DisplayReference)* is zero
or more additional comma-separated display references, and [;] is the ability to
ﬁnish of with a semicolon.. For example:
Display("Cycle: %s, Register x: %s", $cycle, reg x)
Binary expression rules
Binary expressions are those that have an operator
and two operands, a left-hand side and a right-hand side. We’ve already been
through how the assignment expression works which is a binary expression. As
previously discussed we must make sure that the precedence rules are followed
for the expressions. We do this by creating a rule for each tier of precedence,
whether that contains one or more expressions, and letting the operand expres-
sions be an expansion of the expression that is one tier lower in the precedence
rules than the expression we are working on. This way an expression with a
higher tier of precedence is be preferred over one with a lower-tier since the
parser parses the ﬁrst rule that matches. A binary expression is thus of the
form
LowerTierExpression (Operator LowerTierExpression)*
where LowerTierExpression is the expression with the immediate lower tier
and Operator is the operator of the given expression eg. || for logical or.
Unary expression rule
Unary expressions are kind of like binary expressions
except there is no left or right-hand side there is only an internal expression.
Additionally, identiﬁers and integers are also seen as unary expressions since
register, signal and constant value references are of the lowest precedence tier.
The unary expression rule expands to one of the following:
( LogicalOrExpression() )
==PAGE:68==
54
Implementation
! UnaryExpression()
~ UnaryExpression()
- UnaryExpression()
Reference()
Integer()
where ! is a logical not, ∼is a bitwise complement, and - is a unary minus.
The reason that those three expand to another unary expression and not a logical
or expression, like the parentheses, is that it causes look ahead conﬂicts. There-
fore, if one wishes to logically negate, take the bitwise complement or invert the
sign of an expression that expression must be surrounded in parentheses.
5.4.3
Error recovery
Error recovery in JavaCC is done by surrounding an expansion rule with a try-
catch statement. If a ParseException is thrown then we can continue consuming
tokens until we reach a token that could plausibly be the next token, such
as a semicolon of any of the declaration tokens, if the rule that failed was
a declaration.
This has been moved into a function, which can be seen in
listing 5.5, that takes an array of tokens that is okay to skip to, such that it can
be reused in diﬀerent parts of the grammar.
Listing 5.5: The error recovery loop for the parser.
1
boolean loop = true;
2
Token t;
3
do {
4
t = getToken(1);
5
for ( int i = 0; i < skipTo.length; i++ ) {
6
if ( t.kind == skipTo[ i ] ) {
7
loop = false;
8
break;
9
}
10
}
11
if(loop)
12
getNextToken();
13
} while( loop );
==PAGE:69==
5.5 Metrics
55
5.5
Metrics
There are a few parts to the way the metrics tracking feature has been imple-
mented.
The code it self is straight forward but the way the feature is put
together deserves a mention.
First, when the simulator is started it looks for an external ﬁle called Metr-
cisSettings.json, if this ﬁle exists it is read, deserialized and used to overwrite
the default values that are hard-coded in the singleton class MetricsSettings.
This singleton class can then be used anywhere in the simulator to query the
energy cost of a speciﬁc component. Because of this implementation it is easy
for users of the system to swap out MetricSettings ﬁles and easily run multiple
simulations using diﬀerent "technologies".
The second part resides in the super class for expressions themselves. When
an expression is instantiated the name of the expression is derived from the
name of the class and saved as a ﬁeld of the class. Additionally, the evaluate
function of the super class contains code that adds the energy it takes, to use the
component that corresponds to the given expression, to the modelstate. Since
all of this takes place in the expression super class, it is very easy to add new
expressions as they will automatically use this system. Additionally, there is no
duplicate code at all.
The third part of the system is in the modelstate. When the expression super
class calls the method in the models state to report that energy is being spent,
the modelstate ﬁrst checks if energy has been spent by a component of the
same name in the current cycle. If it has then the number of times it has seen
this speciﬁc component, in the current cycle, is appended to the name of the
component, before it is saved. This way, since a component can not be used
multiple times in the same cycle, the data shows how many components are
necessary of a given type to build the system in real hardware.
In real electronics it might be possible to do some sort of analysis of a cycle that
reveals that a component could in fact be used multiple times because the cycle
is very long and the data from the component is only used in speciﬁc intervals.
But we are satisﬁed with this system at least giving a pointer towards a number
of components needed.
At the end of each cycle, the modelstate takes all the energy spent in the current
cycle and adds it to a dictionary of energy spent during the whole simulation.
This way at the end of a simulation we can see the total amount of energy spent
by diﬀerent components.
==PAGE:70==
56
Implementation
5.6
Visualisation of the Simulation
To produce VCD ﬁles that can be visualized by GTKwave we need to write
them in the correct format which is as follows:
$date
{Date and Time string}
$end
$version
{Version of our software}
$end
$timescale {timescale string} $end
$scope module {scope name string} $end
{variable definitions}
$upscope $end
$enddefinitions $end
$dumpvars
{initial values for variables}
$end
{data values broken into timestep segments}
The text within curly brackets are our descriptions of the type of data that
needs to be put in that speciﬁc place. Data and time as well as version is pretty
obvious. The timescale is the unit of time the VCD visualization software will
associate with each timestep. Since we do not work with real time but cycles,
it does not matter what we set this to. We will just set this to 1ps(pico-second)
to insinuate that cycles are fast.
Multiple scopes can be deﬁned, which allows for grouping of variables. By using
one scope per model instance and naming them the same as their associated
instance we can group all signals and registers, that belong to a model instance,
together such that it is easier for the user to navigate. An example of how this
looks in GTKWave can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1 and 5.2.
Within each scope we deﬁne that each variable is 32 bits wide, as well as their
display name and the name that will be used to reference them when providing
a value change in a given timestep.
In the dumpvars section of the format we can write the initial values of the
variable, it is possible to set a variable as undeﬁned which we can use to diﬀer-
entiate between input signals that have default values or are bound to constant
values, and input signals that are bound to output signals.
==PAGE:71==
5.6 Visualisation of the Simulation
57
Figure 5.1: A screen capture of GTK-
Wave showing two scopes
corresponding
to
two
model instances.
Figure 5.2: A screen capture of GTK-
Wave showing the list of
variables associated to a
model instance when se-
lecting the a scope.
==PAGE:72==
58
Implementation
After the dumpvars section we provide the timesteps and value changes that
happen in those timesteps. A new timestep is started by writing "#time" where
time is the timing, relative to the timescale, e.i. "#2" means the timestep at
2ps. After starting a new timestep, all the variables that change values in the
timestep should be added. It is possible to have multiple of the same timestep
throughout the ﬁle. This allows us to write the value changes one model of a
time instead of having to write it one timestep at at time. We can do this by
iterating through each model and then going through each of the timesteps in
which there are changes. For example it can look something like this:
#1
value model1.signal1
value model1.signal2
#2
value model1.signal1
#1
value model2.signal1
#2
value model2.signal1
The way this is all implemented is that a VCDWriter class is initialized, when the
simulation starts, and given all the names and default values of the variables of
all the model instances. These names and default values are saved in a dictionary
for later use. After each cycle has stabilized, all the models that where active in
the cycle reports their values to this class. The values are then saved in a two
level dictionary where the outer dictionary is keyed to the name of the model
instance and the inner dictionary is keyed to the cycle the values were reported
in.
When the simulation reaches stability in the ﬁnal cycle the VCDWriter is told to
write the vcd ﬁle and it produces a ﬁle of the format described above. The ﬁrst
few lines of the description are hardcoded and the rest is produced by iterating
through the variable deﬁnition and two level dictionaries.
5.7
Memory blocks
Memory blocks, like the other data variables, consists of two parts: the object
in the model state that actually contains the data and the reference expression
that can be used to read from or write to the memory block. The reference works
in almost the same way as with the other data variables, the only diﬀerence is
==PAGE:73==
5.8 DataValue class
59
that it takes in an expression for determining which address in the memory the
reference is for. When the reference is evaluated for reading, it evaluates the
index expression and then calls a function on the modelstate to get the data
from that address in the referenced memory block. When the reference is used
on the left hand side of an assignment, the index expression is also evaluated
such that it can be used to write to the correct address in the memory block.
There is multiple ways to store the words in the memory blocks.
We have
chosen to simply use an array of registers, since this allows us to easily reﬂect
synchronous memory given that registers already have this built in. Addition-
ally, if the data format were to change we would only have to update it for the
registers and not also the memory blocks. Another option could have been to
just use two array of whatever underlying data type the rest of the system uses
and then do the synchronization in the memory block as well.
5.8
DataValue class
Initially the underlying data type was a standard Java integer, which gave the
framework two problems. The ﬁrst being that it is impossible to represent real
values, if necessary at some point, and the second being that there is no way of
knowing whether a value has been set or not. This is because, in Java, integers
are primitive values and thus not reference based and can not be set to null. It
would be possible to just say that 0 means unassigned, but 0 is a very common
value in electronics so that would be a bad idea. Another option could be to
specify that negative values means unassigned, but that also removes a lot of
possibilities for the users.
In either of these two cases it would only ﬁx the
second problem and not the ﬁrst.
The solution is to replace the integers with another data type. Therefore, we cre-
ated a class called DataValue which is essentially just an integer and a boolean.
The integer holds the value just like previously and the boolean is used to track
whether or not a value has been assigned or if the value in the integer is just
garbage. While this does not allow for the use of real values it does make it a
lot easier to switch out the underlying data type, since everything works with
the DataValue class only that class needs to be changed.
==PAGE:74==
60
Implementation
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6
Testing and Experiments
This chapter will present the diﬀerent kinds of testing that has been used
throughout the project to make sure that the ﬁnished framework performs as
expected and has the necessary features.
6.1
Unit Testing
There are a lot of unit tests in this project. However, most of them are the
ones from the preliminary project that this thesis builds upon. This project
has yielded unit tests for 3 features, which are the new expression that have
been added. The reason for this is that most of the features made during this
project are very intertwined, thus making it unfeasible to create unit tests that
test speciﬁc parts. Additionally, we have chosen not to create unit tests for the
simple functions that are testable, such as functions that return private lists.
While it would be possible setup unit tests for the compiler to make sure that
it produces the correct serialized model, it would require that we have some-
thing to compare against. We could create this model either by hand compiling
the test input or creating the corresponding model through the programmatic
interface and serializing it, but there is a much simply solution that avoids this
==PAGE:76==
62
Testing and Experiments
comparison and thus also the need to remake it if the input needs to change. The
easier solution is to do end to end testing, that is, testing the whole framework
together.
6.2
End to end testing
In our case, end to end testing means ﬁrst running the compiler on an input
and then running the simulator on the output of the compiler.
This way if
the compiler does something wrong the simulator will complain. Additionally,
it means that if changes are made to the simulator that aﬀect the way the
compiler needs to function, we will know immediately by running these tests
instead of having to remember to change the unit tests to the new format.
6.2.1
System Tester
End to end tests can usually be done in the same testing framework as ones
unit tests by running the test on the whole system instead of speciﬁc classes or
functions. However, since our framework is two separate programs we are not
that lucky. It might be possible to use some sort of java reﬂection to access the
other project but then the question becomes whether the tests should be with
the compiler or the simulator when in reality they should be somewhere else and
encapsulate both components to drive home the point that it is tests that test
the entire framework as a whole. For this purpose we have developed a third
program, called System Tester, that can run these end to end tests. It works in
the following way:
• Go through all sub-folders in a speciﬁed folder.
– Go through all the ﬁles in the sub-folder that ends in ".ahml".
∗Using Java’s ProcessBuilder class run the compiler jar, found in
a speciﬁed folder, supplying it with the .ahml ﬁle.
∗Start a thread with a runnable class that contains a buﬀered
reader to relay the error stream from the process builder.
∗Read and deserialize the test settings ﬁle if it exists.
∗Using Java’s ProcessBuilder class run the simulator jar, found in
the same folder as the compiler jar, and supply it with the com-
piled result from the compiler along with the simulation settings
ﬁle, as well as any additional settings ﬁles that are speciﬁed in
the optional test settings.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 End to end testing
63
∗Start threads for relaying output and error streams from simu-
lator process.
∗If test settings has any expected results speciﬁed then go through
them and check against the produced memorydump.json ﬁles
from the simulator.
In the implementation a few things are hard-coded which is sub optimal, but
since this program is only used for testing if the framework works, as a whole,
we do not think it is worth the time to change it. The speciﬁed folder for looking
for subfolders in, as well as the speciﬁed folder for ﬁnding the jar ﬁles are such
hard-coded values. Besides that, the naming of test settings ﬁles and simulation
settings ﬁles is hard-coded aswell. Test settings ﬁles must be named the same
as the .ahml ﬁle they belong to, but with "TestSettings" appended and the ﬁle
type being .json. The same goes for simulation settings except they must have
"SimulationSettings" appended instead.
The format of the test settings class is somewhat simple but also a little com-
plicated. It consists of two ﬁelds: one list of strings that contains the names of
any additional settings ﬁles that must be used in the simulation, and a nested
dictionary making sure that results of a simulation are as expected. The dic-
tionary is nested in the following way: the ﬁrst layer is keyed with the name of
the model instance, the second layer is keyed with the cycle, the third layer is
keyed with the type of data variable to test(input signal, output signal, register,
etc.) and ﬁnally the fourth layer is a dictionary mapping the name of the data
variable to the expected result.
Since the memorydump ﬁles use the same format for storing data variable values
as the expected results in the test settings, it is as easy as iterating through the
expected results dictionaries and seeing if the results match.
With this system a set of test model descriptions were created to make sure
certain features worked as planned.
• GDC - Equivalent to the test done using the programmatic interface to
make sure the results are the same.
• Insertion sort - Same as with GDC.
• Hierarchy Test - A test made to make sure hiarchical models can be sim-
ulated.
• Concurrency Test - A test made to make sure concurrent models can be
simulated.
==PAGE:78==
64
Testing and Experiments
• Composite Test - A test to make sure that simulation groups work.
• Input Test - A test to make sure that sub models are able to get input
signal values from their parent model.
• Cyclic Dependencies Between Models - A test to make sure that a warning
and exception is thrown when there is a cyclic dependency between models.
• Memory Test - A test to make sure that declaring, reading from and
writing to memory blocks works.
• Range Test - A test to make sure that getting a certain range of bits from
the value or a register, signal or expression works.
6.3
Experiments
Testing all the diﬀerent functions and the system as a whole with small tailor-
made tests for speciﬁc features does make sure that these features work, at
least individually. To make sure that the entire framework works as intended,
workﬂow included, we made some larger experiments to help try out and test
this. The systems that the experiments consist of are systems that have been
used as assignments in the Computer Systems course at DTU. Thus there exist
hardware modeling frameworks that are capable of simulating them and the
experiments therefore also provide insight into whether this framework is missing
any necessary features as well as how it compares, in these speciﬁc scenarios,
to some other frameworks. During these experiments, we were able to identify
and ﬁx bugs as well as implement missing features and options.
6.3.1
An Experiment: Simulation of a small CPU
In this experiment, the system to build is a CPU that is capable of reading
instructions from a ﬁle and executing them.
This system was a part of an
assignment used in the Computer Systems course in which it was used to run
a ﬁltering algorithm on some data. The primary idea of this system is that it
is versatile because it reads its instructions from a ﬁle, and works on data from
another ﬁle. Thus an instruction set is designed and the results and functionality
of the system primarily lie in the program that it is supplied. A key component
in this is the ability to use memory blocks and speciﬁcally memory blocks that
get initialized with data from a ﬁle. At the time of creating this experiment,
this was not possible in this framework and thus a result of this experiment is
that a model now can use memory blocks.
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Experiments
65
Figure 6.1: A diagram showing the diﬀerent FSMDs and their connections in
the CPU experiment
For an instruction to be as versatile as possible, it can usually be broken into
diﬀerent sections with one of them being the opcode which is what speciﬁes
what kind of instruction the CPU should execute and the rest of the instruction
is then data, for example, which registers to read or write from. To support this
there needs to be a way to look at individual parts of a signal or register instead
of the value as a whole. This too was not possible when the experiment started
but was added as a result of it.
The system consists of eight concurrent models and one submodel and a diagram
showing these models and their connections can be seen in ﬁgure 6.1.
The
PC(Program Counter) is responsible for keeping track of which instruction is
being processed and which to process next. The Instruction Memory returns
the actual instruction based on the address supplied by the PC. It does this
by reading a memory block that is initialized from a ﬁle with the instructions.
The Jump Controller is used to tell the PC whether it should jump to a speciﬁc
instruction instead of continuing to the next one. The ALU(Arithmetic Logic
Unit) is responsible for doing arithmetic computations and is a submodel for
the Controller. The Register File is used for reading and writing to the CPU’s
eight registers. The Immediate Selector is a mux used for supplying the ALU
with one of its inputs. If the current instruction is an immediate instruction
then the value from the instruction is used, otherwise a value from the Register
File is used. The Store Chooser is a mux used for selecting to either store a
value from the Data Memory or the ALU. The Data Memory uses a memory
block initialized with data from a ﬁle to allow the CPU to run on an outside
set of data. The Controller is responsible for reading and executing the current
instruction.
==PAGE:80==
66
Testing and Experiments
Figure 6.2: Input data for the CPU
experiment.
Figure 6.3: Results from the CPU ex-
periment.
To make sure that the system works, the same algorithm and data as used in
the course is used. The input data consists of 250 data points and are a small
section of a larger dataset that constitutes the hearth rate of a person suﬀering
from a hearth attack. The dataset has been run through multiple ﬁlters before
reaching this algorithm. The input data can be seen in ﬁgure 6.2 and contains
a single hearth beat. The job of the algorithm is to smooth out the peaks of the
hearth beats such that it is easier for another algorithm to detect.
The results of running the system on the input data are exactly as expected,
a smoothed out peak in the data that can be detected by a peak detection
algorithm. The results can be seen in ﬁgure 6.3.
6.3.2
An Experiment: Simulation of an FSMD for pixel
erosion
The system in this experiment is a pixel erosion algorithm used as part of a
droplet detection system in an assignment in the Computer Systems course.
The algorithm takes a black and white image and "erodes" any clusters of white
pixels, resulting in a new black and white image where the white clusters have
had pixels at the edges removed, and thus making up smaller clusters than
before. The algorithm iteratively goes through every pixel in the image and
checks whether it is a white pixel, as well as if any of its neighboring pixels are
black. If that is the case then the pixel is an edge pixel of a cluster and it is
painted black instead. Pseudo-code for this algorithm can be seen in listing 6.1.
Listing 6.1: Pseudo-code of pixel erosion algorithm.
1
for (x from 0 to 19) {
2
for (y from 0 to 19) {
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Experiments
67
3
if (pixel is at the edge of the input image) { set pixel to
black in output image and continue with next pixel }
4
if (if pixel at coordinate (x,y), in the input image, is
black) {
5
set pixel to black in output image
6
} else {
7
if (a neighbouring pixel, in the input image, is black) {
8
set pixel to black in output image
9
} else {
10
set pixel to white in output image
11
}
12
}
13
}
14
}
This type of algorithm is perfect for turning into a FSMD and thus showcase
how the framework handles a larger FSMD than the toy examples used in the
unit and end-to-end tests. The algorithm can be seen as a FSM in ﬁgure 6.4
where guards and actions are omitted as they can easily be inferred from the
name of the state and the pseudo-code in listing 6.1. Besides the model for the
algorithm, the system contains a model for the data memory that is initialized
with the input data. The input data can be seen in ﬁgure 6.5.
Figure 6.4: A ﬁnite state machine encapsulating the erosion algorithm
Given that the algorithm runs on an image, the number of words of memory
that is needed gets fairly large quite fast when increasing the size of this image.
In the assignment, a 20-pixel by 20-pixel image is used and the same image is
used in the experiment but this still leaves us with the need for 800 words of
memory, 400 for storing the original, and 400 for storing the result. This is
of course nowhere near being a problem with modern computers, but it does
pose a challenge with regards to reading the resulting data as well as creating a
rather large VCD ﬁle when every word is traced in every cycle.
==PAGE:82==
68
Testing and Experiments
Figure 6.5: Input data for the erosion
experiment.
Figure 6.6: Results from the erosion
experiment.
Thus as a result of this test, options to enable and disable tracing of memory,
tracing in general, and whether or not to generate memory dumps, where added
to the framework. Additionally, models with a memory block that has been
initialized by a ﬁle will create a result ﬁle, containing the values at the end of
the ﬁnal cycle, at the end of the simulation. This way the results of a simulation
can still be viewed without having to generate dumps every cycle, and even when
debugging with the dumps they, it is possible to avoid them becoming inﬂated
by the memory blocks.
The result of running the experiment is as expected, an image that looks like
the input data but where the clusters of white are slightly smaller because they
have been eroded. The resulting image can be seen in ﬁgure 6.6.
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 7
Discussion
This chapter presents a discussion of how the product of this thesis measures
up against similar frameworks in regards to present functionality and its usage
as a teaching tool, for software bachelor students. The chapter is divided into
sections, with each section focusing on comparing against a single framework,
except for the last of these sections which compare two. Each section starts with
discussing the comparability of the frameworks, before discussing the function-
ality they have in common and then ﬁnally discussing the points at which they
deviate. Additionally, a discussion of the process used to produce this thesis is
also presented, as well as proposed future work for the framework.
7.1
Gezel
Given that Gezel has formerly been used in course 02132 to teach the students
about hardware design, it is a good measuring stock, for the product of this,
in regards to whether a framework is usable as a teaching tool. Since Gezel is
based on FSMDs, like our framework, comparing functionality can be done on a
feature to feature basis. As discussed in section 6.3.1, our framework is capable
of simulating the hardware design which Gezel has previously been used for.
Both frameworks are based on the FSMD model and allow for the simulation of
==PAGE:84==
70
Discussion
various conﬁgurations of such a model. It is possible to simulate a single model
or multiple models concurrently as well as building a composite hierarchy of
models that all simulate concurrently. Both frameworks allow for the use of all
the operators from the C programming language as combinational logic, except
the ternary operator which is only present in Gezel and not the product of this
thesis. Additionally, it is possible to get both frameworks to produce VCD ﬁles
that can be used to visualize a simulation.
Gezel is written in C++ and needs to be compiled for a speciﬁc operating
system, a pre-compiled package is provided for Linux users. Due to issues with
compiling Gezel for Mac and Windows users in course 02132, the organizers
provided the students with virtual machines running Linux and containing the
pre-compiled package. At the moment of writing this thesis, the homepage of
Gezel provided in [SC05] is unavailable. Our framework is written in Java and
thus needs the Java Virtual Machine to run. The JVM is available on every
common operating system and allows for a single package to be distributed and
used by everyone, regardless of their underlying operating system.
Gezel does, as mentioned, allow for composite hierarchy, but it does not allow
for true hierarchical modeling, where a model is encapsulated in a speciﬁc state
of another model, like our framework.
Our framework has extensive semantics that prevents unwanted behavior and
provides proper error messages, as can be seen in the Design chapter. Gezel
does not, as is evident by [HMB07]. The lack of clearly deﬁned semantics in
Gezel makes it diﬃcult to develop models because no explanations are given as
to why something does not work.
The FSMD model used in Gezel is broken into its components, FSMs and Dat-
apaths, this allows for the reuse of datapaths in diﬀerent FSMDs, by use of
duplication, as well as the use of predeﬁned FSMs. While this does make Gezel
more versatile it makes it appear as if there is no connection between the com-
binational logic and the control logic which might confuse someone who is both
trying to learn hardware design and the FSMD concept.
The Gezel framework contains a tool to translate designs written in Gezel into
VHDL designs which can then be further simulated and synthesized. There is
no equivalent functionality in our framework but it is likely not a functionality
needed by software students, and it has not been one used by the students of
course 02132.
Our framework provides the ability to retrieve energy usage estimates from
a simulation, this functionality is however limited in usage depending on the
data provided to the simulator. Gezel does not give energy estimates like our
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Chisel
71
framework but it can provide a toggle count, the number of times that bits are
ﬂipped, which can be used to calculate energy usage.
7.2
Chisel
Chisel, like Gezel, has been used in course 02132 and is thus also a good mea-
suring stick for our framework. Chisel does not require the use of the FSMD
concept but it does allow it. As discussed in section 6.3.2 our framework can be
used to fulﬁll the task which Chisel is current used for.
Both frameworks can simulate FSMD based hardware designs concurrently and
hierarchically and provide VCD ﬁles to visualization.
Chisel is not a language deﬁnition, but instead a library for the Scala lan-
guage. This is what allows Chisel to provide the hardware design with software
functionalities likes OOP and functional programming but it also carries the
verboseness of the language with it. While OOP and functional programming
concepts do provide many functionalities, it also adds a lot of complexity to the
designs. Scala runs on the JVM like Java does which means that Chisel and
our framework share the same beneﬁts and issues with regards to who can use
it and ease of installation.
Chisel can be translated into synthesizable Verilog but like with Gezel this is
not a functionality used in course 02132.
Chisel does not provide any sort of energy consumption data whereas our frame-
work allows the user to get energy consumption estimates that are based on
supplied data. If the supplied data to our framework is realistic, at least with
regards to the ratios between diﬀerent components, then our framework will
provide estimates which can be used to compare diﬀerent design’s ineﬃciency.
7.3
VHDL and Verilog
VHDL and Verilog are both far more comprehensive frameworks than our frame-
work, they allow for the synthesis of designs into physical hardware and timing-
based simulation on multiple levels of abstraction including register-transfer-
level, like our framework, and gate-level.
Neither framework is based on a
speciﬁc conceptual model but they both allow for the use of the FSMD concept.
==PAGE:86==
72
Discussion
Both VHDL and Verilog are language standards and thus users rely on vendors
to supply the actual frameworks capable of understanding and simulating their
designs. The speciﬁc functionality present, as well as how it is implemented is
thus not necessarily uniform across all users.
VHDL and Verilog are minded at industry professionals that want to physically
produce hardware and thus the target audience is not the same between them
and our framework. Therefore, the fact that VHDL and Verilog are more com-
prehensive is not necessarily a weakness of our framework, but a strength since
it is made speciﬁcally for the software student audience.
7.4
Thesis Process
The process of this thesis has worked well and resulted in a well functioning
framework. At the beginning of the project, a time schedule was made, which
can be seen in appendix A, to scope out the project. This time schedule has
mostly been kept and the deviations have only been because of a few cases of
under and overestimating the size of a task. The main idea behind the process
to work in an agile fashion with weekly sprints that focus on a speciﬁc feature
or a part of a speciﬁc feature. Additionally, weekly supervisor meetings are held
to discuss issues and whether or not there is a need to refocus the coming week’s
tasks.
In hindsight, it might have been a better idea to incorporate more time for
writing the report during the individual tasks instead of pushing the bulk of it
until the end of the project. However, it was our belief that doing so would
produce an incoherent report that would still need a lot of care and there would
ultimately not be enough time for that since the entire time schedule would have
had to be shifted, with more time added to each task.
7.5
Future Work
Although a lot of features have been designed and implemented throughout this
project there are still things that can be improved upon or added. This section
presents some of the things that we would have liked to have included but were
unable to, as well as additions that are out of scope of this thesis but still makes
sense for the framework.
==PAGE:87==
7.5 Future Work
73
Better Data Type Support
In its current state the only possible type of data that can be stored and used
is Java integers, which in most cases are 32-bits signed integers. However, the
size might be diﬀerent depending on the operating system. This is suﬃcient to
accomplish most tasks but it does not allow the same control as real electronics
do. It especially deprives the users of the possibility of analyzing what happens
when data variables have a bit width too small to handle their values, whether
that happens intentionally or not.
Additionally, there is no way to use real
numbers, a lot of unnecessary memory is used on storing booleans as integers,
and there is no way to know if a boolean is in fact a boolean or just an integer.
Therefore, we suggest that the current DataValue system be adjusted or replaced
such that it has these features.
Simulation Settings Creation
While the simulation settings system is needed in order to convey all the settings
necessary for a proper simulation, to the simulator, it could be made a lot easier
to write. The problem is primarily the input bindings and the issue lies in the
fact that the format is a one-to-one representation of the internal data structure,
which is a dictionary nested in multiple objects. Thus we propose that another
system for creating the simulation ﬁles, or at least for setting up the input
bindings, is made. We believe that there is two good option when it comes
to this: creating some sort of language that allows one to easily and concisely
describe the I/O connections of models, or a graphical user interface that allows
the user to load in model descriptions and then drag and drop connections
between them. In either case we do not think there is a need to change the
underlying data structure for the input bindings which means that which ever
solution is chosen it should produce a settings ﬁle of the format that currently
exists.
Fine Control of Memory Dumps
Currently the only options that exist with regards to memory dumps is whether
or not to produce them at all. With large models and simulations these ﬁles
might become very large and very diﬃcult to navigate and ﬁnd speciﬁc signals
or registers within. This was the primary reason why VCD traces where added
to the system. While they are meant to replace memory dumps for debugging,
it might still make more sense in some cases to quickly open up the memory
==PAGE:88==
74
Discussion
dump in a text editor, and compare a few numbers, versus having to open
up GTKWave and look at the activity patterns. However, this is not possible
since every single signal and register are present. Thus we propose to add the
ability to either exclude signals or register that the user does not want dumped,
or require the user to explicitly state which signals or registers they do want
dumped. The same system might be applied to the energy metrics tracking, if
the user only cares about a few of the types of components and does not wish
to see all of them.
Fine Control of Traces
Like with memory dumps there is no ﬁne control over which signals, registers or
memory blocks to trace. While it is possible to disable the tracing of memory
blocks all together, we still think it could make sense to create a similar system,
as the proposed one for memory dumps, that give the user full control over which
data to trace or not. However, given the use of GTKWave it is less important,
since the scopes hide away data variables of other model instances and there is
a text ﬁeld that functions as a ﬁlter that can be used to ﬁlter out or in certain
variables. The primary beneﬁt of adding this feature would be that the VCD
ﬁles become less big.
Integrated Development Environment
Another thing outside the scope of this thesis, is creating an Integrated Devel-
opment Environment for this framework. This would make it so the user does
not have to work with multiple diﬀerent jar archives, but instead simply use a
graphical application that can invoke the jar archives automatically. An addi-
tional beneﬁt of an IDE would be the possibility of adding syntax highlighting
and the possibility of letting the user know, while they are writing their model
descriptions, of any typos or errors in their descriptions.
All-in-one GUI
A diﬀerent possibility is, instead of creating an IDE, to make an GUI application
be an interface of the framework. This way the users can create their models
through the GUI instead of having to write their models in code. This GUI could
even be combined with the application for creating the simulation settings such
that the user just has to use one application for describing, connecting and
==PAGE:89==
7.5 Future Work
75
simulating their designs. An additional beneﬁt of this is that, the user of the
framework will most likely want to create a diagram of their model to see if it
makes sense before even testing it. This diagram could be what the GUI allows
the user to create, thus making it so the user does not have to create their design
multiple times. Finally, a way to visual the application, like it currently is in
GTKWave, could be integrated into this GUI application making it an All-in-
one framework application. To preserve modularity, the diﬀerent parts of the
application could be their own application that gets executed on-demand by a
central controller application.
==PAGE:90==
76
Discussion
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have explored the design, implementation, testing of a frame-
work for hardware design and analysis aimed at the 3rd-semester software bach-
elor students at DTU taking the course 02132 Computer Systems. The frame-
work is an extension of a simulator that can simulate a single FSMD model
which we developed as a preliminary course at DTU. The framework is meant
to allow the students to design and validate hardware systems, to give them a
deeper understanding of computer science and how hardware and software are
connected. Additionally, the framework has been compared with Gezel, which
was previously used in course 02132, and Chisel, which is currently being used
in course 02132, as well as VHDL and Verilog, which are industry standards for
hardware design and synthesis.
In the design, we presented an overall architecture as well as explored the prob-
lems faced and decisions made regarding the features of the framework. We
proposed using an external ﬁle to specify connections between models as well
as general settings for a given simulation. To allow for a greater range of de-
signs to be captured easily we speciﬁed designs for simulating multiple models
concurrently as well as hierarchically. For concurrent simulation, we proposed
to use a design based on sensitivity lists, that is, to re-execute all models, that
have had their inputs aﬀected by the (re-)execution of another model, until we
reach stability. Hierarchical models are achieved by substituting the underlying
ﬁnite state machine with a modiﬁed hierarchical state machine that makes sure
==PAGE:92==
78
Conclusion
we can pass I/O data between parent and child models by concatenating their
chosen transitions. Furthermore, we proposed to create and use a customized
programming language to describe one’s hardware designs. This language is
heavily inspired by C-style programming languages to diminish the learning
curve of the description language itself such that the students can focus on un-
derstanding the hardware design principles. We proposed that the language is
created using a compiler compiler and recommend using JavaCC. Additionally,
we proposed semantic rules that should be enforced as well as how to enforce
them, the most important of which is how to detect inter-model combinational
loops. These loops are not the only types of loops that can occur and thus we
can check a loop is of any of the non-combinational kind. We can then proceed
to warn the user, as we can not be sure whether a loop will ever be encountered
during the simulation without actually performing the simulation. Besides this,
we proposed a system for outputting energy consumption estimates of a given
simulation, the system relies on energy consumption data of given components
supplied by the user. It uses this data to keep track of how many times diﬀerent
kinds of components ﬁre in every cycle and outputs this information together
with accumulated values for the entire simulation run. Lastly, we proposed the
production of Value Change Dump ﬁles to visualize simulations through the use
of programs such as GTKWave.
In the implementation, we presented high-level explanations and pseudo-code
for implementing the most diﬃcult parts of the design. We proposed pseudo-
code for implementing the simulation of concurrent models, which utilizes a
queue of models to execute which get repopulated by models whenever their
sensitive input is changed. We then proposed pseudo-code for simulating hier-
archical models on their own as well as how to merge the implementations of the
concurrent models and the hierarchical models. Furthermore, we present a way
to implement the compiler for our language in JavaCC, by ﬁrst explaining how
to implement the Lexer, then the Parser, and lastly how to make sure we can
produce proper error messages. Additionally, we explain how to implement the
energy tracking system by way of extending the existing software. Besides this,
we propose a way to implement the production of VCD ﬁles for visualization,
how to implement memory blocks, as well as a replacement for the existing data
type system.
We have tested the framework by conducting unit and end-to-end testing as well
as two larger experiments. The experiments are both assignments from previous
iterations of course 02132 and used to be solved by designs written in Gezel and
Chisel. The experiments show that it is possible to describe said designs in our
framework, as well as simulate them with the same results as with their Gezel
and Chisel solution.
Lastly, we have compared our framework with Gezel, Chisel, VHDL, and Verilog,
==PAGE:93==
79
which are other frameworks for hardware design, the most interesting ones being
Gezel and Chisel since they have previously been used in course 02132.
Gezel and our framework both contain customized programming languages for
the description of designs, they both use the FSMD model, and they both sup-
port the simulation of multiple models concurrently and hierarchically. Unlike
our framework, Gezel is able to translate designs into VHDL but this feature is
not one that is being used in course 02132. Chisel does not contain a language
deﬁnition, unlike our framework, but is instead a library to the Scala program-
ming language. Chisel does enable one to use the FSMD concept for creating
models but only through the explicit use of registers and switch cases. Both
Chisel and our framework support simulation of multiple models both concur-
rently and hierarchically. Chisel can be translated into synthesizable Verilog
designs whereas our framework does not support such a translation, however,
this is not a feature used in course 02132. Furthermore, our framework has
explicitly stated semantics that prevents design and simulation errors, whereas
both Gezel and Chisel does not. Additionally, our framework provides energy
consumption estimates for a simulation, based on energy data supplied by the
user, whereas Gezel merely provides a toggle count of the bits of signals, and
Chisel provides neither. From this, we can gather that our framework is at least
as capable of being used in course 02132 for hardware design as Gezel and Chisel
are, and because of the explicitly deﬁned semantics, it would be more suitable for
students trying to learn about hardware design as they will inevitably produce
errors during their trial and error design.
Comparing against VHDL and Verilog we observed that while they are indus-
try standards, they are merely language standards and thus the actual feature
set depends on the framework that implements it which primarily consists of
commercial-grade software. Both languages support design and simulation on
multiple levels of abstraction, which results in a potentially steeper learning
curve. They do not rely on the FSMD concept, but merely allow the emulation
of it through the use of registers and switch cases. Furthermore, they both have
clearly deﬁned semantics just like our framework. Additionally, they are able
to produce schematics for physical hardware, from their designs, although only
from a certain subset of their respective languages, through a process called
synthesizing. From this, we can gather that both VHDL and Verilog are a lot
more feature-rich than our framework and supports a wider range of use cases.
However, all of the advanced features also make them more diﬃcult to learn and
thus takes away from learning hardware design itself. Therefore, it would make
more sense to use our framework if the focus is not to be on the framework but
the designs themselves and if the advanced features of VHDL and Verilog or not
needed.
To summarize, we have produced a framework that can be used to design and
==PAGE:94==
80
Conclusion
analyze hardware and is capable of replacing Gezel and Chisel in course 02132.
Our framework contains the following set of features:
• Customised C-style language for specifying designs, including a compiler
that translates designs into a format understandable by the simulator, as
well as gives syntactic and semantic warnings.
• Simulation of FSMD models, both multiple models concurrently, hierar-
chically and combined, as well as singular models.
• Ability to use the entire set of operators from the programming language
C, except the ternary operator, for the combinational logic.
• External ﬁle format for specifying model connections, general simulation
settings, as well as simulation groups for composite hierarchy.
• Semantic analysis of simulation settings ﬁles.
• Semantic warnings for inter-model combinational loops.
• Production of energy estimates for a given simulation, based on user-
supplied energy consumption data.
• Production of Value Change Dump ﬁles for visualization of a simulation.
• Memory block language construct that allows the designer to load in data
from an external ﬁle.
==PAGE:95==
Appendix A
Time schedule
==PAGE:96==
82
Time schedule
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[anta]
Antlr homepage. https://www.antlr.org/. Visited 29/12/2020.
[antb]
Antlr
vs
javacc
overhead.
https://dzone.com/articles/
antlr-and-javacc-parser-generators. Visited 15/12/2020.
[BL98]
Bilung Lee and E. A. Lee. Hierarchical concurrent ﬁnite state ma-
chines in ptolemy. In Proceedings 1998 International Conference on
Application of Concurrency to System Design, pages 34–40, 1998.
[BVR+12] J. Bachrach, H. Vo, B. Richards, Y. Lee, A. Waterman, R. Avižienis,
J. Wawrzynek, and K. Asanović. Chisel: Constructing hardware in
a scala embedded language. In DAC Design Automation Conference
2012, pages 1212–1221, 2012.
[chi]
Chisel wiki. https://github.com/chipsalliance/chisel3/wiki.
Visited 11/12/2020.
[DGG+]
Rainer Dömer, Andreas Gerstlauer, Daniel Gajski, R. Dömer,
A. Gerstlauer, and D. Gajski. Specc language reference manual.
[ghd]
Ghdl. http://ghdl.free.fr/. Visited 10/12/2020.
[gtk]
Gtkwave homepage. http://gtkwave.sourceforge.net/. Visited
27/12/2020.
[HMB07]
Michael R. Hansen, Jan Madsen, and Aske Wiid Brekling. Seman-
tics and Veriﬁcation of a Language for Modelling Hardware Architec-
tures, pages 300–319. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2007.
==PAGE:98==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[jav]
Javacc homepage. https://javacc.github.io/javacc/. Visited
29/12/2020.
[jjt]
Jjtree
documatation.
https://javacc.github.io/javacc/
documentation/jjtree.html. Visited 29/12/2020.
[Lin]
Tobias Lindstrøm. Fsmd simulation project. Supplied in docs folder
together with the source code.
[SC05]
Patrick Schaumont and Doris Ching. Gezel user manual, 2005.
[Sch10]
P. R. Schaumont.
A practical introduction to hardware/software
codesign, chapter 4. 2010.
[Sch19]
Martin Schoeberl. Digital Design with Chisel. Kindle Direct Pub-
lishing, 2019.
[Smi96]
D. J. Smith. Vhdl and verilog compared and contrasted-plus modeled
example written in vhdl, verilog and c. In 33rd Design Automation
Conference Proceedings, 1996, pages 771–776, 1996.
[ver06]
Ieee standard for verilog hardware description language. IEEE Std
1364-2005 (Revision of IEEE Std 1364-2001), pages 1–590, 2006.
[vhd00]
Ieee standard vhdl language reference manual. IEEE Std 1076-2000,
pages 1–300, 2000.
