==PAGE:1==
Quantification of Mechanical
Properties of Two-Component
Epoxy Coatings During Curing
Master Thesis
Caroline Erup Friis
January 3rd, 2021
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Due to their exceptional mechanical properties and chemical resistance, epoxies are
commonly used in anticorrosive coatings for metals. The curing of two-component
epoxy coatings is a complicated process where chemical crosslinking reactions and
solvent evaporation takes place simultaneously. Through FTIR-spectroscopy and a
gravimetric analysis, it was found that before vitrification solvent free coatings had
a higher epoxy conversion than corresponding solvent containing coatings, and after
vitrification, the solvent containing coatings obtained a higher conversion because of
residual entrapped solvent. The chemical curing kinetics data was found to have a
reasonable fit with the Kamal-Sourour model, modified with the Cole equation. To
characterise the mechanical property evolution of epoxy coatings during curing, the
epoxy conversion data was evaluated in conjunction with experimental data from an
advanced rheometer, obtained via both dynamic mechanical analysis and runs with
a parallel plate geometry. Thus, it showed that both the elastic shear modulus and
the glass transition temperature was higher for a solvent free coating than a corres-
ponding solvent containing coating. A mathematical model, using the development
of the shear storage modulus for prediction of the epoxy conversion, showed a less
good fit with the experimental data than the chemical kinetic model. The exper-
imental data showed an almost linear increase in the glass transition temperature
related to the epoxy conversion. The glass transition temperature data was fitted
to the DiBenedetto equation, but due to limitations of the experimental method,
it was not possible to properly assess the performance of the model. To quantify
the curing-induced internal stress of the epoxy coatings the beam deflection method
was utilised, but due to low sensor resolution the method did not provide usable
results. However, the chemical shrinkage, which is directly related to the curing-
induced internal stress, of an epoxy coating during curing could be monitored using
the rheometer. It was found that after gelation the coating displayed a close to
linear correlation between the shrinkage and the epoxy conversion.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
iii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at The Hempel Foundation Coatings Science and Techno-
logy Centre (CoaST) within DTU Chemical Engineering, the Department of Chem-
ical and Biochemical Engineering at The Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering, Msc Eng. The work carried out in regards to this thesis was initiated
on the 3rd of September 2020 and finished on the 3rd of January 2021.
I hereby declare, that this thesis was composed by myself, that the work contained
herein is my own, except where due acknowledgement is made in the thesis, and that
this work has not previously been submitted for any other degree or professional
qualification.
I wish to express my appreciation to my advisors at CoaST, Professor Søren Kiil,
Senior Executive Officer Claus Erik Weinell, and Ph.d. student Qiong Li. Thank
you for your time and guidance. In addition, I would like to thank Christian and
the rest of my family, for their love and support throughout the project.
Caroline Erup Friis - s133612
Signature
Date
iv
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:5==
Project Description
Master Thesis Project, E2020
The CoaST group, DTU Chemical Engineering
Thesis Title
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During
Curing
Author
Caroline Erup Friis (s133612)
Supervisors
Associate Professor Søren Kiil
Senior Executive Officer Dr. Claus Erik Weinell
PhD student Qiong Li
Background
Two-component epoxy coatings are commonly applied as protective coatings in both
the process and marine industry. Due to their chemical structure, the epoxy coatings
have superior properties, including chemical resistance and mechanical and thermal
stability. The epoxy coating curing process is complicated, due to solvent evapor-
ation and chemical reactions occurring simultaneously. Through curing, the epoxy
resin is linked chemically to a curing agent forming a three-dimensional crosslink-
ing network. At a certain degree of curing, the so-called gel point is reached, the
viscosity of the coating approaches infinity, and an elastic modulus starts to de-
velop within the coating. Past the gel point, the network structure becomes more
rigid, and eventually the coating vitrifies or stiffens. With that, the rate of curing
becomes diffusion controlled instead of controlled by the crosslinking reaction rate.
The curing process is highly influenced, by the coating components such as type of
binder and curing agent, fillers, pigmentation, and solvent, together with the curing
conditions regarding e.g. temperature and relative humidity.
The elastic modulus affects the degree of internal stress developed in the coating
due to shrinkage during curing. When released, the internal stress can be the cause
of coating defects, such as cracks and delamination.
Aims of the Project
The aim of this master thesis project is to examine how the mechanical properties
within two-component epoxy coatings evolve during the curing process. Experiment-
ally, the effects of the initial solvent concentration on the epoxy conversion, solvent
evaporation rate, and elastic modulus will be investigated using FTIR spectroscopy,
a rheometer, a scale, and a climate chamber for controlling the curing conditions.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
v
==PAGE:6==
Furthermore, a mathematical model, describing the relationship between the evolu-
tion of the elastic modulus and the curing process, could be set up.
Expected Outcome
• A literature study within the topic of anticorrosive epoxy coatings, coating
mechanical properties, and how these relate to the curing process. Moreover,
earlier experiments and mathematical models available in the literature are
included.
• Experimental data regarding conversion, solvent evaporation rate, and elastic
modulus during curing of epoxy-coatings obtained using FTIR spectroscopy,
a rheometer, and gravimetric analysis.
• A mathematical model developed to reveal the relation between the elastic
modulus of epoxy coatings and the degree of conversion/solvent evaporation
during curing.
Time Schedule
• Project start: 03.08.2020
• First progress report: 06.09.2020
– Literature review
• Second progress report: 25.10.2020
– Preliminary experimental results
• Third progress report: 13.12.2020
– Final experimental results and possibly mathematical model
• Final report: 03.01.2021
vi
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Explanation
ATR
Attenuated total reflection
BPA
Bisphenol A
BPF
Bisphenol F
DGEBA
Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A
DMA
Dynamical mechanical analysis
DSC
Differential scanning calorimetry
FTIR
Fourier transform infrared
GDP
Gross domestic product
IR
Infrared
K-S
Kamal-Sourour
MXDA
m-xylylenediamine
UV
Ultraviolet
VOC
Volatile organic compounds
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
vii
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Definition
A
Area
A
Arrhenius pre-exponential factor
Amax
Initial IR peak area
Ae0
Initial IR epoxy peak area
Aet
IR epoxy peak area
Ar0
Initial IR reference peak area
Art
IR reference peak area
a
Absorptivity
C
Structure and temperature dependent constant
c
Concentration
d
Sample thickness
d
Deflection
E
Young’s modulus/Elastic modulus
Ea
Activation energy
Ec
Young’s modulus of coating
Es
Young’s modulus of substrate
F
Force
f
Functionality
f
Reaction mechanism model function
fd
Diffusion controlled reaction model
G
Shear modulus
G∗
Complex shear modulus
G′
Shear storage modulus
G′
0
Initial shear storage modulus
G′
∞
Final shear storage modulus
G′′
Shear loss modulus
GR
Rubbery shear modulus
G∞
R
Final rubbery shear modulus
The table is continued on the next page.
viii
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:9==
Symbol
Definition
h
Gap size
h0
Initial gap size
k
Chemical reaction rate constant
l
Length
l0
Initial length
m
Reaction order
m
Mass
m0
Initial mass
N
Number of molecules
N0
Initial number of molecules
n
Reaction order
R
Universal gas constant
r
Radius of curvature
T
Temperature
t
Time
tc
Thickness of coating
ts
Thickness of substrate
Tg
Glass transition temperature
Tg0
Glass transition temperature of uncured resin (α = 0)
Tg∞
Glass transition temperature of fully cured resin (α = 1)
r
Molar ratio
α
Degree of conversion
αc
Critical conversion degree
γ
Shear strain
tan(δ)
Loss tangent
ϵ
Strain
ϵV
Volumetric chemical shrinkage
λ
Structure dependent parameter
ν
Poisson’s ratio
νc
Poisson’s ratio of coating
νs
Poisson’s ratio of substrate
σ
Stress
τ
Shear stress
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
ix
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Time Schedule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Study
3
2.1
Corrosion of Metals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Coatings for Corrosion Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Principles of Corrosion Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Coating Adhesion and Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Two-Component Epoxy Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
The Epoxy Coating Curing Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Coating Mechanical Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.8
Epoxy Coating Curing Reaction Kinetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.9
Epoxy Coating Mechanical Property Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.10 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3
Scientific Hypotheses of the Project
40
4
Experimental Methods
41
4.1
Coating Materials and Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
FTIR Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Gravimetric Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Rheology Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5
Deflection Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.6
Experimental Setup and Measurement Method . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Results and Discussion
61
5.1
Epoxy Conversion and Solvent Evaporation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Mechanical Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.3
Internal Stress and Chemical Shrinkage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
x
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:11==
6
Modelling of Experimental Data
98
6.1
Curing Reaction Kinetics Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
6.2
Storage Modulus-Epoxy Conversion Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6.3
Epoxy Conversion and the Glass Transition Temperature . . . . . . . 112
7
Conclusions
117
8
Recommendations for Future Work
119
References
120
Appendix
129
A Experimental Plan
129
B Coating Formulation Calculations
131
C Gravimetric Analysis Data Processing
137
D Gravimetric Analysis Data
140
D.1 Solvent Containing Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
D.2 Solvent Free Coatings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
E IR Spectra
149
E.1
DGEBA Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
E.2
Novolac Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
F DMA Results
161
F.1
100% Solid Volume Coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
F.2
80% Solid Volume Coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
G Deflection Test Data
165
H Kamal-Sourour Model MATLAB Script
168
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
xi
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
Due to their unique properties, metallic materials have found widespread use in many
industrial applications, including the process and marine industries. However, an
ongoing challenge is susceptibility of the metallic materials typically employed in
industry, such as steel, towards corrosion [1]. In the natural electrochemical phe-
nomenon of corrosion, charge and electron transfer reactions entail oxidation of a
metal surface when exposed to an aggressive environment [1, 2]. The process of cor-
rosion leads to a progressive degradation of the metal, which ultimately undermines
the integrity of the material properties [3]. Besides severe economical consequences,
caused by downtime of plants etc., structural failures caused by corrosion can also
have consequences for the health of both humans and the surrounding environment
[4, 5].
According to NACE International, The Worldwide Corrosion Authority, the annual
costs related to corrosion were in 2016 equivalent to more than 3% of the world’s
gross domestic product (GDP) [1, 2].
Furthermore, estimates have shown, that
around 15%-35% of the costs globally associated with corrosion can be saved by
the employment of available corrosion protection strategies [2]. Therefore, in order
to enhance the service life of metallic structures and reduce the expenses to an
acceptable level, both economically and environmentally, corrosion prevention is a
necessity [5, 6].
Protective coatings is the most commonly used method for prevention of metal
corrosion, and epoxy resins are widely used in the coatings industry for anticorrosive
coatings [4, 7]. Because of their chemical structure, the epoxies have exceptional
properties, such as resistance towards highly corrosive environments, solvents, and
heat, as well as easy processing, mechanical hardness to withstand hits, elasticity
and flexibility to avoid cracking, and good adhesion to many substrates [8, 9, 10].
Organic coatings, such as protective epoxy based coatings, are applied to the sub-
strate surface as a liquid, and then cured to obtain a prolonging solid film, separat-
ing the substrate from the environment [11]. The curing is a complicated process,
which involves the simultaneous evaporation of solvent and chemical crosslinking
reactions with a curing agent, which links the polymeric epoxy chains to form a
three-dimensional network structure [11, 12]. At the so-called gel point, the coating
transitions from being a viscous liquid to the rubbery state, accompanied by the
development of an elastic modulus. After gelation, the crosslinking density of the
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
1
==PAGE:13==
coating increases as the curing carries on. Eventually the polymer enters the glassy
state and becomes brittle (vitrification) [13]. The elastic modulus is an important
mechanical property of a coating because it affects the the amount of internal stress
developed during curing [14, 15]. The curing-induced internal stress originates from
shrinkage of the coating, and can, upon release lead to the formation of coating
defects such as cracks and delamination [16].
The coating curing process, and thus, the performance of epoxy coatings is highly
influenced by several different parameters, such as the coating formulation, and the
curing exposure conditions, i.e. the temperature and relative humidity [4].
1.1
Scope of the Thesis
This project investigates how the mechanical properties of epoxy coatings develop
during the curing process, and how that is affected by the solvent content of the
coating.
In order to do so, firstly a literature study has been made on the subject of anti-
corrosive coatings and the mechanical property evolution of epoxies during curing.
Then, the epoxy conversion as a function of the curing time has experimentally been
studied through IR spectroscopy, for coatings formulated with different concentra-
tions of solvent, the solvent evaporation rate has been investigated by means of a
gravimetric analysis, and the coating mechanical property evolution, including the
development of the elastic modulus, the gel point, the glass transition temperat-
ure, and chemical shrinkage, has been investigated using an advanced rheometer.
Furthermore, the aim of a deflection method test is to quantify the curing-induced
internal stress of both solvent containing and solvent free coatings.
Mathematically, the relationship between the curing process and the mechanical
property evolution, in terms of the elastic modulus and the glass transition temper-
ature, has been investigated by fitting of models to the experimental data.
2
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:14==
2
Literature Study
This literature review examines various aspects regarding anticorrosive two-component
epoxy coatings, including the mechanisms of corrosion, corrosive environments, prin-
ciples for corrosion protection, coating composition, epoxy chemistry, the curing
process, and how it affects the mechanical properties of the final coating. Further-
more, an overview of the most important experimental methods and mathematical
models, for investigating the curing process and evolution of mechanical properties
in epoxy resins, employed in the literature is included.
2.1
Corrosion of Metals
The corrosion of a metal is a process, where an unintentional attack leads to de-
gradation of the metal, and, thus, an impairment of its functionality [4, 12, 17].
Section 2.1.1 deals with the mechanisms leading to corrosion of metals in detail and
in Section 2.1.2 different types of corrosive environments and their characteristics
are treated.
2.1.1
Mechanisms of Corrosion
For metallic materials, the mechanism of corrosion most often follows an electro-
chemical route [3, 17]. The process of electrochemical corrosion occurs when a metal
surface is exposed to an electrolyte [4]. The surface of a metal is inhomogeneous
and contains some areas with anodic and some with cathodic character [3, 4]. These
differences in the electrode potential across the metal surface is what promotes the
electrochemical corrosion. As shown in Figure 2.1, the phenomenon is based on
charge and electron transfer reactions, which results in oxidation of the metal [1].
Figure 2.1: Principle sketch of corrosion of an iron containing metallic material.
Figure adapted from Spennemann [18].
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
3
==PAGE:15==
The oxidation reaction takes place at the anode. Thus, on e.g. a steel surface, the
iron atoms will loose their two valence electrons as follows
Fe (s) −−→Fe2+ (aq) + 2 e−
(2.1)
At the cathode, the free electrons from the oxidation reaction undergoes a reduction
reaction and are transferred to another species. As such, in an acidic solution, the
high concentration of H+-ions will lead to the formation of molecular hydrogen, as
shown in reaction (2.2) [17].
2 H+ + 2 e−−−→H2 (aq)
(2.2)
In the case where acid is available together with oxygen, it is likely that the reduction
reaction leads to the formation of water [17]:
O2 (aq) + 4 H+ + 4 e−−−→2 H2O (l)
(2.3)
For neutral or basic solutions, with oxygen present, the reaction at the cathode will
result in formation of hydroxide ions:
O2 (aq) + 2 H2O (l) + 4 e−−−→4 OH−
(2.4)
The hydroxide ions can then combine with Fe2+-ions, formed at the anode, as per
reaction (2.1) [4, 17].
Fe2+ + 2 OH−−−→Fe(OH)2 (aq)
(2.5)
In a subsequent series of reactions, iron hydroxide is further oxidised. Firstly, to
green hydrated magnetite by reaction with oxygen (2.6) [4].
6 Fe(OH)2 (aq) + O2 (aq) −−→4 H2O (l) + 2 FeO · Fe2O3 · H2O (s)
(2.6)
Then, a decomposition of the unstable hydrated magnetite to black magnetite follows
[4]:
FeO · Fe2O3 · H2O (s) −−→FeO · Fe2O3(s) + H2O(l)
(2.7)
The presence of oxygen allows for one last oxidation reaction, where stable red-brown
hydrated hematite, commonly known as rust, is formed:
2 FeO · Fe2O3 (s) + 1
2 O2 (aq) + 3 H2O (l) −−→3 Fe2O3 · H2O (s)
(2.8)
Thermodynamically, the process of metal corrosion is spontaneous and irreversible,
and thus, causes a decrease in the Gibbs’ free energy of the system [1, 3]. As for
any other chemical reaction, the change in Gibbs’ free energy for corrosion varies
depending on the type of metal. How vulnerable a metal is towards corrosion, can
be estimated from its standard electrode potential [17, 19].
4
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:16==
2.1.2
Corrosive Environments
As the chemical reactions involved in corrosion, presented in Section 2.1.1 indicate,
the corrosion mechanism depends on the local environment which can vary signific-
antly. The different environments can be categorised, based on the type of exposure,
as shown in Figure 2.2 [4, 12].
Figure 2.2: Overview of the different environments encountered by anticorrosive
coatings. The figure is adapted from Sørensen et al. [4].
Atmospheric
The properties of atmospheric environments can vary considerable both locally and
around the world [4, 20]. The locally alternating conditions include changes in the
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, temperature, humidity, and salt and gas concentrations
in the atmosphere [4, 20]. On a larger scale, the composition, and hence corrosivity,
of the atmosphere is much dependent on both the climate, pollution level, and
proximity to the sea [4].
Industrial and marine atmospheres are highly corrosive compared to those of rural
areas [12].
Industrial environments typically have a high concentration of solid
particles, such as soot, sand, and sulphate salts, in the air. Especially the sulphate
salts are important when considering corrosivity, since they can lead to acid rain [4].
In the process industry, a coating can also be exposed to air containing e.g. ammonia,
hydrogen sulfide acids, and fuel gases [12]. Marine atmospheres are significantly
different. They are characterised by a high concentration of chloride ions, originating
from the water. The ions are aggressive towards metals and can result in localised
pitting corrosion, leading to the formation of cavaties [4, 20].
Immersion
For surfaces which are either buried in soil or immersed in water, the corrosivity of
the environment is very dependent on local conditions [20]. For soil environments,
the aggressiveness of the environment towards corrosion mainly depends on the
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
5
==PAGE:17==
humidity, bacteria, salt, oxygen content, pH, and simply the type of soil [4]. The
corrosivity of fresh waters is largely determined by type and concentration of various
dissolved salts and oxygen [4, 20]. Compared to fresh waters, the concentration of
dissolved salts, especially sodium chloride, is very high in sea waters, and as a
consequence, sea water environments have a much higher corrosivity. Additionally,
anticorrosive coatings which are immersed in water will be subject to biofouling
[4]. Common for both soil and water environments is that sand, gravel, stones, and
changes in the temperature can affect coatings [4].
Splash Zone
The ”splash zone” is a term for the area near the waterline of the sea [4, 8]. Structures
located in this area, e.g. parts of offshore oil-rigs or wind turbines, are extremely
prone to corrosion due to the continuous combination of oxygen rich atmosphere
and splashing of water containing electrolytes. Furthermore, corrosion in the splash
zone is likely to be accelerated by the mechanical stress, which results from the
continuous alternating periods of dryness and moisture [4].
2.2
Coatings for Corrosion Protection
The application of a protective coating is the most widely used method for corrosion
protection of metals within the process- and marine industry [12]. This section firstly
deals with the different types of coatings used for anticorrosive purposes, then the
various components constituting organic coatings are treated in more detail.
2.2.1
Types of Anticorrosive Coatings
Depending on the corrosive environment and the specific requirements for anticorros-
ive protection, several different types of coatings, of significantly different nature and
character, both organic and inorganic, are used for corrosion protection. Commonly,
the anticorrosive coatings are divided into three overall types; organic, metallic, and
various inorganic coatings [4, 20].
Organic Coatings
Organic coatings, also commonly termed paints, are the most versatile type of coat-
ing and the one most commonly applied for corrosion prevention [21]. The organic
coatings work through the formation of a paint film, which covers the surface of the
metal, and thus acts as a barrier between the metal and the environment [12].
Epoxy coatings fall within this category of coatings, and thus, the remainder of this
literature review is dedicated to exploring the different aspects regarding organic
coatings, and in particular anticorrosive epoxy coatings. However, firstly brief de-
scriptions of the two remaining types of coatings used for corrosion prevention are
included to provide a more broad perspective to the subject of anticorrosive coatings.
6
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:18==
Metallic Coatings
A metallic coating is of inorganic character. It is a thin layer of a type of metal
different to the substrate coated on to the surface for the purpose of corrosion
protection.
Based on the electrode potential of the metal applied, i.e.
more or
less inert towards corrosion than the substrate, the metallic coatings are divided
into categories of either cathodic or anodic. Where cathodic coatings mainly act
through creating a barrier effect, the anodic coatings in addition provide cathodic
protection to any bare spots of the metallic substrate exposed to the environment
[21]. The result is, that when a cathodic coating is applied, the substrate will be
subject to galvanic corrosion in case of a coating defect, but if an anodic coating
is chosen, only the cathodic reaction will take place at the substrate because the
coating instead will be subject to the anodic reaction, and thus, the corrosion. More
detailed descriptions of the different principles utilised for corrosion prevention in
coatings are included in Section 2.3.
Low porosity, high mechanical strength, and continuous adhesion to the substrate is
important for metallic coatings, especially for the cathodic kind [12]. In the protec-
tion of steel, nickel and lead are applied in cathodic coatings, zinc in anodic coatings,
and aluminum vary in polarity in relation to steel depending on the particular en-
vironment [12, 21]. Out of the aforementioned metals, zinc, through the method of
galvanising, is the most widely used. Galvanising can be done via e.g. electrolytic
plating, hot dipping, or thermal spraying [21].
Various Inorganic Coatings
Other types of inorganic coating are typically enamel or glass linings, which provide a
barrier between the metal substrate and the corrosive environment [21]. This coating
type is most often applied in the form of a powder, and then heated in a furnace to
allow for the coating material to become soft and bind to the metal surface [12, 21].
Inorganic coatings provide high chemical resistance, but the linings are very brittle,
and thus, tolerate little deformation, and can be sensitive to thermal shocks [21].
The inorganic coatings consist of materials such as chromate, phosphate, potassium
silicate, calcium aluminate, or zinc/silicate compounds [12, 20].
2.2.2
Composition of Paints
Organic coatings (or paints) are heterogeneous dispersed systems, and hence, consist
of a continuous liquid phase with solid particles dispersed in it [11, 22, 23]. The
constituents of the liquid phase of the paint are a binder, solvent, and additives,
whereas the solid phase is composed of pigments and fillers [4, 11].
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
7
==PAGE:19==
Binder
The binder is the film-forming component of the paint [11, 24]. Nowadays, binders
are most often based on synthetic polymers, such as e.g. epoxy resins. Depending
on the type of binder, the properties of the paint film can derive either primarily
from evaporation of the solvent and thinners, that is called physical filming, or from
chemical reactions with a curing agent also present in the coating. The latter is the
case in epoxy based coatings where crosslinking filming is obtained [11].
Solvent and Thinners
Also solvents and thinners are fundamental constituents of coatings. Their function
is to reduce the viscosity of the paint, to facilitate the application process. Ease of
application is important in order to avoid defects in the film [11, 23].
In addition, the solvents and thinners assist in the control of the film formation [11,
23]. When the coating has been applied to the substrate, the solvents and thinners
evaporate, and the solid film is formed. It is important, that the evaporation is
both rapid and thorough [11].
Variations in the solvent composition during the
evaporation process can influence both the integrity and resistance properties of the
final film, and is thus to be avoided. Since solvents and thinners typically are a
mixture of different components, that can create challenges in the formulation of
coatings [11]. Solvents and thinners are most often volatile organic compounds [11,
24]. For epoxy coatings, often ketones or esters are utilised as solvents [23]. In the
case of water based paints, water acts as the solvent [23].
Pigments
The pigments provide the shade or colour to the coating. They are small, usually
synthetic, particles dispersed in the liquid phase of the paint [11, 23]. In technical
coatings the pigments have additional functions other than providing colour. In
anticorrosive coatings, pigments also contribute to the anticorrosive effect [23]. In
cases where the coating is applied to structures, which are exposed intensely to solar
radiation, special types of pigments are used to help the coating resist the action of
ultraviolet rays and heat [11].
Additives
The term additives covers a broad range of components added in small amounts
to improve different mechanical, physical, and chemical properties of coatings [23].
That includes thickness of the paint, hardness, flexibility, increasing abrasion and
chemical resistance, and decreasing the permeability of the film [11].
Common classes of additives include defoamers, thickeners, anti-settling agents, an-
tioxidants, surfactants, dispersants, coalescing agents, crosslinkers, etc. [21, 23, 24].
Additives can also be chosen to help withstand chemical actions of the environment,
8
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:20==
such as coatings used in acidic environments containing a low amount of carbonates
[11]. The additives are often metal oxides, based on e.g. titanium , alumina, zinc, or
silica, or inorganic salts, e.g. sulphates, complex silicates, or, as mentioned above,
carbonates [11].
Fillers
Like the additives, some particulate fillers enhance different properties of the coating
[3, 14]. Another type of fillers, which often constitute a major part of the total paint
formulation, are the so-called extenders. Extenders are inexpensive components,
and are thus, used to reduce the production cost of the coating [25]. Extenders are
typically naturally occurring minerals, aluminum or magnesium silicates, calcium
carbonates, silica, aluminum oxides, etc. [4, 25]. These extenders can of course also
impact the final film properties. Especially, porosity, surface area, and particle size
distribution are among the properties of extenders, which can impact both the paint
processing and the final film properties [25].
2.3
Principles of Corrosion Protection
The different methods for corrosion protection or control can be divided into 5
main principles: (1) Choice of materials/design considerations, (2) alteration of the
environment, (3) barrier effect, (4) inhibitive effect, and (5) electrochemical, i.e.
cathodic and anodic protection [12, 21]. Out of these methods, the three latter are
applied in anticorrosive coatings, and are thus, the ones of interest for this literature
review. It is common to utilise more than one of the principles in a coating [6,
21]. When choosing between the different protective mechanisms, it is usually a
combination of considerations regarding both effectiveness, economics, appearance
of the final product, and environmental concerns [21].
2.3.1
Barrier Effect
As the name indicates, the barrier effect acts by creating a physical barrier between
the corrosive medium and the metal surface to prevent contact [2, 21].
Epoxy
coatings in large rely on the barrier effect for its anticorrosive properties. To obtain
an effective barrier effect in a coating system, it requires that the permeability of
gasses, liquids, and ions is low [4]. In organic coatings, this can efficiently be obtained
by acting on different properties such as the paint composition and the thickness of
the coating [11].
To promote the barrier effect, the molecular structure of the binder must be of a
kind, that ensures a dense film. This is obtained when using thermosetting polymers
with a high degree of crosslinking, such as e.g. epoxy resins [11, 21]. Both the type
and amount of solvent also affects the barrier effect. It has been found that generally
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
9
==PAGE:21==
a low amount of solvent leads to a paint film with a low permeability. Even small
portions of solvent trapped in the coating after curing can promote the absorption
of water [11]. Also the shape, size, content, and nature of pigments influence the
water absorption and permeability of the film [11].
Increasing the film thickness of a barrier system generally increases the anticorrosive
performance [11]. It has been found, that better performance is obtained, when the
film is composed of multiple thin coat layers, rather than of fewer and thicker layers.
However, economically fewer and thicker layers are preferred, since it is a way of
reducing labor costs and down time [4].
To obtain a barrier effect sufficient to
withstand various aggressive environments, a minimum total film thickness of 200-
300 µm is necessary. Most ordinary paints reach a maximum film thickness per coat
layer of 30-35 µm [11].
However, the protection a barrier coating provides has shown to be more complex
than just a physical barrier [11]. Studies have indicated that the anticorrosive effect
mainly is due to impermeability of ions and not water and oxygen [4].
In fact
water and oxygen can diffuse through the coatings in quantities larger than what is
necessary for corrosion [11]. But due to ionic impermeability of the barrier system,
the solution at the interface between the metal surface and the coating has a low
concentration of electrolytes. This minimizes the transfer of electrons from anode
to cathode on the substrate surface, and, hence, inhibits corrosion [4, 11].
Coatings with barrier effects are often applied on structures to be immersed in water,
buried in soil, or in highly corrosive chemical environments. They find use as both
primers, intermediates, and topcoats [4].
2.3.2
Electrochemical Protection
The electrochemical principle of corrosion protection is divided into two different
methods; cathodic and anodic. Compared to cathodic corrosion control, which has
been applied for decades, anodic protection is relatively new [12].
Cathodic Protection
The cathodic type of protection is based on the mechanism of galvanic corrosion
[4, 12].
The surface of the metal is protected by making it the cathode of an
electrochemical cell.
That is accomplished by formulating a paint containing a
metal which is more electrochemically active than the metal to be protected, and
thus, acts as the sacrificial anode [2, 12].
The most widely used type of active pigment for cathodic protection is zinc powder,
which has been employed for corrosion protection for decades [4, 11]. To obtain the
effect of the sacrificial coating, there must be direct contact between the sacrificial
10
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:22==
metal, e.g. zinc powder, and the surface of the substrate. Therefore, the sacrifi-
cial coatings are only utilised as primers [4]. Furthermore, there must be contact
between the individual metal particles in the coating to ensure transfer of the gal-
vanic current. Hence, the sacrificial type of coatings have a very high concentration
of pigments, which is often just below the critical pigment volume concentration [4].
To obtain the best performance, the zinc content should be above ∼90 wt% [11].
Due to the risk of water permeating through the coating possibly causing the sacri-
ficial metal to corrode, sacrificial coatings are not ideal for structures immersed in
water [4].
Anodic Protection
The method of anodic protection can only be applied for active-passive coating
metals or alloys, such as stainless steel, nickels, and chromium [12, 26]. The metals
are kept in the passive region by an externally applied anodic current [12, 20].
The advantage of anodic protection is that even a low current largely reduces the
corrosion rate. It is applicable in environments containing strong acids and other
highly corrosive components, but it cannot be used if the media contains chloride
ions. The chloride ions can attack and destroy the formed film [12, 21].
2.3.3
Inhibitive Effect
The inhibitive anticorrosion mechanism relies on passivating the surface of the metal
substrate [4, 12]. By affecting the anodic, the cathodic, or even both reactions, the
inhibitors work by retarding the rate of corrosion [12]. Retardation of the anodic
reaction works by either making the dissolution rate sufficiently slow and/or by
forming a thin film over the anode with the reaction products to passivate the
surface of the substrate [6, 12]. The other possibility is to use cathodic inhibition
to disrupt the flow of electrons from the anode to the cathode and/or to let the
reaction products adsorb selectively to the cathodic sites of the substrate, again, to
passivate the surface [12].
The inhibitive effect appears, when moisture permeates trough the coating, and
as a result, the inhibitive pigments become partly dissolved.
They can then be
transported to the surface, where the dissolved ions react with the substrate to
form products which passivate the surface by creating a film, as described above
[4]. Hence, to obtain a sufficient level of inhibition, the concentration of inhibitive
pigments in the coating must be of a certain level. However, if the concentration of
inhibiting pigments is too high, it can lead to the occurrence of blisters [4].
The permeability, and thus the degree of barrier effect, of a coating system is de-
termining for the efficiency of inhibitive pigments [6].
If the coating has a low
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
11
==PAGE:23==
permeability towards water, the inhibitive pigments will dissolve to a lesser degree,
and the barrier effect will be the dominant. Oppositely, coatings with higher water
permeability will experience a better solubility of the pigments, and as an effect of
that, a stronger inhibitive effect [4].
To allow for reaction between the dissolved inhibitive pigments and the metal sur-
face, inhibitive coatings are mainly used as primers [12]. The primary application of
inhibitive coatings are to structures subject to atmospheric corrosion in industrial
environments. Generally this type of coating is not used for structures immersed
in water or buried in soil [4]. The most widely used type of inhibitive pigments are
slightly water soluble inorganic salts, such as phosphates, chromates, molybdates,
nitrates, borates, and silicates [4].
2.4
Coating Adhesion and Application
In order for the various principles of corrossion protection to be effective, and thus to
obtain good anticorrosive properties, proper adhesion of the coating to the substrate
is essential [4]. Adhesion is the interfacial phenomenon that in some cases occur
when two surfaces approach each other, and an interface is formed between the two
surfaces due to physical and chemical forces [4]. If adhesion is insufficient it can lead
to premature failure of the coating [4, 10, 12].
2.4.1
Adhesion Mechanisms
The dominating forces in adhesion are of a short-range type, and therefore, the two
surfaces must be in very close proximity of each other (less than 10 nm) to obtain
adhesion [22]. To accomplish that, good wetting is almost always a prerequisite.
Wetting occurs when the surface tension of a liquid, e.g. a coating, is lower than
the surface tension of the metal [22].
However, good wetting is not a guarantee of good adhesion. The level of adhesion
depends on a number of different factors, including the curing procedure [10]. There
are three different mechanisms, which control the adhesion of a coating to a metal
surface; mechanical interlocking, adsorption, and chemical bonding [10, 27].
Mechanical Interlocking
Adhesion through mechanical interlocking is obtained by penetration of the coating
into small pits or pores on the surface of the substrate [10, 28].
In this way, a
hook like structure is formed, with the coating being mechanically anchored to the
substrate [4, 10]. The adhesion strength obtained through mechanical interlocking
is highly dependent on the surface morphology and roughness. These factors can be
controlled by applying a suitable surface treatment process prior to the application
of the coating [10]. Mechanical interlocking typically dominates in primers or on
12
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:24==
porous metallic surfaces [4].
Adsorption
For the adsorption mechanism to be an effective means of adhesion, good wetting is
crucial. Adsorption is obtained via secondary bonding forces such as attractive van
der Waals forces and hydrogen bonds [10, 28].
The van der Waals forces are susceptible to polar interactions, which can be increased
by introducing functional groups on the substrate surface to interact with the polar
functional groups present in the coating [10]. The energies of the van der Waals
forces typically range from 4 to 8 kJ/mol [4].
For many types of metals, the surface easily becomes covered with a thin layer of
oxide. This layer promotes the formation of hydrogen bonding between the metal
surface and organic coatings containing binders with polar groups, such as epoxy
resins [4]. The hydrogen bonds typically have bond energies from 8 to 35 kJ/mol
[4].
Chemical Bonding
The adhesion of a coating to the substrate is improved by the formation of chemical
bonds, especially covalent [10]. Compared to e.g. hydrogen bonds, covalent bonds
have high bond energies, ranging from 40 to 400 kJ/mol [4]. Thus, the adhesion is
greatly improved when covalent bonds form between the coating and the substrate.
However, the polymers typically used in organic coatings, such as epoxy resins, do
not normally form primary chemical bonds with inorganic metallic surfaces [28].
The formation of covalent bonds can be promoted by applying favorable surface
treatment, the use of a primer, and/or coupling agents added to the paint [4, 28].
2.4.2
Surface Pre-treatment
In order to ensure a good performance of the paint, proper preparation of the surface
prior to application of the coating is important. The purpose of the pre-treatment
is mainly to ensure that the surface has a high level of cleanliness and adequate
roughness, in order to obtain proper adhesion of the coating [11, 21]. If present,
impurities or defects located at the interface between the metal surface and the
coating will have a negative effect on the adhesive strength [10].
The amount of surface pre-treatment necessary, varies depending on the type of
coating, but generally, the pre-treatment process can be divided into two steps
[11, 21]. Firstly, the surface is cleaned and degreased, to ensure that any oil or
grease contamination and dirt of various origin and nature is removed [11, 12].
Subsequently, oxides, corrosion products and mill scale is removed either chemically
by pickling or mechanically by sandblasting [12, 11]. This part of the pre-treatment
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
13
==PAGE:25==
process also subjects the surface to roughening to improve the adhesive properties
[11]. For epoxy coatings, dry sandblasting is the method reported to provide the
best coating performance [6, 10]. After sandblasting the metallic surface is prone
to oxidation, and therefore, it is important that the first coating layer is applied
immediately after the surface pre-treatment [11].
2.4.3
Coating Application
Also the coating application process itself can affect the final coating properties
[11]. Firstly, a proper application system must be chosen; e.g. brushing, rolling
spraying, or immersion. Which to choose depends on both the type of paint and
the area of application. Considerations must also be put towards the atmospheric
and environmental conditions during application and curing of the coating. Too get
the best film properties, the temperature should be neither too high or too low [11].
Also, the level of relative humidity should be paid attention to [11]. More details
towards the effects of atmospheric conditions on the curing process are provided in
section 2.7.3.
2.5
Two-Component Epoxy Coatings
The advantageous properties of epoxy coatings for the purpose of corrosion protec-
tion can mainly be attributed to the chemistry of the epoxy resins. In the curing of
the coatings, the reactive epoxy groups of resins react with a crosslinking agent in
order to form a network structure. [11]. As such, epoxy resins belong in the category
of thermosetting polymers. These highly crosslinked networks is what provides the
exceptional chemical resistance of epoxy coatings [29].
Depending on the type of crosslinking agent, the process of curing the epoxy coating
can occur at room temperature or be initiated either thermally or by UV radiation
[30, 31]. In the case of room temperature curing, a two-component coating system
is necessary to avoid premature curing. Thus, the binder and the curing agent are
stored in two different pots, which are mixed together immediately prior to use [11].
2.5.1
Epoxy Resins
The term epoxy describes a large variety of different molecules containing an epoxy
(also termed oxirane) group as part of their chemical structure [15, 32]. An epoxy
group is a three-membered ring containing an oxygen atom, as depicted in Figure
2.3.
An epoxy resin is a special type of polyether containing at least two epoxy groups [7,
13, 33]. Thus, the term epoxy resin covers a broad class of molecules, characterised
by the epoxy groups, but with greatly varying physical and chemical properties [15,
14
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.3: Chemical structure of an epoxy ring (also termed oxirane ring). Mo-
lecules containing an epoxy group are termed epoxies.
34]. Because of their role as building blocks for thermosetting polymers, obtained
through crosslinking polymerisation, epoxy resins are often referred to as prepoly-
mers [15, 29]. The driving force, of the crosslinking reactions, is the reactivity of
the epoxy resins towards many different substrates due to ring strain in the epoxy
rings [13, 14]. It should be noted, that also the cured material often is referred to
as an epoxy, even though the product no longer contains epoxy groups [15, 32].
There are many different commercially available epoxy resins, all representing differ-
ent mechanical properties depending on their chemical structure. The epoxy resins
can be divided into three major types: glycidyl ether resins, aromatic glycidyl amine
resins, and non-glycidyl ether epoxides [14, 33].
The most widely used type of epoxy resins, epichlorohydrin diglycidyl ether of bi-
sphenol A (DGEBA), is an example of glycidated epoxy resins [14, 30]. Other com-
mercially available glycidated epoxy resins include the glycidation products from
reactions of bisphenol F with epichlorohydrin [14, 35]. These resins have lower vis-
cosity than the corresponding bisphenol A resins. Also novolac resins fall in the
category of glycidated resins [14, 33]. The novolac resins have a high concentration
of epoxy groups in the molecules compared to bisphenol resins. Due to their high
functionalities, coatings based on novolac epoxy resins are strong with a tightly
crosslinked structure, which makes them ideal for highly corrosive environments
[4]. Figure 2.4 shows the molecular structure of the three aforementioned types of
glycidated epoxy resins and Table 2.1 provides an overview of their properties [35].
Common for the different epoxy resins is, that the number of repeating units, n,
in the chain of the prepolymer is determining for the properties of the epoxy resin
[7]. Typically, commercial liquid resins is composed mainly of low molecular weight
resins mixed with a small amount of high molecular weight prepolymers [14, 34].
The aromatic glycidyl amine resins are formed from either aromatic or aliphatic
amines, primary or secondary. This type of resins have been reported to produce
stable products, when the amine is aromatic or if the aliphatic alkyl substituents
has more than four carbon atoms [14].
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
15
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.4: Molecular structures of common types of glycidated epoxy resins [33].
Table 2.1: Properties of common glycidated epoxy resins [35].
Bisphenol A (BPA)
Liquid (medium viscosity)
Less tendency to crystallise at low temperatures
Used in the majority of protective coatings for steel
Bisphenol F (BPF)
Lower viscosity than BPA
Higher functionality than BPA
Resistance to a wider range of chemicals than BPA
Novolac
Higher viscosity than BPA
Higher functionality than BPF
Highest chemical resistance
High heat resistance
More brittle than BPA and F
16
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:28==
The last category of epoxy resins, the non-glycidyl ether, epoxies, can be further
divided into two categories; those with a linear structure, called acyclic aliphatic
epoxy resins, and those with a ring structure, called cyclic aliphatic resins [14]. The
acyclic aliphatic resins exist in three types; epoxidised diene polymers, epoxidised
oils, and polyglycol diepoxides [14]. The cyclo aliphatic epoxy resins have a saturated
molecular structure, which results in good stability against UV radiation, thermal
stability, and electrical properties. They are typically resins with a low viscosity
and curing temperature, but a short pot life and are easily affected by moisture in
the uncured form [33].
2.5.2
Curing Agents
As the name indicates, the function of the curing agent is to promote or control the
crosslinking reactions of the epoxy resins which leads to the curing of the coating
[7]. For that reason, the curing agents are also called hardeners or crosslinkers. A
variety of different curing agents are available, and the choice of curing agent can
influence, not just the curing process, but also the final properties of the coating film
[14]. Generally, a higher degree of crosslinking is obtained in epoxies designed to be
cured at high temperatures [30]. The curing agents utilised for epoxy resins can be
divided into categories based on their chemical composition as follows; amine-type,
alkali, anhydrides, and catalytic curing agents [7].
Amine Curing Agents
The most widely used type of curing agent for epoxy coatings is the amine type [30].
This type of curing agents acts by a nucleophilic addition reaction of the amine to the
epoxy by ring opening, as shown in Figure 2.5. The ring opening of the epoxy leads
to the formation of hydroxyl groups, which act as catalysts for the curing reaction.
Thus, the reaction is autocatalytic [15]. The curing then proceeds as a step-growth
polymerisation reaction [33]. An important feature of the reaction mechanism is
that no volatile byproducts are formed, which allows for the formation of structures
without voids [33].
This type of curing, where the amine work as a co-reactant, is mainly accomplished
with primary and secondary amines. Tertiary amines instead work as alkali curing
agents [14]. The primary amines have the ability to react twice with epoxy groups,
as can be seen from the reaction scheme in Figure 2.5, and they are generally more
reactive than the secondary amines [15]. In reaction with an amine curing agent,
the functionality of each epoxy group is one, and hence, if a diepoxide, such as
DGEBA is used, the total functionality of the amine coreactant must be larger than
two, in order to obtain a crosslinked network. That can be obtained by using e.g.
a primary diamine curing agent [15].
The higher the functionality of the epoxy
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
17
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.5: Reaction of a primary amine curing agent with an epoxy resin through
nucleophilic addition. Figure adapted from [7].
resin and/or amine curing agent, the tighter and more three-dimensional is the
resulting crosslinked network. Thus, when increasing the functionality, it increases
the strength and chemical resistance of the coating [35].
The amine-type curing agents can be classified as either aliphatic, aromatic, or cyclo
aliphatic amines [7]. Common amine curing agents include 4,4’-diaminodiphenyl
methane and 4,4’-diaminodiphenyl sulfone [7]. The cyclo aliphatic amines provide
a high degree of corrosion resistance for epoxy coatings, and have traditionally been
the most common of the amine type curing agents, especially for curing at room
temperature [4, 30].
However, their market share is decreasing in the favour of
polyamines and -amides which are becoming increasingly widely used [4, 15]. Reac-
tions of polyamine with epoxy resins are typically slower and easier to control, than
what is the case when an amine is used as curing agent. Curing with polyamides
result in more flexible coatings, but with only moderate acid, solvent, and corrosion
resistance [4].
Due to toxicity of amine curing agents, some coatings are also cured with adduct of
amine mixed with a small amount of epoxy. While having the same basic properties
as amine cured epoxy coatings, these adducts have been reported to improve other
parameters of the paint performance, such as limiting reactivity and increasing res-
istance towards UV light [4]. Furthermore, the amine-adducts can be used to control
the chemical reaction rate.
Alkali Curing Agents
There are two different types of alkali curing agents: imidazoles and tertiary amines,
which both react with the epoxy in an anionic polymerisation reaction [7, 15]. Im-
idazoles can be used as curing agents themselves, but their primary application is
18
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:30==
in conjunction with other types of curing agents to accelerate the epoxy-hardening
reaction [7]. In the same manner tertiary amines are often used as accelerators for
e.g. amine, polyamide, and ahydrides [7].
Anhydride Curing Agents
As the amine curing agents, the anhydrides are co-reactants which function by cre-
ating links between the epoxy resins [14]. Advantages of the acid anhydride curing
agents include good chemical resistance and physical properties together with very
long pot lives.
Catalytic Curing Agents
Catalytic curing agents are activated by means of external stimulation, such as
heating or photo irradiation, and they are thus inert under normal conditions [7].
The catalytic curing agents initiates the curing which then propagates via cationic
chain growth polymerisation. Catalytic curing agents are especially used in one-
component epoxy coatings, due to their storage stability [30]. The types of catalytic
curing agents include benzylsulfonium, benzylpyridinium, benzylammonium, and
phosphonium salts [7].
2.5.3
Solvents
As mentioned in Section 2.2.2, different organic solvents have typically been used for
epoxy based coatings. These volatile organic compounds have constituted a major
part of the coating and been an important factor regarding the overall performance
of the coating [4].
However, because they are volatile at normal conditions, regarding temperature and
pressure, these organic solvents are of great environmental concern. Vapours of the
volatile organic compounds can, in the case of long term exposure, result in human
health risks such as harm to the central nervous system [4, 36]. Furthermore, the
vapours also pose fire and explosion hazards [4]. Due to to these challenges, there is
now legislation in place aiming at reducing the emissions of VOC and pushing the
industry towards research and development in products with low contents of organic
solvents [4]. Thus, recently attention has been put to the more environmentally
friendly water-borne and powder coatings [4, 12].
Water-Borne Coatings
Two fundamentally different technologies are used for the formulation of water based
epoxy coatings. In the first type, a liquid epoxy resin, most often DGEBA, is used
together with a water-soluble amine curing agent, which also acts as emulsifier for
the epoxy resin [4, 37].
The amine curing agent, typically polyamidoamines or
polyamides, is made water soluble by salting treatment with a volatile organic acid,
such as e.g. acetic acid [4]. The other type of water-borne epoxy coatings utilise
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
19
==PAGE:31==
solid epoxies dispersed in water together with co-solvents [4, 37]. A drawback of
this technology, is the risk of incomplete coalescence leading to the formation of a
heterogeneous dispersion with epoxy and amine rich regions [4].
The main challenge within water based epoxy coatings has been insufficient corrosion
resistance, compared to that provided by a typical solvent-borne epoxy coating
[4].
However, recent developments within the field of water-borne technologies,
regarding e.g. polyfunctional resins and curing agents, has enabled the formulation
of water based coatings, with the ability to protect metals against corrosion in highly
corrosive marine environments, if used together with a zinc rich primer [4]. Despite
these recent advances, there are still challenges regarding the use of water borne
epoxy coatings for corrosion protection.
Powder Coatings
Powder coatings is the most widely applied type of solvent-free coating [12]. Ther-
moset resins used in powder coatings include both polyester-epoxies and acrylic-
epoxies [4, 15]. The powder coatings are an environmentally friendly option because
they essentially contain 100% solids [4]. Powder coatings provide a series of ad-
vantages such as high application efficiency, durable finishes, and easy clean-up and
recycling. However, there are also some disadvantages, including high capital costs
due to the need of ovens and special spraying equipment, high baking temperat-
ures, and inability to modify the coating composition or film thickness during the
application [4].
2.5.4
Coating Systems
Within protective coatings, one type of coating can rarely provide all the necessary
features to obtain satisfactory protection against e.g. corrosion [11]. Therefore, a
coating cycle or system is most often applied. It usually consists of a primer, an
intermediate coating, and a finishing or top coat [11, 21].
The primer is the first coating layer. It is indirect contact with the surface of the
metal, and thus, an important feature of the primer is to ensure good adhesion
[11]. The intermediate coating layer(s) provide thickness to the paint and reduces
permeability.
Typically, the intermediate coating is composed of less expensive
materials than the primer and top coat [11]. The finishing coating layer must be
resistant towards the surrounding aggressive environment [11]. Furthermore, the
topcoat contains the colour pigments and extenders, which also can improve the
barrier effect of the coating cycle [21].
Epoxy coatings are mainly used as primers and intermediate coatings because of
a tendency towards yellowing when exposed to UV radiation. Epoxy coatings can
20
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:32==
be formulated with enhanced resistance towards UV damage, but that typically
happens at the expense of the anticorrosive properties [4].
2.5.5
Recent Developments
Research is continuously carried out within the field of epoxy resins and coatings, to
comply with the increasing demands for more sustainable and durable solutions for
e.g. corrosion protection. The following sections highlight some of the main aspects
within current research in the field of epoxy based coatings.
Toughening
Due to their heavily crosslinked network structures, most thermosetting polymers,
including cured epoxy resins, are brittle [17].
Due to their brittle nature, only
relatively little strain can be tolerated before a fracture occurs in the epoxy resin
[17]. Thus, they show poor resistance to crack initiation and growth, which can affect
the long term corrosion protection [2, 14]. To overcome the brittle character of the
epoxy thermosets, different methods can be adopted to avoid the concentration of
stress in the coating [10]. That is termed toughening. Toughness is a material’s
ability to plastically deform without fracturing [17].
The toughening methods used for epoxy resins include elastomeric, particulate, and
thermoplastic modification [14]. Out of these, the elastomeric modification is prob-
ably the one most attention has been put towards, at least until very recently [14,
38]. The elastomeric modification works by imparting toughness to the epoxy resin
by either dispersing a small amount of elastomer as a discreet phase in the coating
or by incorporating reactive liquid polymer to the existing polymer phase [14, 38].
The most recent developments within toughening are mainly focused on particulate
modification in the form of nanocomposite coatings.
Nanocomposite Coatings
It has been found that the incorporation of nanomaterials in epoxy coatings, greatly
can improve the mechcanical properties of the coating [2, 39]. That is done through
a dramatic increase in the interfacial area between the polymer and fillers, which
results due to the very small size of the nanoparticles [39]. Thus, the nanosize effect
allows for the use of a much smaller amount of material, to obtain the same level
of improved properties, relative to the case where micro sized or larger particles are
used as fillers [2, 40]. Furthermore, the incorporation of nanofillers can also greatly
improve the barrier performance of the coating [2, 40]. Inorganic materials showing
significant potential in the function as nanofillers include metal nanopowders, metal
oxides, nano-glass flakes, nitrides, carbides, and nano-calcium carbonates [2].
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
21
==PAGE:33==
Self-healing
Another subject of interest within recent research is self-healing coatings [41]. The
self-healing properties are typically obtained by the incorporation of microcapsules
into the polymer matrix. The capsules contain the functional constituents of a heal-
ing agent and a catalyst [4]. When mechanically ruptured, due to coating damage,
the capsules release their contents, which then is transported to the damaged coat-
ing regions. Then, a polymerisation reaction, which leads to repair of the coating,
is initiated [4, 41].
Bio-Based Epoxy Resins
In order to accommodate the increasing focus on environmental concerns a substan-
tial amount of research has also been put into the development of both bio-based
and recyclable epoxy resins and curing agents [30, 42].
Instead of the conventional petrochemical resources, bio-based polymers originate
from sustainable bio-based feedstocks [43, 44].
In the past few years many bio-
based epoxy resins have been synthesised from sources such as modified plant oils,
sugars, polyphenols, terpene, rosin, natural rubber, and lignin [43, 44]. However,
the vast majority of these epoxy resins currently available do not present mechanical
properties satisfactory for anticorrosive purposes [44].
2.6
The Epoxy Coating Curing Process
Epoxy coatings are chemically cured, meaning that the transformation from liquid
paint to a solid film is governed by a series of chemical reactions between the epoxy
resin and a curing agent. Through the chemical curing reactions, the resin is cross-
linked into a solid three-dimensional insoluble and infusible network [14, 15]. The
degree of curing related to the curing time, defined based on the epoxy conversion,
can be calculated from
α(t) = N0 −N(t)
N0
(2.9)
where N0 and N are the number of epoxy groups in the coating initially and at
curing time t, respectively [13].
2.6.1
Crosslinking and Evaporation
When an epoxy coating is applied to a substrate, the formation of the coating film
is mainly governed by two interdependent processes taking place simultaneously;
chemical curing, i.e. crosslinking, and evaporation [45, 46]. Both of these processes
are functions of the curing time and can be characterised by the degree of con-
version of the reactive groups and the amount of solvent evaporated (weight loss),
respectively [46].
22
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:34==
Initially, the coating is a liquid mixture with binder, curing agents, etc. dissolved in
the solvent, and the crosslinking process is controlled by the chemical reaction rates.
Initially in the curing process, the liquid flows freely and there are no concentration
gradients present in the film [45]. At this point, the solvent evaporation is controlled
by the rate of external mass transport of the solvent, which is dependent on the
temperature, any wind velocity, and the difference in concentration between the
coating and the immediately surrounding air [45]. As the solvent evaporates, the
concentration of the other paint components increase [45].
2.6.2
Gel Point
When a certain degree of crosslinking is reached, the system will pass through the gel
point, which marks an abrupt change in the rheological behaviour of the polymeric
matrix from having liquid-like to rubber-like behaviour [15, 46]. Macroscopically,
this process, termed gelation, can be characterised by the formation of a gel or
insoluble polymer fraction [15].
Gelation occurs when the first growing polymer molecule extending to every bound-
ary of the film has been formed [15]. At this point, the viscosity of the system be-
comes infinite [45]. In conventional crosslinked, materials like an epoxy thermoset,
the process of gelation is irreversible [15]. Gelation does not affect the kinetics of
the crosslinking reactions [15].
The degree of conversion, at which gelation occurs, is called the critical conversion
degree. There are several different approaches for theoretically approximating the
critical degree of conversion. One of these, which is useful for network step-growth
polymerization because it only requires knowledge regarding the functionalities, f,
and the initial molar ratio, r, of the reaction mixture components, is a statistical
method [13, 45]. Thus, for curing of an epoxy resin with an amine hardener, the
critical conversion degree, αc, can be calculated from:
αc =
1
√
r · (fepoxy −1)(famine −1)
(2.10)
As mentioned in Section 2.5.2, the crosslinking reactions proceed, depending on the
curing agent, either via step- or chain-growth polymerisation. Prior to gelation, the
two modes of polymerisation result in different behaviours of the coating system
[15]. In the case of step growth polymerisation, the system is cured with similar
conditions throughout the system, because the polymerisation occurs at all reactive
molecules, which are homogeneously distributed in the coating [15, 13].
Chain-
growth polymerisation involves an initiation step which takes place at discrete points
of the system [15, 13].
Due to the intrinsically inhomogeneous structure of the
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
23
==PAGE:35==
process, it can lead to the development of small inhomogeneties called microgels,
which is crosslinked polymer coils swollen by unreacted monomers [15].
2.6.3
Vitrification
As the chemical reactions proceed, the molecular weight of the polymeric binder in-
creases [46]. As a consequence of the increased crosslinking density and the decrease
in solvent concentration, the mobility of the system decreases [46]. That leads to an
increase in the glass transition temperature, Tg, of the polymeric binder. Tg marks
the transition from the amorphous solid, glass like, state to the liquid melt state of
a polymer [29, 13]. Eventually, Tg will become equal to the film curing temperature,
and then the system vitrifies (solidifies) [45]. Vitrification entails that the diffusivity
of the reactive functional groups become very restricted [47].
At this point, the crosslinking curing reactions become diffusion-controlled, and the
rate of reaction decrease considerably, even though, there might be a significant
concentration of functional groups available for reaction [46, 47]. Because of that
a limiting degree of conversion can be reached [45, 47]. Increasing the temperature
allows for less restricted movement of the crosslinked polymers, and thus the degree
of conversion at which vitrification occurs increases with temperature [15]. As such,
epoxies curing at higher temperatures, generally obtain a higher degree of crosslink-
ing, and thus a higher Tg [30]. Hence, contrary to the point of gelation, the degree
of conversion where vitrification occurs is highly dependent on the temperature.
But where gelation is an irreversible process, vitrification is, independently from the
degree of conversion, always reversible. Depending on the temperature, vitrification
can take place both before and after gelation [15].
Vitrification is also influenced by the solvent content of the coating. Generally, the
presence of solvent in the coating results in a lower Tg, which leads to an earlier
onset of vitrification, and thus a lower curing degree. This suggests, that in terms of
crosslinking density, the network structure is altered by the presence of solvent [48].
The gradually increasing crosslinking density also affects the diffusion rate of the
solvent molecules, and as a consequence of the decreased mobility of the system, the
solvent evaporation slows down [46]. Furthermore, solvent concentration gradients
can form due to transport of solvent from the interior of the film to the surface [46].
2.7
Coating Mechanical Properties
As described in the previous section, both the physical and chemical characteristics
of the coating changes during the curing process due to solvent evaporation and
crosslinking of the epoxy resin [48]. However, the mechanical behavior of the sys-
tem, including the elastic modulus, during curing is not just related to the reaction
24
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:36==
time, but also depends on the curing conditions and coating composition [49]. Fur-
thermore, also the final properties of the film is to a large degree dependent on the
curing process [50].
2.7.1
Viscoelasticity and the Elastic Modulus
When used above the glass transition temperature, polymers, and thus epoxy resins,
are so-called viscoelastic materials. The viscoelastic means that they have properties
resembling both those of viscous liquids and elastic solids. Below the glass transition
temperature, epoxies are brittle and can only withstand little elastic deformation.
For a solid, the elastic deformation (strain), resulting when a stress is applied or
released is instantaneous; thus, the strain is time independent. The elastic deforma-
tion is totally reversible, so upon release of an external stress, the solid will assume
its original dimensions (spring like behaviour) [17]. The deformation of viscous li-
quids as response to stress is not instantaneous, meaning that the strain resulting
from an applied stress is time dependent. In addition, the deformation is not re-
versible, and thus, it will not be completely recovered upon release of the stress [17].
For a viscoelastic material, the rate of strain determines whether elastic or viscous
behavior predominates in the mode of deformation [17, 51].
Elastic Deformation of Solids
The elastic behaviour of a solid material can be described through a simple linear
relationship termed Hooke’s law:
σ = Eϵ
(2.11)
where σ is stress and ϵ the resulting strain, which are related through the elastic
modulus, E, also termed Young’s modulus. The elastic modulus is a material prop-
erty, describing a solid material’s resistance towards elastic deformation.
Thus,
elasticity is the inherent stiffness of a solid material, and it is used as a measure of
the strength and hardness [17, 52].
For coatings, the elastic modulus is one of the main characteristics because it can
be used to determine the amount of internal stress build-up within the coating [52].
Generally, metals are much stiffer than polymers (or polymer coatings), and thus
their elastic moduli are much larger. The elastic modulus for steel is ∼200 GPa,
whereas that for a typical epoxy polymer is ∼2.4 GPa [17]. For all materials, the
elastic modulus is temperature dependent and decreases with increasing temperat-
ure, but the elastic properties of polymers are much more sensitive to temperature
changes than metals [17].
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
25
==PAGE:37==
Tensile and Shear Stresses
Young’s modulus relates to the case where a stress is applied to a specimen in
the form of a tensile load which produces an elongation [17]. This is illustrated
schematically on Figure 2.6. In that, case the stress is defined as the ratio of the
force applied perpendicular to a cross sectional area of the specimen as
σ = F
A
(2.12)
where F is the force and A is the cross sectional area [17]. The linear strain, resulting
when applying a tensile stress, can be calculated from:
ϵ = l −l0
l0
= ∆l
l0
(2.13)
where lo is the original length of the specimen and l is the instantaneous length,
when the tensile stress is applied.
Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of different stress types applied to a material
specimen.
Figure 2.6 also depicts the situation, where a stress is applied to a material through
a shear force. When an elastic deformation of a solid is caused by a shear stress, the
relation between stress and strain is governed by the shear modulus, G, and Hooke’s
law, equation (2.11), is written as
τ = Gγ
(2.14)
where τ and γ are the shear stress and strain, respectively.
The shear stress is
defined in the same manner as the tensile stress in equation (2.12). For isotropic
materials, Young’s modulus and the shear modulus are related to each other as
E = 2G(1 + ν)
(2.15)
26
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:38==
where ν is the material’s Poisson’s ratio, which is defined as the ratio of lateral and
axial strains resulting from an applied uni-axial stress (in the z-direction), and can
be expressed as [17]:
ν = −ϵx
ϵz
= −ϵy
ϵz
(2.16)
Thus, a Poisson’s ratio of 0.5 corresponds to an incompressible material.
Many
metals and metal alloys have Poisson’s ratios in the range of 0.25 to 0.30 and for
epoxies it ranges from 0.30 to 0.35 [17, 53].
Complex Modulus of Viscoelastic Materials
For viscoelastic materials a complex modulus, also called the dynamic modulus, is
defined in addition to the elastic modulus.
The complex modulus describes the
ratio of stress to strain in dynamic vibratory conditions, and is denoted G∗for
conditions where a shear stress is applied. The complex modulus is comprised of
a storage modulus, G′, and a loss modulus, G′′, as per equation (2.17) [51, 54]. A
corresponding notation is used for the complex modulus related to tensile stress
conditions.
G∗= G′ + iG′′
(2.17)
The storage modulus represents the elastic portion of a viscoelastic material. It
relates to the ability of the material to store energy elastically, and thus gives in-
formation about the amount of structure present in the material [51]. Similarly, the
loss modulus represents the viscous part of a material, and relates to a material’s
ability to dissipate stress through heat [51]. The ratio of the loss modulus to the
storage modulus is defined as tan(δ), also called the loss tangent [51]:
tan(δ) = G′′
G′
(2.18)
tan(δ) is an indication of the relative degree of energy dissipation (damping), which
is effects that reduces the amplitude of vibrations within a viscoelastic material [51].
In the case where the storage and loss moduli are of equal size, tan(δ) = 1, and the
material is equally elastic and viscous [51].
Prior to curing, the epoxy resins utilised in epoxy coatings are dominated by viscous
behaviour, and thus the loss modulus is larger than the storage modulus. As curing
progresses, the crosslinking density of the polymeric matrix increases and the coating
becomes increasingly viscous. Eventually, the increasing degree of crosslinking leads
to the coating reaching the gel point which, as described in Section 2.6.2, marks a
sudden change in the mechanical behaviour of the coating from viscous liquid to the
rubbery state. Thus, past the gel point the storage modulus of a polymeric material
will be larger than the loss modulus [54].
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
27
==PAGE:39==
2.7.2
Internal Stress Development
During curing, epoxy coatings shrink due to solvent evaporation and chemical bond-
ing. Initially, when the coating is a viscous liquid, it can shrink freely. At a certain
point in the curing process the coating goes through gelation, which causes a sig-
nificant increase in the coating elastic modulus, and that enables internal stress to
build-up within the coating. Due to adhesion to the substrate the gelled coating
is restricted from shrinking freely in the plane of the coating. As such, when the
gelled coating shrinks it causes a strain resulting in the formation of stress within the
coating [55, 56]. Hence, the amount of internal stress induced by the curing process
depends on the elastic modulus, which is related to the degree of crosslinking, and
therefore, the internal stress increases as the curing proceeds [57].
Mathematically, the average coating in-plane stress, resulting from chemical shrink-
age during curing, can be described as
σ(t) =
Ec
1 −νc
· ϵ(t)
(2.19)
where σ is the stress as a function of time t, ϵ is the strain, which likewise is a
function of t, Ec is the elastic modulus, and νc is Poisson’s ratio of the coating [55].
Near the edge of the coating, shear and out-of-plane stresses appear in addition to
tensile stress in the plane of the coating. However, within a distance of a few coating
thicknesses from the edge, these decay to zero, and therefore, the bi-axial modulus
utilised in equation (2.19) is for most practical applications a good approximation
[55].
Equation (2.19) is based on the assumption that after gelation the elastic modulus
remains constant.
In reality, the modulus increases with time as a function of
the increasing crosslinking density and evaporation of any solvent present in the
coating. As such, also the Poisson’s ratio vary with the curing time. Furthermore,
the equation does not account for stress relaxation, i.e. stress release which can lead
to the formation of coating defects [55].
However, shrinkage is not the only contributor to the formation of internal stress
within the coating. Recently, it has been found that internal stress also can be
caused by differences in material properties at the interface between the coating
and the substrate surface. Furthermore, the presence of different phases inside the
coating, e.g. fillers and pigments in the polymer resin, and also the distribution of
crosslinking nodes in the polymeric matrix, which cannot be perfectly homogeneous,
can be the cause of internal stress [58].
28
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:40==
2.7.3
Influence of Curing Conditions
The curing process is highly influenced by the atmospheric and environmental con-
ditions at which it takes place, and both the temperature and the relative humidity
affects the development of mechanical properties through the curing process [11].
The driving force in the evaporation of solvent is the difference between the equilib-
rium vapour pressure at the interface between the surface of the coating and in the
bulk of the air, and thus the rate of evaporation is affected by the relative humidity
[19]. When the relative humidity is high, the driving force for evaporation becomes
smaller, and as a result, the rate of evaporation is decreased. Furthermore, high
relative humidities (exceeding 85%), should be avoided because non-polymerised
binder and hardener in some cases can absorb water [11].
The curing temperature also affects the rate of evaporation, which increases as a
function of increasing temperature. However, if the temperature is too high it can
lead to solvent evaporation occurring too fast [11]. And likewise, too low temper-
atures can result in the evaporation being so low, that it causes alterations to the
chemical curing process [11].
Chemical reaction rates are temperature dependent, and normally increase with
increasing temperature. Hence, the curing process of two-component epoxy coatings
require a certain minimum temperature, for the crosslinking reactions to take place
at a satisfactory rate. The limit often set for epoxy coatings is 10°C [21].
At a certain degree of crosslinking gelation takes place, and afterwards, the elastic
modulus of the coating is increased as the crosslinking reactions proceed. As de-
scribed in section 2.6.3, the degree of conversion at which vitrification occurs can be
increased by increasing the curing temperature. Hence, higher curing temperatures
ultimately leads to coatings with improved elastic properties, because the elevated
temperatures allow for a higher degree of crosslinking [15].
2.7.4
Influence of Coating Composition
The coating mechanical properties are also influenced by the composition of the
coating.
Of course, adequate amount of binder and curing agent must be used
to obtain a cured coating with good properties, but also the amount of solvent
can greatly influence the curing process and the mechanical properties originating
therefrom [48].
When the solvent evaporates from the coating the volume is reduced, and thus it
results in shrinkage of the film [46, 48]. As the elastic modulus evolves through
crosslinking reactions, the coating develops an inability to shrink freely because of
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
29
==PAGE:41==
adhesion to the substrate, and thus the solvent evaporation results in build-up of
internal stress in the coating [48, 59]. Thus, when the solvent constitutes a larger
part of the coating formulation, the tendency of shrinking, and thus the amount of
internal stress formed between the coating and the surface, will be increased [48,
59]. Also the crosslinking reactions contribute to shrinking of the film by contraction
due to the formation of covalent bonds [46]. Depending on the composition, epoxy
coatings can shrink as much as 6 vol% during curing [60].
If a larger concentration of solvent is present in a coating, it can result in entrapment
of small amounts of solvent and/or the formation of pores and voids throughout the
polymer matrix, attributed to interactions between the solvent and the epoxy, which
negatively affects the durability of the coating [48]. However, if the amount of solvent
in the coating is insufficient, it can lead to the coating performing unsatisfactorily
due to only partial wetting of the substrate which causes non-protected areas [4].
2.7.5
Cracks and Other Coating Defects
When released, the internal stress build-up in the coating can lead to formation of
cracks in the coating material [16]. Furthermore, internal stress also affects both
the adhesion and cohesion of the coating, and can, thus, have a significant impact
on the durability of an anticorrosive coating [4, 57].
Residual solvent trapped in the cured film, can also lead to cracks and issues re-
garding adhesion of the cured coating to the substrate. Particularly in immersed
systems, another consequence of entrapped solvent is formation of osmotic pressure
gradients, which can lead to delamination of the coating [45].
Residual organic
solvent present in coatings in unacceptable levels, can also be a concern from an
environmental point of view [45].
In addition to entrapped solvent, a coating applied to a metal surface may also
contain different inhomogeneities such as air bubbles, microvoids, contaminants,
and non-bonded weak areas which all will affect the coating degradation process, by
influencing the transport of corrosive species, through the coating, to the surface of
the substrate [4, 45].
Thermal expansion, is the tendency of a solid matter to expand upon heating and,
likewise, to contract upon cooling [17]. Generally, the thermal expansion is much
larger for polymers than for metals. Thus, when a metal substrate with a polymeric
coating is heated, the polymeric coating will expand more than the metal, and when
cooled upon, the coating will contract to a larger degree than the metal. Due to
these differences in properties rapid temperature changes can also be the cause of
coating defects [17].
30
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:42==
2.7.6
Amine Blushing
Amine exudate, also termed amine blushing, is an unwanted side effect caused by
chemical reactions between an amine curing agent and carbon dioxide and water
from the atmosphere, which can occur on the surface of a coating [61].
Many amines, especially low molecular weight (primary) amines, are hygroscopic,
meaning that they readily absorb water [61]. The water absorbed by the amine
curing agent can react with carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in order to form
carbonic acid [62, 63]:
H2O + CO2 −−→H2CO3
(2.20)
Subsequently, the carbonic acid can take part in a reaction with a primary amine of
the curing agent which converts the carbonic acid to carbamic acid [62, 63]:
H2CO3 + RNH2 −−→RNHCOOH + H2O
(2.21)
Lastly, a carbamate ion is formed through a reaction of the carbamic acid with
another primary amine of the curing agent [62, 63]:
RNHCOOH + R′NH2 −−→R′NH3
+−OCONHR
(2.22)
Amine blushing can be observed as grey cloudiness, gloss reduction, and/or opaque
or white patches which appear on the surface of a coating during curing [64]. These
surface defects can cause issues such as poor coating cohesion and insufficient adhe-
sion of any subsequent coating layers [61].
The phenomenon of amine blushing is intensified for curing in an atmosphere with
high relative humidity and/or low temperature [64]. When the humidity is high, the
amine curing agent will absorb more water, and thus the amine blushing reactions
can occur to a higher degree. When the temperature is low, the reaction rate of
the epoxy curing reactions are slowed down. That causes an increase in the time
period where a substantial amount of curing agent amine groups are available for
the blushing reactions.
One method for preventing amine blushing is to reduce the reactivity of the amine
curing agent. That can be done by using the amine curing agent in the form of an
epoxy-amine adduct, as described in Section 2.5.2.
2.7.7
Substrate Geometry and Coating Thickness
Far from all substrate surfaces are flat, and many of them will include areas with
corners. It has been found, that the internal stress build-up, and the therefrom
resulting strain, formed in an epoxy coating during curing is larger for substrates
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
31
==PAGE:43==
presenting inner corners with smaller radii.
Thus, the least amount of strain is
formed for flat substrates [65].
Experimentally, it has been observed, that also the coating thickness might have
an effect on the amount of curing-induced internal stress, with very large dry film
thicknesses leading to an increase in the internal stress [65, 66].
However, it is
believed that the effect of the film thickness on the internal stress is indirect, so that
the observed increase in the internal stress is due to some physical and chemical
effects that become important at larger film thickness [66]. One such mechanism is
delayed solvent evaporation. When the film thickness is high, the solvent evaporation
will slow down due to the increased path of diffusion to the surface of the coating.
Thus, a larger fraction of the solvent will evaporate after the film formation has
taken place through crosslinking. This volume loss is likely to be a contributor to
the observed increased amount of internal stress [45, 66].
2.8
Epoxy Coating Curing Reaction Kinetics
In the previous sections, regarding the curing process and the associated evolution
of mechanical properties, it was made clear that the final properties of the cured
epoxy resin to a large extent depends on the chemical crosslinking reactions taking
place during curing. Therefore, in order to get a better understanding of how to
control the chemical kinetics of the curing process of epoxy resins, various different
experimental methods have been used for monitoring. Out of these, two of the most
applied methods are Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) [50, 67].
In infrared (IR) spectroscopy, the characteristic IR absorption of molecules is utilised
to determine their chemical structures [68, 69]. FTIR spectroscopy is one possible
way of monitoring the overall reaction kinetics of the curing process [50]. When an
epoxy resin partakes in crosslinking reactions with e.g. an amine, the concentration
of the different species involved in the reaction varies with time. The intensity of
an absorption peak in an IR spectrum is related to the sample concentration, and
thus, this can be observed through changes in the absorption peaks related to these
functional groups [50].
DSC monitors the flux of heat, associated with phase transitions and chemical re-
actions, to or from a sample [50, 70]. Many chemical reactions, including the cross-
linking reactions of epoxy resins, are exothermic [47, 67]. As such, DSC is a useful
method for monitoring the curing behaviour of epoxies [71]. Monitoring of the heat
release allows for determination of the extent of reaction as a function of time [67].
32
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:44==
There are many examples in recent literature of FTIR spectroscopy and DSC being
used, often in combination, for evaluating the curing reaction kinetics of epoxy
resins. That includes different modelling approaches for fitting of the experimental
data.
2.8.1
Curing Kinetics Modelling Methods
Common for the different phenomenological kinetic models applied for the curing
reactions of epoxies is, that they relate the reaction rate to a conversion function
through a temperature dependent reaction constant as [72]:
dα
dt = k(T)f(α)
(2.23)
where α is the degree of conversion, t is the time, and thus, dα/dt is the rate of the
curing reaction. The curing rate is considered a function of the conversion degree
and the temperature, T. f(α) is a model function for the reaction mechanism, k(T)
is the apparent rate constant, which generally is accepted to have a temperature
dependence according to the Arrhenius equation:
k(T) = A exp
(
−Ea
RT
)
(2.24)
where R is the universal gas constant, A is the Arrhenius pre-exponential factor,
and Ea is the activation energy. Through results from e.g. DSC, different methhods
exist for estimating the activation energy [44, 73, 74].
Zhao et al. have studied the curing kinetics and mechanisms of a novolac epoxy
resin with a methanol etherified amino curing agent at temperatures from 160 to
200 ◦C using both FTIR spectroscopy and DSC [49]. Zhao et al. evaluate their ex-
perimental data using two different kinetic models, commonly applied for modelling
of epoxy curing kinetics; the nth-order reaction model and an autocatalytic reaction
model. Both of these models, are of the same form as the general model presented
in Equation (2.23).
The nth-order model is the most simple and only considers one reaction order for
the curing kinetics:
dα
dt = k(1 −α)n
(2.25)
n is the reaction order and k is, again, the rate constant, which has an Arrhenius type
dependence of the temperature, as presented in equation (2.24) [49]. The autocata-
lytic model more directly accounts for the reaction orders of both the nucleophilic
reaction, leading to epoxy ring opening, and the autocatalytic reation:
dα
dt = k(1 −α)nαm
(2.26)
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
33
==PAGE:45==
n and m are the reaction orders of, respectively, the epoxy ring opening and the
autocatalytic reactions [49, 75]. Based on reaction orders determined through DSC,
Zhao et al. found a better fit of the experimental curing data with the nth-order
model for their epoxy/amine system [49].
In an article by Olamilekan et al. the applicability of 4,4’-diglycidyloxybiphenyl is
investigated through kinetic analyses of the curing reaction mechanisms with several
p-phenylenediamine derivatives representing different levels of steric hindrance of
the curing agent [75].
Olamilekan et al.
evalulate the effect of different curing
factors, such as the curing temperature which is varied from 110 to 150 ◦C, through
FTIR spectroscopy and DSC [75]. To obtain details of the curing reaction kinetics,
Olamilekan et al.
analysed their experimental data by fitting the curves to the
autocatalytic model in equation (2.26). In addition, Olamilekan et al. used FTIR
spectroscopy to analyse the chemical structures at different curing times in detail
[75]. Olamilekan et al. generally found good agreement between their experimental
data and the autocatalytic model and conclude that larger steric hindrance of the
curing agent decreases the curing rate [75].
Hosseinpour et al. have made a study of the curing behaviour of a high viscosity
epoxy resin used for pipe-lining with a diamine at temperatures from 15 to 250 ◦C
through a non-isothermal mode of DSC [76]. For fitting of their experimental data,
Hosseinpour et al. utilised a kinetic model, called the Kamal-Sourour model, which
is a superposition of the nth-order (2.25) and the autocatalytic (2.26) reaction models
[73]:
dα
dt = (k1 + k2αm)(1 −α)n
(2.27)
where the two rate constants, k1 and k2, respectively, correspond to the nucleophilic
ring opening reaction with reaction order n and the autoctalytic reaction of reac-
tion order m [47]. The model uses the simplifying assumption of equal reactivity
of primary and secondary amines [47]. Furthermore, the K-S model assumes full
conversion of the epoxy.
Hosseinpour et al. found the predictions of the Kamal-Sourour model to overall be
in good agreement with their experimental data, and thus, concluded that it was an
appropriate model for the epoxy curing behaviour analysis [76].
Diffusion Controlled Curing Reactions
In an article by Abliz et al., the K-S model from equation (2.27) is also used for
fitting of experimental curing reaction kinetics data [77]. The work by Abliz et al. is
focused on the influence of the model parameter estimation method on curing kinet-
ics modelling. In that regards, they have utilised the experimental method of DSC,
34
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:46==
in both an isothermal mode and with a constant heating rate, for monitoring the cur-
ing of a commercial DGEBA-type epoxy resin cured with methyltetrahydrophthalic
anhydride using 1-methyl imidazole as accelerator at curing temperatures ranging
from 110 to 130 ◦C [77].
Abliz et al. find that in the initial part of the curing process, their data agrees
well with the K-S model [77].
However, the K-S model only describes the rate
controlled curing reactions, and thus, the model does not account for the case where
the coating vitrifies, at some point during curing, causing the chemical reactions
to become diffusion controlled with a very limited reaction rate. Therefore, to get
a better fit with their experimental data, for the part of the curing process taking
place after vitrification, Abliz et al. use a modified version of the K-S model. As
such, the model is extended with a diffusion controlled reaction model as:
dα
dt = (k1 + k2αm)(1 −α)nfd(α)
(2.28)
where fd(α) is the diffusion controlled reaction model. As the diffusion controlled
term, Abliz et al. use a commonly cited model proposed by Fournier et al. [77, 78]:
fd(α) =
2
1 + exp(α −αc)/C −1
(2.29)
where αc is the critical conversion and C is a constant, which depends on the struc-
ture of the system and the curing temperature.
Abliz et al. find, that, when utilising the Fournier model for the diffusion term, the
model agrees well with their experimental data, also after vitrification. Abliz et al
[77]. also note, that the deviation of the original K-S model from the experimental
data is larger at lower curing temperatures, and thus, that the diffusion controlled
term becomes increasingly important for low cure temperatures [77].
Achilias et al. have studied two commercial thermosetting epoxy systems, consisting
of an epoxy resin based on bisphenol-A and a cycloaliphatic diamine hardener at
curing temperstures from 30 to 70 ◦C, by means of FTIR spectroscopy and DSC
[47].
Achilias et al.
employed FTIR spectroscopy to investigate the isothermal
curing kinetics of the two systems at different temperatures, and with DSC, they
also investigated the non-isothermal curing kinetics [47].
As Abliz et al., Achilias et al. have used a modified version of the K-S model for
fitting of their experimental data [47]. The K-S model only describes the case where
a complete conversion of epoxy is obtained during curing. In many cases, that does
not occur, due to the considerable decrease in the rate of the curing reactions as
they become diffusion controlled when the polymer vitrifies [47]. To describe the
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
35
==PAGE:47==
effect of the diffusion restricted phenomenon on the overall curing kinetics, Achilias
et al. have used the following expression
fd(α) =
1
1 + exp(C(α −αc))
(2.30)
where C again is a structure and temperature dependent parameter [47]. The reac-
tion model in equation (2.30) is termed the Cole model, and takes into account the
possibility of an incomplete curing of the epoxy due to vitrification. Achilias et al.
found, that when modified with the Cole model, the K-S model described the epoxy
curing process well, also for curing at low temperatures [47, 77].
One thing, that must be noted, for all the aforementioned kinetic models, is that
they do not account for the presence of solvent within an epoxy coating, and how
that influences the curing reactions. In order to properly account for the presence of
solvent, it requires knowledge regarding the solvent evaporation rate, any residual
solvent entrapped within the coating, and for the incorporation of a position variable
to the model, in order to account for a possible solvent gradient through the thickness
of the coating.
2.9
Epoxy Coating Mechanical Property Evolution
The development of the mechanical properties f epoxy coatings is closely related
to the curing process. Thus, like the curing chemical kinetics, the relation of the
different mechanical properties to the curing has been investigated through various
experimental methods, and with fitting of the experimental data to different math-
ematical models. For this application, a rheometer is one of the more widely used
experimental methods and also DSC is commonly applied for determining the glass
transition temperature of thermosets, such as epoxies [58, 71].
2.9.1
Elastic Modulus Modelling Methods
In two related articles by Domínguez et al., the chemorheological behaviour of a
phenolic resol resin and a phenolic novolac resin, respectively, is investigated [79,
80]. Like epoxy resins, these two resins fall within the category of thermosetting
polymers, and thus, many of the same modelling methods can be utilised [80]. In
both sets of experiments by Domínguez et al., a rheometer was utilised in a parallel
plate setting to perform isothermal curing runs of the resins in order to explore the
development of the complex elastic modulus during the crosslinking reactions [79,
80]. In addition to the rheological tests, measurements with DSC were carried out,
to determine the degree of curing of the resins at the end of the isothermal runs [79,
80].
36
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:48==
To calculate the degree of cure, Domínguez et al. used the changes observed in the
shear storage modulus [79, 80]. This was done according to the following expression
α(t) = log(G′(t)) −log(G′
0)
log(G′
∞) −log(G′
0)
(2.31)
where α is the degree of curing and G′ is the shear storage modulus, which both
are functions of the curing time t. G′
0 and G′
∞, respectively, refers to the modulus
before curing and the modulus for of the fully cured polymer [81].
The focus of an article by Abouhamzeh et al. is the development of an analytical
model to predict the development of mechanical properties of an epoxy adhesive
hybrid material during curing [82]. In that regards, Abouhamzeh et al. deal with
modelling of the elastic modulus as a function of the curing degree after gelation.
When above the glass transition temperature, the thermoset material is rubbery,
and the stiffness will depend mainly on the curing polymerisation. Hence, in an
isothermal curing process, with a curing temperature above Tg, the elastic modulus
during curing can be approximated by the equilibrium modulus [82, 83]. That is
utilised in the Martin and Adolf model, which is applied by Abouhamzeh et al.:
GR(α) = G∞
R
(α2 −α2
c
1 −α2
c
)8/3
for
α > αc
(2.32)
where G∞
R is the rubbery shear modulus in the final cured state, α is the curing
degree, and αc is the critical degree of curing, where gelation takes place [82, 83].
Both of the models, dealing with the relation between the storage modulus and cur-
ing degree, assume full and uniform conversion. Thus, the models do not contain
a position variable, as would be necessary to account for the curing process devel-
opment of the elastic modulus for a solvent containing epoxy coating. The solvent
can lead to the formation of a conversion gradient and residual entrapped solvent
can affect the modulus.
2.9.2
Glass Transition Temperature Modelling
The glass transition temperature is related to the polymeric crosslinking density,
and thus, it is also dependent on the epoxy degree of curing. The DiBenedetto
equation is very commonly used for relating the glass transition temperature to the
degree of curing for epoxy resins [84, 85]:
Tg(α) = Tg0 + (Tg∞−Tg0) λα
1 −(1 −λ)α
(2.33)
In the above equation, the glass transition temperature Tg is a function of the curing
degree, α. Tg0 is the glass transition temperature of the resin before curing, Tg∞
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
37
==PAGE:49==
is the glass transition temperature of the fully cured polymer, and λ is a structure
dependent parameter, which has a value between 0 and 1.
In the empirical DiBenedetto equation, the shift in the glass transition temperature
is related to the extent of reaction based on entropic considerations, where the
thermosetting polymer is regarded as a random mixture consisting of the initial
monomers, or resins, and the fully reacted network, in amounts that depend on the
degree of conversion [81, 84, 86]. The DiBenedetto equation does not account for
a gradient in the conversion degree, and thus, in the value of Tg, which could be
present in a solvent containing coating.
Jansen et al. have fitted experimental data for the curing of a novolac epoxy resin
with Bisphenol-A as the hardener and triphenyl phosphate as the catalyst to the
DiBenedetto equation [87]. The article by Jansen et al. deals with characterisation
and modelling of the mechanical behaviour of the epoxy resin, which is utilised as
a moulding compound when mixed with additives. Thus, Jansen et al. is, among
other things, investigating the degree of cure at temperatures ranging from 90 to
150 ◦C. The DiBenedetto equation is found to agree well with the experimental data
of Jansen et al. [87].
2.10
Conclusions
Two-component epoxy coatings are widely used for the purpose of corrosion protec-
tion of metals. The success of the epoxy coatings can mainly be attributed to the
molecular structure of the epoxy resins. Due to the chemical crosslinking reactions
and solvent evaporation taking place simultaneously, the curing of epoxy coatings
is a complicated process. The two processes are interdependent, and the final mech-
anical properties of the coating largely rely on the curing process and conditions
during curing. After gelation, the physical appearance of the coating changes from
liquid to rubber like, and an elastic modulus develops. That enables build-up of
internal stress within the coating, due to inability of the coating to shrink because
of adhesion to a substrate. Upon release, the elastic modulus can lead to coating
defects, such as cracks, forming.
Much effort has been put into characterising the epoxy curing process and the ac-
companying evolution of mechanical properties. In that regards, various different
experimental methods have been utilised. For research aiming at investigating the
chemical kinetics of the crosslinking reactions, FTIR spectroscopy and DSC are
among the most widely used methods. For measurements of the elastic modulus
evolution during curing, and other mechanical properties, monitoring with a rheo-
meter is a popular approach in recent literature. The experimental data has been
38
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:50==
fitted to various different mathematical models, representing different levels of com-
plexity and use of assumptions.
However, to fully understand the complicated interactions in the curing of epoxy
coatings, more research is still needed. Most of the data available in recent literature
is focused on one aspect of the curing process and, as such, does not provide a full
overview of how e.g. the chemical kinetics and solvent content and evaporation rate
affects the coating mechanical properties how that relates to the development of
curing-induced internal stress. In addition, most of recent literature is focused on
epoxies cured at elevated temperatures.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
39
==PAGE:51==
3
Scientific Hypotheses of the Project
The overall aim of this project is to investigate the mechanical property evolution of
two-component epoxy coatings during curing, together with the effect of the initial
solvent content in the coating on the epoxy conversion, and solvent evaporation rate.
In order to do so, the following scientific hypotheses, set up based upon the findings
of the literature review, have been investigated experimentally:
• The influence of coating formulation (e.g. the initial solvent content) on the
binder conversion can be observed experimentally with FTIR-spectroscopy.
• By conducting measurements with a rheometer and using the deflection method,
the elastic modulus and the internal stress evolution during curing can be re-
lated to the epoxy conversion and the coating formulation.
• Gravimetric analysis can, in combination with FTIR spectroscopy, rheometer
measurements, and the deflection method, be used to provide unique insight
to how the initial solvent content and the solvent evaporation rate influences
the final coating mechanical properties.
40
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:52==
4
Experimental Methods
To investigate the scientific hypotheses, various different experimental methods have
been utilised to investigate amine-cured epoxy coatings. Details regarding the coat-
ing compositions are included in Section 4.1. The experimental methods include:
• FTIR spectroscopy
• Gravimetric analysis
• Advanced rheometry
• Deflection method
When the curing reactions of the epoxy binder with the amine curing agent progress
to eventually form a crosslinked network and the solvent simultaneously evaporates,
the composition of the functional groups present in the coating changes.
These
alterations within the chemical composition can be observed through the infrared
spectrum of the coating. Therefore, by recording multiple spectra of coatings at
different curing times and with varying initial solvent contents using an FTIR spec-
trometer, the conversion degree and reaction rate of the epoxy resin in the coating
can be related to the curing time as well as to the influence of the initial solvent
content.
In the gravimetric analysis, the weight loss, due to solvent evaporation, during cur-
ing is monitored. Thus, the gravimetric analysis can be used to relate the solvent
evaporation rate to the curing time and the initial solvent content. In combination
with the remaining experimental methods, the gravimetric analysis can provide in-
sight to how the presence of solvent influences the curing rate, the development of
the coating mechanical properties, and the curing-induced internal stress.
By the use of different operating modes, an advanced rheometer can be utilised
to provide information on a coating regarding both the curing process, chemical
shrinkage, and the mechanical properties of a coating sample. As such, by using the
rheometer to observe the coating curing process, the gelation and vitrification points
can be determined. Furthermore, through a dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA),
the rheometer allows for determination of the shear loss and storage moduli and the
glass transition temperature of free film samples of both partially and fully cured
coatings. Thus, in combination with FTIR results, the coating mechanical properties
obtained by measurements with the rheometer can be related to the epoxy conversion
and the initial solvent content in the coating. Lastly, the rheometer can be used
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
41
==PAGE:53==
to monitor the chemical shrinkage of a coating during curing, which then can be
related to the build-up of internal stress within the coating.
The deflection method is the most widely used technique for determining the average
curing-induced internal stress [55]. The method involves measuring the deflection,
that is the structural displacement, of a thin, low modulus coated substrate caused
by the internal stress build-up within the coating during curing, which then can be
related to the development of the coating elastic modulus [55]. In regards to this
project the curing-induced internal stress determined via the deflection method, is
subsequently compared to the rheometer chemical shrinkage data. Thus, the two
experimental methods can be evaluated against each other.
For each test method, parallel samples were used to quantify the experimental un-
certainty.
More details regarding the different experimental methods, including
experimental setups, measurement procedures, and results, are included in the fol-
lowing sections.
An overview of the experimental plan is provided in Appendix
A.
4.1
Coating Materials and Formulation
In the experimental work, coating formulations based on two different epoxy binders
were used; a DGEBA and a novolac epoxy resin. Additionally, the coatings consisted
of an m-xylylendiamine (MXDA) adduct hardener and an organic solvent; xylene.
Throughout the different experimental methods, the content of solvent initially in
the coating was varied from 100% to 80% solid volume. In all cases, a stoichiometric
ratio of epoxy to amine was used for the coating formulation. The coating mixtures
were prepared by manual mixing of the different components. Subsequently, the
coatings were applied to the substrates utilised in the different experimental pro-
cedures using an applicator from Elcometer with a resolution of 10 µm (model no.
3580/2).
The DGEBA resin, supplied by KUKDO Chemical Co.
Ltd., was a liquid low
molecular weight epoxy resin with an epoxy equivalent weight of 187 g/equivalent.
The DGEBA epoxy resin molecule contains two epoxy groups which can partake in
the curing reactions with the amine hardener. The molecular structure was shown
in Figure 2.4.
The novolac epoxy resin was supplied by Hexion Inc. and, like the DGEBA resin, was
liquid and with a low molecular weight. The novolac resin had an epoxy equivalent
weight of 169 g/equivalent. For the novolac epoxy resin, the number of epoxy groups
within the molecule depends on the number of repeat units n, as was seen from the
42
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.1:
Molecular structures of the curing agent, m-xylylenediamine, and
solvent, xylene, used in the coating formulations. The xylene used in the exper-
imental work is a mixture of the depicted m-xylene, o-xylene, and p-xylene. The
molecular structures of the DGEBA and novolac epoxy resins were included in Fig-
ure 2.4.
molecular structure in Figure 2.4. Thus, novolac epoxy resins typically have a higher
functionality than DGEBA epoxy resins.
When a single molecule contains more than one reactive group, it must be taken
into account in stoichiometric calculations, such as those for the ratio of epoxy to
amine groups in the coating mixture. That is done by basing the calculations on
equivalent weights, which can be thought of as the mass of a substance that contains
one functional group. Thus, in the case of the epoxy resins, the epoxy equivalent
weight is calculated based on the molecular mass of the epoxy resin and the number
of epoxy groups within the molecule.
The curing agent, MXDA, was supplied by Merck Life Science ApS. MXDA is a
primary diamine (the molecular structure is shown in Figure 4.1) with a molecular
weight of 136.19 g/mol. Recall from Figure 2.5 that, when reacting with an epoxy
group, a primary amine is converted to a secondary amine and a secondary amine
is converted to a tertiary amine. As such, MXDA has a functionality of four in the
curing reaction, because the two amine groups contain a total of four hydrogens
available for the curing reaction. That is accounted for by basing the equivalent
weight of the amine on the number of reactive hydrogens in the molecule. Thus, the
hydrogen equivalent weight of MXDA is 34.05 g/equivalent.
In the coating formulations, the amine curing agent was applied in the form of an
adduct, which was produced by adding a small amount of the epoxy binder to the
amine. That was done in order to reduce the reactivity of the curing agent prior to
mixing with the epoxy binder, to allow for a more controlled curing reaction rate.
For each of the two epoxy resins, MXDA adducts containing 5.5 mol% and 7.5 mol%
epoxy groups were utilised.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
43
==PAGE:55==
When determining the amount of binder and MXDA adduct hardener necessary to
achieve a stoichiometric ratio within the coating, it must be taken into account that
in the adduct some of the amine already has reacted with epoxy. And thus, it is
required to know the hydrogen equivalent weight within the hardener (the amine
adduct). The hydrogen equivalent weight in the hardener differs from the hydrogen
equivalent weight in the pure amine, because both the mass of the added epoxy and
the amount of hydrogen consumed in reaction with the epoxy must be considered.
The hydrogen equivalent weight in the hardener is based on the mass of free amine
within the hardener. The so called free or active amine, is any amine which has not
yet been used up in reaction with epoxy, and thus, still contains hydrogen available
for reaction. When determining the mass of free amine left within the hardener,
any differences in the reactivity between primary and secondary amines are not
accounted for. Furthermore, it is assumed that in the formation of the adduct, all
four hydrogens of MXDA can partake in reactions with the epoxy resin and that
the reaction between epoxy and amine is complete.
The coatings were prepared by adding varying amounts of the solvent, xylene, to
the stoichiometric mixture of epoxy resin and hardener. The xylene was supplied by
solvadis Distribution GmbH, and was a mixture of the three xylene isomers; ortho-,
para- and meta-xylene. The molecular structure of meta-xylene is depicted in Figure
4.1. It is assumed that mixing of the different coating components, do not result
in any volume change. Hence, the volume of xylene to add to a coating in order
to obtain a given solid volume percentage is simply determined based on volume
fractions.
For each of the experimental methods, an overview of the coating formulations util-
ised in the experimental analyses is included in the following sections. In addition, a
detailed description of the coating formulation calculations is included in Appendix
B.
4.2
FTIR Spectroscopy
IR spectroscopy utilises the characteristic infrared absorption of molecules to de-
termine their chemical structures. Exposure to IR radiation will cause the molecules
in a sample to absorb radiation of specific wavelengths. That results in a change in
the dipole moment of the molecules, which in turn causes the vibrational energy of
the molecules to transfer from the ground to an excited energy state. The size of the
vibrational energy gap, determines the frequency of the corresponding absorption
peak. In the IR spectrum, the frequency is normally converted to a wave number
with the unit of cm−1. Different vibrations in the molecule will result in peaks with
44
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:56==
different wave numbers, and thus, the number of absorption peaks relates to the
number of vibrational freedom in the molecule. The intensity of an absorption peak
is related to the change in dipole moment and the sample concentration. Hence, IR
spectroscopy can be used obtain much information about the chemical structure of
most molecules. Most organic compounds absorb IR radiation in the region from
4000 to 400 cm−1, and therefore this region is commonly used for IR spectroscopy
[68, 69].
In Fourier-transform IR spectrometers, radiation passes the sample through an in-
terferometer to a detector, where the signal is amplified and converted to digital
format. The signal is then transferred to a computer which carries out Fourier trans-
formation [68]. Advantages of FTIR spectrometers include high accuracy in wave
numbers, short scan times, and high resolution [68].
Attenuated total reflection
(ATR) is a sampling technique for IR spectroscopy, which operates by measuring
changes within an internally reflected IR beam occurring as the beam comes into
contact with the sample. ATR works well for both solid and liquid samples [88].
In regards to epoxy coatings, FTIR spectroscopy is one possible way of monitoring
the overall reaction kinetics of the curing process [50]. When an epoxy resin partakes
in crosslinking reactions with e.g. an amine, the concentration of the different species
involved in the reaction varies with time. That can be observed through changes in
the IR absorption peaks related to the functional groups, and thus IR spectroscopy
can be used to explore the progress of the crosslinking reactions [50]. As the curing
reactions progress, the concentration of epoxy groups will decrease, and thus, that
leads to a corresponding decrease in the intensity of IR peaks related to the epoxy
ring functional group.
The concentrations of the different reactive functional groups are linearly related
to the peak area ratios in the IR spectrum. Thus, as absorption increases with
concentration, Beer-Lamberts law can be written as
A
Amax
= adc
(4.1)
Where a is absorptivity, d is the sample thickness, and c is concentration. Amax and
A represents the area under a peak, corresponding to a chemical group partaking
in the epoxy curing reaction, initially and at time t, respectively [50]. Most often a
peak belonging to the epoxy ring is chosen, but that of the curing agent, can also
be used.
However, due to uncertainties regarding an absolute uniform thickness of the sample
and shrinkage during curing, which can cause errors in peak area integration, the
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
45
==PAGE:57==
validity of equation (4.1) will often be questionable [50]. To avoid these errors, an
internal reference band can be used. That is a peak associated with a component
which remains constant in concentration during the curing process. Aromatic rings
do not participate in the crosslinking reactions of the epoxies, and therefore, absorp-
tion peaks belonging to these are most commonly used as reference peaks [50, 89].
Thus, when normalising the peak areas for epoxy rings with an internal reference,
the mechanism of curing, and hence the epoxy conversion, can be monitored via
FTIR spectroscopy by calculating a degree of conversion, α, as
α = 1 −(Aet)(Ar0)
(Art)(Ae0)
(4.2)
where Ar0 is the initial area under the reference peak and Art is the are under the
reference peak at time t. Likewise, Ae0 and Aet are the areas under the epoxy peak
initially and at time t, respectively. However, even when an internal reference peak is
used for the calculations, the results of the method can be influenced by interference
of other absorption peaks.
4.2.1
FTIR Experimental Setup and Procedure
IR measurements of the coating samples were carried out with an FTIR spectrometer
from Thermo Fisher Scientific using the ATR sampling technique. The spectra were
recorded and subsequently analysed with the OMNIC™Spectra software, also from
Thermo Fisher Scientific. The IR spectra were obtained for wavenumbers from 4000
to 400 cm−1 with a resolution of 4 cm−1 and a total of 8 scans per spectrum.
The method of IR spectroscopy was utilised for monitoring the epoxy conversion as
a function of the curing time for both DGEBA and novolac based coatings. In both
cases, an absorption peak at ∼915 cm−1, which is assigned to the C-O stretching
within the epoxy ring, was utilised for the epoxy conversion calculations based on
equation (4.2) [50, 89]. This peak was chosen because it proved to be sharp and
well separated from other peaks in the spectra. For the DGEBA coatings, the epoxy
peak was normalised using an absorption peak at 1509 cm−1, assigned to the C-C
stretching of benzene, since this group remains unchanged during curing [89, 50].
For the novolac coating spectra, the C-C stretching peak was not well separated
from the adjacent peaks. Therefore, a peak at 1250 cm−1, assigned to the aromatic
C-O stretch of the alkyl aryl ether, was instead used as the reference peak [90, 91,
92].
An overview of the different coating compositions utilised for IR spectroscopy, in-
cluding the binder type, the epoxy percentage of the amine adduct used as curing
agent, and the solid volume percentage, is included in Table 4.1. The coatings were
46
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:58==
Table 4.1: Overview of the coating compositions for which IR spectroscopy was
utilised.
Binder
MXDA adduct (%)
Solid volume (%)
DGEBA
5.5
100
95
Novolac
7.5
100
80
5.5
100
applied to the substrates with a wet film thickness of 300 µm. In addition, to the
IR spectra recorded for the various coating samples, a spectrum was obtained for
xylene to use for comparison with the solvent containing coatings.
The coating samples to be analysed through IR spectroscopy were applied to plastic
substrates. These were chosen because the epoxy coating does not adhere well to
the plastic. Thus, it is relatively easy to remove the cured coating film from the
substrate, which allows for measurements of the base of the film at the interface
between coating and substrate. By comparison of IR spectra, recorded for a sample
of the plastic substrate before application of the coating and again after removal of
the cured coating, it was confirmed that there was no chemical interaction between
the plastic substrates and the epoxy coating during curing.
Initially, when the coating is liquid, the FTIR measurement is performed simply
by placing a drop of the coating from the sample on the sampling point of the
spectrometer. As the curing progresses, and the coating turns into a gel, it becomes
possible to separate the surface of the coating, and thus, the conversion degree
both at the surface and average within the coating can be determined. Eventually,
it becomes possible to the remove the coating from the substrate as a free film,
and then, also the degree of conversion at the coating-substrate interface can be
measured through FTIR. As the coating vitrifies and becomes brittle, the free film
can be grinded/crushed into a powder in a crucible, which again makes it possible
to analyse the average of the coating.
In the beginning of the curing process, the rates of the chemical curing reactions
are fast, and therefore, it is necessary to frequently (once pr. hour) perform the
IR measurements of the coating samples.
As the coating vitrifies, the reaction
rate is slowed down significantly, and thus, fewer measurements are necessary. The
measurements were continued until no further significant change within the epoxy
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
47
==PAGE:59==
conversion was observed. In between the measurements, the coating samples were
placed within a climate chamber, supplied by Aralab, in order to control the exposure
conditions. The temperature was kept constant at 23 ◦C and the relative humidity
at 35%.
4.3
Gravimetric Analysis
In the curing of a solvent containing coating, the solvent evaporates leading to a
decrease in the total weight of the coating.
Thus, by conducting a gravimetric
analysis of the coating during curing, the solvent evaporation rate and the total
amount of evaporated solvent from the coating can be determined. Furthermore,
when investigating the solvent evaporation of coatings with several different initial
solvent concentrations, the gravimetric analysis can also be used for comparison of
e.g. the amount of trapped solvent within the cured coating.
4.3.1
Experimental Setup and Procedure for Gravimetric Analysis
The gravimetric analysis is carried out, simply by weighing the substrate applied
with epoxy coating multiple times throughout the curing process. Hence, the weight
loss which accompanies the evaporation of the xylene solvent is monitored as a
function of the curing time. For the gravimetric analysis, the coating samples were
Figure 4.2: Principal sketch of the setup used for the gravimetric analysis. The
glass substrate is firstly weighed prior to the coating application.
Subsequently,
when after coating application, it is weighed with suitable intervals throughout the
curing process, to monitor the solvent evaporation rate.
applied to a glass substrate, and the measurements were carried out, using a standard
laboratory scale from Sartorius with an accuracy of 1 mg was used. As shown on
Figure 4.2, the clean substrates were weighed prior to application of the coating in
order to determine the initial weight of coating applied to the substrate as
Coating Weight = Weight of Substrate with Coating −Clean Substrate Weight
(4.3)
The solvent evaporation is faster in the beginning of the curing process, and there-
fore, the samples must initially after coating application be weighed very frequently
48
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:60==
(5 minute intervals). As the rate of evaporation slows down, the intervals between
the measurements are increased. The weight of the coating samples were monitored
until the weight of the samples had stabilised. However, since the evaporation starts
as soon as the solvent is added to the coating, also the coating container was weighed,
both immediately after addition of the coating components (with the solvent added
last) and after the mixing process, in order to account for solvent evaporation taking
place during the mixing process.
To allow for control of the exposure condition, the coating samples were place in
a climate chamber in between the measurements. The temperature in the climate
chamber was set to 23℃and the relative humidity to 35%. The coating samples
were applied to the substrate with a wet film thickness of 300 µm.
In addition to the tests carried out for solvent containing coatings, to monitor the
xylene evaporation process, corresponding tests were made for solvent free coatings
to check for any increase in the weight of the coatings during curing, occurring due
to amine blushing at the surface of the coatings. The phenomenon of amine blushing
was treated in Section 2.7.6.
An overview of the coating compositions, for which the gravimetric analysis was
carried out, providing the type of binder, the percentage of epoxy within the amine
adduct hardener, and the solid volume content is included in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Overview of the coating compositions utilised for the gravimetric analysis.
The solvent free coatings were tested gravimetrically in order to account for any
weight increase as a consequence of amine blushing.
Binder
MXDA adduct (%)
Solid volume (%)
DGEBA
5.5
100
90
80
Novolac
7.5
100
90
80
5.5
100
80
4.3.2
Gravimetric Analysis Data Processing
The experimental data is used to determine the percentage of xylene, initially present
within the coating, which has evaporated at a given time. In order to do so, both
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
49
==PAGE:61==
the initial mass of xylene in a coating sample and the amount of xylene after a
given period of time must be known. This can be calculated based on the coating
formulation.
Firstly, the coating density is calculated from the amounts of the three components
in the coating (binder, hardener, and solvent), and the corresponding mass fractions
and densities of the components. Thus, the density of the coating is dependent on
the concentration of xylene within the coating and must therefore be calculated for
each of the coating formulations, for which the gravimetric analysis is carried out.
Likewise, the coating density changes as the solvent evaporates.
It must be accounted for, that solvent evaporation takes place already during mixing
of the coating. Therefore, the coating mixture is weighed both immediately after
addition of xylene and again after the mixing procedure. Based on the weight change,
the percentage of xylene, that has evaporated during the mixing of the coating, can
be determined. This assumes that all changes in the weight of the coating samples
are due to solvent evaporation. This leads to calculation of a new coating density
and solid volume fraction.
The total weight of a coating sample applied to a substrate, is found by subtracting
the weight of the clean substrate from the weight of the substrate with coating
immediately after the coating has been applied, as written in equation (4.3). The
initial coating weight can then be used to determine the initial coating volume via the
coating density after mixing. Based on the coating volume and solid volume fraction
after mixing, the initial volume of xylene within the coating can be determined.
Finally, the corresponding initial weight of xylene is determined via the density of
xylene.
The weight of xylene remaining within the coating as curing and evaporation pro-
gresses is found by subtracting the weight loss of the sample from the initial xylene
weight. The weight loss of the sample is monitored through the measurements on
the scale, and determined by subtracting the weight of the sample at time t from the
initial sample weight. From that, the percentage of evaporated xylene is calculated
from
Xylene evaporation = m0 −m(t)
m0
· 100%
(4.4)
where m0 refers to the initial weight of xylene within the coating sample applied
to the substrate and m(t) to the weight of xylene at time t. A detailed calculation
example is included in Appendix C.
50
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:62==
4.4
Rheology Testing
The rheological properties describe how a material deforms or flow in response to
applied forces or stresses and these properties can, as the name indicates, be meas-
ured using a rheometer [93]. In regards to this thesis, a rheometer has been used
for a dynamical mechanical analysis (DMA) and to monitor the curing process and
the chemical shrinkage of the epoxy coatings.
The hybrid rheometer utilised in the experimental work was a rotational shear rheo-
meter of the model ”Discovery HR 20” supplied by TA Instruments and controlled
via the TRIOS software [94].
The rheometer was utilised for testing of novolac
epoxy coatings, because preliminary tests of coatings prepared with the DGEBA
epoxy resin proved to be too brittle, when in the glassy state, for the DMA to be
carried out.
4.4.1
DMA
The technique of DMA is widely used for characterisation of a material’s properties.
In DMA, a small sinusoidal deformation is applied to a sample of known geometry.
Then, by subjecting the sample to a controlled stress, the sample will deform a
certain amount. This allows for studying of the material’s response to stress, tem-
perature, and frequency, which is related to its stiffness. As such, DMA can be used
to obtain information about the elastic modulus of the sample [95].
DMA Experimental Setup and Procedure
The DMA technique was used for both partially and fully cured solvent free and
80% solid volume samples of the novolac epoxy coatings cured with the MXDA
7.5% adduct hardener. When using the DMA technique at various times throughout
curing, it provides data on how the moduli and glass transition temperature varies
with time, and thus, degree of curing. Three parallel samples were used for the
DMA.
When carrying out the DMA, the coating samples must be prepared as free films.
That was done by application of the wet coatings to a plastic substrate (the same
type as used for IR spectroscopy), which allows for easy removal of the coating after
it has gelled. Thus, DMA was only utilised for the part of the curing process taking
place after gelation. For the DMA, an initial wet film thickness of 300 µm was used
for the samples. Figure 4.3 shows a free film sample fixed in the rheometer prior to
DMA. The film is secured at both ends, and during the analysis, the top part exerts
the oscillatory force whereas the bottom part is kept in position.
The geometry of the tension fixture was set to a sample length of 30 mm. The
remaining dimensions (width and thickness) of the free film coating samples varied,
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
51
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.3: The experimental setup used for the DMA. In the rheometer, the free
film coating sample is secured at both ends. The positioning of the coating sample is
marked in red. During the DMA the top part of the fixture performs the oscillatory
deformation.
but was for every analysis accounted for through the settings of the rheometer
software. Both the widths and thicknesses of the free film coating samples were
measured at three different positions of the sample with a vernier caliper, and an
average was determined and utilised. In all cases, no large variation of the measured
dimensions was detected within a sample.
In the DMA, the free film coating samples were heated at a constant rate of 1.0
℃/min starting at a temperature of 30 ◦C and increasing to 150 ◦C. The tests were
carried out in a tension mode using an axial force of 1.0 N. The oscillation had a
frequency of 1 Hz and an axial displacement (amplitude) of 25 µm.
4.4.2
Curing Process Rheology
The advanced rheometer was also utilised to conduct measurements of isothermal
curing of the novolac epoxy coatings. In that manner, the rheometer allows for
monitoring the development of the storage and loss moduli, and the resulting tan(δ),
as a function of time. These changes are linked to the chemical reactions taking
place during curing, which leads to the irreversible transformation of the coating
from a viscous liquid to the rubbery state at the gel point [80, 96]. As such, the
rheometer curing monitoring is utilised to determine the point of gelation and also
the transition from gel to glassy solid at vitrification.
Curing Process Experimental Setup and Procedure
The curing process was monitored by using the rheometer in an oscillatory parallel
plate setting where a sinusoidal shear strain was applied to the coating [97].
A
52
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:64==
picture of the setup is included in Figure 4.4. The setup consists of two smooth
parallel plates with the coating placed in between. The bottom plate is fixed in
position and the top plate rotates, causing torque.
A sketch showing the basic
principles of oscillatory parallel plate rheometry is shown in Figure 4.5. The freshly
prepared coating sample is placed on the bottom plate after which the top plate is
moved into position and any excess paint is removed. The liquid coating is confined
between the two plates by capillary forces [98].
Figure 4.4: The rheometer setup used for monitoring of the isothermal curing pro-
cess.
The liquid coating is placed inbetween the two parallel plates, which are
marked in red. The bottom plate is kept in position and the top plate performs the
oscillatory strain during the curing process.
The two plates had a diameter of 25 mm and the gap between the plates was kept
constant at 200 µm. The analysis of the curing process was carried out at room
temperature using a controlled strain of 6.25% and a fixed frequency of 1.0 Hz. The
values of the strain and frequency were chosen because they fall within a linear
region, where the material’s response to the sinusoidal impact also will be sinusoidal
with the same frequency [97]. Thus, in the linear region and at constant temperature,
the rheological properties of the material is only dependent on the frequency.
Investigating the curing process using the rheometer was done for two parallel
samples of the solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5% MXDA adduct
hardener. Due to the enclosed setup (see Figure 4.4), not allowing for solvent to
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
53
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.5: The principle of the parallel plate setting of the rheometer. The epoxy
coating is kept in between two parallel plates. The top plate rotates causing torque.
The figure is adapted from O’Brien et al. [60].
evaporate in the same manner as would be the case for typical curing conditions,
solvent containing coatings are not suitable for this type of test.
4.4.3
Chemical Shrinkage
As described in Section 2.7.4, the polymerisation reactions, taking place during cur-
ing of epoxies, lead to chemical shrinkage [99]. Using a rheometer, again with a
parallel plate setting, the dimensional changes associated with the chemical shrink-
age of a coating during curing can be determined by performing a stress controlled
test, where a small constant force is applied [99].
Since the coating material can be assumed to be isotropic, the chemical shrinkage,
εV , can be evaluated through the variation in the size of the gap between the plates,
which is taken up by the coating, as
εV =
(
1 + 1
3 ·
(h −h0
h0
))3
−1
(4.5)
where h0 is the initial gap and h is the actual gap [99, 100, 101]. A negative value
of εV implies a volumetric contraction, i.e. shrinkage [99].
In addition to isotropic material properties, the equation assumes that the coating is
incompressible, and thus, that any dimensional changes are as a result of shrinkage
during curing. Furthermore, it uses the assumption that the sample in-plane stress
is zero. The validity of this assumption is based on the strong adhesion between the
coating and the plates, which prevents any in-plane motion [99, 101].
Evaluating the chemical shrinkage as a function of the curing time as a strain, the
related internal stress, σ, of the coating can be calculated from Hooke’s law (2.11)
σ(t) = EcεV (t)
(4.6)
54
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:66==
where Ec is the Young’s modulus of the coating [17]. After gelation, where the
coating mainly acts as an elastic solid, the shear modulus G can be approximated
by the shear storage modulus G’ [51]. And thus, the value of G’ obtained from the
DMA can be used to calculate Young’s modulus of the coating from equation (2.15),
which relates E to G, as:
Ec = 2G′ · (1 + νc)
where νc is the coating Poisson’s ratio, which for epoxies range from 0.30-0.35 [53,
101, 102]. For the calculations, a Poisson’s ratio of 0.30 was used for the epoxy
coatings, since this is the value most commonly used for modelling purposes [53].
However, since the mechanical properties of a coating is affected by the presence of
solvent, it is expected than in reality the Poisson’s ratio of a solvent free coating
would be different to that of a corresponding solvent containing coating.
Chemical Shrinkage Experimental Setup and Procedure
The chemical shrinkage test utilises the same oscillatory parallel plate configuration,
as described in Section 4.4.2 for the investigation of the curing process using the
rheometer. However, for the chemical shrinkage analysis, the test is divided into
two segments and a short intermediate transition period; one segment before and
one after gelation. From that, the assumption follows, that no chemical shrinkage
occurs before gelation and the accompanying development of the elastic modulus.
To allow for linear shrinkage measurements without compression of the initially
liquid coating sample, the rheometer is, in the first segment (before gelation), run
using the same settings as for the isothermal curing tests. That is, it utilises a
constant strain and gap size. The details were provided in Section 4.4.2.
The point of gelation, where the test passes on to the second segment, was de-
termined based on the results from the rheometer curing tests, with the gel point
approximated by the time, where the shear modulus becomes larger than the loss
modulus [54, 103]. That was found to occur after 3.6 hours of curing. In order
to transition to the second segment of the test a constant force of 5.0 · 10−5 N is
utilised to do an initial adjustment of the size of the gap between the two parallel
plates. The gap size is adjusted by allowing for the top plate to move vertically
whilst keeping the base plate fixed in position. In the second segment of the test,
the instrument is run in a compression mode, meaning that the instrument adjusts
the size of the gap between the two parallel plates, in order to maintain a fixed
compressive load on the sample. The chemical shrinkage is then measured via the
change of the gap size during the test [104].
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
55
==PAGE:67==
The applied stress was calculated from equation 2.12
σ = F
A
which relates the stress, σ, to the force, F, and the surface area, A. Hence, based
on the plate geometry (round with a diameter of 25 mm), the applied stress is
determined so that it matches the force applied in the transition period. As such,
the stress is kept constant at 0.1 Pa in the second segment of the test, whereas in
the first segment, the strain was constant.
The chemical shrinkage tests were carried out at room temperature using a frequency
of 1.0 Hz for the oscillation, because that is within the linear region as described in
Section 4.4.2. The initial gap size was set to 200 µm.
As the curing tests, the chemical shrinkage tests were carried out for two parallel
samples of the solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5% MXDA adduct
hardener. The same challenges regarding solvent evaporation, as stated in Section
4.4.2 for the curing process investigation, applies for the chemical shrinkage test.
Therefore, this experimental method was not applied for solvent containing coating
samples.
4.5
Deflection Method
As solvent evaporates and chemical bonds are formed in the curing process, epoxy
coatings shrink. After gelation, the coatings become unable to shrink freely due to
adhesion to the substrate, and that causes internal stress to build up [55, 56]. This
was described in more detail in Section 2.7.4. When released, the internal stress of
a coating can lead to the formation of coating defects, and therefore, it is desirable
to quantify the curing-induced internal stress.
When stress develops within a coating applied to a flexible substrate, the substrate
will deform in response to the stress, and this effect can be utilised to determine
the coating stress [105]. As such, if placing the elastic substrate applied with coat-
ing, either on a support at each end or as a cantilever beam, the substrate will,
when stress builds up during curing, develop a natural bend with the coating on
the concave side [56]. Then, depending on the method, either the curvature or the
magnitude of the displacement, also called the deflection, at the end of the sub-
strate can be related to the amount of internal stress build-up. The two principles
are illustrated on the sketch in Figure 4.6. The deflection method, is the most com-
monly used method for analysing the stress development within a coating on a flat
substrate.
56
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:68==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Principle of (a) the curvature and (b) the cantilever beam deflection
method. Coating is applied to a substrate either placed on supports at each end or
secured in one end as a cantilever. When the stress develops within the coating, due
to inability to shrink freely, it results in a deformation of the substrate in the form
of (a) a curvature or (b) a deflection, d, at the free end of the substrate with length
L. The figure is adapted from Francis et al. [55].
The stress measured through the deflection method is the average stress of the
coating. Thus, any stress gradients appearing through the thickness of the coating
and edge effects are not directly accounted for [55].
Several different equations exists, relating the deformation, measured as a function
of curing time, to the internal stress, σ, of the coating. One of these, which builds
on equation (2.19) for the coating in-plane stress, is Stoney’s formula:
σ =
Est2
s
(1 −νs) · 6rtc
(4.7)
where Es is the elastic modulus of the substrate, ts is the thickness of the substrate,
νs is the substrate Poisson’s ratio, r is the radius of the curvature of the substrate
resulting from the deformation, as shown on Figure 4.6a, and tc is the coating
thickness [55]. If, instead of measuring the substrate curvature, the deflection of a
point along the deformed substrate is measured, the radius to be used in Stoney’s
formula can, for a cantilever geometry clamped in one end (as shown on Figure
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
57
==PAGE:69==
4.6b), be calculated from:
r = l2
2d
(4.8)
with l being the length from the clamp to the point of measuring and d the deflection
at that same point. The expression uses the assumption that d << r [55].
Stoney’s formula, equation (4.7), assumes the substrate and coating to behave with
identical elastic moduli, that the coating thickness is negligible in comparison to the
thickness of the substrate, and, lastly, that the coating stress is uniform and bi-axial.
Also, the equation does not take into consideration relief of stress due to bending of
the substrate and, thereby, the coating. In spite of these assumptions, the equation
is useful, because it does not require knowledge of the coating mechanical properties
in order to calculate the internal stress.
Another equation for the relation between deflection and stress, based on Stoney’s
formula, was proposed by Corcoran [55]. The Stoney-Corcoran equation is more
general and accounts for the effect of deformation on the stress:
σ =
dEst3
s
3tcl2 · (ts + tc)(1 −νs) + dEc · (ts + tc)
l2 · (1 −νc)
(4.9)
In the above equation, the subscripts c and s denote the coating and substrate,
respectively. Thus, the stress is dependent on both the coating and substrate elastic
modulus and Poisson’s ratio according to the Stoney-Corcoran equation [55]. The
stress reduction upon bending is accounted for by the second term in equation
(4.9). The error, resulting when this term is omitted, increases when the thickness
of the coating is increased relative to that of the substrate and, in the same manner,
when the coating modulus increases relative to the substrate modulus. The coating
Young’s modulus, Ec, is in the same manner as described in Section 4.4.3, calculated
from equation (2.15) using the experimental value of the shear storage modulus
obtained through DMA.
In the original derivation of the Stoney-Corcoran equation (4.9), the neutral axis
was positioned midway through the substrate thickness. That is accurate in the
case where the substrate is much thicker and stiffer than the coating [55]. Further
assumptions used in the Stoney-Corcoran equation are, again, that the coating stress
is bi-axial, the adhesion between the coating and substrate is perfect, neither the
coating or substrates deforms plastically, the mechanical properties are isotropic,
and the deflection is small relative to the thickness of the substrate.
4.6
Experimental Setup and Measurement Method
The deflection method was utilised for solvent free and 80% solid volume samples
of the novolac epoxy coatings cured with the MXDA 7.5% adduct hardener and
58
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.7: Sketch of stainless steel substrate applied with coating (blue) to a length
of 16 cm. The red dot is the sensor focus point at which the deflection is measured.
solvent free DGEBA coatings, also cured with a 7.5% adduct hardener. For the
solvent free coating, samples were prepared with wet film thicknesses of both 300,
500, and 700 µm, and for the solvent containing coating wet film thicknesses of 150
and 300 µm were used, based on the less viscous nature of these coatings due to the
xylene. In all cases, three parallel samples were utilised. Again, a Poisson’s ratio of
0.30 was used for the epoxy coatings [53]. However, since the mechanical properties
of a coating is affected by the presence of solvent, it is expected than in reality the
Poisson’s ratio of a solvent free coating would be different to that of a corresponding
solvent containing coating.
Using the applicator, the coatings were applied to 316L stainless steel substrates
with a length of 160 mm from the clamp, a thickness of 0.1 mm, and a width of
15 mm. Thus, for a wet film thickness of 300 µm the, the width is 25 times larger
than the wet film thickness. Therefore, the assumption of a bi-axial modulus, which
is used in equation (4.9) for the calculation of internal stress, is reasonable, since
shear and out-of-plane stresses appearing near the edge of the coating decay to zero
within a few coating thicknesses [55]. This was described in Section 2.7.2.
For 316L stainless steel, Young’s modulus is 193 GPa and Poisson’s ratio is 0.30
[17]. Due to the clamp, securing the substrates in one end, not the entirety of the
substrates were coated. To ensure that all substrates were applied with the same
area of coatings, masking tape was used in the application process. A sketch showing
a substrate applied with coating including the point of measurement with the sensor
is included in Figure 4.7.
The experimental setup includes a base where the test specimens are placed hori-
zontally, the clamp securing one end of the substrates and a laser distance sensor
with a resolution of 1 mm, monitoring the distance to the surface of the substrate at
the other end. The setup was placed inside the climate chamber to allow for control
of the exposure conditions. The temperature was kept constant at 23℃and 35%
relative humidity was used. A photo of the experimental setup is included in Figure
4.8.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
59
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.8: Experimental setup used for the deflection method.
Stainless steel
substrates applied with coating are secured with a clamp in one end and free in
the other. The laser beam from the sensor is visible as a red dot at the end of the
substrates.
In order to quantify the uncertainties involved in the test, a coating free reference
substrate was monitored for comparison. Furthermore, to assess the performance of
the sensors through comparison of data, a parallel test was carried out for the 80%
solid volume coating applied with a thickness of 300 µm using a different sensor,
type Keyence IL-1000, with a resolution of 1 µm. The setup used for the Keyence
sensor measurements corresponded to that otherwise used in the deflection tests.
60
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:72==
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Epoxy Conversion and Solvent Evaporation
Throughout curing of the different epoxy coatings, IR spectra were recorded in order
to determine the epoxy conversion, based on the area of peaks in the spectra, as a
function of the curing time. Initially, this was carried out for DGEBA and novolac
epoxy coatings cured with 5.5% MXDA adducts. Figure 5.1 shows IR spectra recor-
ded of a 95% solid volume DGEBA coating initially and after 172 hours of curing
(a) from 4000 to 400 cm−1 and (b) focused on the area from 1600 to 800 cm−1. The
spectrum for 0 hours of curing is the average of the coating and the spectrum for
172 hours of curing represents the coating at the coating-substrate interface. On
Figure 5.1b the epoxy and reference peaks are labelled. It clearly shows that the
area of the epoxy peak has decreased significantly during the curing process due to
the crosslinking reactions.
In the initial part of the curing process the coatings were liquid like, and IR spectra
to determine the average conversion of epoxy within a coating were easily obtained
by mixing of a small amount of the liquid coating sample, ensuring that coating from
both the surface and coating-substrate interface was included. At a certain point in
the curing process, the coatings passed through first gelation and then eventually
vitrification. That required for grinding of free films of the coatings into a powder
in order to obtain IR spectra for determining the average epoxy conversion within
the coatings. However, depending on the brittleness of the coating, the resulting
fineness of the powder grain size was limited, and thus, the spectra did not in all
cases reflect a true average of the coating.
5.1.1
Surface Carbonation Influence on Conversion Data
In order to account for any differences in the degree of epoxy conversion based
on the position in the coating, IR spectra were, in addition to those representing
coating-surface interface and the average of the coating, recorded at the surface
of the coatings. However, in the spectra for the surface of the coatings, both for
DGEBA and Novolac based coatings, an overlap of the epoxy peak used for the
conversion calculations, at 915 cm−1, with another absorption peak was identified,
as can be seen from the IR spectra in Figure 5.2. This is believed to be caused by
the phenomenon of amine blushing, as described in Section 2.7.6. Amine blushing
results in new chemical compounds being formed at the surface of the coating, and
thus it influences the IR spectra recorded for the surface of the coatings.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
61
==PAGE:73==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: IR spectra for 95% solid volume DGEBA coating cured with the 5.5%
adduct after 0 hours and 172 hours of curing. The initial spectrum represents the
average of the coating and the spectrum recorded after 172 hours of curing represents
the coating-substrate interface. Figure (a) shows the full IR spectra recorded and
Figure (b) is focused on the spectra from 1600 to 800 cm−1.
62
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:74==
Figure 5.2: IR spectra recorded for the surface and coating-substrate interface,
respectively, of the 95% solid volume DGEBA coating cured with the 5.5% adduct
after 172 hours of curing. In the spectrum, recorded for the surface of the coating,
there is an overlap between the epoxy peak and another absorption peak.
The
spectrum recorded for the base of the coating shows a distinct epoxy peak.
The two spectra included in the figure represents the surface and coating-substrate
interface, respectively, of a 95% solid volume DGEBA coating cured with the 5.5%
adduct after 172 hours of curing. It clearly shows, that whereas the epoxy peak
is distinct in the spectrum for the base of the coating, it overlaps with another
peak in the spectrum for the surface of the coating. That of course influences the
surface conversion calculations, and therefore, the conversion calculations based on
the spectra recorded for the base of the coatings were deemed the most reliable.
Hence, the conversion calculations have been based mainly on the coating-substrate
interface IR spectra, supported by spectra for the average of the coating for the
initial part of the curing process.
The indication of amine blushing, was substantiated by visual inspection of the
coating throughout the curing process. For all coating formulations, it was observed
that within the first hours of curing, the surface of the coating started to loose gloss
and developed opaque/white patches. This is seen in the pictures in Figure 5.3 for
80% solid volume DGEBA coating samples cured with the 5.5% adduct, right after
application to the glass substrate and after 24 hours of curing.
In order to confirm, that the reactions taking place on the surface of the coatings
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
63
==PAGE:75==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Pictures of samples of 80% solid volume coating (a) right after applica-
tion to a glass substrate and (b) after 24 hours of curing, where the amine blushing
shows as gloss reduction and opaque/white patches on the surface of the coating.
indeed were caused by carbonation of the amine curing agent, IR spectra was recor-
ded for the carbonation product formed by pure MXDA through reaction with the
atmosphere. In Figure 5.4 an IR spectrum for the MXDA carbonation product is
presented together with spectra recorded for the surface and coating-substrate inter-
face of the 95% solid volume DGEBA coating after 172 hours of curing. The figure
clearly shows, that the spectrum for the surface of the coating exhibits absorption
peaks not present in the spectrum recorded for the coating-substrate interface, and
that these peaks coincide with the absorption peaks present in the spectrum for the
amine carbonation product.
The sharp peak seen in Figure 5.4 at ∼3330 cm−1 in the amine carbonation and
the coating surface spectra can be assigned to the N-H stretch within a secondary
amine. That is consistent with the amine blushing reactions, presented in equations
(2.20) through (2.22), leading to an increased amount of secondary amine being
formed [106, 107]. The spectrum representing the coating-substrate interface shows
a smaller peak in the same area, since also the base of the coating will contain some
secondary amine, produced in the curing reactions, and in addition, the N-H stretch
of the primary amine absorbs in a similar part of the IR spectrum. Furthermore,
between approximately 3200 and 2500 cm−1 a very broad peak with a maximum
absorbance at ∼2850 cm−1 shows in the spectra for the amine carbonation product
64
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.4: IR spectrum for the carbonation product of pure MXDA reacted with
the atmosphere presented together with IR spectra for the surface and base, re-
spectively, for the 95% solid volume DGEBA coating after 172 hours of curing. The
absorption peaks of the MXDA carbonation product coincide with peaks present in
the spectrum for the surface of the coating.
and coating surface.
This peak is typical for the presence of a carboxylic acid.
The amine blushing reactions lead to the formation of carbonic and carbamic acid,
which both contain carboxylic acid groups [106, 107]. Again, peaks with a lesser
absorbance is seen in the same area in the spectra for the coating-substrate interface.
That can be assigned to the O-H stretch of alcohols, which are present in both the
uncured epoxy resin and in the cured coating, and absorb in the same area.
To investigate how much of the coating is influenced by amine blushing, the sand
paper method was utilised to record IR absorption spectra at different depths of the
coating thickness. With the sand paper method, sand paper is used to gradually
reduce the thickness of the coating. After using sandpaper, the coating thickness
was measured in several places using a vernier caliper. As such, Figure 5.5 shows IR
spectra recorded for different coating depths of a 95% solid volume coating after 96
hours of curing. From Figure 5.5a it is seen that the spectrum recorded for a coating
thickness of 290 µm, corresponding to the surface of the coating, is distinctively
different from the remaining spectra. It indicates that the amine blushing reactions
only influence the very surface of the coating. From Figure 5.5b, showing the spectra
for wavenumbers from 4000 to 2000 cm−1, it is seen more clearly that the surface
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
65
==PAGE:77==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: IR spectra recorded at different coating depths for 95% solid volume
coating after 96 hours of curing. 290 µm corresponds to the surface of the coating.
Figure (a) show the spectra for the range of wavenumbers and (b) are focused on the
part of the spectra with the peaks assigned to the amine blushing reaction products.
66
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:78==
layer influenced by the amine blushing reactions has a thickness of ∼20 µm.
One method for preventing amine blushing is to reduce the reactivity of the amine
curing agent. That can be done by using an epoxy-amine adduct, with a larger
concentration of epoxy, and thus, a smaller excess of active (or free) amine [61].
Therefore, to reduce the phenomenon of amine blushing, the epoxy conversion tests
were for the novolac based coatings repeated for coatings cured with the 7.5% ad-
duct. However, the same issue regarding overlap of the epoxy peak with an adjacent
absorption peak was experienced for the coatings cured with the 7.5% adduct, and
therefore the influence of amine blushing was investigated further through the gra-
vimetric analysis.
5.1.2
Curing of Solvent Containing Coatings
The two graphs in Figure 5.6 display the experimental data from the gravimetric
analyses with the percentage of evaporated xylene related to the coating curing
time.
The analysis was carried out for DGEBA coatings of 90% and 80% solid
volumes, respectively, both cured with the 5.5% amine adduct hardener, and for
novolac coatings of 90% and 80% solid volumes, respectively, cured with the 7.5%
amine adduct hardener together with an 80% solid volume coating cured with the
5.5% hardener. The gravimetric analysis was carried out for three parallel samples,
and as such the percentages shown in the graph is the average value of the samples.
The error bars in the graphs, denote the standard deviation within the three parallel
samples. The percentage of xylene evaporated during mixing for the different coating
compositions is included in Table 5.1. The highest evaporation during mixing of
6.7% was observed for the 90% solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5%
adduct and the smallest mixing evaporation was found for the 80% solid volume
DGEBA coating cured with the 5.5% adduct. The evaporation of xylene during
mixing of the coatings is accounted for in the graphs in Figure 5.6 by having the
initial evaporation percentage deviate from 0. Thus, the percentages of evaporated
xylene displayed in the graphs denote the percentage out of the total amount of
solvent initially present in the coating.
Figure 5.6a shows the full time span for the gravimetric analyses and Figure 5.6b the
initial part of curing, where the majority of solvent evaporation takes place. Figure
5.6b clearly shows that in all cases, the vast majority of the xylene evaporation
from the coatings takes place within the first ∼15 minutes of the curing process.
Furthermore, the graphs clearly indicate that far from all xylene in the coatings
evaporate, and thus, that some is left entrapped within the cured coatings.
The presence of residual solvent entrapped within the cured coatings was further
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
67
==PAGE:79==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: Percentage of evaporated xylene vs. curing time shown for (a) the full
time span for the gravitmetric analyses and (b) for the initial 1 hour of the curing
process, where the vast majority of the xylene evaporates.
68
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:80==
Table 5.1: Xylene evaporation taking place during mixing for the different coating
formulations utilised in the gravimetric analysis.
Binder
MXDA adduct (%)
Solid volume (%)
Xylene mixing evaporation (%)
DGEBA
5.5
90
4.52
80
4.02
Novolac
7.5
90
6.70
80
6.02
5.5
80
5.888
confirmed through comparison of IR-spectra recorded for pure xylene, a solvent
containing coating (novolac binder, 80% solid volume, 7.5% adduct hardener) at
different curing times, and a solvent free coating (novolac binder, 100% solid volume,
7.5% adduct hardener) as seen in Figure 5.7. The figure shows the spectra for (a)
the full range of wavenumbers recorded and (b) from 800 to 400 cm−1. As such,
Figure 5.7b shows a peak in the xylene spectrum at ∼485 cm−1, which also appears
in the the two spectra recorded for the solvent containing coating at 0 h and 120 h of
curing, respectively, but not in the spectrum for the solvent free coating. From the
figure, it is also seen that the xylene peak is slightly higher in the spectrum for the
solvent containing coating at 0 h than at 120 h in agreement with the evaporation
of xylene during curing.
Using the same method, for which the epoxy conversion degree was calculated based
on the IR-spectra (see equation (4.2)), the degree of xylene evaporation has been
calculated based on the IR-spectra for the 80% solid volume novolac coating. The
calculations were based on the xylene peak highlighted in Figure 5.7b and the peak
at 1250 cm−1, previously identified as reference peak for the novolac based coatings.
The IR based calculations yielded a xylene evaporation of 57.1% after 120 h whereas
the gravimetric analysis showed an evaporation of 46.7% after 24 h. Thus, both
methods indicate a significant amount of residual xylene entrapped within the cured
coating. Even trace amounts of solvent present in the cured coating can affect the
durability negatively, and thus, this is generally undesirable for protective coatings
[48]. This was described in more detail in Section 2.7.4.
For both the DGEBA and novolac based coatings, the 80% solid volume coatings dis-
played a higher percentage of evaporation than the corresponding 90% solid volume
coatings (see Figure 5.6). Out of the 80% solid volume coatings, the highest total
solvent evaporation of 50.8% was detected for the DGEBA coating cured with the
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
69
==PAGE:81==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: IR spectra for pure xylene, 80% solid volume novolac coating cured with
the 7.5% adduct after 0 hours and 120 hours of curing, and a corresponding solvent
free novolac coating also after 0 hours of curing. The initial spectra represents the
average of the coating and the spectra recorded after 120 hours of curing represents
the coating-substrate interface. The figures show (a) the full IR spectra recorded
and (b) the spectra from 800 to 400 cm−1 with the xylene peak labelled.
70
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:82==
5.5% addduct. Moreover, by comparing the xylene evaporation of the two 80% solid
volume novolac coatings cured with 7.5% and 5.5% adducts, respectively, it shows
that not only the type of epoxy binder but also the reactivity of the curing agent
affects the evaporation process. The 7.5% adduct is the less reactive of the two
adducts, and hence, the results indicate that using a less reactive hardener leads to
a better xylene evaporation.
The more reactive of the hardeners is also more prone to amine blushing, which
could influence the results of the gravimetric analysis, due to absorption of water
and carbon dioxide on the surface of the coating. This was investigated through
a corresponding gravimetric analysis of solvent free coatings, in order to assess to
which degree amine blushing occurs. The results presented in Figure 5.8 show that
in all cases, the solvent free coatings exhibited a slight increase in weight during
curing, and that the weight increase is larger for a coating cured with the 5.5%
adduct than a corresponding coating cured with the 7.5% adduct. For the solvent
containing coatings, the effect of amine blushing is expected to be less than for
the solvent free coatings, because the solvent containing coatings and, thus, their
surface areas are diluted with xylene. Therefore, the percentage weight increase and
the difference in the weight increase between the coatings cured with the 5.5% and
the 7.5% adduct is deemed to be small enough, so that it is insignificant for the
overall conclusions of the gravimetric analysis for the solvent containing samples.
Figure 5.8: Percentage weight gain during the first 2 hours of curing for solvent
free coatings caused by amine blushing reactions taking place on the surface of the
coatings.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
71
==PAGE:83==
Using equation (4.2), the epoxy conversion (defined in equation (2.9)) has been cal-
culated based on IR spectra throughout the curing process. Figure 5.9 shows the
conversion degree related to the curing time for solvent free and 95% solid volume
DGEBA coatings cured with the 5.5% adduct hardener together with solvent free
and 80% solid volume novolac coatings cured with the 7.5% adduct. The conversion
degrees are calculated based on IR spectra recorded for the coating-substrate inter-
face. But, for all coatings, the first few data points, up until 3 h for the 100% and
95% solid volume coatings and 6 h for the 80% solid volume coating, represent the
average of the coating, since it was not yet possible to remove the coatings from the
substrate as a free film, and thus, record the spectra for the coating-substrate inter-
face. The conversion degrees in the graph represent the average for three parallel
samples and the error bars denote the standard deviation.
In Figure 5.9a the epoxy conversion is shown for the complete time range, where IR
spectra were recorded, and Figure 5.9b shows the conversion development within the
first 10 hours of curing. From Figure 5.9b it can be seen that for the two coatings
based on the DGEBA binder, the solvent free coating exhibits the highest degree
of conversion up to ∼4 hours of curing, after which the 95% solid volume coating
develops a higher conversion degree. Likewise, the solvent free novolac coating has
a higher conversion degree than the corresponding 80% solid volume coating up
until ∼7 hours of curing, where after the conversion degree of the solvent containing
coating surpasses that of the solvent free.
Initially, the rate of curing is fast and controlled by the rate of the chemical curing
reactions. When present, the solvent dilutes the system leading to a lower reaction
rate, and thus, a lesser conversion degree for the solvent containing coatings; more
pronounced for the 80% than the 95% solid volume coating. As the coating vitrifies,
the curing reactions transition to being diffusion controlled. Any solvent remaining
in the vitrified coating will increase the mobility, which leads to an increased react-
ivity of the system, and, in this case, ultimately a higher final conversion degree of
the solvent containing coatings than the corresponding solvent free coatings. Hence,
the results in Figure 5.9 are in accordance with what was found in the gravimetric
analysis; that some xylene remains entrapped within the cured coatings. The de-
crease in the conversion degree of the 95% solid volume DGEBA coating experienced
at 104 hours of curing is believed to be caused by the IR spectra being recorded for
coating areas with bad adhesion.
The sand paper method, where the thickness of the coating gradually is reduced by
removing of coating with sand paper, as described in section 5.1.1, was also used for
the purpose of investigating how the curing degree varies through the thickness of
72
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:84==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.9: Conversion degree, calculated based on IR spectra, as a function of
time for solvent free and solvent containing coatings. The DGEBA coatings were
cured with the 5.5% adduct and the novolac coatings with the 7.5% adduct. The
conversion degrees represent the average for three parallel samples and the error bars
the corresponding standard deviations. Figure (a) shows the conversion degrees for
the full time period where IR spectra were recorded and (b) the initial 10 hours of
curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
73
==PAGE:85==
the coating. That was done for both solvent containing coatings, where the curing
is influenced by the entrapped xylene, and for solvent free coatings.
Thus, the
conversion degrees calculated based on IR spectra for different coating depths of
95% and 100% solid volume DGEBA coatings, respectively, are shown in the graphs
in Figure 5.10 with 0 µm corresponding to the coating-substrate interface.
The
graph for the 95% solid volume represents the conversion after 96 hours of curing
and the graph for the solvent free coating represents the degree of conversion after
250 hours of curing. In both cases it must be taken into account that the degree
of conversion calculated for the top ∼20 µm of the coating could be influenced by
the amine blushing reactions. For the solvent free coating, the graph shows that the
degree of conversion does not vary through the thickness of the coating sample. For
the 95% solid volume coating, however, the graph shows that the highest degree of
conversion is found at the coating-substrate interface (0 µm). That is as expected
since the concentration of residual solvent within the coating will be a gradient with
the highest concentration, and hence, the highest reaction rate after vitrification, in
the lower region of the coating.
Figure 5.10: The conversion degree depicted as a function of thickness within the
coating sample for 100% and 95% solid volume coatings. The graph for the 100%
solid volume coating represents the degree of conversion after 250 hours of curing.
The graph for the 95% solid volume coating represents the conversion degree after
97 hours of curing.
74
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:86==
5.2
Mechanical Properties
Using the data obtained through the DMA and curing tests carried out using the
rheometer, several of the mechanical properties characterizing the epoxy coatings
throughout the curing process can be quantified.
5.2.1
Gel Point Results
Monitoring of the curing process in the rheometer using a constant strain provides
data regarding the development of the storage and loss moduli together with the
associated tan(δ) during the curing process. The curing tests were performed for
the solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5% adduct at room temperature,
in order to make the data relatable to the FTIR conversion degree results. However,
during the tests, the exothermal curing reactions and the oscillatory motions of the
rheometer caused the temperature to rise from the initial 23 ◦C to ∼28 ◦C after 4
hours of running. The FTIR conversion degree data was obtained using a controlled
and constant humidity. That was not possible for the rheometer tests, where the
coating samples are confined between the two parallel plates of the rheometer.
The data obtained for a run of the curing test is included in the graph in Figure
5.11. As seen from the graph, there is some scatter in the data, especially for the loss
modulus. Despite that, the trend of the data can clearly be identified. Uncertainties
associated with the experimental procedure, when using the rheometer in the parallel
plate configuration, which can contribute to the data scatter as well as to other errors
in the data include bubbles within the coating and imperfect adhesion between the
coating and the plates. Furthermore, both sample underfilling and overfilling can
cause errors in the experimental results. Underfilling causes a change in the sample
radius of the sample compared to the plate and overfilling of the sample can cause
an additional force, especially if the rim is wetted [108, 109]. In the experimental
procedure, measures were taken to avoid both under- and overfilling by applying
enough of the coating sample so that some was pushed out between the plates when
moving them to the geometry gap. Any excess coating was removed thoroughly
from the plate rims.
From the graph in Figure 5.11, the gel point can be identified as the point of inter-
section between the storage and loss moduli [81]. As such, the average of the curing
data indicates gelation to occur after approximately 3.6 hours of curing. Prior to
gelation the loss modulus is larger than the storage modulus, and thus, the coating
mainly acts as a viscous fluid. After gelation, the storage modulus transition to
continuously being larger than the loss modulus, causing the coating to mainly act
in the manner of an elastic solid.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
75
==PAGE:87==
Figure 5.11: Storage and loss moduli together with the resulting tan(δ) recorded,
using constant strain in a rheometer, as a function of curing time for a solvent free
novolac coating cured with the 7.5% adduct hardener at room temperature.
In conjunction with the FTIR data, presented in Figure 5.9, the gel point identified
from the rheometer data can be related to the epoxy conversion degree. As such, it
is found that for gelation to occur after 3.6 hours of curing corresponds to a critical
conversion degree of approximately 50%. This can further be compared with the gel
point calculated theoretically using the statistical approach of equation (2.10). The
novolac epoxy resin has a functionality of 3.6 and the amine used in the hardener,
MXDA, has a functionality of 4. Since a stoichiometric ratio of epoxy and amine
was used in the coatings, r = 1, and thus, it yields the critical conversion to be 36%,
which is slightly less than what was observed experimentally. The deviation between
the experimental and the theoretical value can both be due to the aforementioned
uncertainties associated with experimental procedure and it can indicate that the
formula used for calculating the theoretical value is not a good fit.
5.2.2
Vitrification and Glass Transition Temperature
The data obtained for curing using the rheometer in a mode of constant strain
can also be used to identify the point at which vitrification occurs. On the graph
in Figure 5.11 vitrification can be observed as the point in time, where the value
of the storage modulus plateaus [81]. As such, for the curing data of the solvent
free novolac coating, the onset of vitrification was averagely found to take place
after approximately 4.5 hours of curing. That is in good agreement with the FTIR
76
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:88==
conversion data in Figure 5.9, which showed a significant decrease in the reaction
rate, indicating that the coating has vitrified, after approximately 5 hours of curing.
Vitrification occurs when the glass transition temperature, Tg, becomes equal to the
curing temperature. The Tg is influenced by the curing degree and increases with
increasing epoxy conversion. Thus, a higher curing temperature allows for a higher
degree of curing before the onset of vitrification.
Through DMA, the Tg has been determined for coating samples at different curing
times. Figure 5.12 shows the result of the DMA carried out for an 80% solid volume
novolac coating cured with the 7.5% adduct after 24 hours of curing. From the
DMA results, Tg can be determined based on either the onset of the decrease in
the storage modulus or the peak in the graph for the loss modulus or tan(δ). The
storage modulus onset relates to mechanical failure, the loss modulus peak reflects
the molecular processes and relates to the physical property changes attributed
to the glass transition, and the tan(δ) peak can be used as an indication of the
leather-like midpoint between the glassy and rubbery states [110]. For the storage
modulus, Tg can be read off as ∼35 ◦C, for the loss modulus peak Tg is found to be
approximately 37 ◦C, and for tan(δ) Tg is ∼52 ◦C.
Figure 5.12: Result of DMA after 24 hours of curing for an 80% solid volume novolac
coating cured with the 7.5% adduct hardener. The data is obtained using a constant
heating rate in the rheometer.
In Figure 5.13a, Tg as determined based on the DMA for both the storage and loss
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
77
==PAGE:89==
moduli and tan(δ) is shown as a function of the curing time. Throughout, tan(δ)
indicates the highest temperature and the storage modulus the lowest, with the loss
modulus in between. Moreover, the results for the three methods of determining
Tg show a corresponding tendency regarding the the increase in Tg as the curing
progresses. In the remainder of this report, the experimentally determined glass
transition temperature is based on the peak of the storage modulus, because it
represents the middle of the three glass transition temperatures. The graph in Figure
5.13b shows the loss modulus recorded with DMA as a function of temperature for a
sample of the solvent free novolac coating at varying curing times. From the graph
it is seen, how the temperature at which the peak in the loss modulus is observed,
shifts towards higher temperatures, corresponding to the increasing glass transition
temperature, as the curing time is increased.
By carrying out the DMA at different curing times, for both solvent free and solvent
containing coatings, the Tg of the coatings can be related to not just the curing time
and, through the FTIR data, the conversion degree but also to the influence of the
solvent. Hence, the two graphs in Figure 5.14 shows the Tg for solvent free and 80%
solid volume novolac coatings cured with the 7.5% adduct hardener as a function
of time and conversion degree, respectively. For the solvent free coating, the first
data point represents the Tg after 6 hours of curing and for the solvent containing
coating, the first data point represents the Tg after 9 hours of curing. Prior to these
curing times, the coating was either too soft or too brittle to prepare the free film
samples for the DMA.
The graphs in Figure 5.14 clearly show that the presence of solvent within the
coating contributes to a decrease in the value of Tg. Figure 5.14a shows the Tg
values as a function of time, and for both coating types it is seen that the increase
in Tg slows down as the curing time progresses, which agrees with the conversion
rate slowing down as seen from Figure 5.9a. The relation between the increase in
Tg and the degree of conversion is further clarified from Figure 5.14b, where it can
be seen that the relation between Tg and conversion degree, at least for the part of
the curing where DMA was carried out, is almost linear especially for the solvent
free coating. However, that does not necessarily entail that the Tg vs. extent of
reaction is linear throughout, since some epoxy resin/amine curing systems show
a greater relative increase in the glass transition temperature at higher degrees of
epoxy conversion [86]. Furthermore, using the method of DMA, the Tg after 6 hours
of curing was, for the solvent free coating, found to be approximately 33 ◦C. For
the curing tests, vitrification was found to occur after approximately 4.5 hours of
curing at a temperature of 28 ◦C. Thus, it is an accordance with the glass transition
78
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:90==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13: DMA data for solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5% adduct.
(a) Glass transition temperature as a function of the curing time, as determined
based on the storage and loss moduli and the corresponding tan(δ), respectively.
(b) DMA results showing how the temperature, where the peak in the loss modulus
is observed, shifts as the curing time is increased. The DMA results are the average
of three parallel tests, and the error bars denote the standard deviation.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
79
==PAGE:91==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14: Tg, obtained from DMA of solvent free and 80% solid volume novolac
coatings cured with the 7.5% adduct hardener, depicted as a function of (a) time
and (b) the conversion degree. The degree of conversion is obtained using FTIR
spectroscopy. The vertical error bars denote the standard deviation for Tg recorded
for three parallel samples and the horizontal error bars the standard deviation for
the conversion degree, also for three parallel samples.
80
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:92==
temperature increasing with increasing crosslinking degree.
5.2.3
Coating Defects
In order to perform the DMA it requires the preparation of free film coating samples.
In this process, the coating films are removed from the substrate and cut into fitting
sizes. This inevitably leads to the formation of small coating defects at the edges of
the free film samples originating from the cutting. Also the removal of the coatings
from the substrate can lead to the formation of small cracks. This can be seen
in the pictures in Figure 5.15 obtained using an optical microscope from Keyence
(model no. VHX-6000). Figure 5.15a shows a crack at the edge of the coating after
cutting together with micro cracks at the coating-substrate interface occurring as a
consequence of removal from the substrate. In the same manner, Figure 5.15b shows
the cross section of the coating at the edge where it is cut. At the top of the coating
defects originating from the cutting are seen and at the base cracks originating from
the removal from the substrate. These defects affect the strength of the coating,
and can, thus, also influence the results obtained through the DMA.
However, not just the preparation of free films contributes to the introduction of
coating defects. In the process of preparing the coatings, they are mixed, which
leads to the formation of air bubbles within the coating, and some of these air
bubbles can become entrapped in the cured coating film. The bubbles themselves
are coating defects, but they can furthermore be the cause for crack initiation. This
can be seen in the microscope pictures in Figure 5.16. Figure 5.16a shows bubbles
entrapped at the coating-substrate interface and small cracks propagating from some
of these. The same tendency of cracks propagating from entrapped bubbles can be
seen from the picture of a coating cross sectional area shown in Figure 5.16b. These
defects can influence, not just the DMA data, but also the data of the other analyses
carried out using the rheometer and the deflection method analysis.
5.2.4
Storage Modulus Development
Throughout the curing process, the shear storage modulus of the epoxy coatings
was monitored through constant strain curing tests and DMA, both carried out
with the rheometer. The curing tests were utilised for the initial hours of the curing
for solvent free coatings only. They were carried out using a temperature close to
constant with the initial temperature being that of the room. The DMA was utilised
for both solvent free and solvent containing coatings at several different curing times.
DMA utilises a constant heating rate, starting at 30 ◦C. Since the modulus decreases
as the temperature increases, as seen from Figure 5.17, the modulus from the DMA
was taken at the very beginning of the test to allow for better comparison with the
constant strain curing data. Figure 5.17 shows the storage modulus recorded from
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
81
==PAGE:93==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.15: Coating defects originating from the process of free film preparation
shown on pictures obtained with an optical microscope. Figure (a) shows a crack at
the edge where the coating has been cut and micro cracks at the coating-substrate
interface. Figure (b) shows the cross sectional area of the coating where it has been
cut. At the top, there are defects resulting from the cutting and at the coating-
substrate interface there are cracks originating from removal from the substrate.
82
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:94==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.16: Pictures obtained with an optical microscope showing (a) many small
bubbles entrapped at the coating-substrate interface and (b) bubbles in the cross
sectional area of the coating. In both cases cracks propagate from the bubbles.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
83
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5.17: DMA results showing the storage modulus as a function of temperature
for solvent free novolac coatings cured with the 7.5% amine adduct at varying curing
times.
the DMA as a function of the temperature for a sample of the solvent free novolac
coatings at varying curing times. Thus, it can also be seen from the figure how the
loss modulus increases with increasing curing time.
In Figure 5.18, data obtained for the storage modulus for solvent free coatings
is shown, for both the curing tests and DMA, as a function of (a) time and (b)
conversion. From both the graphs in Figure 5.18 it is seen, that there is a significant
gap between the values of the storage modulus recorded through the curing tests
and those recorded with DMA, and that is even though the curing test data includes
the initiation of the plateau in the storage modulus occurring due to vitrification;
this can be seen more clearly on Figure 5.19. Out of the two, DMA is the most
widely used method for the characterization of material properties for polymers.
Typical values of the shear modulus for epoxies are in the range of 1.07 to 5.86 GPa,
corresponding to logarithmic values in Pascal ranging from 9.03 to 9.77 [111, 112].
This agrees well with the results obtained through DMA, which yields a modulus of
2.79 GPa, corresponding to a logarithmic value in Pascal of 9.44, after 124 hours of
curing.
Figure 5.19 shows the shear storage modulus as a function of time for the initial
6 hours of curing, where the majority of the mechanical property evolution takes
place. The, almost linear, steep increase in the modulus in the very beginning of
84
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:96==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.18: The shear storage modulus shown as a function of (a) time and (b)
degree of conversion. The experimental data is obtained through constant strain
curing test and DMA for a solvent free novolac epoxy resin cured with the 7.5%
amine adduct. The vertical error bars represent the standard deviation of the storage
modulus and the horizontal error bars in (b) the standard deviation of the conversion
degrees obtained through FTIR spectroscopy.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
85
==PAGE:97==
Figure 5.19: The shear storage modulus shown as a function of time for the initial 6
hours of curing. The experimental data is obtained through a constant strain curing
test for a solvent free novolac epoxy resin cured with the 7.5% amine adduct. The
error bars represent the standard deviation of the storage modulus.
the curing is believed to be caused by the change from static to dynamic conditions
following as the curing test is initiated in the rheometer. That is followed by a
section where the modulus experiences an increase, which accelerates in the time
surrounding the observed point of gelation at 3.6 hours, and finally plateauing due
to vitrification.
As the DMA was carried out for both solvent free and solvent containing coatings,
it allows for an assessment of the influence of solvent on the coating elastic shear
modulus. As such, in Figure 5.20 the storage moduli for solvent free and 80% solid
volume novolac coatings are shown as a function of (a) time and (b) the conversion
degree.
The data shows a higher modulus for the solvent free than the solvent
containing, meaning that the solvent free coating is more rigid, or in other words,
that more force is required to produce a deformation in the coating. The decrease in
the modulus experienced for the 80% solid volume coating at 72 hours, corresponding
to 74% conversion, and for the solvent free coating at 100 hours, or 71% conversion,
is likely caused by coating defects influencing the DMA, as described in Section
5.2.3.
86
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:98==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.20: The shear storage modulus shown as a function of (a) time and (b)
degree of conversion for solvent free and 80% solid volume novolac coatings cured
with the 7.5% amine adduct. The experimental data is obtained through DMA.
The vertical error bars represent the standard deviation of the storage modulus and
the horizontal error bars in (b) the standard deviation of the conversion degrees
obtained through FTIR spectroscopy.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
87
==PAGE:99==
5.3
Internal Stress and Chemical Shrinkage
If released, the stress induced to a coating during curing, can lead to coating failure
through the formation of cracks.
In order to quantify how the in-plane curing
induced internal stress is influenced by solvent and coating thickness, deflection
method tests were carried out for samples of both solvent free and solvent containing
coatings applied with varying wet film thickness to stainless steel substrates. It is
expected, that, during curing, internal stress will build up within the coating. This
should be initiated around the time of gelation (∼3.6 hours), and can at some point
be replaced by a decrease in the case of stress release through cracking.
Figure 5.21 shows the deflection data for three parallel samples of solvent free no-
volac coatings cured with the 7.5% adduct and applied to the substrate with a wet
film thickness of 700 µm together with a moving average (50 data points pr. moving
average) in order to simplify the data by filtering out noise from random short term
fluctuations. From the graph it is evident that the expected development in the
internal stress is not seen in the experimental data. The figure shows alternating
periods of increasing and decreasing deflection, and internal stress, distributed al-
most uniformly throughout the curing period; including before gelation, where no
internal stress is expected within the coatings due to the lack of elastic modulus.
Thus, it shows that the experimental method did not work as intended.
By comparison of the data, recorded for the three parallel samples of coating presen-
ted in Figure 5.21, it is evident that the fluctuations in the recorded deflection is
not just induced by one sample, but is a recurring issue throughout the recorded
data. A similar behaviour, with alternating increasing and decreasing deflection and
corresponding internal stress, was seen for the case of DGEBA based and solvent
containing coatings. Deflection data for other coating formulations is included in
Appendix G.
If the resolution of the sensor is not high enough compared to the magnitude of the
changes occurring within a sample, it cannot properly account for these, and that
can be an explanation for the observed fluctuations in the deflection. Hence, the
large jumps, in the values of the deflection, observed in the graphs are due to the low
resolution of the sensors applied in the test. This is substantiated by comparison
with the deflection measured for a coating free substrate sample used as reference,
which is included in Figure 5.22. The deflection observed for the reference sample is
of the same magnitude as those observed for the coated samples, and thus, it indic-
ates that the deflection of the samples is not large enough to be properly accounted
for by the sensors due to their resolution, and that the observed fluctuations instead
88
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:100==
Figure 5.21: Deflection data, recorded using sensors with a resolution of 1 mm, as a
function of curing time for a solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5% amine
adduct applied to stainless steel substrates with a wet film thickness of 700 µm.
Figure 5.22: Deflection recorded using sensor with a resolution of 1 mm for a refer-
ence sample of the substrate without coating. Thus, the observed deflection origin-
ates from background noise.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
89
==PAGE:101==
originate, at least partially, from background noise. Furthermore, if the sensors are
not properly calibrated it can cause a displacement of the zero point, introducing
uncertainties to the data since more than one sensor was used, and can lead to the
data indicating a negative deflection as seen from the graphs. Due to the support
under the substrates, as seen from Figure 4.8, a negative deflection of the samples
was not physically possible.
An explanation, for the lack of deflection observed within the coated substrates,
could be, that due to gravity, the weight of the coating acting on the substrate,
will counteract the observed deflection. The degree, to which the results were in-
fluenced by the coatings weighing down the substrate, was investigated by placing
the substrates applied with coating vertically and manually measuring the resulting
deflection. This was done after the in situ deflection tests were finished, and thus,
does not provide any information regarding the development of stress during curing,
but only regarding the stress of the cured coating. Data for the observed deflection,
when placing the samples vertically is included in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Deflection observed for substrates applied with solvent free coatings when
placed vertically post curing. The coatings were applied to the substrate with a wet
film thickness of 300 µm.
Coating type
Hardener
Sample no.
Deflection (mm)
Internal stress (MPa)
DGEBA
7.5%
1
8.479
-
2
1.463
-
3
4.507
-
Novolac
7.5%
1
0.838
0.161
2
1.988
0.382
For the solvent free DGEBA coating, the deflection measured for the horizontally
placed substrates was in the same magnitude as for the novolac coatings (see Figure
5.21). When placing the samples coated with the DGEBA based coating vertically,
the resulting deflection was overall substantially larger than what was observed
with the sensors, even though there was a relatively large deviation within the three
measured samples, as seen from the data in Table 5.2.
Thus, it indicates that
gravity did indeed influence the results. For the novolac coatings, the magnitude
of the deflection when placing the samples vertically was of the same magnitude as
what was recorded by the sensors. However, since the sensor data did not properly
account for the development during curing, it indicates that these samples were also
90
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:102==
influenced by the weight of the coating, so that the deflection, when the samples
were placed horizontally, was less. If the tests were to be repeated with the samples
placed vertically during curing, it would secure that the data was not influenced by
gravity in the same manner. Due to time constraints, such data is not included in
the report. When placing the samples vertically, there is a risk of the wet coating
running, leading to an uneven distribution of the coating on the substrate. Thus,
care should be taken regarding the thickness with which the wet film is applied for
such a test.
For the novolac coating, Table 5.2 also includes the internal stress, corresponding
to the deflection measured vertically.
The internal stress is calculated based on
equation (4.9) using the shear modulus of the coatings as determined trough the
DMA after 120 hours of curing as seen in Figure 5.20a. Thus, for the two solvent
free novolac samples, tested vertically, deflections of 0.838 mm, corresponding to an
internal stress of 0.161 MPa, and 1.988 mm, corresponding to a stress of 0.382 MPa,
were observed.
That is somewhat lower than the corresponding values typically
reported in the literature, which range from a few to 50 MPa [55].
To use for comparison, deflection data for one sample of the 80% solid volume novolac
coating was also recorded using a different type of sensor which had a resolution of
1 µm. The data recorded using the high resolution sensor is included together with
the resulting internal stress as a function of the curing time in Figure 5.23a and
related to the conversion degree obtained through IR spectroscopy in Figure 5.23b.
The data presented in Figure 5.23a agrees with the expected tendency; that an
increasing amount of curing-induced internal stress builds up within the coating
during curing, leading to a final internal stress of 1.4 · 10−2 MPa after 120 hours of
curing. Even so, the data set displays some sudden and unexpected increases in the
deflection and internal stress, which cannot be well explained. The magnitude of
the deflection recorded by the high resolution sensor is much less than 1 mm, which
was the resolution of the low resolution sensors, and thus, it underlines the issues
identified regarding the data recorded using those.
From Figure 5.23b it is seen, that until ∼70% conversion the coating only experiences
very little internal stress. Subsequently, a rapid increase in the stress is observed. For
the solvent containing coatings, the gel point was not directly determined through
the rheometer tests. However, from Figure 5.9, which shows the development in the
conversion degree related to the curing time, it is seen, that for the 80% solid volume
novolac coating, 70% conversion corresponds to the time at which the conversion
rate is slowed down due to the onset of vitrification. As such, the data in Figure
5.23b indicates that, for the solvent containing coatings, the majority of the internal
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
91
==PAGE:103==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.23: Deflection data, recorded using a sensor with a resolution of 1 µm,
shown together with the internal stress as a function of (a) time and (b) conversion
degree for an 80% solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5% amine adduct
applied to the substrate with a wet film thickness of 300 µm. The horizontal error
bars denote the standard deviation of the conversion degree.
92
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:104==
stress is developed after vitrification.
One of the main contributors to curing-induced internal stress is the chemical shrink-
age, occurring due to bond formation and, for solvent containing coatings, solvent
evaporation. Hence, using the rheometer, the chemical shrinkage post gelation was
monitored, in order to relate it to the internal stress computed from the deflection
data. That was done utilising the change in the gap size between two parallel plates,
resulting when applying a constant stress, in the form of a compressive load, to the
samples. The gel point was taken as the intersection of the storage and loss moduli
in the data obtained from the rheometer curing tests, as seen in Figure 5.11. As
such, gelation was found to occur after 3.6 hours of curing. The rheological chemical
shrinkage tests were carried out for two solvent free novolac coating samples cured
with the 7.5% hardener at room temperature. As for the curing test, carried out
using the rheometer, a temperature increase from 23 to 28 ◦C was observed within
the first ∼4 hours of the test due to the exothermic reactions.
Figure 5.24 shows the gap size for two solvent free coating samples as a function of
the curing time. Thus, the initial data points relate to the gap size as the constant
stress part of test is initiated following gelation. From the figure it is seen, that
the change in the gap size overall can be divided into two segments. In the time
period immediately following gelation, the samples display a rapid, close to linear,
decrease where the majority of the change observed in the gap size occurs. This
effect comes to a halt after approximately 5 hours of curing, there after, the gap size
only decreases slowly. That agrees well with the time of curing at which vitrification
is initiated, as could be seen from the plateauing of the conversion degree in Figure
5.9a and from the corresponding plateauing of the storage modulus in the curing
test results in Figure 5.11. Overall, the data indicates that most of the shrinkage
takes place before vitrification, and thus, that is expected to also be the case for
the accompanying development in the internal stress. However, what was seen in
the deflection data for the high resolution sensor in Figure 5.23, albeit not directly
comparable since the deflection data represents a solvent containing coating, was
that the majority of the internal stress developed after vitrification.
Post vitrification, overall a second linear tendency is seen in the change in the gap
size as a function of the curing. However, the data recorded for the gap size is not
a smooth curve, as is the case before vitrification, instead it shows periods of both
increasing and decreasing gap size. That indicates some issues in the precision of
the data when using the rheometer in this mode for samples in the glassy state.
This could, at least partially, be caused by the formation of small cracks happening
i.e. due to the oscillatory movements of the rheometer. However, for both samples,
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
93
==PAGE:105==
Figure 5.24: The rheometer gap size shown as a function of curing time for two
solvent free novolac coatings cured with the 7.5% adduct hardener. After gelation,
the coating samples were subject to a constant stress within the rheometer, causing
the gap size to decrease with the increasing chemical shrinkage. The shrinkage are
divided into two segments, each showing a linear correlation with time. The first,
denoted by the yellow line, where the coatings are in the gel state, and the second,
denoted by the green line, where the coatings have vitrified.
the overall tendency in the gap size past vitrification is decreasing.
In Figure 5.25, the chemical shrinkage occurring within the two segments of the
curing past gelation, i.e. when the coating behaves as a gel and when it is a glassy
solid, is shown as a function of the curing time. The shrinkage is calculated from the
gap size using equation 4.5. Hence, Figure 5.25a shows how the chemical shrinkage
rapidly increases immediately after gelation and how the rate of shrinkage subsides
as vitrification approaches. Figure 5.25b clearly shows how the shrinkage after the
onset of vitrification is less well defined in the rheometer data and continuously
increases and decreases, and overall contributes only with a small percentage of
the total shrinkage.
That is in accordance with the rate of chemical conversion
reactions being significantly slower in the time domain after vitrification, where they
become diffusion controlled. After 120 hours of curing, the total chemical shrinkage
averagely observed for the two coatings samples was 7.54% with a standard deviation
of 0.36%. The values typically reported for the chemical shrinkage of epoxies are in
the range of 2-7% [101, 104]. Using equations (4.6) and (2.15) the stress resulting
94
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:106==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.25: Chemical shrinkage for two samples of solvent free novolac coatings
cured with the 7.5% adduct shown as a function of time for (a) the first segment
immediately after gelation and (b) after vitrification.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
95
==PAGE:107==
from the chemical shrinkage has been calculated to 548 MPa. That is much larger
than typical values from the literature, which are in the range from a few to 50
MPa. This deviation could be caused by issues regarding the calculation method
or the experimental procedure. The equation relating the chemical shrinkage to the
internal stress (4.6) is simple and does not account for any stress released during
curing.
The method used for quantifying the chemical shrinkage, where a constant stress
is applied in the rheometer, makes use of the assumption that after gelation the
coatings are incompressible. That is, partially, accounted for by only applying a
small stress to the coatings. However, if the coating to some extent is compressed
when a force is applied, it would result in the data displaying a larger chemical
shrinkage than what is actually the case. In addition, depending on the accuracy
of the gel point, determined through the curing tests, the data could display a too
large shrinkage, if the coatings have not completely passed through gelation when a
force is first applied to them, since that could result in a liquid coating being pushed
out between the parallel plates. Oppositely, if the curing tests indicate gelation to
occur too late in the curing, the chemical shrinkage observed in the constant stress
test will be less than the actual chemical shrinkage, since a part of the shrinkage
will take place before the constant stress is applied and the resulting change in the
gap size is recorded. However, since the gap size after adjusting before initiation of
the constant stress part of the test, is consistent with the initial gap size of 200 µm
that is not likely to be the case.
Other studies, similarly investigating the chemical shrinking of epoxies utilising a
rheometer in a mode of constant stress, has found a relationship close to linear
between the degree of cure and the chemical shrinkage after gelation [99, 101]. In
Figure 5.26 the chemical shrinkage for the full time range after gelation is displayed
as a function of the conversion degree, determined using the FTIR spectroscopy data.
From the figure it is seen, that, except for the data points at conversion degrees of
0.63 and 0.66, corresponding to 6 and 9 hours of curing (these two points are marked
in blue on the graph), respectively, there is a clear linear correlation between the
conversion degree and the chemical shrinkage. Through linear regression, the value
of R2 for correlation is found to be 0.99. If including the two data points, which
differ from the obvious linear tendency in the regression, it yields an R2 value of
0.85. These two data points refers to curing times close to the time of vitrification,
and thus, it could be an indication that the transition from gel to glassy somehow
influences the results of the rheometer. That is substantiated by the alternating
periods of increasing and decreasing gap size, and thus, shrinkage, observed in the
96
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:108==
data after vitrification. In order to better evaluate, whether or not, there indeed is
a tendency of a linear correlation between the conversion degree and the chemical
shrinkage it would require more data points recorded for the conversion degree within
the period of curing, where the coatings are in the rubbery state.
Figure 5.26: The average of the chemical shrinkage observed for two samples of
solvent free novolac coatings cured with the 7.5% adduct shown as a function of
epoxy conversion degree.
The vertical error bars denote the standard deviation
within the two samples. The conversion degrees were obtained through FTIR spec-
troscopy, and as such, the horizontal error bars denote the standard deviation for
the IR experimental data. The black dashed line indicates the linear correlation
between the conversion degree and the chemical shrinkage, when omitting the two
data points marked in blue corresponding to curing times in proximity of vitrifica-
tion. R2 for the linear correlation is 0.99.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
97
==PAGE:109==
6
Modelling of Experimental Data
In order to map the relationship between the curing process and the development
of the coating mechanical properties, mathematical models, dealing with the epoxy
conversion degree as a function of time, the relation between the conversion degree
and the shear storage modulus, and the influence of the conversion degree on the
glass transition temperature, has been set up. In order to assess the validity of the
models, the experimental data, obtained through FTIR spectroscopy and DMA and
constant strain curing tests in the rheometer, is used for comparison with the results
of the models.
6.1
Curing Reaction Kinetics Model
Through knowledge of the reaction mechanism, a rate equation can be set up to
mathematically describe the relation between concentration, and thus conversion
degree, of the chemical species or groups involved in the reaction and time. For epoxy
resins, different models have been proposed to describe the epoxy conversion as a
function of the curing time. Out of these, the one that has found most widespread
use is the Kamal-Sourour (K-S) model [76, 78].
In its original form, as presented in equation (2.27), the K-S model only accounts for
the chemical reaction controlled part of the epoxy curing process, and in addition
to that, it assumes full conversion of the epoxy resin [78, 72]:
dα
dt = (k1 + k2αm)(1 −α)n
α is the conversion, t is the time, m and n relate to the reaction orders, and k1 and k2
are temperature dependent rate functions expressed by the Arrhenius relationship
from equation (2.24):
ki(T) = Ai exp
(
−Ei
RT
)
where A is the pre-exponential factor, E the activation energy, R the universal
gas constant, and T the temperature. In the K-S model (2.27), A1 and E1 are the
Arrhenius parameters belonging to the amine addition reaction initiated by a proton
donor and A2 and E2 to the amine addition, internally catalysed by hydroxyl groups
formed in the former reaction [76]. Details of the curing reactions were provided in
Figure 2.5.
However, as was seen from the experimental data presented in Section 5.1, full con-
version was far from the case for the coating formulations utilised in the experimental
98
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:110==
work. This is not uncommon for epoxy resins, especially when curing at low tem-
peratures. That is because, at some point in the curing process, the glass transition
temperature exceeds the curing temperature, which causes for the polymer to vitrify
and for the curing reactions to become diffusion controlled [47]. Therefore, for the
modelling of the IR-spectroscopy experimental data of the epoxy conversion, the K-
S model is used in a modified form, where an extra term, called the Cole model, is
introduced to the K-S model. The Cole model accounts for the diffusion controlled
part of the curing process and the resulting incomplete conversion of epoxy groups:
dα
dt = (k1 + k2αm)(1 −α)n ·
1
1 + exp(C(α −αc))
(6.1)
C is a structure and temperature dependent parameter and αc is the critical conver-
sion [77, 47]. Thus, the Cole model assumes a relation between the critical conversion
degree and the conversion degree at which the onset of vitrification occurs. This
relation is governed by the parameter C.
The modified form of the K-S model, presented in Equation (6.1), is chosen for the
modelling, because it previously has proven to describe the epoxy curing behaviour
at low temperatures well [47]. This was treated in Section 2.8.1.
As seen from the experimental data, the presence of solvent within an epoxy coating
can lead to a conversion gradient through the depth of the coating. It must be noted,
that this is not accounted for by the K-S model, which assumes a uniform degree
of conversion. Therefore, the experimental data for the solvent free novolac coating
cured with the 7.5% adduct is used for fitting of the modified K-S model (6.1). The
curing was carried out at a constant temperature of 23 ◦C.
The initial kinetic parameters of the model are typically estimated using DSC res-
ults. That is done by relating the heat flow to the reaction rate in the resulting
thermograms, stemming from either a constant heating rate or an isothermal run
[72]. However, because DSC has not been performed as part of the experimental
work, the parameters used in the modelling relies on data from the literature.
Most of the experimental data available in the literature refers to epoxy resins cured
at temperatures much higher than room temperature, as was used in the experi-
mental work carried out in regards to this thesis. However, Hosseinpour et al. have
reported DSC data for a commercially available epoxy resin-hardener system using
a constant heating rate starting below room temperature [76]. Thus, the values
reported by Hosseinpour et al. for the Arrhenius pre-exponential factors, activation
energies, and reaction orders are deemed appropriate as initial estimates for the
modelling of the experimental data.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
99
==PAGE:111==
The parameter C, for the diffusion controlled term of the model, is estimated based
on values reported in an article by Achilias et al., which uses the same modified
version of the K-S model for fitting of experimental data. The critical conversion
degree, that is the conversion at the gel point, is taken from the experimental data,
where it was found to be approximately αc = 0.50. An overview of the initial values
of the model parameters is provided in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Kamal-Sourour model parameters as reported by Hosseinpour et al. for
the values of A, E, m, and n and by Achilias et al. for the C-value [76, 47]. αc
is based on the approximate gel point, determined experimentally. The values are
used as initial estimates for the modelling of the experimental data.
A1 (s−1)
E1 (J/mol)
A2 (s−1)
E2 (J/mol)
m
n
C
αc
1.46 · 107
7.18 · 104
836.9
3.83 · 104
0.48
1.40
30
0.50
The data in Table 6.1 show, that for the values reported by Hosseinpour et al., the
activation energy of the amine addition initiated by a proton donor E1 (70.8 · 104
J/mol) is higher than the that of the amine addition catalysed by the presence of
hydroxyl groups E2 (3.83 · 104 J/mol), which is in agreement with what is otherwise
reported in the literature [76].
The K-S model is over-parameterized which leads to a strong correlation of the dif-
ferent material parameters [78]. Ultimately, the consequence of that is a risk of
unreliable parameters, because an error in the value of one parameter can be com-
pensated for by a corresponding error in the value of another parameter [113]. Hence,
it is evident that a proper estimation of the initial values of the model parameters
is important, since poor initial parameters can result in unstable or poor modelling
results [77]. As such, depending on the methods used for the parameter estimation
and the regression algorithm, studies exist reporting quite different model paramet-
ers for similar or same epoxy resin systems [77]. Optimisation of the parameter
values is most often done using numerical solving by regressional analysis of the test
data and model [77]. Hosseinpour et al. have employed a genetic algorithm usually
used for absolute extremum to determine their final parameters for the model, in
order to avoid the results becoming entrapped in local minima [76].
6.1.1
Kamal-Sourour Model Sensitivity Analysis
To evaluate how the values of the different parameters of the modified K-S model
affect the epoxy conversion, which is the dependent variable of the model, a sensitiv-
ity analysis has been carried out. For the sensitivity analysis, a base case modelling
100
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:112==
result has been computed with the values presented in Table 6.1 [76]. Then, the 8
parameters have, one at a time, been varied with ±20% to account for the sensitivity
of the conversion degree, computed with the model, towards the individual paramet-
ers. Since the experimentally determined value of αc is an approximate estimate, the
sensitivity analysis is also carried out for αc. The results are included in Figures 6.1
to 6.4. As such, the sensitivity analysis gives an indication of the parameters, where
a small change in the value will have a large effect on the outcome of the modelling,
and for which parameters the model is more robust towards the estimated value.
For the parameter A1 no obvious effect was seen when increasing or decreasing their
value with 20% (Figure 6.1a). For the remainder of the parameters, the sensitivity
analysis showed that when adjusting their value with 20% it clearly reflects on
the computed epoxy conversion degree. As such, when decreasing the value of the
activation energy E1, the result is a higher conversion degree; both initially, where
it is expressed as a high reaction rate causing a much steeper curve, and after the
point of vitrification, which can be identified as the point where the reaction rate
decreases significantly. However, when increasing the value of E1 it does not affect
the conversion process to a large degree; only a small decrease in the initial reaction
rate is observed.
For the pre-exponential factor, A2, an increase in the value results in a slightly higher
rate of conversion in the initial part of the curing process and also a small increase
in the conversion degree observed after vitrification, and correspondingly a decrease
results in a lower conversion rate and lower conversion after vitrification (see Figure
6.2a). For the activation energy, E2, the relation to the epoxy conversion is opposite;
increasing the value of E2 results in a much lower conversion both before and after
vitrification, and decreasing the value of E2 results in a very high initial conversion
rate and a higher conversion degree after vitrification (see Figure 6.2b).
The two parameters related to the reaction order, m and n, both show an increase in
the conversion rate for a part of the curing process, when decreasing their value (Fig-
ures 6.3a and b, respectively), and in the same manner a decrease in the conversion
degree when increasing the parameter value. For m, the change in the parameter
value is expressed as almost a parallel shift in the epoxy conversion up until vitri-
fication. After vitrification, the affect caused by the change in the m-value abates,
and thus, the change in m does not affect the final conversion degree. For n, the
conversion degree after vitrification is what is affected when adjusting the value, and
thus, changing the value of n does not influence the conversion rate in the initial
part of the process (see Figure 6.3b).
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
101
==PAGE:113==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1: Sensitivity analysis for the A1 and E1 parameters of the Kamal-Sourour
model. One at a time all parameters were changed to ±20% of the value from Table
6.1.
102
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:114==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2: Sensitivity analysis for the A2 and E2 parameters of the Kamal-Sourour
model. One at a time all parameters were changed to ±20% of the value from Table
6.1.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
103
==PAGE:115==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.3: Sensitivity analysis for the m and n parameters of the Kamal-Sourour
model. One at a time all parameters were changed to ±20% of the value from Table
6.1.
104
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:116==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4: Sensitivity analysis for the C parameter of the Kamal-Sourour model
and the critical conversion. One at a time all parameters were changed to ±20% of
the value from Table 6.1.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
105
==PAGE:117==
The C paramater and the critical conversion degree, αc, does not influence the
progress of the conversion before vitrification. For C, decreasing the value results in
a higher conversion rate after vitrification and, in the same manner, increasing the
value results in a lower conversion after vitrification. αc affects the conversion degree
at which the conversion is slowed down significantly due to the onset of vitrification.
Thus, for a higher value of αc a higher final conversion degree is obtained.
6.1.2
Kamal-Sourour Modelling Results
Using the values from Table 6.1 as initial estimates of the model parameters, the
modified K-S model was fitted to the experimental data for the solvent free novolac
coating cured with the 7.5% adduct. That was done in an iterative process in order
to optimise the parameters to get the best fit of the model to the experimental
data. The MATLAB script used for the modelling is included in Appendix H. The
optimisation process was focused on the parameters which values were identified to
have a larger impact on the modelling results in the sensitivity analysis. Thus, since
the model outcome only to a very limited degree is influenced by the value of the
A1, it would have to differ drastically from the system investigated by Hosseinpour
et al. for it to influence the modelling [76]. The final parameters are included in
Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Final parameters for the modifies K-S model for solvent free novolac
coating cured with the 7.5% adduct. The values presented in Table 6.1, were used
as initial estimates for the modelling of the experimental data.
A1 (s−1)
E1 (J/mol)
A2 (s−1)
E2 (J/mol)
m
n
C
αc
1.46 · 107
7.18 · 104
836.9
3.68 · 104
0.48
1.40
35
0.53
In the graphs in Figure 6.5, the modified K-S modelling results are presented together
with the experimental data. Figure 6.5a includes the results for the full experimental
time span and Figure 6.5b for the initial 20 hours of curing. From Figure 6.5a it
is seen that, overall, the model describes the experimental data well, also for the
diffusion controlled part of the process. However, for the initial part of the curing,
the experimental data shows an almost linear increase in the conversion degree as
a function of the curing time. In the same time span, the modelling results suggest
a low conversion rate in the very beginning of the curing which then increases as
curing progresses, and then decreases more abruptly at the onset of vitrification
than what was experienced experimentally (see Figure 6.5).
As was seen from the sensitivity analysis in Section 6.1.1, several of the model
parameters affect the conversion results computed by the model in a similar way,
106
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:118==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.5: Experimental data for the conversion degree obtained through FTIR-
spectroscopy for the solvent free novolac coating presented together with the mod-
elling results obtained using the modified K-S model for (a) the full time span and
(b) the initial 20 hours of curing. The experimental data represents the conversion
degree at the coating-substrate interface and the error bars the standard deviation
resulting from measurements of three parallel samples.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
107
==PAGE:119==
and thus, in some cases, a bad estimate for one parameter can be compensated for by
another parameter. Hence, it should be noted, that because most of the parameters
are estimated based on data available in the literature, and not from experimental
data for the actual system, the final parameters in Table 6.2 might not correspond
to the actual values of the system, even though there is good compliance between
the model and the experimental data.
6.2
Storage Modulus-Epoxy Conversion Model
Through the curing process, the epoxy groups in an epoxy coating are converted
through the chemical curing reactions leading to a network with an increasing de-
gree of crosslinking to be formed. Simultaneously, the mechanical properties of the
coating develop, with gelation marking the point where the coating transitions from
being a viscous liquid to a material with properties mainly resembling those of an
elastic solid. Thus, the elastic modulus of the coating is closely related to the degree
of curing.
As such, the epoxy conversion can be related to the shear storage modulus of the
coating using the relation
α(t) = log(G′(t)) −log(G′
0)
log(G′
∞) −log(G′
0)
(6.2)
where both the conversion, α, and the storage modulus, G’, is a function of the
curing time. G′
0 is the initial modulus, that is before curing, and G′
∞is the modulus
of the fully cured coating [81, 79].
As was mentioned in the literature review (Section 2.9), the model is simple, and
as such, it does not account for the rate of curing or the points of gelation and
vitrification, and the associated effects on the storage modulus and epoxy conversion.
It is entirely based on the magnitude of the difference between the initial and final
modulus and the relation to the modulus at time t.
In addition, the model assumes full conversion of the epoxy. Thus, the model is not
a good fit for the case where full conversion is not obtained. This can be seen from
Figure 6.6, where the epoxy conversion as a function of the curing time, determined
through IR spectroscopy, for a solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5%
adduct hardener is shown together with the conversion computed with the model
when using the results from the DMA.
The DMA was only performed after gelation, when free film coating samples could
be prepared, and therefore, the initial modulus, G′
0, used in the modelling of the
DMA experimental data, is estimated using the curing test results. Estimating the
108
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:120==
Figure 6.6: Epoxy conversion shown as a function of the curing time for solvent free
novolac coating cured with the 7.5% adduct. The data represents the conversion as
computed using the model based on the shear storage modulus and the experimental
results obtained through IR spectroscopy.
initial modulus based on the curing test data is reasonable, even though the curing
tests generally returned values for the storage modulus substantially smaller than
the DMA (see Figure 5.18), since the initial modulus is much smaller than the final
modulus, as could also be seen from the experimental data presented in Figure 5.18,
and thus, does not have a large impact on the modelling results. The final modulus,
G′
∞, is, for the modelling of the DMA data, taken as being the modulus obtained
for the samples tested after 120 hours of curing.
In order to obtain a better fit of the model to the experimental data, which for
all the formulations where tests were carried out, did not reach full conversion, a
parameter, α∞, accounting for the final conversion degree has, been introduced to
the model:
α = log(G′(t)) −log(G′
0)
log(G′
∞) −log(G′
0) · α∞
(6.3)
Using the modified model, the epoxy conversion, again for the solvent free novolac
coating cured with the 7.5% adduct hardener, has been computed using the curing
test data for the initial part of the curing process and the data from the DMA for
the remainder of the curing time. The results are displayed in Figure 6.7a for the full
time span, where experimental data was recorded and in Figure 6.7b for the initial
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
109
==PAGE:121==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.7: Epoxy conversion for solvent free novolac coating adduct shown as a
function of the curing time for (a) the full time span for the experimental data and
(b) the initial 20 hours of curing. The results of the modified model are based on
the storage modulus obtained through curing tests and DMA, respectively. The
final conversion degree and the experimental results are obtained through IR spec-
troscopy.
110
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:122==
20 hours of curing, where the majority of the epoxy conversion and the development
of the shear storage modulus takes place. The final storage modulus, G′
∞, is for the
curing tests taken as the modulus observed at the end of the test, corresponding to
15 hours of curing and for α∞the conversion obtained after 24 hours of curing is
used, since this was the available data point most accurately corresponding to the
conversion at 15 hours of curing.
The results in Figure 6.7, computed with the modified model, show much better
agreement with the experimental data, than the original model. However, not nearly
as good as what was obtained with the chemical kinetic model in Section 6.1. The
model does not account well for the diffusion controlled reactions, leading to epoxy
conversion taking place after vitrification, and thus, a very abrupt decrease in the
rate of conversion is seen in the model results, whereas the experimental data in-
dicates a more soft transition between the reaction rate and the diffusion controlled
domains of curing. The very steep increase followed by a small decrease observed
in the modelling results for the conversion degree within the first hour of curing is
associated with the uncertainties of the curing test results on which the modelling is
based, resulting when the coating transitions from a static to a dynamic conditions
as described in Section 5.2.3.
6.2.1
Model for Solvent Containing Coatings
As seen from equation (6.3), the model used for computing the conversion degree
based on the shear storage modulus does not include a position variable, and hence,
the degree of conversion computed based on the model does not account for vari-
ations in the epoxy conversion or the elastic modulus through the depth of the
coating.
For the solvent free coatings, the curing degree did not vary through the thickness
of the coating, as seen from Figure 5.10. Also, neither of the methods used for ex-
perimentally measuring the store shear modulus accounts for any variations through
the depth of the coating, and thus, the observed values of G′ is an average of the
coating samples. Thus, for the solvent free coatings, it is reasonable that the model
determines the epoxy conversion without including a position variable.
However, for the solvent containing coatings, the epoxy conversion was found to be
higher at the coating-substrate interface than at the coating surface, due to an in-
creased mobility past vitrification resulting from a higher concentration of entrapped
solvent near the base of the coating. As such, a thickness dependent conversion
gradient was present in the cured coatings, as could also be seen from Figure 5.10.
The conversion gradient is expected to also influence the elastic modulus, and thus,
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
111
==PAGE:123==
for the model to properly account for this variation in the degree of curing, it would
require a position variable to be incorporated.
6.3
Epoxy Conversion and the Glass Transition
Temperature
When the crosslinking density of the polymeric matrix in an epoxy coating increases,
as a result of epoxy resin curing, it entails a corresponding increase in the glass
transition temperature, Tg, of the coating. Above the glass transition temperature
a polymer is either a viscous liquid or a rubbery solid, that is, respectively, before
and after gelation. Below the glass transition temperature, the polymer is in the
glassy state, and thus becomes brittle.
In regards to the epoxy coating curing
process, knowledge of the glass transition temperature and its relation to the epoxy
curing degree is important, because when the curing temperature becomes equal
to the glass transition temperature, the coating vitrifies and the rate of the curing
reactions decreases significantly as they become diffusion controlled.
Several different models exist for fitting of experimental data of Tg vs α, but out of
these, the DiBenedetto equation is the one most widely used [84, 85]. The DiBene-
detto equation (2.33) is written as
Tg(α) = Tg0 + (Tg∞−Tg0) λα
1 −(1 −λ)α
where Tg(α) is the glass transition temperature, related to the extent of the curing
reactions, Tg0 is the glass transition temperature of the uncured system, meaning
that α = 0, Tg∞is the glass transition temperature of the fully cured resin (α = 1),
and λ is a structure dependent parameter with a value between 0 and 1.
As for the models presented in the previous sections, the DiBenedetto equation does
not account for any gradients of the epoxy conversion, and thus the glass transition
temperature, through the thickness of the coating.
The DiBenedetto equation has previously been applied successfully for different
epoxy-diamine stoichiometric copolymer systems.
Therefore, it been chosen for
modelling of the experimental data for Tg as a function of the epoxy conversion,
α, which was obtained through DMA and IR spectroscopy, respectively [86]. The
DiBenedetto equation is mainly utilised for pure epoxy-amine systems, and there-
fore, the modelling is carried out for the experimental data for the solvent free
novolac coating cured with the 7.5% adduct [84, 86].
112
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:124==
6.3.1
DiBenedetto Equation Sensitivity Analysis
The value of Tg0 to be used in the DiBenedetto equation is typically determined
through DSC [84, 85]. However, since the method of DSC was not utilised in the
experimental work carried out in regards to this thesis, Tg0 is instead estimated
based on common values reported in the literature. In the same manner, Tg∞is
also typically determined experimentally, through e.g. DSC or DMA, but since full
conversion was not obtained for the epoxy coatings in the experimental work, no
data is readily available for Tg∞, and thus, an initial estimate based on values cited
in the literature is used [84, 85]. As such, there are three variable parameters, when
fitting the DiBenedetto equation, to the experimental data of Tg vs. α: Tg0, Tg∞,
and λ.
In order to evaluate how the three parameters individually affect the results of the
model, a sensitivity analysis has been carried out in the same manner as for the
chemical kinetic model in Section 6.1.1.
Thus, the three parameters have been
varied, one at a time, starting from a base case which is defined as Tg0 = −20 ◦C,
Tg∞= 100 ◦C, and λ = 0.5. The results for Tg(α) are included in Figures 6.8 and
6.9a and b. The base case represents values within the range of what is typically
reported for epoxy resin/amine systems [85, 87].
Figure 6.8: Sensitivity analysis for the DiBenedetto equation relation of Tg vs. α.
Tg0 = −20 ◦C, Tg∞= 100 ◦C, and λ is varied.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
113
==PAGE:125==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.9: Sensitivity analysis for the DiBenedetto equation relation of Tg vs. α.
In Figure (a) Tg∞= 100 ◦C, λ = 0.5, and Tg0 is varied. In Figure (b) Tg0 = −20 ◦C,
λ = 0.5, and Tg∞is varied.
114
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:126==
When varying λ, it influences the linearity of the Tg(α)-function (see Figure 6.8).
For λ = 1 the correlation between Tg and α is linear, and the DiBenedetto equation
(2.33) is reduced to
Tg = Tg0 + (Tg∞−Tg0)α
(6.4)
whereas for values of λ < 1, the rate of increase in the glass transition temperature
is slow for small values of α and increases as the extent of reaction increases. As was
mentioned in Section 5.2.2, the relative increase in the glass transition temperature
often is greater at higher reaction extents, and thus, in most cases λ takes a value
smaller than 1 [86]. Varying the values of Tg0 and Tg∞results in a shift in the
placement of the Tg(α)-curve, originating from α = 0 and α = 1, respectively (see
Figures 6.9a and b).
6.3.2
Glass Transition Temperature Modelling Results
The DMA, from which the experimental data for the glass transitions was obtained,
was only carried out for the coating samples after gelation, because it required the
preparation of a free film sample of the coating. Thus, the experimental data only
represents values of Tg for a limited range of epoxy conversion from approximately
0.62 to 0.72. In Section 5.2.2 it was shown, that within that range, the relation
between the epoxy conversion and the glass transition temperature was almost linear
(see Figure 5.14b). That does, however, not necessarily mean that that Tg(α) is a
linear function throughout.
As was done for the chemical kinetic modified K-S model, the parameters of the
DiBenedetto equation were optimised in an iterative process, to get the best fit with
the experimental data. Figure 6.10 shows the modelling results for two different
sets of model parameters together with the experimental data for Tg vs. α. Both
set of parameters, even though substantially different, yield a good fit between the
experimental data and modelling results.
The parameter values utilised for the
modelling are all in the range of what is commonly reported for epoxy resin/amine
systems [85]. An overview of the two sets of parameters are included in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Parameters used for the modelling of Tg vs. α with the DiBenedetto
equation presented in Figure 6.10.
Tg0 (℃)
Tg∞(℃)
λ
1
-20
161
0.24
2
-50
100
0.73
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
115
==PAGE:127==
From the modelling results in Figure 6.10, it is evident, that in order to properly
evaluate the performance of the model experimental data for Tg vs. α for a larger
range of the epoxy conversion degree is necessary. And of course, knowledge regard-
ing the actual value of Tg0 and/or Tg∞would reduce the number of parameters in
the model.
Figure 6.10: Experimental data for Tg vs. α obtained through DMA and IR spec-
troscopy, respectively, of a solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5% adduct
hardener, presented together with corresponding modelling results computed with
the DiBenedetto equation (2.33) for two different sets of parameters. The paramet-
ers for modelling cases 1 and 2 are included in Table 6.3.
116
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:128==
7
Conclusions
By monitoring the epoxy conversion as a function of the curing time using FTIR-
spectroscopy, it was found that in the initial part of the curing process, a solvent
free coating exhibited a higher degree of conversion than the corresponding solvent
containing coating.
However, past vitrification the highest degree of conversion
was found in the solvent containing coating due to an increased rate of diffusion
resulting from entrapped solvent.
However, for all the coatings tested, the final
epoxy conversion was far from complete.
In the solvent free coating, the conversion was uniform throughout the thickness
of the coating, whereas for the solvent containing coating the degree of curing var-
ied with the position, with the highest degree of conversion found at the coating-
substrate interface. In all cases, it was found that the surface of the coatings were
subject to the phenomenon of amine blushing, which is a carbonation of the amine
hardener. This was verified through the gravimetric analysis, which showed a small
weight increase during curing for the solvent free coatings.
The conversion data for the solvent free novolac coating was fitted to the chemical
kinetic Kamal-Sourour model, which was modified with the Cole model to account
for the diffusion controlled part of the curing process and incomplete epoxy conver-
sion. For the modelling, parameters found in the literature were used. Overall, the
model showed reasonable agreement with the experimental data.
Investigating the solvent evaporation through a gravimetric analysis, showed that
the vast majority of the solvent, xylene, evaporated within the first 15 minutes
of curing, but also that a considerable amount of the solvent remained entrapped
within the cured coating. This was substantiated by spectroscopy results, which
showed a peak associated with xylene in the spectra of the cured solvent containing
coatings.
The shear storage modulus was monitored during curing, both using an advancded
rheometer in a parallel plate oscillation mode and with DMA. It was found that G’
was higher for the solvent free coating throughout. Thus, the presence of solvent, to
some extent, softens the coating. The results of a model, that utilises the relation
between the initial and final value of the shear storage modulus to determine the
epoxy conversion as a function of the instant shear storage modulus, was compared
with experimental data for epoxy conversion, obtained through IR spectroscopy.
The model did not fit the data nearly as well as the modified K-S model.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
117
==PAGE:129==
The glass transition temperature increases with increasing cross linking density, and,
through the DMA, it was found that for the novolac coatings, the increase in Tg was
almost linearly related to the epoxy conversion. This was especially true for the
solvent free coating. The glass transition temperature was higher for the solvent
free coating than the solvent containing coating, even though the solvent containing
coating expressed a higher epoxy conversion. Thus, the residual entrapped solvent
also affects Tg.
Due to low sensor resolution, the experimental tests carried out, to determine the
curing-induced internal stress of the coatings, using the deflection method did not
yield usable results. However, using the rheometer in the parallel plate setting with
a constant applied stress, tests determining the chemical shrinkage after gelation,
which is related to the internal stress, were carried out for the solvent free novolac
coating. Except for in the time around vitrification, the results showed a linear
correlation between the chemical shrinkage and the epoxy conversion degree.
The experimental data for the glass transition temperature as a function of the epoxy
conversion was fitted to the DiBenedetto equation. Due to the limitations of the
DMA method, experimental data for Tg was only obtained for a relatively narrow
range of epoxy conversion degrees. That resulted in a good fit with model for several,
considerably different, combinations of model parameters. Thus, a wider range of
experimental data is required to properly assess the performance of the model.
118
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:130==
8
Recommendations for Future Work
Based on the conclusions for the experimental an modelling work carried out in
regards to this thesis, the following areas are indicated as recommendations for
further work.
Firstly, to avoid the uncertainties which the phenomenon of amine blushing intro-
duced to the experimental work, it is advised that any future work is carried out
using another amine, less prone to blushing than MXDA, as the curing agent. That
would, among other things, allow for a better assessment of the epoxy conversion
at the surface of the coatings using IR-spectroscopy.
Also, it could be investig-
ated if changing the amine, affects the solvent evaporation rate and the amount of
entrapped solvent.
In addition to that, incorporating the experimental method of DSC to the work
would be advantageous because it can provide more accurate data for the chemical
kinetics of the epoxy conversion (at least for the average within a coating sample) [71,
114]. As such, using DSC it would be possible to obtain estimates for the paramaters
of the Kamal-Sourour kinetic model, related directly to the actual epoxy/hardener
system, and values of the glass transition temperature for a larger range of epoxy
conversion, than what was possible with the DMA. This would also allow for a better
assessment of the performance of the DiBenedetto equation, which relates the glass
transition temperature to the conversion.
Because of low sensor resolution, the deflection method tests did not provide good
results. Therefore, in order to use this experimental method for determining the
curing-induced internal stress of coatings, it requires an adjustment of the experi-
mental setup. That could be in terms of changing the placement of the samples to
a vertical position, which would result in a larger deflection because gravity in that
case does not affect the deflection in the same manner. Alternatively, sensors with
a higher resolution could be utilised and the effect of gravity accounted for in the
calculations.
Furthermore, it could provide interesting data if expanding the experimental re-
search and the modelling efforts regarding the mechanical property evolution of
epoxy coatings during curing to also account for the effects of the exposure condi-
tions during curing, i.e. the temperature and relative humidity, and other coating
ingredients such as fillers and pigments.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
119
==PAGE:131==
References
[1]
Hosseini, M. and Makhlouf, A. S. H. Industrial Applications for Intelligent
Polymers and Coatings. 1st ed. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[2]
Pourhashem, S., Saba, F., Duan, J., Rashidi, A., Guan, F., Nezhad, E. G. and
Hou, B. ‘Polymer/Inorganic nanocomposite coatings with superior corrosion
protection performance: A review’. In: Journal of Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry 88 (2020), pp. 29–57.
[3]
Goldade, V. A., Pinchuk, L. S., Makarevich, A. V. and Kestelman, V. N.
Plastics for Corrosion Inhibition. 1st ed. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,
2005.
[4]
Sørensen, P. A., Kiil, S., Dam-Johansen, K. and Weinell, C. E. ‘Anticorrosive
coatings: A review’. In: Journal of Coatings Technology and Research 6.2
(2009), pp. 135–176.
[5]
Tang, G., Ren, T., Yan, Z., Ma, L., Pan, X., Liu, J., Hou, X. and Huang,
X. ‘Corrosion resistance of a self-curing waterborne epoxy resin coating’. In:
Journal of Coatings Technology and Research 16.3 (2019), pp. 895–904. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11998-018-00166-2.
[6]
Santos, I., Carvalho, L., Reznik, L. and Brasil, S. ‘Anti-corrosive properties
of two epoxy primer systems applied to steel surfaces prepared with vari-
ous mechanical abrasive treatments’. In: Journal of Adhesion Science and
Technology (May 2020).
[7]
Jin, F. L., Li, X. and Park, S. J. ‘Synthesis and application of epoxy resins:
A review’. In: Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 29 (2015).
[8]
Adomenas, A., Curran, K. and Falconer-Flint, M. Surface Coatings. 3rd ed.
Springer Netherlands, 1993.
[9]
Dagdag, O., Hsissou, R., Berisha, A., Erramli, H., Hamed, O., Jodeh, S. and
El Harfi, A. ‘Polymeric-Based Epoxy Cured with a Polyaminoamide as an
Anticorrosive Coating for Aluminum 2024-T3 Surface: Experimental Stud-
ies Supported by Computational Modeling’. In: Journal of Bio- and Tribo-
Corrosion 58.5 (2019).
[10]
Wei, H., Xia, J., Zhou, W., Zhou, L., Hussain, G., Li, Q. and Ostrikov, K.
‘Adhesion and cohesion of epoxy-based industrial composite coatings’. In:
Composites Part B: Engineering 193.108035 (2020).
[11]
Pedeferri, P. Corrosion Prevention by Coatings. 1st ed. Springer International
Publishing, 2018, pp. 327–361.
120
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:132==
[12]
Jafar Mazumder, M. A., Sheardown, H. and Al-Ahmed, A. Functional Poly-
mers. 1st ed. Springer, Cham, pp. 883–909.
[13]
Stevens, M. P. Polymer Chemistry: An Introduction. 3rd ed. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1999.
[14]
Unnikrishnan, K. P. and Thachil, E. T. ‘Toughening of epoxy resins’. In:
Designed Monomers and Polymers 9.2 (2006), pp. 129–152.
[15]
Vidil, T., Tournilhac, F., Musso, S., Robisson, A. and Leibler, L. ‘Control
of reactions and network structures of epoxy thermosets’. In: Progress in
Polymer Science 62 (2016), pp. 126–179.
[16]
Tomar, B. S., Shahin, A. and Tirumkudulu, M. S. ‘Cracking in drying films
of polymer solutions’. In: Soft Matter 16.14 (2020), pp. 3476–3484.
[17]
Callister, W. D. and Rethwisch, D. G. Materials Science and Engineering:
An Introduction. 9th ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2014.
[18]
Spennemann, D. H. R. Techniques in Historic Preservation: Why do corroded
corrugated iron roofs have a striped appearance ? Tech. rep. Charles Sturt
University, Institute for Land, Water, and Society, 2015.
[19]
Atkins, P. and de Paula, J. Atkins’ Physical Chemistry. 10th ed. Oxford
University Press, 2014.
[20]
Uhlig, H. H. and Revie, R. W. Corrosion and corrosion control. An introduc-
tion to corrosion science and engineering. 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2008.
[21]
Bardal, E. Corrosion and Protection. 1st ed. Springer-Verlag London, 2004.
Chap. 10, pp. 237–307.
[22]
Kontogeorgis, G. M. and Kiil, S. Introdution to Applied Colloid and Surface
Chemistry. 1st ed. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2016.
[23]
Hughes, A. E., Mol, J. M. C., Zheludkevich, M. L. and Buchheit, R. G. Active
Protective Coatings. 1st ed. Springer Netherlands, 2016, pp. 85–104.
[24]
Chenier, P. J. Survey of Industrial Chemistry. Springer US, 2002, pp. 345–
360.
[25]
Bashir, M. A., Jakobsen, M. G. and Farstad, V. B. ‘The effect of extender
particle size on the glass transition temperature of model epoxy coatings’. In:
Polymers 12.196 (2020).
[26]
Burleigh, D. T. ‘Photocurrents on passive and active-passive metals’. In: Cor-
rosion Science 31 (1990), pp. 745–750.
[27]
Weiss, H. ‘Adhesion of advanced overlay coatings: mechanisms and quantit-
ative assessment’. In: Surface and Coatings Technology 71.2 (1995), pp. 201–
207.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
121
==PAGE:133==
[28]
Karbhari, V. M. Rehabilitation of Metallic Civil Infrastructure Using Fiber
Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Composites. 1st ed. Woodhead Publishing, 2014.
[29]
Fried, J. R. Polymer Science & Technology. 3rd ed. Prentice Hall, 2014.
[30]
Yilmaz, F. Paint and Coatings Industry. IntechOpen, 2019.
[31]
Da Silva, L. F. M. Materials Design and Applications. 1st ed. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2017.
[32]
Peters, S. T. Epoxy Resins. 2nd ed. Springer US, 1998.
[33]
Peerzada, M., Abbasi, S., Lau, K. T. and Hameed, N. ‘Additive Manufactur-
ing of Epoxy Resins: Materials, Methods, and Latest Trends’. In: Industrial
and Engineering Chemistry Research 59.14 (2020), pp. 6375–6390.
[34]
Goosey, M., Roth, M., Kainmüller, T. and Seiz, W. Plastics for Electronics.
2nd ed. Springer Netherlands, 1999.
[35]
Durig, J. D. ‘Comparisons of epoxy technology for protective coatings and
linings in wastewater facilities’. In: Journal of Protective Coatings and Linings
17.5 (2000), pp. 49–54.
[36]
Hansen, M. B. Personlig Sikkerhed ved Arbejde med Epoxy og Isocyanater.
17th ed. Praxis - Erhvervsskolernes Forlag, 2020.
[37]
Watkins, M. J., Weinmann, D. J. and Elmore, D. E. ‘Formulating High-
Performance Waterborne Epoxy Coatings’. In: Thermoset Resin Formulators
Association (2006).
[38]
Verma, S., Mohanty, S. and Nayak, S. K. ‘A review on protective polymeric
coatings for marine applications’. In: Journal of Coatings Technology and
Research 16.2 (2019), pp. 307–338.
[39]
Bittnar, Z., Bartos, P. J. M., Nemeck, J., Smilauer, V. and Zeman, J. Nan-
otechnology in Construction 3. 1st ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
[40]
Nazari, M. H. and Shi, X. Industrial Applications for Intelligent Polymers
and Coatings. 1st ed. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[41]
Fadl, A. M., Abdou, M. I., Hamza, M. A. and Sadeek, S. A. ‘Corrosion-
inhibiting, self-healing, mechanical-resistant, chemically and UV stable PDMAS/-
TiO2 epoxy hybrid nanocomposite coating for steel petroleum tanker trucks’.
In: Progress in Organic Coatings 105715.146 (2020).
[42]
Chen, X., Chen, S., Xu, Z., Zhang, J., Miao, M. and Zhang, D. ‘Degradable
and recyclable bio-based thermoset epoxy resins’. In: Green Chemistry 22
(2020), pp. 4187–4198.
[43]
A Baroncini, E., Yadav, S. K., Palmese, G. R. and Stanzione III, J. F. ‘Recent
advances in bio-based epoxy resins and bio-based epoxy curing agents’. In:
Journal of Applied Polymer Science 44103.45 (2016).
122
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:134==
[44]
Chen, X., Hou, J., Gu, Q., Wang, Q., Gao, J., Sun, J. and Fang, Q. ‘A
non-bisphenol-A epoxy resin with high Tg derived from the bio-based pro-
tocatechuic Acid:Synthesis and properties’. In: Polymer 122443.195 (2020).
[45]
Kiil, S. ‘Quantification of simultaneous solvent evaporation and chemical cur-
ing in thermoset coatings’. In: Journal of Coatings Technology and Research
7.5 (2010), pp. 569–586.
[46]
Dušková-Smrčková, M. and Dušek, K. ‘Processes and states during poly-
mer film formation by simultaneous crosslinking and solvent evaporation’.
In: Journal of Materials Science 37.22 (2002), pp. 4733–4741.
[47]
Achilias, D. S., Karabela, M. M., Varkopoulou, E. A. and Sideridou, I. D.
‘Cure kinetics study of two epoxy systems with Fourier Tranform Infrared
Spectroscopy (FTIR) and Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC)’. In: Journal
of Macromolecular Science, Part A: Pure and Applied Chemistry 49.8 (2012),
pp. 630–638.
[48]
Yi, C., Rostron, P., Vahdati, N., Gunister, E. and Alfantazi, A. ‘Curing kin-
etics and mechanical properties of epoxy based coatings: The influence of
added solvent’. In: Progress in Organic Coatings 124 (2018), pp. 165–174.
[49]
Zhao, S. F., Zhang, G. P., Sun, R. and Wong, C. P. ‘Curing kinetics, mech-
anism and chemorheological behavior of methanol etherified amino/novolac
epoxy systems’. In: Express Polymer Letters 8.2 (2014), pp. 95–106.
[50]
Cholake, S. T., Mada, M. R., Singh Raman, R. K., Bai, Y., Zhao, X. L.,
Rizkalla, S. and Bandyopadhyay, S. ‘Quantitative analysis of curing mech-
anisms of epoxy resin by mid- and near-fourier transform infra red spectro-
scopy’. In: Defence Science Journal 64.3 (2014), pp. 314–321.
[51]
Franck, A., TA Instruments Germany. Viscoelasticity and dynamic mechan-
ical testing. 2020. url: http://tainstruments.com/pdf/literature/AAN004_
Viscoelasticity_and_DMA.pdf (visited on 15/12/2020).
[52]
Tushinsky, L., Kovensky, I., Plokhov, A., Sindeyev, V. and Reshedko, P.
Coated Metal: Structure and Properties of Metal-Coating Compositions. 1st ed.
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2002.
[53]
Epoxy Technology. Tech Tip 19: Understanding Mechanical Properties of
Epoxies For Modeling, Finite Element Analysis (FEA). 2012. url: http://
www.epotek.com/site/files/Techtips/pdfs/tip19.pdf (visited on 07/12/2020).
[54]
Dodiuk, H. and Goodman, S. H. Handbook of Thermoset Plastics. 3rd ed.
Elsevier, 2014.
[55]
Francis, L. F., McCormick, A. V., Vaessen, D. M. and Payne, J. A. ‘De-
velopment and measurement of stress in polymer coatings’. In: Journal of
Materials Science 37.22 (2002), pp. 4717–473.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
123
==PAGE:135==
[56]
Roose, Patrice. ‘Residual stress in radiation-cured acrylate coatings’. In: Re-
active and Functional Polymers 73.2 (2013), pp. 323–331.
[57]
Bouchet, J., Roche, A. A. and Hamelin, P. ‘Internal stresses, Young’s modulus
and practical adhesion of organic coatings applied onto 5754 aluminum alloy’.
In: Thin Solid Films 355 (1999), pp. 270–276.
[58]
Vosgien Lacombre, C., Bouvet, G., Cohendoz, S., Trinh, D., Feaugas, X.,
Touzain, S. and Mallarino, S. ‘Influence of internal stresses on the physi-
cochemical and mechanical properties evolution of pigmented epoxy systems
during hygrothermal ageing’. In: Surface and Coatings Technology 341 (2018),
pp. 86–94.
[59]
Ochi, Mitsukazu, Onishi, Kazuaki and Ueda, Shigehisa. ‘Internal Stress and
Mechanical Properties of Epoxy Resin Coatings Cured with Acid Catalyst in
the Presence of THF’. In: Polymer 33.21 (1992), pp. 4550–4555.
[60]
O’Brien, D. J., Mather, P. T. and White, S. R. ‘Viscoelastic properties of an
epoxy resin during cure’. In: Journal of Composite Materials 35.10 (2001),
pp. 883–904.
[61]
Crow, S. for TRiiSO. Epoxy Coating Blush: Explanation & Prevention Re-
commendations. 2018. url: https://www.tri- iso.com/documents/Epoxy_
Amine%5C%20_Blush_Prevention.pdf (visited on 19/10/2020).
[62]
Blain, M., Jean-Gérard, L., Dominique, B., Bernard, B., Bruno, A. and
Sylvain, C. ‘Synthesis of Aminotelechelic Prepolymers to Circumvent the
Carbonation of Amines in Epoxy Coatings’. In: Macromolecular Materials
and Engineering 301.6 (2016).
[63]
Pham, H. Q. and Marks, M. J. ‘Epoxy resins’. In: Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia
of Chemical Technology. Vol. 10. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2004, pp. 347–471.
[64]
Epoxy Technology. Tech Tip 28: Amine Blush. 2015. url: https://www.
epotek.com/site/files/Techtips/pdfs/techtips_28.pdf (visited on 19/10/2020).
[65]
Wray, L. A., Ayre, D., Irving, P. E., Jackson, P. A., Jones, P. R. and Zhao, F.
‘Implications of Substrate Geometry and Coating Thickness on the Cracking
Resistance of Polymer-Based Protective Coatings’. In: Procedia Structural
Integrity 13 (2018), pp. 1768–1773.
[66]
Knudsen, O. Ø., Bjørgum, A., Polanco-Loria, M., Øyen, A. and Johnsen,
R. ‘Internal stress and mechanical properties of paint films’. In: NACE -
International Corrosion Conference Series 7003 (2007).
[67]
Thomas, S., Thomas, R., Zachariah, A. K. and Mishra, R. K. Thermal and
Rheological Measurement Techniques for Nanomaterials Characterization.
1st ed. Elsevier, 2017.
124
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:136==
[68]
Pavia, D. L., Lampman, G. M., Kris, G. S. and Vyvyan, J. R. Introduction
to Spectroscopy. 5th ed. Cengage Learning, 2015.
[69]
Hilal, N., Ismail, A. F., Matsuura, T. and Oatley-Radcliffe, D. Membrane
Characterization. 1st ed. Elsevier B.V., 2017.
[70]
Jawaid, M., Tahir, P. M. and Saba, N. Lignocellulosic Fibre and Biomass-
Based Composite Materials. 1st ed. Woodhead Publishing, 2017.
[71]
Grumezescu, V. and Grumezescu, A. M. Materials for Biomedical Engineer-
ing: Thermoset and Thermoplastic Polymers. 1st ed. Elsevier, 2019.
[72]
Zhang, C., Binienda, W. K., Zeng, L., Ye, X. and Chen, S. ‘Kinetic study of
the novolac resin curing process using model fitting and model-free methods’.
In: Thermochimica Acta 523.1-2 (2011), pp. 63–69.
[73]
Zhan, W., Fu, X., Wang, F., Zhang, W., Bai, G., Xiao, W., Zhou, A., Sui,
G. and Yang, X. ‘Effect of aromatic amine modified graphene aerogel on the
curing kinetics and interfacial interaction of epoxy composites’. In: Journal
of Materials Science 55.24 (2020), pp. 10558–10571.
[74]
Wu, F., Zhou, X. and Yu, X. ‘Reaction mechanism, cure behavior and prop-
erties of a multifunctional epoxy resin, TGDDM, with latent curing agent
dicyandiamide’. In: RSC Advances 15.8 (2018), pp. 8248–8258.
[75]
Olamilekan, A. I. and Yeo, H. ‘Curing Behavior of 4,4￿-Diglycidyloxybiphenyl
with p-Phenylene Diamine Derivatives’. In: Macromolecular Research 28.1
(2020).
[76]
Hosseinpour, A., Nazockdast, H., Behzad, T. and Salimijazi, H. R. ‘Investig-
ation of the cure kinetics of an epoxy resin by advanced isoconversional and
model-fitting methods’. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 1713 (2016).
[77]
Abliz, D., Artys, T. and Ziegmann, G. ‘Influence of model parameter estim-
ation methods and regression algorithms on curing kinetics and rheological
modelling’. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 134.30 (2017).
[78]
Leistner, C., Hartmann, S., Abliz, D. and Ziegmann, G. ‘Modeling and sim-
ulation of the curing process of epoxy resins using finite elements’. In: Con-
tinuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics 32.2 (2020), pp. 327–350.
[79]
Domínguez, J. C., Alonso, M. V., Oliet, M. and Rodríguez, F. ‘Chemorheolo-
gical study of the curing kinetics of a phenolic resol resin gelled’. In: European
Polymer Journal 46 (2010), pp. 50–57.
[80]
Domínguez, J. C., Alonso, M. V., Oliet, M., Rojo, E. and Rodríguez, F.
‘Kinetic study of a phenolic-novolac resin curing process by rheological and
DSC analysis’. In: Thermochimica Acta 498 (2010), pp. 39–44.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
125
==PAGE:137==
[81]
Prime, R. B. ‘Dynamic mechanical analysis of thermosetting materials’. In:
Thermal analysis. Fundamentals and applications to material characteriza-
tion. 2005, pp. 206–224.
[82]
Abouhamzeh, M., Sinke, J., Jansen, K. M. B. and Benedictus, R. ‘Closed
form expression for residual stresses and warpage during cure of composite
laminates’. In: Composite Structures 133 (2015), pp. 902–910.
[83]
Abouhamzeh, M., Sinke, J. and Benedictus, R. ‘Prediction models for dis-
tortions and residual stresses in thermoset polymer laminates: An overview’.
In: Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing 4.3 (2019).
[84]
Urbaniak, M. ‘A relationship between the glass transition temperature and
the conversion degree in the curing reaction of the EPY® epoxy system’. In:
Polimery/Polymers 56.3 (2011), pp. 240–243.
[85]
Boisse, P. Advances in Composites Manufacturing and Process Design. 1st ed.
Woodhead Publishing, 2015.
[86]
Pascault, J. P. and Williams, R. J. J. ‘Glass transition temperature versus
conversion relationships for thermosetting polymers’. In: Journal of Polymer
Science Part B: Polymer Physics 28.1 (1990), pp. 85–95.
[87]
Jansen, K. M. B., Wang, L., Van’t Hof, C., Ernst, L. J., Bressers, H. J. L. and
Zhang, G. Q. ‘Cure, temperature and time dependent constitutive modeling
of moulding compounds’. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference
on Thermal and Mechanical Simulation and Experiments in Microelectronics
and Microsystems, EuroSimE 2004 4 (2004), pp. 581–585.
[88]
Thermo Fisher Scientific. FTIR Sample Techniques: Attenuated Total Re-
flection (ATR). url: https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/industrial/
spectroscopy-elemental-isotope-analysis/spectroscopy-elemental-isotope-analysis-
learning - center / molecular - spectroscopy - information / ftir - information / ftir -
sample-handling-techniques/ftir-sample-handling-techniques-attenuated-total-
reflection-atr.html (visited on 17/10/2020).
[89]
Hu, D.-D., Lyu, J.-X., Liu, T., Lang, M.-D. and Ling, Z. ‘Solvation effect of
CO2 on accelerating the curing reaction process of epoxy resin’. In: Chemical
Engineering & Processing: Process Intensification 127 (2018), pp. 159–167.
[90]
Merck KGaA. IR Spectrum Table & Chart. 2020. url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.
com/technical-documents/articles/biology/ir-spectrum-table.html (visited on
04/11/2020).
[91]
Asimakopoulos, I. A., Psarras, G. C. and Zoumpoulakis, L. ‘Nanocompos-
ites of barium titanate nanoparticles embedded in thermosetting polymer
matrices (Novolac resin/unsaturated polyesters/epoxy resin): A comparative
study’. In: ChemEngineering 3.1 (2019), pp. 1–20.
126
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:138==
[92]
Nikolic, G., Zlatkovic, S., Cakic, M., Cakic, S., Lacnjevac, C. and Rajic, Z.
‘Fast fourier transform IR characterization of epoxy GY systems crosslinked
with aliphatic and cycloaliphatic EH polyamine adducts’. In: Sensors 10.1
(2010), pp. 684–696.
[93]
Figura, L. and Teixeira, A. A. Food Physics. 1st ed. Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg, 2007.
[94]
TA Instruments. Discovery Hybrid Rheometers. 2020. url: https://www.
tainstruments.com/products/rheology/discovery-hybrid-rheometers/ (visited
on 12/11/2020).
[95]
PerkinElmer, Inc. Dynamic Mechanical Analysis - A Beginner’s Guide. 2013.
url: https://www.perkinelmer.com/CMSResources/Images/44-74546GDE_
IntroductionToDMA.pdf (visited on 12/11/2020).
[96]
Gotro, J. Rheology of Thermosets Part 4: Isothermal Curing. 2014. url:
https://polymerinnovationblog.com/rheology-thermosets-part-4-isothermal-
curing/ (visited on 12/11/2020).
[97]
Franck, A., TA Instruments Germany. Measuring and Evaluating Oscillation
Data. 2020. url: https://www.tainstruments.com/pdf/literature/APN007e_
V2_Analyzing_Oscillation_Data.pdf (visited on 17/12/2020).
[98]
Roussel, N. Understanding the Rheology of Concrete. 1st ed. Woodhead Pub-
lishing, 2012.
[99]
Shah, D. U. and Schubel, P. J. ‘Evaluation of cure shrinkage measurement
techniques for thermosetting resins’. In: Polymer Testing 29.6 (2010), pp. 629–
639.
[100]
Haider, M., Hubert, P. and Lessard, L. ‘Cure shrinkage and characterization
and modeling of a polyester resin containing low profile additives’. In: Com-
posites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing 38.3 (2007), pp. 994–
1009.
[101]
Khoun, L., Centea, T. and Hubert, P. ‘Characterization methodology of
thermoset resins for the processing of composite materials -Case study’. In:
Journal of Composite Materials 44.11 (2010), pp. 1397–1415.
[102]
Polymer Properties Database. Relations Between Moduli of Elasticity. 2020.
url: http : / / polymerdatabase . com / polymer % 5C % 20physics / Moduli . html
(visited on 10/12/2020).
[103]
TA Instruments. Gelation Kinetics from Rheological Experiments. 2020. url:
https : / / www . tainstruments . com / pdf / literature / RH103 . pdf (visited on
17/12/2020).
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
127
==PAGE:139==
[104]
Nawab, Y., Shahid, S., Boyard, N. and Jacquemin, F. ‘Chemical shrinkage
characterization techniques for thermoset resins and associated composites’.
In: Journal of Materials Science 16.48 (2013), pp. 5387–5409.
[105]
Mézin, A. ‘Coating internal stress measurement through the curvature method:
A geometry-based criterion delimiting the relevance of Stoney’s formula’. In:
Surface and Coatings Technology 200.18-19 (2006), pp. 5259–5267.
[106]
McMurry, J. Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry. 7th ed. Brooks/Cole Cen-
gage Learning, 2011.
[107]
Bruice, P. Y. Organic Chemistry. 8th ed. Pearson Education Limited, 2017.
[108]
Cardinaels, R., Reddy, N. K. and Clasen, C. ‘Quantifying the errors due to
overfilling for Newtonian fluids in rotational rheometry’. In: Rheologica Acta
58.8 (2019), pp. 525–538.
[109]
Hellström, L. O., Samaha, M., Wang, K., Smits, A. and Hultmark, M. ‘Er-
rors in parallel-plate and cone-plate rheometer measurements due to sample
underfill’. In: Measurement Science and Technology 26.1 (2015).
[110]
TA Instruments. Thermal Solutions: Measurement of the Glass Transition
Temperature Using Dynamic Mechanical Analysis. 2020. url: http://www.
tainstruments.com/pdf/literature/TS64.pdf (visited on 01/12/2020).
[111]
Sudheer, M., Pradyoth, K. R. and Somayaji, S. ‘Analytical and Numerical
Validation of Epoxy/Glass Structural Composites for Elastic Models’. In:
American Journal of Materials Science 5.3C (2015), pp. 162–168.
[112]
MatWeb - Material Property Data. Overview of materials for Epoxy Cure
Resin. 2020. url: http://www.matweb.com/search/datasheet_print.aspx?
matguid=956da5edc80f4c62a72c15ca2b923494 (visited on 05/12/2020).
[113]
Johnson, R., Freund, J. and Miller, I. Miller and Freund’s Probability and
Statistics for Engineers. 8th ed. Pearson, 2011.
[114]
Venkatesan, J., Anil, S. and Kim, S. K. Seaweed Polysaccharides: Isolation,
Biological and Biomedical Applications. 1st ed. Elsevier, 2017.
128
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:140==
A
Experimental Plan
Table A.1: Overview of the experimental plan. The first part of the experiment
description, e.g. BPA MXDA 5.5% X100, denotes the epoxy resin, amine, adduct
epoxy percentage, and solid volume percentage in the coating formulation.
The
second part of the description, i.e. 1, 2, or 3, denotes the sample number. ”—”
denotes that an experiment is continued from the previous week.
Week 38 (14th to 20th of September)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
FTIR-Spectroscopy
BPA MXDA 5.5% X100: 1-3
Rheometer - Chemical Shrinkage
BPA MXDA 5.5% X100: 1
Week 39 (21st to 27th of September)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
FTIR-Spectroscopy
Novolac MXDA 5.5% X100: 1-3
Rheometer - Chemical Shrinkage
—
BPA MXDA 5.5% X100: 2
Week 40 (28th of September to 4th of October)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
FTIR-Spectroscopy
BPA MXDA 5.5% X95: 1-3
Rheometer - Chemical Shrinkage
—
Experimental plan for Week 41 (5th to 11th of October)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Gravimetric Analysis
BPA MXDA 5.5% X90 and X80: 1-3
Week 42 (12th to 18th of October)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
FTIR-Spectroscopy
BPA MXDA 5.5% X90: 1-3
Week 43 (19th to 25th of October) - Thesis Writing, no experimental work.
The table is continued on the next page.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
129
==PAGE:141==
Week 44 (26th of October to 1st of November)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
FTIR-Spectroscopy
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 1-3
Rheometer - DMA
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 1
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 2
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 3
Deflection Method
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 1-3
Week 45 (2nd to 8th of November)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
FTIR-Spectroscopy
BPA MXDA 7.5% X80: 1-3
Gravimetric Analysis
BPA MXDA 7.5% X90 and X80: 1-3
Rheometer - DMA
—
—
Rheometer - Curing Process
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 1-3
Deflection Method
BPA MXDA 7.5% X80: 1-3
Week 46 (9th to 15th of November)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Rheometer - DMA
BPA MXDA 7.5% X80: 1
BPA MXDA 7.5% X80: 2
BPA MXDA 7.5% X80: 3
Week 47 (16th to 22nd of November)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Rheometer - DMA
—
Rheometer - Chemical Shrinkage
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 1
Week 48 (23rd to 29th of November)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Rheometer - Chemical Shrinkage
—
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 2
Week 49 (30th of November to 6th of December)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Rheometer - Chemical Shrinkage
—
BPA MXDA 7.5% X100: 3
Week 50 (7th to 13th of December)
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Rheometer - Chemical Shrinkage
—
130
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:142==
B
Coating Formulation Calculations
This appendix includes a calculation example for the coating formulation with the
DGEBA epoxy resin, the 5.5% MXDA adduct hardener, and a solid volume of 95%.
In addition, tables with corresponding data for the other coating types utilised in the
experimental work is included.
The equivalent weight is the mass of a substance that contains one functional group.
Thus, in the case of the epoxy resins, the epoxy equivalent weight is calculated based
on the molecular mass of the epoxy resin and the number of epoxy groups within
the molecule as
Eq. wt. of epoxy = Epoxy resin molecular mass
No. of epoxy groups in resin
(B.1)
Therefore, the epoxy equivalent weight (Eq. Wt. of Epoxy) of the DGEBA epoxy
resin corresponds to half of the epoxy resin mean molecular mass, since the epoxy
resin contains two functional epoxy groups. The equivalent of the DGEBA resin is
187 g/equivalent.
The curing agent, MXDA, is a primary diamine with a molecular weight of 136.19
g/mol. MXDA has a functionality of four in the curing reaction, because the two
amine groups contain a total of four hydrogen available for the curing reaction.
That is accounted for by basing the equivalent weight of the amine on the number
of reactive hydrogen in the molecule (as the epoxy equivalent weight was based on
the number of epoxy groups pr. molecule). Thus, the equivalent of hydrogen in
MXDA is defined by
Eq. wt. of hydrogen =
Amine molecular mass
No. of hydrogen in amine
(B.2)
Which for MXDA, with a functionality of four, yields
Eq. wt. of hydrogen =
136.19 g/mol
4 equivalent/mol = 34.05 g/equivalent
(B.3)
In the different coating formulations, the amine curing agent was applied in the form
of an adduct, which was produced by adding a small amount of the epoxy binder to
the amine.
The MXDA adduct contained 5.5 mol% epoxy groups. The mass of epoxy resin
necessary to obtain a 5.5 mol% adduct for a given mass of amine, is calculated by
solving for the mass of epoxy in the adduct in equation (B.4).
Adduct =
Mass of epoxy in adduct/Eq. wt. of epoxy
Mass of amine/Eq. wt. of hydrogen in amine · 100%
(B.4)
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
131
==PAGE:143==
Thus, for e.g. 100 g of MXDA the amount DGEBA resin necessary to obtain a 5.5%
adduct can be calculated from
5.5% = Mass of epoxy in adduct/187 g/equivalent
100 g/34.05 g/equivalent
(B.5)
where solving for the mass of epoxy in the adduct yields 30.2 g. An overview of the
calculation results regarding the MXDA adduct is provided in Table B.1
Table B.1: The masses of the amine curing agent, MXDA, and the epoxy binder,
DGEBA, used to obtain an amine adduct of 5.5 mol%, presented together with the
equivalent weight of H in the amine and of epoxy groups in DGEBA.
Mass (g)
Equivalent Weight (g/equivalent)
MXDA
100
34.0 (of hydrogen)
DGEBA
in 5.5% adduct
30.2
187 (of epoxy groups)
in 7.5% adduct
41.2
Novolac
in 5.5% adduct
27.3
169 (of epoxy groups)
in 7.5% adduct
37.2
The different coating formulations were prepared with a stoichiometric ratio between
epoxy groups and reactive hydrogen in the amine curing agent. When calculating the
amount of binder and hardener necessary to achieve a stoichiometric ratio within the
coating, it must be taken into account that in the adduct some of the amine already
has reacted with epoxy. Therefore, the mass of binder and hardener necessary to
achieve a stoichiometric ratio in the final coating mixture is calculated from
Amine
Epoxy binder = Mass of adduct/Eq. wt. of hydroge in adduct
Mass of epoxy binder/Eq. wt. of epoxy
(B.6)
In the case of stoichiometry, the above equation equals 1, and hence, by fixing the
mass of epoxy, the amount of hardener needed to obtain a stoichiometric ratio in
the coating can be calculated by solving in the equation, or vice versa.
Thus, it is necessary to know the hydrogen equivalent weight in the hardener (the
amine adduct). The hydrogen equivalent weight in the hardener differs from the
hydrogen equivalent weight in the pure amine, because both the mass of the added
epoxy and the amount reactive hydrogen consumed in reaction with the epoxy must
be considered. Therefore, in order to determine the equivalent weight of hydrogen
in the hardener, it is firstly necessary to calculate the mass of free amine within the
hardener. The so called free or active amine, is any any amine which has not yet
132
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:144==
been used up in reaction with epoxy, and thus, still contains hydrogen available for
reaction.
When calculating the mass of free amine left within the hardener, any differences
in the reactivity between primary and secondary amines are not accounted for.
Furthermore, it is assumed that in the formation of the adduct all four hydrogens of
MXDA can partake in reactions with the added epoxy resin and that the reaction
between epoxy and amine is complete. With that, the mass of free amine remaining
within the hardener can be calculated from
Mass of free amine =
Mass of amine −1
4 · Mass of epoxy in adduct
Eq. wt. of epoxy
· Amine molecular weight
(B.7)
In the curing reaction between epoxy and amine, one epoxy group consumes one
amine hydrogen, which corresponds to one epoxy group reacting with 1/4 of the
reactive hydrogen in one amine molecule.
Therefore, the mass of free amine is,
compared to the initial mass of amine, reduced by 1/4 of the amine molecular weight
multiplied by the mass of epoxy added to the adduct divided by equivalent weight of
the epoxy. For the sake of compliance within the units in the above equation, note
that the epoxy equivalent weight corresponds to half of the mean epoxy molecular
mass.
For the case of an adduct containing 100.00 g of MXDA and 30.2 g of the epoxy resin
(corresponding to 5.5 mol%), the mass of free amine remaining within the hardener
is then
Mass of free amine =
100.0 g −1
4 ·
30.2 g
187 g/equivalent · 136.19 g/mol = 94.5 g
(B.8)
Based on the mass of active amine remaining in the hardener, the mass of adducted
amine, that is the amine which has reacted with the added epoxy, and therefore is
linked to the epoxy, can be calculated from
Mass of adducted amine =
Mass of epoxy in adduct + (Mass of amine −Mass of free amine)
(B.9)
where the mass of amine refers to the initial amount of amine present in the adduct.
Hence, for the example used above, the mass of adducted amine yields
Mass of adducted amine = 30.2 g + (100.0 g −94.5 g = 35.7 g
(B.10)
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
133
==PAGE:145==
Then, the fraction of active amine within the adduct can simply be calculated from
Fraction of free amine =
Mass of free amine
Mass of free amine + Mass of adducted amine
(B.11)
which, when inserting the numbers from the example, yields
Fraction of free amine =
94.5 g
94.5 g + 35.7 g = 0.726
(B.12)
Lastly, the fraction of free amine can be applied to calculate the hydrogen equivalent
weight in the hardener from
Fraction of free amine = Eq. wt. of hydrogen in amine
Eq. wt. of hydrogen in adduct
(B.13)
With an equivalent weight of hydrogen in the pure amine of 34.05 g/equivalent the
above equation is written as
34.05 g/equivalent
Eq. wt. of hydrogen in adduct = 0.726
(B.14)
and solving for the equivalent weight in the hardener yields 46.9 g/equivalent.
With the hydrogen equivalent weight in the hardener known, it is possible to calcu-
late the mass of hardener necessary to obtain a stoichiometric ratio between epoxy
groups and reactive hydrogen for a fixed amount of epoxy binder, as shown in equa-
tion (B.6). Thus, for a coating containing e.g. 100.0 g of the DGEBA epoxy binder,
the amount of the 5.5 mol% amine adduct hardener needed to obtain a stoichiometric
ratio is calculated from
Mass of adduct/46.9 g/equivalent
100.0 g/187 g/equivalent
= 1
(B.15)
where solving for the mass of the hardener yields 25.1 g.
In Tables B.2 and B.3 the mass of epoxy and amine adduct hardener required
to obtain a stoichiometric ratio between epoxy groups and reactive hydrogen is
included for the DGEBA and the novolac epoxy resins, respectively. In addition,
the Tables include the corresponding volumes calculated based on the densities. For
the MXDA-adducts, the densities are determined as average densities based on the
mass fractions of amine and epoxy in the hardener.
Coatings with different percentages of solid volume, ranging from 100% to 80%, were
used in the experimental work. It is assumed that mixing of the different coating
components, do not result in any volume change. And hence, the percentage solid
volume is calculated as
Percentage solid volume =
Solid volume
Solid volume + Liquid volume · 100%
(B.16)
134
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:146==
Table B.2: Mass and corresponding volume, based on the density, of the DGEBA
epoxy binder and the MXDA-adduct hardeners yielding coating formulations with
stoichiometric ratios of epoxy groups and reactive hydrogen in the amine adduct.
Mass (g)
Density (g/cm3)
Volume (cm3)
DGEBA
100.0
1.17
85.5
5.5% MXDA-adduct
25.1
1.08
23.2
7.5% MXDA-adduct
27.8
1.09
25.6
Table B.3: Mass and corresponding volume, based on the density, of the novolac
epoxy binder and the MXDA-adduct hardeners yielding coating formulations with
stoichiometric ratios of epoxy groups and reactive hydrogen in the amine adduct.
Mass (g)
Density (g/cm3)
Volume (cm3)
Novolac
100.0
1.174
85.2
5.5% MXDA-adduct
27.1
1.08
25.2
7.5% MXDA-adduct
37.2
1.09
27.5
where the solid volume is the total volume of the epoxy binder and the hardener,
and the liquid volume simply is the initial solvent volume. Thus, for the solvent free
coating, the solid volume of course equals 100%.
The volumes of the different coating components are calculated based on their dens-
ities; 1.17 g/cm3 for the DGEBA epoxy binder and 1.052 g/cm3 for the pure amine.
The density of the hardener is calculated as an average density based on the mass
fractions of amine and epoxy in the hardener:
ρhardener = xamine · ρamine + xepoxy · ρepoxy
(B.17)
where ρ denotes the densities of the amine, epoxy, and hardener, i.e. a mix of amine
and epoxy, and x denotes the mass fractions of the amine and epoxy in the hardener.
Thus, for a hardener consisting of 100.0 g of epoxy resin and 30.2 g of amine adduct
hardener, the average density is
ρhardener =
100.0 g
100.0 g + 30.2 g · 1.052 g/cm3 +
30.2 g
100.0 g + 30.2 g · 1.17 g/cm3 = 1.08 g/cm3
(B.18)
For a coating prepared with 100.0 g of the DGEBA epoxy it was found that adding
25.1 g of the hardener would result in a stoichiometric ratio. In that case, the epoxy
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
135
==PAGE:147==
volume equals 85.5 cm3 and the hardener volume 23.2 cm3. Thus, the volume of
solvent resulting in a coating of e.g. 95% solid volume can be calculated from
95% =
85.5 cm3 + 23.2 cm3
85.5 cm3 + 23.2 cm3 + Liquid Volume · 100%
(B.19)
where solving for the liquid volume yields 5.72 cm3. Using the density of xylene,
0.87 g/cm3, the xylene volume is converted to the mass. The mass, and correspond-
ing volume, of xylene added to the 100% solid volume coatings (Tables B.2 and B.3),
to yield the solvent containing coating formulations, is presented in Tables B.4 and
B.5.
Table B.4: The volumes and corresponding masses of xylene resulting in a solid
volume content of 95%, 90%, and 80%, respectively, for the solvent free coating
DGEBA coating formulation with the 5.5% adduct hardener presented in Table
B.2. The density of xylene is 0.87 gm/cm3.
Solid Volume (%)
Mass of xylene (g)
Volume of xylene (cm3)
95
5.0
5.7
90
10.5
12.1
80
23.6
27.2
Table B.5: The volumes and corresponding masses of xylene resulting in a solid
volume content of 95%, 90%, and 80%, respectively, for the solvent free coating
novolac epoxy coating formulation with the 7.5% adduct hardener presented in Table
B.2. The density of xylene is 0.87 gm/cm3.
Solid Volume (%)
Mass of xylene (g)
Volume of xylene (cm3)
90
10.9
12.5
80
24.5
27.3
136
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:148==
C
Gravimetric Analysis Data Processing
The following section includes a calculation example for gravimetric analysis data
processing for a sample of the coating formulation with the novolac epoxy resin, the
7.5% MXDA adduct hardener, and a solid volume of 80%.
The 80% solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5% MXDA adduct hardener
was prepared in accordance with the formulation calculations presented in Section
4.1. The weighed amounts of the different coating components are included in Table
C.1 together with the corresponding mass fractions and densities.
Table C.1: Weighed amounts, corresponding mass fractions and densities of the
coating components for the 80% solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener.
Mass (g)
Mass fraction
Density (g/cm3)
Novolac epoxy resin
11.740
0.647
1.174
7.5% MXDA adduct
3.506
0.193
1.09
Xylene
2.893
0.159
0.87
Total
18.139
1
-
Based on the weighed amounts and the corresponding mass fractions from Table
C.1, the initial density of the coating is calculated as
ρini = 1.174 g/cm3·0.647+1.09 g/cm3·0.193+0.87 g/cm3·0.159 = 1.109 g/cm3 (C.1)
Initially, the total weight of the coating mixture is, as seen from Table C.1, 18.139
g. After manually mixing of the coating for 5 minutes, the weight of the coating
was 17.957 g, which corresponds to a weight decrease of 0.182 g during mixing.
Assuming, that the weight decrease entirely is caused by evaporation of xylene
during mixing of coating, the weight of xylene after mixing is
mxylene = 2.893 g −0.182 g = 2.711 g
(C.2)
In percentage, that corresponds to a xylene evaporation during mixing of
2.893 g −2.711 g
2.893 g
· 100% = 6.29%
(C.3)
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
137
==PAGE:149==
The mass fractions of the different coating components after mixing are included
in Table C.2. Based on the mass fractions after mixing, the density of the coating
after the mixing process can be calculated in the same manner as before mixing:
ρmix = 1.174 g/cm3 · 0.654 + 1.09 g/cm3 · 0.195 + 0.87 g/cm3 · 0.151 = 1.111 g/cm3
(C.4)
Also the solid volume percentage of the coating changes after mixing due to the
Table C.2: Mass and corresponding mass fractions after mixing of the coating com-
ponents for the 80% solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5% MXDA adduct
hardener.
Mass (g)
Mass fraction
Density (g/cm3)
Volume (cm3)
Novolac epoxy resin
11.740
0.654
1.174
10.00
7.5% MXDA adduct
3.506
0.195
1.09
3.217
Xylene
2.711
0.151
0.87
3.116
Total
17.957
1
-
16.333
xylene evaporation.
In order to calculate the new solid volume percentage, the
volume of the different coating components after mixing is calculated. These results
are also included in Table C.2. Then, the new solid volume percentage is calculated
as
X = 10.00 cm3 + 3.217 cm3
16.333 cm3
· 100% = 80.95%
(C.5)
After mixing, part of the prepared coating is applied to the substrate, and the mass
of the coating sample applied to the substrate is calculated as
mcoating = (msubstrate + mcoating) −msubstrate
(C.6)
Thus, the weight of the coating applied to the substrate is determined by weighing
the clean glass substrate before the coating is applied and again immediately after
application of the coating. As such, it was found that the weight of the coating
sample applied to the substrate was 1.384 g.
Based on the mass and the coating density after the mixing process, the volume of
coating applied to the substrate can be calculated:
Vcoating =
1.384 g
1.111 g/cm3 = 1.245 cm3
(C.7)
Since the coating after the mixing process has a solid volume content of 80.95%, the
volume of xylene, within the coating sample on the substrate, right after application
138
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:150==
is
Vxylene = 1.245 cm3 · (1 −0.8095) = 0.237 cm3
(C.8)
which, calculating based on the density of xylene, corresponds to 0.206 g.
Finally, the percentage of the xylene, within the coating sample, which evaporates
during curing can be calculated from
xylene evaporation = m0 −m(t)
m0
· 100%
(C.9)
where m0 is the amount of xylene within the coating sample on the substrate im-
mediately after application (0.206 g) and m(t) is the amount of xylene within the
sample at curing time t. m(t) is calculated as
m(t) = mcoating −mcoating(t)
(C.10)
Since it is assumed that all weight changes are caused by xylene evaporation.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
139
==PAGE:151==
D
Gravimetric Analysis Data
Selection of raw data from the gravimetric analysis.
D.1
Solvent Containing Coatings
Table D.1: Experimental data for the weight loss observed during mixing of solvent
containing coatings. The coatings were mixed manually for 5 minutes.
DGEBA coating
Novolac coating
MXDA adduct hardener (%)
5.5
5.5
7.5
7.5
5.5
Solid volume (%)
90
80
90
80
80
Weight before mixing
Coating (g)
15.877
17.420
16.574
18.131
15.174
Xylene (g)
1.240
2.775
1.283
2.893
2.400
Weight after mixing
Coating (g)
15.821
17.308
16.488
17.957
15.033
Xylene (g)
1.184
2.664
1.197
2.719
2.259
Xylene evaporation during mixing (%)
4.517
4.024
6.703
6.015
5.875
140
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:152==
Table D.2: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 90%
solid volume DGEBA coating cured with the 5.5% MXDA adduct. The percentage
of xylene evaporated at 0 min after application refers to evaporation taking place
during mixing of the coating.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Xylene evaporation (%)
0
1.392
4.517
5
1.374
17.603
10
1.370
21.515
15
1.370
21.515
20
1.369
22.493
25
1.369
22.493
30
1.368
23.471
40
1.368
23.471
50
1.367
24.449
60
1.367
24.449
80
1.367
24.449
100
1.366
25.427
120
1.366
25.427
24 h
1.364
27.383
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
141
==PAGE:153==
Table D.3: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 80%
solid volume DGEBA coating cured with the 5.5% MXDA adduct. The percentage
of xylene evaporated at 0 min after application refers to evaporation taking place
during mixing of the coating.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Xylene evaporation (%)
0
1.475
4.024
5
1.399
34.203
10
1.373
45.904
15
1.372
46.354
20
1.37
47.254
25
1.367
48.604
30
1.368
48.154
40
1.366
49.054
50
1.366
49.054
60
1.365
49.504
80
1.364
49.954
100
1.363
50.404
120
1.362
50.854
24 h
1.356
53.554
142
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:154==
Table D.4: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 90%
solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5% MXDA adduct. The percentage
of xylene evaporated at 0 min after application refers to evaporation taking place
during mixing of the coating.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Xylene evaporation (%)
0
1.515
6.703
5
1.50
13.832
10
1.497
16.599
15
1.496
17.521
20
1.495
18.443
25
1.492
21.209
30
1.492
21.209
40
1.492
21.209
50
1.492
21.209
60
1.492
21.209
80
1.491
22.131
100
1.491
22.131
120
1.491
22.131
24 h
1.490
23.054
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
143
==PAGE:155==
Table D.5: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 80%
solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5% MXDA adduct. The percentage
of xylene evaporated at 0 min after application refers to evaporation taking place
during mixing of the coating.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Xylene evaporation (%)
0
1.384
6.015
5
1.33
26.521
10
1.302
40.273
15
1.295
43.711
20
1.294
44.202
25
1.292
45.184
30
1.291
45.676
40
1.291
45.676
50
1.29
46.167
60
1.29
46.167
80
1.289
46.658
100
1.289
46.658
120
1.288
47.149
24 h
1.282
50.096
144
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:156==
Table D.6: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 80%
solid volume novolac coating cured with the 5.5% MXDA adduct. The percentage
of xylene evaporated at 0 min after application refers to evaporation taking place
during mixing of the coating.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Xylene evaporation (%)
0
1.683
5.875
5
1.609
29.820
10
1.600
33.446
15
1.600
33.446
20
1.599
33.849
25
1.599
33.849
30
1.599
33.849
40
1.599
33.849
50
1.599
33.849
60
1.599
33.849
80
1.599
33.849
100
1.599
33.849
120
1.599
33.849
24 h
1.597
34.655
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
145
==PAGE:157==
D.2
Solvent Free Coatings
Table D.7: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 100%
solid volume DGEBA coating cured with the 5.5% MXDA adduct.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Weight increase (%)
0
1.559
0
5
1.565
0.385
10
1.568
0.577
15
1.568
0.577
20
1.569
0.641
25
1.569
0.641
30
1.569
0.641
40
1.569
0.641
50
1.569
0.641
60
1.569
0.641
80
1.569
0.641
100
1.569
0.641
120
1.569
0.641
24 h
1.569
0.641
146
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:158==
Table D.8: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 100%
solid volume novolac coating cured with the 7.5% MXDA adduct.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Weight increase (%)
0
1.598
0
5
1.602
0.250
10
1.603
0.313
15
1.603
0.313
20
1.604
0.375
25
1.604
0.375
30
1.605
0.438
40
1.605
0.438
50
1.605
0.438
60
1.605
0.438
80
1.605
0.438
100
1.605
0.438
120
1.605
0.438
24 h
1.605
0.438
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
147
==PAGE:159==
Table D.9: Experimental data from the gravimetric analysis of sample 1 of the 100%
solid volume novolac coating cured with the 5.5% MXDA adduct.
Time after coating application (min)
Coating weight (g)
Weight increase (%)
0
1.499
0
5
1.504
0.334
10
1.505
0.400
15
1.506
0.467
20
1.509
0.667
25
1.509
0.667
30
1.509
0.667
40
1.509
0.667
50
1.509
0.667
60
1.509
0.667
80
1.509
0.667
100
1.509
0.667
120
1.509
0.667
24 h
1.509
0.667
148
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:160==
E
IR Spectra
Selection of raw data IR-spectra for investigating the epoxy conversion as a function
of the curing time.
E.1
DGEBA Coatings
E.1.1
5.5% Adduct Hardener and 100% Solid Volume
Figure E.1: IR spectra for the average of DGEBA based coating, using the 5.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 0 h of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
149
==PAGE:161==
Figure E.2: IR spectra for the average of DGEBA based coating, using the 5.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 1 h of curing.
Figure E.3: IR spectra for the average, surface, and bottom of DGEBA based
coating, using the 5.5% MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 24
h of curing.
150
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:162==
Figure E.4: IR spectra for the surface and bottom of DGEBA based coating, using
the 5.5% MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 192 h of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
151
==PAGE:163==
E.1.2
5.5% Adduct Hardener and 95% Solid Volume
Figure E.5: IR spectra for the average of DGEBA based coating, using the 5.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 95% solid volume after 0 h of curing.
152
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:164==
Figure E.6: IR spectra for the average of DGEBA based coating, using the 5.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 95% solid volume after 1 h of curing.
Figure E.7: IR spectra for the average, surface, and bottom of DGEBA based
coating, using the 5.5% MXDA adduct hardener and a 95% solid volume after 24 h
of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
153
==PAGE:165==
Figure E.8: IR spectra for the surface and bottom of DGEBA based coating, using
the 5.5% MXDA adduct hardener and a 95% solid volume after 172 h of curing.
154
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:166==
E.2
Novolac Coatings
E.2.1
7.5% Adduct Hardener and 100% Solid Volume
Figure E.9: IR spectra for the average of novolac based coating, using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 0 h of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
155
==PAGE:167==
Figure E.10: IR spectra for the average of novolac based coating, using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 1 h of curing.
Figure E.11: IR spectra for the bottom of novolac based coating, using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 24 h of curing.
156
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:168==
Figure E.12: IR spectra for the surface and bottom of novolac based coating, using
the 7.5% MXDA adduct hardener and a 100% solid volume after 168 h of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
157
==PAGE:169==
E.2.2
7.5% Adduct Hardener and 80% Solid Volume
Figure E.13: IR spectra for the average of novolac based coating, using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 80% solid volume after 0 h of curing.
158
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:170==
Figure E.14: IR spectra for the average of novolac based coating, using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 80% solid volume after 1 h of curing.
Figure E.15: IR spectra for the surface and bottom of novolac based coating, using
the 7.5% MXDA adduct hardener and a 80% solid volume after 24 h of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
159
==PAGE:171==
Figure E.16: IR spectra for the bottom of novolac based coating, using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener and a 80% solid volume after 120 h of curing.
160
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:172==
F
DMA Results
Selection of raw data from the dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA).
F.1
100% Solid Volume Coating
Figure F.1: Results for DMA of 100% solid volume novolac coating using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener after 6 h of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
161
==PAGE:173==
Figure F.2: Results for DMA of 100% solid volume novolac coating using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener after 24 h of curing.
Figure F.3: Results for DMA of 100% solid volume novolac coating using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener after 124 h of curing.
162
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:174==
F.2
80% Solid Volume Coating
Figure F.4: Results for DMA of 80% solid volume novolac coating using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener after 10 h of curing.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
163
==PAGE:175==
Figure F.5: Results for DMA of 80% solid volume novolac coating using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener after 24 h of curing.
Figure F.6: Results for DMA of 80% solid volume novolac coating using the 7.5%
MXDA adduct hardener after 124 h of curing.
164
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:176==
G
Deflection Test Data
Figure G.1: Deflection data, recorded using sensors with a resolution of 1 mm, as a
function of curing time for a solvent free novolac coating cured with the 7.5% amine
adduct applied to stainless steel substrates with a wet film thickness of 300 µm.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
165
==PAGE:177==
Figure G.2: Deflection data, recorded using sensors with a resolution of 1 mm, as
a function of curing time for an 80% solid volume novolac coating cured with the
7.5% amine adduct applied to stainless steel substrates with a wet film thickness of
150 µm.
166
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:178==
Figure G.3: Deflection data, recorded using sensors with a resolution of 1 mm, as
a function of curing time for a solvent free DGEBA coating cured with the 7.5%
amine adduct applied to stainless steel substrates with a wet film thickness of 300
µm.
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
167
==PAGE:179==
H
Kamal-Sourour Model MATLAB Script
1
clear all
2
3
%Experimental data
4
5
t=[0, 3600/60^2, 7200/60^2, 10800/60^2, 14400/60^2, 21600/60^2,
32400/60^2, 86400/60^2, 115200/60^2, 172800/60^2, 201600/60^2,
259200/60^2, 345600/60^2, 374400/60^2, 432000/60^2];
6
7
alpha=[0, 0.110062443, 0.237107857, 0.411055057, 0.545890018,
0.630666669, 0.658390166, 0.687065272, 0.702485941, 0.699917262,
0.711607885, 0.727568837, 0.720269954, 0.715850307, 0.723886029];
8
9
plot(t,alpha,'*-')
10
11
hold on
12
13
%Defining constants
14
R=8.314; %J/(mol*K)
15
16
m=1.1;
17
18
n=1.5;
19
20
a1=1.46*10^7*60^2; %h^(-1)
21
22
a2=836.9*60^2; %h^(-1)
23
24
e1=70.8*10^3;
%J/mol
25
26
e2=34.8*10^3; %J/mol
27
28
T=296.15; %K
29
30
K1=a1*exp(-e1/(R*T));
31
32
K2=a2*exp(-e2/(R*T));
33
34
C=35;
35
36
alphac=0.53;
37
38
time=120; %h
168
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
==PAGE:180==
39
40
tspan=linspace(0, time, 150);
41
42
alpha0=0;
43
44
[t,alpha] = ode23(@(t,alpha) (K1+K2*alpha^m)*(1-alpha)^n*1/(1+exp(C*(
alpha-alphac))), tspan, alpha0)
45
46
plot(t,alpha,'-')
Backmatter/E6A2_X100_75.m
Quantification of Mechanical Properties of Two-Component Epoxy Coatings During Curing
169
==PAGE:181==
Technical University of Denmark
Søltofts Plads 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 2822
www.kt.dtu.dk
