==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
A CFD surrogate model for annual energy production 
calculations of wind farms 
 
 
Javier Criado Risco 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0413 
January 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Javier Criado Risco 
Title: A CFD surrogate model for annual energy production calculations 
of wind farms 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0413 
January 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
August 2020 – January 2021 
 
 
 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor(s): 
Paul van der Laan 
Mads Mølgaard Pedersen 
Pierre-Elouan Réthoré 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The annual energy production or AEP is an essential parameter at the time of assessing
the proﬁtability of renewable energy projects. In the wind energy industry, the AEP
depends, among other things, on the layout of the wind farm, as it has to account for
the losses that arise due to the interaction between the ﬂow and the wind turbines, also
referred to as wake losses.
Researchers and engineers have tried to improve the accuracy in the calculation of the
AEP along the last decades by means of developing deﬁcit models, which calculate the
wind speed deﬁcits originated by the wind turbines, thus considering the loss of power
derived from it. Modern models based on heavy numerical computing, like LES or RANS,
have demonstrated high ﬁdelity in the estimation of deﬁcits and power production from
wind farms. However, the necessary computational resources to run these models makes
them impractical for optimization purposes. Hence, a new approach is proposed, known
as surrogate modelling, that consists of generating a look-up table of pre-calculated
RANS deﬁcit and turbulence ﬁelds for a single wind turbine, and then use this data to
run faster simulations by simply reading and interpolating in the look-up table for every
wind turbine within a wind farm, and superposing the obtained variable ﬁelds.
The new deﬁcit surrogate model was developed and implemented in PyWake [1] using two
parameters to model the wake, namely the thrust coeﬃcient and the ambient turbulence
intensity. For the superposition of the variable ﬁelds from diﬀerent wind turbine sources,
an investigation was undertaken to determine that the linear overlapping of the deﬁcit
and turbulence ﬁelds achieves a higher accuracy when compared to full RANS simulations.
In general, the surrogate model proved to underestimate the wind speeds in the wake of
the downstream wind turbines, and consequently the power losses are overestimated.
The surrogate model was compared to Fuga [2], a deﬁcit model that is based on the
linearization of the RANS equations. Several wind farm array cases were run under
diﬀerent inﬂow conditions and spacing between wind turbines to determine which model
achieved higher ﬁdelity. In most of the cases, the surrogate model provided more accurate
wind speed predictions and less relative diﬀerences in terms of power with respect to
RANS.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The last ﬁve months have been very challenging for me. Before starting my master thesis,
I had never used Python, so I really had to speed up and learn fast all the skills that
would help me to cope with the programming part of this project. In many occasions,
this involved spending long hours for easy tasks that otherwise would have been quite
straightforward for me. In addition, the pandemic situation around the World made it
necessary to hold online meetings most of the times, which can bring about additional
diﬃculties.
Despite of this, I am quite happy with the outcome and all that I have learnt during these
months. I am also conﬁdent that my ﬁndings will be useful for the wind energy industry
and maybe for other students that might research on this ﬁeld in the forthcoming year.
Looking back to when I arrived to Denmark, I still cannot believe that two years have
passed so quickly. I am glad that I took the decision to quit my job and face this
challenge, since it has not only allowed me to broaden my engineering skills, but also to
meet fantastic people and to know beautiful places.
I would like to thank my parents for their sponsorship - without them, this adventure
would have been impossible -, to my supervisors Paul, Mads and Pierre for their time,
help and guidance, and to my beloved Magda for her unconditional support and care -
and for her delicious cooking in the most stressful days.
Copenhagen, January 10, 2021
Javier Criado Risco
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
• AEP = Annual Energy Production
• RANS = Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes
• MOST = Monin-Obukhov Similarity Theory
• ASL = Atmospheric Surface Layer
• CFD = Computational Fluid Dynamics
• LUT = Look-Up table
• AD = Actuator Disk
• CGI = Circular Gauss Integration
• D = Diameter (referred to a wind turbine rotor)
• U∞= Inﬂow wind speed
• TI∞= Ambient turbulence intensity
• CT = Thrust coeﬃcient
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Nomenclature
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction and motivation
1
1.1
European Energy framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Wind farm layout optimization to maximize annual energy production . .
1
1.3
Blockage and wake eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Analytical vs computational models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theoretical framework
7
2.1
Theoretical background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Behavior of the deﬁcits in the wake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
PyWake: a tool for AEP calculation
15
3.1
Introduction to PyWake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Engineering models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
PyWakeEllipSys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Surrogate modelling
25
4.1
Generation of data in PyWakeEllipSys
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Implementation of the model in PyWake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Accuracy assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Superposition investigation
35
5.1
Superposition models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Study of the variables over the rotor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Investigation of the rotor average models in PyWake
. . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Comparison with Fuga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusions and future research
57
A Methodology to average the ﬂow variables
61
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
B Grid Study
63
C Modelling of the speed-ups
67
D Impact of the spacing between wind turbines
69
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and motivation
1.1
European Energy framework
The new European Commission has set the ambitious objective of halving the greenhouse
gas emissions by 2030 to later reach net-zero emissions by 2050. This would help us
to limit global climate change to 1.5oC, which is adressed by the goals of the Paris
Agreement (2015). Decarbonization of Europe involves accelerating the transition to
renewables in the power sector while phasing out fossil fuels in industry, transport and
heating sectors. According to the European Commission ’1.5TECH scenario’ [3], this
will require between 5 to 8 times more solar, around 3.5 times more onshore wind and 20
times more oﬀshore wind capacity by 2050, in comparison with the current scenario.
To put this into perspective, the oﬀshore wind installed capacity must increase between
400 and 450 GW until 2050, a vast amount if compared with the approximately 20 GW
installed in the present [4]. Therefore, oﬀshore wind deployment rates must increase
quickly during the following years. In addition, this challenge has to be achieved while
respecting the environment and biodiversity, as well as ensuring the cost-eﬃciency of the
transition in order to keep a growing European economy.
Evolution in the levelized costs of green energies points the net-zero emissions objective
to be economically feasible. Accounting just for the oﬀshore wind in Northwest Europe,
costs have declined by approximately 70% since 2012 [4], and they are expected to
continue declining as there is still potential for optimization of renewable technologies.
1.2
Wind farm layout optimization to maximize
annual energy production
In this framework, wind farm layout optimization has been gaining increasing attention
and being focus of research during the recent years [5] [6] [7], as it oﬀers the possibility
for cost-eﬃciency improvement of wind power. The layout of a wind farm is deﬁned as
the positions of the wind turbines within the area delimited by the wind farm boundaries.
Thus, its optimization is referred to the problem of ﬁnding those optimal positions that
maximize the energy yield whilst minimizing the costs and meeting certain constraints,
which might include: physical boundaries, minimal distance between turbines, noise
emission level, maximum total investment, etc. [8]. An important aspect to remark is
that the energy yield depends on the wind conditions and on the wind farm layout. Thus,
the energy yield is normally expressed as the annual energy production, namely AEP,
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction and motivation
which is an estimation of the total amount of electrical energy that a wind farm would
produce over a year given a determined set of wind climate conditions and a certain wind
farm layout. AEP is an essential parameter at the time of assessing the proﬁtability of
an energy project, since even small changes on its value can lead to signiﬁcant variations
of the Internal Rate of Return [9]. Hence, not only a maximized but also a reliable
calculation of the AEP is desired by investors and engineers in pre-feasibility studies of
new wind farms.
The AEP calculation for a given wind farm layout requires knowing the wind conditions
at the site and the power curve of the used wind turbine model. The wind conditions
can be measured at the site for a period of time suﬃciently long in order to reﬂect in a
reliable way the site climate features, being a good practice to include at least 2 years of
data measurements. The measurements are often ﬁtted with a Weibull distribution curve
[10], which is also typically used when wind measurements are not available. The wind
turbine power curve is given by the manufacturer and it relates the power output of the
machine for a range of wind speeds, normally limited between 4 and 25 m/s. Once this
information is available, it is possible to calculate the AEP by multiplying every wind
speed frequency (time units) into the corresponding power output value (power units),
for every wind direction and every probability of combination between the diﬀerent wind
speeds and directions, eventually integrating all the results (energy units). However,
if this rough calculation was performed for every wind turbine in the wind farm, that
would lead to a gross value of the AEP. In practice, the interaction between the wind
ﬂow and the wind turbines produces a signiﬁcant loss of energy for a wind farm during
its operation. When estimating the proﬁtability of a project, it is critical to account for
these wind farm losses, hence seeking for a net AEP value.
1.3
Blockage and wake eﬀects
When it comes to optimizing the layout of a wind farm, the largest losses are often related
to the interaction between the ﬂow and the wind turbines. This interaction prompts two
phenomena that are well known by the wind industry as they reduce the production
in a substantial way. The study and subsequent modelling of these is therefore of high
interest for the wind industry.
The ﬁrst phenomenon occurs when the wind approaches the wind turbine. In the near
upstream distance, the pressure increases, the ﬂow is slowed down and skewed around the
wind turbine, giving rise to the so called blockage eﬀect, also referred to as wind turbine
induction. Segalini and Dahlberg [11] demonstrated that deﬁcits in the wind velocity can
be observed from 2 to 4 diameters upstream. The magnitude of the blockage depends
on the wind turbine characteristics, the wind farm layout, and the site atmospheric
conditions, but it does not matter if the wind farm is onshore or oﬀshore. Borrachino
et al. [12] observed wind speed deﬁcit values around 0.7% at 2.5 diameters upstream.
However, despite this wind speed deﬁcit being almost negligible for an individual wind
turbine, the sum of the total blockage arisen from all the wind turbines in a wind farm
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Analytical vs computational models
3
might not be as unimportant. In terms of energy production, the blockage eﬀect can
involve losses ranging from 0% to 4% of the annual energy production, according to DNV
GL [13].
The second phenomenon takes place when the wind interacts with the rotor of a wind
turbine. Part of the wind’s kinetic energy is extracted by the rotor and converted into
mechanical energy, and as a result, the wind speed behind the rotor is slowed down,
the pressure suddenly drops, and the ﬂow becomes turbulent, creating a region of wind
speed deﬁcits and increased turbulence intensity downstream. As the distance increases
from the rotor downstream, the ﬂow slowly recovers its initial speed and turbulence
dissipates. This is known as the wake eﬀect, and those regions of wind shadowing and
increased turbulence are called wakes. The wake region can be divided into the near
wake and the far wake. The ﬁrst one, immediately after the rotor, extends for 2 to 5
diameters downstream [14], where the ﬂow is highly inﬂuenced by the rotor geometry [15].
This sub-region is dominated by the turbulence created from the interaction between
the ﬂow and the rotor, and due to the blade rotation, vortex formation occurs creating
expanding helical trajectories that give rise to a cylindrical shear layer [14]. Pressure
and axial velocity steep gradients and wake expansion are common features of the near
wake region [15]. The far wake starts when the generated shear layer reaches the wake
axis, and in this sub-region the pressure and the wind velocity slowly recover their free
stream conditions, being the turbulence the dominant property [14]. The velocity deﬁcit
resembles a Gaussian curve, showing axisymmetric and selfsimilar proﬁle. The wake
eﬀect involves a signiﬁcant loss of energy in large wind farms (>10% of long-term average
energy loss according to [16]). This is due to the downstream turbines experiencing
lower power outputs as a consequence of the lower wind speeds. Additionally, the wake
eﬀect also involves higher loading due to the increased turbulence in the wakes, which
translates into shorter wind turbine lifetime.
Thereby, the study and modelling of the blockage and wake eﬀects within a wind farm
is extremely important for the optimization of its layout and the prevention of early
damage on the wind turbines. Already existing models have to be reﬁned or substituted
to continuously improve their performance and achieve higher levels of accuracy that
ultimately lead to a better ﬁnancial results for the wind power industry.
1.4
Analytical vs computational models
Wake modelling has been an important topic of research over the past ﬁve decades. By
contrast, blockage modelling (or modelling of the induction zone) has been more of a
focus in the recent years. Following an increasing order of complexity, several approaches
have been traditionally followed to model the interaction between the ﬂow and the
wind turbines: on the ﬁrst place, analytical models, also referred to as engineering
models, are based on semi-empirical functions that can run simulations in a matter of
seconds. These focus on modelling the wake expansion and the velocity deﬁcits through
calibrated parameters and mathematical expressions, providing eﬃciency and faster
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction and motivation
resolution; secondly, models based on the Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes equations,
referred to as RANS models, take several hours to run and can perform simpliﬁcations
of the Navier-Stokes equations to fully characterize the ﬂow around the wind turbine,
providing a high level of detail for the wake and turbulence; lastly, time resolved large
eddy simulations, also known as LES models, provide very high resolution computations
of the ﬂow around the wind turbines, which may take several weeks to complete even
when large computer clusters are used. The later two, RANS and LES models, are within
the category of computational models (CFD). The main diﬀerence between them is that
while RANS models are statistical averaging of a turbulent signal (for instance, the wind
velocity), LES models are based on ﬁltering of the signal, rather than averaging. In terms
of turbulence scales, LES resolves the large and models the small ones, while RANS
models all turbulence scales. In essence, RANS models lead to steady equations, and
LES models lead to unsteady equations.
Every one of these approaches has a speciﬁc purpose. LES models are useful when it
comes to perform detailed studies of the interaction of turbulent ﬂow with the blades or
interaction between wakes, and this can later be used to validate or calibrate simpler
models. Additionally, they are applicable to the study of unsteady loads, for instance
to fatigue studies.
In turn, RANS are more suited to perform parametric studies
related to power losses. For optimization purposes, computational models such as CFD
are, in general, not used. The reason behind this fact is that optimization processes
require multiple calculations that include diﬀerent conﬁgurations. In wind farm layout
optimization, a high number of wind turbine position combinations have to be evaluated
for diﬀerent wind speeds and directions in order to get an optimal solution. Engineering
models are suitable for this purpose as they provide an eﬃcient and fast way to solve
each iteration within the optimization process.
For modelling the blockage, some analytical models have been developed in the recent
years, for instance, the vortex cylinder model developed by Branlard and Forsting [17]
or the Self-Similarity model by Troldborg and Forsting[18]. The vortex cylinder model
was based on the cylindrical rotor model of Joukowski to determine the velocity ﬁeld
that is developed in the induction region. The model represents an actuator disk and its
wake by assuming a prescribed vorticity, and it can be used for quick estimations with
a remarkable accuracy. Likewise, the Self-Similarity model describes the deﬁcits in the
induction zone in a simple analytical way. It was proposed after ﬁnding that induced
velocity is self-similar and independent of the rotor geometry for distances beyond one
rotor radius upstream by Troldborg and Forsting. They used incompressible RANS
simulations with actuator disks for the validation of these results.
A wider number of wake models can be found, as they have been studied for considerably
longer time. There are some very well known ones that must be mentioned because
of their relevance for the wind industry. The Jensen model [19] (1983) is a very fast
and simple model that quantiﬁes the reduction in the wind speed downstream the rotor.
Based on empirical observations, it assumes that the radial wind speed remains constant
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Motivation
5
within the wake, whose expansion is modeled through a decay parameter that might
be constant or dependent on the turbulence intensity. The Jensen model is not very
accurate when calculating the wake losses under speciﬁc atmospheric inﬂow conditions
due to its simplicity, but it is fairly accurate when it comes to estimating wake losses on
an annual basis [20]. The Ainslie model [21] (1985) is a linearized wake model that uses
parabolized RANS equations to obtain the ﬂow behind a wind turbine rotor. The model
assumes axisymmetric ﬂow and ignores the pressure gradient, which means it cannot be
applied to the near wake, where the pressure gradient is dominant. Nevertheless, it is
considered to be relatively fast an accurate for the far wake [22]. Another important
model that was developed more recently is Fuga [2]. This is a linearized RANS model
that is based on a series of look-up tables (LUT), some general and some turbine speciﬁc,
and that allow to construct the velocity ﬁelds around a single or multiple turbines. The
LUT contains data generated through linearized RANS simulations for a quasi-steady
ﬂow. A limitation of Fuga is that it can be only applied to oﬀshore or homogeneous
terrain cases.
Among other advantages, linearized models as Fuga can provide an approximation of the
computational models being computationally cheaper and faster to evaluate. However,
linearization can bring some disadvantages. In the case of Fuga, for regions very close to
the rotor, the linearized equations violate the momentum balance, and as a consequence
the results for the near wake ﬁeld are not as accurate [2].
Likewise linearized models try to approximate the behavior of CFD models whilst avoiding
big computational eﬀort, a similar approach was followed by Schmidt and Stoevesandt
[23] to integrate CFD simulations into wind farm modelling. They solved the deﬁcit ﬁelds
for a series of wind speeds with a single wind turbine by using the steady incompressible
RANS equations, and then created a numerical model based on these results. The model
can later solve diﬀerent cases by interpolating in the pre-calculated deﬁcit ﬁelds and
superposing these when several wind turbines are present. This approach is also known
as surrogate modelling, and it is commonly followed in engineering when the problem
requires simulations that are too heavy and time consuming. In the method followed by
Schmidt and Stoevesandt [23], the preparation of the data containing the deﬁcit ﬁelds
requires some computational eﬀort at the beginning, but this has to be done just once
and then the model can be run very fast whilst provide some capabilities of RANS.
1.5
Motivation
In this scenario and based on the discussion above, the purpose of this master thesis is
to build a new surrogate model for the calculation of the wind speed deﬁcits in wind
farms that can achieve a precise and eﬃcient calculation of the AEP, providing the
ﬁdelity of a computational model whereas demanding very low computational eﬀort. A
close approach to the one followed by Schmidt and Stoevesandt in their study [23] is
applied, storing pre-calculated deﬁcit ﬂow ﬁelds in a LUT that feeds the model. However,
a step further is intended, as two parameters to store the ﬁelds are used: the thrust
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction and motivation
coeﬃcient and the ambient turbulence intensity. It is expected that the use of a local
inﬂow parameter like the ambient turbulence intensity helps to achieve a higher level of
accuracy when using superposition models.
With this purpose in mind, it is intended to provide an answer to the following questions:
1. What is the behavior of the wind speed deﬁcit ﬁelds in the wake as a function of
the thrust coeﬃcient and the ambient turbulence intensity?
2. Schmidt and Stoevesandt [23] demonstrated that the thrust coeﬃcient can be used
as a parameter to model the deﬁcit ﬁelds by surrogate modelling. Could their
results be improved if an additional inﬂow parameter, like the turbulence intensity,
is used to predict the deﬁcits?
3. What is the best superposition method to add deﬁcit and turbulence intensity
ﬁelds from diﬀerent wind turbine sources?
4. What advantages can be achieved by using a surrogate model instead of linearizing
the RANS equations as done in Fuga? Is surrogate modelling a better way to
approach wind farm modelling?
In order to address these questions, the present report is divided into six chapters. An
introduction to the problem, the main objective and the research questions for this
master thesis have been described in the present Chapter 1. Chapter 2 brings up the
theoretical basis behind the model, and additionally, the behavior of the deﬁcits as a
function of the parameters to use is studied. Research Question 1 is addressed in this
chapter. For the building and development of the model, the software tool PyWake will
be used; Chapter 3 provides an general overview of it and its main features. Subsequently,
Chapter 4 describes the implementation of the surrogate model in PyWake. Furthermore,
an accuracy assessment is performed. On Chapter 5, the superposition of turbulence
intensity and deﬁcit ﬁelds is investigated. In addition, the surrogate model is contrasted
with Fuga, which is also implemented in PyWake. Research Question 2, 3 and 4 are
addressed in this chapter. Finally, Chapter 6 summarizes the conclusions and suggestions
for further research.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical framework
This chapter describes the theoretical foundations on which the surrogate model is
based. Section 2.1 describes the physical principle of the Re-Similarity and how the
incompressible Navier Stokes equations can be written in their non-dimensional form in
order to make the simulation results independent of the wind speed and wind turbine size.
Section 2.2 studies the deﬁcit and turbulence ﬁelds resulting from RANS simulations for
a single wind turbine, with the purpose of providing a better understanding of how these
variables behave in the wake.
2.1
Theoretical background
In the real world, wind turbines operate under atmospheric conditions characterized by
a high Reynolds number (Re), with values that can range from 106 to 108, depending on
the rotor diameter and on the inﬂow wind speed. However, scaling laws in ﬂuid dynamics
can reduce the complexity of the numerical simulations by making these independent of
Re. This can be achieved by implementing an idealized atmospheric inﬂow, represented
by an ASL with a normalized wind speed gradient, according to the Monin-Obukhov
Similarity Theory [24]. Hence, for a certain stability state, the turbulence length scale will
be independent of the wind speed, and consequently the deﬁcits and turbulence intensity
ﬁelds in the wake region of a wind turbine will be independent of the inﬂow velocity
scale, as demonstrated by van der Laan in [25]. Using this physical principle, known as
Re-Similarity, enables to simplify the numerical calculations of RANS solvers, making
the resulting ﬁelds dependent just on the ambient turbulence intensity, the stability state,
and the thrust coeﬃcient of the wind turbine.
The Re-Similarity can be understood by looking at the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations for mass 2.1 and for momentum 2.2, which are commonly used to describe the
ﬂow in wind farms. These can be derived to a non-dimensional form, as done in [25], to
demonstrate how the non-dimensional solution is independent of the wind speed and the
wind turbine size, always that Re is large enough.
Departing from the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, the normalization follows as
described below:
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(2.1)
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theoretical framework
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂p
∂xi
+ ν ∂
∂xj
 ∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
+ fi
ρ
(2.2)
where xi are Cartesian coordinates, t is the time, ui are the velocity components, p is the
pressure, ρ is the ﬂuid density, ν is the kinematic molecular viscosity and fi are external
forces per unit of volume (for a wind farm purposes these could be wind turbine, Coriolis
and buoyancy forces).
Using the Boussinesq (linear) stress-strain relation for the Reynolds-stress, the equation
(2.2) can be written as the RANS (momentum) equations in non-dimensional form:
U ′
j
∂U ′
i
∂x′
j
= −∂P ′
∂x′
i
+ ∂
∂x′
j
" 1
Re + ν′
T
  ∂U ′
i
∂x′
j
+ ∂U ′
j
∂x′
i
!#
+ F ′
i
(2.3)
where U ′
i ≡Ui/U, P ′ ≡P/(ρU2) and F ′
i ≡FiL/(ρU2) , with Ui, P ′ and Fi as Reynolds-
averaged variables, P represents the modiﬁed pressure including the turbulent kinetic
energy, and ν′
T ≡νT/(UL) is the normalized eddy-viscosity with νT as the dimensional
eddy-viscosity. The transient terms disappear, as the time is left out of the equation. As
mentioned before, the order of Re for a real wind turbine ranges between 106 and 108.
For this order of Re, the viscous eﬀects can be neglected (unless the external wind turbine
forces include a viscous component). Thereby, if all external forces F ′
i are scaled with
ρU2/L, and νT scales with UL in order to obtain the Reynold number independence, then
the RANS momentum equations in normalized form will not depend on the characteristic
scales of velocity and length.
Consequently, according to the discussed above, if the previous normalization is applied
to a system of equations to run wind farm simulations under a suﬃciently high Reynolds
number Re, the non-dimensional solution will be independent of the wind speed (velocity
scale) and wind turbine size (length scale), and therefore, the thrust coeﬃcient of the
wind turbine will be the main parameter that determines the wake. Note that the wake
would also depend on D/zH, but for the same wind turbine model this parameter does
not change, and other wind turbine parameters as the tip speed ratio or the power
coeﬃcient, have a minor impact,since the ﬁrst one is related to the distribution of the
normal forces (and not their magnitude) and the later one to the tangential forces.
Besides the thrust coeﬃcient, the Re-Similarity principle involves that the ﬁelds in the
wake will be also aﬀected by two inﬂow parameters, the ambient turbulence intensity
and the stability state. Thereby, if a certain stability state is assumed, the deﬁcits in
the wake will ultimately depend on the thrust coeﬃcient and the ambient turbulence
intensity.
The idea behind the surrogate model is that if we are able to perform RANS simulations
for a range of thrust coeﬃcients and ambient turbulence intensity values with a normalized
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Behavior of the deﬁcits in the wake
9
inﬂow wind speed, assuming certain stability state, and store the resulting normalized
deﬁcit and turbulence ﬁelds in a LUT, then it is possible to run faster simulations for a
particular case by interpolating those two parameters in the LUT and scaling up the
normalized deﬁcits with the wind speed.
2.2
Behavior of the deﬁcits in the wake
In the prior section, the theoretical foundations that lead to an overall approach for the
surrogate model have been described, concluding that one main wind turbine parameter,
the thrust coeﬃcient (CT), and two main inﬂow parameters, the stability state and the
ambient turbulence intensity (TI∞), deﬁne the deﬁcit and turbulence ﬁelds in the wake.
Ultimately, the deﬁcits in the wake deﬁne the eﬀective wind speed that determines the
power output of the wind turbines, and thus a better understanding of the deﬁcit ﬁelds
is desired. For this purpose, the behavior of the deﬁcits was studied individually as a
function of the thrust coeﬃcient and the ambient turbulence intensity, assuming a certain
stability state.
2.2.1
Deﬁnition of the parameters
The thrust is deﬁned as the axial force that the wind turbine rotor applies on the incoming
wind ﬂow. The thrust coeﬃcient is given by the expression that relates the total thrust
force with the rotor geometry and the inﬂow wind speed and density:
CT =
T
0.5ρAU 2
∞
(2.4)
where T represents the total thrust force, ρ is the air density, A is the rotor surface, and
U∞is the inﬂow wind speed. Following this expression, the thrust coeﬃcient is directly
proportional to the thrust force and inversely proportional to the squared wind speed.
On the other hand, the turbulence intensity in the wind energy industry is deﬁned as the
standard deviation of the wind velocity divided by its mean value over a deﬁned time
period, typically 10 minutes. It represents the amount of ﬂuctuation in the wind velocity,
and it can be estimated by the expression:
TI ≡u′
U =
r
1
3

u′2
x + u′2
y + u′2
z

q
U
2
x + U
2
y + U
2
z
(2.5)
where u′ is the root-mean-square of the turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations in the three space
directions and U is the mean velocity. The turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations can be also
expressed as a function of the turbulent kinetic energy:
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theoretical framework
TI ≡
q
2
3k
U
(2.6)
where k is the turbulent kinetic energy.
Measured with a cup anemometer, the turbulence intensity can usually range from 3%
to 20% [26]. Based on this, the ambient turbulence intensity values chosen for the
simulations along this master thesis were within this interval.
2.2.2
Deﬁcit ﬁelds as a function of the thrust coeﬃcient
A series of RANS simulations were run in PyWakeEllipSys using an inﬂow wind speed of
1 m/s, a range of thrust coeﬃcients from 0.1 to 0.9 with a step of 0.1, and a constant
ambient turbulence intensity (several values but one at a time). Figure 2.1 illustrates
the normalized average wind speeds for every thrust coeﬃcient and for TI∞= 5%, 10%
and 15%. Appendix A provides an description of the followed methodology to average
the wind speed. A better visualization of the behavior is achieved by normalizing the
wind speeds by the thrust coeﬃcient, according to the next expression:
U(x) = U i
CT,i
(2.7)
where U is the average wind speed calculated as described in Appendix A, and CT,i
represents the ith thrust coeﬃcient included in the range.
From Figure 2.1, some interesting features regarding the averaged wind speeds can
be highlighted. In the ﬁrst place, it can be assumed that for the induction region the
behavior is linear, as it was already demonstrated in [27]. In the near wake, corresponding
to 0 < x < 5D, non-linear behavior is observed. For the far wake, corresponding to
5D < x < 20D, the wind speeds still show non-linearity for low TI∞(upper plot), but
more linear behavior can be observed as the TI∞gradually increases (bottom plot, for
x > 10D).
Another insight that can be noticed is that for increasing CT values, the shape of the
wind speed curve in the wake (x > 0) reaches lower values downstream the rotor, and on
top of that, the slope after the peak is more steep, which means that the wind speed
recovers faster.
Focusing on the curve peaks where the maximum deﬁcits are reached (red dots), it can
be seen that the distance that separates them from the rotor, referred to as rotor-to-peak
distance, seems to align as the TI∞rises. Additionally, they seem to be more sharped
for higher turbulence intensity levels.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Behavior of the deﬁcits in the wake
11
Figure 2.1: Normalized average wind speeds as function of the CT for TI∞=5%, 10% and 15%.
To sum up, all of these observations imply that the higher the turbulence intensity at
the rotor, the less wind speed deﬁcits will be observed downstream, and the faster the
recovery of the inﬂow wind speed will be. Apart from that, the shape of the resulting
deﬁcit ﬁelds will depend on CT only when TI∞is low.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theoretical framework
2.2.3
Deﬁcit ﬁelds as function of the ambient turbulence
intensity
In this study, the thrust coeﬃcient was kept constant while running a series of RANS
simulations for a range of ambient turbulence intensity values. Again, an inﬂow wind
speed of 1 m/s was used, and the simulations were repeated with the next CT values:
0.2, 0.5, 0.8. The range of ambient turbulence intensities chosen was: 2.5%, 5%, 7.5%,
10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5% and 20%.
Figure 2.2 shows the resulting normalized average wind speeds, calculated as described
in Appendix A, for the speciﬁed cases. As it would happen with the previous study, the
results are non-linear for the region downstream the rotor. Nevertheless, certain linearity
can be observed in the wake for curves corresponding to values of TI∞higher than 0.1,
and this occurs in all the CT cases.
As the turbulence intensity increases, the observed deﬁcits are lower. Regarding the
peaks where the maximum deﬁcit occurs, they look more sharped for higher values of
CT. Furthermore, the rotor-to-peak distances are reduced as CT and TI∞increase.
All in all, several ﬁndings can be pointed out from the undertaken studies. It is expected
that more deﬁcits occur for low TI∞and high CT. With respect to the shape of the
deﬁcit curves, they present decreasing dependency on the CT as the TI∞increases.
Consequently, the rotor-to-peak distance is mostly deﬁned by the TI∞value, but in
certain extent also depends on CT when the turbulence is low. An intuitive way of
understanding the behavior would be as follows: increasing CT values shifts the wind
speed curves downwards (more wind speed deﬁcit), and increasing TI∞values shifts the
wind speed curve to the left (reducing the rotor-to-peak distance) and upwards (less
wind speed deﬁcit).
The surrogate model uses linear interpolation to get the deﬁcit and turbulence intensity
ﬁelds from the LUT. Given that non-linear behavior prevails, the accuracy of the results
will highly depend on how many values of the look-up parameters are stored in the
LUT. In other words, the thinner the step of each parameter within the LUT, the more
accurate the results will be. On the other hand, there is a trade-oﬀbetween the step and
the memory that the LUT needs. Hence, an optimal step has to be found.
Based on this, the step for the look-up parameters was decided. For the CT, the step was
set to 0.1, because although the behavior is less linear for values above 0.3, reducing the
step to 0.05 did not signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy. In the case of the TI∞, the step
was decided not to be constant, as it was observed that for values below 0.1 the resulting
wind speed ﬁelds were less linear. Consequently, for values of TI∞between 0 and 0.1 the
step was set 0.025, for values above 0.1 the step was set to 0.05, and for values above 0.3
the step was set to 0.1.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Behavior of the deﬁcits in the wake
13
Figure 2.2: Normalized average wind speeds as function of the TI∞for CT = 0.2, 0.5 and 0.8.
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
PyWake: a tool for AEP
calculation
This chapter introduces the tool PyWake, which will be used along the whole master thesis
for the implementation of the surrogate model and the comparison with other models.
This tool has a commercial plugin known as PyWakeEllipSys that can solve RANS
simulations using a general purpose ﬂow solver developed in DTU, called EllipSys3D.
Section 3.1 introduces PyWake, describing the main elements on which the software
is based; Section 3.2 provides an overview of the multiple engineering models already
implemented in PyWake; eventually, Section 3.3 presents the CFD model PyWakeEllipSys
and its main features, describing the physics and the parameters used for the simulations
along this master thesis.
3.1
Introduction to PyWake
PyWake [1] is an open source wind farm simulation tool developed as a Python package.
This tool provides a fast and easy way of calculating wind farm ﬂow ﬁelds and annual
energy production under speciﬁc wind site conditions. One of the advantages with respect
to other wind farm software packages (for instance WAsP [28] developed by DTU or [29]
by ECN) is that PyWake allows to select within a list of engineering models of diﬀerent
ﬁdelity levels to calculate the wind speed deﬁcits. Therefore, in function of the case,
the user can choose the model that is more appropriate for the conditions to simulate.
Additionally, PyWake was developed in a heavy vectorized way making use of Python
numerical libraries, and hence it can be run very fast.
Three elements, deﬁned as Python classes, constitute the backbone of PyWake: Site,
WindTurbines and WindFarmModel. In order to run a case, it is required to instantiate
each one of these three elements. Additionally, the wind turbine coordinates have to be
speciﬁed.
• A Site object contains all the information referred to the local wind conditions, in
terms of wind speed, wind direction, turbulence intensity, and the probability of
each combination between the wind speeds and the wind directions. Besides, the
Site element calculates the downwind, crosswind and vertical distance between the
diﬀerent wind turbine locations, taking into account if the terrain is ﬂat or not.
• The WindTurbines objects are featured by their power and thrust curves, and also
==PAGE:26==
16
3 PyWake: a tool for AEP calculation
the hub height and the diameter. For a given wind turbine type and the eﬀective
wind speed provided by the Site object, WindTurbines will return the power output
and the thrust coeﬃcient, required by the WindFarmModel to calculate the total
annual energy production.
• Eventually, a WindFarmModel object deﬁnes the procedure that determines how
the wake and blockage deﬁcits are propagated within area occupied by the wind
farm. Several engineering models can be set from a predeﬁned list. These models
are responsible for the calculation of the wake deﬁcit, blockage deﬁcit, superposition
of deﬁcits from diﬀerent wind turbines, deﬂection due to yaw misalignment, and
turbulence in the wakes. Section 3.2 provides a more detailed description about
these engineering models. WindFarmModel uses the Site and WindTurbines as
input to return a SimulationResult object, which contains the calculated eﬀective
wind speed, power output and thrust coeﬃcient for every wind turbine location, as
well as a series of methods that allow to calculate the AEP and to generate ﬂow
maps with the wind speed deﬁcits and the turbulence intensity variations.
Additionally, PyWake has a plugin named PyWakeEllipSys, which is a Reynolds-averaged
Navier-Stokes based wind farm ﬂow model. A more detailed description of PyWakeEllip-
Sys is provided in Section 3.3.
3.2
Engineering models
One of the main advantages of PyWake is its modularity, which allows to include new
models in a very easy and fast way. Currently, the software has a list of available models
that can be used to calculate deﬁcits upstream and downstream, deﬂections, superposition
and turbulence. There are two main base classes of wind farm models that deﬁne how
the deﬁcits propagate in the wind farm:
• PropagateDownwind: This model neglects upstream blockage eﬀects, and therefore
just wake deﬁcits are calculated, which makes it very fast. It iterates over all the
wind turbines in downstream order, and in every iteration the eﬀective wind speed
at the wind turbine is calculated as the free stream wind speed minus all the deﬁcits
from the upstream sources. Once the eﬀective wind speed is known, the deﬁcits for
the next turbine downstream can be calculated with a wake deﬁcit model, further
explained in Section 3.2.1.
• All2AllIterative: This model includes upstream blockage eﬀect, and thus it is slower
than PropagateDownwind. In this case, the iterations are performed until the
eﬀective wind speed reaches convergence for the wind turbines that are aﬀected
to each other mutually. In every iteration, the deﬁcits from all the wind turbine
sources are summed up to calculate a total deﬁcit on the current wind turbine, and
then the deﬁcit created by the current wind turbine is calculated on the rest of
wind turbines.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Engineering models
17
3.2.1
Deﬁcit models
Each one of the previously deﬁned engineering models is combined by one or two deﬁcit
models, for the blockage and the wake respectively. The wind speed deﬁcits are calculated
by these models, that can be based on analytical expressions or in pre-calculated deﬁcit
tables.
• NOJ: the NOJ model is a wake deﬁcit model, referred to as Jensen model [19] in
Chapter 1. It is only valid for the far wake region, and despite of its simplicity it
can provide a fairly accurate approximation of the wake losses on an annual energy
production basis [30].
• Fuga: based on a set of Look-Up tables, Fuga [2] is a fast model that calculates the
deﬁcit in both the upstream and downstream regions. The Look-Up are derived
from the linearized RANS equations.
• Bastankhah Gaussian: another fast model that is just valid for the far wake.
The model is implemented according to Bastankhah and Porté-Agel [31].
In
contrast with the top-hat models, like the NOJ model, the velocity deﬁcit in the
wake is represented with a Gaussian distribution. Therefore, the Bastankhah
Gaussian model does not underestimate the deﬁcit at the center of the wake and/or
overestimate it near the edge of the wake. A second version of this model is also
implemented according to the IEA taks 37 [32].
• GCL: this model, also sometimes referred to as Larsen model [33], is based on
an analytical solution of the thin shear layer approximation of the Navier Stokes
equations. The wake ﬂow ﬁelds are assumed to be symmetric, and the inﬂow,
uniform. Expansion is modelled by an empirical function for the wake width,
making this parameter dependent on the diameter, the rotor thrust and the
ambience turbulence intensity.
• Niayifar Gaussian: this model is implemented according to Niayifar and Porté-Agel
[34]. The wake expansion is a linear function of the local turbulence intensity. The
constant parameters are based on LES simulations.
• Zong Gaussian: it models the wake expansion as a function of the local turbulence
intensity.
The Zong Gaussian is actually a near wake model of the Niayifar
implementation, in this case according to [35].
• Self Similarity: the self similarity model [18] models the induction zone, therefore
just provides the deﬁcits due to the blockage eﬀect. It can be used in combination
with other wake models to include the deﬁcits all around the wind turbine.
3.2.2
Superposition models
In linear systems, the superposition of two signals corresponds to their linear sum.
However, the response of a wind turbine to the inﬂow does not result in a linear behavior
in general, and therefore, when more than one wind turbine is included in a simulation, a
==PAGE:28==
18
3 PyWake: a tool for AEP calculation
superposition model is needed. The superposition models in PyWake are responsible for
the calculation of the eﬀective wind speed and turbulence intensity when the deﬁcits and
the added turbulence intensity from multiple sources are given. These are added up to
the local wind and to the ambient turbulence intensity respectively by means of diﬀerent
mathematical expressions. Currently there are four superposition models implemented in
PyWake, listed hereafter. Notice that some of them are valid for deﬁcit and turbulence
models, and some are just applicable to one of them:
• LinearSum: it is the most basic model in which the deﬁcits and/or turbulence
intensities sum up linearly. Valid for deﬁcit and turbulence models.
• SquaredSum: this model sums up the deﬁcits as the root-sum-square. Valid only
for deﬁcit models.
• MaxSum: this model only considers the largest deﬁcit or the largest added turbu-
lence intensity. Valid for both deﬁcit and turbulence models.
• SqrMaxSum: this model is only valid for turbulence models. It calculates the
squared root of the squared ambient turbulence intensity plus the square of the
maximum value of the added turbulence intensity.
3.2.3
Rotor average model
Wind turbines within a wind farm are not subjected to the same wind speed in all the
parts of the rotor: on the one hand, the inﬂow usually follows a logarithmic proﬁle that
changes with the height, and modern wind turbines are large enough so that this makes
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the bottom and the top part of the rotor. Besides, wind
turbines shadowed by wake eﬀects also undergo considerable changes of wind speeds for
the same heights. This makes it necessary to average the rotor wind speeds for a better
estimation of the power output of the wind turbine. The rotor average models deﬁne
one or more points at the rotor and calculate a weighted deﬁcit average. The predeﬁned
rotor average models included are:
• RotorCenter: it is the most basic model, providing the rotor average wind speed
from the rotor center point. Unless other option is speciﬁed, this model is set by
default.
• GridRotorAvg: this model deﬁnes a set of points in Cartesian coordinates that can
be set manually by the user as an input.
• EqGridRotorAvg: this model deﬁnes a NxN equidistant Cartesian grid of points,
excluding the point of the rotor center.
• GQGridRotorAvg: this model deﬁnes a grid of MxN points, using a Gaussian
quadrature coordinates and weights.
• PolarGridRotorAvg: this model deﬁnes a grid using polar coordinates.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 PyWakeEllipSys
19
• CGIRotorAvg: the model deﬁnes a circular Gauss integration with 4, 7, 9 or 21
points, as deﬁned in Abramowitz M and Stegun A. [36].
3.2.4
Deﬂection models
When the wind turbine rotor is not facing directly the wind direction, a wake deﬂection is
produced. This can occur due to diﬀerent reasons, like yaw misalignment, sheared inﬂow,
etc. To include the eﬀects of this in PyWake, the deﬂection models calculate deﬂected
downwind and crosswind distances for the deﬁcits. Currently just one deﬂection model is
available, namely the JimenezWakeDeﬂection model, implemented as described in [37].
3.2.5
Turbulence models
The turbulence intensity behind the rotor can be modelled with one of the predeﬁned
turbulence models included in PyWake. These models calculate the added turbulence in
the wake from the source wind turbine to downstream wind turbines within the wind
farm.
• STF2005TurbulenceModel: this model, known as the Steen Frandsen model, is
implemented according to IEC61400-1, 2005.
• STF2017TurbulenceModel: another version of the Steen Frandsen model, in this
case implemented according to IEC61400-1, 2017.
• GCLTurbulence: this model is known as the Gunner Chr. Larsen model, and it is
implemented according to [38].
• CrespoHernandez: this model is implemented as in [39].
3.3
PyWakeEllipSys
PyWakeEllipSys is a CFD model that is linked to PyWake and can be set up as a plugin.
Unlike the rest of deﬁcit models included in PyWake, PyWakeEllipSys is based on the
incompressible Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations, and hence it can achieve a
higher level of ﬁdelity than the other ones for the calculation of the ﬂow. PyWakeEllipSys
can be used to simulate ﬂow cases, perform parametric studies and calculate the AEP of
a determined layout, nevertheless, as already explained in Section 1.4, the computational
eﬀort and time required to solve the ﬂow makes it impractical for optimization purposes.
PyWakeEllipSys uses a closed source general purpose ﬂow solver named EllipSys3D,
which was developed at the DTU by Jess A. Michelsen [40] [41] and Niels N. Sørensen
[42]. The solver was developed in Fortran and MPI, but it has been adapted to be able
to run as a Python object, providing also the posibility of changing variables during a
simulation. The main setup is conﬁgured for its use in ﬂat terrain with homogeneous
roughness, but complex terrain is applicable. Additionally, an unsteady RANS model
==PAGE:30==
20
3 PyWake: a tool for AEP calculation
(URANS) has been added, and it allows to use a transient atmospheric inﬂow based on
an idealized diurnal cycle.
3.3.1
Grid domain deﬁnition
The numerical grid used by the EllipSys3D solver is block structured and curve linear.
The ﬂow is solved in a box shaped domain, inside which a reﬁned domain is applied with
thinner grid spacing that allows to study the wakes at a wind turbine scale. Around
the inner domain, an additional buﬀer region is used to solve terrain or wind farm scale
eﬀects. The dimensions of all the parts of the grid can be controlled.
Several grid types are available in PyWakeEllipSys. All domains use an atmospheric
Cartesian coordinate system, being x and y the horizontal plane and z the height. For
this master thesis, given that the simulations excluded terrain eﬀects, a ’ﬂatbox’ grid
type was used. This type of grid considers uniform roughness and elevation. In order
to reduce the number of iterations when several wind directions are to be simulated,
the wind farm layout is rotated while the inﬂow direction is kept constant. Thus, the
inﬂow direction is set to 270o (from the West to the East), and only the wind turbines
placed in the inner grid domain are changed for simulations with diﬀerent directions.
The origin of the domain is the wind farm center, calculated as a mean of all the wind
turbine positions. The origin of the heights is zero elevation.
Figure 3.1: Grid domain parameters.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 PyWakeEllipSys
21
The majority of grid parameters are normalized by the reference rotor diameter used in
the simulation. The most important ones are illustrated in Figure 3.1. When several
types of wind turbines are used, the reference diameter will be the smallest one. One of
the most important parameters is the grid spacing of the inner domain, grid_cells1_D,
since the resolution of the solved ﬂow mostly relies on it. A grid study was performed
to determine which spacing would be convenient for the master thesis, resulting in D/8
(the grid study can be found in the Appendix B). Outside the inner domain, the spacing
grows as the distance increases from the wind farm. The growth ratio can be modiﬁed
with the parameter grid_r, which is recommended to be kept not higher than 1.2. For
the master thesis, this parameter is left by default.
The extension of the inner domain is speciﬁed through four parameters referred to the
west, east, north and south, which are set normalized by the reference rotor diameter.
The wind farm area is limited by a parameter that determines the wind farm radius,
grid_radius, to be set in meters. The height of the inner domain is changed with the
parameter grid_zWakeEnd_D, which is to be set in normalized diameters, and similarly
the total height of the domain can be set throught the parameter grid_zlen_D, also
normalized by the diameter. The vertical spacing grows with the distance from the rough
wall, but the minimal set spacing is kept.
3.3.2
Boundary conditions
This section describes the conditions for each one of the six walls that form the grid
domain box ’ﬂatbox’ type. The variables that are speciﬁed are the streamwise velocity
U, the lateral velocity V , the vertical velocity W, and the turbulent kinetic energy k and
its dissipation ε.
The ﬁrst boundary is the ground wall, which represents the surface where the wind
turbines are placed. This boundary is set as a rough wall. The streamwise velocity U,
the lateral velocity V and the vertical velocity W are set to zero. The turbulent kinetic
energy is given by a Neumann condition, and its dissipation is given by the inﬂow proﬁle
set by the inﬂow model (see Section 3.3.3).
The front and top walls are considered as inlet boundaries. The streamwise velocity U,
the lateral velocity V , the turbulent kinetic energy k and its dissipation ε are given by
the inﬂow model, and the vertical velocity W is set to zero.
Finally, the lateral walls are set as periodic boundary type, and at the outﬂow boundary, a
fully developed ﬂow is assumed and all gradients in the normal direction of this boundary
are set to zero.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 PyWake: a tool for AEP calculation
3.3.3
Inﬂow and turbulence models
PyWakeEllipSys includes six inﬂow models, from which ﬁve are steady-state (RANS)
and one is transient (URANS). Each inﬂow model is coupled to a turbulence model.
However, for the current version of PyWakeEllipSys only the k-ε-fP turbulence model
has been validated. All non-neutral and ABL inﬂow and turbulence models are under
development and might need to be recalibrated.
For this master thesis, a neutral stability ASL inﬂow coupled with the k-ε-fP turbulence
model was used in all the simulations. The ASL inﬂow is described by the log-law:
U∞= u∗
κ ln
z + z0
z0

,
k∞=
u2
∗
q
Cµ
,
ε∞=
u3
∗
κ (z + z0)
where U∞represents the inﬂow streamwise velocity, k∞the inﬂow turbulent kinetic
energy and ε∞the inﬂow dissipation, u∗the friction velocity, z0 the roughness length,
κ the Von Karman constant, which is set to 0.4, and Cµ a turbulence model constant,
which is set to 0.03.
The turbulence model k-ε-fP is a version of the k-ε, improving the accuracy of the later.
This model was proposed by van der Laan et al. in [43]. Typically, the standard k-ε
overestimates the eddy viscosity in the wake, resulting in an underestimation of the
deﬁcits in the wake. The scalar factor fP improves the interaction between the wind
turbine wakes and the ASL, limiting the local turbulence length in the regions of the
wake where the velocity gradients are large.
fP =
2f0
1 +
r
1 + 4f0 (f0 −1)

σ
¯σ
2,
f0 =
CR
CR −1
where σ ≡k/ε
q
(Ui,j)2 represents the shear parameter, ˜σ = 1/
q
Cµ the normalized shear
in the neutral ASL, and CR is a model constant set to 4.5 based on a calibration with
LES simulations for eight single wake cases [43]. The fP is directly set in the eddy
viscosity:
νT = CµfP
k2
ε
This turbulence model for a neutral ASL ignores Coriolis, wind veer, temperature, and
momentum buoyancy eﬀects. The independent input parameters that need to be set are
the reference height (zRef) and the turbulence intensity (which is set by changing the
roughness z0).
==PAGE:33==
3.3 PyWakeEllipSys
23
3.3.4
Actuator disc model and force method
In PyWakeEllipSys, the wind turbines are represented by actuator discs (AD) that
consist of a polar grid where the forces due to the inﬂow are computed. This grid is
deﬁned by equidistant radial and azimuthal points through the variables adgrid_nr and
adgrid_ntheta respectively. The model of an AD uses a force method that simulate
those that would act upon the incoming ﬂow in a real wind turbine. Currently in
PyWakeEllipSys, a total of 22 diﬀerent AD force methods can be used. The force method
can be changed with the variable ad_force. The force methods are deﬁned by 4 digits,
each of which models a physical aspect; the ﬁrst digit refers to the force types; second
digit allows to include tangential forces; the third digit sets the inﬂow eﬀects (shear and
veer); ﬁnally the fourth digit is a force control ﬂag.
For the simulations included in this master thesis, a polar grid of 64×64 was used, as this
was shown by Baungaard in [44] to have a relative diﬀerence in power and wake recovery
inferior to 0.1% compared to ﬁner polar grids. Regarding the AD force, the ’1000’ method
was used for single wind turbine simulations. This force method keeps constant thrust
forces based on the thrust curve of the wind turbine and a given normalized thrust
distribution, uniform along the azimuthal direction. The normalized force distributions
representing the NREL5MW wind turbine for a below rated wind speed (8 m/s) were
applied for the run simulations. Tangential forces, shear, veer and force control are
disregarded by this AD model.
For simulations with several wind turbines, the AD force method was changed to ’1001’,
which only diﬀers from the previous method in that it adds control and thus it requires
force calibration simulations. For the calibration, the normalized force distributions that
are scaled by C∗
T and the AD velocity ⟨UAD⟩, which is averaged over the AD area. An
alternative thrust coeﬃcient C∗
T is deﬁned, based on ⟨UAD⟩, and this avoids the necessity
of calculating the freestream wind speed, which can be hard to determine in a wind farm.
The C∗
T is deﬁned as follows:
C∗
T =
FT
1
2ρA ⟨UAD⟩2 = CT
 U∞
⟨UAD⟩
!2
where FT is the thrust force, ρ is the air density, A is the rotor area and U∞is the
freestream wind speed.
Regarding the power calculation, a power coeﬃcient is deﬁned, C∗
P, that is later used in
the post processing. The C∗
P is deﬁned by the next expression:
C∗
P =
P
1
2ρA ⟨UAD⟩3 = CP
 U∞
⟨UAD⟩
!3
==PAGE:34==
24
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Surrogate modelling
Once the theoretical basis and the tools to be used have been described, this chapter
deals with how the surrogate model is built up and implemented in PyWake.
For
this, Section 4.1 depicts the methodology used to generate and post-process the RANS
data that needs to be stored in the LUT. Subsequently, Section 4.2 provides a detailed
description of the implementation of the model in PyWake. Furthermore, Section 4.3
closes the chapter with a sensitivity analysis and an assessment of the surrogate model’s
accuracy once it has been set up.
4.1
Generation of data in PyWakeEllipSys
The setting-up of the RANS simulations in PyWakeEllipSys requires to conﬁgure a
number of main inﬂow parameters: ambient turbulence intensity, inﬂow wind speed and
a stability variable, all are deﬁned at a reference height. This reference height is set to
be the hub height of the wind turbine to use1. The inﬂow wind speed was deﬁned with 1
m/s, equivalent to a normalized value (as it was shown that the resulting ﬂow ﬁelds do
not depend on it whenever the Re number is high enough). The direction of the ﬂow
was set to be 270◦(from West to East).
Secondly, the CT curve must be input. For the generation of the ﬂow ﬁelds, a deﬁned CT
curve was used, containing the desired values to cover (the original CT curve contains CT
values not evenly spaced, and thus is not the best range of values to use for interpolation).
The wind turbine coordinates have to be set as well, but since the simulations to generate
the ﬁelds are run for a single wind turbine, the selected coordinates do not really matter
in this case, as the solver always deﬁnes the geometrical center of the wind farm as the
grid origin ([0,0]).
Thirdly, the grid domain has to be deﬁned. As discussed in the grid study (Appendix B),
the inner grid cells are sized as a function of the wind turbine diameter, D/8. The
extension of the inner grid was: 4D to the West, which corresponds to the upstream
area; 20D to the East, which is the downstream region where the wakes develop and
needs higher accuracy; 2.5D to the north and south, as this crosswind distance is enough
to cover the lateral expansion of the deﬁcits.
As described in Section 3.3.4, the turbulence model is the k-ε-fP, the actuator disc model
1Along the master thesis, two wind turbine models were used, namely the NREL5MW model and
the V80. Hence, two LUT were prepared following the same methodology.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Surrogate modelling
force method is ’1000’ and its grid was set to 64×64. The level of convergence for the
residuals was set at 10−5. According to [45], residual levels of 10−4 are considered to be
loosely converged, levels of 10−5 are considered to be well converged, and levels of 10−6
are considered to be tightly converged.
Lastly, the thrust coeﬃcient and the ambient turbulence intensity have to be deﬁned.
These are the core parameters of the simulations for the scope of this master thesis, as
the resulting ﬂow ﬁelds are stored as functions of them. A set of simulations were run
for range of thrust coeﬃcients between 0 and 1 with a step of 0.1, keeping a constant
ambient turbulence intensity of 1%. Consecutively, the same set of simulations was
repeated changing the ambience turbulent intensity to eventually cover the next set of
values: 1%, 2.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30% and 40%. The reason to choose
these values was detailed in Section 2.2. In total, a number of 110 simulations (11 CT
values × 10 TI∞values) were performed to generate and store the required ﬂow ﬁelds.
It is worth to mention that the PyWakeEllipSys solver produces some numerical wall
problems that change the values of the variable ﬁelds slightly when compared to the
inlet. This small numerical error is insigniﬁcant when using the LUT in simulations
with a single wind turbine once the model is implemented in PyWake, but it represents
a problem when multiple wind turbines interact, as the error is scaled up. Therefore,
in order to correct the numerical error, another series of simulations were run without
forces for any TI∞value. This would be the equivalent to using an actuator disc force
method of ’0000’, i.e., without any force. Then, the resulting ﬁelds from this precursor
simulations were subsequently subtracted from the previously obtained ﬂow ﬁelds with
the correct actuator disc force method, resulting in the elimination of the error.
Eventually, the generated data that was stored in the LUT consist of the variable ﬂow
ﬁelds, i.e., the wind speed deﬁcits and the turbulence intensity, as function of the thrust
coeﬃcient, CT, the ambient turbulence intensity, TI∞, and the grid cell center coordinates
x, y and z. PyWakeEllipSys has a post-processor that, in case of running ﬂat terrain
simulations, allows to save the ﬂow ﬁelds in a netCDF format that can be read in Python.
When saving the ﬂow ﬁelds in netCDF format, the heights were trimmed for those heights
out of the rotor limits so that the ﬁnal LUT ﬁle was smaller.
4.2
Implementation of the model in PyWake
The surrogate model is implemented as one submodel for the turbulence and another
submodel for the wind speed deﬁcits. In PyWake, this is done with two main classes: a
turbulenceModel class that ﬁrstly calculates the turbulence intensity ﬁelds downstream
every wind turbine, and a deﬁcitModel class that calculates the deﬁcit ﬁelds upstream
and downstream every wind turbine. When several wind turbines are given, a superposi-
tionModel class is used to overlap the resulting deﬁcit and turbulence ﬁelds (diﬀerent
superposition methods can be used for turbulence and deﬁcits). Additionally, a rotorAvg-
Model class calculates the eﬀective turbulence and wind speed over the rotor, considering
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Implementation of the model in PyWake
27
one point at the center or diﬀerent grid options.
Both the turbulence and deﬁcit models are run under the basic engineering model class
All2AllIterative, explained more in detail in Section 3.2. Besides, they are built up in a
similar way, with two main functions that are responsible for:
• Interpolate in the LUT with the given thrust coeﬃcient and eﬀective turbulence
intensity values for every wind turbine.
• Reshape the ﬂow ﬁeld variables (added turbulence and wind speed deﬁcits) to the
PyWake grid dimensions.
The added turbulence ﬁelds are summed to the ambient turbulence intensity, thus the
second downstream wind turbine will experience a turbulence intensity that is the result
of the initial ambient turbulence intensity and the added turbulence intensity performed
by the turbulence model. Similarly, the deﬁcit ﬁelds are subtracted from the inﬂow wind
speed to determine the eﬀective wind speed of a downstream wind turbine. In the case
of the deﬁcit model, the the normalized deﬁcit ﬁelds are scaled up with the inﬂow wind
speed, as the LUT data was generated with 1 m/s. This is allowed by the ﬂuid mechanics
laws, following the Re-Similarity principle explained in Section 2.1.
To run a simulation in PyWake, a Site and a WindTurbines objects have to be deﬁned or
imported. Section 4.2.1 and Section 4.2.2 describe these elements. Then, the wind turbine
coordinates within the wind farm have to be speciﬁed. Once all this is set, PyWake
calculates the eﬀective turbulence intensity and wind speed at every wind turbine (if
the wind turbine is standing alone, the eﬀective wind speed would be the same as the
inﬂow wind speed, as no blockage eﬀects from other wind turbines would be considered;
otherwise, the eﬀective wind speed is calculated by an iterative process until convergence
is reached). These eﬀective wind speeds are interpolated in the wind turbine thrust curve,
obtaining the thrust coeﬃcient at which the wind turbine is operating; subsequently, the
ambient turbulence intensity and the thrust coeﬃcient are used to interpolate in the
LUT, returning the added turbulence and deﬁcit ﬁelds for every wind turbine. Lastly,
the variable ﬁelds are overlapped according to the superposition model that is used.
4.2.1
Site
The Site class contains all the local wind conditions for a given location. PyWake contains
some examples predeﬁned. For this master thesis, the predeﬁned Hornsrev1Site will
be used in all the PyWake simulations. The Hornsrev1Site is featured by a Weibull
distributed wind speed and wind sector probabilities, as illustrated in Figure 4.1. For
this particular site, the wind tends to blow majorly from the west, as the most probable
sector is 270o ± 45o.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Surrogate modelling
Figure 4.1: Sector distribution for Hornsrev1Site.
The Weibull distributions by wind speed magnitude are shown in Figure 4.2. The default
ambient turbulence intensity is 10%, but it is changed according to the value assigned to
every case.
Figure 4.2: Weibull distribution by wind speed intervals for Hornsrev1Site.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Implementation of the model in PyWake
29
4.2.2
Wind turbines
The windTurbines object contains the diameter, hub height, power, and thrust coeﬃcient
curves of the wind turbine type. PyWake has an available list of wind turbine models
with their corresponding power and thrust coeﬃcient curves. The V80 model is one of
them, and it was one of the used types due to being the wind turbine used in Horns Rev
I. The V80 is manufactured by Vestas and has a hub height of 70 m and a diameter of
80 m. The power and thrust curves are illustrated in Figure 4.3.
Additionally, for this master thesis, a new wind turbine was implemented in PyWake:
the NREL5MW model [46]. This wind turbine was developed by the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory to support concept studies aimed at assessing oﬀshore wind technology.
The model is a conventional three-blade, variable-speed and variable-pitch wind turbine,
with the rotor diameter and the hub height being 126 m and 90 m respectively. The
power and thrust coeﬃcient curves are illustrated in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.3: V80 Power and thrust curves.
Figure 4.4: NREL5MW Power and thrust curves.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Surrogate modelling
4.2.3
Wind farm models
It is desired that the model includes blockage, and thus the main wind farm model
All2AllIterative of PyWake is used. The deﬁcit, both for blockage and wake regions, is
calculated by the surrogate deﬁcit model; the turbulence is calculated by the surrogate
turbulence model; the rotor average model is left as default (RotorCenter), although
in Chapter 5 a section is included where diﬀerent ones are tested; with respect to the
superposition model, it will be described in detail in the Chapter 5, as for now the focus
is a single wind turbine and there is no deﬁcit or turbulence superposition.
4.3
Accuracy assessment
In this section, the accuracy of the surrogate model was evaluated. Firstly, a sensitivity
analysis was done to analyze how the AEP of a single wind turbine deviates with small
changes in the inﬂow wind speed. Arbitrarily, two limits are deﬁned for the AEP deviation,
corresponding to a high and an ideal accuracy. Afterwards, the error in predicting the
wind speeds by the surrogate model was studied, comparing the results from a RANS
simulation with those provided by the surrogate model, and computing their relative
diﬀerence. Lastly, this relative diﬀerence was contrasted with the AEP deviation limits
previously deﬁned in order to assess the accuracy.
4.3.1
Sensitivity analysis
As explained in the Chapter 1, when planning a new wind farm it is desired that the
deﬁcit models are able to calculate the AEP with a high accuracy, as the return of the
investment depends directly on this parameter. For companies with a big portfolio of
wind farms, small deviations in the AEP estimations for their wind farms can involve
large unexpected losses. Thus, reducing the risk is a must for them. Aiming to provide a
reliable deﬁcit model that can be used for the industry in the future, a sensitivity analysis
was done with PyWake to evaluate how the AEP deviates with small changes of the wind
speed. It is important to remark that for this analysis just the wind speed magnitude is
changed, remaining the probability of combinations with each wind direction unchanged.
For this analysis, the NREL5MW wind turbine model and the Horns Rev I wind rose
were used.
The sensitivity of the AEP with the wind speed change is shown in Figure 4.5, which
shows the variations for a single wind turbine. The left plot provides an insight of the
trend that it follows with large changes of the wind speed, whereas the right plot is
zoomed in the area where small changes are produced. Here, two limits of AEP deviation
were deﬁned, ±0.5%, corresponding to a high accuracy, and ±0.1%, corresponding to an
ideal accuracy. These values were chosen according to a previous study [47] that had
into consideration the industry needs. Since the model predicts the wind speed with a
certain error, these limits serve as a reference of the maximum allowable.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Accuracy assessment
31
Figure 4.5: Left: AEP rate of change with the wind speed; right: zoomed on the interest area.
Based on the analysis illustrated in Figure 4.5, the next intervals are obtained for the
wind speed change:
∆u0.5 = [−0.359%, 0.395%]
∆u0.1 = [−0.071%, 0.079%]
within which the predicted wind speed has to be in order to get the AEP accuracy
desired.
4.3.2
Relative diﬀerence with RANS simulations
Aiming to measure the magnitude of the surrogate model’s error at predicting the wind
speeds, the relative diﬀerences with respect to the RANS simulations were studied. A
case with a standalone wind turbine was simulated, being the parameters chosen an
inﬂow wind speed of 11 m/s at the hub height, corresponding to a thrust coeﬃcient of
0.746 in the NREL5MW CT curve, and an ambient turbulence intensity of 6.8%. Notice
that these values force the model to interpolate in the two dimensions (CT and TI∞).
The results were compared by representing the normalized average wind speeds along the
volumetric cylinder that has the wind turbine rotor as a section and the perpendicular
line to the rotor plane at its center as central axis. The methodology to calculate the
averaged wind speeds along this cylinder has been described in detail in Appendix A.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Surrogate modelling
Additionally, the relative diﬀerences between the wind speed proﬁles were computed
following the expression:
Relative diﬀerence = U −U RANS
U RANS
× 100
[%]
(4.1)
where U is the normalized average wind speed predicted by the surrogate model and
U RANS is the normalized average wind speed from the RANS results. The relative
diﬀerence represents the error of the surrogate model along the x axis, and provide an
insight of whether the error is within the previously deﬁned limits.
The comparison along the x axis in Figure 4.6 shows a very close results of the surrogate
model with respect to RANS. It is worth to mention that the wind turbine rotor is located
in x = 0. The relative diﬀerences show almost no diﬀerence in the blockage region, for
x < 0. Then, some overestimation of the wind speeds can be observed in the region
between approximately 4D < x < 8D, and underestimations from around x > 13.5D on.
In these regions, the error is out of the accuracy limits deﬁned in Section 4.3.1.
Figure 4.6: Predicted vs RANS wind speed and relative diﬀerences.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Accuracy assessment
33
The relative diﬀerences are caused by the interpolation in the LUT: as it was seen in
Section 2.2, the deﬁcits as a function of the thrust coeﬃcient and the ambient turbulence
intensity do not behave linearly, and thus some diﬀerences are expected with respect to
RANS. Furthermore, diﬀerences are expected to increase for higher CT and lower TI∞
values.
According to these results, the surrogate model could not ensure an accuracy enough
to keep the AEP estimations within the ±0.5%. Besides, in wind farm simulations,
when several wind turbines interact with each other, the resulting wind speed ﬁelds
from diﬀerent sources overlap. This makes the relative diﬀerences increase, as the wake
superposition is not fully understood nowadays. Nonetheless, the superposition problem
will be tackled on Chapter 5.
4.3.3
Comparison against other PyWake models
To complement the accuracy assessment, it is intended to illustrate how the surrogate
model diﬀers from other PyWake models in terms of wind speed deﬁcits, and with respect
to a RANS simulation. Figure 4.7 shows the average wind speed proﬁles for a RANS
simulation and several PyWake models, including the surrogate model. More speciﬁcally,
the case was run with a single NREL5MW wind turbine model, using an inﬂow wind
speed of 8 m/s, corresponding to a CT = 0.77, and a turbulence intensity of 5%.
The rest of illustrated models are: the Jensen model[19] (NOJ), the Larsen model [33]
(GCL + SS), the Bastankhah Gaussian model[31] (Gaussian + SS), the Niayifar model[34]
(Niayifar + SS), the Fuga model[2] (Fuga), and the Zong model[35] (Zong + SS). For
some of them, the blockage is had into account by setting the Self-Similarity model [18]
(SS).
For a quantitative analysis, the error was computed by integrating the absolute value of
the diﬀerence between of each normalized average wind speed curve with respect to the
RANS data, and then dividing by the total sum of the RANS values. This leads to a
calculation of the error for each case, allowing to numerically compare the performance
of each model in every case. Then, the error was analyzed splitting the x/D distance
according to three diﬀerent regions: the blockage region, for x < 0; the near wake, for
0 < x < 5D; and the far wake, for 5D < x < 20D. Expression (4.2) was used to calculate
the error by each model:
Error =
R
x | U i −U RANS | dx
R
x U RANS dx
× 100
(4.2)
where U i denotes the normalized average wind speed calculated by model ith, U RANS
is the RANS normalized average wind speed, and x is referred to each of the three
mentioned regions.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Surrogate modelling
Figure 4.7: Deﬁcit models in PyWake vs RANS. Normalized deﬁcits along the centerline for a
CT =0.77.
The Table 4.1 summarizes the computed results of the error. In every region, the surrogate
model achieves a much better accuracy, highlighting the potential beneﬁts that this
technique can involve for the wind industry.
PyWake model
Blockage
(-4D <x <0)
Near wake
(0 <x <5D)
Far wake
(5D <x <20D)
Surrogate
0.08%
0.01%
0.15%
NOJ
1.73%
1.03%
9.11%
GCL + SS
0.26%
0.39%
2.75%
Bastankhah + SS
0.89%
0.51%
2.99%
Niayifar + SS
0.17%
0.46%
2.47%
Fuga
0.44%
1.22%
2.78%
Zong + SS
0.34%
0.89%
1.66%
Table 4.1: Computed error with respect to RANS for PyWake models.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Superposition investigation
This chapter introduces the superposition models for the application of the surrogate to
wind farm simulations. Several inﬂow conditions are tested in a wind farm to understand
how the initial values of the main parameters aﬀect the resulting deﬁcit ﬁelds. Section 5.1
analyzes the performance of the surrogate model under diﬀerent superposition methods
for the turbulence and deﬁcit ﬁelds separately, determining which one works best based
on the diﬀerences with respect to the RANS results. Afterwards, Section 5.2 investigates
the observed deviations by looking at the variation of the ﬂow variables over the rotor.
Diﬀerent rotor average models are studied in order to achieve a higher level of accuracy.
Lastly, Section 5.4 compares the surrogate model with Fuga to demonstrate that the
achieved results can improve some of the features of this well-known model.
5.1
Superposition models
When it comes to simulating a wind farm case, a superposition model is required. As
already mentioned in Section 3.2.2, they are responsible for the calculation of the eﬀective
wind speed when deﬁcits from multiple sources are given. In the case of the surrogate
model, each of the wind turbines within the wind farm returns a deﬁcit ﬁeld. This
involves that the ﬁelds from diﬀerent wind turbines overlap and each point of the space
has a resulting deﬁcit value. However, the modelling of wake interaction within a wind
farm is not an easy task, as nowadays the physical way in which the wind speed deﬁcits
add up in the regions where the wakes merge is not yet fully understood, as stated by
Machefaux [48].
Similarly, the eﬀective turbulence intensity is also calculated by means of a superposition
model. It is worth to recall that the surrogate model is implemented as two sub-models,
one for the deﬁcits and one for the turbulence, and therefore it is possible to distinguish
between two superposition problems. PyWake oﬀers the possibility of using diﬀerent
superposition models for the deﬁcit and the turbulence, and thus they will be studied
separately. Furthermore, the turbulence superposition problem is tackled ﬁrstly, because
even though both superposition problems depend on each other, the ﬁnal and most
important outcome is the deﬁcit ﬁelds, since they determine the power.
It is relevant to mention that the spacing between wind turbines has an impact on the
accuracy of the results, and thus it should be considered in the study. Although the
spacing was kept constant for Section 5.1, it was taking into account for other parts, as
Section 5.4 or Appendix D.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Superposition investigation
5.1.1
Turbulence superposition
Several analytical models for the estimation of the turbulence intensity in a wind farm
have been developed, for instance, Crespo[39] or Larsen[38] models. However, there is
not a lot of available literature about turbulence intensity superposition in the merging
wakes. According to Machefaux et al. in [49], today’s commonly used superposition
techniques rely on simple mathematical rules that are not justiﬁed by any physical
means. Because of the way the turbulence intensity ﬁelds are stored in the LUT, the
linear superposition appeals to be the most intuitive method to overlap these ﬁelds.
Additionally, the maximum sum and the squared maximum sum were used.
A wind farm with ﬁve wind turbines arranged in a straight row and spaced between
themselves by a distance equivalent to seven wind turbine diameters was used for the
simulations. The wind turbine model used was the V80. The superposition models were
studied under two diﬀerent inﬂow wind speeds, namely 8 and 17 m/s, i.e., high and low
CT values respectively. In the same way, a low and a high ambient turbulence intensity
values were tested, which were set to be 5%, and 12% respectively. In the four presented
cases, the turbulence intensity was averaged following the methodology explained in
Appendix A, in order to take as much information as possible from the wakes.
Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2 illustrate the results for the below rated cases, i.e., high CT, for
TI∞= 5% and 12% respectively. The scattered markers represent the average and the
eﬀective turbulence intensity at the wind turbine rotors. The diﬀerence between these is
that average values are used to compare the superposition models with RANS at the
rotors, meanwhile the eﬀective turbulence intensity values are used only by PyWake to
interpolate in the LUT and deﬁne the resulting turbulence intensity ﬁelds. Hence, there
is not an eﬀective value for the RANS series.
Figure 5.1: Average turbulence intensity. U∞= 8 m/s and TI∞= 5 %.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Superposition models
37
Figure 5.2: Average turbulence intensity. U∞= 8 m/s and TI∞= 12 %.
All the turbulence superposition models underestimate the turbulence intensity for the
downstream wind turbines. As observed by Crespo et al. [50], predicting the wind
speed deﬁcits in the merging wakes is challenging due to the fact that the downstream
wind turbines face a very diﬀerent ambient ﬂow with respect to the most upstream
wind turbine. Here, the equivalent phenomenon can be seen with the added turbulence
intensity: as the mixing increases, the predictions get poorer.
The LinearSum model achieves a better performance for the below rated cases, as the
gap with respect to the RANS data is signiﬁcantly smaller in comparison with the
other superposition models. A remarkable diﬀerence is that the amount of turbulence
intensity variation along the wind farm, i.e., the diﬀerence between the minimum and
the maximum TI value, is relatively higher for the case of TI∞= 5%. Deviations in
estimating the eﬀective turbulence intensity will translate into an error in the prediction
of the deﬁcits, as it will be analyzed in Section 5.1.2, therefore the error is expected to
increase under low ambient turbulence intensity conditions.
Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4 illustrate the results for the above rated cases, i.e., low CT, for
TI∞= 5% and 12% respectively. Once again, all superposition models underestimate
the turbulence intensity for the downstream wind turbines, and the LinearSum achieves
a higher accuracy. Notice that for higher wind speeds, the turbulence intensity variations
along the wind farm are less if compared to the below rated cases. A last comment can
be added regarding the diﬀerences between the RANS data and the LinearSum model
in the wake of the ﬁrst wind turbine, more speciﬁcally for 0 < x < 7D (more visible in
Figure 5.4 due to the axis scale, but also occurring in Figure 5.3). These diﬀerences are
originated by LUT interpolation errors, caused by the nonlinearity of the ﬂow variables.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Superposition investigation
In this study it was observed that for the downstream wind turbines the superposition
models fail to predict correctly the turbulence intensity ﬁelds, underestimating them in
general. This is believed to be caused by the increasing mixing that occurs after the
ﬁrst wind turbine. The LinearSum superposition proved to achieve a better accuracy
independently of the initial conditions, meanwhile the MaxSum and the SqrMaxSum
showed very poor results. Higher inﬂow wind speed and ambient turbulence intensity led
to better performance of the surrogate turbulence model. Based on these conclusions,
the LinearSum will be used for the turbulence superposition in all the next sections.
Figure 5.3: Average turbulence intensity. U∞= 17 m/s and TI∞= 5 %.
Figure 5.4: Average turbulence intensity. U∞= 17 m/s and TI∞= 12 %.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Superposition models
39
5.1.2
Deﬁcit superposition
The mathematical modelling of the wind speed deﬁcit superposition in the wakes has
been a topic of research for many years. Lissaman [51] introduced the linear superposition
to model overlapping deﬁcit ﬁelds. This approach was later discussed and questioned
by Crespo et al. in [50], claiming that the linear superposition would fail for large
perturbations where many upstream wakes were overlapped, since negative velocities
could happen.
Later, Katic et al.
[52] suggested the application of the quadratic
summation rule for the superposition of the wind speed deﬁcits. Their proposal was
supported by results that agreed with experimental data in cases where many wakes were
combined, achieving better performance than the simple linear superposition. Larsen et
al. in [53] sustained that the deﬁcit would be determined by the dominant wake, thus
their superposition approach was based on the maximum sum of the overlapping ﬁelds.
Having into consideration these strategies, the performance of the surrogate deﬁcit model
was tested in this section. For the present study, the same wind farm cases that were
presented in Section 5.1.1 were taken as a base, as it is interesting to see where the
observed turbulence intensity deviations lead to.
Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6 illustrate the bellow rated cases for ambient turbulence
intensities of 5% and 12% respectively. In this case, the scattered markers represent the
average and eﬀective wind speed at the wind turbine rotors. The average values compare
the wind speeds at the rotor between RANS and the superposition models, whereas the
eﬀective values are used only by PyWake to interpolate in the wind turbine power curve
to get the thrust coeﬃcient. Thus, there is no eﬀective value for RANS.
Figure 5.5: Normalized average wind speed. U∞= 8 m/s and TI∞= 5 %.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Superposition investigation
Figure 5.6: Normalized average wind speed. U∞= 8 m/s and TI∞= 12 %.
The LinearSum is the model that leads to more correct results for both cases. The
SquaredSum and MaxSum lead to a signiﬁcant overestimation of the wind speeds when
compared to RANS data. Focusing on the LinearSum superposition, both cases show
wind speed underestimations and rotor-to-peak distance diﬀerences in the wakes of the
last three wind turbines. In addition, the more downstream the wind turbine is, the
more the wind speed curve is shifted downwards. These facts are in agreement with what
was seen in the turbulence intensity superposition study (Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2), and
therefore it can be expected that the rotor-to-peak distance and shifting diﬀerences are
due to the turbulence intensity underestimations. Furthermore, the diﬀerences are minor
for a higher ambient turbulence intensity.
Figure 5.7 and Figure 5.8 illustrate the bellow rated cases for ambient turbulence
intensity of 5% and 12% respectively. Again, the LinearSum achieves a better accuracy
for both cases. Looking at the low ambient turbulence intensity case, the LinearSum
underestimates the wind speeds in the wakes of the last two wind turbines. However,
in the high ambient turbulence intensity the wind speed predictions are almost perfect,
with the exception of the far wake region after the last wind turbine.
Newly, these observations agree with the turbulence superposition study for the same
initial conditions (Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4). In particular, for the low ambient turbulence
intensity case, the underestimation was more remarkable in the turbulence superposition
study. According to the ﬁndings of Section 2.2, a higher eﬀective turbulence intensity
value would shift the surrogate wind speed predictions towards the left and upwards,
reducing the mismatch in the rotor-to-peak distance and minimizing the shifting with
respect to RANS in the wakes of those two last wind turbines.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Superposition models
41
Figure 5.7: Normalized average wind speed. U∞= 17 m/s and TI∞= 5 %.
Figure 5.8: Normalized average wind speed. U∞= 17 m/s and TI∞= 12 %.
A quantitative analysis was done in order to get a numerical insight of the diﬀerences
for each case. For this, the expression (4.2) was used to compute the error. For the
integration, the considered x domain covers from 4D upstream to 48D downstream. The
results from this analysis are included in Table 5.1.
Both the qualitative analysis from the wind speed plots and the quantitative results
conclude that the LinearSum superposition is the most accurate out of the three studied
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Superposition investigation
models for all of the run cases. Besides, it can be inferred that high ambient turbulence
intensity values result in a lower error in the wind speeds predictions, which means that
the superposition problem is less complex under this inﬂow condition. On top of that,
high inﬂow wind speeds, i.e., low thrust coeﬃcients, lead to more accurate wind speeds
predictions as well. The explanation behind these inferences is approached in the next
section.
Low ambient turbulence
High ambient turbulence
Superposition model
Below-rated
Above-rated
Below-rated
Above-rated
LinearSum
3.65%
2.68%
2.06%
0.32%
SquaredSum
10.52%
5.45%
8.86%
2.98%
MaxSum
14.54%
7.60%
11.32%
3.65%
Table 5.1: Computation of the error of every superposition model for the below and above
rated wind speed and under low and high turbulence intensity cases.
5.2
Study of the variables over the rotor
It has been demonstrated that the linear superposition of the deﬁcit and the turbulence
intensity ﬁelds result in a better performance of the surrogate model. Furthermore, it
was identiﬁed that the most diﬃcult conditions to predict the wind speeds are those
cases with low ambient turbulence intensity. Along this section, a description of how the
variables change over the rotor of the downstream wind turbines is provided in order to
explain the observed diﬀerences. Then, several rotor average models are tested to see if
it is possible to correct the turbulence intensity underestimations at those downstream
rotors.
From the cases presented in Section 5.1, the ones with an ambient turbulence intensity of
5% are taken here as a reference. When the inﬂow wind speed was set to 8 m/s, it was
observed how the LinearSum model predicted correctly the turbulence intensity in the
wake of the ﬁrst wind turbine, and then the error gradually increased until the last one,
ending up in an underestimation of the eﬀective turbulence intensity at the downstream
rotors (see Figure 5.3). Looking at ﬁrst and the last wind turbine rotors individually
(x = 0 and x = 28D) allows to get an insight of what is happening with the turbulence.
This can be done in PyWake with a vertical grid in the yz plane. The coordinate x
is not exactly the one at the rotor, as the surrogate model has a feature for avoiding
the turbulence and the deﬁcits on itself, and this creates distortion at the rotor plane.
Instead, the x coordinate immediately in front of the rotor is chosen (10 cm upstream),
since this plane is also valid for what is intended to demonstrate in this analysis.
Figure 5.9 shows the turbulence intensity at rotor planes of the mentioned wind turbines.
Essentially, the ﬁrst wind turbine (left plot) faces a turbulence state almost constant over
the rotor (no mixing), whereas the ﬁfth wind turbine (right plot) faces a very diﬀerent
turbulence intensity conditions, with a lot of variations and mixing that has been caused
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Study of the variables over the rotor
43
by the interaction of the ﬂow with the upstream wind turbines. These high variations
explain why the surrogate model fails to estimate correctly the eﬀective turbulence
intensity at the downstream rotors, and as a consequence, the wrong value is looked up
in the LUT, dragging the error to the prediction of the deﬁcits.
The surrogate model also proved to work better for above rated wind speeds. To provide
an explanation for this, Figure 5.10 shows the turbulence intensity for the below and
above rated cases (left and right respectively) at the rotor of the ﬁfth wind turbine for
both cases. A similar situation is found: with an inﬂow of 8 m/s, the turbulence intensity
increases remarkably in comparison with the ambient one, producing a lot of mixing,
while for an inﬂow wind speed of 17 m/s, the changes in turbulence are very low, showing
very little mixing.
Figure 5.9: Turbulence intensity over the rotor of the ﬁrst and ﬁfth wind turbines. U∞= 8
m/s and TI∞= 5%.
Figure 5.10: Turbulence intensity over the rotor of the ﬁfth wind turbine, for the below-rated
and above-rated cases with a TI∞= 5%.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Superposition investigation
Therefore, low inﬂow wind speeds lead to higher turbulence intensity variations along
the wind farm, which causes the turbulence model fails to correctly predict the eﬀective
turbulence intensity at the rotor of the downstream wind turbines. Ultimately, this drives
to an overestimation of the deﬁcits.
It is also interesting to describe how the wind speeds change over the rotor to investigate
if the surrogate deﬁcit model is predicting the eﬀective wind speed correctly. Otherwise,
the CT would be inaccurate and this would lead to more interpolation errors.
Figure 5.11 shows the wind speeds over the rotor of the ﬁfth wind turbine for the below
and above rated cases. It can be observed that in the below rated case there are more
variations of wind speed over the rotor than in the above rated case. According to
this, it could be expected that the surrogate model would be prone to make an error in
predicting the CT for the below rated case, since the rotor average model takes only the
point at the center of the rotor. To explain why this does not occur, it is necessary to
look at the thrust curve of the wind turbine, in this case the V80 (Figure 4.3). It can be
checked that for the considered inﬂow wind speed, i.e., 8 m/s, the corresponding part
of the curve is almost ﬂat. Hence, even if the rotor average model estimates a slightly
higher or lower wind speed, this will end up in nearly the same thrust coeﬃcient.
For the above rated case, despite of the fact that the wind speed variations over the rotor
are not very signiﬁcant, the slope of the wind turbine thrust curve can lead to a wrong
estimation of the CT. Accordingly, considering more points over the rotor could help to
improve the accuracy.
Figure 5.11: Wind speed over the rotor of the ﬁfth wind turbine, for the below-rated and
above-rated cases with a low ambient turbulence intensity.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Investigation of the rotor average models in PyWake
45
5.3
Investigation of the rotor average models in
PyWake
Based on the discussion above, the surrogate model needs to be adjusted so that the
eﬀective turbulence intensity and the thrust coeﬃcient at the downstream rotors are
estimated more accurately. The strategy followed to improve the results was to use
diﬀerent rotor average models in PyWake that would consider more points over the rotor,
in an attempt to achieve a more accurate value of the look-up parameters.
Several PyWake rotor average models (Section 3.2.3) were evaluated in this new study:
the RotorCenter, the PolarGridRotorAvg with six points equally weighted at a radius of
D/4, CGIRotorAvg with four and twenty-one points, being inner points more weighted,
and the GQGridRotorAvg with ﬁve points at the hub height, with more weight at the
center. Notice that the rotor average models are only used to estimate the eﬀective
variables at the rotor (wind speed and turbulence intensity), and not to average the ﬂow
variables, as the methodology explained in Appendix A.
Figure 5.12 illustrates the normalized average wind speeds given by each of these rotor
models for the case of an ambient turbulence intensity of 5% and inﬂow wind speed of 8
m/s. As observed, the diﬀerences between the models are very small, and therefore the
resulting average wind speed curves are quite compact. For a better understanding of
how the rotor average models perform, Figure 5.13 show an augmented part from the
previous ﬁgure, at the ﬁfth wind turbine rotor.
Figure 5.12: Normalized average wind speed with the evaluated rotor average models. U∞= 8
m/s and TI∞= 5%.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Superposition investigation
Figure 5.13: Normalized average wind speed with the evaluated rotor average models. U∞= 8
m/s and TI∞= 5%. Augmented region at the ﬁfth wind turbine rotor.
For the below rated case, none of the alternative rotor average models achieves a higher
accuracy than the RotorCenter. As observed in Figure 5.13, in the region where the gap
with RANS is larger, the RotorCenter still is closer than the other models. Table 5.2
shows the eﬀective turbulence intensity values calculated by every of these models. The
RotorCenter model achieves higher values, and since the problem was an underestimation
of the eﬀective TI values, no rotor average model out of these can provide a better result.
Eﬀective turbulence intensity
Rotor average model
WT 1
WT 2
WT 3
WT 4
WT 5
Rotor Center
0.050
0.129
0.135
0.135
0.136
Polar Grid (6 points)
0.050
0.129
0.133
0.133
0.134
CGI (4 points)
0.050
0.127
0.130
0.131
0.132
CGI (21 points)
0.050
0.127
0.130
0.131
0.132
GQGrid (5 points)
0.050
0.129
0.133
0.133
0.134
Table 5.2: Eﬀective turbulence values at the wind turbine rotors calculated by every rotor
average model in the below rated case.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Investigation of the rotor average models in PyWake
47
With respect to the thrust coeﬃcient, Table 5.3 includes the values calculated by each
one of the rotor average models. As it can be seen, the diﬀerences between them are in
the order of 10−4, and therefore, using a diﬀerent rotor average model for the estimation
of the thrust coeﬃcient under these inﬂow conditions will barely have an impact on the
accuracy of the results.
Thrust coeﬃcient
Rotor average model
WT 1
WT 2
WT 3
WT 4
WT 5
Rotor Center
0.8060
0.8042
0.8040
0.8045
0.8047
Polar Grid (6 points)
0.8060
0.8043
0.8041
0.8044
0.8046
CGI (4 points)
0.8060
0.8044
0.8041
0.8042
0.8045
CGI (21 points)
0.8060
0.8044
0.8041
0.8042
0.8045
GQGrid (5 points)
0.8060
0.8043
0.8041
0.8043
0.8046
Table 5.3: Thrust coeﬃcient values at the wind turbine rotors calculated by every rotor average
model in the below rated case.
On the other hand, in the case with an above-rated inﬂow wind speed, the results are
quite diﬀerent. Figure 5.14 illustrates the normalized average wind speeds predicted by
the surrogate model with every one of the previously introduced rotor average models. In
Figure 5.15, an augmented region at the rotor of the ﬁfth wind turbine has been plotted
for a better visualization.
Figure 5.14: Normalized average wind speed with the evaluated rotor average models. U∞=
17 m/s and TI∞= 5%.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Superposition investigation
Figure 5.15: Normalized average wind speed with the evaluated rotor average models. U∞=
17 m/s and TI∞= 5%. Augmented region at the rotor of the ﬁfth wind turbine.
Here, it can be observed how the RotorCenter is the model that performs the worst, in
contrast to what was seen for the below rated case. The CGIRotorAvg, which shows
barely no diﬀerence between four or twenty-one points, is the one that gets closer to the
RANS data in this occasion.
Table 5.4 and Table 5.5 contain the turbulence intensity and thrust coeﬃcient values
respectively, as calculated by every one of the diﬀerent rotor average models. In this
case, more variability can be observed in terms of thrust coeﬃcient, which was already
referred to in the last part of Section 5.2: the slope of the thrust curve for a given inﬂow
wind speed will have an impact on the accuracy to estimate the CT (less steep slope,
more accuracy, and vice versa).
Eﬀective turbulence intensity
Rotor average model
WT 1
WT 2
WT 3
WT 4
WT 5
Rotor Center
0.050
0.053
0.056
0.060
0.065
Polar Grid (6 points)
0.050
0.053
0.056
0.060
0.064
CGI (4 points)
0.050
0.054
0.056
0.059
0.062
CGI (21 points)
0.050
0.053
0.056
0.059
0.062
GQGrid (5 points)
0.050
0.054
0.057
0.060
0.064
Table 5.4: Eﬀective turbulence intensity values at the wind turbine rotors calculated by every
rotor average model in the above rated case.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Investigation of the rotor average models in PyWake
49
Thrust coeﬃcient
Rotor average model
WT 1
WT 2
WT 3
WT 4
WT 5
Rotor Center
0.1671
0.2074
0.2499
0.3019
0.3642
Polar Grid (6 points)
0.1671
0.2016
0.2382
0.2798
0.3231
CGI (4 points)
0.1671
0.1967
0.2269
0.2583
0.2929
CGI (21 points)
0.1671
0.1968
0.2273
0.2591
0.2941
GQGrid (5 points)
0.1671
0.1999
0.2343
0.2721
0.3101
Table 5.5: Thrust coeﬃcient values at the wind turbine rotors calculated by every rotor average
model in the above rated case.
Regarding the turbulence intensity, the RotorCenter model still achieves higher values
than the rest, and therefore none of the other rotor average models can ﬁx the under-
estimation of the turbulence intensity downstream. Furthermore, considering points
out of the hub height leads to lower eﬀective TI values. A potential way to minimize
the underestimation of the turbulence intensity is to consider just points above the hub
height, close to the tip of the blade, since the turbulence intensity increases in this part
of the rotor (see Figure 5.9 right plot, and Figure 5.10). Alternatively, more weight could
be assigned to those points above the hub height when using a rotor average model that
considers points all over the rotor.
Eventually, the error of each model with respect to RANS has been computed following
the expression (4.2), including the results in Table 5.6. According to these, when the
inﬂow wind speed is above rated, the CGIRotorAvg can provide more accuracy than the
RotorCenter model. This is due to the fact that considering more points over the rotor
achieves a better estimation of the thrust coeﬃcient. However, it has been demonstrated
that none of the tested rotor average models can provide higher values of the eﬃcient
turbulence intensity than the RotorCenter model.
Rotor avg model
Error (U∞=8 m/s)
Error (U∞=17 m/s)
Rotor Center
3.65%
2.68%
Polar Grid (6)
4.17%
2.08%
CGI (4)
4.77%
1.66%
CGI (21)
4.79%
1.70%
GQGrid (5)
4.29%
1.87%
Table 5.6: Computation of the error for every rotor model. TI∞=5%.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Superposition investigation
5.4
Comparison with Fuga
As already mentioned in Chapter 1, Fuga [2] is a linearized CFD model that can predict
the wind speed deﬁcits in the wake for ﬂat terrain or oﬀshore wind farms. The model
discards all the non-linear terms of the RANS equations to generate a series of LUT.
Then, the data contained in this LUT can be accessed by interpolation and scaled up,
given some inﬂow parameters for a wind turbine. However, the linearization of the
RANS equations brings up some loss of ﬁdelity, especially near to the rotor, where the
perturbations are quite high.
There are certain diﬀerences between the surrogate model and Fuga that must be
mentioned. On the ﬁrst place, regarding the LUT, the surrogate stores variable ﬁelds that
have been solved with the non-linear RANS equations, while Fuga disregards non-linear
terms. In addition, Fuga LUT are made for a constant ambient turbulence intensity,
and therefore Fuga disregards turbulence intensity changes within a wind farm. Lastly,
although both models scale the stored deﬁcits with the wind speed, Fuga additionally
scales with the thrust coeﬃcient. This involves that Fuga disregards the diﬀerences seen
in Section 2.2, where is was demonstrated that the thrust coeﬃcient changes the shape
of the resulting wind speeds, especially for low ambient turbulence intensity conditions.
According to these diﬀerences, it is expected that the surrogate model can provide some
improvements over Fuga, in particular in the near wake. For the comparison of the models
in PyWake, ﬁrst the resulting average wind speeds under diﬀerent inﬂow conditions and
wind turbine spacing is computed. Then, the relative power is also compared. For all
the studied cases of this section, the wind turbine model V80 was used.
5.4.1
Impact of the spacing between wind turbines
Initially, a wind farm consisting of ﬁve wind turbines arranged in a row is considered. The
wind turbine spacing is gradually increased, starting from 3D to 4D, 5D and eventually
7D. The inﬂow wind speed is 8 m/s and the ambient turbulence intensity 5%.
Figure 5.16 illustrate the normalized average wind speeds for the considered spacing
values. Both the surrogate and the Fuga wind speeds improve as the spacing is increased.
The surrogate results manage to capture the wind speed behavior with more detail, and
this can be especially noticed in the near wake.
In terms of power, Figure 5.17 illustrate the relative power output for the same spacing
cases. Both models overestimate the power losses along the wind farm, but in total,
the surrogate achieves better results for the 5D and 7D cases. Table 5.7 summarizes
the error and relative diﬀerences in power. The error in the wind speed prediction was
computed according to expression (4.2).
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Comparison with Fuga
51
Figure 5.16: Comparison between the normalized average wind speed predicted by the surrogate
model and Fuga. U∞= 8 m/s, TI∞= 5%. Spacing values: 3D (upper left), 4D (upper right),
5D (lower left) and 7D (lower right).
Error
(wind speeds)
Total power output
[kW]
Relative diﬀerence
in power output
Spacing
Surrogate
Fuga
RANS
Surrogate
Fuga
Surrogate
Fuga
3D
4.00%
10.35%
1531
1138
1254
-25.69%
-18.09%
4D
3.93%
9.58%
1721
1326
1359
-22.97%
-21.04%
5D
3.82%
9.12%
1866
1510
1458
-19.07%
-21.86%
7D
3.66%
8.51%
2077
1766
1643
-14.98%
-20.92%
Table 5.7: Impact of the spacing: Error in the wind speed prediction, total power output and
relative diﬀerences in power between the surrogate model and Fuga with respect to RANS.
It is remarkable to notice that the more downstream a wind turbine is, the worse Fuga
estimates the power. This is due to the fact that as the turbulence intensity increases
along the wind farm, the surrogate improves, since it is able to model these variations,
whereas Fuga only takes into account the ambient turbulence intensity.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Superposition investigation
Figure 5.17: Comparison between the relative power predicted by the surrogate model and
Fuga. U∞= 8 m/s, TI∞= 5%. Spacing values: 3D (upper left), 4D (upper right), 5D (lower
left) and 7D (lower right).
5.4.2
Impact of the ambient turbulence intensity
A spacing of 7D is ﬁxed between the ﬁve wind turbines and a comparison between
the surrogate model and Fuga is done under two diﬀerent ambient turbulence intensity
conditions. Figure 5.18 shows the wind speeds predicted for TI∞= 5% (top) and 12%
(bottom), and Figure 5.19 illustrates the relative power predictions.
Table 5.8 summarizes the error in the calculation of the wind speeds with respect to
RANS, the total power output and their relative diﬀerences. The table reveals that the
performance of the surrogate model is better than Fuga in the two cases. Furthermore,
both models improve their results for a higher ambient turbulence intensity, as it was
shown that this inﬂow condition leads to less turbulence variations along the wind farm
(Section 5.2).
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Comparison with Fuga
53
Figure 5.18: Comparison between the normalized average wind speeds predicted by the surrogate
model and Fuga. U∞= 8 m/s, TI∞= 5% (top) and 12% (bottom).
Figure 5.19: Comparison between the relative power predicted by the surrogate model and
Fuga. U∞= 8 m/s, TI∞= 5% (left) and 12% (right).
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Superposition investigation
Error
(wind speeds)
Total power output
[kW]
Relative diﬀerence
in power output
TI∞
Surrogate
Fuga
RANS
Surrogate
Fuga
Surrogate
Fuga
5%
3.66%
8.51%
2077
1766
1643
-14.98%
-20.92%
12%
2.07%
5.18%
2241
2048
2026
-8.60%
-9.57%
Table 5.8: Impact of the TI∞: Error in the wind speed prediction, total power output and
relative diﬀerences in power between the surrogate model and Fuga with respect to RANS.
5.4.3
Impact of the inﬂow wind speed
When the inﬂow wind speeds are higher, the accuracy of the surrogate model improves.
It is worth to compare how the model can perform against Fuga for an above rated wind
speed. Figure 5.20 illustrates the case for an inﬂow wind speed of 17 m/s and ambient
turbulence intensity of 12%. For the simulations in PyWake, the CGIRotorAvg with 4
points was used, as it proved to perform better for above rated wind speeds (Section 5.3).
Figure 5.20: Comparison between the normalized average wind speeds predicted by the surrogate
model and Fuga. U∞= 17 m/s, TI∞= 12%.
These inﬂow conditions are very favourable for the surrogate model (high ambient
turbulence intensity and above rated wind speeds) because they cause little turbulence
intensity variations over the downstream wind turbine rotors, and therefore the turbulence
model works better. In this case, the surrogate model achieves very accurate wind speed
predictions along the whole wind farm, meanwhile Fuga performs well in the far wake,
but simpliﬁes the near wake.
For this case, it is not worth to compare the relative power production, since for above
rated wind speed all the wind turbines produce at their nominal power.
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Comparison with Fuga
55
5.4.4
Impact of the number of wind turbines
Since it was experienced that the error in predicting the wind speed increases for the
downstream wind turbines, it could be expected that the more wind turbines in a row,
the more inaccurate the surrogate model would be. In order to check this fact, Figure 5.21
shows a wind farm case with ten wind turbines arranged in a row, under an inﬂow wind
speed of 10 m/s and an ambient turbulence intensity of 10%. According to these results,
it can be stated that the number of wind turbines do not involve less accuracy. Indeed,
the relative power, shown in Figure 5.22, indicates that the surrogate model predicts more
accurately the power from the wind turbine number seven on. The relative diﬀerences in
power with respect to RANS were -11.25% for the surrogate and -11.30% for Fuga.
Figure 5.21: Comparison between the normalized average wind speeds predicted by the surrogate
model and Fuga. U∞= 10 m/s, TI∞= 10%.
Figure 5.22: Comparison between the relative power predicted by the surrogate model and
Fuga. U∞= 10 m/s, TI∞= 10%.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Superposition investigation
The compared cases lead to an important inference: it can be stated that the turbulence
intensity plays an essential role in the deﬁnition of the resulting wind speed deﬁcit ﬁelds
in the wake of a wind turbine. The assumption on which Fuga is based that disregards
turbulence intensity changes along the wind farm is not suitable for an accurate estimation
of the wind speeds, specially for long wind turbine arrays. This is reason why the surrogate
model improves the Fuga predictions of power output.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions and future
research
Conclusions
Following the scaling laws of ﬂuid mechanics, more speciﬁcally the Re-Similarity principle,
single wind turbine simulations with a normalized inﬂow wind speed can be run for a
range of thrust coeﬃcients and ambient turbulence intensity values, storing the resulting
deﬁcit ﬁelds in a LUT. Assuming a high enough Re number, the stored results can be
used to predict any desired inﬂow case by interpolating in the LUT and scaling by the
eﬀective wind speed. A surrogate model that is based on this strategy can achieve a
similar accuracy to that obtained in a RANS simulation.
The behavior of the wind speed deﬁcit ﬁelds as function of both the thrust coeﬃcient
and the ambient turbulence intensity is, in general, non-linear. Moreover, the simulations
showed that as the thrust coeﬃcient increases, the resulting deﬁcit ﬁelds are less linear,
and as the ambient turbulence intensity increases, the resulting deﬁcit ﬁelds are more
linear. According to this, an error is induced in the results. Part of this error is due
to the interpolation itself, although this is almost negligible, and the rest is due to the
non-linearity of the results, which can involve signiﬁcant diﬀerences with RANS.
Despite of the error, an accuracy assessment concluded that the surrogate model can
predict the wind speeds in the wake of a single wind turbine with a higher level of ﬁdelity
if compared to other PyWake deﬁcit models. Nevertheless, for the assessment of its
performance in wind farms, a superposition study was undertaken.
The turbulence and the deﬁcit superposition problems were investigated separately. In
both cases, the linear overlapping of the ﬁelds turned out to be the method that provided
better results compared to RANS. It was observed that the model tends to underestimate
the eﬀective turbulence at the downstream wind turbines, and this consequently produces
an overestimation of the power loss due to wake eﬀects. A further investigation of the
ﬂow variables over the rotor indicated that this issue is caused by the diﬀerent inﬂow
conditions that the downstream wind turbines face with, mainly characterized by a higher
mixing.
Diﬀerent rotor average models were tested in an attempt to correct the turbulence
intensity underestimation at the downstream rotors. It was found that the turbulence
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Conclusions and future research
cannot be improved with any of the tested models, but the results can be slightly improved
for high wind speed inﬂow conditions if more points over the rotor are considered. This
is because of the fact that the thrust coeﬃcient is better estimated if more points over
the rotor are considered.
Similarly to the Schmidt and Stoevesandt model [23], the surrogate model was based
on the overlapping of individual three-dimensional wake deﬁcit ﬁelds. However, some
setting diﬀerences have to be pointed out: meanwhile Schmidt and Stoevesandt used
the inﬂow wind speed as the main parameter to deﬁne the resulting deﬁcit ﬁelds, the
surrogate model developed here uses the thrust coeﬃcient (characteristic of the wind
turbine model) and the ambient turbulence intensity (local inﬂow). In terms of results,
in [23] the superposition method that provided a better agreement with RANS results
for a row of aligned wind turbines was the square root of the squared deﬁcits, while in
this master thesis the linear summation proved to perform better. The ﬁtting of the
results with respect to RANS is more accurate for the surrogate model, and thus it can
be inferred that the addition of the turbulence intensity as a parameter to model the
wake can provide certain beneﬁts.
Compared to Fuga, some signiﬁcant diﬀerences were observed depending on the initial
ambient conditions and on the downstream distance. The deﬁcits are modelled more
correctly in the near wake by the surrogate model, and for the far wake both models
proved to achieve relatively accurate solutions. In terms of power output, both models
overestimate the power losses with respect to RANS, but the surrogate demonstrated
to achieve less relative diﬀerences than Fuga in most of the cases, thus leading to more
accurate solutions.
Fuga assumes a constant turbulence intensity along the wind farm. However, along
this master thesis it was demonstrated that the turbulence intensity that a downstream
wind turbine faces is quite diﬀerent from the ambient conditions, and additionally, the
turbulence intensity has an impact on the resulting deﬁcit ﬁelds. Therefore, this Fuga
assumption leads to an error in the estimation of the wind speeds and the power output
of the downstream wind turbines. The surrogate model considers turbulence intensity
changes within the wind farm, and this is believed to be a key aspect in order to explain
the improvement of the results.
==PAGE:69==
6 Conclusions and future research
59
Future research and work
The achieved results along this master thesis are promising and more work on the
surrogate model has to be done in order to keep closing the gap between engineering
models and CFD simulations. For future work, it is relevant that the experienced
problems are coped with in order to improve the ﬁdelity of the surrogate model developed
along this master thesis. In particular, the turbulence intensity underestimations need to
be addressed so that the accuracy of the model improves downstream. If this problem is
ﬁxed, the wind speed and power estimations would be improved as well.
In relation to this, one could consider to continue studying the superposition problem
of the turbulence intensity, as there is not a lot of literature available about this ﬁeld.
Guowei Qian and Takeshi Ishihara proposed in [54] the superposition of turbulence
intensity ﬁelds by the square root of the squared sum, adding a correction term to
consider wake mixing. A similar turbulence superposition model could be implemented in
PyWake to investigate if this could provide a potential solution for the underestimation
of the eﬀective turbulence intensity in the downstream wind turbine rotors.
Another simple but straightforward strategy that could be considered for improving the
turbulence intensity underestimation would be to investigate a new rotor average model
for the turbulence that considers points above the rotor height or assign more weight to
those points located in regions where more mixing occurs.
In order to reduce the relative diﬀerences with respect to RANS, which proved to be out
of the ±0.5% AEP accuracy limits, an upgraded LUT could be built up with a thinner
step for low values of turbulence intensity and with a smaller cell in the PyWakeEllipSys
grid domain. Although this work could be computationally expensive, it would improve
the ﬁdelity of the results.
In addition, whole wind farm simulations need to be run to investigate the performance
of the surrogate model in more realistic cases, since for the scope of this master thesis
only small wind turbine arrays were simulated. Whole wind farm simulations would
require a lot of computational eﬀort as well, but are needed to validate the models.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Methodology to average the
ﬂow variables
The ﬂow ﬁelds that result from the RANS simulations in PyWakeEllipSys need to be
compared to the respective results in PyWake. Both the deﬁcits and the turbulence
intensity will be studied for one wind direction, which for the shake of simplicity is set to
be 270◦in all the cases. For the purpose of this master thesis, the most interesting deﬁcit
and turbulence information is contained in the cylindrical volume that has the area of
the wind turbine rotor as section and the wind direction at the rotor center as central
axis (perpendicular to the rotor plane). Since representing all this information in contour
plots of plane sections along the wind direction or choosing the most representative one
(i.e., the horizontal plane at the hub height) would take too much space or would ignore
valuable data, it is desired to come up with a method to plot in a single graph all the
possible information contained in this volume.
Figure A.1: Cylindrical volume wherein the ﬂow variables are averaged.
With this objective in mind, a method was designed to average the ﬂow variables along
the cylinder that contains the most important data. As a departing point, one of the
rotor models implemented in PyWake was used: the Circular Gauss Integration (CGI),
implemented according to [36]. The idea is to take a series of nodes in the rotor section,
covering most of the area, and then extracting the ﬂow variable values along the wind
direction (x axis) for every one of these points between the desired coordinates (x0
and xf). Thus, several series of values for every ﬂow variable are obtained. The CGI
==PAGE:72==
62
A Methodology to average the ﬂow variables
method additionally uses weight coeﬃcients for every one of the deﬁned nodes. As a
ﬁnal outcome, the summation of multiplying every series of values by the corresponding
weight coeﬃcient gives a weighted average of the variables along the deﬁned cylinder.
In this way, a unique series of values for every variable is obtained, making it easy to
represent all the valuable information in an only plot.
Figure A.2: Point distribution at a cylinder section. The color bar measures the weights of
every node, being the center one the most important.
The CGI method with 21 nodes was chosen. Figure A.2 shows the distribution of the
nodes at one section of the cylinder. A node is placed in the center of the cylinder section,
with its y and z coordinates being (0,0), and then two concentric series of k nodes are
given by their yk and zk coordinates according to the expressions:
(yk, zk) =


s
6 −
√
6
10
R cos 2πk
10 ,
s
6 −
√
6
10
R sin 2πk
10


∀k ∈1, . . . , 10
(A.1)
(yk, zk) =


s
6 +
√
6
10
R cos 2πk
10 ,
s
6 +
√
6
10
R sin 2πk
10


∀k ∈1, . . . , 10
(A.2)
for the inner and the outer series respectively, where R is the radius of the wind turbine
rotor. With respect to the node weights, the center node has a weight of value 1/9; then,
the inner k nodes have a weight of 16+
√
6
360
each one; for the outer k nodes, the weight of
each node is given by 16−
√
6
360 .
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX B
Grid Study
In order to determine the optimum grid spacing for the inner grid of the RANS simulations,
a grid study was done. The grid spacing is an important parameter, as it has a high
impact on the accuracy of the results. Moreover, there is a trade-oﬀbetween the grid
spacing and the computational time required to solve the ﬂow: the thinner the grid, the
more time it takes to reach a converged solution.
The RANS simulations were run in PyWakeEllipSys using the NREL5MW wind turbine
model, am inﬂow wind speed of 10 m/s, which corresponds to a thrust coeﬃcient CT =
0.765, and a turbulence intensity of 5%. Several grid spacing were included in the study.
As a rule of thumb, each time that the grid spacing is reduced, the size halved. According
to this, the next spacings were tested: D/2, D/4, D/8 and D/16. The computational
time required by the solver to reach convergence are included in the next table:
Grid spacing
Number of cores
Walltime [sec]
Computational time [CPUH]
D/2
12
50
0.16
D/4
15
96
0.4
D/8
18
1115
5.57
D/16
20
10841
60.23
Table B.1: Computational time required for diﬀerent grid spacing in PyWakeEllipSys.
The grid spacing D/2 was decided to be very coarse for the purpose of the master thesis.
On the other hand, D/16 is considered to reach a quite accurate solution, but in turn
requires a signiﬁcant time for one wind turbine, and therefore this spacing would be
computationally very expensive for simulations including several wind turbines. With
this in mind, it was decided to use the results of the spacing D/16 as a reference case to
assess how much the D/4 and D/8 cases diﬀer from a quite accurate solution.
For this study, the results will be assessed by analyzing the averaged wind speed proﬁles
along the cylinder that has the rotor as section and the line that crosses the rotor center
perpendicularly as central axis, following the methodology explained in Appendix A.
Additionally, the relative diﬀerences are also analyzed for the averaged wind speed proﬁles
and horizontal contour plots at the hub height.
The ﬁgure B.1 illustrates the averaged wind speed proﬁles for the reference and the
evaluated cases. The x axis represents the distance in the wind direction, and it is
==PAGE:74==
64
B Grid Study
expressed normalized by the rotor diameter. The proﬁles include from x = 4D upstream
to x = 20D downstream, in order to be able to compare the blockage and the wake
diﬀerences. As expected, the D/8 case is closer to the reference case, whilst the D/4 case
shows remarkable diﬀerences. In order to quantify these, the relative diﬀerences between
the assessed cases and the reference case is illustrated in ﬁgure B.1. The relative diﬀerence
curves show that the remarkable gaps are found close around the rotor, reaching -3% and
-1.9% for the D/4 and D/8 cases respectively, and further downstream the diﬀerences
increase to almost -5% for D/4 and to -2.5% for D/8.
Figure B.1: Wind speed proﬁles along the centerline and relative diﬀerence between the D/4
and D/8 cases with respect to the reference case D/16.
This plot provides a general insight of how the wind speed changes in the wind direction
(downwind). However, for a broader understanding of the deﬁcits in the crosswind
direction, contour maps were plotted in Figure B.2 for a horizontal plane at the hub
height, showing the relative diﬀerences in the velocity ﬁelds (notice that just the upper
symmetry plane of the velocity ﬁelds have been included). The black line represents
the rotor radius, and the y axis represents the crosswind distance normalized by the
rotor diameter. The case D/4, at the right, shows diﬀerences of the order of 5% in the
upstream region, whilst for the case D/8, at the left, the diﬀerences in the same region
are inferior to 3%. It is clear that most of the diﬀerences are concentrated in the near
wake region, being those much higher for the D/4 case, ranging from -15% to 35% in
contrast with the -10% to 20% for the D/8 case.
==PAGE:75==
B Grid Study
65
Figure B.2: Contour plots with relative diﬀerences in the wind speed.
According to the discussed observations of this section, the grid study concluded that
using a grid spacing of D/8 would provide much more accuracy to the results of the
RANS simulations, and the increment of computational time with respect to the D/4
grid cells was aﬀordable. Therefore, the grid spacing used for the simulations was, in
general, D/8, unless other grid spacing is speciﬁed.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C
Modelling of the speed-ups
The surrogate model provides some new features and can improve some capabilities with
respect to what it is already implemented in PyWake. One of this features is the modelling
of the ’speed-ups’, which are the areas near behind the rotor and at the sides of the wake
region where increased wind speeds can be observed, i.e., negative deﬁcits. Currently,
none of the deﬁcit models implemented in PyWake could represent this phenomenon
(although Fuga can approximate the speed-up eﬀects, these are unphysical due to wriggles,
i.e., they appear concentrated in areas rather than decreasing uniformly).
Figure C.1 illustrates a sample of how the speed-up areas can be identiﬁed. In this
sample, sixteen wind turbines from the wind farm Horns Rev I are represented with the
wind speed ﬂow ﬁelds at the hub height. The inﬂow wind speed was set to be 10 m/s
(ambient turbulence intensity is irrelevant for this analysis).
Figure C.1: Contour plot representing the wind speed deﬁcits at the hub height. U∞= 10 m/s
As it can be observed, the downstream region that surrounds the near wake of every
wind turbine is plotted in a darker colour tone than the inﬂow wind speed. This means
that there is an acceleration of this part of the ﬂow, when the wind passes through the
wind turbine and part of it is deviated to the sides of the wind turbine.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX D
Impact of the spacing
between wind turbines
In the accuracy assessment that was done in Section 4.3 it was seen how the precision of
the wind speed predicted by the surrogate model varies with the downstream distance.
Thus, the distance between wind turbines will have an impact on the ﬁnal accuracy of the
wind speed proﬁle of a wind farm. In this appendix, the impact of the spacing between
wind turbines as a parameter that aﬀects the accuracy was studied. A wind farm of 5
V80 wind turbines arranged in a row is used for the analysis. As initial conditions, an
ambient turbulence intensity of 5% and an inﬂow wind speed of 8 m/s were set. Three
diﬀerent spacings are studied.
Figure D.1: Normalized average wind speed proﬁles and their relative diﬀerence with an spacing
of 5D between wind turbines.
Figure D.2 illustrates the wind speed proﬁles and the relative diﬀerence between RANS
==PAGE:80==
70
D Impact of the spacing between wind turbines
and the surrogate predictions for a spacing between wind turbines of 5D, where D is the
diameter of the wind turbine rotor. The relative diﬀerences become positive after the ﬁrst
wind turbine, reaching a value of 6.31% at the rotor of the second wind turbine. Then it
falls to negative values as the downstream distance increases. This corresponds to an
underestimation of the wind speeds by the surrogate model. Although the maximum
relative diﬀerence is reached at around x = 21D with a value of -11.29%, the error at
the rotor of the three last wind turbines are higher than -5%, i.e., the power prediction
will have an error of this order.
Figure D.2 illustrates the results for a wind turbine spacing of 7D. The relative diﬀerence
follows a similar trend, but the maximum values are reduced, being the peak for the
second wind turbine 4.55% and the values in the wake of the last two wind turbines
-9.61%. The wind speeds at the rotor of the last three wind turbines now show diﬀerences
above -3%.
Eventually, Figure D.3 shows the results for a wind turbine spacing of 9D. The errors are
reduced once again, and for this case the peak at the second wind turbine reaches 2.36%
of relative diﬀerence. With respect to the lowest relative diﬀerence, it reaches -8.46% in
the wake of the last wind turbine.
Figure D.2: Normalized average wind speed proﬁles and their relative diﬀerence with an spacing
of 7D between wind turbines.
==PAGE:81==
D Impact of the spacing between wind turbines
71
Figure D.3: Normalized average wind speed proﬁles and their relative diﬀerence with an spacing
of 9D between wind turbines.
From this study, it is concluded that the spacing between the wind turbines in a wind
farm makes an impact on the accuracy of the surrogate model in predicting the wind
speeds.
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Introduction — PyWake 2.1.0 documentation. url: https://topfarm.pages.
windenergy.dtu.dk/PyWake/notebooks/Introduction.html.
[2]
Søren Ott, Jacob Berg, and Morten Nielsen. “Linearised CFD Models for Wakes”.
In: (2011).
[3]
European Commission. “IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS IN SUPPORT OF THE COM-
MISSION COMMUNICATION COM ( 2018 ) 773”. In: November (2018).
[4]
Ørsted. “How oﬀshore wind can help decarbonise Europe”. In: (2019).
[5]
Siyu Tao et al. “Nonuniform wind farm layout optimization: A state-of-the-art
review”. In: Energy 209 (2020). issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2020.
118339.
[6]
H. Díaz and C. Guedes Soares. “Review of the current status, technology and
future trends of oﬀshore wind farms”. In: Ocean Engineering 209.June (2020),
page 107381. issn: 00298018. doi: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2020.107381. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2020.107381.
[7]
I. G.W. Krabben et al. “Why curved wind turbine rows are better than straight
ones”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1256.1 (2019). issn: 17426596.
doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1256/1/012028.
[8]
J Shen. “Optimization of Wind Farm Layout: A Reﬁnement Method by Random
Search”. In: (2013), pages 624–633.
[9]
Sarah Karlina-Barber. “A rough guide to annual energy prpduction estimations for
wind energy investors”. In: Resource Global Network RGN 4.5 (2020), pages 60–71.
[10]
Martin O. L. Hansen. Aerodynamics of wind turbines. 1980. isbn: 0898711657. doi:
10.1002/9781119994367.ch3.
[11]
A. Segalini and J. A. Dahlberg. “Global Blockage Eﬀects in Wind Farms”. In:
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1256.1 (2019). issn: 17426596. doi: 10.1088/
1742-6596/1256/1/012021.
[12]
Antoine Borraccino et al. “Wind Field Reconstruction from Nacelle-Mounted Lidars
Short Range Measurements”. In: Wind Energy Science Discussions March (2017),
pages 1–23. issn: 2366-7621. doi: 10.5194/wes-2017-10.
[13]
Wind-Farm-Scale Blockage Eﬀects: Points of Clariﬁcation - DNV GL. url: https:
//www.dnvgl.com/news/wind-farm-scale-blockage-effects-points-of-
clarification-161311.
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
[14]
Nikolaos Simisiroglou. Wind power wake modelling. 2018. isbn: 9789151303574.
[15]
Tuhfe Göçmen et al. “Wind turbine wake models developed at the technical
university of Denmark: A review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
60 (2016), pages 752–769. issn: 18790690. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.01.113.
[16]
August Mark Stoelinga. “White Paper A Multi-Project Validation Study of Vaisala
’ s Wake Loss Estimation Method”. In: August (2019).
[17]
Emmanuel Branlard, Alexander R.Meyer Forsting, and M. Gaunaa. “Using a
cylindrical vortex model to assess the induction zone in front of aligned and yawed
rotors”. In: European Wind Energy Association Annual Conference and Exhibition
2015, EWEA 2015 - Scientiﬁc Proceedings January (2015).
[18]
Niels Troldborg and Alexander Raul Meyer Forsting. “A simple model of the wind
turbine induction zone derived from numerical simulations”. In: Wind Energy 20.12
(2017), pages 2011–2020. issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.2137.
[19]
N O Jensen. “A note on wind generator interaction”. In: Risø-M-2411 Risø National
Laboratory Roskilde (1983), pages 1–16. issn: 01676105. doi: Riso-M-2411. url:
http://www.risoe.dk/rispubl/VEA/veapdf/ris-m-2411.pdf.
[20]
Alfredo Penã, Pierre Elouan Réthoré, and M. Paul Van Der Laan. “On the applica-
tion of the Jensen wake model using a turbulence-dependent wake decay coeﬃcient:
The Sexbierum case”. In: Wind Energy 19.4 (2016), pages 763–776. issn: 10991824.
doi: 10.1002/we.1863.
[21]
J F Ainslie. “Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 27 (1988)
213-224”. In: Journal of Wind Engineering 27.1-3 (1988), pages 213–224. url:
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0167610588900372.
[22]
Hyungyu Kim et al. “Wind turbine wake characterization for improvement of the
Ainslie eddy viscosity wake model”. In: Energies 11.10 (2018). issn: 19961073. doi:
10.3390/en11102823.
[23]
Jonas Schmidt and Bernhard Stoevesandt. “Wind farm layout optimization with
wakes from ﬂuid dynamics simulations”. In: European Wind Energy Association
Conference and Exhibition 2014, EWEA 2014 October (2014). doi: 10.13140/2.
1.2544.3847.
[24]
Thomas Foken. “50 years of the Monin-Obukhov similarity theory”. In: Boundary-
Layer Meteorology 119.3 (2006), pages 431–447. issn: 00068314. doi: 10.1007/
s10546-006-9048-6.
[25]
P van der Laan et al. “Fluid scaling laws of idealized wind farm simulations”. In:
Torque (2020).
[26]
Julie Lundquist and Andrew Clifton. How turbulence can impact power performance.
2012. url: https://www.wind-watch.org/documents/how-turbulence-can-
impact- power- performance/#:~:text=If%20the%20wind%20fluctuates%
20rapidly,turbulence%20intensity%20will%20be%20high.&text=Typical%
20values%20of%20horizontal%20turbulence,from%203%25%20to%2020%25..
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
75
[27]
A. R.Meyer Forsting, A. Bechmann, and N. Troldborg. “A numerical study on
the ﬂow upstream of a wind turbine in complex terrain”. In: Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 753.3 (2016). issn: 17426596. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/753/3/
032041.
[28]
Wind energy industry-standard software - WAsP. url: https://www.wasp.dk/.
[29]
E T G Bot. “FarmFlow validation against four full scale wind farms”. In: December
(2012).
[30]
T Sørensen and Ml Thøgersen. “Adapting and calibration of existing wake models
to meet the conditions inside oﬀshore wind farms”. In: EMD International A/S.
... 27491529 (2008), page 118. url: http://www.risoe.dk/rispubl/NEI/NEI-
DK-4960.pdf.
[31]
Majid Bastankhah and Fernando Porté-Agel. “A new analytical model for wind-
turbine wakes”. In: Renewable Energy 70 (2014), pages 116–123. issn: 09601481.
doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2014.01.002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2014.01.002.
[32]
I E A Task and Wind Energy. “Wake Model Description for Optimization Only
Case Study”. In: (), pages 2–3.
[33]
Gunner C Larsen. “A simple stationary semi-analytical wake model”. In: Denmark.
Forskningscenter Risoe. Risoe-R 1713.August (2009), pages 1–21.
[34]
Amin Niayifar and Fernando Porté-Agel. “Analytical modeling of wind farms: A
new approach for power prediction”. In: Energies 9.9 (2016), pages 1–13. issn:
19961073. doi: 10.3390/en9090741.
[35]
Haohua Zong and Fernando Porté-Agel. “A momentum-conserving wake superposi-
tion method for wind farm power prediction”. In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 889
(2020). issn: 14697645. doi: 10.1017/jfm.2020.77.
[36]
Milton Abramowitz and Stegun Irene. Abramowitz_and_Stegun.Pdf. 1970.
[37]
B. Akay et al. “Investigation of the root ﬂow in a Horizontal Axis”. In: Wind
Energy November 2013 (2013), pages 1–20. doi: 10.1002/we.
[38]
James James and E. L. Petersen. Wind Energy for the Next Millennium. James
and James Science Publishers, 1999, page 1244. isbn: 1-902916-00-X.
[39]
A. Crespo and J. Hernández. “Turbulence characteristics in wind-turbine wakes”. In:
Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics 61.1 (1996), pages 71–85.
issn: 01676105. doi: 10.1016/0167-6105(95)00033-X.
[40]
Jess .A. Michelsen. Basis3d - a platform for development of multiblock PDE solvers.
Technical report. Lyngby: Technical University of Denmark, 1992.
[41]
R. Mikkelsen. “Actuator Disc Methods Applied to Wind Turbines”. PhD thesis.
DTU, 2003.
[42]
N. N. Sørensen. “General purpose ﬂow solver applied to ﬂow over hills”. PhD thesis.
DTU, 1994.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[43]
Paul van der Laan et al. “An improved k-eps model applied to a wind turbine wake
in atmospheric turbulence”. In: Wind Energy (2015).
[44]
Mads Christian Baungaard. “Modeling of aerodynamic rotor interaction for multi-
rotor wind turbines”. In: July (2019).
[45]
3 Criteria for Assessing CFD Convergence > ENGINEERING.com. url: https://
www.engineering.com/DesignSoftware/DesignSoftwareArticles/ArticleID/
9296/3-Criteria-for-Assessing-CFD-Convergence.aspx.
[46]
NREL. Deﬁnition of a 5-MW Reference Wind Turbine for Oﬀshore System Devel-
opment. Technical report. 2009.
[47]
Hiram Eustacio Lucatero Villaseñor. “Investigation and modeling of blockage eﬀects
in wind farms Wind Energy Master Report”. In: July (2020).
[48]
Ewan Machefaux. “Multiple Turbine Wakes”. In: DTU Vindenergi PhD Rapport
2015 January (2015), page 204.
[49]
E. Machefaux, G. C. Larsen, and J. P.Murcia Leon. “Engineering models for merging
wakes in wind farm optimization applications”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 625.1 (2015). issn: 17426596. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/625/1/012037.
[50]
A. Crespo, J. Hernández, and S. Frandsen. “Survey of modelling methods for
wind turbine wakes and wind farms”. In: Wind Energy 2.1 (1999), pages 1–24.
issn: 10954244. doi: 10.1002/(sici)1099- 1824(199901/03)2:1<1::aid-
we16>3.3.co;2-z.
[51]
P. B.S. Lissaman. “Energy Eﬀectiveness of Arbitrary Arrays of Wind Turbines.”
In: Journal of energy 3.6 (1979), pages 323–328. issn: 01460412. doi: 10.2514/3.
62441.
[52]
I. Katic, J. Højstrup, and N.O. Jensen. “A Simple Model for Cluster Eﬃciency
Publication date : Publisher ’ s PDF , also known as Version of record Link to
publication”. In: European wind energy association conference and exhibition 1
(1987).
[53]
Gunner C. Larsen et al. “Wake meandering: A pragmatic approach”. In: Wind
Energy 11.4 (2008), pages 377–395. issn: 10954244. doi: 10.1002/we.267.
[54]
Guo-wei Qian and Takeshi Ishihara. “Prediction of ﬂow ﬁeld in wind farm using a
new multiple wake model”. In: 2 (2019), pages 2–5.
