==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Use of 360 Degree Video in Virtual Reality
for Image-Based Environment Lighting
Malthe Haulund Elkær (s134856)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
Advisor
Jeppe Revall Frisvad
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this project we will be analysing the problem of using 360◦video files as the basis
for creating a virtualized outdoor environments that you can experience in VR. Using
a dual camera approach to high dynamic range, we maintain a balance between visual
fidelity and integrity of data. The project is implemented in the Unity game engine,
and has been developed assuming the performance of a VR-capable PC.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Masters thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Masters degree in Computer Science Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 19, 2021
Malthe Haulund Elkær (s134856)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Environment captures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The shortcomings of 360 cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Environment shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Environment lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Method development
9
2.1
Preliminary testing and initial results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Ambient lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Initial thoughts about direct lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
The color of a shadow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Double camera setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Unused strategies or further work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Instrumentation and capture
19
3.1
Recording workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Pre-processing software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Game Engine
23
4.1
Video file to sequence of textures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Materials and shaders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Game engine troubles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Related Works
29
5.1
3D scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Photogrammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Light field captures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Case Products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6
Conclusion
33
A
An Appendix
35
Bibliography
41
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The primary goal of VR is to give users a sense of being present in the virtual world.
This is typically called “achieving a sense of presence”. Achieving true presence can be
very diﬀicult and there is no silver bullet, however we must strive to enable it as best
we can. VR hardware is designed to more easily enable this illusion: high resolution
panels with low persistence enabling binocular vision. On the software side the bare
minimum is achieving consistent performance and avoiding jagged edges. The more
realistic and internally consistent a scene is, the less likely a willing participant is to
cast doubt as to the “realness” of the experience.
The usecases for digitizing real-world scenes are abundant, and depending on the
intended method of consumption, various degrees of realism are tolerated. An interior
design rendering or architectural visualization is expected to be near photo-realistic,
but a map can be abstract and idealized.
In this project we will be using a static “360 camera” setup to record real-life
locations and convert them into virtual scenes that can be experienced in Virtual
Reality (VR). We are using an image-based approach to environment lighting where
the scene lighting illuminating virtual objects is dynamically reacting in response to
the environment depicted in said recordings.
1.1
Environment captures
Let us examine some of the methods for recording environment maps:
Panorama
A single camera repeatedly captures images as the camera rotates to
cover the desired angle. Using a process known as “stitching”, the various image
captures are fused together to form a single image covering an increased field of view.
To use a panorama as an environment, you project the panorama unto a geometry
covering the same field of view that got captured. In the case of a full 360 degree
rotation, this would be a cylinder, and if extra effort is made to capture the scene
above and below, then the panorama is a full sphere.
Stitching requires for there to be some overlap in the field of view covered by each
sample. By fitting the overlapping regions on top of each other, a continuous image
can be synthesized. If the scene changes visually between the time two neighbouring
samples are taken, then stitching becomes more diﬀicult, and the resulting output no
longer depicts a single point in time.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
The cameras we will be using in this project can perform on-device stitching, or
perform stitching via specific pre-processing software, and as such we do not need to
go into this in great detail.
Spherical captures
An improvement to the traditional panorama stitching system
is to use a multi-sensor camera or multi-camera rig with wide lenses that cover the
entire field of view simultaneously. Being able to capture the entire scene at the same
time allows for the camera to record video of a dynamic environment. This is the core
technique we will be using in this project. At least two sensors are required, facing
opposite directions. The cameras used in this project will be described in detail later.
By their very nature, having multiple sensors arranged this way also means that each
sensor is in a different physical position. This means that from the vantage point
of one sensor, the scene will look slightly different than from the vantage point of
another. This is most visible with regard to close-by objects, as the parallax effect
can result in stitching artefacts. Additionally the volume between the sensors, and
a certain volume above and below, is not captured on any sensor, and thus act as
deadspots in the otherwise “full 360 view”.
HDRI
Camera sensors, much like human eyes, have limited dynamic ranges. When
we examine a region in shadow, our pupils dilate, making our vision more sensitive
by letting in extra light. When we look up and see a backlit cloud bright in the
sky, our pupils constrict, letting in only a fraction of the light. An aspect of our
brain then synthesises a mental model of the scene that contains both the details in
the highlights and the details in the shadows, despite our simultaneous vision having
a significantly lower dynamic range.
The auto-exposure functionality featured on
any modern camera will attempt to select an appropriate level of exposure for any
given frame, that balances the amount of details visible in the shadows, with the
amount of information lost due to highlights clipping. However, for a 360 degree
capture, the field of view of each sensor is very large, so selecting a single level of
exposure that exposes the scene depicted within it satisfactorily, is almost guaranteed
to make details in highlights unrecoverable due to clipping. A way of dealing with
this is to take multiple exposures of the same scene from the same viewpoint using
a method known as Exposure Bracketing. Some shots are deliberately underexposed
with respect to the majority of the environment, in turn makes them appropriately
exposed for details in the highlights. Merging the different brackets produces a single
image with a much wider dynamic range. However, as these multiple exposures are
not captured simultaneously, this approach generally only works for still images rather
than video. If you have direct access to the internal image processing pipeline of the
camera it is indeed possible to interleave short low exposure captures with longer
normal exposure captures, but that is not the case with cameras used in this project.
Additionally it is worth noting that video output using the HDR moniker is often
captured internally at a higher dynamic range, but then tonemapped and exported
to a standard dynamic range file. Because the internal data and tonemapping step is
==PAGE:11==
1.2 The shortcomings of 360 cameras
3
not within our control, we cannot guarantee the behaviour of such files, and cannot
use them.
Some cameras are designed with the specific intent of capturing high dynamic
range content, using specialized sensors with logarithmic response to light, or photo-
sensor arrays that mix varying photosites of varying responsiveness across the sensor.
Neither of these are the case with the cameras used in this project, for all intents and
purposes they are “normal” spherical cameras.
HDRI’s are typically used to provide detailed but static backdrops for virtual
scenes. Image Based Lighting (IBL) techniques generally use an HDRI like this for
high quality ambient lighting.
1.2
The shortcomings of 360 cameras
Now, let us look at the limitations inherent to the static 360 camera approach.
The main issue is that the tool we are using to capture the environment provides us
true information only from one single point in space. We know what light is incident
only on the location of the probe itself.
As distance increases from this location,
our captured environment becomes increasingly unlikely to suﬀiciently represent the
environment.
Moving in the virtual scene, you would expect to be able to “look
behind” objects by changing your point of view. As the camera is static and the
video is pre-recorded, no changes to the video happen in response to the movements
of the user. The recording allows for a dynamic scene at capture-time, but it does
not react to the user at run-time.
If we had depth information for each pixel, we would be able to create a point cloud
which could be turned into a mesh, allowing the user to “look behind” objects. Even
if this were the case, we would have no information about the formerly occluded
regions, and would have to reveal “nothing”, or attempt to synthesize the missing
environment dynamically. Depth information for such scenes is usually created using
a structure-from-motion (SfM) approach, but doing so requires that the camera is
dynamic, and that the scene is static. In our case, the camera is static but the scene
is dynamic.
1.3
Environment shape
A natural solution faced with lack of depth data is to present the environment as
being infinitely far away. When everything is infinitely far away, it is to be expected
that no motion from the user will have enough parallax to reveal unseen parts of the
environment. However, rendering the environment to the far plane does very little
to give you a sense of presence. Your own movement has absolutely no effect, so it
feels like you cannot move. Everything being rendered far away means that close-by
objects, such as the ground, are perceived to be unnaturally large. With everything
being at the same distance, there is also no sense of three-dimensionality as there is
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
no parallax in the binocular vision. Virtual objects present in the scene appear to be
floating, as there is no nearby “ground” for them to be sitting on. Adding a virtual
ground of course solves this issue, but at the cost of not being able to see half of the
recorded environment. This is how a skybox is typically used in video games, with a
fully digital terrain acting as the ground.
These are not traits we desire when trying to achieve the illusion of presence, so
this solution is not satisfactory for us. We can idealize the ground into a plane, and
using the known offset from the plane (that is, the height from ground to camera
sensor), we can project part of the texture into the ground.
We perform this projection by getting the position vector for every fragment in the
ground plane relative to the offset height. This position vector represents a direction,
and we can sample this direction in our environment map, for each fragment in the
ground plane. In the case of a cubemap asset you can directly use position vector to
sample the appropriate region of the environment map.
Note that this projection also means that any object visible in what is approxi-
mately the lower half of the environment video gets projected into the ground, flatten-
ing it in a manner that looks accurate only from the center of the projection. Due to
this, we prefer for the ground in the captured scene to be flat and clear of obstacles.
(a)
Person
seen
from the center of
the scene
(b) Same person seen from
an off-angle
(c) Same person appearing
to walk straight through a
virtual object
Figure 1.1: Objects projected into the ground plane entail various issues
If the ground is flat and clear of obstacles, occlusion and parallax are not issues
for the ground texture, but as the terrain becomes increasingly distant we have less
data from the camera, resulting in a less detailed ground texture.
It is typical for VR programs to implement some sort of virtual locomotion, allow-
ing the user to move around the scene by either smoothly sliding around the ground,
or teleporting around the scene. As deviating significantly from origo is sure to break
coherence of our scene, we are implementing no such feature. With the only sort of
locomotion being actual, real-world locomotion, we can ensure that the user’s point
of view does not deviate more than a meter or two from the camera’s point of view
due real-world space limitations.
The top half of the environment can be represented by a hemisphere, with every-
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Environment shape
5
Figure 1.2: Towards the edge of the ground region the texture becomes stretched and
distorted
thing being an equal but not infinite distance away from the origin of the projection.
As such we have the ground plane at height 0, and a hemisphere offset from the ground
plane by the height of the camera rig as measured from the lenses to the ground. The
missing bit of the environment going from the bottom of the hemisphere to the ground
could be idealized as a cylinder, but this gives an awkward and sharp transition from
the cylinder to the ground, so instead we use a gentle slope.
Figure 1.3: An equirectangular texture applied to a dome of radius 20m and capture
height of 1.5m. The dome is composed of two meshes and a plane, all created in the
3D modelling software Blender. The normals face inwards so the texture is visible
from inside of the mesh.
The resulting shape resembles a dome with a smooth transition. It is impossible to
select a “correct” value for the radius of the dome, as in reality the things represented
in the hemisphere are different distances away from the origo, so any single value is
“incorrect”. If the value is too small, distant objects will feel as if they are too close
and thus too small. For extremely small values, the user might even be able clip
through the environment dome. For a large part of the texture, the part representing
the sky, an infinitely large value is indeed appropriate. If the radius is too large,
objects represented in the hemisphere will feel too far away, and appear to be larger
than expected. However, unlike the scenario where everything was rendered to the
far-plane, the localized ground plane is anchoring the user in place, and the parallax
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
of the ground texture moving relative to the user will make them feel a sense of motion
and 3D, regardless of whether or not they perceive they can approach distant objects.
As such, small values can be devastating and large values are generally fine. The best
value will depend on the contents of the scene, but it is recommended simply trying
several values and selecting one that seems most appropriate, most likely a value on
the larger end.
1.4
Environment lighting
As discussed earlier, the video representing the environment is only standard dynamic
range, and almost guaranteed to have blown out highlights in the sky. Details in
the highlights are unrecoverable due to clipping, and makes it quite impossible to
use this video to determine the position of the sun in the sky with a satisfactory
precision. Exposing for details in the sky would make the environment way too dark,
and lifting the “shadows” would make the environment incredibly noisy with color
fringing. Some cameras support recording in “flat” or logarithmic modes, which allow
for an increased dynamic range at the cost of having to be manually color-graded. The
increased dynamic range is nowhere near suﬀicient for our use case, and having to
devise a system for color-grading arbitrary scenes is a big ask.
Instead what we can do is using a secondary spherical camera recording simulta-
neously, from a similar position. We can change the settings on this camera inde-
pendently and optimize it for low exposures that maximize highlight detail. Because
the cameras are recording independently and simultaneously, the scene can still be
dynamic, and changes to the scene will be reflected in both videos at the same time.
The real-world distance to the sun is so large that modelling it to be infinitely far
away and a source of parallel light is common practice in computer graphics. Rather
than being determined by a location in 3D space, parallel light is incident on the
entire scene from the same angle. This means that despite having a sample from only
one location, we can accurately determine the angle of incident sunlight for the entire
scene. In addition to this, parallel light casts strongly defined hard shadows that we
can accurately render, whereas other light sources have varying regions of hard and
soft shadowing that depend on the relative size and location of both the light source
and shadow casting object, all information that we do not have. Luckily, the sun is
so tremendously bright that it quite literally outshines any other light source, and we
can easily model the sun as the only light source to cast a shadow.
It is quite noticeable if the shadows cast by an object significantly differ from
expected, but much harder to tell whether ambient coloring is suitable. The parts of
the environment that are contributing color to an object are always out of view of the
player, so even major inconsistencies can be hard to spot. For many years specular
reflections on objects in video games have succesfully been implemented as pre-baked
cubemaps, despite the cubemap not necessarily reflecting anything resembling the
actual environment.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Environment lighting
7
1.4.1
Target capture scenes
Keeping the above sections in mind, what kind of scenery can we expect to capture and
virtualize with satisfactory results? Outdoor scenery can respect our three primary
requirements for capture and virtualization, namely:
1. That the ground is flat and mostly clear of objects.
2. That objects that are present in the scene can be reasonably modelled as being
some arbitrary far-away distance.
3. Direct lighting in the scene is predominantly due to the sun.
Using these requirements we strive to be able to:
• provide reasonable ambient lighting for the scene
• determine the primary parameters of the sun, namely position and intensity, so
as to recreate the direct lighting
• place virtual objects in the scene, casting credible shadows unto other virtual
objects as well the environment
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Method development
In this chapter I will document some of the thoughts, approaches, problems, and so-
lutions I encountered and devised during the development of the method I ultimately
ended up using.
2.1
Preliminary testing and initial results
I decided to sample various lighting conditions to gather information. To avoid the
highlights in the sky being blown, all photos are captured at minimum exposure values,
achieved by manually setting the camera’s shutter time to be as short as possible, and
the camera’s ISO to be as low as possible. The only way to make exposures even
darker would via the use of an ND filter. ND filters are typically installed in front of
the lens of a normal camera, but this poses an issue on most 360 camera designs, and
as such no ND filters are available for the cameras used in this project1.
I categorized the pictures into several degrees of turbidity: Blue sky, cloudy,
slightly overcast, and entirely overcast. I also made sure to capture situations that I
expected to be challenging and probably unsuited for this task. A gallery of images
are available in the appendix, and even more files are available in the project folder.
These images are taken using the Insta360 One X, the camera that would eventually
be used for the low-exposure video. The images are either taken simply handheld, or
mounted on a rod which is handheld. Looking at each image, we are mostly interested
in three things:
• If the sun is present, how does it, and the area around it appear? Would we be
able to precisely locate it in the sky?
• How does the sky look?
Would we be able to consistently segment it from
the scene, despite it having many different appearances and potentially being
covered up?
• How does the direct lighting look?
Can we determine the intensity and/or
coloration of the sun by looking at the scene?
1In September 2020, the company Freewell released ND filters that attach to the Insta360 One
R, a camera that could replace the One X used in this project.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Method development
The main takeaways I gathered from the preliminary testing was:
• Depending on the turbidity, the sky can look very different, but regardless of
whether it is clear blue or dull grey, its actual effect on the scene is not drastic.
This can be explained by the fact that when the sun is not obstructed, it is
significantly overpowering the sky lighting for any lit areas. When the sun is
obstructed and the entire scene is ambiently lit predominantly by sky light, both
the camera’s auto white balance feature, as well as our own human perception
is working to remove any blue color cast.
• We associate blue skies with strong sunlight and hard shadows, but this is only
the case when the sun is directly visible. Measuring the luminosity of a blue
sky often yields results that are lower than an overcast sky. This is because
the layer of clouds is acting as a diffuser, effectively transforming sunlight from
being parallel light into being an area light.
• Local changes to the scene near the camera can affect the scene at large. If the
camera sensor is in shadow, for all intents and purposes, we must consider the
entire scene to be in shadow. As such, hard shadows should be kept away from
the camera when deciding where to record.
• Two skies can appear to be virtually indistinguishable, but have dramatically
different impact on the scene due to direct lighting. Despite using the minimum
exposure settings, the dynamic range is nowhere near suﬀicient to capture even
the rather large intensity swings a cloud passing by the sun can give.
Furthermore, additional in-engine testing revealed:
• Our texture source is dynamic, which means it cannot be trivially used in game
engines where you would usually supply an environment texture or “cubemap
texture”, as some amount of processing is done upon import, such as the con-
volutions used for image based lighting.
• Lighting a scene with a HDR image gives somewhat satisfying lighting on the
surface of every virtual object, but casts no shadows on the ground or other vir-
tual objects. A high intensity light source such as the sun needs to cast shadows
on the environment to anchor objects to the scene, and lighting needs to react
to it being occluded. As such, omni-directional lighting is an OK representation
of ambient lighting, but not well suited for direct lighting, assuming more than
a single virtual object is present in the scene.
2.2
Ambient lighting
Based on these pictures, I set out to devise a method of segmenting the sky from
the rest of the texture, and isolating the sun within the sky. As it turned out, a
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Initial thoughts about direct lighting
11
rather naïve approach will handle the most common cases quite well: For something
to qualify as sky, it must be in the upper half of the texture, and be within a certain
range of hues or greyscale, as well as have a certain amount of intensity. If the sky
is too overcast to reach the intensity threshold, then it is uninteresting as a source of
environment lighting regardless. There are various ways to implement such a mask,
but tinkering with HSL and YCbCr quickly produced satisfactory results, segmenting
the sky from the rest.
(a) Rather simple sky
(b) Rather complex sky
Figure 2.1: Legend: Green pixels indicate sun, pink pixels indicate non-sky. Remain-
ing pixels depict sky as captured
However, what did this really give us? While the sky light indeed has a large im-
pact on the ambient light, is there a purpose to intentionally removing other sources
of ambient light? I was aware that some game engines, notably Unreal Engine support
Sky Light as light emitters and shadow casters, which would be a radical improve-
ment over plain ambient textures. However, as it turns out, it was not suﬀicient to
feed a segmented sky texture to such a light, and re-capturing the sky is a heavy
operation that the documentation notes to be “very costly and will definitely cause a
hitch.”2. This means we can at best run it once for the initial frame as even infrequent
hitching is unacceptable in VR. Regardless, even a rapidly changing sky with clouds
drifting about, has essentially no impact on the environment lighting, unless it affects
the region near the sun, and our cameras are simply not capable of measuring the
intensity changes of the sun by looking directly at it. The most radical changes in the
environment video actually happens in the lower half of the texture, as the intensity
of the sun changes. As such, recapturing the skylight of the scene provides little to
no benefit over using the entire scene for ambient lighting.
2.3
Initial thoughts about direct lighting
Comparing the lightness of two pixels requires converting the RGB color primaries of
our sRGB textures into some sort of expression of luminance. Many colorspaces use
2Unreal Engine 4.26 released December 2020 appears to have introduced real time capture of
sky light, but for obvious reasons I cannot comments as to its performance.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Method development
two dimensions to express the type of color, and one dimension to express the intensity
of the color. In YCbCr the Luma component, in HSL the Lightness component, and
in HSV the Value component are used for this purpose. You can also stay in the RGB
colorspace and convert the gamma-compressed color primaries into linear values, and
then multiply them as follows Y = 0.2126R + 0.7152G + 0.0722B to get luminance.
However, as is apparent from the test pictures, the sun is so bright that it is
essentially always clipping, even in cases where the scene does not really seem to be
in sunlight, see A.4 and A.5. This mean that we need to find a new way of determining
the intensity of the sun for a given scene. In a scene with well defined shadows it
might be possible to estimate the intensity of the sun by comparing the intensity of
areas in the lower half of the video that are known to be in shadow, and areas that
are known to be in direct sunlight. However we have no such mask segmenting the
two regions, and as we have no idea as to the materials or colors of anything present
in these areas, it would be diﬀicult to generate one reliably. If we take a picture of
the scene either in full direct sunlight, or fully ambiently lit, such a mask can be
generated by analysing the difference. Such an approach has several problems:
1. If the ground contains a significant amount of specular surfaces such as metal or
wet asphalt, then the color represented by the ground texture does not merely
depend on whether it is in shadow.
2. Any large changes to the scene represented by the “ground half” of the video will
impact the intensity of the sun. If a car 10 meters away leaves the scene after
recording the still frame, a difference comparison between this frame and any
other frame would be indicating massive differences, even if the direct lighting
is the exact same in both scenes.
The idea of using a still frame containing a known lighting state of either “full
direct lighting” or “no direct lighting” is sound, but it greatly benefits from some sort
of known material in a known position. We will revisit this idea later.
2.4
The color of a shadow
The way shadows work in game engines depend on the rendering path, but in the
end some sort of texture is generated for the current frame as seen by the camera,
and this texture is added on top of the scene, darkening certain areas. If two objects
are casting shadows due to obscuring the same light source, and the shadows are
overlapping, then the intersecting region is no darker than the difference. The union
of all shadows have the same “tone”. This is natural, as in the real world the shadow
is caused by the absence of direct light, and obscuring a light source twice does not
cause it to be doubly obscured. However, in our case we need to keep in mind that
some shadows are not cast by virtual objects, but are baked directly into the ground
texture. As far as the shadowmap is concerned, there are no shadows already preset
in that area, and double-shadowing occurs.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 The color of a shadow
13
(a) Baked shadow
(b) Baked shadow overlapping with a dy-
namic shadow
Figure 2.2: Double-shadowing occurs in regions of the environment texture where
baked shadows intersect with shadows from virtual objects
If it were possible to accurately determine which regions of the ground are in
shadow, and to what extent, it might be possible, depending on the degree of access
to the rendering pipeline, to manipulate the shadowmap such that double-shadowing
does not occur. However, as discussed earlier, it is not reliable to generate such a
mask, so we must use a different approach.
If what we perceive to be shadows are the absence of direct lighting, and the only
relevant source of direct lighting in a scene is the sun, then the appearance of a region
in shadow must be the same as its appearance when entirely ambiently lit. As we
already require a still from of the environment either fully ambiently lit or in full
direct sunlight, we can simply limit this to an ambiently lit frame.
(a) Baked shadow
(b) Baked shadow and dynamic shadow
Figure 2.3: Using the shadowmatte approach no double shadowing occurs as the
intersecting region just gets assigned the color it would have regardless
For any surface of the environment that is shadowed by a virtual object, we can
simply sample the ambient frame rather than the live video frame that represents the
lit areas. By doing so, double-shadowing is eliminated, as the shadow cast by virtual
objects has the expected effect on the environment, whether or not the region is in
shadow already.
As an extra benefit, this also works out nicely for specular surfaces. If a region
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Method development
of the environment becomes shadowed by a virtual object, it does not maintain its
high specular response to light, merely darkening overall, it actually loses the glossy
“shine” entirely.
(a) The surface of the ground has a
specular shine due to the angle of
the sun
(b) When shadowed these specular
spots disappear
Figure 2.4: Shadowing specular highlights using the shadowmatte approach
As a consequence of sampling a static frame, any region in the environment that
is shadowed by a virtual object is no longer dynamic as seen in 2.5. By and large,
the entire scene is dynamic, and regions that are in shadow are likely to be small
and close to the recording rig where presumably few things are moving due to the
presence of the recording rig, so this seems like a reasonable compromise.
2.5
Double camera setup
It was at this point I thought to use two cameras in conjunction. One camera would
capture the entire scene in high resolution and quality, suitable for the environment
backdrop, and another camera would use the minimum-exposure settings to minimize
the loss of data in the highlight regions that the standard-exposure video would be
sure to have. Once I mounted the secondary camera on top of the primary camera,
I was happy to note that it could not be seen in the footage of the primary camera,
and as such would not be visible anywhere in the environment backdrop. I also noted
that the primary camera was visible to the secondary camera, but considered this
to no issue as the intent for this footage was merely to track the position of the sun
in the upper hemisphere. I later realized that that having low-exposure video of a
know object in a known location was exactly what I needed to be able to estimate
the intensity of the sun in a reliable fashion. Note the reflection of the sun on the
primary camera on the bottom most part of 2.6.
Because the video has been intentionally underexposed, details in the highlights
are well preserved. We can use the clipping regions in the standard video as the basis
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Unused strategies or further work
15
Figure 2.5: Part of the front wheel of the bike appears to be missing as it “passes
through” the shadow cast by the rock. The shadow does not appear to be “visible”
here, as it has the same color as the “lit” areas.
(a) Scene in shadow
(b) Scene in sunlight
Figure 2.6: Same scene in different lighting conditions. Note the brightness of the
pixels in the bottom of each picture. Both pictures taken at minimal exposure using
secondary camera. Images are not gamma-corrected and as such appear darker than
final presentation
for a mask, and we can then sample the underexposed bracket for that region as seen
in 2.7.
2.6
Unused strategies or further work
In this section I will briefly mention some approaches and solutions to problems
related to this project that could have been used but ultimately were not.
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Method development
(a) Crop from the sky of the standard-
exposure capture. Note that colors have not
been gamma-corrected and as such appear
darker than final presentation
(b) Crop of sunny region with synthesized
extended range texture applied to environ-
ment
Figure 2.7: Synthesizing an extended dynamic range photo by replacing near-clipping
and clipping regions with samples from a different exposure bracket.
Direct light intensity
Measuring the intensity of sunlight incident on the probe
could be done much more accurately by using one (or multiple), ironically named
“ambient light sensors” on or nearby the camera rig. You would need some way of
recording the output, and synchronizing the videos with the light level data. As this
did not add anything new but merely refined data we already had, I discarded this
idea.
Analytic model of sun
If the location and time of recording is known, then the
position of the sun in the sky can be accurately determined without even analysing
the video. You would need to know how the camera is rotated in relation to north
to ensure that the environment in the scene is consistent with calculated position of
the sun. The movement of the sun in the sky also follows a predetermined arc, which
could give very smooth and accurate time-of-day appropriate shadows from virtual
objects. All in all I would consider this be a quite a decent solution. Combined with
a light sensor, you could skip the secondary camera in its entirety, provided you are
satisfied with clipping in the sky.
Image analysis for detecting sun
Image analysis algorithm for shape detection
generally assume that the texture represents a rectilinear viewport, rather than a
full sphere. Having a discontinuity between the left and right edges of the texture,
and massive deformation at the top edge means that the equirectangular texture is
ill suited for such algorithms. However, using the fact that the sun only occurs in
the upper hemisphere, it is possible to map that hemisphere to a circle in a plane
with much less distortion, making a circle like the sun appear as circular on most
of the texture and slightly elliptical towards the horizon. As the sun is not even
==PAGE:25==
2.6 Unused strategies or further work
17
guaranteed to look like a circle in the first place, due to flaring on the sensor, cloud
cover, or partial obfuscation by branches or similar, I abandoned this approach. I
think the strongest reason for doing it this way would be the ability to disregard
certain reflective surfaces, as there is a tendency for them to be rectangular.
Analyzing turbidity of the sky
The International Commission on Illumination
(CIE) defines several preset lighting conditions corresponding to different skies. These
presets are often used in architectural rendering and visualization programs.
By
segmenting the sky from the scene, it becomes possible to analyse exactly what kind of
sky the scene contains, in terms of parameters of the CIE standard skies, which could
be useful for different things. The scenes I tested in this project had no radical changes
in ambient lighting throughout the duration of the clip, so dynamically isolating the
sky and analysing it would have no real purpose. For longer clips where the weather
changes radically throughout the duration of the clip, analysis like this could be useful.
For longer clips, the ambient lighting of the scene can change significantly, and as such
a single ambiently lit cubemap is insuﬀicient. For further work it would be nice to
dynamically analyse the scene, and if there is a frame that appears to be contain
only ambient lighting, save that texture to a cubemap and perform the required pre-
processing to use the texture as a cubemap asset, then transition to using the new
cubemap that more accurately represents the scene ambiance.
Replacing sky
Segmenting the sky from the scene also allows you to replace it
with something else. Perhaps you wanted to see how a scene you captured on a sunny
day could look on a cloudy day. You could replace the sky with an entirely digital
sky, or with a capture from a different day or location. Achieving different ambient
lighting could be done with tonemapping, but the direct lighting visible in the scene
would almost certainly be inconsistent with the replaced sky, severely limiting the
usefulness of such a feature.
Alternative approach for determining angle of sun
By placing an object of
known shape into the real-world scene, where it is lit by the sun, it casts a shadow
into the ground plane. By looking at the shadow, that is, 2D projection into the
ground plane, it is possible to determine the angle of the sun. As it happens, the
scene always contains an object of known shape, that is the recording rig itself, and
indeed the shadow of the rig is present in the recordings. If the shadow cast by the
rig is too complex to analyze, an object with a simpler shape, like a rod or cone could
be placed beneath the rig. The tripod used in this project already had a rod on its
major axis, beneath the cameras. Depending on the resolution of the camera, the
materials in the ground plane, and the exact degree of “flatness”, this could have OK
results in certain cases, but as the intensity falls relative to ambient lighting, this
strategy quickly becomes unreliable. It also provides little benefit over the current
strategy, besides adding an extra “point of view”. If the two strategies were to be used
in conjunction, you would be able to determine the angle of the sun in the case where
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Method development
the sun is obscured from the point of view of the camera sensors, but not obscured
from the shadow casting object. However, a shadow that obscures the sensors is likely
to also affect whatever method is being used to determine the intensity of the direct
sunlight, and knowing the angle of the sun is pointless if the intensity that is being
measured does not apply to the scene as a whole.
Shadow removal
Whenever the sun is directly visible from the point of view of
the camera, the camera itself is obscuring sunlight from some area of the ground,
thus casting a shadow unto it. If a mesh representation of the camera is not visible
in the scene, this shadow seems to come out of nowhere and could be undesired.
Other approaches have the luxury of having multiple points of view and being able to
reproject some aspect of another viewport into the ground plane, thus overwriting the
shadow. The recording from the other point of view must by definition be taken at
a different time, thus making the reprojected area not consistent with the dynamics
seen in the primary video. An alternative solution is to identify the shadow cast by
the recording rig, and attempt to lift the shadows to a lit level, thereby removing it
from the scene. As the recording rig’s shape and location is known, and the direction
of the sunlight casting the shadow is being determined, the rig’s projection into the
plane would mostly match up with the shadow to be removed. Depending on the
quality of the shadow removal desired, this could be as easy as casting an additive
shadow from a 3D model, lifting brightness of the pixels in the shadowed area, or as
advanced as a machine learning algorithm dynamically using the shadowmask as an
in-painted area.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Instrumentation and
capture
The cameras we will be using in this project are both created by the company Insta360.
We are using a relatively small camera from the consumer lineup called “One X”, and
a relatively large camera from the prosumer lineup called “Pro 2”. We will be using
the Pro 2 (Henceforth “Primary camera”) to capture a high quality, high resolution
video exposed for the environment, visible to the user, and the One X (Henceforth
“Secondary camera”) to capture a low resolution, low-exposure video.
(a) Insta360 Pro 2, the primary cam-
era
(b) Insta360 One X, the secondary
camera
Figure 3.1: The cameras used in this project, roughly to scale
We will be using the combination of cameras to approximate the results of a much
more involved multi-sensor imaging setup.
The primary camera can be installed on a tripod, and has a convenient screw hole
on the top where we will be mounting the secondary camera. We want the primary
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Instrumentation and capture
camera to record only the environment, so we do our best to remove as much of the
recording rig from the video as possible. The primary camera can be rotated as to
mostly hide the three legs within the dead spots of the six lenses on the primary
camera, and the secondary camera is in fact entirely within the rather large conical
deadspot produced by the primary camera. The image stitching performed either
on-device or via Insta360’s software will then more or less remove the tripod from
the video recorded by the primary camera. The primary camera itself, however, is
present in the video recorded by the secondary camera, as the deadspot produced by
the much smaller secondary camera is itself much smaller. However, this region of
the video is never visible to the user, and in fact is of great benefit to us as we will
see later. While we can hide the camera rig itself from the footage, as a consequence
of being in direct sunlight, a shadow still remains in the footage.
The primary camera comes with antennae for range extension, but these protrude
into the field of view of the secondary camera, so we will not mount them.
3.1
Recording workflow
I have devised the following workflow for capturing suitable footage. If you want to
produce footage similar to the one used in this project, I recommend you follow this
workflow.
• Ensure that both cameras are charged and have suﬀicient storage. The sec-
ondary camera can be charged via USB in a pinch, but the primary camera
will need to charge via a wall outlet. I frequently had issues where the primary
camera would either have lost charge unexpected, or would refuse to power on
despite the battery being charged. In such a scenario, remove the battery from
the device, wait a bit and reinsert it. Use a thin, hard tool to depress the reset
button for a dozen seconds.
• At recording time, measure the offset from the ground to the height of the
camera lenses of the primary camera.
• Ensure that the physical camera is level, and ideally perform the software cali-
bration as well.
• Pair one external monitor (smartphone or tablet running Insta360’s oﬀicial apps
using local WiFi hotspots) to the primary camera, and pair another one to the
secondary camera. This allows you to change settings and monitor the results
without touching the rig.
• Rotate the primary camera such that the tripod is mostly invisible in the pre-
view footage.
• Mount the secondary camera on top of the primary camera with a headless
screw.
Be careful not to tighten too much as such a screw can be diﬀicult
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Pre-processing software
21
to remove without damaging the thread. Ideally rotate the secondary camera
such that one lens is roughly facing the sun, as to minimize flaring and stitching
issues.
• Start the recording on both devices and step away. Without the range extenders
installed the primary camera has a hard time maintaining connection, so it
might be necessary to stop recording by hitting the physical stop button.
• Double check that your footage got captured correctly. On one occasion a clip
I recorded turned out to be just the color green.
3.2
Pre-processing software
Both cameras can perform in-body stitching of the video, providing a single seamless
video file as output, but the primary camera does so at reduced quality. As such, we
will perform the stitching in post via the first party program Insta360 Stitcher. For
the footage from the secondary camera we will be importing it into the first party
program Insta360 Studio.
While Stitcher allows us to produce impressive 8k and H.265 video output, there
seems to be limited support for hardware accelerated playback of these files.
As
such we will be exporting as high compatibility H.264 3840-by-1920 at 30 frames-per-
second mp4 files. Use the highest settings available to you, that can be played back
via hardware acceleration.
In Studio we will be exporting the secondary camera video to H.264 480-by-240
mp4 files. The resolution is dramatically lower to decrease the computational load
of analysing every frame. Quality of analysis is mostly unaffected by this significant
reduction in resolution, as the information we need to determine, that is, approximate
angle and intensity of incident sunlight, is not high frequency and does not benefit
from a high level of detail. Depending on the hardware the project is running on, the
video resolution can be increased. Consider the settings documented here to be very
conservative.
As the cameras are not genlocked or otherwise synchronized, we must manually
trim the recordings such that they start at approximately the same time, and last
the exact same amount of frames. This can be done using tools like FFMPG. Ensure
that you have at least one frame where the scene is lit entirely by the ambient light,
though strictly speaking this frame need not be contained in the timeline of the video.
==PAGE:30==
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Game Engine
The program is implemented in the popular game engine Unity. Unity offers inte-
gration with virtual reality and provides hardware accelerated playback of video files.
It also provides a lot of tools and presets for video game creation that seem like
they could be relevant for this project, but in fact fall short due to differences in
implementation.
Figure 4.1: The main scene as captured from Unity’s editor view. A virtual represen-
tation of the capture rig sits in the center of the scene. The statue and the rock on
the left side are virtual objects. The grey line intersecting with the primary camera
represents the direction of sunlight, and its color corresponds to the current intensity.
The pink line intersecting with the secondary camera has the same angle, and points
to the same location on a hemisphere which has a texture that transitions between
the two brackets of video. The clipping pixels used to determine the position of the
sun are highlighted in pink.
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Game Engine
4.1
Video file to sequence of textures
Unity supports the playback of video files via the Video Player class of objects. We
create two Video Players, one for playback of the standard exposure video, and one
for playback of the low exposure video. Each video player is configured to output
its current frame to a Render Texture. Unlike traditional textures that go through
the Unity asset importer, our options for Render Textures are somewhat limited.
For example, despite being able to assign the value “Cubemap” to the parameter
“Dimension”, the resulting texture is not compatible with fields that expect actual
cubemap textures. This means we are restricted in how we can use this stream of
frames.
Additionally, since the video playback is hardware accelerated, the render texture
lives entirely on the GPU, which makes it trivial to access in a performant manner in
the rendering pipeline such as via shaders, but very slow to access via scripts executed
by the CPU. To access a render texture via script, the render texture has to be read
pixel by pixel and a new texture living on the CPU has to be created. This is a
significant pipeline stall introducing several milliseconds of processing for every single
video frame, making the entire experience unreasonably low performance. Thankfully,
our analysis script is not very sensitive to latency as the position or intensity of the
sun is unlikely to change drastically from one frame to the other. By creating a co-
routine that asynchronously converts the current render texture into a texture every
33ms, and having our analysis script run on the texture at the same frequency, we
eliminate the need for the analysis script to wait on the conversion process. See the
script “DarkVideoAnalysis” for implementation details.
Intensity and direction of sunlight is calculated using a rolling buffer as to minimize
jittering.
When the analysis script is called, it converts the top half of the frame, as well
as the bottom bit of the frame, in which the primary camera is visible, into arrays.
These arrays are rather small due to the low resolution of the footage, and are of
course computationally cheap to access both in terms of reads and writes.
Each frame it analyses the contents of both arrays.
For the bottom array it
estimates the intensity based on the brightness of the pixels, corresponding to intensity
of reflected sunlight on the surface of the primary camera.
For the top array it determines the average location of the clipping pixels by
computing the sum of direction vectors corresponding to clipping pixel positions.
Each vector is weighed relative to its latitude in the equirectangular map, as more
pixels represent the same spherical angle towards the top of the texture.
4.2
Materials and shaders
Virtual objects
Any virtual object that is placed into the scene should use a
standard PBR material. No special modifications are required for arbitrary virtual
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Materials and shaders
25
objects to work right. Virtual objects are affected by ambient lighting, direct lighting,
as well as shadows cast by virtual objects.
Ground
The environment itself has already been lit and shadowed in an accurate
manner by virtue of being a recording of the real world. This means that it should
not be affected by the digital lights we are configuring in the scene. However, making
the environment’s material into a simple unlit material means that it also cannot
receive shadows, which we in fact do need.
The way we achieve this is by rendering the environment using an unlit material,
but having a duplicate of the ground plane rendering right on top of the first one. The
duplicate plane allows transparency and uses the “shadowmatte” tag which enables
it to receive shadowing information and make the shadowed regions opaque. In the
standard ground plane we sample the current frame of the primary camera’s video,
and in the shadowmatte we always sample the static ambient cubemap.
It is not strictly required to do this using two planes rather than a single plane
sampling several textures, but accessing the shadow map programmatically seems to
often break between Unity versions.
In the introduction we mentioned that we create a location vector from the center
of projection to each fragment in the environment, and use this vector to sample the
environment map. As we do not have an actual cubemap asset, we cannot use the
SampleCubemap method, but must instead use math to find the appropriate spot to
sample using the SampleTexture2D method. Throughout this process it is extremely
important to keep in mind that the dimensions X, Y, and Z are defined quite arbi-
trarily and are not guaranteed to refer to the same axis depending on the context.
Other pitfalls include the UV texture spanning the environment map not necessarily
matching expectations.
We first derive the corresponding azimuthal angle ϕ and the angle of inclination
θ, and by comparing the actual angles to the maximum angle (a full rotation for ϕ
and half a rotation for θ) we can compose a two dimensional vector by which we can
sample the texture2d. See the included shader “Longlat” for implementation details.
Hemisphere
The sample coordinates for the hemisphere are calculated the same
way as the ground, but rather than sampling a single image per material, we are
sampling both the bright and the dark video simultaneously. We first create a mask
that segments regions of the sky that either have been or are close to being blown
out. Then we use linear interpolation to determine to which extent we are sampling
the overexposed bracket, and which extent we are sampling the underexposed bracket.
Finally, the colors of the underexposed video are brought in line with the colors of the
overexposed video by adjusting the gamma and hue, so the newly synthesized region of
the sky fits appropriately into the scene. See the included shader “EnvironmentTop”
for implementation details.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Game Engine
4.3
Game engine troubles
As VR is a somewhat niche usecase, it is not uncommon for even critical features to be
severely broken, depending on the exact version number, branch, and rendering path.
VR uses two cameras to render the scene from slightly different points of view, thus
enabling binocular vision of nearby objects. A number of optimizations exist that seek
to decrease the rendering overhead inherent to this process, such as rendering each
object in both eye simultaneously, only having to access every asset once per frame,
rather than rendering each eye sequentially. Objects more than a certain distance
away also have minimal parallax between each eye and a single rendering can be
suﬀicient for use in both eyes. As the full screen contains two images, screen effects
need to be designed with this in mind or they will cause a stereo mismatch. These
kinds of optimizations allow VR to reach the performance target it requires, but also
complicates the rendering process, frequently resulting in engine-level bugs.
During the development of this project I encountered versions and settings that
produced entirely unusable images with massive flickering or distortion, or other
quirks like one eye missing shadows or the shadow map being applied to the full
screen rather than each eye independently. In Unreal Engine I was stuck using a
years old version if I wanted to access the shadowmap directly, as the feature had
broken at some point and never gotten fixed.
Unity is currently in the process of replacing their standard rendering pipeline with
the high-quality HDRP and the high-performance URP1. Sadly, neither option is great
for this project, but the original Unity has seen little attention lately and is unlikely
to get improvements for VR use. HDRP’s advanced features are mostly too expensive
to use when targeting high resolution and framerate for VR. The high quality shadow
filtering implemented in the higher quality presets of HDRP also appear to be entirely
incompatible with the shadowmatte approach to shadows, resulting in flickering noise
where smooth penumbra is expected. URP was missing several key features at the
start of this project, in particular lighting was very limited. As such, the project is
implemented in HDRP with most of the bells and whistles turned off. Performance
when running in the Unity editor leaves much to be desired, frequently dipping into
the 30fps range which can be uncomfortable or directly nausea inducing in many
people, but when compiled to a standalone executable it runs fine on VR-capable
hardware.
For a while I was also researching the usefulness of rendering the environment
not in the application layer but in the compositor layer of the program, as this is
the recommend solution for 180 and 360 degree video playback.
As it turns out,
the Oculus SDK supports equirect compositor layers only on its mobile platforms,
whereas the PC SDK supports only quads, cylinders, and cubemap assets, which as
we have discussed earlier are not quite the same thing. Furthermore, while rendering a
video through the compositor layer results in the video being sampled in an intelligent
1Originally the “Universal Rendering Pipeline” was known by the moniker “Light Weight Ren-
dering Pipeline” LWRP
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Game engine troubles
27
manner with regards to the lenses and the viewbuffer, whenever you want to have a
virtual objects be in front of said video, as would be the case in this project, a “hole”
has to be punched in the video to let the application layer shine through. In my
experience this hole is less than graceful with regard to aliasing issues, resulting in an
overall worse picture than letting the video be rendered in the application layer. As
the application is not away of the content existing in the compositor layer, it cannot
effectively use anti aliasing to minimize this. Using compositor layers also complicates
the development process as the layers can only be seen from inside of the headset,
and with the terrible in-editor VR performance this can be quite detrimental.
==PAGE:36==
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Related Works
In this chapter we will discuss different approaches to VR scene capturing, and some
software products applying them:
5.1
3D scanning
3D scanning is a method of creating high quality meshes of small to medium sized
objects. There are two main approaches to 3D scanning. In one approach, an object is
removed from the scene and placed in a bespoke 3D scanner where a laser strikes the
object as it rotates on a platter. Alternatively a structured light source illuminates
the object, and by the deformation of the structured light, the surface of the object
is determined. As a consequence of shooting light at something and measuring the
response, both strategies struggle with transparent, reflective, and black surfaces.
This approach is best suited digitizing individual objects, as digitizing an entire scene
is incredibly challenging and time-consuming.
5.2
Photogrammetry
Photogrammetry can be considered to be similar to panoramic stitching, except the
output is a continuous 3D surface rather than a 2D one. A large amount of photos
are taken, sweeping over the scene, with overlapping regions allowing for software to
align the photos, creating a point cloud that is eventually turned into a continuous
surface.
By moving the camera around, or indeed by using multiple cameras in
parallel to speed up the task, you can get the required depth information, and getting
information about occluded regions. Because the process of capturing a scene scan
is not instantaneous, the scene has to be entirely static, and does not deal well with
reflections, as reflective surfaces appear different from different vantage points. A high
quality texture is generated for the entirety of the scene, but lighting and reflections
are baked into the texture. Optionally lighting information can be attempted to be
removed, and the scene can be digitally re-lit.
==PAGE:38==
30
5 Related Works
5.3
Light field captures
Unlike the two former approaches, this approach does not create a 3D mesh, but rather
records a video that is to some extent responsive to user movement. By capturing
the scene from a vast amount of vantage points at the same time, binocular vision is
created by sampling the scene as seen from the vantage point of each eye. A single
camera moving in a controlled manner, such as by a robotic arm, can capture a static
scene, and an array of cameras capturing simultaneously can capture a dynamic scene.
Note that moving out of bounds of the volume determined by the capturing rig means
there is no information. Because light field captures do not create meshes, it is not
straight forward to add virtual objects into such a scene. For captures where the
light field does not represent a full 360 degree field of view, you have a lot of lighting
information available to light the surface of an object that is not visible from the
vantage point of the user, and if fact lack the lighting information requires to light
the surfaces that are.
5.4
Case Products
5.4.1
Google Earth VR (street view)
Google Earth VR’s Street View is based on spherical captures. Google supports multi
different categories of captures for this feature, first-party captures and user uploads.
First party captures are produced by a camera mounted to a vehicle or backpack, with
photos taken at regular intervals. Due to the nature of spherical photo captures, the
resulting scene is static and has no depth information at all. Users can look around
in full spherical field of view, but moving around does not influence the scene at all,
and there is no sense of scale or 3D. Users can “move” to discrete scenes in nearby
location. Due to the different scenes not being captured at the same time, moving
in one direction generally “rewinds” the time, and turning a corner will generally
use data captured on a different day altogether. Due to the relative proximity of
the various first party captures, data from one capture can influence nearby captures.
For example, Google uses data from a nearby capture to project into the “ground”
region of the current scene, stitching the two scenes together, thus hiding the camera
rig, vehicle, or camera operator. Third party captures do not have this luxury, and
as such generally include the camera operator.
5.4.2
Google Earth VR (non-street view)
This feature is largely based on photogrammetry and structure-from-motion. Funda-
mentally the idea is the same as described earlier, except the scale is very different.
Rather than sweeping a camera through a scene, this type of photogrammetry is
based on data from planes and satellites sweeping across the sky.
==PAGE:39==
5.4 Case Products
31
The output is a static scene with low fidelity mesh and low resolution textures
covering a large percentage of the surface of the Earth. Details smaller than a car
are generally not distinguishable, so representing a scene in 1:1 size does make for
a high quality presentation. The program allows adjusting the position of the sun,
but this just changes the ambient color of the environment.
Shadow information
is baked into the textures, and as such is mostly inconsistent with the position of
the virtual sun.
Some buildings have details that are unlikely to be the product
of the general photogrammetry approach, and are probably the result of specialized
efforts and manual 3D-modelling, similar to that used on Google Maps. Google Earth
dynamically changes the distance between the cameras corresponding to your eyes,
giving the impression that the earth is miniature-sized but grows as you get closer.
An optional setting forces 1:1 size at all times.
5.4.3
Apple Maps
Apple Maps is as of yet not viewable in VR, but the product’s similarities to Google’s
Maps and Earth products make it relevant to include. Apple Maps’ Flyover and Look
Around features are significantly newer than Google’s features, and as such include
several improvements to the method, at the cost of not being available in anywhere
near as many regions. Where Google Maps offers a planar, textured, satellite view and
a textureless 3D mode, Apple Maps offers a textured 3D view similar to the one found
in Google Earth. Apple’s equivalent to Street View, namely “Look Around” uses
some parallax to simulate depth as the user looks around the spherical view, making
it feel much closer to looking around a 3D scene, rather than rotating a textured
sphere. Moving from one location to another in Look Around is also significantly
more seamless, probably due to having significantly more samples, and the particular
choice of interpolation between discrete scene views.
5.4.4
Google 2018 light field demo (static content, full spherical
field of view)
: Capturing process takes 30-90 seconds for the fast setup, and as such doesn’t allow
for motion or dynamic content. The camera array is moved after completing part
of a capture, and can as such cover a full spherical field of view. The illusion of
dynamic content at a small scale can be made by, for example, having subjects in the
scene maintain eye-contact with the rig as it captures the scene. The result is that
where ever the user moves in the limited volume, eye-contact persists. The paper also
documents a higher quality workflow that takes substantially longer time but yields
higher quality results.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Related Works
5.4.5
Google 2020 light field demo (dynamic content, roughly
half a sphere field of view)
In this setup, the camera array is static, and as such can record data from all vantage
points simultaneously, meaning it allows for dynamic content. As a consequence of
the shape of the array, the field of view is limited, as increasing the field of view
beyond this, would cause the cameras to obscure each other, ultimately rendering the
capture pointless.
5.4.6
Realities
Whereas Google Earth’s photogrammetry was never intended to be viewed from up
close in VR, Realities is impressive photogrammetry showcase specifically made for
VR. Realities depicts various environments from around the world, and each scene is
a sight to behold.
5.4.7
“Capturing reality for computer graphics applications”
In this project a high quality photogrammetic reconstruction is made taking thou-
sands of samples from multiple locations. The images are then aligned and turned
into a point cloud, and a custom workflow in which an artist designates surfaces as
being planar further refines the scene. This makes the approach best suited for indoor
scenarios where many surfaces can be approximated as such. Every surface is shaded
using the photo samples used for photogrammetry. The main improvement of the
VPS approach documented in the paper over an IBL one, is that the scene lighting
is reconstructed into a focal volume which covers the entire scene, rather than being
sampled from only a single location. The focal volume allows virtual objects to re-
ceive receive and cast shadows in an accurate manner. The focal volume is a single
snapshot of the scene’s direct lighting. The entire process involves tens of gigabytes
of data for a single static scene, as well as approximately an hour of capture time and
four hours of skilled labour for refining the scene and exporting the final product.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
If you adhere to the scene requirements
• Outdoor scene, lit predominantly by sunlight
• Flat ground, free of obstacles for several meters
• No hard shadows being cast near the point of capture
then this method is a fast way of producing reasonably immersive scenes. In com-
parison to photogrammetric approaches, the level of realism is much lower, as we
are unable to produce high quality meshes and volumetric constructions of lighting
using multiple HDR light probes like in the VPS approach. However, those methods
output static environments, and while realistic, they do not give the same sense of
immersion as a dynamic scene can give. Being able to see and hear a car going by in
the distance, having a cloud pass by the sun, changing the mood of the scene, these
kinds of dynamics greatly improve the sense of presence.
Light field captures enable dynamic content at the cost of restricting the user’s
headpose to a small volume and cutting their field of view in half.
Additionally,
introducing virtual objects into such light field capture is not straight forward, as
lighting is only recorded in the “forward” direction, making it possible to shade the
surface of an object that can never be seen, and impossible to shade the surface of
the object that is visible.
We know that realism tends to help with immersion, leading to presence, but it is
also possible to feel present in a blocky Minecraft world, or indie horror game. The
significantly lower amount of man-hours required to produce a scene using this method
in comparison to other strategies, also makes it much more viable for products where
quantity is appreciated over quality. If Google Earth’s tomography had to have the
detail level of an interior design photoscan, then presumably only Mountain View,
California would be covered, rather than the majority of the surface of the Earth.
While this implementation of the project uses pre-recorded video files, both cameras
do support wifi and can stream their recordings directly to a remote location. It
would be possible to set up multiple capturing rigs in different locations and monitor
their scenes in near realtime.
==PAGE:42==
34
==PAGE:43==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
More files available included in the project folder. I encourage flipping through them
in a program suitable for showing images, or even better, 360 degree images.
Figure A.1: Bright blue sky, camera in direct sunlight. The exact position of the
sun is very easy to detect, but despite being taken at minimal exposure settings, this
picture almost seems appropriately exposed
==PAGE:44==
36
A An Appendix
Figure A.2: Bright blue sky, camera is in shadow, yet a fragment of the sun is still
visible through the canopy of the tree. The sky appears to be a paler shade of blue
near the horizon and as a gradient around the sun itself. I briefly considered whether
this would be a possible way of detecting the position of sun even if it were not directly
visible
Figure A.3: Bright blue sky, most of the scene in shadow due to light filtering through
the canopy. Despite the scene being very dark, the sun seems very present. Stitching
artifacts very visible roughly 1/4 and 3/3 through the image. Flaring artifact visible
as green circle roughly 1/3 though the image
==PAGE:45==
A An Appendix
37
Figure A.4: Cloudy sky, note the appearance of the sun in the sky as well as the
distinct shadow cast by camera operator towards the left edge
Figure A.5: Cloudy sky, few seconds earlier than the prior picture. Note that the
sky is essentially identical looking, yet the scene lighting is substantially different,
notably the lighting incident on the camera is no longer strong enough to cast a
distinct shadow
==PAGE:46==
38
A An Appendix
Figure A.6: Overcast sky, the entire scene is very dark. It is not possible to tell where
the sun is, and it also does not really matter. The lighting in this scene is almost
non-existent. Note that the rain has made the surface of the road quite reflective
Figure A.7: Overcast sky, very dark. Lots of trees covering the sky
==PAGE:47==
A An Appendix
39
Figure A.8: Cloudy sky, sun is not directly visible from this point of view. Two strong
reflections appear bright in the scene. Reflections are a big issue, but in a case like
this, even if the position of the sun becomes wrong, the intensity is still zero and thus
would have no effect on the scene
Figure A.9: Slightly overcast sky, sun behind tree but still partially visible. Note
that the entire scene seems quite bright despite the sun not shining. The shadow cast
by the bike is extremely vague as it is being lit roughly the same amount from every
angle
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[]
Experimenting with Light Fields. https://www.blog.google/products/
google-ar-vr/experimenting-light-fields/. Accessed: 2021-01-19.
[]
Immersive Light Field Video with a Layered Mesh Representation. https:
//augmentedperception.github.io/deepviewvideo/. Accessed: 2021-
01-19.
[]
Unity 2020.1 Documentation. https://docs.unity3d.com/2020.1/
Documentation/Manual/index.html. Accessed: 2021-01-19.
[Ung+15]
Jonas Unger et al. “Capturing Reality for Computer Graphics Applica-
tions.” In: SIGGRAPH Asia 2015 Courses. SA ’15. Kobe, Japan: Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, 2015. isbn: 9781450339247. doi: 10.
1145/2818143.2818160. url: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.
dk/10.1145/2818143.2818160.
==PAGE:50==
