==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Compressing String Collections
Master Thesis
s144469 - Stefan Lemvig Frederiksen
January 18, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Background
2
2.1
Strings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Lempel Ziv Factorization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Genomic datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Algorithm
5
3.1
Random access queries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Theoretical improvements and limits
7
4.1
Encodings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Non-greedy RLZ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Length and position encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5
Experimental results
10
5.1
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Results of RLZ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3
Results of general-purpose compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4
Comparison between results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6
Conclusion
17
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
References
18
A Implementation
19
B Data Format
20
Abstract
This thesis aims to look at the problem of compression collections of similar
strings, mainly genomic data within a single species. The DNA sequences within
a single species are mostly identical barring small mutations. The DNA looked
at is various variants of the fungi Saccharomyces cerevisiae, commonly known as
Baker’s yeast. This data will be compressed using Relatize Lempel Ziv (RLZ)
compression, which uses a reference to compress the data against, and compared
with the general-purpose compression program Gzip. The thesis aims to try a
new heuristical approach for optimizing the reference string for RLZ. The results
were that this new approach did optimize in large parts the RLZ compression,
and lead to remarkable boosts in the compression rates. Many improvements to
the RLZ compression were introduced in the paper and it would be fascinating
to see if this heuristical approach would still garner an improvement to the
overall compression rate in future research.
1
==PAGE:3==
1
Introduction
This thesis looks at the following problem:
Definition 1 ([9], [8]) Given a collection C of r sequences Sk ∈C such that
|Sk| = n for each 1 ≤k ≤r and ∑r
k=1 |Sk| = N, where S2, S3, ..., Sr are
mutated copies of the base sequence S1 = R containing overall s point mutations,
the repetitive collection indexing problem is to eﬀiciently store C while allowing
queries of the form display(i, j, k) to eﬀiciently return the substring Sk[i..j].
In other words, it is the compression of a collection of strings that does not
change much in between each item, while still allowing eﬀicient random access
into the compressed data without having to decompress all of it.
An ideal application of this form of compression is in genomic data since
there is only a slight variation, in the form of mutations, between each genome
of the same species. DNA sequences are the coding blocks for all biological
mechanisms within an organism. Perturbing the DNA suﬀiciently can cause
observable biological differences. A species is the smallest differentiator that
can be made on a ”family” of organisms, and as such, an ideal candidate for
this type of compression.
The technology for sequencing the DNA of a genome is advancing. It is
becoming easier, faster, and cheaper to produce and consequently, the data
accumulation is accelerating. The consequence of this is more space is needed
to store all this data. If this data can be compressed, then not only will less
space be needed, it will be faster to transmit this data across the world. This
is a huge boon for medical research as this gives researchers faster access to
the data.
In current world events with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, swiftness to
data could potentially save lives as this is an abnormally infectious and deadly
disease.
2
Background
To properly and correctly discuss this subject, some notation and ground con-
cepts are laid out here. This covers how strings are formulated in this paper,
how the factorization mechanism works, and lastly some information to better
understand genomic datasets.
2.1
Strings
A String in this sense is defined as a sequence of any amount of characters.
S = σ0σ1...σn−1 would be a string of n characters. n can be 0, representing the
empty string. Substrings are denoted as S[i..j] for 0 ≤i < n and i < j ≤n.
Usually both indexes are inclusive, but it is denoted a little differently here, in
order to ensure that S[0..|S|] = S. An example is S = banana, then S[1..5] =
anan. A suﬀix of S is S[i..|S|] for some 0 ≤i < |S|. A prefix of S is S[0..j] for
0 < j ≤|S|.
2
==PAGE:4==
2.2
Lempel Ziv Factorization
Given a reference string R and a string S, then the factorization of S with
regards to R signifies the decomposition of S into smaller parts of R. This is
denoted as LZ(S|R) = w0w1...wz. For example if R = banana and S = anaban,
then a possible factorization could be LZ(S|R) = w0w1, where w0 = ana and
w1 = ban. To save space on the labels, this is encoded as two numbers (p, l),
namely the starting position p in R and the length l of the label. In this example,
w0 = (1, 3), w1 = (0, 3).
In order to cover the case where a symbol in S is not contained in R, this is
encoded as the symbol instead of the starting position in R and of length 0. If
S = anaxban, then LZ(S|R) = (1, 3)(x, 0)(0, 3). This ensures that any string
can always be compressed according to R, however it introduces the overhead
of the p argument being either an integer or a symbol. In order to avoid this
scenario, R can always be appended all the characters of a finite alphabet σ, or
all the characters in C if σ is not given. For the remainder of the thesis, it is
assumed that the alphabet is known, and that R contains every symbol in σ.
2.3
Genomic datasets
In this paper, the compression algorithm is tried on genomic datasets. Genomes
consist of DNA (certain viruses1 contain RNA instead) which are sequences of
nucleotides. A nucleotide is one of the four; adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine
(G), and thymine (T). RNA may contain an additional one called Uracil (U),
which replaces T in the entire genome.
A single nucleotide is also called a
base. The four bases for DNA will denote the alphabet σ. There is a lot to
be said about the reading of DNA sequencing, but to keep it brief, the reads
are not always accurate. There is a non-zero probability for each base to be
misread. Using several techniques, some of the possibilities can be eliminated
and this elimination of a possible nucleotide option can be encoded so the work
is not lost. In these cases, several new symbols are introduced to describe these
possible combinations [3].
This alphabet is denoted Σ and every symbol is
explained in table 1.
The FASTA format2 is a text-based format defining a nucleotide sequence.
As seen in figure 1, this begins with a description line characterized by the
starting symbol ”>” followed by several lines of base symbols. Depending on
how complete the sequence is, this can belong entirely to σ. If not, then Σ
symbols are present in the data. As also seen in figure 1, there are several line
breaks, which follows the convention that lines should be no longer than 80
characters.
The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) hosts a collec-
tion of various genomic reads in an accessible and free manner. Anyone can
submit their genomic read of some organism to this database, and it will be
1Influenza, Covid-19, Measles, and more.
2https://web.archive.org/web/20201218050755/https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Blast.cgi?CMD=Web&PAGE_TYPE=BlastDocs&DOC_TYPE=BlastHelp
3
==PAGE:5==
Symbol
Description
A
Adenine
C
Cytosine
G
Guanine
T
Thymine
U
Uracil
M
C or A
R
A or G
W
T, U, or A
Y
C, T, or U
K
T, U, or G
S
C or G
B
C, T, U, or G
D
A, T, U, or G
H
A, T, U, or C
V
A, C, or G
N
Any
Table 1: The Σ alphabet and the description as to what it means compared to
the σ-alphabet.
added as an assembly. The assembled genomes are tracked and versioned, s.t.
updates can be applied to an assembly and over time become more complete.
As the reads of a single genome are not completed in one continuous motion,
these singular reads need to be individually linked to form the correct genomic
sequence. The submitted assemblies do not need to be complete and as such,
some of the data consists of multiple FASTA files each containing an incomplete
read.
>REF.chr10
CCCACACACACACCACACCCACACCCACACACACCACACCCACACACCACACCCACACCA
ACTCTCTCTCATCTACCTTTACTCGCGCTGTCACACCTTACCCGGCTTTCTGACCGAAAT
TAAAAAAAATGAAAATGAAATCCTGTTCTTTAGCCCTACAACACTTTTACATAGCCCTAA
ATAGCCCTAAATAGCCCTCATTTACGTCTCCTCCAAGCCCTATTGACTCTTACCCGGAGT
TTCAGCTAAAAGCTATACTTACTACCTTTATTTTATGTTTACTTTTTATAGACTGTCTTT
Figure 1: The beginning of the reference gene for S. cerevisiae in the FASTA
format
4
==PAGE:6==
3
Algorithm
The algorithm for compressing the collection C is rather simple. It greedily
utilizes the Lempel Ziv Factorization. For starters, the reference string R is
either given or chosen as the first string, S1, and every other string Sk ∈C is
parsed greedily into the factorization LZ(Sk|R) format. The greedy algorithm
proceeds as follows: (1) find the longest prefix of Sk that is also a substring of
R and assign it to wi. (2) Remove this prefix from Sk. Repeat from (1) until
the entire string has been factorized. Because this method uses a single string
as its reference, this is denoted the Single strategy. Additionally, in section 4.2
a non-greedy approach is presented and discussed.
Choosing a single string in the collection at random can have varying results.
If a bad reference is chosen, more factorizations are needed to compress the data,
which ends up using more space. The goal is therefore to minimize the sum of
the size of the reference string and the total size of the factorizations. Based
on some quick experiments on some of the data, another strategy is tested in
this thesis. The idea behind this is that after the data has been compressed and
compared to a reference sequence, the compression rate for each string can be
measured. Taking the worst compressed string of the collection, breaking ties
arbitrarily, appending it to the reference string, and then compressing the data
again did yield good results during manual testing. From this, it was elevated
to a recursive method. It will continue to append the worst compressed string
until the new compressed data has a worse compression rate than the previous
iteration. This strategy is called Merged since it merges the strings into a good
reference for C.
Space.
To analyze the space, a new variable Z is introduced to denote
the total amount of factorizations. Each factorization is constant in size since
it represents a slice of the reference through two numbers.
Thus saving all
factorizations requires O(Z) space. In the absolute worst case, the reference
string only contains each symbol in the alphabet once, and every factorization
only encompasses a single symbol. In that case, the space required is bounded
by the size of the input, O(N). However, one of the assumptions made on this
data is that the data is similar, so this should not pose much of an issue. The
reference sequence also needs to be saved, and in the Single strategy this is one
of the strings. This can be saved in the normal way in O(n) space. This strategy
thus requires O(Z + n) space.
As for the Merged strategy, it will extend the reference sequence by more
strings, if the overall space is smaller. It follows that this results in the Merged
strategy using equal or less space than the Single strategy. Since it is a heuristic
approach, the theoretical case is unchanged and also uses at worst O(Z + n).
Time complexity. To analyze the time required to compress the data, the
time required to build and use a data structure that eﬀiciently helps in building
the factorizations is included. Namely, the problem of finding the longest prefix
of Sk that is also a substring of R is akin to finding a pattern P in R. Thus
a Suﬀix Tree is an optimal choice. Using Ukkonen’s algorithm [10] this can be
constructed in O(n log σ) for alphabets of arbitrary size, where n is the size of
5
==PAGE:7==
the input string or O(n) for alphabets of constant size. Because this suﬀix tree
is constructed on R, this can be at most n in the notation for this paper.
Querying the suﬀix tree for a pattern P is linear in the length of the pattern.
This pattern is usually provided statically, but it can easily be extended to find
the longest prefix of a string S dynamically. Simply start from the first symbol
in S, and see if the suﬀix tree contains it. If it does not, then no substring exists.
If it does, then simply ”walk” the edge from that symbol down to the next node,
checking if each symbol is pairwise equal to the symbols on the edge label. If
it does not match the entire label, then either there are no more symbols in S
and thus the entirety of S is a prefix for R, or it stopped matching along the
label, and the prefix can then be computed and returned. If it matched the
entire label, then it can repeat the method from the starting point, with the
only exception being if it does not have a child node containing the next symbol,
then the longest prefix is the label up to that node.
When a prefix is found, it can be made into a factorization using the starting
position p in R, which can be saved in the suﬀix tree data structure, along with
the length l of this prefix, which can be computed by how many symbols were
covered across the edge labels. This method is then repeated on the substring
Sk = Sk[l..|Sk|]. The lookup in the suﬀix tree is O(1) and walking along the
edges is O(m), where m is the length of the pattern. Because it repeats until it
has covered all of S this means it is linear O(n) in the Single strategy.
Each string in C is compressed in this manner and results in the compression
taking O(N) time. The only notable difference is that each string Sk can be
compressed independently of each other, as long as R has been chosen, which
means this can run in parallel.
As to the Merged strategy, the changes it makes to the reference string means
that more time to construct the suﬀix tree is needed, but the compression it has
to do afterward is smaller. Since both are linear, this trade-off should cancel out
and still use O(N). However, it does repeat the compression a certain number
of times. There cannot be more repeats than there are strings in the collection,
which means this is bound by r. During testing, however, this stops much, much
faster than r, and did not need more than 10 repeats on the largest dataset.
Theoretically, the Merged strategy uses O(r ∗N) time to compress, but this
would also mean that every string is included in the reference, which also means
unless the reference is compressed somehow, no compression was done.
3.1
Random access queries
Definition 1 outlined that the query display(i, j, k) is supposed to eﬀiciently
return the substring Sk[i..j].
The naive approach to this operation without
changing anything would be to look at the factorizations of Sk in turn and sum
up the lengths up until that point until this reaches i. At this point it can start
constructing the substring. More formally, let
counterv =
v
∑
w=0
lw
6
==PAGE:8==
i.e. the sum of all the lengths of the factorizations up until the v’th one. Finding
the smallest v where counterv > i is where the substring starts. For simplicity,
assume that this substring is entirely contained by wv. The start position in
R is then s = pv + (counterv −i), and likewise the end position is then e =
pv + (counterv −j). A single substring of R is then returned, R[s..e] = Sk[i..j].
Now assume that the substring is not only covered in wv, but also wv+1.
This means that lv < counterv −j and that the next factorization also has to be
included to cover Sk[i..j]. The factorization enclosed by wv is then R[s..pv +lv].
The start of wv+1 is simply pv+1 and the end e unchanged, but now just uses
the (v + 1)’th factorization instead,
e = pv+1 + (counterv+1 −j)
This results in the substring R[pv+1..e]. These two substrings are then concate-
nated and returned as R[s..pv + lv]R[pv+1..e].
To complete the example, the substring is covered by many factorizations.
Let wstart and wend denote the start and ending factorizations. start is then
the first instance where counterstart > i, and end is the first instance where
counterend ≥j. The assumption is then that end −start > 2 at the least, s.t.
multiple factorizations are in play. The start and end substrings can be found
like the previous example showed, but any factorizations in between them also
have to be decompressed and returned. This is done by just taking the entire
factorization, ”unwrapping” it from R, and concatenating them in the correct
order.
Let occ = j −i denote the number of symbols in the substring. Finding the
start of the substring is then linear in the number of factorizations z, which is
at worst the last factorization, and then linear in the substring length. This
results in O(z + occ) running time and no changes to space.
A glaringly simple optimization would be to save counterv into wv for all
factorizations, as this can then be used to look randomly at a factorization and
see how much of Sk is covered up until that point. Using the simple binary
search algorithm to find the start and end factorization, the entire thing can
then be unwrapped as previously discussed in the naive approach. This results
in O(1) extra space in the form of a single number per factorization, and it
brings the running time down to two binary searches, and then at most the
number of occurrences, O(logz + occ).
4
Theoretical improvements and limits
The algorithm in itself is somewhat straightforward, but there are lots of smaller
improvements to be made in various parts. To keep the previous section explain-
ing the space complexity clean, the O-notation was used, but when it comes to
compression then looking at how many bits are needed is more adequate and
this is also where some theoretical improvements can be made.
The reference string takes nR⌈log σ⌉bits to store in the normal way. The
factorizations consist of 3 numbers. The position argument p is bound by the
7
==PAGE:9==
size of the reference string nR. The length argument is bound by the size of the
string being compressed, ni. Additionally, the total length is also bound by ni.
Let Z denote the total amount of factorizations, then Z log nR + 2Z log ni bits
are needed to store all of the factorizations in C. This can be improved slightly
using a couple of methods.
The remainder of this section will cover a few encoding methods along with
a non-greedy variant of RLZ which can utilize encodings to better store some
of the factorizations. It will also cover how the length and position components
of the factorization can be encoded.
4.1
Encodings
There are several types of encoding, but here it is limited to the Unary and
Golomb codings, as these are the ones used and mentioned in the next couple
of sections.
Unary coding. This encoding is quite possibly the simplest form of encod-
ing. It takes an integer x > 0 and encodes it using x bits. It does this by having
(x−1) 1 bits, followed by a single 0 bit. Take x = 3 for example, this is encoded
using (x−1) = 2 1 bits, and then a single 0 bit, resulting in 110. This is effective
in that the encoding returns a variable-length result where smaller numbers use
fewer bits than if fitted into a machine word. However, this encoding is very
ineﬀicient for larger integers. Finding the original value is straightforward by
simply counting the number of bits until, and including, a 0 bit is found.
One of the advantages of doing it this way is that the 0 bit also acts as a
separator between multiple values.
Golomb coding [5]. This encoding also encodes an integer x > 0, but it
does this by dividing x by a constant b. It then encodes the quotient by unary
encoding and regular binary encoding for the remainder. Fix b = 8 and encoding
for x = 18 would look like the following. First the quotient is ⌊18/8⌋= 2, and
the unary coding form of this is 10. The remainder is 18%8 = 2, which binary
form is also 10. The final encoding is then 1010 which uses a total of 4 bits. More
generally, let q denote the quotient. The remainder is bound by the constant b
by simple division rules. The encoding then uses q bits for the quotient followed
by at most ⌈log2 b⌉bits for the remainder. To decode this, the quotient q is
decoded using the unary decoding method, and then the at most ⌈log2 b⌉bits
are read to obtain r. Then the result is simply x = q ∗b + r.
The number of bits this coding uses is determined by b. In general, values of
powers of two are chosen for the simple reason that bit-shifting is more eﬀicient
than division and modulo operations. If a small b is chosen, then smaller inte-
gers use fewer bits, whereas larger integers will require more bits in saving the
quotient and vice versa for a large value of b. This means that the value of b is
to be picked dependent on the expected values of x to be encoded for the most
eﬀicient results. This encoding does require that b is known as the decoder, so
8
==PAGE:10==
this has to be shared in some form3.
4.2
Non-greedy RLZ
A non-greedy variant of RLZ is presented in Kuruppu et al. [7]. For the non-
greedy variant to perform better, the factorization pair (p, l) must be encoded
using a variable-length code. If the pair is always encoded using a fixed num-
ber of bits, the greedy variant will perform as well as any other variant. Thus,
to include a variable-length code, the non-greedy variant will try to introduce
smaller factorizations, where these parts can be encoded from their literal sym-
bols rather than as the (p, l) pair.
The method used for the non-greedy parsing is akin to the one used in
Gzip compression. It utilizes a ”lookahead” by some constant h. Assume that
h = 1 and that the parsing has reached position i. Instead of encoding the
factorization as the longest substring of R as (p, l), it will then also check the
factorization resulting from checking it at position i + 1, (p′, l′). If l′ > l, then
this factorization is favored, and factorization at position i then only covers a
single symbol. This is generalized up to the constant h, and the longest factor
is then stored.
Kuruppu et al. [7] introduce a variant of this lookahead idea, where instead
of h being fixed, it is determined by the longest factor in a region.
This is
defined as a factor in position p′ and length l′ at position i′. No other factor
between (i, i′), and (i′, i′ + l′) has length greater than or equal to l′.
The
lookahead constant h is then set to l′.
If the lookahead ever finds a longer
factor than l′, then l′ is replaced with this longer factorization and h is also
updated accordingly. Keeping track of the previous longest factors found until
the entire region is covered will ensure that these can also be encoded when the
process has finished.
By prioritizing longer factorizations there will be times when one or more
short factorizations are included. Instead of saving this as a (p, l) pair, this can
be more eﬀiciently encoded as its base symbols. For the σ alphabet, this can
be represented using 2 bits per nucleotide (4 possibilities), and 4 bits for the Σ
alphabet (16 possibilities). To differentiate between a short factorization’s en-
coding and a regular factorization, the first bit is reserved as a flag to determine
the variant. 0 for short and 1 for regular. The length l of this factorization is
then encoded using Golomb coding, followed by the l bases in a simple base-
to-bit mapping. This results in 1 + q⌈log2 b⌉+ l ∗c bits used, where c is either
2 or 4 depending on the alphabet, q is the resulting quotient and b is chosen
depending on the data. Kuruppu et al. found that b = 8 was optimal for their
datasets because many short factors had an average length of 12.
To choose between the short and regular factors, both variants are encoded.
The one using the least amount of bits is then kept in the compressed data.
The beauty of this approach is that it covers mutations very naturally. It
will eﬀiciently get the parts of the reference the same if the mutation is either
3One idea is that b = 2c for some c ≥0 and then c could be more eﬀiciently saved or even
encoded.
9
==PAGE:11==
a point mutation, a deletion, or an insertion. In the deletion case, no extra
factorization is covered, but both the point mutation and insertion can then
utilize the short factor encoding. Additionally, this short factor encoding is not
restricted to only the non-greedy variant as it can also be implemented on the
greedy variant, but not as many short factors are introduced.
4.3
Length and position encoding
A factorization consists of a position and length pair, (p, l). As mentioned previ-
ously at the beginning of section 4 the position needs log nR bits and the length
needs log ni bits. This section describes an encoding for the length argument
along with a technique for reducing the size of the position argument.
First, l is generally much smaller than ni. Because of this, the length can
simply be Golomb coded. Looking at the lengths and frequency of the factor-
izations is needed to choose an optimal value for b, but Kuruppu4 found in their
Ph.D. work that b = 64 gave the best results on multiple datasets.
Secondly, for p, Kuruppu et al. [7] observed that the position argument can
generally be predicted as the genomic data contains mutations, and larger re-
gions cover the same parts of the reference. In general and with few exceptions
for the non-greedy RLZ, there were alternating short and long factors through-
out the resulting compression. They observed that for a long factor, the sum of
the lengths for the short factors and the previous long factor’s position would be
equal to the factor’s position value. As an example, say that i is a long factor,
i + 1 is a short factor, and i + 2 is another long factor. Then pi + li+1 = pi+2.
They exploit this property, if it holds at that point, to reduce the position ar-
gument to instead be the difference between the position arguments of the long
factors. This difference is finally Golomb encoded.
5
Experimental results
The algorithm has been implemented and executed on a genomic dataset from
NCBI5. In this section, the data that is experimented upon is outlined and the
results are presented from running the algorithm and the generic Gzip algorithm
on the data.
The data was run on DTU’s High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster
sporting an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2670 v3 @ 2.30GHz CPU and a total
of 256GB of RAM with 2133 MT/s6. The reason that it was run on the HPC
cluster rather than a home computer was that on the larger variants and the
Merged strategy, the RAM was quickly consumed. Exactly why this is the case
will be touched upon in section 6.1.
4http://hdl.handle.net/11343/37308, page 164.
5https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/
6Megatransfers per second; with a data bandwidth of 8 bytes this is approximately 17
GB/s.
10
==PAGE:12==
To compare the compression results, the compression rate is looked at. It is
calculated using the following formula:
compression rate = compressed size
total size
The compressed size is the resulting data usage needed to store the com-
pressed variant and the reference string, and the total size is how much space
was required to store the assembly in its raw form.
This should give a number between 0, not inclusive, and 1. But if the com-
pression does a worse job at compressing it, then the compressed size could be
larger than the total size, giving a compression rate above 1. This happens when
running the algorithm on data that do not contain point mutations between the
different strings, but rather random data. As a result, there is no similarity for
the collection to exploit. A simple way to get around that, however, would be to
build in a mode that simply does not compress it at all if it ends up using more
space. This would not be very relevant, since the wrong compression algorithm
was used on data that did not warrant it.
5.1
Dataset
The dataset downloaded from NCBI is Saccharomyces cerevisiae, more com-
monly known as baker’s yeast. All the assemblies’ genomic FASTA data was
downloaded in early November 2020. There were a total of 823 assemblies. As of
January 2021, another 6 have been added but are not included in these results.
The data’s quality varies greatly between the different assemblies, with only
41 of the 823 assemblies having no unknown nucleotides and all the reads prop-
erly linked. As mentioned in table 1, some characters can represent multiple
possibilities, but how much are they distributed on the data?
It is a given
that the compression algorithm works best on repetitive data, but if a read was
never completed or some data would be missing, this will inherently make the
compression worse. For these two reasons, the data has been split into different
variants and the algorithm tested on each, to see how it performs in each circum-
stance, and it would be expected that the more varied the data, the worse the
compression becomes. Additionally, for each variant, the amount each symbol
occurs is presented for its data variant.
In total there are four variants, and the respective requirements for how each
variant accepts the assemblies are:
1. No unknown nucleotides (only A, C, G, and T) and is arranged into a
single sequence.
2. Only nucleotides A, C, G, T, and N and is arranged into a single sequence.
3. Accepts all nucleotides, but only if it is arranged into a single sequence7.
7Whether this sequence is complete is not examined.
11
==PAGE:13==
4. Accepts all of the assemblies. It will however arbitrarily concatenate the
data from each assembly into a single sequence s.t. the algorithm can
work with it.
An additional variant is also added, courtesy of Shanika Kuruppu who wrote
a Ph.D. thesis on this very algorithm. Looking at the data provided by them,
it very much appears to be almost the same as Variant 1, but smaller in size.
Table 2 shows the amount of assemblies accepted in the dataset, as well as
the total size of the dataset. Based on the definitions from Variants 1 −4, it is
clear that each subsequent variant accepts the previous, plus some additional
ones. Thus Variant 1 ⊆Variant 2 ⊆Variant 3 ⊆Variant 4, and the number of
assemblies and their sizes also reflect this.
Dataset
Assemblies
Size (GB)
Variant 1
41
0.47
Variant 2
245
2.74
Variant 3
363
4.10
Variant 4
823
9.20
Kuruppu
40
0.43
Table 2: The number of assemblies and the total size in gigabytes of the dataset
variants.
Table 3 shows the number of times each character is represented in the
respective datasets. As can be seen from the table, A, T, C, and G, are of
course the primary bases with infrequent occurrences from the other characters.
Of the symbols in Σ, N is by far the most common.
If the V character happened to appear in some place of the genome instead
of A if this was the actual symbol, this would be akin to a mutation in the
data and split up a factorization into two more factorizations.
As a result,
the compression performs a little worse on incomplete data.
It is therefore
interesting to see if variant 3 and 4 perform worse or better than variant 1 and
2.
5.2
Results of RLZ
Both strategies were tried on all of the variants, and the compression rates for
the resulting compressed data were calculated. This is both with and without
the additional space overhead needed for doing random access. Additionally,
the time to compress and decompress was captured, along with the size of the
reference string and the total size of the factorizations. These can all be seen in
tables 4, 5, and 6.
For clarity, each factorization is said to need two times 4 bytes (32-bit). One
for the position in the reference string and another for the length. If random
access is considered, then a position argument which is also 4 bytes is included.
The compressed size is then the summation of all of the factorizations.
12
==PAGE:14==
Variant 1
Variant 2
Variant 3
Variant 4
Kuruppu
A
152,033,573
888,039,590
1,337,024,937
3,005,764,824
139,695,417
T
151,886,962
887,344,425
1,335,523,195
2,999,745,837
139,336,427
C
94,005,319
551,802,046
836,314,145
1,863,739,193
86,255,701
G
93,936,218
550,888,567
827,090,928
1,853,559,828
86,146,292
N
-
64,866,411
66,577,004
156,341,857
34,439,301
R
-
-
32,586
64,356
-
Y
-
-
32,282
64,385
-
W
-
-
8,430
21,392
-
M
-
-
5,879
13,832
-
K
-
-
5,771
13,518
-
S
-
-
4,662
10,238
-
D
-
-
145
578
-
H
-
-
30
30
-
B
-
-
27
27
-
V
-
-
25
25
-
Table 3: The amount of each character in the different variants of the NCBI S.
cerevisiae dataset.
wkm is the m’th factorization of the k’th string. The size of each factorization
is the same, so |wkm| is either 8 bytes or 12 bytes, depending on whether or not
random access is included.
Compressed size =
r
∑
k=1
n
∑
m=1
|wkm|
Dataset
Strategy
Size (GB)
CR (total)
CR (without RA)
Variant 1
Single
0.47
0.39
0.21
Merged
0.47
0.14
0.11
Variant 2
Single
2.74
0.28
0.14
Merged
2.74
0.07
0.05
Variant 3
Single
4.10
0.23
0.12
Merged
4.10
0.06
0.04
Variant 4
Single
9.20
0.17
0.09
Merged
9.20
0.09
0.05
Kuruppu
Single
0.46
0.09
0.06
Merged
0.46
0.09
0.07
Table 4: The size in gigabytes and compression rates (CR), with and without
random access (RA), of the variants of the S. cerevisiae dataset.
From the compression rates, in table 4, the merged strategy always seems to
be better or just as good as the single variant. This is evident from the fact that
13
==PAGE:15==
Dataset
Strategy
Compression time (s)
Decompression time (s)
Variant 1
Single
16.80
2.40
Merged
165.74
0.73
Variant 2
Single
26.32
11.49
Merged
725.81
4.03
Variant 3
Single
27.29
15.04
Merged
758.82
5.56
Variant 4
Single
35.52
26.06
Merged
336.66
19.73
Kuruppu
Single
15.54
0.76
Merged
95.95
0.50
Table 5: The compression and decompression times for the variants of the S.
cerevisiae dataset.
Dataset
Strategy
Reference size (MB)
Factorizations size (MB)
Variant 1
Single
11.08
85.62
Merged
35.09
14.62
Variant 2
Single
11.57
389.59
Merged
90.37
53.84
Variant 3
Single
11.97
474.20
Merged
90.61
73.26
Variant 4
Single
11.27
792.19
Merged
44.59
397.48
Kuruppu
Single
11.94
13.95
Merged
23.58
8.37
Table 6: The sizes of the reference string and the factorizations of the variants
of the S. cerevisiae dataset.
14
==PAGE:16==
it takes a single reference string and then sees if appending the worst offender
improves this compression rate or not. If it makes it better, it continues like
this, so it will generally get the same result as the Single strategy, or better.
Another thing to note in this table is that the compression rate varies quite a
bit as previously mentioned. The Variant 1 and Kuruppu datasets are largely
the same, but in Kuruppu case, it found a very good reference string right away,
giving a compression rate of 0.09, while Variant 1 found a bad reference string,
and even the Merged strategy could not bring the compression rate down to the
level of the one chosen in the Kuruppu case.
The compression time for the Merged strategy is much larger than the Single
strategy, even more so than simply multiplying the time by the number of
iterations.
Realistically this does make sense since IO operations and cache
misses do add up. One thing that seems to be taking the longest on the current
implementation is the Suﬀix Tree which is rebuilt on every iteration. Exactly
how much this contributes is not yet benchmarked. A way to rectify this problem
is presented in section 6.1. Additionally, for Variant 4 is was faster than both
Variant 2 and 3, and since both strategies started from the same reference string,
the postulate is that this improvement stems from the choice of starting point
in Variant 4. This meant that not as many iterations were needed to minimize
the compression rate.
A surprising outcome of the Merged strategy was the decompression time
also reduced significantly. This does make sense in that it only takes as long
to decompress as there are factorizations, and since the Merged strategy does
minimize the number of factorizations by making the reference longer, this ended
up reducing the time to decompress. An unexpected, but quite useful, side effect,
as data generally only needs to be compressed once but decompressed multiple
times.
5.3
Results of general-purpose compression
To have some sort of comparison with a general-purpose compression algorithm,
Gzip is tested. First, the dataset was kept in folders, so this was made into
a tarball and then compressed with gzip.
Gzip offers two different ways to
compress the data, a normal way, and an optimized way. The normal way is
usually worse at compressing it but does so in a decent amount of time. The
optimized way compresses the data better but is also considerably slower. The
idea was to test both of these variants, but since the compression time for the
optimized one already used about an hour on Variant 2, it was skipped for both
Variant 3 and 4.
Gzip implements DEFLATE which combines Lempel-Ziv 77 (LZ77) and
Huffman coding to do compression.
Since the idea between RLZ and LZ77
is mostly the same, this is a good algorithm to compare it against. The main
difference between the two algorithms is that LZ77 is a general-purpose algo-
rithm and thus has to minimize the amount of memory it uses at a given time.
Because of this, the reference it keeps is a sliding window of a certain size of the
raw data. This also means that it cannot do random access, without having to
15
==PAGE:17==
decompress all of the data.
Some newer compression protocols do prove to be better, 7zip for example
achieved about a 0.15 compression rate on Variant 1, but was not accessible on
the HPC cluster so this was not timed nor tested, but would be an even more
interesting comparison.
Dataset
Gzip mode
Compression rate
Compression time (s)
Variant 1
Fast
0.33
11.52
Opt.
0.28
541.59
Variant 2
Fast
0.32
67.60
Opt.
0.27
3,209.43
Variant 3
Fast
0.33
100.99
Opt.
-
-
Variant 4
Fast
0.32
424.31
Opt.
-
-
Kuruppu
Fast
0.31
17.80
Opt.
0.26
482.10
Table 7: The general purpose compression rate and time in seconds of Gzip on
the variants of the S. cerevisiae dataset.
The results in table 7 show the compression rate and how long it took to
compress the datasets. The extra time needed for the optimized version of Gzip
is surprisingly longer, but it does achieve a little better compression rate as a
result. Generally, the compression rate on this data landed between 0.26 and
0.33, so a pretty consistent compression.
5.4
Comparison between results
In Variant 1, Gzip actually managed to compress this data both better and
faster than then Single strategy, but this seems to have been simply because a
bad reference string was chosen. A more fair representation would have been to
choose a certain number of random strings to use as a reference, and either take
the best or the average of these to compare against. In all the other variants,
RLZ managed to be both faster and better at compressing this data.
The Merged strategy shows itself as a way to optimize a reference string to
achieve better results than before. However, it still does fall victim to a pitfall
if a bad starting reference is chosen on smaller dataset.
It also seems that
the more data there is, the better the Merged strategy performs. For a large
amount of data, this Merged strategy could be a heuristic for finding clusters
of mutations, as including these in the reference leads to better compression of
the entire cluster.
16
==PAGE:18==
6
Conclusion
Relative Lempel Ziv works great as a compression method for collections of
data that is very similar. Even using a random reference from the collection
tends to beat out the general-purpose compression Gzip.
Several encodings
and a different way to parse the factorizations were introduced in section 4.2
which further optimizes the compression rate. The simple strategy of extending
the reference string by the currently worst compressed string in the collection
is a simple heuristic that generally improved the compression. If the encoding
methods introduced in 4.3 are implemented on the factorizations, the hypothesis
is that this would only make the compression even better. In the current variant,
the factorizations were the ones that used up the most space, and elongating
the reference does minimize this fact. But if the factorizations used smaller size,
then conversely the reference string might end up being the bottleneck for the
compression rate.
The fact that there are gains to be made by simply adding more patterns
to the reference does also materialize the concern that maybe there are points
in the data where it is best to split up and let each split be treated separately,
even on species data. Furthermore, multiple datasets could even be combined
to utilize patterns across the data for better results than on their own.
6.1
Future work
While the suﬀix tree uses O(n) space, the constant it uses is quite big. This
means it is not as practical to use on computers with less than 32 GB of memory
in its current implementation, which home computers generally are. In practice,
the overall space consumption can be reduced by using suﬀix arrays instead.
These are both O(n) space, but the suﬀix arrays use O(log n) query time instead
of the suﬀix tree’s O(1). This does not end up affecting the compression rate,
only how much memory is needed at a given point to compress the data. If
memory usage is a concern, i.e. if it is the limiting factor, this has to be changed.
Furthermore, if the suﬀix tree is kept, a prominent change would be to not
reconstruct the entire suﬀix tree on each iteration. For this, a Generalized Suﬀix
Tree [2] is a good choice since this can sequentially append new strings onto the
suﬀix tree, as long as there are some out-of-alphabet markers to distinguish the
different strings. Currently, there are additional characters appended onto the
end of the reference string which ruins this idea a little, but this can be fixed
by simply prepending the characters with the reference string instead.
Another way of choosing, or constructing, the reference string could be to
instead make one based on a dictionary or some form of pattern detection. Using
Rabin-Karp fingerprinting, finding patterns of certain sizes could be a good
starting point, and then after a base reference of the most common patterns is
made, it could even be combined with the Merge strategy.
It could also be interesting to see if the chosen reference string could be
further compressed and see how this affects the space and time complexities,
but this is out of the scope for this project.
17
==PAGE:19==
References
[1]
ACSC ’11: Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Australasian Computer Sci-
ence Conference - Volume 113. Perth, Australia: Australian Computer
Society, Inc., 2011. isbn: 9781920682934.
[2]
Bieganski et al. “Generalized suﬀix trees for biological sequence data:
applications and implementation”. In: 1994 Proceedings of the Twenty-
Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Vol. 5. 1994,
pp. 35–44. doi: 10.1109/HICSS.1994.323593.
[3]
Athel Cornish-Bowden. “Nomenclature for incompletely specified bases in
nucleic acid sequences: rcommendations 1984”. In: Nucleic Acids Research
13.9 (May 1985), pp. 3021–3030. issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/13.
9.3021. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-pdf/13/9/
3021/7057605/13-9-3021.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
13.9.3021.
[4]
Paolo Ferragina et al. “Compressed Text Indexes: From Theory to Prac-
tice”. In: ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics 13 (Feb. 2009). issn: 1084-6654. doi:
10.1145/1412228.1455268. url: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.
dtu.dk/10.1145/1412228.1455268.
[5]
S. Golomb. “Run-length encodings (Corresp.)” In: IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory 12.3 (1966), pp. 399–401. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1966.
1053907.
[6]
Christopher Hoobin, Simon J. Puglisi, and Justin Zobel. Relative Lempel-
Ziv Factorization for Eﬀicient Storage and Retrieval of Web Collections.
2011. arXiv: 1106.2587 [cs.DS].
[7]
Shanika Kuruppu, Simon J. Puglisi, and Justin Zobel. “Optimized Rel-
ative Lempel-Ziv Compression of Genomes”. In: ACSC ’11: Proceedings
of the Thirty-Fourth Australasian Computer Science Conference - Volume
113. Perth, Australia: Australian Computer Society, Inc., 2011, pp. 91–98.
isbn: 9781920682934.
[8]
Shanika Kuruppu, Simon J. Puglisi, and Justin Zobel. “Relative Lempel-
Ziv Compression of Genomes for Large-Scale Storage and Retrieval”. In:
String Processing and Information Retrieval. Ed. by Edgar Chavez and
Stefano Lonardi. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,
pp. 201–206. isbn: 978-3-642-16321-0.
[9]
Veli Mäkinen et al. “Storage and Retrieval of Highly Repetitive Sequence
Collections”. In: Journal of Computational Biology 17.3 (2010). PMID:
20377446, pp. 281–308. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2009.0169. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1089/cmb.2009.0169. url: https://doi.org/10.1089/
cmb.2009.0169.
[10]
E. Ukkonen. “On-line construction of suﬀix trees”. In: Algorithmica 14.3
(Sept. 1995), pp. 249–260. issn: 1432-0541. doi: 10.1007/BF01206331.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01206331.
18
==PAGE:20==
A
Implementation
The implementation of the algorithm can be found at https://github.com/
StefanFrederiksen/CompressingStringCollections.
In this implementation, the Rust programming language has been used. It
is still a relatively new programming language, but is has shown great promise
in the guarantees it can give the programmer right from the compilation step.
One of these being excellent for parallelization, which is also implemented in
the algorithm when every string has to be compressed relative to the reference.
It was programmed using Rust version 1.49.0 and was separated into several
smaller projects. As seen on figure 2 there are 4. The ”suﬀix_tree” project is
a library implementation of Ukkonen’s algorithm. The ”relative_lempel_ziv”
project is a library implementation of the compression algorithm.
The ”cli”
project is an executable which interfaces between the computer and the RLZ
compression, giving a command-line interface (CLI) for files, flags and options
for the compression. Lastly the ”data_normalizer” project is also an executable
and is further described in appendix B.
Figure 2: The project structure of the implementation
It was tested on both windows and linux, where each library implementation
contain a mix of unit tests and property based testing to ensure correctness.
The implementation of the suﬀix tree boils the input down to bytes instead
of chars, since this ends up using less space in Rust. The reason for this is
that a char always reserves 4 bytes in order to be UTF-8 compliant. Charac-
ters in UTF-8 are variable-length encoded, so a character such as n is encoded
as 0x6e in decimal form. However a chinese character such as 蕉encodes as
[0xe8, 0x95, 0x89], using 3 bytes. To make matters even worse, some characters
called diacritics are not actual symbols themselves, but rather add on additional
information to the character that preceded it. This results in access into strings
being dependant on the characters that came before. In order to avoid this
O(n) access, raw bytes are used which circumvent this little issue and still get
O(1) access. Another way to have implemented this would have been to use the
OsString data structure, rather than String, but this would not work with any
character.
One last note about the project is that the random access queries is not im-
plemented to access a substring, but rather a single character. Think Sk[i..i+1].
This is something that can be implemented in the future, and even benchmark
19
==PAGE:21==
this against other compression algorithms that also support random access.
In section 3.1, the counter variable is mentioned as the length up and includ-
ing to a certain point. The implementation currently does this in the reverse
way, in that it does not include the current factorization’s length in this vari-
able. The only difference is that instead of saying counter −i to get the relative
distance into R, i −counter is used instead.
B
Data Format
In the FASTA format, the bases could be represented both using small and
capital letters. As these are fundamentally different in computers, these need to
be normalized in order to ensure a better compression is achieved. Additionally,
the description lines are not entirely relevant to the compression algorithm, so
these also need to be stripped.
Since it was also interesting to look at different variants of the same data,
depending on how complete it is, a way to transform the data from the assem-
blies into an algorithmic input was needed. For this, the ”data_normalizer”
takes in the raw assemblies and can do some transformations of this data. It
mainly capitilizes all the letters and removes the lines starting with ”>”. But in
order to support the different variants, support was also added to say that only
files only containing certain characters were accepted, along with accepting one
or more FASTA files.
The executable was made so it could be done on arbitrary genome datasets
downloaded from the NCBI database, and could be useful for anyone who wishes
to normalize the data from a single file format.
20
