==PAGE:1==
Human leukocyte antigen typing from next
generation sequencing data
Master’s Thesis
Author:
Nikolas Hallberg Thuesen
s152993
Supervisors:
Internal: Assoc. Prof. Gabriel Renaud
Internal: Assoc. Prof. Shyam Gopalakrishnan
External: Michael Schantz Klausen (Evaxion Biotech)
Hand-in date: 22nd January 2020
ECTS: 30
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system is a group of genes coding for proteins that
are central to the adaptive immune system and of great clinical importance. Identifying the
speciﬁc HLA allele combination of a patient is relevant in organ donation, risk assessment
of autoimmune and infectious diseases and cancer immunotherapy. The high genetic
polymorphism in this region however makes HLA typing a diﬃcult problem. With the
advance of next-generation-sequencing (NGS), computational methods for NGS based
HLA typing have emerged.
This project investigated the performance of the ﬁve of these NGS based HLA typing
tools for the ﬁve HLA genes, HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1 and -DQB1 using 829 whole-exome
sequencing (WES) samples from the International Genome Sample Resource. Speciﬁcally,
this study looked at the typing accuracy and required computational resources of the tools
and how these parameters depended on the coverage of the WES samples.
Optitype was found to have the highest typing accuracy for HLA class I genes (98.45% at
2-ﬁeld resolution) and HLA*LA was found to have the highest typing accuracy for all ﬁve
genes (95.72% at 2-ﬁeld resolution). HLA*LA also had the highest peak memory usage
(median of 31 GB) and Optitype had the lowest (median of 1.1 GB).
Furthermore, a subsampling study was carried out to evaluate the typing accuracy of the
tools at diﬀering coverages. It was found that HISAT-genotype, Kourami and STC-Seq
require coverage above 100X to perform optimally while the typing accuracy of HLA*LA
and Optitype only starts to drop signiﬁcantly at coverages below 75X.
I
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
I
List of Abbreviations
V
Acknowledgements
VI
1
Introduction and Theory
1
1.1
Biological Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
The adaptive immune system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
The HLA complex
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
HLA nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.1
Ambiguous and Alternative allele names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Disease associations of the HLA complex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.1
Autoimmune diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.2
Infectious diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.3
Transplantaion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3.4
Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.3.5
Immunotherapy and neoepitope prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.4
Next-Generation Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.4.1
Illumina sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.4.2
The pitfalls of PCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.4.3
WGS and WES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.4.4
The human reference genome
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.4.5
Read alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1.4.6
Graph-based alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
II
==PAGE:4==
1.4.7
NGS data formats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
1.5
HLA Typing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
1.5.1
Traditional HLA typing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
1.5.2
HLA typing using NGS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
1.5.3
General trends in NGS based HLA typing algorithms . . . . . . . .
32
1.5.4
Challenges of NGS based HLA typing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
1.6
Objectives of this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2
Methodology
38
2.1
Selection of HLA typing tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2.1.1
Computerome 2.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.1.2
Availability of HLA typing tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2.2
Gold standard dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.3
Performance Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
2.3.1
Typing accuracy and conversion of typing resolutions . . . . . . . .
44
2.3.2
Ensemble approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.3.3
Downsampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.3.4
Time- and memory usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
2.3.5
Overview of the typing workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
2.4
Outline of HLA typing algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
2.4.1
Optitype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
2.4.2
Kourami . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
2.4.3
HLA*LA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
2.4.4
HISAT-genotype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
2.4.5
STC-seq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3
Results
60
3.1
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.1.1
Typing accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.1.2
Time and memory usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.1.3
Ensemble method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.2
Downsampling analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
3.2.1
Typing accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
III
==PAGE:5==
3.2.2
Time and memory usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4
Discussion
76
4.1
Inherent bias in the gold standard dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.2
The performance of the tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.3
Future work and the future of HLA typing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.4
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
References
86
Appendices
101
A Statistics from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database
102
B Typing accuracies for individual HLA genes
105
IV
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
ACT:
Adoptive Cell Transfer
ADO:
Allelic Dropout
ARD:
Antigen Recognition Domain
bp:
base pairs
BWT:
Burrows-Wheeler Transformation
CNV:
Copy Number Variation
CPI:
Checkpoint Inhibitor Therapy
FM index
Ferragina Manzini index
HLA:
Human Leukycote Antigen
IGSR:
Internation Genome Sample resource
HCT:
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation
ILP:
Integer Linear Program
MHC:
Major Histocompatability Complex
MSA:
Multiple Sequence Analysis
OV:
Oncolytic Virus
PCR:
Polymerase Chain Reaction
SBT:
Sequence Based Typing
SNP:
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
SSOP:
Sequence-Speciﬁc Oligonucleotide Probes
SSP:
Sequence-speciﬁc primers
WES:
Whole Exome Sequencing
WGS:
Whole Genome Sequencing
V
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my DTU supervisors, Gabriel and Shyam for guiding me through the
project from start to ﬁnish through numerous Monday meetings which at their worst was
mostly about my thesis and at their best hardly about my thesis.
This project was carried out with and at Evaxion Biotech. From here, I want to thank my
external supervisor, Michael, for always having time to pause your own work to answer my
questions, my mentor Anders and my fellow DTU student Charlotte, who ﬁrst introduced
me to Evaxion. To the rest of the wonderful people I have met at Evaxion I want to say
thank you for lunch dates, Friday bars, runs around Kastellet, morning swims in cold
water and for making me feel welcome and part of the company, even though I was just
visiting.
The completion of this project means that I ﬁnish more than ﬁve years of studying at DTU.
With that, I want to thank the many amazing people I have met and friends I have gained
during my studies. I especially want to thank my colleagues from DTU ScienceShow for
countless great memories and for making my university time ﬁre.
Finally, I want to thank my family for their support and Ciara for necessary and un-
necessary sparring, heaps of class craic and for translating my broken sentences into an
”understandable” form of British English.
VI
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND THEORY
1
Chapter
Introduction and Theory
HLA typing is the determination of a person’s speciﬁc allele combination in the human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) region.
This chapter aims to introduce the reader to the
biological relevance of the HLA system, how individual HLA alleles are named and why
HLA genotyping is clinically relevant. This chapter also includes a description of next-
generation sequencing (NGS) as well as an overview of newly developed HLA typing
workﬂows, where NGS data is used.
Page 1 of 107
==PAGE:9==
Biological Background
1.1
Biological Background
1.1.1
The adaptive immune system
The immune system is divided into two parts, the innate and the adaptive immune system.
The innate immune system gives a quick and nonspeciﬁc response, while the adaptive
immune system identiﬁes an invading pathogen and develops a speciﬁc response. The
pathogen and corresponding response are hereafter remembered so that the same pathogen
can be fought more eﬀectively in the future. The two systems work together and a response
from the adaptive immune system depends on a previous innate response[1].
B lymphocytes (B cells) and T lymphocytes (T cells) are central to the adaptive immune
system. These cells can distinguish foreign cells from native cells and combat the identi-
ﬁed pathogens. The lymphocytes detect pathogens by binding to peptides derived from
degraded proteins from the pathogen. These small molecules are called antigens and the
part of the antigen, that binds to a receptor on a lymphocyte is called the epitope[1].
T lymphocytes express a speciﬁc T-cell receptor (TCR) for peptide recognition. The TCR
recognises peptides when they are bound to a specialised antigen-presenting molecule
called the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and displayed on the cell surfaces.
This is shown in ﬁgure 1.1.1. Each TCR is only able to recognise a distinct selection of
peptides that matches the structure of the TCR binding pocket. This binding speciﬁcity
is important to how the adaptive immune system detects pathogens and distinguishes
them from healthy cells [1]. Cells can present peptides (also known as epitopes) to T-cells
both from pathogens (non-self epitopes), tumour mutations (neoepitopes/neoantigens)
and cells native to the body (self-epitopes). T cells are however generally able to recognise
the diﬀerence. This means that a cell, which displays epitopes which indicate that the
cell is, for example, infected by a virus or developing into a tumour cell, will trigger an
immune response, but a healthy cell avoids doing so[2, 3, 4].
1.1.2
The HLA complex
MHC molecules are situated on the surface of cells and present peptides/antigens to the
immune system, enabling the immune system to identify foreign peptides that indicate a
Page 2 of 107
==PAGE:10==
Biological Background
transformation in a cell due to, for example, infection or cancer. The MHC gene region is
found in all jawed vertebrates and the genes are expressed co-dominantly. In humans, the
region is called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex[3, 5, 6].
HLA genes can be divided into three subclasses (class I, II and III) based on their structure
and function. Generally, HLA class I proteins are found on most somatic cells and present
peptides originating from intracellular proteins to CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs),
while HLA class II proteins only are found on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and present
exogenous peptides to CD4+ helper T-cells[3]. This diﬀerence as well as some others
between class I and class II molecules are shown in ﬁgure 1.1.1.
Figure 1.1.1: Epitope/peptide presentation on APCs to a CD4+ helper T-cell via MHC II (a)
and to a CTL (CD8+ T cell) via MHC I. The two types of T-cells express either the CD4 or the
CD8 coreceptor, which enables correct pairing between CD4+ and MHC II/HLA II as well as
between CD8+ and MHC I/HLA I[1]. Figure adapted from [1] which incorrectly labeled both
MHC complexes as MHC I
Both class I and class II molecules are heterodimers but they diﬀer in the antigen recogni-
tion domains (ARD). In Class I molecules, this region is made up of the α1 and α2 domains,
which are part of the same monomer and are encoded by the same gene. Conversely, the
binding region of class II molecules consists of two domains (α1 and β1) that belong to
two diﬀerent monomers and are encoded by two diﬀerent genes. Class I molecules typically
Page 3 of 107
==PAGE:11==
Biological Background
bind peptides that are 9 amino acids long[7]) and the peptides binding to class II molecules
are typically 13-25 amino acids long[8, 9]).
HLA class III proteins are not involved in antigen presentation but are instead associated
with inﬂammatory responses, leukocyte maturation and the complement cascade[2, 10].
This project only focuses on HLA class I and II, as these are the antigen-presenting proteins.
The general trend of class I proteins presenting intracellular peptides and class II proteins
presenting exogenous has some exceptions - one example is cross-presentation. This process
can occur in situations where a pathogen or tumour cell avoids normal detection by the
HLA system. In these cases, peptides from the infected cells can be transported to APCs
and be presented on HLA class I molecules despite being extracellular. This can then
trigger an immune response called cross-priming, where CTLs ﬁght the pathogen or tumour
cell, that originally produced the peptide[3, 11].
Several HLA class I genes exist. HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C are called the classic HLA-I
genes (as these are important for organ transplantation) while HLA-E, -L, -J, -K, -H and
-G are examples of less important, non-classical HLA-I genes. The structure of an HLA
class I gene is shown in ﬁgure 1.1.2. Likewise, several types of HLA class II genes exist.
HLA-DP, -DQ, and -DR are the classical HLA class II genes and additional examples
are HLA-DM, -DM and -DO. Here, the ﬁrst letter (D) indicates the class and the second
letter indicates the family. HLA class II genes consist of both an α- and a β chain (as
seen in ﬁgure 1.1.3) and several versions of these exist. Examples of HLA class II genes
are therefore HLA-DPA1, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DRB2 and HLA-DRB3. More examples can
be seen in ﬁgure A.0.2 in appendix A.
The peptides presented by HLA molecules are not just random fragments of a degraded
protein. Instead, an HLA molecule is highly selective and only recognises peptides that
match the proteins binding cleft. Whether a peptide can be presented by a speciﬁc HLA
molecule, therefore, depends on the structure of the binding cleft, and consequently on
both the HLA gene and the speciﬁc version of the gene that is found in an individual (the
speciﬁc HLA allele)[12, 13]
Page 4 of 107
==PAGE:12==
Biological Background
Figure 1.1.2: The exon-intron organisation of a HLA-class I gene. Exons 2 and 3 code for the
ARDs[2]. Figure taken from [2].
Figure 1.1.3: The exon-intron organisation of a HLA-class II gene. Both the α chain and the
β chain gene code for proteins, which have a domain that is part of the ARD. This domain is
encoded by exon 2 in both genes[2]. Figure taken from[2].
Page 5 of 107
==PAGE:13==
HLA nomenclature
1.2
HLA nomenclature
The HLA region - with its 45 genes - is one of the most polymorphic regions in the human
genome. Currently, over 28000 diﬀerent allele sequences are known for the region and
more are consistently discovered[5] (see also Appendix A).
New alleles are registered and named by the WHO Nomenclature Committee for Factors of
the HLA System and stored in the IPD-IMGT/HLA database. The database is continuously
updated to correct errors and includes new alleles[5].
The naming of a new HLA allele follows a 2010 naming convention[14, 15] illustrated
in ﬁgure 1.2.1. An allele name is separated into four ﬁelds each consisting of 2-3 digits.
The ﬁrst and most important ﬁeld denotes the allele group or family i.e. alleles coding
for HLA molecules that can bind the same antigen or have a high degree of sequence
homology to the rest of the alleles in the group[14]. The second ﬁeld notes an allele
within an allele family that codes for one speciﬁc protein sequence. The third ﬁeld is used
to distinguish between alleles that code for the same protein sequence but are diﬀerent
due to synonymous mutations in the exons/coding region and the fourth ﬁeld is used to
distinguish alleles that solely diﬀer in introns/non-coding regions. The actual numbers in
the ﬁelds 2, 3 and 4 often simply indicate the order of discovery[14].
HLA-B*03:103:02:01N
HLA Prefix
Gene
Separators (-, * and :) are here shown without background colour
Field 1: Allele group
Field 2: Specific protein
Field 3: Different synonymous mutations
 within coding region
Field 4: Differences in non-coding region
Suffix to denote 
changes in expression
Figure 1.2.1: HLA nomenclature shown with four ﬁeld (8-digit) resolution. This ﬁgure is
adapted from the IPD-IMGT/HLA website (http://hla.alleles.org/nomenclature/naming.
html) [?, 16, 17] and made using diagrams.net[18].
A speciﬁc allele has at least 2 ﬁelds in its name as the third and fourth ﬁeld are only used
Page 6 of 107
==PAGE:14==
HLA nomenclature
when two or more alleles share the two ﬁrst ﬁelds and further speciﬁcation is needed to
resolve the ambiguity[5]. The name ”HLA-A*01:01” refers to several alleles which all code
for the same protein and the third and fourth ﬁeld are therefore needed here - see also
ﬁgure 1.2.2. In addition to the four ﬁelds, trailing letters are used to add information
about expression for a speciﬁc allele or to note an allele group. An overview of the meaning
behind these trailing letters is shown in table 1.2.1[5].
1.2.1
Ambiguous and Alternative allele names
The most important part of the HLA molecule is the binding region - the ARD. This
domain is coded by exon 2 and 3 in class I molecules and only exon 2 in HLA class II
molecules. The most important diﬀerences between alleles are therefore the ones aﬀecting
nucleotides in this region[14]. This is the basis of two alternate ways of grouping alleles -
G group and P group - that exist on top of the classical naming system described in ﬁgure
1.2.1.
Alleles belonging to the same G group share identical nucleotide sequences in exons coding
for the ARD while alleles belonging to the same P group have identical peptide sequences
in the ARD. G group resolution focuses on the genomic level, while P group resolution
focuses on the proteomic level. An example of a G group is HLA-A*02:01:01G and an
example of a P group is HLA-A*11:02P
The name of a G group always includes three ﬁelds (at least six digits) preceding the ’G’
since the smallest diﬀerence that separates two G groups is a synonymous mutation. P
group resolution only has two ﬁelds followed by a P, as the smallest diﬀerence between
two P groups is found on proteomic level.
G and P groups only have a trailing letter (G or P) if the group consists of more than one
allele. The group A*01:01:01G has a trailing ’G’, as it consists of the alleles A*01:01:01:01,
01:01:01:02N as well as more than 100 additional alleles. The ”group” A*01:01:02 is only
made up of a single allele, and is therefore lacking a trailing G. Both A*01:01:01G and
A*01:01:02 would however be the correct names of alleles using G group resolution.
A special feature P group resolution is that alleles need to be able to express a functioning
protein before they are included in a P group. The allele A*01:04N (a null allele) is part
of the A*01:01:01G group and therefore also shares an identical nucleotide sequence across
Page 7 of 107
==PAGE:15==
HLA nomenclature
exon 2 and 3 with all alleles in the A*01:01P group. A*01:04N is however not part of this
P group because this version of the HLA-A gene does not express a functioning protein.
This exclusion of null alleles is further discussed in section 2.3.1[16].
Deprecated and/or alternative names for alleles and allele resolutions than the oﬃcial
names described above sometimes appear in the literature. 4-ﬁeld resolution is, for example,
sometimes referred to as 8 digit resolution, as when fewer alleles were known, each ﬁeld
only consisted of two digits. P group resolution or higher is also referred to as ”high
resolution” while ”low resolution” is another term for 1-ﬁeld resolution. Allelic resolution
is the number of ﬁelds needed to refer to one unique allele. A*01:01:01:01 and A*01:12
are both allele names in allelic resolution because they unambiguously refer to one single
allele whereas A*01:01 is not a name in allelic resolution. Many alleles sharing the ﬁrst
two ﬁelds ”A*01:01” but only one has the ﬁrst two ﬁelds ”A*01:12”[5, 19, 20].
High
Allelic
HLA-A*01:01:01:01
(1 allele)
HLA-A*01:01P
(232 alleles)
HLA-A*01
(551 alleles)
HLA-A
(6291 alleles)
Low
All
Figure 1.2.2:
(Unoﬃcial) HLA allele resolutions according to [19] with the allele HLA-
A*01:01:01:01 used as example. The number of alleles on each resolution level is found by
using the IMGT/HLA Allele Query Form and the provided list of P alleles[16]. Note: null alleles
are excluded in P group resolution. The ﬁgure is adapted from [19, 21, 22] and made using
diagrams.net[18].
Page 8 of 107
==PAGE:16==
HLA nomenclature
Table 1.2.1: Explanation of trailing letters in HLA nomenclature. Previously, other letters
than the ones shown in this table have been used, but these are the ones that are currently used
and listed on the IPD-IMGT/HLA website[16, 22].
Suﬃxes denoting a change in expression
HLA-A*24:09N
A null allele
HLA-A*30:14L
Signiﬁcantly reduced or ’Low’ cell surface expression
HLA-A*24:02:01:02L
Signiﬁcantly reduced or ’Low’ cell surface expression, where
the mutation is found outside the coding region
HLA-B*44:02:01:02S
The protein is only expressed as a ’Secreted’ molecule
HLA-A*32:11Q
An allele with ’Questionable’ expression
Suﬃxes denoting allele groups
A*02:01P
A group of alleles which share the same peptide sequence
across the ARDs.
A*02:01:01G
A group of alleles which have identical nucleotides across
the exons coding for the ARDs.
Page 9 of 107
==PAGE:17==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
1.3
Disease associations of the HLA complex
The enormous diversity of HLA genes is thought to be a result of heterozygous individuals
having an advantage over homozygous individuals. The HLA system in heterozygous
individuals can bind and present a wider range of peptides to T-cells resulting in better
detection of and protection against pathogens. It is further thought that heterozygous indi-
viduals with more dissimilar alleles have an additional advantage compared to individuals
with heterozygous but similar alleles. The diversity of the HLA region is, therefore, an
adaptation to combat diseases and the region is also associated with more diseases (mainly
autoimmune and infectious) than any other gene region in the human genome[23, 24].
This section contains a brief overview of some of the diseases associated with the HLA
complex. As opposed to a complete description of the HLA complex’s role in these dis-
eases, the following should serve as a justiﬁcation of the relevance of researching the HLA
complex and the importance of determining the speciﬁc HLA alleles (the HLA proﬁle) of
an individual. This section does not cover all medical situations associated with the HLA
system, for example, pregnancy problems, drug sensitivity and HLA deﬁciency problems.
It should be noted that not all the mechanisms behind all the disease associations are fully
known. There are claims that some of the diseases correlated with speciﬁc HLA alleles are
instead caused by other genes that are located close to the HLA locus. If these claims
are correct, the correlation between disease and a speciﬁc HLA allele would be a result
of linkage disequilibrium (LD). An example of this is the close association between the
HLA-DQ allele (DQB1*06:02) and narcolepsy. The disease is caused by a mutation in
the hypocretin receptor 2 gene, but the receptor gene is in close LD with HLA-DQ, and
speciﬁc alleles, therefore, appear together. Another important point about these disease
association studies of the HLA system is that subsequent studies often fail to replicate
the results and some originally found associations might be due to errors in the original
studies[12, 15, 25].
1.3.1
Autoimmune diseases
Autoimmune diseases are the result of self-peptides mistakenly being recognised as foreign
by the immune system. This leads to the targeting and destruction of the organism’s
own cells. In healthy individuals, T cells are put through a strict selection process during
Page 10 of 107
==PAGE:18==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
maturation to prevent this from happening. In this process, T cells interact with both
class I and class II HLA molecules and develop into either CD4 helper or CD8 killer T-cells.
The cells that develop TCRs with a strong aﬃnity to self-peptides undergo apoptosis and
are not released into the body[2, 12].
The association between autoimmune diseases and the HLA region has been studied for
more than 50 years and several HLA alleles have been associated with a higher risk of
these diseases. Without providing a complete list here, alleles from both the HLA class I
and class II regions are associated with type 1 diabetes (T1D) and Grave’s disease, class I
is further associated with multiple sclerosis (MS) and class II with rheumatoid arthritis.
Examples of disease associations for some alleles are listed in table 1.3.1.
Table 1.3.1: Examples of disease associations of HLA alleles[12, 26]
Disease
Allele(s) associated with risk or protection
T1D
Risk: B*39:06, DR3 haplotype (DQA1*05:01-DQB1*02:01) and
DR4 haplotype (DQA1*03:01-DQB1*03:02)
MS
Risk:
DR15
haplotype
(DRB1*15:01-DQA1*01:02-
DQB1*06:02-DRB5*01:01)
Malaria
Protection: B*53, DRB1*13:02/DQB1*05:01
HIV
Protection: B*27 and B*57
1.3.2
Infectious diseases
The immune system detects invading pathogens through presentation of degraded pep-
tides from the pathogen on HLA molecules and recognition by TCRs. Since the HLA
molecules only bind peptides which ﬁt their peptide-binding cleft, a speciﬁc pathogen
with its select proteins might therefore be more easily recognised by one HLA allele and
more readily avoid detection from others. Examples of HLA alleles that seem good at
detecting speciﬁc diseases are HLA-B*53 (predominantly found in African populations) and
HLA-DRB1*13:02/DQB1*05:01 which seem to be correlated with a degree of protection
from malaria[12].
Page 11 of 107
==PAGE:19==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
HIV displays one of the most consistent associations with HLA. A normal progression
of the disease is: initial symptoms upon infection of the virus, followed by an asymp-
tomatic period of 8-10 years. Hereafter, CD4+ counts drop and the immune defence is
signiﬁcantly weakened. Patients who are homozygous at the HLA locus however show a
more rapid progression than heterozygous patients. This is because the immune system in
heterozygous individuals can recognise a more diverse range of foreign antigens due to these
individuals expressing two diﬀerent versions of an HLA gene instead of only one version.
This broader range of HIV peptides recognised by HLA heterozygous individuals brings a
more eﬃcient cytotoxic T-cell response and further makes it more diﬃcult for the virus to
acquire mutations that help the virus avoid or combat the immune system. Studies of HLA
and HIV infection have found that class I alleles form a continuous spectrum of protective
to hazardous alleles with B*27 and B*57 being especially protective. Interestingly, the
protection of B*27 is also associated with protection against some other viral infections
e.g. hepatitis C, hinting, that the mechanism with which the allele protects against HIV
is not speciﬁc to this individual virus[12].
Recent COVID-19 studies have also investigated potential correlations between HLA
alleles and disease spread/severity. An Italian study found that HLA-B*44 and HLA-C*01
were independently and positively associated with COVID-19[27], and an American study
investigated whether the before mentioned B*27 allele gave protected against COVID-19
but found no signiﬁcant correlation[28].
As HLA molecules are co-dominantly expressed and heterozygous individuals seem to have
an immunological advantage, it makes sense for an individual to aim for a partner with a
diﬀering HLA proﬁle. Such studies of how mating preferences are related to HLA proﬁles
have been carried out for both rodents and humans, and some do indeed ﬁnd a preference
for HLA dissimilarity in the choice of partner[12].
1.3.3
Transplantaion
Malfunction of the HLA system can - as explained - result in diseases. In the case of
transplantation, however, the generally well-functioning and highly speciﬁc system causes
problems. When tissue/an organ is transplanted, recipient T cells might recognise the
Page 12 of 107
==PAGE:20==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
donor’s foreign HLA molecules. This can happen on donor APCs (direct presentation) but
foreign HLA molecules can also be transported to recipient APCs and be recognised here
(indirect presentation). This especially causes problems if the donor and the recipient have
diﬀerent HLA proﬁles. Therefore, HLA matching between donor and recipient is beneﬁcial
in both solid-organ transplantation and hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) [12].
The importance of the HLA complex in transplantation has been known for quite some
time. The ﬁrst descriptions of MHC proteins were in studies of rejection of tumours
explanted from mice into other mice in the 1930s[29]. HLA matching has been used
extensively in organ allocation for kidney transplantation where mismatches might result
in immunological rejection or de novo donor-speciﬁc HLA antibody development[30]. More
recently, advances in immunological suppression protocols that can be used to manage
rejection episodes have lessened the importance of HLA matching, but multiple studies
have shown that even with these new technologies, HLA matching still makes a signiﬁcant
positive diﬀerence[12].
1.3.4
Cancer
Cancer is a collection of related diseases in which self-cells in an organism undergo genetic
changes that enable unlimited proliferation and tissue invasion. Cancerous cells have
mutations that diﬀer these cells to healthy cells, meaning that they also display diﬀerent
peptides on HLA molecules on the surface. These peptides, which are products of genetic
alterations, are called neoepitopes and can usually be distinguished from self-epitopes by
the T-cells (see also section 1.1.1). Abnormal mutations would normally make cells targets
for destruction by the immune system so tumour cells need to actively avoid detection
and destruction. Examples of avoidance mechanisms are loss of expression of tumour
antigens/neoepitopes, production of immunosuppressive cytokines and altered HLA class
I surface expression and/or function. Additional characteristics are needed for cells to
develop into malignant tumour cells (cancer). The full set of attributes are referred to as
the ”Hallmarks of Cancer”[12, 31, 32].
When the immune system detects and destroys tumour cells this creates a selective process
which favours less visible variants. This notion, that the immune system shapes tumour
cells, is called cancer immunoediting and the process consists of three phases - (A) elimina-
Page 13 of 107
==PAGE:21==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
tion, (B) equilibrium and (C) escape, which are shown in ﬁgure 1.3.1. In the elimination
phase, the immune system can destroy tumour cells faster than they appear and thus
ends in the host being completely tumour free. If single cells escape apoptosis, they
enter the equilibrium phase, where the tumour cells are prevented from further outgrowth
but not destroyed. Immunoselection and - as a consequence of this - immunoediting
happens in this stage. The tumour might stay in the equilibrium phase but stronger, more
immunoresistant cell variants might also appear, pushing the tumour into the ﬁnal phase.
This could be cells which avoid detection, are insensitive to immune eﬀector mechanisms
or induce an immunosuppressive state in the surrounding environment[31, 33].
Speciﬁc HLA alleles seem to have an impact on cancer prognosis e.g. HLA-A*02 is
associated with a poor prognosis in ovarian, prostate, melanoma and lung cancer[12].
Figure 1.3.1: According to the theory of immunoediting, a tumour progresses through three
phases before developing into cancer[33]. Figure adapted from [33]
1.3.5
Immunotherapy and neoepitope prediction
The HLA allele combination (HLA type) of an individual is valuable information which
can be used to ﬁnd speciﬁc alleles with a higher risk of disease and/or to match organ
donors. A more recent use for is in cancer immunotherapy.
Immunotherapy is a cancer treatment method where the host’s own immune system is used
to combat and kill cancer cells and push tumours towards the elimination phase. Main
strategies of immunotherapy include adoptive cell transfer (ACT), checkpoint inhibitor
therapy (CPI), oncolytic virus (OV) therapy and cancer vaccines[34].
Page 14 of 107
==PAGE:22==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
Figure 1.3.2: Cancer vaccines can give tumour regression in various ways. a: The speciﬁc
antigens in a cancer vaccine can bring a new antigen-speciﬁc T cell response to previously
untargeted tumour cells. b: If a T cell response is already present, a cancer vaccine further
ampliﬁes the response or c: gives a more diverse response. Figure taken from [35].
The ﬁrst step of ACT is to isolate a culture of lymphocytes from a patient or a donor in
vitro. The cells are then activated, selected for tumour speciﬁcity and expanded before
being reinfused into the patient[34, 35].
CPI targets some of the immune inhibitory pathways that cancer cells exploit to suppress
the immune system and avoid T cell activation. These T cell brakes are targeted and
inhibited by monoclonal antibodies leading to T cell activation and increased immune
response. One challenge of CPI is that the method lacks speciﬁcity which means that
the tumour suppression from CPI also comes with toxic side eﬀects in other parts of the
body[34, 35].
Oncolytic viruses (OVs) selectively target, replicate in and kill tumour cells. OV’s can be
Page 15 of 107
==PAGE:23==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
designed to help immune cell recruitment and activation, but can also itself be targeted
and cleared by the immune system, before having a real eﬀect[34].
Some OVs contain antigens which are foreign to the human body but found in some
tumour cells. Because of this tumour speciﬁcity, these antigens can be used in cancer
vaccines. Several vaccines using such antigens have already been successful in preventing
HPV-associated cancers. However, not all tumour-speciﬁc antigens (neoepitopes) are
found in OVs. Therefore a more general approach is to analyse the tumour and healthy
cells from the patient, ﬁnd a selection of tumour-speciﬁc neoepitopes and design vaccines
based on these. This vaccine would be speciﬁc to both the patient and the tumour[35].
Cancer vaccines have multiple eﬀects which all seek to manipulate the immune system to
target tumour cells as shown in ﬁgure 1.3.2).
Previously, discovering tumour antigens and developing cancer vaccines were very expensive,
but the emergence of next-generation sequencing (further explained in section 1.4) has
resulted in a signiﬁcant price reduction[35]. An article from 2020[36] lists 20 ongoing
and 7 completed clinical trials which target cancer neoepitopes. Neoepitope discovery
is, however, not limited to cancer vaccines. Figure 1.3.3 shows a basic framework of
neoantigen discovery for ACT.
Page 16 of 107
==PAGE:24==
Disease associations of the HLA complex
Figure 1.3.3: Identiﬁcation and prioritisation of cancer neoepitopes for an individual cancer
sample. First, next-generation sequencing is used to sequence both healthy and tumour tissue.
Sequence data from healthy cells and HLA typing algorithms are then used to ﬁnd the patient’s
HLA type (see also section 1.5). The HLA type is hereafter used together with sequence data
from both healthy cells and tumour cells to ﬁnd a selection of tumour-speciﬁc neoepitopes.
The selected neoepitopes are then used to activate T cells which, when reinfused, can give a
tumour-speciﬁc immune response. Figure taken from [36].
Page 17 of 107
==PAGE:25==
Next-Generation Sequencing
1.4
Next-Generation Sequencing
The Human Genome Project was a huge, worldwide genome sequencing project which
was completed in 2003 and cost more than 5 billion US dollars (2020 currency rate -
adjusted for inﬂation). One of the primary goals was to sequence a high-quality version
of the human genome[37, 38]. Since then, the price of sequencing a human genome has
diminished greatly (ﬁgure 1.4.1)[39].
Figure 1.4.1: The cost of sequence data has been falling rapidly since 2000 and has since 2008
outpaced Moore’s law. Figure taken from [39].
One of the earliest DNA sequencing methods is Sanger sequencing from 1977. The method
consists of several steps. First, the original DNA is fragmented and ampliﬁed. Hereafter
the generated DNA templates are mixed with speciﬁcally designed DNA primers, DNA
polymerase and both labelled and unlabelled dideoxynucleotides. The primer then binds to
single-stranded DNA templates and the DNA polymerase can add the dideoxynucleotides
to match the DNA template. By labelling a speciﬁc dideoxynucleotide in each reaction
mix, sequence detection is then possible using electrophoretic separation. The output data
is high quality (up to 99.999% accuracy) sequence reads of around 1000 base pairs (bp).
A modiﬁed version of this process was still the leading sequencing technology during the
human genome project and until 2005, when massively parallel DNA sequencing/next-
generation sequencing (NGS) was introduced[40, 41].
Page 18 of 107
==PAGE:26==
Next-Generation Sequencing
A large number of diﬀerent NGS methods have been developed since 2005 and many of
them - like Sanger - use sequence by synthesis (SBS) to generate data. However, instead
of doing sequencing and detection in two separated steps, NGS technologies using SBS
couple and parallelize these two processes. This enables sequencing of up to billions of
templates simultaneously compared to a single template in Sanger. One drawback is, that
the output data is of both lower accuracy and lower average read length compared to
Sanger[40, 41].
Some of the latest NGS methods employ single-molecule sequencing (SMS) technology
instead of SBS. These are sometimes referred to as third-generation sequencing implying
SBS as the second generation and Sanger as the ﬁrst. Unlike the prior generations, SMS
technologies do not use DNA ampliﬁcation in the process but can reduce potential bias by
using the original genetic sample[42]. The single-molecule real-time platform from Paciﬁc
Biosciences and Oxford Nanopore Technologies are prominent examples of technologies
employing SMS.
Compared to SBS methods, SMS have a lower accuracy but oﬀer greatly longer reads
which can provide an advantage, for example in de novo assembly where the goal is to
ﬁnd the sequence of a genome from many short reads without using a reference genome
(described in section 1.4.4)[40, 41, 42].
1.4.1
Illumina sequencing
Illumina sequencing is the most widely used NGS technology today[43]. Several diﬀerent
Illumina technologies are commercially available, but they generally oﬀer short read data
of 150-300 bp[44]. Data generation projects, such as the 1000 Genomes Project (see also
section 2.2), have used the SBS based technology to produce vast amounts of sequencing
data[45]. The sequencing data in the gold standard dataset used to benchmark HLA
typing algorithms in this project is made using Illumina.
Illumina sequencing consists of three steps, shown in ﬁgure 1.4.2. First, a library is
created by taking fragmented DNA molecules and ligating two diﬀerent adaptors to both
ends of the molecule. These adaptors can have bar codes for later identiﬁcation. The
library is then ampliﬁed with longer primers further extending the adaptor sequences.
Page 19 of 107
==PAGE:27==
Next-Generation Sequencing
Figure 1.4.2: The three central steps of Illumina sequencing are a: Ligation and extension of
adaptors, b: bridge ampliﬁcation through multiple PCR cycles and c: sequencing by synthesis
of single-stranded templates. Figure taken from [41].
The double-stranded molecules are then separated into single strands and added to a ﬂow
cell. The ligated adaptors are here able to bind to complementary strands/oligomers.
The single-stranded molecules are copied, forming a double-stranded ”bridge” attached
on both ends to the ﬂow cell. Multiple polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) are used for
ampliﬁcation, creating clusters of the ﬂow cell which each are made from the same template.
Finally, nucleotides carrying a laser detectable ﬂuorophore and a chemical blocker are
added in cycles. The blocker ensures that only one nucleotide is added per cycle, and
the clusters emit light in a colour speciﬁc to the added base. The DNA sequence of the
original single-stranded templates can then be read by looking at sequential light emissions
from the ﬂow cell[41].
1.4.2
The pitfalls of PCR
Bridge PCR ampliﬁcation is central to the Illumina sequencing technology and it is there-
fore important to be aware of bias and potential problems related to this process. Three
important errors: ampliﬁcation bias, PCR crossover and PCR stutter.
Ampliﬁcation bias means that one or both alleles are not ampliﬁed adequately. This can
Page 20 of 107
==PAGE:28==
Next-Generation Sequencing
Figure 1.4.3: a: The beginning of PCR cycle N runs as expected, and b: amplicon 1 is partly
replicated. c: After an extension step is interrupted, d+e: the half ﬁnished copy of amplicon 1
is only ﬁnished using amplicon 2 as template f: resulting in a crossover artifact[46, 47]. Figure
taken from[47].
be due to diﬀerences in primer binding, GC content, length, low DNA quality or certain
DNA structures such as G-quadruplexes. Small ampliﬁcation diﬀerences between the
alleles are expected. However, sometimes alleles are not ampliﬁed enough to be detected
or - in extreme cases - not ampliﬁed at all. This is called allelic dropout (ADO)[46, 47].
PCR crossover (see ﬁgure 1.4.3) happens during a round of ampliﬁcation when parts of
two diﬀerent alleles are merged into one single sequence instead of remaining separate.
This new sequence is then replicated in subsequent ampliﬁcation steps. Whether crossover
happens depends on the number of cycles and the initial template concentration, amongst
other things[46, 47].
Short tandem repeats (STRs) are genome sections, where a short nucleotide motif of a
few bases is repeated several/many times[47]. PCR stutter happens when a repeat unit
is deleted or added during a round of ampliﬁcation. The diﬀerence between the alleles
HLA-DRB1*03:01:01:01 and DRB1*03:01:01:02 is only a SNP in intron 1 and a single
repeat unit in intron 2[46, 47]
The artefacts described here only rarely aﬀects performance. However, in cases where high
accuracy is required, e.g. in the determination of HLA alleles for clinical purposes, it is
important to be aware of this pitfall.
Page 21 of 107
==PAGE:29==
Next-Generation Sequencing
1.4.3
WGS and WES
The goal of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) is to sequence the full genome of an organism
without focusing on any speciﬁc region. In many cases, important information is however
not distributed evenly across a genome[48].
Target-enrichment sequencing aims to capture and sequence a speciﬁc part of the genome.
This could, for example, be used in a large population study of a speciﬁc gene or to
determine whether a patient has speciﬁc alleles associated with a high risk of diseases,
such as cancer. A variety of target-enrichment methods exist[49].
A generalised target-enrichment method is called whole-exome capture. This technique
aims to capture all the protein-coding regions (the exome) of an organism. The exome only
makes up about 1 % of the entire human genome but a majority of genetic disorders can
be attributed to these regions. WES can therefore be a cheaper alternative to WGS and
it can oﬀer higher coverage (amount of reads per reference nucleotide) in the important
coding regions[48].
An example of a whole-exome capture technique is array-based hybridisation. This is
based on array bound probes that are complementary to the targeted exonic regions, and
therefore able to capture them. When fragmented DNA is added to the array, the probes
only hybridise to the exonic DNA and the remaining unbound DNA can be washed away.
The captured exons can then be sequenced using, for example, Illumina technology. Exome
capture and subsequent sequencing are referred to as whole-exome sequencing (WES)[48].
1.4.4
The human reference genome
Raw NGS data from Illumina usually consists of millions of short reads, all originating
from one long genome. Finding the correct order of the sequences and assembling the
original genome can be quite diﬃcult. If no reference is used to assemble the genome from
raw data, the process is referred to as de novo assembly. High coverage, read accuracy and
paired-end read information (see ﬁgure 1.4.4) are especially useful in de novo assembly[50].
Humans only diﬀer on about 20 million base pairs out of the 3.1 billion base pairs in a
haploid genome (0.6%)[51, 52] and an easier way of getting useful information from raw
NGS data is therefore to use a reference genome. By using a reference, which closely
resembles the sequenced genome, ordering the raw reads becomes signiﬁcantly easier. An
Page 22 of 107
==PAGE:30==
Next-Generation Sequencing
Figure 1.4.4: Aligning NGS reads to a reference genome using paired-end sequencing. Paired-
end reads are two reads which originate from the same DNA fragment. They can be either
overlapping or separated by a gap called an insert. Reads coupled in this way make subsequent
assembly or alignment easier[50]. Figure taken from [53].
example of how reads are aligned to a reference genome is illustrated in ﬁgure 1.4.4.
One example of a reference genome is the ﬁrst human genome published in the The
Human Genome Project[37]. In the early days of genome sequencing, it was thought that
the majority of the genetic variation between individuals was due to single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), where one single nucleotide is substituted. These small diﬀerences
between a sequenced genome and a reference genome are relatively easy to spot. The
sequenced reads most likely still map to the correct position in the reference genome and
all sequenced reads diﬀer from the reference genome on this one speciﬁc position (see
ﬁgure 1.4.4). The assumption of SNPs accounting for a majority of variation is however
not true. Some regions of the genome have a high degree of structural variation that is
much more complicated than substituting a single nucleotide. One type of variation is
copy number variation (CNV) where a section of a genome is repeated a speciﬁc number of
times that varies between individuals. Another example is the previously mentioned and
highly polymorphic HLA region. The found diversity is accounted for in newer releases of
the human reference genome by including multiple possible paths through the genome.
The ﬁrst patch of the current build (GRCh38.p1) has eight diﬀerent paths through the
HLA region. In practice, a primary assembly is released with multiple alternative DNA
segments as illustrated in ﬁgure1.4.5[54].
Page 23 of 107
==PAGE:31==
Next-Generation Sequencing
Figure 1.4.5: An overview of the ﬁrst patch of the newest build of the human reference
genome (GRCh38.p1) with a primary assembly and 7 alternative reference loci. PAR is the
pseudo-autosomal region. GRCh38.p13, which is the newest patch of the GRCh38 build has 35
alternative reference loci[52]. Figure taken from[54].
1.4.5
Read alignment
A wide selection of read alignment algorithms exist. These can be divided into groups
depending on how a speciﬁc read is allocated the correct position in the reference genome.
Two of the most widely used are: hash-based algorithms and algorithms based on the
Burrows-Wheeler transformation (BWT)[55, 56, 57].
The hashing method works by dividing the reference genome into small chunks of a ﬁxed
length (k-mers) and then using these k-mers as keys in a large dictionary that links a k-mer
to its position in the genome. The read sequences can now be compared to the large list of
k-mers in the dictionary. If a read contains a speciﬁc k-mer, the data structure can then be
used to ﬁnd a probable position in the genome for this read. The k-mers in the dictionary
are hashed and as hash lookup is extremely fast this method often outperforms simpler
algorithms, such as sorting based ones. After the k-mer lookup returns probable positions
where the input read map to the reference genome, slower but more precise alignment
algorithms such as Needleman-Wunsch or Smith-Waterman can be used to ﬁnd the best
alignment and map the read to a speciﬁc position in the reference genome. One drawback
Page 24 of 107
==PAGE:32==
Next-Generation Sequencing
is that it requires a lot of memory to create this large k-mer dictionary[56, 58, 57]. Two
examples of hash-based algorithms are SMALT[59] and Novoalign[60]. The latter can
report multiple alignments per read, which (as is described in section 1.5.3) can be an
advantage when aligning reads to the HLA region[58].
Another prominent approach to alignment is to use the BWT of the reference DNA. BWT
is a reversible transformation that compresses a dataﬁle. A transformed ﬁle can be indexed
using Ferragina Manzini (FM) indexing which can be used to ﬁnd matches to a speciﬁc
k-mer requiring relatively little memory and time[55, 61]. Prominent aligners using this
approach include the Burrows-Wheeler aligner (BWA)[62], Bowtie[63], Bowtie2[64] and
SOAP2[65].
1.4.6
Graph-based alignment
Section 1.4.4 described that a newer version of the human reference genome includes several
alternative DNA segments representing the genetic variation in the human population.
An alternative to this approach is to abandon the linear reference and instead, represent
the human genome using a graph-based structure, as shown in ﬁgures 1.4.6 and 1.4.7.
In a graph genome, each variant is represented with an edge in the structure creating
an enormous amount of valid ”possible paths” through the genome. An area where this
is especially advantageous is in highly polymorphic regions. Linear references focus on
the one most prevalent version of a gene along with some frequently found variations.
Graph-based can more eﬃciently store a larger number of variations and thereby increase
the number of reads that align to the reference. Another advantage of using a graph
genome, as opposed to a linear, is improved representation of ethnic diversity. African
genomes are especially diverse creates diﬃculties for methods using linear reference[66].
Several types of graphs exist - examples are De-Bruijn graphs and Enredo graphs. These
will not be described in detail here, but further information can be found in[67].
One drawback of graph genomes is that the alignment to the reference becomes more
complex. Many available alignment tools only work with a linear reference but some
graph aligners do exist. One of the newest graph-based alignment algorithms is called
HISAT2. This tool uses an extended BWT for graphs[68] and an extended FM indexed
called hierarchical Graph FM index (HGFM).
Page 25 of 107
==PAGE:33==
Next-Generation Sequencing
Figure 1.4.6: Construction of a graph-based reference. a: A simple multiple sequence alignment
(MSA) with three sequences. b: The sequences are shown as a series of nodes with directed edges.
c: Duplicates are marked for merging. d: The three diﬀering sequences are now represented in
one graph structure. Figure taken from [69].
Figure 1.4.7: a: Genetic variation is more easily represented in a graph genome using small
alternative paths - here shown using red arrows. b: A simplicstic illustration of alignment to
a graph genome and a linear reference. The sample is heterozygous and has several SNPs at
the locus. The complexity is here shown to be best represented using the graph-based approach.
Figure taken from [66]
1.4.7
NGS data formats
The raw data in an NGS workﬂow often consist of FASTQ ﬁles. Each entry in a FASTQ
ﬁle consists of four lines, as shown in ﬁgure 1.4.8. The ﬁrst line is the identiﬁer. This line
Page 26 of 107
==PAGE:34==
Next-Generation Sequencing
always starts with an ”@” and contains information, such as the sequencing technology
used, run id, whether the read is a member of a pair etc. The second line is the nucleotide
sequence, the third is simply a ”+” and the fourth line is the quality scores (Phred quality
scores) of the individual nucleotides in the second line[70]. Phred is a system showing
the probability of an error with a single symbol. For instance, in the ASCII base 33
system, which is commonly used, an error probability of 10% is denoted ”+” and an
error probability of 0.1% is denoted ”?”[71]. The FASTQ entries of an analysis usually go
through pre-processing. This could be removing of sequenced adaptors and low quality
reads/parts of reads, but also more advanced techniques, such as identifying whether an
individual single read/part of read is likely to be erroneous given the information of the
rest of the reads (K-mer correction)[72].
Figure 1.4.8: An example of a fastq entry from an Illumina sequence system. Figure taken
from [70]
Given that a FASTQ ﬁle mostly contains a list of individual reads, the ﬁle is not directly
useful for answering biological questions, such as variant calling and feature counts. Instead,
the reads are ordered and mapped to a reference genome in a SAM or BAM ﬁle. SAM
means Sequence Alignment/Map format while BAM is the binary version of a SAM ﬁle
and contains the same information. A SAM/BAM ﬁle contains all the information from
the original FASTQ ﬁles and conversion is reversible. In addition to the information found
in the FASTQ ﬁle, SAM/BAM ﬁles contain the reference genome and information, such
as a note of the alignment tool which was used. A full description can be found in [70].
BAM ﬁles often require too much storage space and alignment ﬁles are therefore alter-
natively stored as CRAM ﬁles. These are reduced versions of the alignment where only
the diﬀerences between the aligned sequence and a reference genome are stored. Since
the typical diﬀerence between two human genomes is very small, this gives a signiﬁcant
reduction in ﬁle size. One drawback is that to be converted back to e.g. BAM format, the
original reference sequence used in the alignment is needed as a separate ﬁle[73, 74].
Page 27 of 107
==PAGE:35==
Next-Generation Sequencing
If only parts of the alignment are needed - for example, the section of chromosome 6
containing the HLA region - the reads mapping to this region can be obtained using an
extraction tool (such as bedtools[75]) and a BED ﬁle. A BED ﬁle could contain the entry
”chr6 28510120 33480577” and, if used for extraction, this means that the DNA sequence
between coordinates 28510120 and 33480577 in chromosome 6 should be extracted[70].
Page 28 of 107
==PAGE:36==
HLA Typing
1.5
HLA Typing
Variant calling is the process of determining sequence variants in an analysed sample[76].
This is a well-described process and a simpliﬁed example is shown in ﬁgure 1.5.1. Due
to the unusually high degree of polymorphism in the HLA region, traditional variant
calling methods for NGS data perform poorly in this region. Accurate variant calling
in the HLA region (HLA typing) therefore currently requires variant calling algorithms
speciﬁcally designed to the region[77]. This section introduces some of these algorithms,
as well as some of the challenges in the ﬁeld. The speciﬁc HLA typing algorithms, which
are benchmarked in this project, are described in section 2.4.
HLA typing, for the most part, focuses on the six classic HLA genes (HLA-A, -B, -C,
-DRB1, -DQB1, -DPB1). These genes both have the highest degree of polymorphism (most
registered alleles) and are the most clinically relevant. Other HLA genes are, however still
studied and some HLA typing methods do perform typing for non-classical alleles (such
as HLA-E, -F and -G) in addition to the classical HLA genes[6, 78]. An overview of the
number of alleles for the HLA genes is shown in appendix A.
Figure 1.5.1: A standard approach for variant calling. After reads (light green) are aligned
to a reference genome (blue) a sequence alignment can be generated (dark green). Diﬀerences
between the base calls in the reads (red) are sometimes due to errors, but if many reads diﬀer
from the reference genome on a position, it is likely to be a position, where the sample diﬀers
from the reference. Figure taken from [79]
Page 29 of 107
==PAGE:37==
HLA Typing
1.5.1
Traditional HLA typing
One of the earliest HLA typing methods is serology-based HLA typing. One form of this
method relies on mixing speciﬁc antibodies and cells with unknown HLA phenotypes. Cells
that bind to the antibody are eventually killed and detected by a dye, while cells which
are not bound to the antibody survive. By using antibodies to the HLA-A*02 antigen
cells with the HLA-A*02 allele can be distinguished from those without. The method as
such only gives HLA typing in 1-ﬁeld resolution. Furthermore, the individual experiment
only answers the question, ”Do these cells have this allele or not?” instead of answering
”Which speciﬁc HLA proﬁle do this/these cells have?”[80, 81].
Figure 1.5.2: The two heterozygous individuals have four diﬀerent HLA-DRB1 alleles between
them. The polymorphic positions are distinguished by the coloured blocks. SSOP, SSP and
SBT are unable to distinguish the two individuals from each other. These methods only provide
the information that all the polymorphic sites (assigned ”+”) are present in the individual.
Additional methods are therefore needed to ﬁnd out which polymorphic sites belong to each
haplotype. The ﬁgure is taken from [82]
More recent examples of conventional HLA typing methods use PCR to amplify the exons
coding for the ARDs in HLA genes. After ampliﬁcation, speciﬁc HLA alleles can then
be identiﬁed through hybridisation with either sequence-speciﬁc oligonucleotide probes
Page 30 of 107
==PAGE:38==
HLA Typing
(SSOP) or sequence-speciﬁc primers (SSP). PCR can also be followed by Sanger sequenc-
ing of the ampliﬁed regions and the sequences can be compared against HLA reference
sequences. This last method, called sequence-based typing (SBT), gives very accurate
results and is currently used as the gold standard for HLA typing[80, 82, 83].
The three methods provide 2-ﬁeld resolution but need to be preceded by serology-based
HLA typing. They are, therefore, very labour intensive, time-consuming and expensive[84].
Another problem, shared by all three methods, is a diﬃculty with resolving phasing
ambiguities for HLA alleles[82], as illustrated in ﬁgure 1.5.2.
1.5.2
HLA typing using NGS data
The rapid development of NGS has made it aﬀordable to sequence the full genome of
individuals. In the later years, this has shifted the focus of HLA typing towards the use of
data from the whole exome or genome (WES or WGS), instead of data from traditional
HLA typing methods that solely focus on the HLA region and have a laborious HLA
enrichment step.
WGS and WES produce sequencing data which are not restricted to the one or two exons
coding for the ARD. This means, that the sequences of all exons (WES and WGS) as
well as the introns the untranslated regions (only WGS) can be found. In the situation
shown in ﬁgure 1.5.2, the additional information also means that the ”barcode” (the ”+”
symbols) for an allele combination becomes much more complex and, in most cases also
unique. These newer NGS based workﬂows therefore often solve the problem of phasing
ambiguity[46, 47].
Another - perhaps more important - advantage to using WES or WGS, as opposed to
data solely generated for HLA typing, is that HLA typing can be integrated into a general
genetic analysis. WGS/WES data are generated for multiple purposes and in many cases,
the data is already available. Most other genes can be typed from WGS or WES data
by simply using a variant calling tool. HLA typing from NGS data harbours separate
challenge as universal variant calling tools fail to accurately predict the correct allele
combination in the polymorphic HLA region. Instead, the typing in this region is done
using specialised HLA variant calling tools/HLA typing algorithms. One of the ﬁrst of
such algorithms was HLAminer from 2012[85] and new algorithms, which outperform
Page 31 of 107
==PAGE:39==
HLA Typing
existing ones, are still being published[46, 80, 86].
NGS based HLA typing can be performed using WGS and WES data but also whole-
transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) data by referring HLA genotypes from the sequenced
transcriptome data. A generalised workﬂow for HLA typing using WGS or WES data is
shown in ﬁgure 1.5.3. Since the data is not made from an HLA targeting approach, a
majority of the reads are not from HLA genes. Removing reads, that do not map to the
HLA region before typing makes ﬁles smaller the typing problem simpler. HLA typing
algorithms therefore often begin with a ﬁltering/read extraction step as also shown in
ﬁgure 1.5.3[46, 80].
1.5.3
General trends in NGS based HLA typing algorithms
Based on the typing step (C) in ﬁgure 1.5.3, HLA typing algorithms can roughly be
divided into two groups: methods using de novo assembly-based methods and methods
which directly align to a reference. The alignment-based methods can further be divided
into methods which use a linear reference and methods which use a graph-based one[46].
Methods using a de novo assembly approach ﬁrst ﬁnds a consensus sequence for the HLA
genes from the input reads without using a reference sequence. Only after reads have been
assembled to consensus sequences are they matched with reference HLA sequences for allele
assignment. Three algorithms which use this approach are HLAminer[85], ATHLATES[87]
and HLAreporter[88]. HLAminer uses a k-mer table of the IPD-IMGT/HLA database
to generate seeds used as starting points for subsequent assembly. ATHLATES works
similarly, but only extracts exonic sequences, while HLAreporter uses the assembly tool
TASR.
Algorithms using a de novo assembly approach still need an alignment step with a com-
parison to HLA reference sequences. This reference can be the IPD-IMGT/HLA database.
NGS based HLA typing algorithms have used a number of the diﬀerent alignment tools
described in section 1.4.5 and 1.4.6 to perform this step[46].
Many of the HLA typing algorithms use BWT-Based mapping algorithms. HLAreporter,
ALPHLARD-NT[89] and OncoHLA[86] use BWA-MEM and STC-seq[84] (described fur-
ther in section 2.4.5) uses Bowtie. The two graph-based algorithms Kourami [69] and
HLA-LA[78] (described in section 2.4.2 and 2.4.3) both use BWA in an early, linear
Page 32 of 107
==PAGE:40==
HLA Typing
A
B
C
Enrichment and sequencing
Read attribution to HLA genes
Genotyping
Exons
Full genes
short-reads
short-reads
long-reads
MHC
PCR
sequencing
HLA-A
HLA-A
HLA-A
all reads
HLA-A
reference gene
+
gene speciﬁc reads
HLA-A
Exons
Alignment
Assembly
Linear
Graph
+
+
+
Scoring and report
Scoring and report
Scoring and report
HLA-A*01:01/HLA-A*15:01
HLA-A*01:01/
HLA-A*15:01
HLA-A*01:01
HLA-A*15:01
Find best part for
each read
Create reference
graph
Figure 1.5.3: A generalised overview of HLA typing with WGS or WES data and a 2nd
generation sequencing method, which has an ampliﬁcation step. A: Target enrichment is used
to capture the exons (only WES) and PCR is used for ampliﬁcation. Long PCR products
are fragmented for reading by short-read technologies. The original sequence and the output
of the PCR are black and sequenced reads are blue B: Reads not speciﬁc to the HLA genes
are removed. The reference sequences are shown in green. C: Generalised workﬂow for linear
alignment-based algorithms (C top) graph-based algorithms (C middle) and assembly-based
algorithms (C bottom). HLA typing workﬂows often share the ﬁrst steps (A and B), but diﬀer
on the typing step (C). Figure is made with inspiration from [46] using diagrams.net[18]
alignment step before moving on to using a graph reference. One last example of an HLA
typing algorithm using BWT is HISAT-genotype[66] (described in section 2.4.4). This
tool is an extension of the graph-based aligner HISAT2 (see section 1.4.6).
Other mapping tools used by HLA typing algorithms include Novoalign (used by Polysolver[90]
and PHLAT[91]) and RazerS3 (which is used by Optitype[92]). Optitype is described in
Page 33 of 107
==PAGE:41==
HLA Typing
section 2.4.1.
The last step in the HLA typing process is to determine which HLA alleles best explain
the reads which are now organised using assembly and/or alignment. This inference is
shown in ﬁgure 1.5.3.C).
HLA typing tools employ various methods to infer HLA alleles, but most use some ver-
sion of the IPD-IMGT/HLA database and try to identify the alleles from this database
that best explain the found NGS reads. The tools PHLAT[91] and Polysolver[90] use a
Bayesian approach, ATHLATES[87] identiﬁes alleles based on their Hamming distance,
while Optitype[92] uses an allele scoring matrix and integer linear programming to ﬁnd
the optimal allele combination explaining the maximum number of reads[46, 80]. The
graph-based alignment used in HLA*LA, Kourami and HISAT-genotype means that HLA
inference takes another form in these tools. Instead of ﬁnding the best alignment to linear
references, inference of the set of HLA alleles is done by ﬁnding the most probable set of
paths through a graph structure. This is explained further in sections 2.4.2, 2.4.3 and
2.4.4) [46, 69, 78, 93].
Individual alleles do not appear at a similar frequency but vary greatly both within a
population and between ethnic groups. The website Allelefrequencies.net[94] provides
information of allele frequencies from diﬀerent worldwide population studies. This informa-
tion is being used by typing algorithms in various ways to give more qualiﬁed predictions.
Optitype uses a simple approach which ignores all alleles in the IPD-IMGT/HLA database
that do not have a reported frequency on Allelefrequencies.net[46].
1.5.4
Challenges of NGS based HLA typing
The previous sections in this chapter have described some general trends and some indi-
vidual diﬀerences of HLA typing and NGS based HLA typing algorithms. This section
will outline some of the most important challenges and pitfalls of NGS based HLA typing
and how algorithms are constructed to address these.
The HLA region is - as earlier mentioned - notoriously diﬃcult to type. This is because of
the high degree of variation in the HLA region and the high degree of homology between
both diﬀerent alleles and alleles of diﬀerent genes. Functional alleles and null alleles can
diﬀer on as little as a 6C stretch (B*51:01:01:01) versus a 7C stretch (B*51:11N) and
Page 34 of 107
==PAGE:42==
HLA Typing
a single base can be the only diﬀerence between two exons belonging to diﬀerent HLA
genes. Furthermore, several pseudogenes exist in this region which typing algorithms
might mistake for real genes, leading to mistyping.
Section 1.5.2 mentioned how NGS based typing helped solve the heterozygosity problem.
However, when polymorphisms are separated by long (>1000bp) homozygous regions,
resolving ambiguity is still a problem for short-read (2nd generation) NGS based methods.
These stretches are especially common in HLA class II genes and can explain part of
why class II genes generally are more diﬃcult to type than class I genes. Optitype and
Polysolver only oﬀer typing for HLA class I genes[46, 90, 92].
The sequencing of a sample using NGS is not a perfect process. As is also explained in
section 1.4.2, NGS data does not always accurately reﬂect the original sample. One reason
for this is PCR ampliﬁcation, which is a biased step. When an allele is not ampliﬁed
(ADO), or when an extra repeat is added to an STR region, the HLA typing algorithms
have diﬃculties in accurately typing based solely on the low quality of the data. Some
measures can be used to detect faulty reads, but since there are a huge amount of HLA
alleles, which sometimes diﬀer very little from each other, these measures are not always
enough[46].
When comparing HLA typing algorithms it is important to note that typing can be per-
formed on diﬀerent resolutions, with 2-ﬁeld and G group being some of the most common.
The performance of an HLA typing tool is therefore not only determined by how often the
predictions are correct, but also the resolution of the predictions. It is, of course, easier to
achieve higher performance if results are only reported in 1-ﬁeld resolution. Therefore,
comparing the accuracy of diﬀerent HLA typing tools is not always straightforward. Many
tools only provide 2-ﬁeld resolution as this is suﬃcient for immunotherapy pipelines, such
as the one seen in ﬁgure 1.3.3[46].
HLA typing using SBT (section 1.5.1) has been used to discover many new HLA alleles
and to construct the IPD-IMGT/HLA database, which many tools use as a reference. The
method however only provides the sequences for the ARD coding exons and a signiﬁcant
number of alleles in the database are therefore missing introns and non-ARD coding
exons. One consequence of this is that more reads map to the alleles with a full sequence
Page 35 of 107
==PAGE:43==
HLA Typing
as the reference sequence is longer. An algorithm that naively assumes the HLA allele
explaining the most reads is the correct one is therefore biased towards the alleles with a
fully registered sequence.
Some tools assess this problem by replacing missing sequences with the most similar
genomic sequences, eﬀectively giving a qualiﬁed guess of the missing information. Others
penalise mismatches in the ARD coding region higher than in other exons or simply
choose to ignore all partially known alleles. A fourth option is to only focus on the ARD
coding exons and disregard other parts of the sequence in the inference step, as is done by
Optitype, HLA*LA and Kourami. One drawback of this choice is that results at best can
be reported in G-group resolution. Typing in 3-ﬁeld resolution requires knowledge about
the ignored additional exons and 4-ﬁeld resolution additionally needs information about
the ignored introns[46].
The IPD-IMGT/HLA database is not only incomplete in regards to partly missing se-
quences, the rapid growth in newly found alleles (see ﬁgure A.0.2 in appendix A) also
indicates that many HLA alleles are still undiscovered. These alleles might be rare as
they have avoided discovery so far, but HLA typing tools that naively align to the IPD-
IMGT/HLA database - assuming it complete - will always mistype these undiscovered
alleles. Kourami and HISAT-genotype are two algorithms which can discover new alleles
based on input data. In Kourami’s case, this is done by allowing penalised extensions of
the graph structure[46, 69].
Page 36 of 107
==PAGE:44==
Objectives of this project
1.6
Objectives of this project
Section 1.5 mentions some of the many NGS based HLA typing tools available, but as noted
in a 2019 review of NGS based HLA typing: ”... many of these tools are proofs-of-concept
only, with few systematic studies on accuracy and use-cases being carried out apart from
benchmarking the new tools.”[46]. When the benchmarking of new tools is done by the
developers of the tools, the estimated performance could be biased.
This project was designed by Evaxion Biotech, a company focusing on AI-driven im-
munotherapy. An overview of their neoepitope prediction pipeline is shown in ﬁgure 1.6.1.
Evaxion uses WES data with a coverage of at least 250X from both healthy and tumour
cells to identify somatic mutations. HLA typing is performed in a separate step. This
pipeline can be optimised as the WES data itself is enough for HLA typing (as explained
in section 1.5).
The primary aim of this project is to ﬁnd the HLA typing tool that is best suited for
Evaxion’s purposes. Speciﬁcally, the goal is to ﬁnd the tool with the highest typing
accuracy for WES data (typing resolution is discussed in section 2.3.1). Another aim is
to curate a gold standard dataset with WES data and corresponding HLA alleles. This
dataset can be used to benchmark the HLA typing tools included in this project, but also
newly developed tools in the future. The next chapter (2) describes the details of how
these steps of this project were carried out.
Figure 1.6.1: Evaxion provides personalised neoepitope prediction from WES data (tumour and
healthy tissue) and from RNA seq data (tumour tissue). HLA typing is carried out separately,
even though it could be done using the available WES data. Figure taken from [31]
Page 37 of 107
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2
Chapter
Methodology
This chapter contains a description of how the benchmarking of ﬁve HLA typing tools
was conducted. The ﬁrst section describes the selection criteria for including HLA typing
algorithms in the benchmarking study. This is followed by a description of the gold
standard dataset used in the analysis and description of how speciﬁcally the performances
of the tools were evaluated. Finally, this chapter contains an outline of the central algo-
rithms of the ﬁve selected HLA typing tools and a reasoning for their inclusion in this study.
All relevant code from this project can be found GitHub: https://github.com/nikolasthuesen/
hlatyping. This includes the bash scripts that were used to run the HLA typing programs.
These have full lists of the software dependencies of each HLA typing tool. Further
examples of code found on the GitHub are workﬂow management scripts (Snakemake) and
Jupyter Notebooks used in result processing and plotting.
Page 38 of 107
==PAGE:46==
Selection of HLA typing tools
2.1
Selection of HLA typing tools
There are numerous NGS based HLA typing tools available. A number of these were
chosen for the benchmarking study according to a list of strict selection criteria that the
tools need to fulﬁl and a list of beneﬁcial traits favoured some tools over others. Both lists
are shown below:
Selection Criteria:
• The tool must be able to work with WES data
• The tool must function on computerome 2.0 (discussed in section 2.1.1)
Beneﬁcial traits:
• Good performance (typing accuracy) in previous benchmarking studies
• Non-restricted use (discussed in section 2.1.2)
• Not too computationally demanding (Memory use, CPU time)
• Interesting or unique features setting the tool apart from others.
Evaxion uses WES data and utilises HLA allele information for the HLA class I genes:
HLA-A, -B and -C, and the HLA class II gene: HLA-DRB1. Tools that only accept
transcriptome data (RNA-seq) as input data e.g. HLAProﬁler[95], arcasHLA[96] and
seq2hla[9] were therefore disregarded and the four genes relevant to Evaxion’s pipeline
were especially relevant when assessing a tool’s performance.
Articles introducing NGS based HLA typing tools often include a proof-of-concept study,
whereby the tool’s performance is proven and compared to the performance of other avail-
able tools. As only a subset of the tools have been included in independent benchmarking
analyses, these proof-of-concept studies are often the best source available for determining
whether or not a tool has a ”Good performance in previous benchmarking studies”.
Table 2.1.1 shows the ﬁve HLA typing tools selected for this benchmarking study. Of these
ﬁve, only Optitype has previously been included in peer-reviewed independent benchmark-
ing studies[80, 97]. The conclusions of these studies are included in section 2.4.1. Outlines
Page 39 of 107
==PAGE:47==
Selection of HLA typing tools
of algorithms and a brief justiﬁcation for their inclusion are found in section 2.4.
Table 2.1.1: The highest oﬀered typing resolution and main approach for HLA typing for the
ﬁve NGS based HLA typign algorithms studied in this project.
Tool
Name
Resolution
Original ar-
ticle
Approach
Optitype
2-ﬁeld
Szolek et al.
2014 [92]
Integer linear programming to ﬁnd the allele
combination that explains the highest number
of reads.
HLA*LA
G group
Dilthey et al.
2019 [78]
Linear alignments projected on a population
reference graph. Likelihood functions to infer
the HLA type.
Kourami
G group
Lee
et
al.
2018 [69]
Weighted graph structure from alignment of
input reads aligned to reference sequences.
Most probable graph path is the inferred type.
HISAT-
genotype
4-ﬁeld
Kim
et
al.
2019 [93]
Graph-based alignment (HISAT2) and an ex-
pectation maximisation algorithm.
STC-seq
3-ﬁeld
Jiao
et
al.
2018 [84]
Dense chip-based probes that capture the
coding regions of HLA. Linear alignment al-
gorithm.
2.1.1
Computerome 2.0
The benchmarking analysis was carried out using the Danish National Supercomputer for
Life Science (Computerome 2.0, https://www.computerome.dk/) which is located at DTU
Risø. Some of the HLA typing tools on the market do not function on a standard laptop
but Computerome 2.0 oﬀers the computational resources, which are needed to run the
heaviest tools. An additional beneﬁt is that the supercomputer is used by bioinformaticians
at both DTU and Evaxion. One drawback is that since many users use the system, it
Page 40 of 107
==PAGE:48==
Selection of HLA typing tools
is not always possible to run programs without waiting time - especially programs that
require a lot of memory or CPU time. Hence why it is an advantage for Evaxion if the
HLA typing tool is not too computationally heavy. Another drawback of Computerome
is that it hinders the use of Docker (https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)
which excludes the tool xHLA from this benchmarking study, as xHLA is installed using
Docker[98, 99]
2.1.2
Availability of HLA typing tools
HLA typing tools are developed by both research groups and companies and can be
split into three categories based on availability: commercial, public and academic non-
commercial research purposes only[47].
The ﬁrst category - commercial HLA typing tools - are developed by software compa-
nies that often sell software licenses for these programs. Two examples are NGSengine
developed by GenDx (https://www.gendx.com/product line/ngsengine/) and HLA Twin
developed by Omixon (https://www.omixon.com/products/hla-twin/).
This project focuses on publicly available tools, which Evaxion and the public can use
freely without the need to purchase a license. The reason that ”non-restricted use” is
deemed a beneﬁcial trait, instead of a hard selection criterion, is that some of the tools
within the third category (academic, non-commercial) have interesting properties that
justify inclusion in the benchmarking study - although they are not potential candidates
for use by Evaxion.
Examples of tools, that only are available for non-commercial research purposes are
ATHLATES[87], PHLAT[91] and HLAVBSeq v2[100].
Page 41 of 107
==PAGE:49==
Gold standard dataset
2.2
Gold standard dataset
The gold standard dataset used to benchmark the ﬁve HLA typing tools consists of WES
sequences from 829 individuals and corresponding HLA alleles for the genes: HLA-A,
-B, -C, -DRB1 and -DQB1. The sequencing coverage ranges from 37X to 456X with the
median being 86X. The sequencing was done as part of the 1000 genomes project and the
validated HLA types for the samples are primarily taken from a 2014 study.
The 1000 Genomes Project was a major genome sequencing project running from 2008
to 2015 and had the goal to ﬁnd and map genetic variation within the global human
population. The ﬁnal data set consisted of data from 2504 individuals distributed over
26 populations all sequenced using Illumina technology[45, 51, 101]. After the conclusion
of the project, the International Genome Sample Resource (IGSR) was established to
maintain and extend the 1000 genomes project data. The IGSR was as of 2017 the world’s
largest open collection of human variation data[102]. One of the aims of the ISGR is
to expand the data further and since its launch, this been actively happening through
both the incorporation of data from other databases and the addition of data from novel
studies[103, 104]. The database currently contains many diﬀerent types of sequence data,
e.g. low/high coverage WGS, PCR-free, long read and WES.
The exome capturing technology used in the 1000 genomes project has varied from centre
to centre - some examples include: NimbleGen’s SeqCap EZ Human Exome Library
v2/v3 and Agilent SureSelect All Exon V2[105].
A full description can be found at
https://www.internationalgenome.org/.
The exome sequence ﬁles used in this project were downloaded in CRAM format from
the 1000 genomes site. One CRAM ﬁle corresponds to one individual but sometimes
to several FASTQ ﬁles, as an individual can be sequenced multiple times[106]. The
CRAM ﬁles are aligned to the GRCh38 build of the human genome, more speciﬁcally
to the genome found at: ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/reference/
GRCh38 reference genome/GRCh38 full analysis set plus decoy hla.fa. A full description
of how the quality of the data was assured and how alignments were generated is found on
the ISGR website[106]. A full list of URLs used to download CRAM ﬁles is found at this
project’s GitHub (https://github.com/nikolasthuesen/hlatyping).
Page 42 of 107
==PAGE:50==
Gold standard dataset
A 2014 study published a dataset containing the HLA alleles (HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1 and
DQB1) for 1267 of the individuals sequenced in the 1000 genomes project. The typing was
performed using SBT (see section 1.5.1) and only focused on the ARD coding exons. Thus,
polymorphisms outside exon 2 and 3 for HLA class I genes or outside exon 2 for HLA
class II genes were not investigated. Due to this and SBT’s typing ambiguity problem (see
ﬁgure 1.5.2 in section 1.5.1), the dataset consists of ambiguous typing for a number of the
alleles. The typing resolution is primarily 2-ﬁeld, but in some cases 3-ﬁeld[107].
A 2018 study reevaluated the results from 2014 and provided HLA types for 1,701 addi-
tional samples. The 2018 study did not use SBT, but instead the licensed HLA typing tool,
PolyPheMe. 105 predictions were found to be discordant with the 2014 dataset and in these
cases, the correct allele was found using sequence inspection and targeted resequencing[108].
The dataset used in this benchmarking study was constructed by taking the 2014 dataset
and updating the HLA alleles found to be false in the 2018 study. The 2018 dataset is not
used further as it was constructed using an in silico HLA typing algorithm. Not all the
1267 samples had corresponding WES ﬁles, and the ﬁnal dataset therefore only consisted
of CRAM ﬁles from 829 individuals.
During the initial assessment of the dataset, it was found to contain three deleted alleles
that have since changed names. These are A*01:34N (shown to be expressed at low levels
and renamed A*01:01:38L), A*03:260 (shown to be identical to A*03:284N) and C*03:99
(renamed C*01:169)[109]. For both the gold standard dataset and for the predictions made
by the HLA typing tools, these three alleles were converted to their newest name.
Page 43 of 107
==PAGE:51==
Performance Evaluation
2.3
Performance Evaluation
The ﬁve HLA typing tools were evaluated on several diﬀerent parameters. The most
important metric is perhaps the number of correct predictions a tool makes out of the total
amount of HLA alleles - the typing accuracy. As explained in section 1.5.4, the typing
accuracy can be assessed at diﬀerent typing resolutions (discussed in section 2.3.1).
The benchmarking also included a downsampling analysis where a selection of WES
samples was downsampled to lower coverages - ranging from 1X to 100X - and each tool’s
performance was evaluated at the varying sequencing depths (section 2.3.3).
The time and memory use of each HLA typing tool was noted in both the analysis using
the full data ﬁles and the downsampling analysis (section 2.3.4).
2.3.1
Typing accuracy and conversion of typing resolutions
The typing accuracy of a tool is deﬁned as the number of correctly predicted HLA alleles
divided by the total number of HLA alleles. Some previous studies have disregarded alleles
for which a tool did not return a prediction, e.g. if a tool returned a prediction for one out
of ten samples but the one prediction was correct, the typing accuracy would be 100%[69].
This gives a higher accuracy on paper, but it does not truly reﬂect how well an HLA
typing tool performs. In addition to the typing accuracy, the tool’s call rate was also
registered. This is the number of predictions of HLA alleles a tool makes divided by the
total number of HLA alleles in the dataset. If a tool outputs a prediction for every single
HLA allele, it, therefore, has a call rate of 100%.
It is easier to achieve a higher typing accuracy if you return predictions at 1-ﬁeld resolution
than at 4-ﬁeld resolution (ﬁgure 2.3.2) and tools should therefore be compared at the same
resolution. The gold standard dataset in this study provides the HLA alleles in (mostly)
2-ﬁeld resolution which can unambiguously be converted to both P-group resolution and
1-ﬁeld resolution. 2-ﬁeld resolution cannot be unambiguously converted to G group resolu-
tion, as 2-ﬁeld resolution separates diﬀerent proteins while G groups separate alleles based
on diﬀerences at a genomic level. Likewise, G group resolution cannot be unambiguously
converted to 2-ﬁeld resolution, as G group resolution solely refers to diﬀerences in the
ARD coding exons while 2-ﬁeld resolution addresses the full protein and therefore the full
protein-coding sequence.
Page 44 of 107
==PAGE:52==
Performance Evaluation
Figure 2.3.1: A binding pocket of a HLA-II molecule (see also ﬁgure 1.1.1). DRA is shown
in green and DRB1 in blue. A melanoma antigen (red) is shown in the binding pocket and the
residues that are important for predictions made by NetMHCIIpan are shown in pink. Protein
data was found in the Protein Data Bank (PDB)[110, 111] and the ﬁgure was made using
PyMOL[112]
G group and P group resolution were constructed to group alleles with identical ARDs, but
the binding of a peptide does not necessarily require all the amino acids of the ARD. The
tools NetMHCpan (MHC class I) and NetMHCIIpan (MHC class II), that both predict
how well peptides bind to speciﬁc MHC alleles, only consider the amino acids that are
directly involved in the binding of a peptide when making predictions[13, 113]. On paper,
Evaxion uses 2-ﬁeld resolution in their pipeline (ﬁgure 1.6.1, section 1.6), but in reality,
the only amino acids that make a diﬀerence to the ﬁnal prediction of the pipeline are those
considered by NetMHCpan (HLA-A, -B and -C) and NetMHCIIpan (HLA-DRB1).
To best ﬁt Evaxion’s pipeline, this project introduces a new (unoﬃcial) typing resolution
- NetMHCpan resolution. This resolution groups proteins that share the amino acids
directly involved in the antigen-binding but does not distinguish between those that diﬀer
at any other site.
Page 45 of 107
==PAGE:53==
Performance Evaluation
In summary, the typing accuracy of each of the HLA typing tools is measured in 1-ﬁeld
resolution, NetMHCpan resolution, P group resolution and 2-ﬁeld resolution.
NetMHCpan
P Group
2-Field
3626 Alleles
4208 Alleles
2157 Alleles
1-Field
 21 Alleles
4-Field
6291 Alleles
3-Field
5543 Alleles
Number of HLA-A alleles 
at differing resolutions
Figure 2.3.2: How many HLA-A alleles exist? The answer varies greatly depending on the
typing resolution. The NetMHCpan resolution is not an oﬃcial resolution, but is deﬁned in this
study. The statistics are taken from IPD-IMGT/HLAFigure made using diagrams.net[18]
Section 1.2.1 mentions that null alleles (non-expressed) are not included in P groups, even
though they share an identical ARD with the alleles in a P group. This is also reﬂected in
this study and predictions are counted as wrong if, e.g. a tool predicts A*01:01P and the
correct allele is A*01:04N and vice versa.
Some HLA typing tools return more than one prediction of an HLA allele when, for
example typing conﬁdence is low[80]. Kourami’s standard output is in G group reso-
lution, but it sometimes outputs ambiguous allele predictions. An example prediction
could be ”B*08:01:01G” for one allele and ”B*57:11;B*57:83” for the other. B*57:11
and B*57:83 only diﬀer on one amino acid but are nevertheless diﬀerent alleles in 2-ﬁeld
resolution. To maintain the one prediction to one allele set up, in the ﬁnal analysis, the
ﬁrst Kourami predication was accepted and the additional prediction ignored. It was
investigated whether including both predictions would make a large diﬀerence, but it was
Page 46 of 107
==PAGE:54==
Performance Evaluation
found not to be the case. At 2-ﬁeld resolution, allowing ambiguous typing only resulted
in 7 additional correct allele predictions, improving Kourami’s typing accuracy for genes
HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1 and -DQB1 from 83.16% to 83.24% (see also ﬁgures 3.1.1 and 3.1.2)
The gold standard dataset also included some ambiguous allele calls, as explained in
section 2.2. In these cases, a prediction was noted as ”correct” if it matched any of the
correct alleles listed in the gold standard dataset.
2.3.2
Ensemble approach
A 2017 study analysed platform-speciﬁc genotyping errors for NGS based HLA typing
tools[114]. One ﬁnding of the study was that Optitype commonly miscalled HLA-A*26:01
to HLA-A*25:01, HLA-B*45:01 to HLA-B*44:15 and HLA-C*08:02 to HLA-C*05:01. One
way of avoiding bias from platform-speciﬁc errors could be to use an ensemble approach
i.e. taking allele predictions from multiple tools into account when making a ﬁnal, overall
prediction.
In this project, it was investigated whether an ensemble approach would outperform any
of the tools. This was done in two groups of tools. The ﬁrst group consisted of Kourami,
HLA*LA, HISAT-genotype and Optitype and the second group consisted only of the
graph-based tools: Kourami, HLA*LA and HISAT-genotype. The ensemble prediction
was found by taking a simple majority vote for each sample. In the case of a tie, the
lowest numerical allele was chosen, e.g. A*01:01 was chosen in a tie between A*01:01
and A*01:02. The lowest numerical name often means an earlier discovery which could
be correlated with a higher allele frequency in the population. This is, however, only a
hypothesis and tied predictions could perhaps be decided in a better way. These results
are discussed in section 3.1.3.
2.3.3
Downsampling
230 out of the 829 samples in the gold standard dataset had a coverage of at least 100X.
These samples were used in a downsampling study to investigate how the performance
of each tool depended on the coverage of the input sample. The performance of the
tools was examined at 1X, 2X, 5X, 10X, 20X, 50X, 75X and 100X. Downsampling was
performed by ﬁrst ﬁnding the full sequencing depth of the CRAM ﬁles used in the
Page 47 of 107
==PAGE:55==
Performance Evaluation
gold standard dataset. This was done using mosdepth (version 0.2.6)[115]. Hereafter,
the alignment ﬁles were downsampled using samtools view -s to achieve the range of
needed coverages[116]. The downsampling scripts are on this project’s GitHub (https:
//github.com/nikolasthuesen/hlatyping).
The downsampled ﬁles were used for HLA typing in a procedure parallel to the typing
process in the main study (overview shown in ﬁgure 2.3.3 in section 2.3.5). The results of
the downsampling analysis are shown in section 3.2.
2.3.4
Time- and memory usage
For each tool, the peak memory usage, the CPU time usage and the wall time were tracked
for all samples in both the main benchmarking analysis and downsampling analysis. This
was done to compare their eﬃciency and to give en estimate of the requirements for
running each tool.
Speciﬁcally, this was carried out by running the qstat command at the end of individual
job scripts used for each tool to type each sample.
All tools in the analysis were run using 10 threads and were given as much memory as
they needed.
2.3.5
Overview of the typing workﬂow
The workﬂow of the preprocessing of data and which ﬁles were given to the HLA typing
algorithms (not including the downsampling analysis) is shown in ﬁgure 2.3.3. In practice,
the workﬂow was constructed using Snakemake[117] - the code is found on this project’s
GitHub (https://github.com/nikolasthuesen/hlatyping). The ﬁve HLA typing algorithms
are described in section 2.4.
Page 48 of 107
==PAGE:56==
Performance Evaluation
 CRAM
WES file from the IGSR
database
BAM file
Full WES sample
Reference Genome
GRCh38 including
alternative contigs
BED file
HLA region coordinates
+ names
BAM file
Read pairs mapping to
HLA region
BAM file
Unaligned read pairs
BAM file
Reads pairs, potentially
relevant in HLA typing
FASTQ file
Reads pairs, potentially
relevant in HLA typing
Kourami
HISAT-Genotype
HLA*LA
Optitype
STC-Seq
Correct HLA alleles
Typing accuracy
and call rate
Time and memory
usage
BED file
Targeted exome regions
in IGSR WES files
CRAM sequencing
depth
For downsampling
analysis
Figure 2.3.3: An overview of the benchmarking study. The input CRAM ﬁle from the IGSR
database (gold standard WES samples) and ﬁles deriving from it are shown in blue. These are
speciﬁc to the individual samples. Reference ﬁles which are identical for each sample are shown
in red, the HLA typing tools in yellow, the correct HLA alleles for each sample is purple and
the output ﬁles are all shown in green. For each sample (CRAM ﬁle), the sequencing depth is
found (used in the downsampling analysis) and the HLA typing tools predict the HLA alleles.
Predictions are compared to the correct alleles (see section 2.2) and the computational resources
used are noted for each tool. In the downsampling analysis, the found sequencing depth for each
CRAM ﬁle is used, but it is not the raw CRAM ﬁle that is downsampled. Instead, the reduced
BAM ﬁle (with read pairs potentially relevant in HLA typing) is downsampled, thereby avoiding
the unnecessary extraction of HLA reads in the downsampling analysis. Figure created using
diagrams.net[18]
Page 49 of 107
==PAGE:57==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
2.4
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
This section contains descriptions of each of the ﬁve NGS based HLA typing tools chosen
for the benchmarking study, as well as some comments on why they were chosen for this
project and how they were installed. These descriptions are made to give the reader an
understanding of how the algorithms work and how they diﬀer from each other but are
not fully comprehensive. For a complete description of each tool, one should refer to the
original articles.
All tools were run with default options.
2.4.1
Optitype
Optitype is a publicly available HLA typing algorithm from 2014. It is one of the earliest
HLA typing tools which does not require HLA enriched NGS data solely generated for
HLA typing and is still regularly updated. Optitype accepts both DNA (WGS and WES)
and RNAseq data as input data in FASTQ format. Two disadvantages of Optitype are
that the typing results are only reported in 2-ﬁeld resolution and that it is only able to
type HLA class I genes[47, 92].
There have been relatively few independent benchmarking studies of NGS based HLA
typing algorithms, but Optitype is included in a signiﬁcant amount of them. It has
furthermore been one of the best-performing tools[80, 86, 118]. Previous benchmarking
studies of Optitype have reported its accuracy for class I genes to be 97.2 %[114] and
98%[80] (both for WES samples at 2-ﬁeld resolution).
Optitype was included in this project both because it has been shown to perform well and
as it allows easier comparison between the results of this study and others that also assess
Optitype’s performance.
Optitype belongs to the group of HLA typing tools based on linear alignment (see ﬁgure
1.5.3). Figure 2.4.1 shows Optitype’s typing pipeline. It is recommended to begin the
process by ﬁltering out the sequenced reads that do not map to the HLA region. This
step is not considered part of Optitype, but the tool’s GitHub both has an example of
how to perform this extraction using the read mapper RazerS3[119] and has the relevant
ﬁles which are needed[92, 120].
Page 50 of 107
==PAGE:58==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
The ﬁrst step in Optitype is an alignment of input reads to exons 2 and 3 (the ARD coding
regions) of HLA class I genes and the intron sequences ﬂanking these exons. For alleles
where these intron sequences are not found in the IPD-IMGT/HLA database, the intron
sequences of the most similar, fully sequenced HLA allele are used instead.
Aligned reads are then used to construct a binary hit matrix with aligned input reads
as rows and candidate HLA alleles as columns. A hit is noted in all cases where a read
maps to an allele. Here, the candidate HLA alleles are limited to non-rare alleles with a
reported frequency (in 2-ﬁeld resolution) on Allelefrequencies.net.
Optitype ﬁnally ﬁnds the HLA allele combination (3 classical and three non-classical class
I genes) that maximises the number of reads potentially originating from the selected
alleles. Speciﬁcally, this is done by combining the hit matrix as well as information about
the goals and constraints in an integer linear program (ILP) and using an ILP solver.
CPLEX 12.5 was used in the original article, but other solvers can be used as well[92].
Figure 2.4.1:
Optitype’s HLA typing pipeline consists of three key steps.
A: First, the
sequenced reads are aligned to a database of HLA allele sequences (only exon 2 and 3). B: The
alignments are then converted to a binary hit matrix (alleles as columns, reads as rows) where a
hit is noted when an allele can explain a speciﬁc read. In the last step, the hit matrix is used to
formulate an ILP in which the predicted HLA alleles are those that maximise the number of
explained reads.
In this project, Optitype version 1.3.3 was installed using the guide on the GitHub[120]
and an article from 2018[77]. CPLEX 12.7 was used in initial tests of Optitype but this
ILP solver often did not converge to a solution. It was therefore replaced with cbc version
2.9.5[121] which was found to always converge at a solution.
Page 51 of 107
==PAGE:59==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
2.4.2
Kourami
Kourami is a publicly available, graph-based HLA typing algorithm from 2018. The tool
accepts WES and WGS data in BAM format and provides typing in G group resolution. A
unique feature of Kourami is that it is not limited to infer HLA alleles based on a database.
It can also be used to discover novel alleles. There are no independent benchmarking
studies of Kourami’s performance, but the tool is - in addition to its own article - included
in the proof-of-concept studies contained in the two articles introducing HLA*LA and
OncoHLA[78, 86]. Kourami performs as well as HLA*LA and OncoHLA for high coverage
WGS data but is outperformed when the coverage drops and for WES data sets. This is
not surprising, as the tool is designed for data that, when aligned, has few gaps resulting
in a large, connected graph structure.
The article introducing Kourami reports that the tool achieved 100% typing accuracy
(132/132 correctly predicted HLA alleles) for WGS data and a typing accuracy of 82.3%
(284/345) for a WES data set[69].
Kourami (v0.9.6) was installed using the guide on GitHub[122] and a 2018 paper[123].
Kourami is graph-guided but is not an entirely graph-based algorithm. Instead, it is a
hybrid method that uses both a linear alignment tool and a graph structure. An overview
of the steps in the algorithm is shown in ﬁgure 2.4.2.
Kourami uses both the full-length and exon-only alleles from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database
to construct the MSA in step a ﬁgure 2.4.2, to which the input reads are aligned in step c.
These alignments are represented as paths through the graph in step d and read depths
(the number of reads aligning to a sequence) are converted to weights on the individual
edges in the graph. The weight on a particular edge is a measure of how many times this
variation was found in the input data. This means that the edges with higher weights
together make a path through the graph that matches the correct allele, as a high number
of input reads will align to these edges. In areas where the input reads do not align
perfectly to the MSA, Kourami allows for graph modiﬁcation to reﬂect insertions, deletions
or substitutions[69].
Kourami does HLA inference in step e by ﬁnding the two paths through the graph that best
explain the weight and the phasing information in the input reading data. Solely relying
on the number of reads (weight) would not account for the fact that the reads originate
from two distinct and likely diﬀerent alleles. Read pair information is therefore used to
Page 52 of 107
==PAGE:60==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
Figure 2.4.2: A simpliﬁed overview of the Kourami algorithm. a: First, an MSA is constructed
based on the sequences from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database. b: Reads that could potentially be
attributed to the HLA region are extracted from the input ﬁle, which here is a WGS, BAM ﬁle.
c: These extracted reads are then realigned to the MSA constructed in part a. d: The graph
structure (a modiﬁed partial-order graph) is constructed based on the MSA and the extracted
and aligned input data. e: Finally, the HLA inference is done by ﬁnding the best pair of paths
through the graph structure. These two paths are shown in red and blue and in purple when
they overlap. Step e is further elaborated in ﬁgure 2.4.3. Figure taken from [69]
ﬁnd out which variations (paths through the graph) belong together. In a heterozygous
region, there are often homologous stretches where two paths in the graph structure merge
and pass through the same nodes and edges. In regions where alleles diﬀer, the paths split.
Kourami calls these split regions bubbles. Speciﬁcally, a bubble consists of all edges in a
stretch where the paths are separate and the two shared edges on each side of this stretch.
Such a bubble is shown in ﬁgure 2.4.3. There are of course ideally only two plausible
paths in a bubble, but sequencing errors and ampliﬁcation of these can result in a bubble
having three or more. The bubbles are found from the graph structure by selecting the
pair (potentially identical in case of homozygosity) that maximise probability given the
Page 53 of 107
==PAGE:61==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
input data (the weight on the edges). Subsequently, phasing information is used to connect
bubble pairs and to merge bubbles from left to right until two, full, individual paths are
found. The best pair of candidate HLA alleles are those that are best explained by the
two bubble paths[69].
Figure 2.4.3: Kourami’s bubbles consist of at least three columns of nodes, where the leftmost
and rightmost node are shared between the two (or more) paths and the rest are not. This ﬁgure
shows three bubbles, two of length 4 and one of length 3. In the ﬁrst bubble, there are three
alternative paths which can be due to a sequencing error. The paths through the bubbles here
match variations between one allele (red) and another (blue) for a homozygous region. Figure is
taken from[69].
Page 54 of 107
==PAGE:62==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
2.4.3
HLA*LA
Like Kourami, HLA*LA is a hybrid tool. It seeks to combine the advantages of representing
variation in a graph genome with the eﬃciency of linear alignment (the ”LA” in HLA*LA).
HLA*LA accepts both short-read and long-read NGS data as BAM or as CRAM ﬁles and
reports typing results in G group resolution. The tool was released in 2019 and has not yet
been included in other peer-reviewed studies, other than its own proof-of-concept study.
Here, it is reported to achieve a 99.4% accuracy on a WGS data set and a 93% accuracy
on a WES dataset. The tool (v 1.0.1) was installed using the guide on the HLA*LA
GitHub[124].
Brieﬂy, HLA*LA constructs a linear alignment of input reads, projects the linear alignments
onto a graph-genome reference, realigns after projection and ﬁnally, infers HLA alleles
based on the graph alignment. Figure 2.4.4 shows an illustration of the workﬂow with a
full explanation of the algorithm.
HLA*LA’s graph-genome (a population reference graph - PRG) is constructed in similar
fashion to what is shown in ﬁgure 1.4.6, section 1.4.6. This is completed before the typing
process begins. The reference sequences used in the initial linear alignment are alleles with
fully known sequences in the IPD-IMGT/HLA database and HLA sequences from the the
the reference genome build GRCh38, including alternative loci. The graph is constructed
based on the same reference sequences but also includes the HLA alleles without completely
known sequences[78, 125].
Page 55 of 107
==PAGE:63==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
Figure 2.4.4: HLA*LA’s workﬂow with labelled graphs. A: An MSA of the sequences used to
construct PRG. This includes both fully and partially known alleles. B: The PRG is constructed
from the MSA and is universal. This diﬀers from the graph structure in Kourami, which is
changed based on the input data. C: An MSA of the reference sequences used in the initial linear
alignment. Only HLA alleles, for which the full sequence is known, are included here. D: Input
sequences from the sample that HLA*LA is typing. E: Linear alignment of input read to the
MSA shown in C using BWA-MEM. Mismatches are shown in red. F: The alignment is projected
onto the PRG. The new graph alignment is shown in green. This is followed by a three-step
optimisation of the graph alignment (G-I). G: The alignment is inspected and larger alignment
regions, that potentially map to the wrong path in the graph structure, are removed. H: The
remaining graph alignment is optimised by smaller local changes using dynamic programming.
I: The part(s) of the alignment removed in step G are reintegrated into the alignment using a
computationally expensive graph alignment method. K: Finally, a likelihood model is employed
to ﬁnd the allele combination (in G group resolution) that best ﬁts the graph alignment. Figure
taken from [78].
Page 56 of 107
==PAGE:64==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
2.4.4
HISAT-genotype
HISAT-genotype is a graph-based HLA typing algorithm based on the graph alignment
program, HISAT2 (hierarchical indexing for spliced alignment of transcripts). By using
a graph-based aligner, HISAT-genotype diﬀers from the hybrid methods Kourami and
HLA*LA that use a graph reference and linear alignment. HISAT-genotype can - like
Kourami - be used to discover new alleles and can provide typing results in up to 4-ﬁeld
resolution.
Figure 2.4.5: Construction of HISAT-genotype’s graph reference. A: The GRCh38 human
reference genome. B: An MSA of HLA allele sequences from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database and
a consensus sequence made from the most frequent nucleotides in each position of the MSA. C:
DNA ﬁngerprinting loci (STRs) for HLA alleles taken from NIST STRBase. The longest allele
(most STRs) is used as consensus sequence. D: Common small variant data (frequency over
1%) for HLA alleles taken from dbSNP. E: An extended version of the human reference genome
is made by combining the consensus sequences shown in B and C with the GRCh38 human
reference genome (A). The extended reference genome is used as a starting point to construct
HISAT-genotype’s graph reference (called genotype genome). Here, all variants from B, C and
D are integrated. The constructed graph reference is not modiﬁed during typing, but the indexes
in the graph are speciﬁc to the version of the human genome (here GRCh38) from which it was
made. Figure modiﬁed from [93].
Page 57 of 107
==PAGE:65==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
The HISAT2/HISAT-genotype article was published in 2019, but HISAT-genotype has
received multiple updates since and is continuously being improved. Version 1.3.2 was
used in this project. The code is available on GitHub[126] and was installed using the
corresponding web-guide[127].
HISAT-genotype’s typing process begins by using HISAT2 to produce an alignment of the
input sequences to the reference graph genome (F in ﬁgure 2.4.5) and thereafter, extracts
the reads mapping to the HLA region. Brieﬂy, HISAT2 uses an extended BWT for graphs
and a modiﬁed version of FM indexing (hierarchical graph FM indexing), developed with
HISAT2. The developers of HISAT2 report that HISAT2 is approximately half as fast
(half the number of read pairs processed per second) and uses about a third more memory
than the linear aligner, BWA-mem[93].
The next step is a graph alignment of the extracted reads to the IPD-IMGT/HLA database.
To address the many alleles that have missing sequences for introns and non-ARD coding
exons, HISAT-genotype groups alleles that share identical ARD coding exons, ﬁnds the
groups that best match the input reads and then uses information from both introns and
exons to give the ﬁnal prediction of HLA alleles. An expectation-maximisation function is
used to both prioritise groups and for the ﬁnal selection[93].
2.4.5
STC-seq
STC-Seq is an HLA typing method that combines an SSO like technique with an NGS
and an in silico HLA typing pipeline. Brieﬂy, it consists of initial HLA allele capture,
PCR ampliﬁcation and Illumina sequencing of captured HLA reads and ﬁnally, an HLA
allele-calling algorithm. The HLA calling algorithm can however be used independently of
the rest of the workﬂow, as it simply predicts HLA alleles from input NGS data. In this
study, only the HLA calling algorithm is tested and it is provided the same (non-HLA
enriched) input data as the rest of the benchmarked algorithms.
An overview of STC-Seq’s HLA calling pipeline is shown in ﬁgure 2.4.6. The code and an
installation manual are available on BioCode[128]. Version 1.0 was used in this project as
it has not been updated since its release in 2017.
STC-Seq is based on data speciﬁcally made for HLA typing and is not designed to use
WES or WGS data. STC-Seq’s HLA calling algorithm is nevertheless included in the
Page 58 of 107
==PAGE:66==
Outline of HLA typing algorithms
benchmarking analysis to assess the eﬀect of using general WES data, as opposed to HLA
targeted data. The article describing STC-Seq reports that the tool was able to correctly
predict 98% of alleles using a dataset with 382 high coverage samples.
The STC-Seq article states that the tool is exclusively for non-commercial use, but as
STC-Seq is not a potential candidate for Evaxion, this is not a problem. The code is
public and can be downloaded from the BioCode website[128] (https://bigd.big.ac.cn/
biocode/tools/BT007068).
Figure 2.4.6: The three steps in STC-Seq’s HLA allele-calling pipeline. A: The large exons
(>70 bp) of alleles from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database are used as a reference. Alleles in this
reference that have any exons which are not suﬃciently covered by the input reads are removed.
Here, ”suﬃciently” means at least a 70 bp continuously aligned region. B: The input reads are
aligned to the full coding regions of the remaining candidate HLA alleles. Alleles are removed if
they have uncovered regions and the corresponding region is covered for other alleles. C: After
the two ﬁltration steps, a scoring algorithm is used to ﬁnd the allele combination that explains
the maximum number of reads. Figure adapted from [84].
Page 59 of 107
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3
Chapter
Results
This chapter outlines the most important results from the benchmarking study of ﬁve
NGS based HLA typing tools which were introduced in the previous chapter. The ﬁrst
section in this chapter investigates how well the tools perform using the full gold standard
dataset, while the second section focuses on how the tools’ performance depends on the
amount of available data, speciﬁcally the coverage/sequencing depth of input ﬁles.
Page 60 of 107
==PAGE:68==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
3.1
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
This section focuses on HLA typing using the full gold standard dataset (all reads from all
samples). The ﬁve NGS based HLA typing tools Kourami, HLA*LA, Optitype, HISAT-
genotype and STC-Seq were evaluated based on their call rate and typing accuracy (section
2.3 and on their time and memory usage (section 2.3.3).
3.1.1
Typing accuracy
Figure 3.1.1 shows the ﬁve tools’ call rate and typing accuracy of the three classical HLA
class I genes. For HLA class I genes HLA*LA, Optitype and HISAT-genotype all have a
call rate of 100%, meaning that they return allele predictions for all alleles in all samples.
Kourami fails to return a prediction for almost 9% of alleles and STC-Seq for more than
30%. In Kourami’s case, a failure to return a prediction often happens when there is not
enough data to suﬃciently cover important regions leading to Kourami’s graph structure
being disconnected
Optitype is the best performing of the tools with an almost perfect typing accuracy at
1-ﬁeld resolution: 99.54%. The tool only mistypes 23 out of 4974 alleles. Optitype’s typing
accuracy expectedly drops when converting to higher resolutions, but is still above 98% at
2-ﬁeld resolution. This conﬁrms what previous studies have found regarding Optitype’s
performance[80, 97]. HLA*LA performs almost as well as Optitype at 1-ﬁeld resolution
but struggles to keep up Optitype at the higher resolutions. At 2-ﬁeld resolution, HLA*LA
on average only mistypes one allele out of four samples (6 alleles per sample) but still
mistypes almost thrice as often as Optitype.
Page 61 of 107
==PAGE:69==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
Figure 3.1.1: Typing accuracies for HLA-A, -B and -C (HLA class I genes). Optitype has
the highest typing accuracy but HLA*LA performs almost as well. HLA*LA, Optitype and
HISAT-genotype all have a call rate of 100 %.
HISAT-genotype has the third-best performing tool but like HLA*LA, HISAT-genotype’s
typing accuracy drops signiﬁcantly when converting from 1-ﬁeld resolution to a higher
resolution.
Kourami does not return a prediction for all alleles, but the predictions that it does return
are almost all (98.60%) correct at 1-ﬁeld resolution. At 2-ﬁeld resolution, 89.97 % of
Kourami’s predictions are correct resulting in a typing accuracy of 81.97%.
STC-Seq is designed to analyse high coverage data where reads are extracted and ampliﬁed,
not WES data. Figure 3.1.1 shows that the tool performs signiﬁcantly worse than the other
four tools - as was expected with the WES dataset. The tool fails to return a prediction
for more than 30% of the alleles and at 2-ﬁeld resolution, roughly 1/3 of the predictions
are wrong.
Page 62 of 107
==PAGE:70==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
Figure 3.1.2: Typing accuracy for HLA-DRB1 and -DQB1 (HLA class II genes). Optitype is
not included here, as it does not provide allele predictions for HLA class II genes. HLA*LA and
HISAT-genotype have a call rate of 100% for both HLA class I and class II genes.
Figure 3.1.2 is parallel to ﬁgure 3.1.1 and shows the call rate and typing accuracy of the
class II genes HLA-DRB1 and DQB1. Although there are more registered alleles for the
three classical class I genes (HLA-A, -B and C) than the three classical class II genes
(HLA-DR, -DQ and DP) (see ﬁgure A.0.2 in appendix A), class II genes are generally
more diﬃcult to type than class I genes (also mentioned in section 1.5.4). This trend is
not reﬂected in this study as Kourami, HLA*LA, HISAT-Genotype and STC-Seq all seem
to perform roughly as well for HLA class II genes as for HLA class I genes. Optitype - as
mentioned previously - does not provide typing for HLA class II genes.
For both HLA class I and class II genes, a conversion between typing resolutions does
not change the rank order of the tools’ performance. In all typing resolution, Optitype
has the highest typing accuracy for class I genes, HLA*LA has the second-highest and
HISAT-genotype, Kourami and STC-Seq follows in order. The rank order is also the same
for class II genes, save Optitype. The typing accuracy of a tool at a speciﬁc resolution can
be relevant in some cases, but ﬁgures 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 indicate that the best performing
tool at one resolution is also the best performing tool at other resolutions.
Page 63 of 107
==PAGE:71==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
Figure 3.1.3: Typing accuracy for HLA-A, -B, -C and -DRB1 - the genes included in Evaxion’s
neoepitope prediction pipeline shown in ﬁgure 1.6.1.
Figure 3.1.3 shows the call rate and typing accuracy for the four HLA genes that are
included in Evaxion’s pipeline: - HLA-A, -B, -C and -DRB1. Optitype here has a call
rate of 75% as it outputs predictions for the 3 represented class I genes. HLA*LA has the
highest typing accuracy for this selection of HLA genes - 97% in the resolution relevant to
Evaxion.
Figure 3.1.4 shows the overall typing accuracy of the ﬁve HLA typing algorithms for the
ﬁve genes relevant to this study. Plots showing the performance of the HLA typing for
individual genes in this study can be found in appendix B.
Figure 3.1.4: The typing accuracy of the ﬁve HLA typing tools for all samples and all genes
included in the gold standard dataset. Optitype only outputs predictions for class I genes that
make up three out of the ﬁve HLA genes which this plot is based on.
Page 64 of 107
==PAGE:72==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
3.1.2
Time and memory usage
HLA*LA had the best typing accuracy for genes included in Evaxion’s pipeline. The
typing accuracy is the most important parameter in the comparison of the tools, but there
are other features to take into account. It is also relevant to compare the computational
resources that each tool needs to perform HLA typing. For each of the ﬁve tools, the peak
memory usage and total CPU time and wall time usage was therefore registered for each
of the 829 typed samples.
It is important to note that the registered computational resources to not comprise the
total HLA typing process. Instead, this analysis only focuses on the step that is speciﬁc
to each tool - the yellow boxes in ﬁgure 2.3.3, section 2.3.5. Steps not included in this
analysis are: the initial preprocessing measures, the extraction of HLA reads and the
conversion of CRAM ﬁles to BAM ﬁles and further to FASTQ ﬁles. The full process of
HLA typing could therefore have a higher peak memory usage and would require more
CPU time than denoted in this section.
Figure 3.1.5: Peak memory usage distribution in the typing of the 829 samples in gold standard
data set. Note that the scale is logarithmic. HLA*LA uses around 30 GB per sample while the
other four tools almost consistently use less than 8 GB per sample. Of the four with a high
typing accuracy, Optitype uses the least amount of memory - around 1 GB per typed sample.
Another important feature to note is that although the tools are compared directly in this
Page 65 of 107
==PAGE:73==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
section, Optitype only provides typing for 3 out of the 5 HLA genes in the gold standard
dataset.
Figure 3.1.5 shows how the peak memory usage was distributed over the 829 samples in the
gold standard dataset for each of the ﬁve tools. HLA*LA uses a median of 31 GB memory
per sample. However, some samples required signiﬁcantly more - NA18504 required 610
GB of memory. This high memory usage is due to HLA*LA’s expensive alignment step
that uses dynamic-programming and is also noted in the HLA*LA blogpost[69, 125]. As a
result, it is impossible to run HLA*LA on a normal laptop with 8 or 16 GB RAM thus
the remaining four tools are preferable when a supercomputer is not available. Optitype
has a median memory usage of 1.1GB and STC-Seq of 0.38 GB. However, these tools can
also pose a problem for a standard laptop, as they for some samples (2 for Optitype and
82 for STC-Seq) use more than 8 GB of memory. Without considering STC-Seq due to its
low typing accuracy, Optitype has the lowest memory usage. Kourami’s median usage
is 1.7 GB and the most demanding sample takes 6.4 GB. HISAT-genotype is limited to
using a maximum of 8 GB memory (median 8.03 and maximum is 8.04). This results in
a top-heavy, mushroom-looking violin plot. It does not seem like the limit to memory
usage can be increased, but if it could (and if a system with more than 8 GB of memory
is available) this could perhaps increase the speed of HLA typing for HISAT-genotype.
Page 66 of 107
==PAGE:74==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
Figure 3.1.6: Distribution of CPU time usage. HLA*LA and HISAT-genotype have the highest
median CPU time usage (between 20 and 30 CPU minutes), while the rest of the tools have a
median less than 10 CPU minutes. For HLA*LA, the CPU time varies a lot between samples.
Some samples are typed using a similar amount of resources as is used by Kourami and Optitype,
while others require over 100 times more CPU time.
Figure 3.1.7: The real time usage of the ﬁve HLA typing tools. This ﬁgure tells a similar story
to ﬁgure 3.1.6. HLA*LA and HISAT-genotype use the most time per typed sample, but some
samples require several hours or more than a day for HLA*LA.
Page 67 of 107
==PAGE:75==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
Figure 3.1.6 shows the CPU time usage and ﬁgure 3.1.7 shows the real time usage for
the ﬁve tools. HLA*LA and HISAT-genotype require the most resources and type per
sample (medians of 24 and 23 CPU minutes respectively), but for a few samples, HLA*LA
requires an extraordinarily high amount of CPU time and real time. The sample requiring
the longest real time to type for HLA*LA took more than 33 hours, while Kourami’s
maximum wall time usage was 4.2 minutes and Optitype’s 14 minutes.
3.1.3
Ensemble method
Some HLA typing tools have typing problems for speciﬁc alleles.
Therefore, it was
investigated whether multiple tools using a majority vote (an ensemble method) could
outperform any single tool (see section 2.3.2). This was not the case. For HLA class
I genes, the ensemble was constructed by taking a majority vote from predictions by
Kourami, HLA*LA, Optitype and HISAT-genotype. This approach was outperformed by
Optitype in all resolutions and by HLA*LA in 1-ﬁeld resolution (ﬁgure 3.1.8). For HLA
class II genes, the ensemble was constructed using predictions by Kourami, HLA*LA and
HISAT-genotype. This approach was outperformed by HLA*LA in all resolutions and
HISAT-genotype in 1-ﬁeld resolution (see ﬁgure 3.1.9).
Figure 3.1.8: For HLA class I genes, an ensemble approach for HLA typing tools gives no
advantage in comparison to using the best performing individual tool.
Page 68 of 107
==PAGE:76==
Benchmarking (full gold standard dataset)
Figure 3.1.9: For HLA class II genes, an ensemble approach for HLA typing tools gives no
advantage in comparison to using the best performing individual tool.
Page 69 of 107
==PAGE:77==
Downsampling analysis
3.2
Downsampling analysis
NGS based HLA typing tools require sequencing data to perform HLA typing and more
data is often an advantage. HLA typing tools will have a higher typing accuracy for a
sample with coverage of 100X coverage than a sample with coverage of 1X. More data
is, however, only an advantage up until a certain point - the typing accuracy might not
increase as a consequence of increasing the coverage from 1000X to 2000X.
The amount of coverage that an HLA typing tool needs for optimal typing accuracy
depends on the tool, e.g. STC-Seq is designed for HLA enriched (high coverage) data.
This section aims to investigate how much coverage is required for optimal typing from
WES data for the ﬁve HLA typing tools.
3.2.1
Typing accuracy
In some instances, samples with high coverage may be diﬃcult to type, and samples with
low coverage may be easily typed. This can be due to, e.g. the sample having rare or
common HLA alleles. In the downsampling analysis, the same 230 samples were used and
the typing accuracy of the ﬁve HLA typing tools was evaluated for these 230 samples at
varying coverages. The samples were downsampled to 100X, 75X, 50X, 20X, 10X, 5X, 2X
and 1X as shown in ﬁgures 3.2.1 (HLA class I genes) and 3.2.2 (HLA class II genes).
The ﬁgures show that for all tools and both HLA class I and II genes general trend is - as
expected - that higher coverage correlates with higher typing accuracy. The correlation is
however not linear and diﬀers between the HLA typing tools.
The general trend is that the gain in typing accuracy is greatest at lower coverages and
that there are diminishing returns in typing accuracy from increasing the coverage when
the coverage is above a threshold.
At 1X, HLA*LA, Optitype and HISAT-genotype are still able to correctly type 15-25% of
alleles whereas Kourami and STC-Seq are unable to type a single allele correctly (2300
alleles from 230 samples of 5 genes). For HLA class I genes, HISAT-genotype and Kourami
have almost identical typing accuracy at 100X, but Kourami’s typing accuracy diminishes
much faster as coverage decreases - at 10X, Kourami’s typing accuracy is 4.6% whereas
HISAT-genotype’s is 39.30%. Optitype is the most robust of the tools and maintains a
Page 70 of 107
==PAGE:78==
Downsampling analysis
typing accuracy above 90% until 20X.
Perhaps, more interestingly, a signiﬁcant increase in typing accuracy between 75X and
100X is observed for Kourami, HISAT-genotype and STC-Seq for HLA class I genes and
for all tools in HLA class II genes. This indicates that increasing the coverage beyond 100X
might result in an increased typing accuracy for these tools. Both the median coverage
and the mean coverage of the gold standard dataset were lower than 100X (86X and 89X
respectively). This indicates that the typing accuracies found in section 3.1 might not be
truly reﬂective of how well the tools would perform if they had input data with suﬃciently
high coverage.
When looking at Optitype and HLA*LA (class I genes) it seems that these tools have hit a
saturation point at 100X and might not beneﬁt from increasing the coverage beyond 100X.
This could well be the case, but Optitype’s typing accuracy does increases from 97.68% at
75X to 98.12% at 100X and HLA*LA’s (class I) increases from 96.09% to 96.16%.
In summary, there seems to be an advantage in increasing the coverage from 75X to 100X
- especially for Kourami, HISAT-genotype and STC-Seq. HLA*LA (class I genes) and
Optitype achieves higher typing accuracies at 100X than at 75X, but further studies would
have to investigate whether increasing the coverage beyond 100X would be an advantage
for these tools.
Page 71 of 107
==PAGE:79==
Downsampling analysis
Figure 3.2.1: The typing accuracy of Kourami, HLA*LA, Optitype, HISAT-genotype and
STC-Seq depends on the coverage of the sample. This ﬁgure shows the typing accuracy for the
HLA class I genes HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C.
Figure 3.2.2: The typing accuracy of Kourami, HLA*LA, HISAT-genotype and STC-Seq
depends on the coverage of the sample. This ﬁgure is parallel to ﬁgure 3.2.1, but shows the
typing accuracy for the HLA class II genes, HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1.
Page 72 of 107
==PAGE:80==
Downsampling analysis
3.2.2
Time and memory usage
Increasing coverage means increasing the amount of data. Section 3.2.1 showed that
this increased the typing accuracy, but it may also increase the computational resources
required for HLA typing. This is investigated in the following.
Figure 3.2.3 shows how the median peak memory usage for the 230 samples in the
downsampling analysis changes at increasing coverages. As also noted earlier, STC-Seq
and Optitype use very little memory compared to the rest of the tools and HLA*LA uses
signiﬁcantly more. Neither Optitype’s, STC-Seq’s or HLA*LA’s median peak memory
usage diﬀers much between low and high coverages. HISAT-genotype uses its peak 8GB
of memory until between 50X and 20X when memory usage drops. Kourami strangely
uses most memory at 20X and uses less at both 100X and 1X. One reason could be that
there are more viable paths through the graph structure which Kourami keeps in memory
at low coverages, but that it simply gives up predicting when the coverage becomes too
low. Importantly, no tool seems to require signiﬁcantly more memory if the sequencing
coverage is increased beyond 100X.
Figure 3.2.3: An increased coverage generally increases the peak memory usage of the HLA
typing tools, but not greatly. For HLA*LA there is almost no diﬀerence in peak memory usage
for 1X and 100X. HISAT-genotype uses more memory when the coverage is increased, but only
up until 8 GB.
Figures 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 shows how the CPU time usage and real time usage of the ﬁve
Page 73 of 107
==PAGE:81==
Downsampling analysis
HLA typing tools depend on the coverage of the input data. All tools use more resources
at higher coverages. The increase in demand is, however, greater for HLA*LA and for
HISAT-genotype, which are the tools using both the most CPU time and real time to
perform the typing. Both CPU time usage and real time usage of HISAT-genotype seem
to be linearly correlated with the coverage of the input data and use around 30 mins (both
CPU and real time) for a sample with 100X.
Figure 3.2.4: An increase in coverage also gives an increase in the CPU time needed to perform
HLA typing. HLA*LA and HISAT-genotype need more resources than the rest of the tools.
These two tools also need relatively more additional CPU time, when the coverage is increased,
which could be a problem for high coverage samples.
Page 74 of 107
==PAGE:82==
Downsampling analysis
Figure 3.2.5: An increase in coverage also means that it takes more time for the tools to
perform HLA typing. The results for walltime are parallel to the ones for CPU time in ﬁgure 3.2.4.
By extrapolating the trend for HISAT-genotype, the tool would need more than an hour to type
samples with a coverage of above 200X (using a setup identical to the one in this benchmarking
study).
Page 75 of 107
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
4
Chapter
Discussion
The last chapter discusses the overall ﬁndings of the benchmarking study. It also contains
a discussion of the study’s weaknesses in regards to the validity of the results and how
studies could improve upon the ﬁndings in this project.
Page 76 of 107
==PAGE:84==
Inherent bias in the gold standard dataset
4.1
Inherent bias in the gold standard dataset
The WES samples from the IGSR database have been used both in previous benchmarking
studies and in the development of HLA typing tools. This is important to be aware of
when using the dataset to avoid drawing conclusions that the data does not support.
Figure 4.1.1 shows the number of individuals whose sequencing data are used both in
the development of the HLA typing tools benchmarked in this project and in the gold
standard dataset. Optitype was developed using data from 95 out of the 827 individuals
that the gold standard data set is based on, and both Kourami and HLA*LA also have an
overlap of samples. This means that performance measured using this dataset might not
be truly reﬂective of how well these tools would perform with new data.
Another potential issue with using a dataset consisting only of registered, known HLA
alleles is that the beneﬁt of Kourami’s and HISAT-genotype’s ability to recognise novel
alleles is not shown.
Figure 4.1.1: Kourami, HLA*LA and Optitype were developed using some of the samples
included in the gold standard dataset used in this project and the accuracy of these tools might
therefore be overestimated in this study.
In the downsampling analysis (section 3.2), it was found that all tools had a higher typing
Page 77 of 107
==PAGE:85==
Inherent bias in the gold standard dataset
accuracy at 100X than at 75X. This was especially the case for Kourami, HISAT-genotype
and STC-Seq whereas the diﬀerence in typing accuracy was smaller for HLA*LA and
Optitype. A majority of the samples in the full gold standard dataset (used in the main
benchmarking analysis - section 3.1) had a coverage below 90X and the gold standard
dataset, therefore, favours tools that perform well for samples with lower coverage and
disfavours tools that only perform well for high coverage samples.
Sequencing at a higher coverage is more expensive and requires more storage; thus, it is
a clear advantage if a tool can achieve high typing accuracy with low coverage samples.
However, in Evaxion’s case, all WES samples are high coverage (>250X), so Kourami,
HISAT-genotype and STC-Seq may perform better using Evaxion’s data rather than the
gold standard dataset.
A potential pitfall, when trying to estimate the performance of an HLA typing tool, is
to assume that two benchmarking studies using the same dataset are independent. WES
samples from the IGSR database have been included in a number of the proof-of-concept
studies in articles introducing NGS based HLA typing tools, but also in benchmarking
studies from 2017[97] and 2018[80]. Optitype performs well in both studies, but as the
studies use some of the same data and since some of that data was also used in the
development of Optitype, these ﬁndings are not as conclusive as they would be if the
dataset were mutually exclusive.
In summary, this gold standard dataset likely overestimates Optitype’s performance
compared to how well it would perform with new data and underestimates Kourami’s,
HISAT-genotype’s and STC-Seq’s performance compared to how well they would perform
with suﬃcient coverage. Kourami and HISAT-genotype could perhaps be viable choices
for high coverage WES data.
This project uses WES from the IGSR database and the typing data from the 2014 and
2018 study (see section 2.2) since this seems to be by far the largest and most complete
dataset available. There are, however, some problems with this dataset and it could
therefore be interesting in a future study to investigate the performance of the ﬁve HLA
typing tools using new data. In Evaxion’s perspective, it would especially be interesting,
Page 78 of 107
==PAGE:86==
Inherent bias in the gold standard dataset
if a new dataset contained samples with higher coverage comparable to the WES data
used in their neoepitope prediction pipeline.
All tools in this study are designed to perform HLA typing based on DNA sequencing data.
However, the benchmarking analysis shows that STC-Seq and Kourami are not well suited
to perform HLA typing from lower coverage WES data. Both tools are reported to have a
typing accuracy very close to 100% with their preferred input data (HLA enriched data
for STC-Seq and high coverage WGS data for Kourami), but, in this benchmarking study,
STC-Seq and Kourami only have call rates of 68.85% and 91.29% and typing accuracies of
50.25% and 83.16% (2-ﬁeld resolution) respectively[69, 84]. The fact that the performance
of these HLA typing tools is greatly aﬀected when typing is performed from input data that
does not exactly match what the tools are designed for, underlines the speciﬁcity of certain
HLA typing tools and the diﬃculty of HLA typing compared to variant calling in general.
When choosing between HLA typing algorithms and when evaluating their performance,
it is important to not only note the type of input data (e.g. DNA sequencing), but also
the speciﬁc technique (WGS/WES/HLA enriched data) and the speciﬁc coverage that the
tool is designed for.
Page 79 of 107
==PAGE:87==
The performance of the tools
4.2
The performance of the tools
This section expands on section 3.1 and 3.2 and discusses the performance of Kourami,
HISAT-genotype, HLA*LA and Optitype. STC-Seq is not elaborated on further due to its
low typing accuracy for this gold standard dataset.
Kourami has a relatively low typing accuracy (83.16 % for all genes in 2-ﬁeld resolution).
It also only returned a prediction for 91% of the examined alleles, whereas HLA*LA,
Optitype and HISAT-genotype all have a call rate of 100%. Some redeeming features of
the tool are that it is fast, requires very little memory despite being a graph-based tool
and it can discover novel alleles.
HISAT-genotype is also able to discover novel alleles and has a higher typing accuracy
than Kourami. It, however, also uses more computational resources and might take more
than an hour to type one of Evaxion’s WES samples that have coverages of at least 250X.
It is the only tool that provides 4-ﬁeld resolution, but, in most practical cases, such high
resolution is not necessary. Both HISAT2 and HISAT-genotype are continuously receiving
new updates and their performance might improve in the future[127, 129].
The diﬀerence between the typing accuracy of Kourami and HISAT-genotype and the
typing accuracy of the better-performing tools HLA*LA and Optitype would likely be
smaller than shown in this study for Evaxion’s high coverage WES samples. This is because
Kourami and HISAT-genotype both seem to beneﬁt from a coverage higher than 100X,
while HLA*LA and Optitype are closer to a saturation point at 75X, where additional
data does not beneﬁt much. This is however only hypothesis and would have to be proven
in a future study using high coverage WES data.
HLA*LA has the highest typing accuracy (95.72% at 2-ﬁeld resolution) for the ﬁve HLA
genes included in this study. However, this tool also requires the largest amount of memory
(around 30 GB per sample), CPU time and real time to type a single sample. Using
HLA*LA to type a few patients would generally not be an issue for Evaxion, but if HLA
typing needed to be done quickly, many samples needed to be typed or a supercomputer
is not available, HLA*LA is not a viable option.
Optitype has the highest typing accuracy for HLA class I genes in this study (98.45% at
2-ﬁeld resolution). It further requires little memory, CPU time and real time. However, in
Page 80 of 107
==PAGE:88==
The performance of the tools
cases where a patient has rare HLA alleles not included in Optitype’s reference database,
this tool will return wrong predictions. This is a clear disadvantage of the tool that (as
explained in section 4.1) is not necessarily reﬂected in the results of this benchmarking
study. Based on the data from this benchmarking analysis, however, Optitype is the best
tool for typing HLA class I genes.
None of the tools oﬀers a fully satisfactory solution alone and one option for Evaxion is,
therefore, to use Optitype to type HLA-A, -B and C and another to type HLA-DRB1.
Figure 4.2.1 shows how well the other four tools typed HLA-DRB1 using the full gold
standard dataset and ﬁgure 4.2.2 shows the results from the downsampling analysis specif-
ically for HLA-DRB1.
Kourami and HLA*LA have the highest typing accuracy for both the full gold standard
dataset and for the samples included in the downsampling analysis at 100X (the highest
coverage). Kourami has a much higher call rate and typing accuracy for HLA-DRB1 than
the other four HLA genes in the study. Since Evaxion has high coverage samples and
Kourami performs worse with low samples, it is perhaps most relevant to compare the
performances of the tools in the downsampling analysis at 100X. For the 230 samples
in the downsampling analysis, both Kourami and HLA*LA have a call rate of 100%.
HLA*LA has a slightly higher typing accuracy (97.83% at 2-ﬁeld resolution and 98.04%
at NetMHCpan resolution) than Kourami (97.61% at 2-ﬁeld resolution and 97.83% at
NetMHCpan resolution), but since HLA*LA requires signiﬁcantly more computational
resources, Kourami is likely the most ﬁtting choice.
The recommendation for Evaxion based on the results of this project is therefore to
perform HLA typing of class I genes with Optitype and of HLA-DRB1 with Kourami. If a
combination of HLA*LA and Optitype is used instead, a coverage of above 250X is most
likely not needed for accurate HLA typing, as both these tools already perform optimally
at lower coverages.
Page 81 of 107
==PAGE:89==
The performance of the tools
Figure 4.2.1: The typing accuracy and call rate of HLA-DRB1 alleles for the four NGS based
HLA typing tools that predict HLA class II genes. The full dataset was used in producing these
results. HLA*LA and Kourami are the best tools for typing HLA-DRB1 with a typing accuracy
at 2-ﬁeld resolution of 97.47% (HLA*LA) and 95.96% (Kourami). Kourami has a much higher
call rate for HLA-DRB1 (99.4%) than the average call rate for all ﬁve genes in this study (91.29
%).
Figure 4.2.2: The typing accuracy of HLA-DRB1 alleles at diﬀering coverages for the four
NGS based HLA typing tools that predict HLA class II genes. Kourami and HLA*LA have the
highest typing accuracy at 100X.
Page 82 of 107
==PAGE:90==
Future work and the future of HLA typing
4.3
Future work and the future of HLA typing
New HLA typing tools are continuously being developed and some of the existing ones are
continuously being improved. This means that the results in this thesis may be obsolete in
a few years. This section discusses how the work in this project could be expanded upon
and how NGS based HLA typing might develop in the future.
Section 4.1 discussed ﬂaws of the gold standard dataset used both in this study and in
previous benchmarking studies. This included an overlap between samples used in the
development of HLA typing tools and samples in the gold standard dataset. Sections
3.2 and 4.2 further discussed how the coverage of many of the WES samples in the gold
standard dataset is much lower than that of WES samples created for clinical purposes,
and how that might lead to a benchmarking analysis underestimating how well some
tools (e.g. Kourami and HISAT-genotype) would perform in industry with high coverage
samples. A future benchmarking study could evaluate the performances of HLA typing
tools by only using the subset of samples that are both high coverage and not included in
the development of the tested tools. One drawback of this approach is that there only
are a limited number of available samples that fulﬁl these criteria and a curated dataset
constructed from in this way would be a small dataset. A better, but also more expensive,
approach would be to create a new dataset of samples with NGS data and known HLA
alleles. This could, for example, be done by coordinating studies that investigate HLA
allele frequencies in populations (such as the ones listed on Allelefrequencies.net) and
studies that seek to sequence a larger number of individuals.
Optitype was found to have the highest typing accuracy for the HLA class I genes included
in the gold standard dataset, but the tool lacks HLA class II typing. The developers
behind Optitype claim that it easily can be adapted to predict HLA class II genes and
this could therefore be the objective of a future HLA typing project.
OncoHLA is a commercial HLA typing tool that provides typing for both class I and class
II genes by using a similar approach to Optitype. It is reported to perform just as well as
Optitype on HLA class I genes and to outperform Kourami and HLA:PRG (a precursor
to HLA*LA) on HLA class II genes. This tool has a two-step HLA inference process
Page 83 of 107
==PAGE:91==
Future work and the future of HLA typing
and HLA allele frequencies are considered in the last of these two steps. OncoHLA’s
code is similar to Optitype’s publicly available code and OncoHLA uses public data from
Allelefrequencies.net. The approach does not seem revolutionary and a public tool with a
similar algorithm and performance will probably be developed in the future.
Another direction that HLA typing might take in the future is to expand and improve
upon graph-based approaches. The graph-based extension of BWT was only developed
in 2014 and the hierarchical graph FM index, that enables HLA typing using a fully
graph-based approach, was partly developed with HISAT2 (ﬁrst released in 2015). The
developers behind HISAT2 and HISAT-genotype are still optimising the tools and future
tools might also expand on these methods, further advancing and improving graph-based
alignment. With an increasing number of registered alleles (also for other regions than the
HLA region), the graph-based approach might overtake the linear based one in the future.
Page 84 of 107
==PAGE:92==
Conclusion
4.4
Conclusion
This study investigated the performance of ﬁve NGS based HLA typing tools: Kourami,
HLA*LA, HISAT-genotype, Optitype and STC-Seq for the ﬁve HLA genes: HLA-A, -B,
-C, -DRB1 and DQB1. The predictions were compared to 829 whole-exome sequencing
samples with conﬁrmed HLA alleles. HLA*LA was found to have the highest overall
typing accuracy (95.72% at 2-ﬁeld resolution) and the highest typing resolution for the
two HLA class II genes (95.75% at 2-ﬁeld resolution) while Optitype was found to have
the highest typing accuracy for the three HLA class I genes (98.45% at 2-ﬁeld resolution).
The tools varied greatly in computational resource consumption with HLA*LA requiring
30 GB of memory per typed sample whereas Optitype only required 1 GB.
A downsampling analysis using 230 of the samples in the gold standard dataset showed
that Kourami, HISAT-genotype and STC-Seq require coverage of above 100X for WES
samples to type optimally. For HLA*LA and Optitype, increasing coverage beyond 75X
only gives a limited increase in typing accuracy.
Considering both the typing accuracy and the required computational resources, it was
found that the best method for typing the four HLA genes HLA-A, -B, -C and -DRB1
was to use Optitype for the HLA class I genes and Kourami for the class II gene HLA-DRB1.
Page 85 of 107
==PAGE:93==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Jose L. Sanchez-Trincado, Marta Gomez-Perosanz, and Pedro A. Reche. Fundamen-
tals and Methods for T- and B-Cell Epitope Prediction. Journal of Immunology
Research, 2017, 2017. ISSN 23147156.
[2] Juan-Manuel Anaya, Yehuda Shoenfeld, Adriana Rojas-Villarraga, Roger A. Levy,
and Ricard Cervera.
AUTOIMMUNITY From Bench to Bedside.
El Rosario
University Press, 2013. ISBN 978-958-738-376-8.
[3] Jacques Neefjes, Marlieke L.M. Jongsma, Petra Paul, and Oddmund Bakke. Towards
a systems understanding of MHC class i and MHC class II antigen presentation.
Nature Reviews Immunology, 11(12):823–836, 2011. ISSN 14741733.
[4] Marine Leclerc, Laura Mezquita, Guillaume Guillebot De Nerville, Isabelle Tihy,
Ines Malenica, Salem Chouaib, and Fathia Mami-Chouaib. Recent advances in lung
cancer immunotherapy: Input of T-cell epitopes associated with impaired peptide
processing. Frontiers in Immunology, 10(JUL):1–8, 2019. ISSN 16643224.
[5] James Robinson, Dominic J. Barker, Xenia Georgiou, Michael A. Cooper, Paul
Flicek, and Steven G.E. Marsh. IPD-IMGT/HLA Database. Nucleic Acids Research,
48:D948–D955, 1 2020. ISSN 13624962.
[6] Sebastian Boegel. The Past, Present, and Future of HLA Typing in Transplantation.
In Sebastian Boegel, editor, HLA Typing (Methods in Molecular Biology), pages
1–10. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2018, 2018.
ISBN 978-1-4939-8546-3. URL http://www.springer.com/series/7651.
[7] Thomas Trolle, Curtis P McMurtrey, John Sidney, Wilfried Bardet, Sean C Osborn,
Thomas Kaever, Alessandro Sette, William H. Hildebrand, Morten Nielsen, and
Page 86 of 107
==PAGE:94==
REFERENCES
Bjoern Peters.
The length distribution of class I restricted T cell epitopes is
determined by both peptide supply and MHC allele speciﬁc binding preference.
Physiology & behavior, 196(4):1480–1487, 2016.
[8] Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen, Massimo Andreatta, Paolo Marcatili, Søren Buus, Ja-
son A. Greenbaum, Zhen Yan, Alessandro Sette, Bjoern Peters, and Morten Nielsen.
Improved methods for predicting peptide binding aﬃnity to MHC class II molecules.
Immunology, 154(3):394–406, 2018. ISSN 13652567.
[9] Sebastian Boegel, Thomas Bukur, John C. Castle, and Ugur Sahin. In Silico Typing
of Classical and Non-classical HLA Alleles from Standard RNA-Seq Reads. In
Sebastian Boegel, editor, HLA Typing (Methods in Molecular Biology), pages 177–
192. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2018, 2018.
ISBN 978-1-4939-8546-3. URL http://www.springer.com/series/7651.
[10] Calliope A. Dendrou, Jan Petersen, Jamie Rossjohn, and Lars Fugger. HLA variation
and disease. Nature Reviews Immunology, 18(5):325–339, 5 2018. ISSN 14741741.
[11] Christian Kurts, Bruce W.S. Robinson, and Percy A. Knolle. Cross-priming in health
and disease. Nature Reviews Immunology, 10(6):403–414, 2010. ISSN 14741733.
[12] Y. M. Mosaad. Clinical Role of Human Leukocyte Antigen in Health and Disease.
Scandinavian Journal of Immunology, 82(4):283–306, 2015. ISSN 13653083.
[13] Massimo Andreatta and Morten Nielsen. Gapped sequence alignment using artiﬁcial
neural networks: Application to the MHC class i system. Bioinformatics, 32(4):
511–517, 2016. ISSN 14602059.
[14] S. G.E. Marsh, E. D. Albert, W. F. Bodmer, and et al.
An update to HLA
Nomenclature, 2010. Bone Marrow Transplantation, 45(5):846–848, 2010. ISSN
02683369.
[15] Sabry Shoeib, Emad El-Shebiny, Alaa Efat, and KhairyA El-Hady. Human leukocyte
antigen in medicine. Menouﬁa Medical Journal, 32(4):1197, 2019. ISSN 1110-2098.
[16] James Robinson, Jason A. Halliwell, James D. Hayhurst, Paul Flicek, Peter Parham,
and Steven G.E. Marsh. IPD-IMGT/HLA webpage, 2015. URL https://www.ebi.
ac.uk/ipd/imgt/hla/.
Page 87 of 107
==PAGE:95==
REFERENCES
[17] James Robinson, Jason A. Halliwell, James D. Hayhurst, Paul Flicek, Peter Parham,
and Steven G.E. Marsh. The IPD and IMGT/HLA database: Allele variant databases.
Nucleic Acids Research, 43(D1):D423–D431, 2015. ISSN 13624962.
[18] JGraph. diagrams.net, v13.10.0, 2020. URL https://www.diagrams.net/index.
html.
[19] Eduardo Nunes, Helen Heslop, Marcelo Fernandez-Vina, Cynthia Taves, Dawn R.
Wagenknecht, A. Bradley Eisenbrey, Gottfried Fischer, Kay Poulton, Kara Wacker,
Carolyn Katovich Hurley, Harriet Noreen, and Nicoletta Sacchi. Deﬁnitions of
histocompatibility typing terms. Blood, 118(23):180–183, 2011. ISSN 00064971.
[20] Eduardo Nunes, Helen Heslop, Marcelo Fernandez-Vina, Cynthia Taves, Dawn R.
Wagenknecht, A. Bradley Eisenbrey, Gottfried Fischer, Kay Poulton, Kara Wacker,
Carolyn Katovich Hurley, Harriet Noreen, and Nicoletta Sacchi. Deﬁnitions of
histocompatibility typing terms: Harmonization of Histocompatibility Typing Terms
Working Group. Human Immunology, 72(12):1214–1216, 2011. ISSN 01988859. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2011.06.002.
[21] IGSR. IPD-IMGT/HLA: Nomenclature for Factors of the HLA System - G/P groups
(Accessed: 01-12-2020). URL http://hla.alleles.org/alleles/g_groups.html.
[22] IGSR. IPD-IMGT/HLA: Suﬃxes used in the HLA Nomenclature (Accessed: 01-
12-2020). URL https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/imgt/hla/nomenclature/suffixes.
html.
[23] Josu´e da Costa Lima-Junior and Lilian Rose Pratt-Riccio. Major histocompati-
bility complex and malaria: Focus on Plasmodium vivax Infection. Frontiers in
Immunology, 7(JAN):1–13, 2016. ISSN 16643224.
[24] Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. A review of HLA allele and SNP associations with highly
prevalent infectious diseases in human populations. Swiss medical weekly, 150(April):
w20214, 2020. ISSN 14243997.
[25] Joseph Holoshitz. The quest for better understanding of HLA-disease association:
Scenes from a road less travelled by. Discovery Medicine, 16(87):93–101, 2013. ISSN
19447930.
Page 88 of 107
==PAGE:96==
REFERENCES
[26] Janelle A. Noble and Ana M. Valdes. Genetics of the HLA region in the prediction
of type 1 diabetes. Current Diabetes Reports, 11(6):533–542, 2011. ISSN 15344827.
[27] Pierpaolo Correale,
Luciano Mutti,
Francesca Pentimalli,
Giovanni Baglio,
Rita Emilena Saladino, Pierpaolo Sileri, and Antonio Giordano. Hla-b*44 and
c*01 prevalence correlates with covid19 spreading across italy. International Journal
of Molecular Sciences, 21(15):1–12, 2020. ISSN 14220067.
[28] James T. Rosenbaum, Hedley Hamilton, Michael H. Weisman, John D. Reveille,
Kevin L. Winthrop, and Dongseok Choi. The Eﬀect of HLA-B27 on Susceptibility
and Severity of COVID-19. The Journal of Rheumatology, page jrheum.200939, 2020.
ISSN 0315-162X.
[29] Samuel E. Weinberg and Lawrence J. Jennings. HLA and autoimmune diseases.
ADVANCES IN MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY, 3:207–219, 2020. ISSN 00926019.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yamp.2020.07.016.
[30] Gizem Kumru Sahin, Christian Unterrainer, and Caner S¨usal. Critical evaluation of
a possible role of HLA epitope matching in kidney transplantation. Transplantation
Reviews, 34(2), 2020. ISSN 15579816.
[31] Nadia Viborg. Interrogating T cells speciﬁc to mutated and shared tumor epitopes in
mouse and man PhD thesis. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[32] Kenneth Crump and Douglas H. Thamm. Cancer chemotherapy for the veterinary
health team. In John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pages 15–22. 2011. ISBN 9781118785621.
[33] Sjoerd H. Van Der Burg, Ramon Arens, Ferry Ossendorp, Thorbald Van Hall, and
Cornelis J.M. Melief. Vaccines for established cancer: Overcoming the challenges
posed by immune evasion. Nature Reviews Cancer, 16(4):219–233, 2016. ISSN
14741768. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrc.2016.16.
[34] Soﬁa Farkona, Eleftherios P. Diamandis, and Ivan M. Blasutig. Cancer immunother-
apy: The beginning of the end of cancer? BMC Medicine, 14(1):1–18, 2016. ISSN
17417015. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12916-016-0623-5.
Page 89 of 107
==PAGE:97==
REFERENCES
[35] Zhuting Hu, Patrick A. Ott, and Catherine J. Wu. Towards personalized, tumour-
speciﬁc, therapeutic vaccines for cancer. Nature reviews. Immunology, 18(3):168–182,
2018. ISBN 2163684814.
[36] Xue Jiao Han, Xue Lei Ma, Li Yang, Yu Quan Wei, Yong Peng, and Xia Wei Wei.
Progress in Neoantigen Targeted Cancer Immunotherapies. Frontiers in Cell and
Developmental Biology, 8(July):1–19, 2020. ISSN 2296634X.
[37] F.S. Collins, E.S. Lander, J. Rogers, and Et Al. International Human Genome
Sequencing Consortium,Finishing the euchromatic sequence of the human genome.
Nature, 431(7011):931–945, 2004. ISSN 0028-0836.
[38] National Human Genome Research Institute. Human Genome Project FAQ (Ac-
cessed:
04-12-2020).
URL https://www.genome.gov/human-genome-project/
Completion-FAQ.
[39] National Human Genome Research Institute.
DNA Sequencing Costs:
Data
(Accessed: 04-12-2020), 2020. URL https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/
fact-sheets/DNA-Sequencing-Costs-Data.
[40] W. Richard McCombie, John D. McPherson, and Elaine R. Mardis. Next-generation
sequencing technologies. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 9(11), 2019.
ISSN 21571422.
[41] Christoph Bleidorn. Sequencing Techniques. In Phylogenomics: An Introduction,
pages 43–60. Springer International Publishing, 2017. ISBN 9783319540641.
[42] James M. Heather and Benjamin Chain. The sequence of sequencers: The history
of sequencing DNA. Genomics, 107(1):1–8, 2016. ISSN 10898646. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2015.11.003.
[43] Kevin Truong. Sequencing giant Illumina scraps $1.2 billion PacBio acquisition (Ac-
cessed: 21-01-2020), 2020. URL https://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/
news/2020/01/03/sequencing-giant-illumina-scraps-1-2-billion.html.
[44] Illumina Inc. Illumina - sequencing platforms (Accessed: 04-12-2020). URL https:
//www.illumina.com/systems/sequencing-platforms.html.
Page 90 of 107
==PAGE:98==
REFERENCES
[45] IGSR.
Sequencing
platform
in
the
1000
genomes
project
(Ac-
cessed:
10-01-2021).
URL
https://www.internationalgenome.org/faq/
what-sequencing-platforms-were-used-1000-genomes-project/.
[46] Steﬀen Klasberg, Vineeth Surendranath, Vinzenz Lange, and Gerhard Sch¨oﬂ. Bioin-
formatics Strategies, Challenges, and Opportunities for Next Generation Sequencing-
Based HLA Genotyping, 10 2019. ISSN 16603818.
[47] Szilveszter
Juhos,
Krisztina
Rig´o,
and
Gy¨orgy
Horv´ath.
On
Genotyp-
ing Polymorphic HLA Genes — Ambiguities and Quality Measures Using
NGS.
In Next Generation Sequencing - Advances, Applications and Chal-
lenges,
pages 369–386. 2015.
URL https://www.intechopen.com/books/
advanced-biometric-technologies/liveness-detection-in-biometrics.
[48] Sarah B Ng, Emily H Turner, Peggy D Robertson, Steven D Flygare, W Abigail,
Choli Lee, Tristan Shaﬀer, Michelle Wong, Arindam Bhattacharjee, E Evan, Michael
Bamshad, Deborah a Nickerson, and Jay Shendure. Targeted Capture and Massicely
Parallel Sequencing of twelve human exomes. Nature, 461(7261):272–276, 2010.
ISBN 1476-4687 (Electronic)\r0028-0836 (Linking). ISSN 1476-4687.
[49] Lira Mamanova, Alison J. Coﬀey, Carol E. Scott, Iwanka Kozarewa, Emily H.
Turner, Akash Kumar, Eleanor Howard, Jay Shendure, and Daniel J. Turner. Target-
enrichment strategies for next-generation sequencing. Nature Methods, 7(2):111–118,
2010. ISSN 15487091.
[50] Jang Il Sohn and Jin Wu Nam. The present and future of de novo whole-genome
assembly. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, 19(1):23–40, 2018. ISSN 14774054.
[51] Adam Auton, Gon¸calo R. Abecasis, David M. Altshuler, and Et Al. A global reference
for human genetic variation. Nature, 526(7571):68–74, 2015. ISSN 14764687.
[52] Genome Reference Consortium. Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38
patch release 13 (GRCh38.p13), 2019.
URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
assembly/GCF_000001405.39.
Page 91 of 107
==PAGE:99==
REFERENCES
[53] Rockefeller University Bioinformatics Resource Centre. Genomic Data, Lecture
Slides (accessed 07-12-2020). URL https://rockefelleruniversity.github.io/
Genomic_Data/.
[54] NCBI.
NCBI Genome Assembly Model (Accessed: 08-12-2020).
URL https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/model/.
[55] M. Burrows and D.J. Wheeler. A Block-sorting Lossless Data Compression Algorithm.
Systems Research, 1994.
[56] John C. Mu, Hui Jiang, Amirhossein Kiani, Marghoob Mohiyuddin, Narges Bani
Asadi, and Wing H. Wong. Fast and accurate read alignment for resequencing.
Bioinformatics, 28(18):2366–2373, 2012. ISSN 13674803.
[57] Nauman Ahmed, Koen Bertels, and Zaid Al-Ars. A comparison of seed-and-extend
techniques in modern DNA read alignment algorithms. Proceedings - 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine, BIBM 2016, pages
1421–1428, 2016. ISBN 9781509016105.
[58] Subazini Thankaswamy-Kosalai, Partho Sen, and Intawat Nookaew. Evaluation and
assessment of read-mapping by multiple next-generation sequencing aligners based
on genome-wide characteristics. Genomics, 109(3-4):186–191, 2017. ISSN 10898646.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2017.03.001.
[59] Sanger. SMALT (Accessed: 13-12-2020). URL https://www.sanger.ac.uk/tool/
smalt-0/.
[60] Novocraft. Novoalign (Accessed: 12-12-2020). URL http://www.novocraft.com/
products/novoalign/.
[61] Paolo Ferragina and Giovanni Manzini. Opportunistic data structures with applica-
tions. In Proceedings 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
pages 390–398. IEEE, 2000.
[62] Heng Li and Richard Durbin. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-
Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics, 25(14):1754–1760, 2009. ISSN 13674803.
Page 92 of 107
==PAGE:100==
REFERENCES
[63] Ben Langmead, Cole Trapnell, Mihai Pop, and Steven L. Salzberg. Ultrafast and
memory-eﬃcient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome
Biology, 10(3), 2009. ISSN 14747596.
[64] Ben Langmead and Steven L. Salzberg. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2.
Nature Methods, 9(4):357–359, 2012. ISSN 15487091.
[65] Ruiqiang Li, Chang Yu, Yingrui Li, Tak Wah Lam, Siu Ming Yiu, Karsten Kristiansen,
and Jun Wang. SOAP2: An improved ultrafast tool for short read alignment.
Bioinformatics, 25(15):1966–1967, 2009. ISSN 13674803.
[66] Adam Ameur. Goodbye reference, hello genome graphs. Nature Biotechnology, 37
(8):866–868, 2019. ISBN 4158701902041. ISSN 15461696.
[67] Birte Kehr, Kathrin Trappe, Manuel Holtgrewe, and Knut Reinert. Genome align-
ment with graph data structures: A comparison. BMC Bioinformatics, 15(1), 2014.
ISSN 14712105.
[68] Jouni Sir´en, Niko V¨alim¨aki, and Veli M¨akinen. Indexing graphs for path queries
with applications in genome research. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational
Biology and Bioinformatics, 11(2):375–388, 2014. ISSN 15455963.
[69] Heewook Lee and Carl Kingsford. Kourami: Graph-guided assembly for novel
human leukocyte antigen allele discovery. Genome Biology, 19(1):1–16, 2018. ISSN
1474760X.
[70] Hongen Zhang. Statistical Genomics - Chapter 1: Overview of Sequence Data
Formats, volume 1418.
Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, 2016.
ISBN
9781493935765. ISSN 10643745. 3–18 pp.
[71] Robert Edgar. Quality (Phred) scores (Accessed: 08-12-2020). URL https://www.
drive5.com/usearch/manual/quality_score.html.
[72] Shifu Chen, Yanqing Zhou, Yaru Chen, and Jia Gu. Fastp: An ultra-fast all-in-one
FASTQ preprocessor. Bioinformatics, 34(17):i884–i890, 2018. ISSN 14602059.
[73] Samtools view manual (Accessed: 08-12-2020). URL http://www.htslib.org/doc/
samtools-view.html.
Page 93 of 107
==PAGE:101==
REFERENCES
[74] Markus Hsi Yang Fritz, Rasko Leinonen, Guy Cochrane, and Ewan Birney. Eﬃcient
storage of high throughput DNA sequencing data using reference-based compression.
Genome Research, 21(5):734–740, 2011. ISSN 10889051.
[75] Aaron R. Quinlan and Ira M. Hall. BEDTools: A ﬂexible suite of utilities for
comparing genomic features. Bioinformatics, 26(6):841–842, 2010. ISSN 13674803.
[76] Sohyun Hwang, Eiru Kim, Insuk Lee, and Edward M. Marcotte. Systematic com-
parison of variant calling pipelines using gold standard personal exome variants.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 5(December):1–8, 2015. ISSN 20452322.
[77] Sebastian Boegel. HLA Typing from Short-Read Sequencing Data with OptiType.
In Sebastian Boegel, editor, HLA Typing (Methods in Molecular Biology), pages
215–224. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2018, 2018.
ISBN 978-1-4939-8546-3. URL http://www.springer.com/series/7651.
[78] Alexander T. Dilthey, Alexander J. Mentzer, Raphael Carapito, Clare Cutland,
Nezih Cereb, Shabir A. Madhi, Arang Rhie, Sergey Koren, Seiamak Bahram, Gil
McVean, and Adam M. Phillippy. HLA-LA - HLA typing from linearly projected
graph alignments. Bioinformatics, 35(21):4394–4396, 2019. ISSN 14602059.
[79] BaseClear.
Baseclear,
Variant
detection
pipeline
(accessed
10-12-
2020).
URL
https://www.baseclear.com/blog/bioinformatics/
baseclears-variant-detection-pipeline-renewed/.
[80] Denis C. Bauer, Armella Zadoorian, Laurence O.W. Wilson, and Natalie P. Thorne.
Evaluation of computational programs to predict HLA genotypes from genomic
sequencing data. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, 19(2):179–187, 3 2018. ISSN 14774054.
[81] J.L. Schmitz. HLA typing using molecular methods. Molecular Diagnostics, pages
485–493, 2006.
[82] Emma C. Morris and Kirsty J. Thomson. An Overview of HLA Typing for Hematopoi-
etic Stem Cell Transplantation. In John M. Walker, editor, Bone Marrow and
Stem Cell Transplantation (Methods in Molecular Biology), volume 37, pages 73–86.
Springer Protocols, 2nd edition, 2014. ISBN 9781461494362. ISSN 13573039.
Page 94 of 107
==PAGE:102==
REFERENCES
[83] Minh Duc Do, Linh Gia Hoang Le, Vinh The Nguyen, Tran Ngoc Dang, Nghia Hoai
Nguyen, Hoang Anh Vu, and Thao Phuong Mai. High-Resolution HLA Typing of
HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1, and -DQB1 in Kinh Vietnamese by Using Next-Generation
Sequencing. Frontiers in Genetics, 11(April):1–10, 2020. ISSN 16648021.
[84] Yang Jiao, Ran Li, Chao Wu, Yibin Ding, Yanning Liu, Danmei Jia, Lifeng Wang,
Xiang Xu, Jing Zhu, Min Zheng, and Junling Jia. High-sensitivity HLA typing by
Saturated Tiling Capture Sequencing (STC-Seq). BMC Genomics, 19(1):1–10, 2018.
ISBN 1286401844. ISSN 14712164.
[85] Ren´e L. Warren, Gina Choe, Douglas J. Freeman, Mauro Castellarin, Sarah Munro,
Richard Moore, and Robert A. Holt. Derivation of HLA types from shotgun sequence
datasets. Genome Medicine, 4(12), 2012. ISSN 1756994X.
[86] Angelina Sverchkova, Irantzu Anzar, Richard Stratford, and Trevor Clancy. Improved
HLA typing of Class I and Class II alleles from next-generation sequencing data.
HLA, 94(6):504–513, 12 2019. ISSN 20592310.
[87] Chang Liu, Xiao Yang, Brian Duﬀy, Thalachallour Mohanakumar, Robi D. Mitra,
Michael C. Zody, and John D. Pfeifer. ATHLATES: Accurate typing of human
leukocyte antigen through exome sequencing. Nucleic Acids Research, 41(14), 8 2013.
ISSN 03051048.
[88] Yazhi Huang, Jing Yang, Dingge Ying, Yan Zhang, Vorasuk Shotelersuk, Nattiya
Hirankarn, Pak Chung Sham, Yu Lung Lau, and Wanling Yang. HLAreporter: A
tool for HLA typing from next generation sequencing data. Genome Medicine, 7(1),
3 2015. ISSN 1756994X.
[89] Shuto Hayashi, Takuya Moriyama, Rui Yamaguchi, Shinichi Mizuno, Mitsuhiro Ko-
mura, Satoru Miyano, Hidewaki Nakagawa, and Seiya Imoto. Alphlard-nt: Bayesian
method for human leukocyte antigen genotyping and mutation calling through si-
multaneous analysis of normal and tumor whole-genome sequence data. Journal of
Computational Biology, 26(9):923–937, 2019. ISSN 10665277.
[90] Sachet A. Shukla, Michael S. Rooney, Mohini Rajasagi, Grace Tiao, Philip M. Dixon,
Michael S. Lawrence, Jonathan Stevens, William J. Lane, Jamie L. Dellagatta, Scott
Page 95 of 107
==PAGE:103==
REFERENCES
Steelman, Carrie Sougnez, Kristian Cibulskis, Adam Kiezun, Nir Hacohen, Vladimir
Brusic, Catherine J. Wu, and Gad Getz. Comprehensive analysis of cancer-associated
somatic mutations in class i HLA genes. Nature Biotechnology, 33(11):1152–1158, 10
2015. ISSN 15461696.
[91] Yu Bai, Min Ni, Blerta Cooper, Yi Wei, and Wen Fury. Inference of high resolution
HLA types using genome-wide RNA or DNA sequencing reads. BMC Genomics, 15
(1), 5 2014. ISSN 14712164.
[92] Andr´as Szolek, Benjamin Schubert, Christopher Mohr, Marc Sturm, Magdalena
Feldhahn, and Oliver Kohlbacher. OptiType: Precision HLA typing from next-
generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics, 30(23):3310–3316, 2014. ISSN 14602059.
[93] Daehwan Kim, Joseph M. Paggi, Chanhee Park, Christopher Bennett, and Steven L.
Salzberg. Graph-based genome alignment and genotyping with HISAT2 and HISAT-
genotype. Nature Biotechnology, 37(8):907–915, 8 2019. ISSN 15461696.
[94] Faviel F. Gonzalez-Galarza, Antony McCabe, Eduardo J.Melo Dos Santos, James
Jones, Louise Takeshita, Nestor D. Ortega-Rivera, Glenda M.Del Cid-Pavon, Kerry
Ramsbottom, Gurpreet Ghattaoraya, Ana Alﬁrevic, Derek Middleton, and Andrew R.
Jones. Allele frequency net database (AFND) 2020 update: Gold-standard data
classiﬁcation, open access genotype data and new query tools. Nucleic Acids Research,
48(D1):D783–D788, 2020. ISSN 13624962.
[95] Martin L. Buchkovich, Chad C. Brown, Kimberly Robasky, Shengjie Chai, Sharon
Westfall, Benjamin G. Vincent, Eric T. Weimer, and Jason G. Powers. HLAProﬁler
utilizes k-mer proﬁles to improve HLA calling accuracy for rare and common alleles
in RNA-seq data. Genome Medicine, 9(1):1–15, 2017. ISBN 1307301704736. ISSN
1756994X.
[96] Rose Orenbuch, Ioan Filip, Devon Comito, Jeﬀrey Shaman, Itsik Pe’Er, Raul
Rabadan, and Yann Ponty. ArcasHLA: High-resolution HLA typing from RNAseq.
Bioinformatics, 36(1):33–40, 2020. ISSN 14602059.
[97] Antti Larjo, Robert Eveleigh, Elina Kilpel¨ainen, and et al. Accuracy of programs for
the determination of human leukocyte antigen alleles from next-generation sequencing
data. Frontiers in Immunology, 8(DEC), 12 2017. ISSN 16643224.
Page 96 of 107
==PAGE:104==
REFERENCES
[98] Chao Xie, Zhen Xuan Yeo, Marie Wong, Jason Piper, Tao Long, Ewen F. Kirkness,
William H. Biggs, Ken Bloom, Stephen Spellman, Cynthia Vierra-Green, Colleen
Brady, Richard H. Scheuermann, Amalio Telenti, Sally Howard, Suzanne Brewerton,
Yaron Turpaz, and J. Craig Venter. Fast and accurate HLA typing from short-read
next-generation sequence data with xHLA. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 114(30):8059–8064, 7 2017. ISSN 10916490.
[99] Haibao Tang, Andrew J. Rech, and Theodore Wong. xHLA GitHub (Accessed:
13-01-2021). URL https://github.com/humanlongevity/HLA.
[100] Yen-Yen Wang, Takahiro Mimori, Seik-Soon Khor, Olivier Gervais, Yosuke Kawai,
Yuki Hitomi, Katsushi Tokunaga, and Masao Nagasaki. HLA-VBSeq v2: improved
HLA calling accuracy with full-length Japanese class-I panel. Human Genome
Variation, 6(1), 12 2019. ISSN 2054-345X.
[101] David L. Altshuler, Richard M. Durbin, Gon¸calo R. Abecasis, and Et Al. A map
of human genome variation from population-scale sequencing. Nature, 467(7319):
1061–1073, 2010. ISSN 14764687.
[102] Laura Clarke, Susan Fairley, Xiangqun Zheng-Bradley, Ian Streeter, Emily Perry,
Ernesto Lowy, Anne Marie Tass´e, and Paul Flicek. The international Genome sample
resource (IGSR): A worldwide collection of genome variation incorporating the 1000
Genomes Project data. Nucleic Acids Research, 45(D1):D854–D859, 2017. ISSN
13624962.
[103] Tianming Lan, Haoxiang Lin, Wenjuan Zhu, Tellier Christian Asker Melchior Laurent,
Mengcheng Yang, Xin Liu, Jun Wang, Jian Wang, Huanming Yang, Xun Xu,
and Xiaosen Guo. Deep whole-genome sequencing of 90 Han Chinese genomes.
GigaScience, 6(9):1–7, 2017. ISSN 2047217X.
[104] IGSR. The International Genome Sample Resource (ABOUT) (Accessed: 27-11-
2020). URL https://www.internationalgenome.org/about.
[105] IGSR. The International Genome Sample Resource (FAQ) (Accessed: 27-11-2020).
URL https://www.internationalgenome.org/faq/.
Page 97 of 107
==PAGE:105==
REFERENCES
[106] IGSR. The International Genome Sample Resource (bam) (Accessed: 27-11-2020).
URL https://www.internationalgenome.org/category/bam/.
[107] Pierre Antoine Gourraud, Pouya Khankhanian, Nezih Cereb, Soo Young Yang,
Michael Feolo, Martin Maiers, John D. Rioux, Stephen Hauser, and Jorge Oksenberg.
HLA diversity in the 1000 genomes dataset. PLoS ONE, 9(7), 2014. ISSN 19326203.
[108] Laurent Abi-Rached, Philippe Gouret, Jung Hua Yeh, Julie Di Cristofaro, Pierre
Pontarotti, Christophe Picard, and Julien Paganini. Immune diversity sheds light
on missing variation in worldwide genetic diversity panels. PLoS ONE, 13(10):1–11,
2018. ISBN 1111111111. ISSN 19326203.
[109] Deleted HLA alleles (Accessed: 15-01-2021).
URL http://hla.alleles.org/
alleles/deleted.html.
[110] Helen M. Berman, Tammy Battistuz, T. N. Bhat, Wolfgang F. Bluhm, Philip E.
Bourne, Kyle Burkhardt, Zukang Feng, Gary L. Gilliland, Lisa Iype, Shri Jain,
Phoebe Fagan, Jessica Marvin, David Padilla, Veerasamy Ravichandran, Bohdan
Schneider, Narmada Thanki, Helge Weissig, John D. Westbrook, and Christine
Zardecki. The protein data bank. Acta Crystallographica Section D: Biological
Crystallography, 58(6 I):899–907, 2000. ISSN 09074449.
[111] Y. Li and R.A. Mariuzza. Structure of MHC class II molecule HLA-DR1 complexed
with phosphopeptide MART-1 (Accessed: 21-10-2021), 2010. URL https://www.
rcsb.org/structure/3l6f.
[112] LLC Schr¨oodinger. PyMOL, The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.4,
2020. URL https://pymol.org/2/.
[113] Edita Karosiene, Michael Rasmussen, Thomas Blicher, Ole Lund, Søren Buus, and
Morten Nielsen. NetMHCIIpan-3.0, a common pan-speciﬁc MHC class IIpredic-
tion method including all three human MHC class IIisotypes, HLA-DR, HLA-
DP and HLA-DQ.
Immunogenetics, 65(10), 2013.
ISBN 6176321972.
ISSN
15378276.
URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3624763/
pdf/nihms412728.pdf.
Page 98 of 107
==PAGE:106==
REFERENCES
[114] Kazuma Kiyotani, Tu H. Mai, and Yusuke Nakamura. Comparison of exome-based
HLA class i genotyping tools: Identiﬁcation of platform-speciﬁc genotyping errors.
Journal of Human Genetics, 62(3):397–405, 3 2017. ISSN 1435232X.
[115] Brent S. Pedersen and Aaron R. Quinlan. Mosdepth: Quick coverage calculation for
genomes and exomes. Bioinformatics, 34(5):867–868, 3 2018. ISSN 14602059.
[116] Heng Li, Bob Handsaker, Alec Wysoker, Tim Fennell, Jue Ruan, Nils Homer, Gabor
Marth, Goncalo Abecasis, and Richard Durbin. The Sequence Alignment/Map
format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics, 25(16):2078–2079, 2009. ISSN 13674803.
[117] Sven Rahmann and Johannes Ko. Snakemake — a scalable bioinformatics workﬂow
engine. Bioinformatics, 28(19):2520–2522, 2012.
[118] Maria Luisa Matey-Hernandez, Søren Brunak, and Jose M.G. Izarzugaza. Bench-
marking the HLA typing performance of Polysolver and Optitype in 50 Danish
parental trios. BMC Bioinformatics, 19(1), 6 2018. ISSN 14712105.
[119] David Weese, Manuel Holtgrewe, and Knut Reinert. RazerS 3: Faster, fully sensitive
read mapping. Bioinformatics, 28(20):2592–2599, 2012. ISSN 13674803.
[120] Andr´as Szolek, Benjamin Schubert, and Christopher Mohr. Optitype Github (Ac-
cessed: 06-01-2020), 2014. URL https://github.com/FRED-2/OptiType.
[121] CBC 2.9.5. URL https://github.com/coin-or/Cbc/releases/tag/releases%
2F2.9.5.
[122] Carl Kingsford and Heewook Lee. Kourami GitHub (Accessed: 06-01-2020), 2018.
URL https://github.com/Kingsford-Group/kourami.
[123] Heewook Lee and Carl Kingsford. Accurate Assembly and Typing of HLA using a
Graph-Guided Assembler Kourami. Methods in Molecular Biology, 1802, 2018.
[124] Alexander T. Dilthey, Jan Forster, and Justin Graham. HLA*LA GitHub (Accessed:
11-01-2021). URL https://github.com/DiltheyLab/HLA-LA.
[125] Alexander T. Dilthey. Fast and highly accurate HLA typing by linearly-seeded
graph alignment - The HLA*LA blogpost (Accessed: 11-01-2021), 2017.
URL
https://genomeinformatics.github.io/HLA-PRG-LA/.
Page 99 of 107
==PAGE:107==
REFERENCES
[126] Daehwan Kim and Chris Bennett. HISAT-genotype GitHub (Accessed: 11-01-2021).
URL https://github.com/DaehwanKimLab/hisat-genotype.
[127] Daehwan Kim, Chris Bennett, and Chanhee Park.
HISAT-genotype oﬃcial
website (Accessed:
11-01-2021).
URL https://daehwankimlab.github.io/
hisat-genotype/main/.
[128] Yang Jiao, Ran Li, Chao Wu, Yibin Ding, Yanning Liu, Danmei Jia, Lifeng Wang,
Xiang Xu, Jing Zhu, Min Zheng, and Junling Jia. STC-Seq manual (accessed
11-01-2021). URL https://bigd.big.ac.cn/biocode/tools/BT007068/manual.
[129] Chanhee Park, Ben Langmead, Yun (Leo) Zhang, Steven Salzberg, and Daehwan Kim.
HISAT2 oﬃcial website (Accessed: 18-01-2021). URL https://daehwankimlab.
github.io/hisat2/main/.
Page 100 of 107
==PAGE:108==
Appendices
101
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX A. STATISTICS FROM THE IPD-IMGT/HLA DATABASE
A
Appendix
Statistics from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database
The number of registered HLA alleles in the IMGT has been rising rapidly in the last
years as seen in ﬁgure A.0.1. A current overview of the number of registered alleles for
each gene is shown in ﬁgure A.0.2[5].
Page 102 of 107
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX A. STATISTICS FROM THE IPD-IMGT/HLA DATABASE
Figure A.0.1: The number of known HLA alleles during the last 30 years. These are named
by the WHO Nomenclature Committee for Factors of the HLA System registered in the IPD-
IMGT/HLA database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/index.html). Next-generation sequencing has
helped increase the rate of discovery, so that more alleles were registered in the ﬁrst 3 months of
2019 than were present in the database at the turn of the milennium[5].Figure taken from [5].
Page 103 of 107
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX A. STATISTICS FROM THE IPD-IMGT/HLA DATABASE
Figure A.0.2: Overview of the number of HLA-alleles for each gene. Taken from the IMGT-HLA
database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/imgt/hla/stats.html) on the 6th of November 2020.
Page 104 of 107
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX B. TYPING ACCURACIES FOR INDIVIDUAL HLA GENES
B
Appendix
Typing accuracies for individual HLA genes
This appendix shows how well Kourami, HLA*LA, Optitype, HISAT-genotype and STC-
Seq perfomed using the full gold standard dataset for each of the ﬁve genes HLA-A, -B,
-C, -DRB1 and -DQB1.
Figure B.0.1: Typing accuracy for HLA-A
Page 105 of 107
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B. TYPING ACCURACIES FOR INDIVIDUAL HLA GENES
Figure B.0.2: Typing accuracy for HLA-B
Figure B.0.3: Typing accuracy for HLA-C
Figure B.0.4: Typing accuracy for HLA-DRB1
Page 106 of 107
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX B. TYPING ACCURACIES FOR INDIVIDUAL HLA GENES
Figure B.0.5: Typing accuracy for HLA-DQB1
Page 107 of 107
