==PAGE:1==
Mathematical decomposition of the quay
crane scheduling problem
Branch and price algorithm for solving
QCSP with graph representation
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
Branch and price algorithm for solving QCSP with graph representation
Master Thesis
January, 2021
By
Gustav Lykke Mortensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Technology, Man-
agement and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfil-
ment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of operations research.
ii
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The quay crane scheduling problem (QCSP) minimizes the handling time of a berthed
vessel in a container terminal. The quay cranes (QC’s) are often the bottleneck in con-
tainer terminals, thus the QCSP is one of the most important problems since it effects
the productivity of the entire container terminal. In this thesis, two exact solution meth-
ods for solving the QCSP to optimality is presented. Based on an existing study, a graph
representation of the QCSP and a mixed integer programming model are proposed.
Using the graph representation a branch and price solution method is presented us-
ing column generation as the lower bound function. The solution methods are used in
a computational study and their performances are compared. The MIP model performs
well on small and medium sized instances, which was also the conclusion in a previ-
ous study. The proposed branch and price solution method did not perform well, since it
were incapable of solving any instances to optimality in the computational study. There
are ways to improve the proposed method, but it is very likely that a branch and price
solution method is just a bad fit for the graph represented QCSP.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Author of this thesis
Gustav Lykke Mortensen, Master of Science in Engineering (Transport and Logistics),
DTU
[Dario Pacino], [Associate Professor, DTU], [Supervisor]
[Thomas Jacob Riis Stidsen], [Associate Professor, DTU], [Supervisor]
[Bernardo Martin Iradi], [PhD student, DTU], [Julia consultant]
Thanks to Dario for being my supervisor and for helping me find an interesting research
topic. Thanks to Thomas for joining as supervisor and sharing his knowledge on de-
composition methods. Thanks to Bernardo for introducing me to the HPC cluster and
helping me with my branch and price implementation.
iv
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
3
Problem characteristics
7
4
Mixed integer programming models for QCSP
9
4.1
Graph representation proposed by Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018
. . . . . . .
9
4.2
Modelling F1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Discussion of F1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Redefining F1 as F2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
A branch and price algorithm for solving the QCSP
19
5.1
Dantzig Wolfe reformulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2
Column generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3
Branch and Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Extensions to Branch and Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Computational study
35
7
Discussion
39
7.1
Discussion of the proposed branch and price solution method . . . . . . . . 39
7.2
Research directions to improve the proposed solution method . . . . . . . . 41
8
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
45
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The maritime transportation sector and its growth has been a key part of the develop-
ment of the global economy in recent years. Transportation of goods by sea is by far
the most used due to the fact that it is the cheapest transportation mode. Looking at
the newest review of maritime transport published by UNCTAD Sirimanne et al. 2019,
we see that in 2018 more than 80% of world merchandise trade by volume was carried
by sea. Internationally, the trade volumes of the maritime sector grew by 2.7% which
is below the historical average of 3% and the growth of 2017 which was 4.1%. Despite
the growth reduction a new high of 11 billion tons was transported in 2018. The slower
growth could be explained by higher uncertainty in the market due to environmental
concerns and the trade tensions between China and the United States. Sirimanne et al.
2019 does not expect the growth reduction to last and they predict and average growth
of 3.4% in the years 2019-2024. The continued growth in the maritime sector requires
the ports to increase in size and efficiency. In many cases space is scarce and adding
extra resources can be too expensive. Therefore, the most important way to improve
the efficiency of ports is to make better use of the space and resources by managing
operations intelligently. One method that can be used to improve the efficiency of ports
is optimization models.
There exists many problems in ports that can be formulated as optimization models. We
will be considering the one planning the operations of quay cranes serving vessels in
a container terminal. The scheduling of quay cranes in a port can be divided into two
problems. First the QC are assigned to vessels which is called the Quay Crane Assign-
ment Problem (QCAP) and then the tasks of loading and unloading vessels is divided
between the quay cranes assigned the vessels and the sequence of operations are de-
cided. We will be focusing on the second part which is called the Quay Crane Schedul-
ing Problem (QCSP). Before a vessel docks a load profile is provided by the shipping
company informing the port of the containers to be processed and their position. Given
the load profile and a solution to the QCAP a QCSP can be defined.
The quay crane scheduling problem is a widely researched topic. The quay cranes are
often a bottleneck in the container terminal and it is therefore important to make good
use of them. The QCSP is NP-complete, meaning it is a very hard problem to solve.
For large instances it is almost impossible to get decent solutions and it is hard to solve
medium sized problems to optimality in decent time. The quay crane scheduling prob-
lem determines the movement of quay cranes and which quay cranes handles load-
ing and unloading at each bay. Given a docked vessel with a number of containers to
be handled at each bay and a number of quay cranes assigned to the vessel, the pur-
pose of the QCSP is to find the fastest possible way to unload and load all required
containers using the assigned quay cranes. While servicing the vessel the quay cranes
must satisfy non-crossing constraints and maintain a safety distance since they are all
mounted on the same trail track. A solution to the problem will be a schedule for all as-
signed quay cranes and a corresponding process time of the vessel.
The goal of this project is to consider one or more state of the art models for solving
QCSP’s available in the literature and try to alter the solution method to improve the
model’s capabilities.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
1
==PAGE:10==
The thesis is organized as follows: Section 2 present a literature review of recent re-
search related to the QCSP. The problem characteristics of the QCSP is described in
section 3. In section 4 a graph representation is presented and MIP models using the
new representation is defined and discussed. A branch and price solution method solv-
ing the QCSP with a graph representation, is presented in section 5.3. In section 6 a
computational study is described and the results are presented. The proposed solution
methods and their performance in the computational study are discussed in section 7.
Section 8 is a conclusion of the project.
2
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
The quay crane scheduling problem is a research topic that has gotten a lot of atten-
tion the last decade since improving the seaside operations efficiency is necessary to
achieve growth in the maritime sector. A survey was made by Bierwirth and Meisel
2010 summarizing and classifying all research made until 2010. No classification of
QCSP’s existed at that time which made it hard to compare research and is was a strug-
gle to find the already existing model to use for a given problem. They created a classi-
fication scheme dividing the QCSP into four attribute types being task attribute, crane
attribute, interference attribute and performance attribute. The classification scheme is
used in the survey to give an overview of the research made prior to 2010. In the follow-
ing years, many new publications were made researching the seaside problems and
a follow-up survey was made by Bierwirth and Meisel 2015. Using the classification
scheme made in 2010 they classify the new literature and gives suggestions for future
research directions. We will now focus on the research made after 2015 and use the
classification scheme of Bierwirth and Meisel to get an overview of the new publications.
For the classification of the work after 2015 see table 2.1. For more information on the
research prior to 2015 we refer the reader to the surveys of Bierwirth and Meisel.
Literature regarding QCSP’s can in general be divided in two groups. Some research
try to improve solution methods to already existing problem descriptions while the rest
adds extra features and complexity and try to solve these new formulations in a reason-
able way. We will start by looking at those considering simple versions of the QCSP.
Al-Dhaheri and Diabat 2015 formulated a MIP model with an alternative objective of
minimizing the relative difference in container workload between bays. Using a stan-
dard commercial solver they were able to solve the model for small problem sizes very
efficiently. The commercial solver struggled solving the model for larger instances which
is why Kenan and Diabat 2015 followed up on the work of Al-Dhaheri and Diabat 2015.
They applied the method branch and price to the formulated model in the hope of solv-
ing the model for larger problem sizes. Using Dantzig Wolfe reformulation and column
generation to create schedules for the quay cranes a branch and price algorithm was
formulated. The algorithm were able to solve larger instances using only seconds when
the commercial solver could not solve to optimality. An alternative representation were
presented by Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 who defined a graph structure to define a QCSP.
Each combination of a bay and a time period was represented by a node and the arcs
connecting the nodes represented either staying in a bay or moving to an adjacent bay.
A MIP model was formulated and solved using binary search. This is done to limit the
time horizon considered in the model, since for each extra time period there would be
an extra node for each bay. The binary search is used to find a short time horizon while
allowing feasibility of the model. Using this method they were able to solve small in-
stances very efficiently and solve large instances in reasonable CPU time that other
models in the recent literature was unable to solve. Kasm and Diabat 2019 developed
a container division and combination (CDC) technique to find good initial solutions to
QCSP’s and to find an upper bound on the number of time periods needed to process a
vessel. They argued that a good bound on the number of time periods was important for
the performance of the model since it affects the number of variables and constraints.
Using only the CDC technique they were able to solve small instances to optimality. For
larger instances a branch and bound algorithm was used allowing larger instances to
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
3
==PAGE:12==
be solved in low computational time. In an attempt to solve medium and large sized in-
stances of QCSP’s Y.-N. Liu et al. 2019 heuristic algorithm consisting of a greedy ran-
dom adaptive search to find a good initial solution and a simulated annealing algorithm
to do optimization. They managed to get close to optimal solutions for large problem
sizes. Sun, Tang, and Baldacci 2019 introduced a Benders decomposition approach
to solve large QCSP’s to optimality. They use a master problem to obtain reasonably
good assignment decisions ignoring crane interference constraints while a subproblem
is used to find the optimal operation sequence solution. With their solution method they
are able to outperform state of the art methods in solving large sized QCSP’s. They are
able to solve instances with up to 50 bays and 6 cranes.
The feature added to the QCSP most frequent is stability of the vessel. With a stability
constraint you want to ensure that the container are loaded and unloaded in a balanced
way so the stability of the vessel is maintained. Stability is considered in the work of Al-
Dhaheri, Jebali, and Diabat 2016a, Msakni, Al-Salem, et al. 2018 and Zhang et al. 2018.
When adding the extra complexity of the stability constraint it becomes even harder to
solve the problem using a MIP model and what we see in the literature is researchers
using decomposition techniques and metaheuristics. Al-Dhaheri, Jebali, and Diabat
2016a uses a genetic algorithm to solve a QCSP assuming unidirectional movement of
the quay cranes. They are able to solve small instances to optimality and solve medium
and large sized instances to near optimal solutions within reasonable time. Another
metaheuristic approach is attempted by Zhang et al. 2018 who created a bicriteria evo-
lutionary algorithm to solve a QCSP with stability constraints. Computational results on
benchmark data showed the algorithms ability to produce high quality solutions. Msakni,
Al-Salem, et al. 2018 used decomposition to handle the added complexity of the stability
constraint. They first solved the QCSP using column generation disregarding the stabil-
ity constraints and afterwards they used the column created by the column generation
to solve a model satisfying the stability constraint. Using this method they could solve
large instances in an acceptable amount of time. Another type of constraints regarding
the vessel that can be considered are draft and trim constraints. These features are in-
cluded in the work of Wu and W. Ma 2017. They solve QCSP’s satisfying draft and trim
constraints using a branch and bound method to solve small and medium sized prob-
lems and a hybrid genetic algorithm (HGA) for larger instances. The HGA combines a
genetic algorithm with a local search procedure. A computational study reveals that the
branch and bound method is very effective for small problem sizes and it finds near opti-
mal solutions for medium sized instances in decent time. The HGA creates high quality
solutions for QCSP’s with draft and trim constraints of all sizes within short time. Yu,
Wang, and Zhen 2017 considers a QCSP for multiple ships that includes the effect of
tidal waves in the harbour and fuel consumption of the vessels. The tidal wave can de-
termine which ships can enter the harbour at different times dependent on the draft of
the ships. The fuel consumption changes if the ship changes speed which can be the
case if it has to hurry to the harbour before the tide goes out. A nonlinear MIP model is
defined and linearized using approximation. They define both a local branching based
solution method and a Particle Swarm optimization method to solve large instances.
Numerical experiments are conducted to validate the effectiveness of both the model
and the two solution methods. In the literature many different features are considered
for example M. Liu et al. 2018 who solves a QCSP including maintenance for the quay
cranes and Chen and Bierlaire 2017 who proposes a MIP formulation to find risk averse
solution to QCSP’s. As new equipment is being developed new methods will have to
follow along. This task was taken on by Kasm and Diabat 2020 who solves QCSP’s
where the quay cranes are multi-trolley portal gantry cranes. This new type of crane can
4
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:13==
handle four containers simultaneous working on two bays. They formulate and solve a
MIP model using branch and price and they solve the largest instances used in a frac-
tion of a second. From their work they also learn that the average service time of a ves-
sel can be reduced up to 65% if the new cranes are used.
A growing tendency in the literature is assuming uncertainty on the processing time of
loading and unloading operations. This seems to be a reasonable assumption and it
is taken on by Al-Dhaheri, Jebali, and Diabat 2016b, Rouky et al. 2019 and S. Ma et
al. 2020 who handles the uncertainty using different methods. The first two mentioned
uses metaheuristics to solve the problem with uncertainty. Al-Dhaheri, Jebali, and Dia-
bat 2016b formulates a simulation based genetic algorithm and shows via a computa-
tional study that the proposed algorithm gives good results and stresses the importance
of simulation to get reliable estimates of quay crane schedule performance. Beside the
uncertainty on crane operations Rouky et al. 2019 also assumes uncertainty on crane
travel times. To solve the formulated problem a hybrid ant colony optimization algorithm
was implemented consisting of an ant colony optimization metaheuristic and a variable
neighbourhood descent local search. Experimental results reveals the competitiveness
of the proposed algorithm and its ability to create robust solutions. S. Ma et al. 2020
uses a different approach to handle the uncertainty which is stochastic programming.
They formulate a two-stage stochastic mixed integer programming model and apply dif-
ferent solution methods dependent on the problem size. An integer L-shaped method
is used to solve small problem instances and a simulated annealing algorithm is pre-
sented for large problems. It is shown through numerical experiments that both solution
methods are capable of solving the problem with uncertainty for their respective prob-
lem sizes.
Table 2.1: Classification of articles written after 2015 regarding QCSP
Problem classification
Extra features
Reference
bay | move | cross, safe | max(compl)
-
Sun, Tang, and Baldacci 2019
bay, prec | - | cross, safe | max(compl)
risk-averse solution
Chen and Bierlaire 2017
group, prec | move | cross, safe | max(compl)
draft, trim
Wu and W. Ma 2017
group, prec | pos, move | cross, safe | max(compl)
stability
Zhang et al. 2018
group, prec | ready, pos | cross, safe | max(compl)
uncertainty
Rouky et al. 2019
group prec | ready, pos | cross, safe | max(compl)
uncertainty
S. Ma et al. 2020
group, prec | ready, pos | cross, safe | min(fuel)
tidal impact, fuel
Yu, Wang, and Zhen 2017
group, prec | TW, ready, pos | cross, safe | max(compl)
maintenance
M. Liu et al. 2018
group, prec | ready | cross, safe | max(compl)
-
Y.-N. Liu et al. 2019
container, prmp | - | cross, safe | max(compl)
-
Kenan and Diabat 2015
container, prmp | - | cross, safe | max(compl)
stability
Msakni, Al-Salem, et al. 2018
container, prmp | - | cross, safe | max(compl)
-
Kasm and Diabat 2019
container, prmp | - | cross, safe | max(compl)
new quay cranes
Kasm and Diabat 2020
container, prmp | - | cross, safe | new
-
Al-Dhaheri and Diabat 2015
container, prmp | pos, move | cross, safe | max(compl)
uncertainty
Al-Dhaheri, Jebali, and Diabat 2016b
container, prmp | pos, move | cross, safe | max(compl)
stability
Al-Dhaheri, Jebali, and Diabat 2016a
container, prmp | pos, move | cross, safe | max(compl)
graph representation
Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018
We are very interested in the model proposed by Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 were a
graph is used to represent the QCSP. Using a graph opens up for some new solution
methods and we will try to take advantage of that. The model proposed showed great
potential and so we will investigate if the graph representation can be used for further
modelling and give good results when used for more complicated solution methods.
Using a graph representation makes the QCSP have a lot of similarities with a Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP). The vehicles in this case is the QC’s that has to visit a subset
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
5
==PAGE:14==
of bays travelling though a graph. Therefore we are also interested in how VRP’s are
solved to optimality.
We would like to get an overview of how Vehicle Routing Problems is solved in the liter-
ature, especially the exact methods used to solve VRP’s to optimality. For this we have
looked at the surveys of Yeun et al. 2008 and Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti 2012.
Yeun et al. 2008 describes the different types of VRP’s and in the end describes the al-
gorithms to solve the different types. The exact algorithms they mention as the most
widely used to solve different variants of VRP’s are branch and bound, branch and but
and branch and cut and price. Here branch and cut and price has been judged the most
effective using column generation to get better lower bounds. The subproblem of the
column generation algorithm creates new routes with negative reduced cost while the
master problem assigns routes to vehicles. Most of the same is repeated by Baldacci,
Mingozzi, and Roberti 2012 who mentions branch and cut algorithms and algorithms
based on set partitioning formulations as the most effective. The set partitioning formu-
lated often consists of creating all feasible routes for the vehicles and then assigning
routes to vehicles in the model.
Using the methods that has been successful on VRP’s we will propose a new solution
method to the QCSP using the graph representation from Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018.
6
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:15==
3
Problem characteristics
In this thesis we will consider the QCSP for a single vessel where the QC’s use bidirec-
tional movement. Since we are going to apply a complicated solution method we will
consider a simple version of the QCSP, excluding features such as time windows for
QC’s and stability of the vessel. These attributes can always be added in future work if
the simple model is a success. The vessel is divided into a set of B bays, ordered from
left to right, each having a given workload assigned. The workload is the sum of con-
tainers to be unloaded and loaded at a bay. The workloads are on a single container
level, meaning multiple QC’s can work on the same bay though out the time horizon. A
vessel is assigned a number of identical QC’s K for the entire time the ship is berthed
each with an initial starting position. The set of QC’s are also ordered from left to right
and they are all mounted on the same rail track. We are assuming bidirectional move-
ment meaning the QC’s can move both to the left and to the right. Since the QC’s are
on the same rail track, they can not cross each other and for safety reasons there must
be a certain minimum distance r, between two adjacent QC’s. We will assume that the
loading and unloading operations of a single container as well as QC movement be-
tween two adjacent bays takes one time unit. The objective will then be to finish all re-
quired crane operations as fast as possible.
From the safety margin and the non-crossing constraints the bays reachable by a quay
crane can be derived. If a crane k can reach a bay b it satisfies (1) b ≥(k −1)(r + 1) + 1
and (2) b ≤B −(K −k)(r + 1). We define the set Bk of reachable bays by QC k as
follows
Bk = {b : b ∈B, (k −1)(r + 1) + 1 ≤b ≤B −(K −k)(r + 1)}
All sets and parameters used in the described QCSP is shown in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Parameters and sets of the QCSP
K
total number of QC’s assigned to vessel
K
set of QC’s, indexed by k
B
total number of bays
B
set of bays, indexed by b
Bk
set of bays reachable by QC k
T
length of the planning horizon
T
set of time periods, indexed by t, T = {1, . . . , T}
wb
workload on bay b in terms of number of containers to be handled
r
minimum distance between adjacent QC’s in terms of number of bays, r ≥1
Ik
initial bay position of QC k
To illustrate the QCSP and what a solution looks like we will present Example 1 of Msakni,
Diabat, et al. 2018. Table 3.2 shows a workload profile with 10 bays and an associated
workload for each bay. We assume that 3 quay cranes with starting positions at bays 1,
7 and 10 are available in this example and the safety margin r is set to 1. The process
time of moving one container as well as the QC movement time between two adjacent
bays is one time unit.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
7
==PAGE:16==
Table 3.2: Workload profile for Example 1
Bay
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Workload
10
6
0
4
2
1
10
4
1
1
Figure 3.1 shows the optimal solution for Example 1. The work of each QC is repre-
sented by the colored boxes and the arrows represent movement between the bays.
We can see in the figure that all workloads are handled after 17 time units and therefore
the optimal makespan is 17.
Figure 3.1: Optimal solution for Example 1
From this point on we will assume a safety margin of 1. This is what is normally used in
container terminals and so we will assume r = 1 throughout the rest of the project.
8
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:17==
4
Mixed integer programming models for
QCSP
Before going into more complicated solution methods we will look at MIP models for
solving the QCSP using a graph representation. In sections 4.1 and 4.2 we present
the graph representation formulated by Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 and their proposed
MIP model. We discuss the proposed model in section 4.3 before settling on a final MIP
model in section 4.4.
4.1
Graph representation proposed by Msakni, Diabat, et al.
2018
In this section we present the work of Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018. We will define the
graph representation as they do before looking at the proposed model F1 used for solv-
ing a QCSP. As they do in Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 we will also define a directed
graph G = (N, A) with nodes N and arcs A to represent the QCSP. First, we define the
nodes of the graph and later the different types of arcs. The graph has a source node
s and a sink node u and all flow starts in s and ends in u. For each quay crane k ∈K
we define a node sk which we will call the quay crane node of QC k. Each QC node has
one incoming arc, coming from the source node, creating a flow for each QC. For each
combination of a bay b ∈B and a time t ∈T we define a node j = ⟨b, t⟩. These nodes
we will call workload nodes and since there is one for each combination of bays and
times, the number of workload bays must be the number of bays B times the length of
the time horizon T, B × T. The set quay crane nodes we denote by NQC and we de-
note the set of workload nodes by NB. Hence, we can define the set of all nodes as,
N = {s} ∪NQC ∪NB ∪{u}.
We will now define the set of arcs A which represent all possible QC movement in the
QCSP. A flow through the graph starts in the source node and goes though a quay
crane node and then through workload nodes until it ends in the sink node. This de-
mands different arc types in A and we will go through all the types needed.
• An arc (s, sk) ∈A represents a link between a source node s and a QC node sk ∈
NQC.
• An arc (sk, j) ∈A links the QC node sk ∈NQC to the workload node j = ⟨b, t⟩∈
NB. This represents the earliest time QC k can work on bay b since it must travel
from its starting position to bay b before it can start working on bay b. For (sk, j) to
be in A the following must hold: (sk, j) ∈A iff t = |b −Ik| + 1 and b ∈Bk.
• An arc (j, j′) ∈A links two workload nodes j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB and j′ = ⟨b′, t + 1⟩∈
NB, where 1 < b < B and 1 ≤t < T. This arc represents flow going from bay b to
bay b′ at time t+1 and dependent on the relation between b and b′ this can mean
three things: (i) b = b′, a quay crane is staying in bay b from time t to t+1 meaning
a container is being handled at bay b. (ii) b′ = b + 1, a quay crane is moving from
bay b to the bay on its right hand side at time t+1. (iii) b′ = b −1, a quay crane is
moving from bay b to the bay on its left hand side at time t+1.
These three scenarios does not cover the left most and right most bays. The outer
bays only have one neighbour and must be defined as follows. The first bay only
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
9
==PAGE:18==
have a neighbour on its right, so for j1 = ⟨1, t⟩∈NB only two arcs satisfy the
aforementioned condition, namely (j1, j′
1), (j1, j′′
1) ∈A where j′
1 = ⟨2, t + 1⟩and
j′
1 = ⟨1, t + 1⟩.
Similarly, the last bay only have a neighbour on its left, hence for jB = ⟨B, t⟩∈NB
the two arcs satisfying the condition are (jB, j′
B), (jB, j′′
B) ∈A where j′
B = ⟨B, t+1⟩
and j′ = ⟨B −1, t + 1⟩.
• An arc (j, u) represents a link between a workload node j = ⟨b, T⟩∈NB and the
sink node u. These arcs ensure that the flow ends in the sink node.
For each arc (i, j) ∈A we associate a binary cost cij which is equal to one if a con-
tainer is being handled by arc (i, j) i.e. the two nodes are related to the same bay or i is
a quay crane node. The weight of the arcs are computed as follows:
• cij = 1, if
– i = sk, first operation by QC k ∈K
– i = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB and j = ⟨b, t + 1⟩∈NB, 1 ≤t < T, stays at bay b to process
container.
• cij = 0, otherwise.
Table 4.1: Workload profile for Example 2
Bay
1
2
3
4
5
Workload
3
1
2
4
2
As an example of the graph representation we will present Example 2 of Msakni, Di-
abat, et al. 2018. The workload profile is given in table 4.1. It is a small example with
only 5 bays and 2 QC’s since the graph grows rapidly when the instance gets larger.
The initial bay positions are 1 and 5 for the QC’s, the safety margin is 1 and the plan-
ning horizon is set to 8, but it could be any upper bound on the makespan. The graph
corresponding to this instance is shown in figure 4.1. We see the value of cij is as-
signed as arc weights in the graph showing the arcs where work occurs. The set of
nodes consists of the source and sink nodes, two quay crane nodes and all the work-
load nodes, of which there is one for each combination of bay and time period. The first
QC can reach bays 1, 2 and 3 thus the QC node of the first QC has arcs going to those
bays at the earliest possible time. Similarly, the second QC has arcs going to bays 3,
4 and 5. Arcs between workload nodes associated with the same bay corresponds to
a crane staying at that bay processing a container. If the bays of the two nodes are not
the same but are adjacent the arc represents movement between the bays. Figure 4.2
shows the optimal solution of example 2. The solution consists of the two routes go-
ing through the graph where the route with first arc (s, s1) is the route used by the first
QC and the route starting with arc (s, s2) is used by the second QC. Under each node
in the routes the current cumulative workload is reported. For a node it shows the num-
ber of containers that has been processed at the bay associated with that node. For
example, zero containers has been processed at bay 2 at time 4 since QC 1 has only
just arrived at bay 2 but QC 1 stays at bay 2 to time 5 and therefore cumulative work-
load is 1. By looking at when the latest work occurs in the routes we can determine the
optimal makespan. We see that both routes have work happening from time 7 to time
10
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:19==
8 and at time 8 all workloads has been fulfilled and thus the optimal makespan is 8. In
many cases we will have a time horizon T, being larger than the optimal makespan. In
those cases the routes would include arcs where in reality, nothing happens, since the
QC using that route has finished working before the end of the time horizon. When con-
sidering an optimal solution we would only be interested in the part up until the last work
is finished. Everything after this point only has the purpose of allowing the flow to reach
the sink node.
Figure 4.1: The obtained graph G of example 2
Figure 4.2: Optimal solution of example 2
4.2
Modelling F1
Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 formulates a Mixed Integer Programming model based on
the graph representation to solve the QCSP. We will here present the model as it is pro-
posed by them. Modelling the QCSP for the graph representation in a compact form
requires the definition of subsets. Multiple subsets of the set of arcs must be defined
along with other subsets and functions. The needed subsets are defined below.
• δ−
j : subset of arcs in A with destination in j ∈N.
• δ+
j : subset of arcs in A with origin in j ∈N.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
11
==PAGE:20==
• αj: a function that returns the bay number of a node j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB, i.e. αj = b.
• βb: subset of workload nodes of NB related to bay b, βb = {j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB}.
• Ab: subset of arcs in A with destination in nodes related to bay b, Ab = {(i, j) ∈
A : j ∈βb}.
• ˆAb: subset of arcs in Ab where loading or unloading occurs in bay b, i.e. (i, j) ∈ˆAb
iff (i, j) ∈Ab and cij = 1.
• Aj
s: subset of arcs in A used to represent the safety margin constraint. Given node
j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB, this subset includes all incoming arcs of nodes that are positioned
from 1 to r bays away from the right-hand side of bay b, and share the same time
period t as j. Thus, Aj
s = {(i, k) ∈A : j = ⟨b, t⟩, k = ⟨b′, t⟩, b′ ∈[b+1, min(b+r, B)]}.
It is enough to define this set for the right-hand side only because if all cranes
keep the safety distance to the cranes on its right-hand side the safety distance
will automatically be satisfied on the left-hand side for all cranes as well.
Together with the sets and parameters defined in section 4.1 the definitions above rep-
resents all the sets and parameters added by the graph representation. All the informa-
tion is summed up in table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Parameters and sets added by the graph representation
s, u
the source and sink node of the graph
NQC
the set of QC nodes, indexed by sk
NB
the set of workload nodes, indexed by j = ⟨b, t⟩
N
the set of all nodes, indexed by j
A
the set of arcs, indexed by (i,j)
cij
parameter indicating if work occurs on arc (i, j) ∈A
δ−
j
arcs in A with destination in j
δ+
j
arcs in A with origin in j
αj
a function that returns the bay number of a node j = ⟨b, t⟩
βb
subset of workload nodes in NB related to bay b
Ab
subset of arcs in A with destination in nodes related to bay b
ˆAb
arcs in A where loading or unloading occurs in bay b
Aj
s
subset of arcs in A used to represent the safety margin constraint
Now we are ready to define F1 as in Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018. The variables used in
the model and the model itself are defined below.
• xij: a binary variable that takes the value 1 if arc (i, j) ∈A is selected, and 0 oth-
erwise.
• yt: flag variable that takes the value 0 if the workload has not been completed at
all bays at time t ∈T , and 1 otherwise.
• Wj: a positive integer variable that counts the workload done at each bay at time
period t for j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB. It is also defined on the QC nodes and are fixed to 0,
Wsk = 0, sk ∈NQC.
12
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:21==
F1 : max
∑
t∈T
yt
(4.1)
s.t.
xsj = 1
∀j ∈NQC
(4.2)
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
xij =
∑
i∈N,(j,i)∈δ+
j
xji
∀j ∈NQC ∪NB
(4.3)
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
xij ≤1 −
∑
(i′,j′)∈Aj
s
xi′j′
∀j ∈NB
(4.4)
∑
j∈N,(sk,j)∈δ+
sk
αjxskj ≤
∑
j∈N,(sk+1,j)∈δ+
sk+1
αjxsk+1j
∀k ∈K \ {K}
(4.5)
∑
(i,j)∈Ab
cijxij ≥wb
∀b ∈B
(4.6)
Wj = 0
∀j ∈NQC
(4.7)
Wj ≤
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
Wi + cijxij
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(4.8)
yt ≤Wj
wb
∀t ∈T , j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(4.9)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀(i, j) ∈A
(4.10)
yt ∈{0, 1}
∀t ∈T
(4.11)
Wj ∈I+
0
∀j ∈NQC ∪NB
(4.12)
Constraints (4.2) initializes the flow for each QC, forcing all QC’s to work on the ves-
sel. Constraints (4.3) ensures flow conservation, forcing the flow on incoming arcs to be
equal the flow on outgoing arcs for all nodes but the source and sink node. The safety
margin and non-crossing are handled by constraints (4.4) and (4.5). Constraints (4.5)
ensures that the outgoing arcs from the QC nodes do not cross, saying that a given
crane must start at a bay with a weakly lower index than the crane on its right-hand
side. From that point on constraints (4.4) ensures that all QC’s keep a safety margin on
its right-hand side and since the safety margin between all QC’s is respected it is impos-
sible for two cranes to cross because they can not get close to each other. Constraints
(4.6) are demand constraints for each bay saying that the workload for the bay must be
satisfied. It does so by calculating the number of arcs where work occurs at a bay b and
forcing this to be larger than the workload at bay b. The W-variables are initialized by
constraints (4.7) by fixing them to 0 at the QC nodes. Constraints (4.8) then calculates
the current accumulated workload at each node based on the accumulated workload at
the previous node related to the same bay. The workload and the W-variables are used
in constraints (4.9) to define the flag variable λt. For all time periods checking if the ac-
cumulated workload is larger or equal the workload in all bays and if this does not hold
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
13
==PAGE:22==
for at least one bay the right-hand side for that constraint would be smaller than 1 forc-
ing the λ-variable to be 0 for that time period. The objective (4.1) maximizes the number
of time periods in the time horizon where workloads at all bays has been processed,
hence we get the solution where the vessel can leave as fast as possible. Using the op-
timal objective value z∗the makespan can be calculated as T −z∗+ 1. The feasible
region of the variables used in the model are defined by (4.10), (4.11) and (4.12).
4.3
Discussion of F1
In the following work we will use the model proposed by Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 as a
starting point but first we will discuss the model a bit and make some small changes be-
fore moving on. The most crucial thing to discuss is the safety margin and non-crossing
constraints. Let us consider an example where a vessel with 10 bays is assigned two
cranes starting at bays 2 and 8 respectively. By constraint 4.5 it would be feasible for
both QC’s to perform their first operation at bay 8. QC 2 would work at bay 8 in time
period 1 since bay 8 is the starting position of QC 2 while QC 1 would start working
at bay 8 in time period 7 after spending the first 6 time periods travelling from bay 2.
The two arcs leaving the QC nodes would be (s1, ⟨8, 7⟩) and (s2, ⟨8, 1⟩). After work-
ing at bay 8 in time period 1 there is nothing in the model stopping QC 2 from moving
to bay 3 and thereby crossing QC 1. The arcs used by QC 2 would be (⟨8, 1⟩, ⟨7, 2⟩),
(⟨7, 2⟩, ⟨6, 3⟩), (⟨6, 3⟩, ⟨5, 4⟩), (⟨5, 4⟩, ⟨4, 5⟩) and (⟨4, 5⟩, ⟨3, 6⟩). This scenario is not hin-
dered by the safety margin constraint because it does not account for arcs with origin
in QC nodes. This is probably a very unlikely scenario but it is feasible in this model
and it should not be since it would allow two cranes crossing each other. It is likely that
this was handled in the implementation and computational study conducted by Msakni,
Diabat, et al. 2018. Nevertheless we will make a simple correction to the model fixing
the problem. We will change the set of arcs A removing the arcs with origin in the QC
nodes. Instead we will simply add one arc going from each QC node to the starting po-
sition of the QC using that QC node. For k ∈K we add the arc (sk, ⟨Ik, 1⟩). Since these
arcs are the only ones leaving the QC nodes we know that the QC’s will be at their start-
ing position in time period 1. From this point on the x-variables track the location of the
cranes and the safety margin constraint will indeed ensure both that the safety margin
is upheld and also make crossing impossible. The new arcs with origin in QC nodes will
not count as working arcs since we do not want to force each QC to work at its starting
position in time period 1. Instead the arc weight cij will be 0 for these arcs and we will
disregard the first time period when we calculate the makespan of a solution. Hence
given an optimal objective value z∗the makespan would be T −z∗+ 1 −1 = T −z∗.
Going forward we choose to use the makespan as our objective function, turning the
model into a minimization problem. We do this because it seems more intuitive to use
the makespan and because we prefer to have a minimization problem for the work to
come.
Regardless of which of the two objective functions are used it could be argued that the
demand constraints (4.6) are unnecessary. If there exist a feasible solution satisfying
the demand constraint, either of the objective functions would ensure that the workload
is processed in all bays. This comes from the way the flag variable yt is defined where
it can be 1 only for time periods where all workloads has been processed. The only pur-
pose of the demand constraint is that it tells if the model is infeasible in the case where
it is impossible to satisfy the demand. We plan to use the model for decomposition and
column generation and in column generation you always start with a feasible solution,
hence we have no use of a demand constraint. Another thing that can be disregarded is
the cij parameter in constraints (4.8). Since we are summing over arcs in ˆAb which are
14
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:23==
arcs where containers are being processed, we know that cij is equal to 1 for all these
arcs. The parameter has no effect and can be removed from the constraints without any
consequences.
Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 use their proposed model to solve small and medium sized
instances. They solve the small instances to optimality very fast and they are able to
find optimal solutions to the medium sized instances as well but in some cases it takes
several hours. It could be argued that some of the instances considered are not very re-
alistic in regards to the number of QC’s assigned to the vessels. They solve instances
where 3 QC’s are assigned vessels with 8 bays, 4 QC’s are assigned vessels with 10
bays and 5 QC’s are assigned vessels with 12 bays. Looking at how QC’s are used
in container terminals these instances use more QC than what is considered normal
for those number of bays. The effect on the model of having the unrealistic relation be-
tween number of QC’s and number of bays is that the movement of the QC’s is very lim-
ited. When the QC’s possibility to move is reduced it makes the solution space smaller
hence making the problem easier to solve. We intend to solve more realistic problem
instances using a different solution method.
4.4
Redefining F1 as F2
In this section we will define the MIP model that will be our frame of reference through-
out this thesis. This will be the model that we compare the performance of other solu-
tion methods to. The model will be based on the model F1 proposed by Msakni, Diabat,
et al. 2018 but with a couple of changes. Besides the changes discussed in the previ-
ous section we shall make one more change to F1. We will assume the bays of the ves-
sel to be non-preemptive meaning only one QC is allowed to serve each bay and when
a QC starts serving a bay it must finish serving that bay before moving on. We do this to
simplify the problem hoping this will make it possible to solve more problem instances.
If our solution method is successful it is easy to go back to preemptive bays and test the
solution methods under these assumptions. With the discussed changes we will now
define a new MIP model for the QCSP using a graph representation. We will call the
new model F2. The set and parameter names are the same as in F1 and can be found
in tables 3.1 and 4.2. We will add an extra type of variable to handle the assumption of
non-preemption, and so the variable definitions and the model F2 are shown below.
• xij: a binary variable that takes the value 1 if arc (i, j) ∈A is selected, and 0 oth-
erwise.
• yt: flag variable that takes the value 0 if the workload has not been completed at
all bays at time t ∈T , and 1 otherwise.
• Wj: a positive integer variable that counts the workload done at each bay at time
period t for j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB. It is also defined on the QC nodes and are fixed to 0,
Wsk = 0, sk ∈NQC.
• qj: a binary variable that takes the value 1 if a container is being processed at
node j, and 0 otherwise.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
15
==PAGE:24==
F2 : min
T −
∑
t∈T
yt
(4.13)
s.t.
xsj = 1
∀j ∈NQC
(4.14)
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
xij =
∑
i∈N,(j,i)∈δ+
j
xji
∀j ∈NQC ∪NB
(4.15)
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
xij ≤1 −
∑
(i′,j′)∈Aj
s
xi′j′
∀j ∈NB
(4.16)
Wj = 0
∀j ∈NQC
(4.17)
Wj ≤
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
Wi + xij
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(4.18)
yt ≤Wj
wb
∀t ∈T , j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(4.19)
qj =
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
xij
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(4.20)
j+wb−1
∑
l=j
∑
i∈N,(i,l)∈ˆ
Ab
xil ≥wb(qj −qj−1)
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB, 1 < t ≤T −wb
(4.21)
j+wb−1
∑
l=j
∑
i∈N,(i,l)∈ˆ
Ab
xil ≥wbqj
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB, t = 1
(4.22)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀(i, j) ∈A
(4.23)
yt ∈{0, 1}
∀t ∈T
(4.24)
Wj ∈Z+
∀j ∈NQC ∪NB
(4.25)
qj ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈NB
(4.26)
Compared to F1 constraints (4.5) and (4.6) has been removed and the objective has
been changed towards minimizing the makespan. Constraints (4.20), (4.21) and (4.22)
as well as expression (4.26) are added to define non-preemption of bays. Constraints
(4.20) checks for each workload node if work occurs at that node and sets the qj vari-
able to 1 if that is the case. Constraints (4.21) checks if a node j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB is the
first node where work occurs at bay b. If so it forces the QC to stay at bay b working
until the workload of bay b is handled. Otherwise the right-hand side of the equation
is zero and the constraints do nothing. Constraint (4.22) is a special case of constraint
(4.21) in the case where t = 1. The problem represented by F2 is what we intend to
16
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:25==
solve and so we will use this model as our frame of reference. Throughout the thesis
we shall compare the performance of our work to the performance of F2. The goal of
course is to present a solution method performing better than F2 either by solving in-
stances faster or being able to solve larger instances.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:27==
5
A branch and price algorithm for
solving the QCSP
Now we will move on to describing a new solution method. From the literature review
we learned that branch and price algorithms has been efficient for solving Vehicle Rout-
ing Problems. Looking at our model F2 we can find a lot of similarities to VRP. In VRP
a fleet of vehicles has to visit a set of customers while minimizing the total distance
travelled by the vehicles. Each customer are visited exactly once and the vehicles all
start at a depot which they also return to when they are finished visiting customers.
In our model a set of QC’s has to visit and service a set of bays while minimizing the
makespan. Since we are assuming the bays to be non-preemptive each bay can only
be serviced by one QC just as in VRP. In our problem there is some waiting time while
bays are being served which is not the case when a vehicle visits a customer in VRP
but this does not change the fact that these two problems are very similar. The biggest
difference is that in our model we have non-crossing and safety margin constraints. No
similar features are being used in VRP’s because as long as the vehicles does not drive
into each other it can not be a problem that they are driving in the same areas. To mit-
igate the difference between the models we will remove the non-crossing and safety
margin constraints from our model and solve the remaining problem using branch and
price. In the branch and price algorithm we will be able to use branching decisions forc-
ing solutions to satisfy the removed constraints so that we still get an optimal solution
that is feasible for F2.
P0
P1
P3
P7
x8 = 1
P8
x8 = 0
x4 = 0
P4
P9
x5 = 0
P10
x5 = 1
x4 = 1
x2 = 0
P2
P5
x8 = 0
P6
P13
x1 = 0
P14
x1 = 1
x8 = 1
x2 = 1
Figure 5.1: Small example of a branching tree
Branch and price is a combination of branch and bound and column generation. In the
standard branch and bound algorithm the relaxation of a MIP model is solved and branch-
ing decisions are made on fractional variables until an optimal solution to the MIP model
is found. A small example of a branching tree can be seen in figure 5.1. We assume
that P0 is the relaxation of some MIP model and any feasible solution to the MIP model
is an upper bound for the model. First the problem P0 is solved which gives a solution
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
19
==PAGE:28==
where x2 is fractional. Two nodes P1 and P2 is created, each being almost identical to
P0. The only change comes from the branching decisions forcing x2 to be 0 in P1 and
forcing x2 to be 1 in P2. The new problems are solved and new fractional variables ap-
pear creating more nodes based on new branching decisions. This process continues
until all created nodes have been solved. When solving the problem at a node different
things will happen depending on the found solution. If the solution value of the found so-
lution is worse than a known upper bound, we say that we fathom that node by bound.
The solution found at any node in the branching tree is a lower bound to the MIP model
and the children of a node can not give a better lower bound than their parent since the
parent is always a relaxation of its children. When we find a node with a solution value
worse than some known upper bound we know that all descendants of that node will
have solution values worse than the upper bound and so we do not create any children
to such a node. We can also fathom nodes by infeasibility and by optimality. If the prob-
lem of a node is infeasible all descendants of that node are infeasible as well and we do
not create children from such a node. If the solution found at a node is integer thereby
feasible to the MIP model we say that the solution is optimal in the subtree having the
given node as root node. There can not exist a node in the subtree with a better solu-
tion value since the root node is a relaxation of all its descendants and so when we find
a node with an integer solution we will not create children from that node. If we are un-
able to fathom a node for one of the three reasons described we have to investigate its
descendants.
In branch and price instead of solving a relaxation of a MIP at each node in the branch-
ing tree we run a column generation method. A column generation method also solves
a relaxation of a MIP model but it does so using a restricted version of the relaxation
and multiple subproblems. These subproblems are often called prizing problems giving
the method its name. The column generation method returns an optimal solution to a
relaxed MIP model and so variables can take fractional values. Branch and price deals
with fractional variables just like branch and bound, branching on them creating new
nodes in the branching tree.
Before we create our branch and price algorithm we must first define a column gener-
ation solution method. In order to do so we need a MIP model formulated on a certain
form. In section 5.1 we reformulate F2 using Dantzig Wolfe reformulation. The reformu-
lated model is used to define a column generation solution method in section 5.2 before
we describe a simple branch and price algorithm in section 5.3. In section 5.4 we con-
sider the weaknesses of our branch and price algorithm and try to find extensions to the
algorithm fixing some of these weaknesses.
5.1
Dantzig Wolfe reformulation
In this section we will redefine the QCSP with graph representation using Dantzig Wolfe
reformulation. Dantzig Wolfe reformulation can be used to simplify some types of mod-
els. Often you look for models where, if some complicating constraints are removed,
it leaves out some simple independent problems. In our case we identify constraints
(4.15), (4.17) and (4.18) of F2 as complicating constraints. Without these constraints
the problem is reduced to just finding a path through the graph for each QC. This leads
us to a two-step method where first we find all the routes through the graph and then we
solve a model choosing the best routes to be used.
Let a route be defined as a collection of connected arcs starting in the source node and
ending in the sink node handling containers on a subset of the bays in B along the way.
The purpose of the model will now be to assign routes to QC’s in a way that satisfies
20
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:29==
the constraints of F2. The sets, parameters and variables used in the Dantzig Wolfe
reformulation can be defined as follows.
• P: the set of all feasible routes for a single quay crane. For a route to be feasible it
must satisfy constraints (4.14), (4.15), (4.20), (4.21) and (4.22) for a single QC.
• Pk: a subset of the routes in P that can be used by QC k. A QC k ∈K can use a
route only if it passes through its QC node sk.
• aijp: a parameter with value 1 if arc (i, j) ∈A is in route p ∈P, and 0 otherwise.
• λkp: a binary variable that takes the value 1 if QC k ∈K is assigned to route p ∈P,
and 0 otherwise.
The idea of Dantzig Wolfe reformulation is that we can substitute the old decision vari-
ables xij from F2 with the new decision variables λkp. Using the sets and parameters
defined above we can write the following equality.
xij =
∑
p∈P
∑
k∈K
λkpaijp
∀(i, j) ∈A
(5.1)
The equality shows the relation between the old and the new variable. If the right-hand
side is 1, meaning a QC has been assigned a route where arc (i, j) ∈A is used, that
corresponds to using the arc (i, j) in F2 meaning xij = 1. Similarly if the right-hand side
is 0 it corresponds to not using an arc in F2. When we later talk about a solution with λ-
variables being feasible to F2 it is implied that the solution must first be translated using
equality (5.1). In the Dantzig Wolfe reformulation we can ignore all constraints from F2
concerning the routes since we assume all routes in P satisfies those constraints. Us-
ing this and substituting in the new variables for the old we can write the Dantzig Wolfe
reformulation. We will refer to this model as the Integer Programming Master problem
(IPM).
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
21
==PAGE:30==
IPM : min
T −
∑
t∈T
yt
(5.2)
s.t.
∑
p∈Pk
λkp = 1
∀k ∈K
(5.3)
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
∑
p∈P
∑
k∈K
λkpaijp ≤1
∀j ∈NB
(5.4)
Wj = 0
∀j ∈NQC
(5.5)
Wj ≤
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
Wi +
∑
p∈P
∑
k∈K
λkpaijp
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(5.6)
yt ≤Wj
wb
∀t ∈T , j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(5.7)
λkp ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K, p ∈P
(5.8)
yt ∈{0, 1}
∀t ∈T
(5.9)
Wj ∈Z+
∀j ∈NQC ∪NB
(5.10)
Constraint (5.3) ensures that all QC’s are assigned exactly one route from the sets of
routes usable by the QC’s. Constraint (5.4) is the same as (4.16) in F2 without the sum
on the right-hand side. For now we are ignoring safety constraints and so we no longer
need to avoid QC’s being within the safety margin of one another. We keep the revised
constraint to ensure that each node is used at most once. Otherwise it would be possi-
ble for two QC’s to be located at the same bay at the same time. Constraints (5.5), (5.6)
and (5.7) are the same as in F2 except for the substitution of the x-variables in (5.6).
The new variable type is defined in (5.8) and the other variables are the same as in F2.
The objective is also the same as in F2 which is minimizing the makespan.
An assumption for this model to work is that we are able to generate the entire set P
and that might not be straight forward. Let us investigate what it would require to gen-
erate P. At first we assume that at all points in time each QC has three options, go left,
stay in bay or go right. Under this assumption we can calculate the total number of fea-
sible routes in a given instance as K · 3T−1. Of course the number of time periods T is
not actually a part of an instance but is chosen in some way based on the instance. We
assume that we are able to find a decent upper bound on the makespan T for these cal-
culations. If we want a more precise estimate on the number of feasible routes we can
include the information that QC’s only have two movement options when located in the
left most or right most bay. The following estimate takes this into account by comparing
the number of bays that are not on the edges of the quay to the total number of bays.
The alternative estimate K(2 + B−2
B )T−1 is probably more accurate than the first one so
we will use this to calculate an estimate of the number of feasible routes for different in-
stances. In table 5.1 three instances are shown together with the value of our estimate.
The first instance is the one from example 2 and the two others are just some random
values while still being realistic. We can see that the number of feasible routes grows
22
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:31==
very fast as a function of the instance size. The estimates grow exponentially as a func-
tion of the number of time periods which will be large for large instances. The third ex-
ample in table 5.1 would be considered a large instance with around 800 containers but
instances with over 1000 containers are also normal.
B
K
T
feasible routes
5
2
8
1606
10
2
25
1.081 · 1011
20
4
250
5.48 · 10115
Table 5.1: Calculations of feasible routes for different instance sizes.
It is clear from these estimates that generating all feasible routes is not doable. Even
if we were able to do it the model would have to contain variables for each route which
would be way to many variables for the model to handle. We handle this issue by using
column generation which start with a small set of feasible routes and adds more routes
that show great promise along the way until finding the optimal routes. This way we will
not have to generate the entire set P and the number of variables will be limited.
5.2
Column generation
In this section we will present a column generation solution method that finds lower
bounds to the IP master problem. The way column generation works in general is that
first we define an Integer Programming Master Problem, in our case it is the Dantzig-
Wolfe reformulation IPM. Then we relax the problem from being an IP problem to be-
ing a linear programming problem that we call the Linear Programming Master Problem
(LPM). The intention when using column generation is to solve LPM and then use an-
other algorithm in order to find a solution feasible to IPM. One such algorithm could be
branch and bound. The way that we find an optimal solution to LPM is by finding a so-
lution that is both primal and dual feasible to LPM. We get a primal feasible solution by
using the Restricted Linear Programming Master Problem (RLPM). RLPM is the same
problem as LPM except it only uses a subset of the columns from LPM. In column gen-
eration a column refers to a route, in the way that the column represents the parameters
related to the λ-variables for that route. Therefore we use the words column and route
interchangeable. We assume that a subset of columns can be found providing a fea-
sible RLPM. From RLPM we get a primal feasible solution to LPM and then we must
check if the solution from RLPM is dual feasible to LPM. By calculating the reduced cost
for the λ-variables we can determine if a solution is dual feasible and so subproblems
are used to check for dual feasibility and to generate new routes. The subproblems con-
sists of an objective function that is negative or zero if the solution is dual feasible and
they have to satisfy the same constraints as the routes used in LPM. This way one can
see if a primal feasible solution is also dual feasible. If the objective values are posi-
tive we use the solutions of the subproblems as new routes in RLPM. This is done until
enough routes are added so that the solution of RLPM is both primal and dual feasible
for LPM and therefore optimal.
First we define the LP master problem. LPM is defined as the relaxation of the IP mas-
ter having identical objective and constraints but with continuous variables. The vari-
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
23
==PAGE:32==
ables in LPM is defined as follows.
λkp ∈[0, 1]
∀k ∈K, p ∈P
(5.11)
yt ∈[0, 1]
∀t ∈T
(5.12)
Wj ≥0
∀j ∈NQC ∪NB
(5.13)
We are still unable to solve LPM since it still requires the set of routes P to be gener-
ated which is why we must define a new model called the Restricted LP master problem
(RLPM). RLPM only uses a subset of routes ˆP ⊆P but are otherwise identical to LPM.
It finds the optimal solution that can be achieved when only a given subset of routes
are available. It is assumed that we are able to generate such a subset ˆP allowing for a
feasible solution satisfying all workloads of RLPM. Given a set of routes ˆP we are able
to solve RLPM to optimality. We know that any feasible solution for RLPM must also
be feasible to LPM since the two models has identical constraints. However, we can
not say if an optimal solution to RLPM is also optimal to LPM. It probably is not since
only a small number of routes were available but there is no way to tell by just look-
ing at the primal problem. We know that the solution is primal feasible for LPM, now
we must check if it is also dual feasible for LPM. We do so by looking at the dual val-
ues of RLPM. The RLPM is a linear model, hence there exists a corresponding dual
model. We are not interested in the entire dual model, only the part concerning the
routes. Constraints (5.3), (5.4) and (5.6) include the route assigning variable λkp and
so we are interested in the dual variables related to these constraints. Let the dual vari-
ables for constraints (5.3), (5.4) and (5.6) be πk, ηj and µj respectively. Now we are
able to write the constraint in the dual problem which has the primal variable λkp as its
dual variable.
πk +
∑
j∈NB


ηj
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
aijp


−
∑
j=⟨b,t⟩∈NB

µj
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
aijp

≤0
∀k ∈K, p ∈ˆP
(5.14)
The RLPM is a minimization problem and the λ-variables are positive, making the above
constraint a lower or equal constraint. The right-hand side is 0 since the λ-variables do
not appear in the objective of RLPM. The left-hand side is derived from the three afore-
mentioned constraints substituting the λ-variables for the respective dual variables of
the constraints. Based on the constraint types of the three primal constraints we know
how the dual variables are defined. Constraints (5.3) are equality constraints, hence
πk ∈R while constraints (5.4) and (5.6) are lower or equal constraints meaning ηj ≤0
and µj ≤0. Using the dual constraints we are now able to define the reduced cost for
λkp as follows.
¯Ckp = πk +
∑
j∈NB


ηj
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
aijp


−
∑
j=⟨b,t⟩∈NB

µj
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
aijp


(5.15)
The reduced costs ¯Ckp can be used to determine whether or not an optimal solution to
RLPM is dual feasible to LPM. If for all k ∈K, p ∈ˆP the reduced cost are no larger than
zero satisfying the dual constraints 5.14 then it follows that the solution is dual feasible
for LPM. However, if the reduced cost is positive for just one k ∈K, p ∈ˆP the solution is
dual infeasible to LPM. This means that there exists a route not currently in ˆP with pos-
itive reduced cost. We want to find the route with the greatest reduced cost and add it
24
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:33==
to ˆP. To do this we use a prizing problem having the reduced cost as objective function.
A pricing problem is defined for each QC k ∈K finding the route usable by QC k with
the greatest reduced cost. The routes are generated by using the route defining con-
straints left out of LPM. For each QC k ∈K we define the following model as the pricing
problem for QC k.
max
πk +
∑
j∈NB


ηj
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
xij


−
∑
j=⟨b,t⟩∈NB

µj
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
xij


(5.16)
s.t.
xs,k+1 = 1
(5.17)
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈δ−
j
xij =
∑
i∈N,(j,i)∈δ+
j
xji
∀j ∈NQC ∪NB
(5.18)
qj =
∑
i∈N,(i,j)∈ˆ
Ab
xij
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB
(5.19)
j+wb−1
∑
l=j
∑
i∈N,(i,l)∈ˆ
Ab
xil ≥wb(qj −qj−1)
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB, 1 < t ≤T −wb
(5.20)
j+wb−1
∑
l=j
∑
i∈N,(i,l)∈ˆ
Ab
xil ≥wbqj
∀j = ⟨b, t⟩∈NB, t = 1
(5.21)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀(i, j) ∈A
(5.22)
qj ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈NB
(5.23)
The constraints and variable definitions of the prizing problems are the same as the
ones defining the routes in F2. This makes it so that a solution to the prizing problem
for QC k is a route starting in the source node going through the QC node for QC k and
travelling through workload nodes until reaching the sink node. The route will satisfy
flow conservation as well as non-preemption of bays. In the objective (5.16) we have
substituted aijp with xij so that what is calculated is the reduced cost of the route cre-
ated by the arcs used in the solution.
With the RLPM and the pricing problems defined, all that is left to do is finding an ini-
tial set of routes ˆP. Many different heuristics for finding initial routes can be defined,
some more greedy than others. Because of how the objective is defined, the initial set
of routes do not have service all bays. The only constraint that needs to be consid-
ered is constraint (5.4). As long as a set of routes makes it possible to satisfy (5.4),
they qualify as our initial set of routes ˆP. If we can not service all bays with the initial
set of routes we just get an objective value of T. However, we would prefer to find a set
of routes servicing all bays giving a better initial solution value. We will define a simple
heuristic for finding a set ˆP which is not especially greedy. The QC with the lowest start-
ing position will travel to bay 1 and service all bays up until the bay left of the second
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
25
==PAGE:34==
QC’s starting position. All other QC’s will service the bays from its starting position to
the bay left of the next QC’s starting position. The right-most QC service the bays be-
tween its starting position and the last bay. This heuristic will generate a route for each
QC and together the routes define ˆP. Using ˆP in RLPM will allow for a feasible solution
to be found and we can begin generating columns.
The column generation method works as follows. Given an initial set of routes ˆP we
solve RLPM to optimality. We use the dual variable values to define a pricing problem
for each QC. We solve the pricing problem for each QC k ∈K and if the objective value
is positive we add the route from the pricing problem to ˆP and ˆPk. If the objective value
of a pricing problem is negative or zero no route is added. We solve the RLPM using
the updated sets of routes and solve the pricing problems using the new dual variables.
We cycle between RLPM until we hit an iteration where all pricing problems has a neg-
ative objective value. Then it follows that no route with a positive reduced cost can be
found and the optimal solution of RLPM is dual feasible to LPM and so the solution is
optimal to LPM.
Now we have our column generation solution method and we are ready to define a
branch and price algorithm. However, before doing so we will test our column gener-
ation method and see how it performs. As an alternative to the branch and price algo-
rithm using column generation we could have just formulated a branch and bound algo-
rithm solving the relaxation of F2 at each node. The reason we went through the trouble
of making the column generation method is that we hope it will perform better than a
simple relaxation of the model F2. When considering the performance a key parameter
of course is the time it takes to find the optimal solution. However, time is not every-
thing and often the structure of the column generation method allows for a more efficient
branching algorithm. Column generation is a very problem specific solution method that
takes advantage of the structures of the problem. Therefore branch and price is often
better at taking advantage of problem specific structures than branch and bound.
We will perform a computational study comparing the performance of our column gen-
eration method and the relaxation of F2. We should keep in mind that the two problems
solved are not identical since F2 satisfies safety constraints which is not enforced in the
column generation method. The difference does not prevent the purpose of this study
which is to compare how fast the two methods solve different problem instances. The
computational study is shown in table 6.1 in section 6. We are interested in the results
in the columns relaxation of F2 and column generation. For each of the two solution
methods we solve 14 different problem instances and report the best objective value
found a long with the time spend. The instances are small and medium sized and infor-
mation for each instance can be seen in the first columns. The UB column shows the
makespan derived from the initial set of routes calculated by the heuristic described ear-
lier. The upper bound is used to define the time horizon T. The time limit for each model
run is chosen to be 3 hours (10800 seconds).
The first thing we notice from the results is that the column generation method uses sig-
nificantly more time than the relaxation of F2. Especially for the larger instances, col-
umn generation uses much more time and in two cases is unable to prove that the so-
lution found is optimal within the time limit. This is concerning since the column gener-
ation method has to run many times when using branch and price and if each run takes
several hours the branch and price algorithm will run very slow. If we look at the solu-
tion values we see that in most cases the two methods get the same optimal solution
value. This happens if the optimal solution found by column generation satisfy safety
constraints. In some cases the values are very close and we expect the difference to
26
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:35==
be coursed by rounding errors. For data instances 18 and 20 the column generation
method finds a significantly lower optimal solution value because in those cases the op-
timal solutions do not comply with safety constraints. In general, we had hoped that the
column generation method would have given us better bounds than the relaxation but
unfortunately that is not the case. If we look at the third results column of table 6.1 we
can see the solution values found by the MIP model F2 for the same data instances.
For all the instances we see a gap of about 50% between the solution values of the
non-integer methods and the corresponding solution values of the MIP model. A gap
of 50% from a lower bound to the optimal objective value is not impressive. It is not a
surprise that the relaxation of F2 gives a bad lower bound. Relaxations of MIP models
are known to produce bad lower bounds. The fact that the column generation method
gives equally bad lower bounds is discouraging.
Even though column generation do not seem to be a good solution method for QCSP
with graph representation we will still try to formulate a branch and price algorithm. As
mentioned earlier run time is not everything and neither is the quality of the lower bound.
Column generation still makes it easier to take advantage of the problem specific struc-
tures in the branching algorithm.
5.3
Branch and Price
In this section we will describe a branch and price algorithm that branches on the solu-
tions of our column generation method in order to find optimal solutions that are feasible
to the model F2. We argued earlier that F2 and IPM solve the same problem with the
exception that F2 also ensures the safety margin between QC’s. If we can show that
an optimal solution to IPM also satisfies safety margin constraints, then it follows that
the solution is also optimal for F2. However, we still have some way to go before find-
ing optimal solutions to IPM. Our column generation method finds an optimal solution
to LPM and since it is not required that the variables are integer we expect that a lot of
the variables will be fractional. In IPM fractional variable values are not allowed so we
need to check the value of all variables in the optimal solution found by column gen-
eration. When we find fractional solutions or solutions not satisfying the safety margin
constraints we branch on the solution and solve the column generation again.
Let us look at the different scenarios requiring branching and how we perform the differ-
ent types of branching. First we consider the case where a λ-variable is fractional. As-
sume we find a fractional variable λkp, i.e. 0 < λkp < 1. This means that QC k ∈K par-
tially uses route p ∈P. Normally we would just branch on λkp creating two new nodes
in the branching tree where λkp is fixed to 0 in the first node and 1 in the second node.
In our case this would not work because the column generation would just create a new
route p′ identical to p and assign p′ to QC k instead of p. To ensure that our branching
decisions have the desired effect we must inflict them on the subproblem of the column
generation. From constraint 5.3 we now that for each QC the sum of λ-variables over
all routes usable by the QC must equal 1, hence there must exist another λ-variable for
QC k with value larger than 0. For all routes p ∈P we check if λpk is larger than 0. We
select two variables λkp and λkp′ that are both larger than 0. Both routes p and p′ can
be used by QC k, hence they must both pass through the QC node if QC k and go to
the starting position of QC k. Looking through the two routes we can find the first time
where they go in separate directions. We identify the arcs (i, j) and (i, j′) as the first
arcs having different destination nodes for routes p and p′. Now we branch on the so-
lution creating two new nodes in the branching tree where in the first node xij is fixed
to 0 and in the second node xij′ is fixed to 0, both being in the subproblem for QC k.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
27
==PAGE:36==
When running the column generation again in either of these two branching nodes at
most one of the routes p and p′ can be generated. This is how we will be branching on
the λ-variables and when enough branching decisions have been made it will at some
point lead to a solution where all the variables are either 0 or 1.
The next variable type is the W-variables. If we look at constraints 5.6 calculating the
variables and assume we have an optimal solution to LPM where all λ-variables are in-
teger, then it follows that the W-variables will be integer as well. Because of how the
objective is created, Wj on the left-hand side of the constraint will try to be as large as
possible and since the right-hand side is an integer, the left-hand side will be the same
integer. Therefore we do not have to branch on the W-variables if we have already
found a solution where all λ-variables are integer. The y-variables however are differ-
ent. If the λ-variables are integer and therefore also the W-variables we can not expect
the y-variables to be integer. Looking at constraint 5.7 we can conclude that yt will grad-
ually grow from 0 to 1 as a function of the time periods. As soon as we reach a time pe-
riod t ∈T where at least one container has been processed at each bay with a nonzero
workload yt is allowed to be larger than zero and because of the objective it will try to be
as large as possible. The y-variables will grow until a time period t where all workloads
have been processed and yt can be 1. We have to create a branching method to handle
these fractional y-variables. Branching on the y-variables is relatively simple. For a so-
lution with fractional variable yt for t ∈T we create two new nodes in our branching tree
where yt is fixed to 0 and 1 respectively. These branching decisions will be enforced
in the LP master problem regardless of what routes are being generated in the column
generation.
After branching on the variables until we get a solution with only integer variable values
we still have to make sure that the solution satisfies the safety margin constraints. We
do so by looking at the routes used by QC’s in the solution and checking if two routes
gets to close to one another. Assume that we find two routes p and p′ getting within the
safety margin. We then identify the arcs (i, j) and (i′, j′) where |αj −αj′|−1 < r, i.e. the
number of bays between nodes j and j’ is below the safety margin r. We can only allow
that at most one of these arcs are used and thus we branch on the solution creating two
new nodes in the branching tree where (i, j) is fixed to 0 in the first node and (i′, j′) is
fixed to 0 in the second node. As in F2 we know that as long as the safety margin is sat-
isfied the non-crossing constraint holds as well since the QC’s can not get close enough
to cross without breaking with the safety margin. If we find a solution that contains no
fractional variables and all pairs of used routes keeps the safety margin then the solu-
tion is feasible to F2 and no more branching has to be performed on this solution.
We are now ready to present a branch and price algorithm using the proposed column
generation method along with the above described branching schemes.The branch and
price algorithm is shown in algorithm 1.
28
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:37==
Algorithm 1 Branch and price for QCSP using column generation
Given QCSP instance, do preprocessing
Create initial solution with solution value I
f(x) := LPM solved by column generation
Initialize: Incumbent = I; LB(P0) = f(P0) with solution X0; Live = {(P0, LB(P0))}
while Live ̸=∅do
select node P from Live to be processed; Live = Live \{P}
Solve P: f(P) = LB(P) with solution X
if P is infeasible then
fathom node P by infeasibility
else
if ⌈LB(P)⌉≥Incumbent then
fathom node P by bound
else
if ∃0 < λkp < 1 in solution X then
find two fractional variables λkp λkp′ in X
find node i where the routes p and p′ are in disagreement with arcs (i, j) and
(i, j′)
P 1 = {P|xij = 0}
P 2 = {P|xij′ = 0}
Live = Live ∪{(P 1, LB(P 1)), (P 2, LB(P 2))}
else
if ∃0 < yt < 1 in solution X then
P 1 = {P|yt = 0}
P 2 = {P|yt = 1}
Live = Live ∪{(P 1, LB(P 1)), (P 2, LB(P 2))}
else
if X violates safety margin constraints then
find two routes p and p′ containing arcs (i, j) and (i′, j′) respectively,
where |αj −αj′| −1 < r
P 1 = {P|xij = 0}
P 2 = {P|xi′j′ = 0}
Live = Live ∪{(P 1, LB(P 1)), (P 2, LB(P 2))}
else
Incumbent = LB(P); Solution = X
end if
end if
end if
end if
end if
end
Return Incumbent and Solution
In the branch and price algorithm we also start with an initial solution. The solution is
used as the initial set of routes ˆP in the column generation and the solution value is
used to define the initial incumbent. Often we can just use the same heuristic as de-
scribed in section 5.2. We only have to check if the routes satisfy the safety margin con-
straint. If it does not we will just use T as initial value of the incumbent. We use the de-
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
29
==PAGE:38==
fined column generation as the lower bound function. Meaning that at each node in the
branching tree we run the column generation starting from the initial set ˆP while satisfy-
ing the branching decisions. If at some point the branching decisions forbid the use of
one of the routes in the initial set of routes we will add some other route instead. The al-
gorithm just goes through the branching tree as long as there are still unresolved nodes.
For each node we solve a LPM by column generation. If the column generation returns
infeasible we fathom that node by infeasibility. This happens when so many branching
decisions are made that one of the subproblems becomes infeasible. Then we move
on to check if the solution value is better than our incumbent. If this is not the case we
fathom the node by bound since we can not get anything from investigating the children
of this node. We can round up the left-hand side because we know that an integer so-
lution will give an integer solution value and we are only interested in integer solutions.
If the solution shows potential by being better than the incumbent we start checking for
fractional variables and safety margin violations and perform the necessary branching if
any is found. If no branching is needed we know that the solution is feasible to F2 and
that it is better than the currently best solution. The incumbent is updated and we save
the solution as the best known solution. When at some point no more nodes are avail-
able to be processed the algorithm terminates and the incumbent and the best known
solution are returned. These represent an optimal solution to LPM that have only inte-
ger variable values and satisfies safety margin constraint. Hence the solution is feasible
to F2 and therefore it must also be optimal.
In practice we will manage the branching decisions with different parameters that are
updated going through the branching tree. The Parameters we will use are defined be-
low.
• Darc
ij : A parameter with value 1 if variable xij for arc (i, j) ∈A is fixed to 0 in all
subproblems, and 0 otherwise.
• Dtime
t
: A parameter with value 1 if variable yt for t ∈T is fixed to 1 in RLPM, with
value 2 if variable yt for t ∈T is fixed to 0 in RLPM, and 0 otherwise.
Branching decisions derived from fractional λ-variables and safety margin violations are
handled by Darc
ij . In the root node of the branching tree Darc
ij
is 0 in all entries and are
then updated when branching decisions are made. Dtime
t
will handle branching deci-
sions derived from fractional y-variables. These parameters will be used in new con-
straints in the RLPM and the subproblem. The new constraints are as follows.
yt = 1
∀t ∈T , Dtime
t
= 1
(5.24)
yt = 0
∀t ∈T , Dtime
t
= 2
(5.25)
xij = 0
∀(i, j) ∈A, Darc
ij
= 1
(5.26)
Where constraints (5.24) and (5.25) are used in the RLPM and constraints (5.26) are
used in the subproblems.
5.4
Extensions to Branch and Price
With algorithm 1 we showed a branch and price algorithm capable of solving instances
of the QCSP. It is a very basic algorithm that is correct and gets the job done but it is not
efficient. In this section we will propose extensions to the branch and price algorithm
and in the end present a more efficient algorithm. The key parameters for the efficiency
30
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:39==
of a branch and price algorithm is the number of nodes in the branching tree that are
investigated and the time it takes to use the column generation method at each node.
We will suggest extensions targeted at improving these two key parameters.
Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018 use the set of reachable bays Bk defined in section 3 in their
model to define the arcs going from the QC nodes to the first workload node. So far the
subset have not been useful for us since we allow crossing of QC’s and so all bays are
reachable for all QC’s. It would have been fine to use the subset to limit which bays are
visited by each QC but in our models we do not have the needed information to do so.
We only know that some QC visits some bay and since we do not know which QC it is
we can not use the subset. However, we can use the subset in the pricing problems be-
cause each pricing problem only uses one specific QC. For a pricing problem related to
QC k ∈K we can enforce that only bays in Bk is visited. This will make it so that only
routes using the allowed bays are generated from the pricing problems. In the end we
want a solution satisfying safety margin and non-crossing constraints which is impossi-
ble if in the solution a QC k uses a route that visits bays not in Bk. By using the subset
in the pricing problems we avoid adding unnecessary routes in column generation mak-
ing it go faster. We also lower the number of times we have to do branching because of
safety margin violations thereby lowering the number of nodes in the branching tree. To
use the subset we add the following constraints to each pricing problem.
∑
(i,j)∈Ab
xij = 0
∀b ∈B \ Bk
(5.27)
This ensure that in a pricing problem for QC k ∈K all x-variables for arcs with destina-
tion in bays outside Bk are fixed to zero and so only arcs going to reachable bays of QC
k are used.
In algorithm 1 at each node in the branching tree we use column generation starting
from an initial set of routes ˆP. When making a branch and price algorithm it is normal to
reuse columns generated throughout the algorithm. Depending on the problem at hand
the reusability varies. We will try to reuse routes created at previous nodes when us-
ing column generation. This will make the initial set of routes ˆP larger and we expect
the column generation to terminate faster since fewer routes has to be added. At each
node in the branching tree we use ˆP as it was when column generation stopped in the
previous node. This way ˆP grows as we search the branching tree, containing more and
more routes. Using this growing set of routes as the initial set of routes at each node,
we have to ensure that only routes satisfying the branching decisions at a node are
used. At each node in the branching tree multiple branching decision has to be satis-
fied. Until now we have managed this by using the parameters Darc
ij
and Dtime
t
. To man-
age which routes are banned at nodes in the branching tree we define the parameter
Droute
p
.
• Droute
p
: A parameter with value 1 if variables λkp for k ∈K is fixed to 0 in RLPM,
and 0 otherwise.
The new parameters are easily calculated based on Darc
ij . Assume at some node in the
branching tree the initial set of routes is given by ˆP and we find Darc
ij
by looking at the
branching decisions from the root node leading down to the node we are looking at.
Then we can calculate Droute
p
as follows. For all routes p ∈ˆP we check if p uses an
arc (i, j) where Darc
ij
= 1. That is for all (i, j) ∈A where Darc
ij
= 1 we check if aijp = 1. If
this is true for at least one arc the new parameter is equal to 1 at index p, and otherwise
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
31
==PAGE:40==
it is 0. Given the new parameter we define a new constraint to be used in RLPM.
∑
k∈K
λkp = 0
∀p ∈ˆP, Droute
p
= 1
(5.28)
The constraint fixes the λ-variables associated with routes using banned arcs to 0. With
the new parameter and constraint we can begin reusing routes generated throughout
the branch and price algorithm.
We have previously discussed the importance of finding a good upper bound on the
time horizon T. The size of T has a huge impact on the size of the model and so we
would like to use as small a value as possible. As of now we have used the makespan
of the initial solution as our value for T. We are interested in finding a way to update T
throughout the branch and price algorithm making the models simpler and simpler. Ev-
ery time we update the incumbent we could also update the time horizon T. We update
the incumbent when we have found a solution feasible to F2 that is better than any so-
lution previously found. The makespan of such a solution would also be a better up-
per bound on the time horizon T than any other upper bound previously found. Hence
we will update the time horizon T every time we update the incumbent throughout the
branch and price algorithm. When updating T we have to redefine all the sets and pa-
rameters dependent of T before moving on. For most of them we just define the new T
and create the sets and parameters the same way as they were originally created. The
one parameter which is a bit more complicated is aijp. The parameter defines which
arcs (i, j) are being used by route p ∈ˆP. All routes in ˆP has length corresponding to the
old time horizon and we need to shorten them so their length match the updated T. We
do so by cutting the last part of each route and adding a new arc going to the sink node.
If for example we find a new time horizon which is smaller than the old time horizon T
by 5, we would cut the arcs with origin in nodes related to time periods after T-5. Lastly
we would add the arc going to the sink node. This way we can update all routes in ˆP so
that they can be reused in future column generations. By updating T we expect all parts
of the algorithm to run faster and we also expect the branching tree to be smaller as a
result thereof. If we did not update T we would have a part of our routes that were irrel-
evant. If the time horizon is T but the makespan of a solution is T-5, the last 5 arcs used
in every route would be irrelevant. We are only interested in what happens up until the
makespan but the last 5 arcs used in routes could still be the cause for branching being
required. By removing the irrelevant arcs we avoid unnecessary branching and thereby
create fewer nodes in the branching tree. Updating the time horizon T only happens
when we find a new best solution to F2. The faster we can find good feasible solutions
to F2, the faster we can begin decreasing T. We want to somehow create a method for
finding more good feasible solutions for F2. To do this we will use the Restricted Integer
Programming Master Problem (RIPM). This is the model that solves the IPM using only
a subset of routes ˆP ⊆P. Any feasible solution to RIPM that satisfies safety margin and
non-crossing constraints is also feasible to F2. At each node in the branching tree af-
ter running column generation we use the updated set ˆP to solve RIPM. If the objective
value is better than our currently best solution we check if the solution satisfies safety
margin and non-crossing constraints the same way we did in algorithm 1. If the solution
value is better than the incumbent and satisfies the constraints we update T to be equal
the solution value of RIPM. This will hopefully help us find good solutions feasible to F2
faster so we can update T and get smaller models. Solving a version of RIPM at each
node is not very demanding since it is a simple model and it is solved very fast.
Extensions such as these were what we hoped for when we chose to stick with column
generation and branch and price despite the bad performance by our column generation
32
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:41==
method. Later we will see if it has payed off. A new branch and price algorithm using
the described extensions is shown in algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Branch and Price for QCSP with extensions
Given QCSP instance, calculate sets and parameters
Create initial solution with solution value I, creating set of routes ˆP
Update T: T = I and recalculate sets and parameters
f(x) := LPM solved by column generation
Initialize: Incumbent = I; LB(P0) = f(P0) with solution X0; Live = {(P0, LB(P0))}
while Live ̸=∅do
select node P from Live to be processed; Live = Live \{P}
Based on branching decisions taken between the root node and P create parame-
ters Darc
ij , Dtime
t
and Droute
p
Solve P: f(P) = LB(P) with solution X creating new ˆP
if P is infeasible then
fathom node P by infeasibility
else
if ⌈LB(P)⌉≥Incumbent then
fathom node P by bound
else
if ∃0 < λkp < 1 in solution X then
Perform necessary branching
else
if ∃0 < yt < 1 in solution X then
Perform necessary branching
else
if X violates safety margin constraints then
Perform necessary branching
end if
end if
end if
Solve RIPM using updated ˆP getting solution ˆX with objective value z∗
if z∗< Incumbent and ˆX satisfies safety margin constraints then
Incumbent = z∗; Solution = ˆX
Update T: T = z∗+ 1 and recalculate sets and parameters
Redefine the routes in ˆP to match the length of the new time horizon T
end if
end if
end if
end
Return Incumbent and Solution
Algorithm 2 uses the same branching methods as algorithm 1 but regardless of branch-
ing being necessary at a node in the branching tree, we always solve a RIPM using the
updated set of routes ˆP. In the case where no branching is necessary we expect RIPM
to find a solution feasible to F2. If branching is necessary we are still interested in solv-
ing RIPM since it is still possible that it will return a solution feasible to F2. If so we still
add the children of the node to the set Live as it is possible we can get an even bet-
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
33
==PAGE:42==
ter solution investigating these nodes and their descendants. In either case if we find a
solution which is better than our current incumbent and it satisfies safety margin con-
straints the following happens. We update our incumbent and save the solution as our
best solution found so far. Then we update the time horizon T by setting it equal the
makespan of the solution plus one. We add one because of how the routes are defined.
No work can occur in the first time period and so we must add one extra time period to
the time horizon. Given the new time horizon T we recalculate all the sets and param-
eters dependent on T and we fix the parameter aijp by cutting the last part of all routes
so that the length of the routes matches the new time horizon. We search the branching
tree until no more nodes exist in the set Live and then we return the incumbent and the
corresponding best found solution.
Using the new extensions we expect algorithm 2 to be significantly more effective than
algorithm 1. Both considering the time spent processing each node and the total num-
ber of nodes to be processed. A thing we have not considered yet is how do we search
the tree. As of now in both algorithms we have just said that we select some node to be
processed. How the nodes are selected defines how we search through the branching
tree and some ways of selecting might lead to a faster algorithm than others. The best
way of selecting nodes is often problem dependent and we should consider which se-
lection scheme would be best for our algorithm. Let us consider some of the well known
tree searching methods and discuss the consequences of using these methods in our
algorithm. The methods we will consider is random search, depth first search, breath
first search and best first search. A random search would select a random node from
the set of nodes to be processed Live. Using random search we do not take advan-
tage of any structures of the problem but it has the advantage that it will newer spend a
lot of time in the same bad area of the branching tree. In a depth first search the node
with the highest depth is chosen. In our case that would mean the node where the most
branching decisions is taken. On average we would expect such a node the most likely
to be pruned. Either by infeasibility, bound or by the fact that no branching is necessary
at the node. Hence, a depth first search could be effective at finding feasible solutions
to F2 fast. However it could also lead to the search spending a lot of time in areas of the
branching tree where no feasible solutions exist. A breath first search is the opposite of
depth first search in the way that it select the nodes with the lowest depth, thereby fill-
ing the branching tree from the top down. This would lead to a selection of the nodes
with fewest branching decisions. Opposite from the depth first search we now expect
to search for a long time before finding any feasible solutions to F2. Simply because
we will often need a lot of branching decisions before finding feasible solutions. On the
other hand we do not waste a lot of time in a certain area of the branching tree. The last
method is best first search where the nodes are chosen based on some performance
indicator. We would use the value of the lower bound function thereby always select-
ing the node with the smallest lower bound. The node with the smallest lower bound
would be where the potentially best solution could be found. We expect the value of
the lower bound function to be correlated with the number of branching decisions at a
node. Branching decisions are constraints and in general we know that adding more
constraints to a model can only lead to worse solution values. Therefore we expect the
best first search so be similar to the breath first search since both of them will search
the upper part of the branching tree first working downwards. All the search methods
have both advantages and disadvantages and so it is hard to know which one will make
the algorithms fastest. We choose to use the best first search but the others might be
just as good or better.
34
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:43==
6
Computational study
In this section we will conduct a computational study to assess the performance of the
proposed branch and price method. 20 QCSP instances are solved by four different
solution methods and the solution value of the best solution found within the time limit
is reported. The time limit is chosen to be three hours and we measure the time used
in seconds. The time used by each solution method on each data instance is also re-
ported in the results. All models and algorithms are implemented and solved in Julia
v.1.5.0. The optimization models uses the commercial solver Gurobi v.9.0.3 and all
models are using four threads. We use the DTU HPC cluster for the computational
study executing all methods using a 2.30 GHz Intel Xeon E5 Processor.
All data instances used in the computational study are fictional and are created for the
purpose of this study. An effort was made to contact the authors of Msakni, Diabat, et
al. 2018 to get the problem instances used in their article, but ultimately we were un-
able to get them. The instances are created to cover different sizes of QCSP with the
number of bays and QC’s available varying. The first six data instances are small in-
stances using only two QC’s and with total workloads below 100 containers. The pur-
pose of these instances is simply to test the solution methods capabilities on small prob-
lem instances. Data instances 7-12 are medium sized instances using four QC’s and
with total workloads ranging between 100 and 750 containers. The purpose of these in-
stances are to test the integer solution methods on some larger problem instances. The
last eight problem instances are meant to test the effect of adding additional QC’s to a
QCSP instance. We fix the number of bays to 15 and consider two workload instances
with respectively 60 and 120 total containers. Each of the two instances are solved four
times with the number of QC’s available varying from two to five.
The computational study is divided into two parts. First, we solve the small instances
1-6 and 13-20 using the non-integer solution methods. This study and the obtained re-
sults are described and used in section 5.2. In the second part we compare the pro-
posed branch and price algorithm with our benchmark model F2. We are using the
branch and price algorithm described in section 5.4 and F2 is defined in section 4.4.
The obtained results of the computational study are shown in table 6.1.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 6.1: Obtained results of the computational study conducted
#.
K
B
∑wb
UB
relaxation of F2
column generation
F2
branch and price
sol
time
sol
time
sol
time
sol
time
1
2
6
10
9
4.51
2.97
4.51
4.73
9
2.71
9
10800
2
2
6
20
16
7.40
3.02
7.39
5.93
13
2.73
13
10800
3
2
6
40
44
11.98
3.46
11.98
35.58
26
7.39
32
10800
4
2
10
30
31
12.34
3.75
12.34
40.60
21
11.07
—
10800
5
2
10
60
35
17.94
4.02
17.95
182.12
35
12.74
—
10800
6
2
10
90
72
24.38
8.60
24.40
4124.29
53
1733.89
—
10800
7
4
15
100
46
31
78.20
—
10800
8
4
15
300
111
83
9658.48
—
10800
9
4
15
500
226
135
10800
—
10800
10
4
20
150
70
47
2709.60
—
10800
11
4
20
450
172
132
10800
—
10800
12
4
20
750
316
—
10800
—
10800
13
2
15
60
40
20.50
6.35
20.50
722.83
38
372.84
—
10800
14
2
15
120
118
33.21
28.18
33.29
10800
73
10800
—
10800
15
3
15
60
31
12.49
4.85
12.50
386.94
27
114.16
—
10800
16
3
15
120
63
22.95
9.79
22.95
10800
49
272.88
—
10800
17
4
15
60
32
9.51
5.11
9.51
221.56
20
26.99
—
10800
18
4
15
120
64
22.41
10.14
18.34
2537.88
42
32.14
—
10800
19
5
15
60
21
8.03
3.76
8.04
105.32
18
7.69
—
10800
20
5
15
120
53
21.85
8.03
17.90
2337.35
43
11.86
—
10800
Solution values written in bold means the solution is proven optimal. We write — when
no solution better than the upper bound is found within the time limit.
For each of the 20 instances table 6.1 shows the number of QC’s available, the number
of bays and the total workload. The upper bound obtained from our heuristic for find-
ing initial solutions is shown along with the computational results of four solution meth-
ods. For each method the best found solution value is reported. If an optimal solution is
found the solution value is written in bold. The time used is also reported for each solu-
tion method. If an optimal solution is found within the time limit of three hours, it shows
the time it took to find the optimal solution and prove that it was optimal. If no optimal
solution was found within the time limit, the time used is equal to the time limit.
We looked at the results from the first two solution methods in section 5.2 and com-
pared their performance. Hence we will not do that in this section. We will look at the
results for the model F2 and the branch and price algorithm and present the conclu-
sions that can be made based on the computational study. Looking at the results for
solution method F2 we see that it is able to solve most of the instances to optimality. In
four cases it can not find the optimal solution within the time limit, but in three of those
cases it does find solutions with solution values better than the initial upper bound. For
problem instance 12, F2 is unable to find any solution with a better solution value than
the upper bound of 316 within the time limit. If we look at the time used by F2 solving
the instances, it is clear that there is a pattern of larger instances taking longer time to
solve. This is as expected but it looks like the number of QC’s and the quality of the up-
per bound has an effect as well. More on that later. Looking at the results obtained for
the branch and price solution method, we can say that they are certainly not very im-
pressive. None of the problem instances were solved to optimality, not even the small-
est instance with a total of 10 containers to be processed. For the first two instances an
optimal solution is found, but the method were unable to prove optimality within the time
limit. In the third instance a solution with a better solution value than the initial upper
36
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:45==
bound was found but it was not the optimal solution. For all other instances no solutions
better than the upper bounds were found within the time limit. It is clear that the branch
and price method was unable to outperform the model F2. Based on the computational
study conducted by Msakni2018 we already new that the MIP model performs well on
small and medium sized problem instances. We had hoped that the proposed branch
and price algorithm would have been able to compete with F2 on the small and medium
instances and maybe be able to solve even larger instances. That is definitely not the
case.
We argued earlier that the more QC’s used in a QCSP instance, the easier it would be
to solve. The argument is that with enough QC’s the movement options for each QC
is limited making the problem simpler. With less movement options the number of so-
lutions a solution method has to search through is smaller and it should be possible to
find the optimal solution faster. Let us consider the results of the last eight instances
and see if there is any evidence confirming our expectations. Looking at the time used
by F2 we see a clear tendency that when more QC’s are used we get a faster solution
time. In most cases we get a smaller upper bound when more QC’s are used since the
workload is divided between more QC’s. The smaller upper bound gives a smaller time
horizon which is also significant for the time used and that might be some of the reason
for the faster solution times. However, if we compare instances 15 and 16 to instances
17 and 18 which have almost identical upper bounds, we still see a significant decrease
in time used when going from three to four QC’s used. Hence, we conclude that there
is a correlation between the number of QC’s used and the solution time. It is therefore
important to use realistic problem instances when testing solution methods.
Let us investigate what effect the quality of the upper bound has on the time needed
to find an optimal solution. The upper bound is used to determine the time horizon. In
the branch and prize solution method we update the time horizon throughout the al-
gorithm but for the other solution methods the time horizon is unchanged. As we have
discussed earlier, the time horizon has huge impact on the sizes of the models used
in all solution methods. Hence we expect a correlation between the quality of the up-
per bound and the time used. We will look at the computational results and see if we
can find some evidence confirming our expectations. Looking at the upper bounds col-
umn and the found solution values for F2, we see that in some cases the upper bound
is equal the optimal solution value or only a little higher. These instances are in most
cases solved fast, but we should keep in mind that the instances with good upper bounds
is mostly the small instances. The instance with the largest upper bound that we are still
able to solve to optimality is problem instance 8. It has an upper bound of 111 and F2
almost uses three hours to find the optimal solution. It is hard to say if it is the quality of
the upper bound or simply the size of the problem that effects the solution time. Hence
we will make a study, solving some of the problem instances again using better upper
bounds. We will use the instances that has a high solution time since we can expect to
see the biggest effect of a better upper bound there. The instances that we will use are
instances 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 14. We will create better upper bounds by looking at the
best found solution in table 6.1.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 6.2: Comparison of results when using
good and bad upper bounds for solving F2
#.
initial UB
improved UB
UB
time
UB
time
6
72
1733.89
55
650.12
8
111
9658.48
85
9396.73
9
226
10800
135
10800
10
70
2709.60
50
4614.94
11
172
10800
132
10800
14
118
10800
72
10800
Table 6.2 shows the improved upper bounds and new solution times compared with
their respective bounds and times from table 6.1. For the six instances considered, the
table shows the solution times for two different upper bounds. Using the improved up-
per bounds we were still unable to solve instances 9, 11 and 12 to optimality. We did
not even find solutions with better solution values for any of the instances. Using sig-
nificantly better bounds did not help in these cases, the instances are simply to compli-
cated to solve in three hours using F2. For instances 6 and 8 we see an improvement
in solution time as a result of better upper bounds being used. Especially for instance 6
we get a large reduction in the solution time meaning at least in some cases the quality
of the upper bound can have a huge impact on the solution time. Looking at instance
10 we see a significant increase in the solution time as a result of using an improved
upper bound. This is somewhat of a surprise, since in general we would always expect
the quality of both upper and lower bounds to have a positive effect on most kinds of
solution methods. This might be caused by how Gurobi does branch and bound and
that the better upper bound are somehow hindering the branching method of Gurobi.
The new upper bound makes branch and bound less flexible since only good solution
are allowed and maybe in some cases this can make the branching methods of Gurobi
perform worse. Based on this study we can not say that a better upper bound will al-
ways improve the solution time of F2 but in some cases it will and in some cases it will
worsen.
38
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:47==
7
Discussion
In this section we will discuss our work and look at how it could be improved. In section
7.1 we discuss the performance of the proposed branch and price method and separate
the method in the elements which performed well and the elements that did not perform
as we had hoped. In section 7.2 we further discuss what can be done to improve the
proposed solution method and suggest a research direction using some of the elements
of our work.
7.1
Discussion of the proposed branch and price solution
method
By looking at the results in table 6.1 from our computational study we can quickly con-
clude that the branch and price solution method did not perform well. The method was
unable to solve even small toy examples to optimality within the three hour time limit.
The number of containers had to be limited at around six for the method to find and
prove an optimal solution within the time limit. Let us take a deeper look at the solution
method and see if we can identify the part causing the bad performance.
When using the branch and price solution method, most of the time is spent doing col-
umn generation. At each node in the branching tree we define some new sets and cal-
culate new parameters, but the time it takes is negligible compared to the time used
on column generation. Hence, the two key parameters for a branch and price algo-
rithm are the time it takes to do column generation and the number of nodes gener-
ated in the branching tree. We saw in table 6.1 that the column generation method was
very slow for some instances, mainly the larger ones and those with a low number of
QC’s compared to the number of bays. Even when the column generation was fast, the
branch and price solution method was unable to finish within the time limit. The num-
ber of nodes generated by the branch and price method must be very large making it
impossible to search through within the time limit. We will consider what makes the col-
umn generation slow and why the branch and price method has to generate so many
nodes in the branching tree.
The column generation method jumps between solving a RLPM and multiple subprob-
lems. RLPM is a simple model allowing fractional variable values and so it can be solved
easily using a LP solver. The subproblems however are MIP models and must be solved
using branch and bound. This is all done automatically when using the Gurobi solver. A
problem when using branch and bound is if there exists many equally good solutions
to the problem, which unfortunately is the case for QCSP. Consider a problem with two
QC’s where in the optimal solution QC 1 is done working after 15 time periods and QC
2 is done after 18 time periods. Since QC 1 finishes with three time periods to spare
there exists many equally good solutions where QC 1 has small changes to its sched-
ule. It could be to stay in a bay and wait one time period extra or to use a slower route.
These other solutions would have an equally good objective value since QC 2 is the
bottleneck. Any feasible route for QC 1 which finishes the tasks after 18 time periods
gives an extra feasible solution. Having many equally good solutions makes it hard for
a branching method to prove that a solution is optimal. Sometimes when doing column
generation it is possible to solve the relaxation of the subproblem instead of the MIP
model. This is the case if the constraint matrix of the subproblem is totally unimodular.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
39
==PAGE:48==
Then we know that the optimal solution to the relaxation will have integer variable val-
ues. Unfortunately our subproblem does not have a totally unimodular constraint matrix
and we have to solve the integer problem. When problem instances get larger, the sub-
problems get harder to solve, which is probably what is making our column generation
method slow. Another thing that effects the running time of a column generation method
is the number of iterations. How many times the RLPM is solved before termination is
important for the total running time. In our problem there is many small adjustments that
can be made to a route. Because of this we might have to add a lot of routes to RLPM
before termination which means solving RLPM and the subproblems many times.
Now we look into what is causing the branch and price algorithm to generate too many
nodes in the branching tree. The problem is again caused by the QCSP having many
equally good solutions, but also by the fact that our branching decisions are too insignif-
icant. When branching is performed on fractional λ-variables and on routes not comply-
ing with safety constraints, the only change from the parent node to the child nodes is
that one extra arc is banned from use. The optimal solution in the child nodes will most
likely be very similar to the optimal solution in the parent node. When one arc is banned
it is probably possible to get an equally good solution by making a small change to the
route using the banned arc. If for example, the last time period where the route is pro-
cessing a container is earlier than for another route, then the change can sometimes be
to just wait for one time period instead of using the banned arc and then follow the same
schedule postponed by one time period. There are other ways to make similar routes
and we would have to solve many very similar problems. This very quickly creates a
huge number of nodes in the branching tree and we have to solve the problem at each
node, which will take a long time. The branching methods are basically too insignificant
and eliminates too few solutions per branching decision. The branching method used
to branch on fractional y-variables is more efficient. For a fractional variable yt it fixes
the variable to 0 and 1 respectively in the child nodes. This eliminates many solutions
at once, since in the first child node, no solutions with a makespan smaller than t is fea-
sible, and for the second child node, no solutions with a makespan larger than or equal
t −1 is feasible. If somehow, we were able to make the other branching methods as effi-
cient as the branching on y-variables we would probably get a faster algorithm. The cur-
rent branching methods are simply too insignificant leading to a huge number of nodes
in the branching tree.
It was mentioned earlier that we were using a best first search in the branch and price
algorithm. When choosing which node in the branching tree to process, we would pick
the one with the lowest solution value. As expected this led to the algorithm searching
mostly in the upper part of the branching tree. In the upper part of the branching tree we
do not expect to find many solutions feasible to F2 since few branching decisions have
been made. The inefficient search strategy might also be a reason for the poor perfor-
mance of the algorithm. The problem is that given the branching methods used none of
the standard search methods would do any better. As a test we tried using a depth first
search instead but as expected this led to the algorithm spending its time in parts of the
branching tree where no solutions feasible to F2 existed. Most of the branching strate-
gies fix variables to 0 and so, when searching deep in the branching tree we, will en-
counter many infeasible problems. If more of our branching decisions were fixing vari-
ables to 1, the depth first search might perform better. When the number variables fixed
to 1 increases, the chance of finding solutions feasible to F2 increases as well.
Most of what we have discussed indicates that a branch and price solution method is
simply a bad match for the QCSP with a graph representation. It also confirms that the
40
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:49==
QCSP is just a very hard problem. Independent of the solution method, the problem will
still have many equally good solutions and many optimal solutions which is a struggle
for most solution methods.
7.2
Research directions to improve the proposed solution
method
In this section we will look at ways to further improve the branch and price solution method
and suggest some research directions based on what we have learned in this project.
One obvious thing to improve would be the heuristic for finding an initial feasible solu-
tion. The quality of the upper bound created by our heuristic is very dependent on the
initial starting position of the QC’s and how the total workload is divided between the
bays. In some cases we would get an initial solution where one QC would handle most
of the workload, giving some bad upper bounds. A heuristic focusing on splitting the
workload more equally between the QC’s would be beneficial. We mentioned above
that the constraint matrix of the subproblems is not totally unimodular, meaning we have
to solve the subproblems as MIP models. However, if we were to drop the assumption
of non-preemptive bays we would actually get subproblems with totally unimodular con-
straint matrices. Without the assumption we would remove constraints (5.20) and (5.21)
and recognize the remaining constraints as the ones defining a shortest path problem.
The constraint matrix of the shortest path problem is known to be totally unimodular,
and so our model would also have a totally unimodular constraint matrix. This would al-
low us to solve the relaxation of the subproblems instead of the MIP models, and still
get integer solutions. It would be interesting to see if using the relaxations makes the
column generation method faster. We can not know since we also expect the assump-
tion of non-preemptive bays to have a positive effect on our solution method. We would
have to weigh which of the two features improve our solution method most.
The most impactful way to improve the branch and price solution method would proba-
bly be to define some more efficient branching strategies. The ones we use are simply
too insignificant. In order for a branching method to be more efficient it would have to in-
fluence several decision variables simultaneously. It is a lot harder to find such branch-
ing methods than to just branch on the individual variables. When using more abstract
branching strategies it also becomes important to prove that the algorithm will actually
terminate and that the found solution is actually the optimal solution to the problem at
hand. We will suggest some branching strategies that might be able to improve the
branch and price solution method. One branching method could say if a QC k ∈K ser-
viced a bay b ∈B or not. This decision would be enforced in the subproblem related to
QC k. In the case where a QC is assigned to service a bay, maybe that information can
be used in the subproblems not related to QC k, saying that they do not have to ser-
vice bay b. This branching strategy would impact much more than just one variable per
branching decision. Another strategy could be to branch on which bays can be visited
by a QC. This could be done by adding two new variables Γb,left and Γb,right for each
bay in all subproblems. When equal to 1, the variables define a boundary on the move-
ment of the QC in a subproblem. If in a subproblem, Γ3,left and Γ10,right were equal to 1,
the route generated from that subproblem would only visit bays between bay 3 and bay
10. This strategy could be extended so that the new variables were also dependent on
the time period. This way the branching decisions are not as effectful, instead it would
be more flexible. It is hard to say whether or not these strategies and other branching
strategies would improve the branch and price algorithm, without implementing and test-
ing them. It would be interesting to learn if better branching strategies could save the
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
41
==PAGE:50==
branch and price solution method or if it is a lost cause.
A possible research direction could be to use the column generation method in a heuris-
tic instead of an exact method such as branch and price. The column generation uses
a lot of time finding an optimal solution to LPM but how long time would it take to find
a good solution? In the beginning of the column generation method the best found so-
lution is updated often and the jumps in solution values can be large. Later, when the
method converges towards the optimal solution, the improvements in solution value are
very small. If the last 50% of the time is used to improve the solution by 1% maybe it
is not worth it. In the branch and price algorithm we do not care if the solution found by
column generation has an objective value of 74.01 or 74.99. We would round up the so-
lution values and in both cases get 75. Because of how the column generation slowly
converges towards the optimal solution, we would save a lot of time if we stopped search-
ing when we found the solution with solution value 74.99. When using branch and price
which is an exact method, we have to find the optimal solution and prove that it is opti-
mal. Otherwise we would not know if the solution found by the branch and price algo-
rithm was the optimal solution. However, if we can accept not necessarily finding the
optimal solution but instead finding a good solution, a heuristic using column generation
might be a good idea. Some criteria would have to be formulated saying when to stop
the column generation. It could be a time limit or it could be looking at how much the
solution value has improved in a number of iterations. It would still be possible to use
the branch and price framework but since we do not need to find the optimal solution
there exists many other search methods such as local search and genetic algorithms. It
would be interesting to learn if the column generation method can be used in heuristics
to find quality solutions in decent time.
42
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:51==
8
Conclusion
This thesis addresses the QCSP which takes place at the quayside of container termi-
nals. The problem deals with the loading and unloading operations performed by quay
cranes assigned to a berthed vessel. The QC’s are mounted on a rail track, thus they
can not cross each other and a safety margin between adjacent QC’s is required. The
QCSP is are very hard problem to solve and large sized instances are yet to be solved
consistently in low computational time. The QCSP is in the class of problems called NP-
complete, thus it is by no surprise hard to solve instances to optimality. Based on the
graph representation defined by Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018, we propose a branch and
price solution method for solving instances of the QCSP to optimality. Using a column
generation method as the lower bound function we define branching strategies guid-
ing the branch and price algorithm towards the optimal solution. We also define a MIP
model for solving the QCSP with a graph representation, and we do it based on the MIP
model proposed by Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018. We compare the performance of the so-
lution methods in a computational study to see if the proposed branch and price solution
method can outdo the MIP model. The computational study confirms the conclusions of
Msakni, Diabat, et al. 2018, showing the MIP models capabilities of solving small and
medium sized instances to optimality. It also shows the negative correlation between
the number of QC’s used and the computation time. Solidifying the importance of using
a realistic number of QC’s in fictional problem instances. Otherwise the solution method
will perform worse when used on real life instances if fewer cranes are used in those.
The performance of the branch and price solution method was bad, seeing that it was
unable to find and prove an optimal solution in any of the instances used in the compu-
tational study. The proposed method is mathematically correct and it works as intended,
but it turned out to be too slow. The main issue with the proposed branch and price
method, is that the branching decisions are too ineffective. This leads to the genera-
tion of a huge branching tree, making it impossible for the solution method to terminate
within a reasonable time limit. It might be possible to solve this by defining new branch-
ing strategies but maybe it should be accepted that a branch and price solution method
using column generation is a bad match to the graph represented QCSP. The work in
this thesis can be extended in multiple ways. An effort could be made to improve the
branch and price solution method mainly by defining new branching strategies. Other
than that the column generation method could be used in a heuristic with the purpose of
finding high quality solutions to the QCSP within low computational time.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
Sirimanne, Shamika N et al. (2019). Review of Maritime Transport 2019. Tech. rep.
tech. rep.
Bierwirth, Christian and Frank Meisel (2010). “A survey of berth allocation and quay
crane scheduling problems in container terminals”. In: European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 202, pp. 615–627. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2009.05.031.
– (2015). “A follow-up survey of berth allocation and quay crane scheduling problems
in container terminals”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 244, pp. 675–
689. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.12.030.
Al-Dhaheri, Noura and Ali Diabat (2015). “The Quay Crane Scheduling Problem”. In:
Journal of Manufacturing Systems 36, pp. 87–94. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.
2015.02.010.
Kenan, Nabil and Ali Diabat (2015). “A Branch-and-Price Algorithm to Solve a Quay
Crane Scheduling Problem”. In: Procedia Computer Science 61, pp. 527–532. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.210.
Msakni, Mohamed Kais, Ali Diabat, et al. (2018). “Exact methods for the quay crane
scheduling problem when tasks are modeled at the single container level”. In: Com-
puters and Operations Research 99, pp. 218–233. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.
2018.07.005.
Kasm, Omar Abou and Ali Diabat (2019). “The quay crane scheduling problem with
non-crossing and safety clearance constraints: An exact solution approach”. In: Com-
puters and Operations Research 107, pp. 189–199. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cor.2019.03.014.
Liu, Yan-Na et al. (2019). “Simulated Annealing Algorithm for the Quay Crane Schedul-
ing Problem”. In: Chinese Control Conference. DOI: 10.23919/ChiCC.2019.8866095.
Sun, Defeng, Lixin Tang, and Roberto Baldacci (2019). “A Benders decomposition-
based framework for solving quay crane scheduling problems”. In: European Journal
of Operational Research 273, pp. 504–515. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.
08.009.
Al-Dhaheri, Noura, Aida Jebali, and Ali Diabat (2016a). “A simulation-based Genetic
Algorithm approach for the quay crane scheduling under uncertainty”. In: Simulation
Modelling Practice and Theory 66, pp. 122–138. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
simpat.2016.01.009.
Msakni, Mohamed Kais, Mohammed Al-Salem, et al. (2018). “Quay Crane Scheduling
with Vessel Stability”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 30, pp. 60–69. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2018.09.008.
Zhang, Zizhen et al. (2018). “The Quay Crane Scheduling Problem With Stability Con-
straints”. In: IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 15, pp. 1399–
1412. DOI: 10.1109/TASE.2018.2795254.
Wu, Lingxiao and Weimin Ma (2017). “Quay crane scheduling with draft and trim con-
straints”. In: Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 97,
pp. 38–68. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2016.10.011.
Yu, Shucheng, Shuaian Wang, and Lu Zhen (2017). “Quay crane scheduling problem
with considering tidal impact and fuel consumption”. In: Flexible Services and Manu-
facturing Journal 29, pp. 345–368. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10696-016-9248-4.
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
45
==PAGE:54==
Liu, Ming et al. (2018). “Quay crane scheduling problem with the consideration of main-
tenance”. In: 2018 IEEE 15th International Conference on Networking, Sensing and
Control (ICNSC), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ICNSC.2018.8361346.
Chen, Jiang Hang and Michel Bierlaire (2017). “The study of the unidirectional quay
crane scheduling problem: complexity and risk-aversion”. In: European Journal of Op-
erational Research 260, pp. 613–624. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.01.007.
Kasm, Omar Abou and Ali Diabat (2020). “Next-generation quay crane scheduling”.
In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 114, pp. 694–715. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2020.02.015.
Al-Dhaheri, Noura, Aida Jebali, and Ali Diabat (2016b). “The quay crane scheduling
problem with nonzero crane repositioning time and vessel stability constraints”. In:
Computers Industrial Engineering 94, pp. 230–244. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cie.2016.01.011.
Rouky, Naoufal et al. (2019). “Simulation optimization based ant colony algorithm for
the uncertain quay crane scheduling problem”. In: International Journal of Industrial
Engineering Computations 10, pp. 111–132. DOI: 10.5267/j.ijiec.2018.2.002.
Ma, Shoufeng et al. (2020). “Stochastic programming approach for unidirectional quay
crane scheduling problem with uncertainty”. In: Journal of Scheduling. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1007/s10951-020-00661-8.
Yeun, Liong Choong et al. (2008). “VEHICLE ROUTING PROBLEM: MODELS AND
SOLUTIONS”. In: Journal of Quality Measurement and Analysis 4(1), pp. 205–218.
DOI: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/11490976.pdf.
Baldacci, Roberto, Aristide Mingozzi, and Roberto Roberti (2012). “Recent exact algo-
rithms for solving the vehicle routing problem under capacity and time window con-
straints”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 218, pp. 1–6. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2011.07.037.
46
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
==PAGE:55==
Mathematical decomposition of the quay crane scheduling problem
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
