==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Anomaly Detection for AIS Data Using
Deep Neural Networks for Trajectory
Predictions
Marie Normann Gadeberg
supervised by
Line K. H. Clemmensen
Kristoﬀer V. Olesen
Sune Hørl¨uck
January 24th, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Anomaly Detection for AIS Data Using Deep
Neural Networks for Trajectory Predictions
This report was prepared by:
Marie Normann Gadeberg, s153382
Advisors:
Line H. K. Clemmensen, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Kristoﬀer V. Olesen, PhD student, Technical University of Denmark
Sune Hørl¨uck, Specialist, Innovation Products, Terma A/S
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard Petersens Plads, Build-
ing 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
Submission Date:
January 24th, 2021
I
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Maritime traﬃc is a dominant way of transport for carrying the worlds trade. Developing reliable
systems to help monitor and control the traﬃc in the world seas is an important task in order to
maintain the maritime situation awareness.
This thesis explores the use of deep neural networks with latent space representations of AIS messages
received from cargo and tanker ships in the Danish maritime waters to detect anomalous behaviour.
By using a Convolutional Autoencoder (CVAE) with the full trajectory image as input it was possible
to reliably reconstruct a given route. The reconstruction probability was then used as a metric for
anomalous behaviour with some success, however for trajectories of very diﬀerent lengths an unwanted
advantage was given to the shorter paths to pass as normal. One easy implemented solution presented
here, was to use local thresholds based on journey duration. This reduced the aforementioned advan-
tage for shorter trajectories but did not solve the problem completely.
Further, given that the model is independent of time, certain anomalies could not be detected and
deploying the model in a online setting would also not be feasible.
To include time, a Variational Recurrent Neural Network (VRNN) was implemented. However, the
model was unable to learn a useful latent space, postulated to be the result of a posterior collapse.
The concept of a posterior collapse is introduced and various methods proposed to alleviate it are
presented, none with the wanted eﬀect for the model developed in this thesis.
II
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
Søfart er en dominerende m˚ade at transportere verdenshandelen p˚a. Udviklingen af robuste systemer
til at monitorere og kontrollere traﬁkken i verdenshavene er en vigtigt opgave for at opn˚a maritim
situationsbevisthed.
Dette speciale udforsker brugen af dybe neurale netværk med en latent repræsentation af AIS beskeder
modtaget fra fragt- og tankskibe i de danske farvande for at detektere unormal opførsel. Ved at bruge
en Convolutional Autoencoder (CVAE) med billedet af den fulde rute som input, lykkedes det at
rekonstruere en given rute p˚alideligt. Rekonstruktionssandsynligheden blev efterfølgende brugt som
indikator for unormal opførsel delvist succesfuldt, dog s˚as det, at for ruter af varierende længde havde
korte ruter en uønsket fordel. En løsning præsenteret her er at bruge lokale tærskelværdier for unormal
opførsel baseret p˚a ruternes varighed. Dette reducerede den fordel der førhen blev givet til korte ruter,
men løste ikke problemet fuldstændigt.
Derudover, givet at modellen er uafhængig af tid, var der visse anomalier som ikke kunne detekteres,
og det ville heller ikke være muligt at køre modellen online.
For at inkludere tid som parameter blev der implementeret et Variational Recurrent Neural Network
(VRNN). For denne model var det dog ikke muligt at lære en brugbar latent repræsentation af data,
hvilket postuleres at være grundet et ”posterior collapse”. Dette koncept bliver introduceret sammen
med forskellige metoder, der har vist sig brugbare til at løse det. Ingen af de præsenterede metoder
løste imidlertidig problemet i dette speciale.
III
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report has been written to fulﬁll the requirements to obtain a master’s degree in Mathematical
Modelling and Computation at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) by stud. polyt. Marie
Normann Gadeberg.
The project was assigned to a workload of 30 ECTS points corresponding to 840 working hours and
spanned over a six month period from the 3rd of August 2020 to the 24th of January 2021. The data
was received from Terma A/S.
Marie Normann Gadeberg
IV
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
AE
Autoencoder
AIS
Automatic Information System
AU
Active Units
ANN
Artiﬁcial Nerual Networks
BN
Bayesian Network
CNN
Convolutional Nerual Network
COG
Course-Over-Ground
CVAE
Convolutional Variational Autoencoder
DBSCAN
Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
ELBO
Evidence Lower Bound
EM
Expectation Maximization
GMM
Gaussian Mixture Model
GP
Gaussian Process
GRU
Gated Recurrent Units
HMM
Hidden Markov Model
KDE
Kernel Density Estimation
KL
Kullback-Leibler divergence
LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
MI
Mutual Information
MMSI
Marine Mobile Service Identiﬁer
MSA
Maritime Situation Awareness
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
ReLU
Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
ROI
Region of Interest
SOG
Speed-Over-Ground
TREAD
Traﬃc Route Extraction and Anomaly Detection
t-SNE
t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
VAE
Variational Autoencoder
VI
Variational Inference
VRNN
Variational Recurrent Neural Network
V
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
II
Resum´e
III
Preface
IV
List of Abbreviations
V
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
7
2.1
Convolutional Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Neural Networks, training and backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.3
Convolutional Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.4
Convolutional Variational Autoencoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Variational Recurrent Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.1
Recurrent Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
VI
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
2.2.2
Variational Recurrent Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Statistical Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.1
Monte Carlo Estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.2
Statistical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Experiments and Results
27
3.1
Datasets and Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Data Representation for CVAE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Data Representation for VRNN model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
CVAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
Neural Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
Results and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
VRNN for Trajectory Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.1
Neural Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.2
Results and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.3
Network Wide Skip Connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.4
Posterior Collapse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.3.5
Results After Model Modiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Discussion
57
5
Conclusion
62
List of Figures
63
List of Tables
65
References
66
VII
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Maritime traﬃc carries around 90% of the worlds trade and is continuously growing at a rate even
higher than the world economy (Tu et al. 2018). The large volume of ships makes it crucial to have
proper surveillance and monitoring of the sailing routes through the vast sea areas. To instate traﬃc
control, maritime situation awareness (MSA) is necessary, deﬁned in (COM-EU 2009) as ”the eﬀective
understanding of activity associated with the maritime domain that could impact the security, safety,
economy, or environment [...]”. The general task of predicting ship behaviour holds many use cases
including navigation, intelligent collision avoidance systems (Gao, Shi, and Li 2018), optimization of
traﬃc streams and avoidance of illegal activities (Riveiro, Giuliana Pallotta, and Vespe 2018, p. 1).
Monitoring traﬃc patterns are often performed at the ports by human oﬃcers but the extensive
amount of data available, and the complexity it holds, makes it prone for human errors to occur
(Riveiro, Giuliana Pallotta, and Vespe 2018, p. 2).
To help the operators navigate in the ever-growing data, machine learning methods and data mining
has been an advancing topic in research (Cazzanti and G. Pallotta 2015).
The data available for vessel tracking can be divided into two groups; self-reporting or observation-
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1. RELATED WORK
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
based. The self-reported positioning data is a voluntary broadcast, either transmitted by the vessel
or sent through satellite communications, whereas observation-based positioning data is collected by
active or passive sensors (Riveiro, Giuliana Pallotta, and Vespe 2018, p. 6).
Falling within the ﬁrst category is the Automatic Information System (AIS) data, the data used
throughout this thesis. AIS was originally developed as a safety tool used in collision avoidance as well
as a general support to vessel traﬃc services, but was quickly after its introduction in 2002 recognized
as a useful aid in the maritime situational awareness.
An AIS message is broadcast from the system periodically, and contains both static and dynamic
information. The static information provides the identiﬁcation of the vessel in the shape of the Marine
Mobile Service Identiﬁer (MMSI), name, ﬂag, country, dimension and ship type.
The dynamic information on the other hand is of greater interest for modelling ship behaviour. Among
others it includes the position given as longitude and latitude coordinates, the speed-over-ground (SOG)
given in knots and the course-over-ground (COG) given in degrees (Cazzanti and G. Pallotta 2015).
There are multiple applications of intelligent analysis of AIS data to increase seafare safety including
route estimation, collision avoidance, path planning and detection of anomalous behaviour (Tu et al.
2018) with the latter being the main topic of this thesis.
With the use of deep learning models, this thesis uses AIS messages from cargo and tanker ships in the
Danish maritime water around the island of Bornholm to model ship behaviour. It is hypothesized, that
any ships exhibiting behaviour diﬃcult to characterize by the model, should be ﬂagged as anomalous.
In Section 1.1 an overview of existing methods used for trajectory prediction and anomaly detection
in the maritime domain will be introduced. Chapter 2 introduces the models and machine learning
concepts used to produce the results seen in Chapter 3. Finally, a discussion of the ﬁndings will be
given in Chapter 4 with the ﬁnal conclusion in Chapter 5.
1.1
Related Work
Maritime anomaly detection can fall within one of two categories; explicit or implicit anomaly detection
(Nguyen et al. 2019b).
The explicit methods use a set of rules to catch anomalous behaviour and an example of an extensive
list of such rules can be found in (Kazemi et al. 2013). That list was a result of a case study in which
several workshops were facilitated to formulate possible anomalous scenarios, after which members
of the Swedish coastguard helped narrow down the list to 11 expert rules based on possibility from
historical occurrence and degree of interest. Examples of these deﬁned anomalies include, if a vessel
A which normally goes between ports X and Y, suddenly goes to port Z or if a vessel has not left a
2
==PAGE:11==
1.1. RELATED WORK
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
port according to the port schedule.
One of the main advantages of the explicit methods are the interpretability. Further, they do not
rely on historical data, which makes them easily implemented. The big drawback of these methods
though, is that making an exhaustive list of anomalies in the maritime domain is challenging since
some parameters, like speed, are relative and makes it diﬃcult to implement the rules across systems
(Nguyen et al. 2019b; Riveiro, Giuliana Pallotta, and Vespe 2018, p. 9).
The implicit methods learn the anomalies from the data. Most of these methods consists of two steps;
learning normal events from data, and detecting anomalies as events that diﬀer from this normalcy
(Sidib´e and Shu 2020). Since the data present in the maritime domain is rarely labelled for anomalies,
most methods used to extract the normal representation is unsupervised. However, modelling the
trajectory of the ships can be thought of as a supervised method, since the ground truth of the
predicted route is just the route itself.
Many diﬀerent techniques and models have been used to try and model ship trajectories and behaviour.
Some early methods tried to learn the abnormal vessel behaviour through the use of Bayesian Networks
(BN). A BN is a directed acyclic graph comprised of a set of nodes connected by directed edges. Every
node can take on a set of states, or variables, which must be deﬁned (Tu et al. 2018). One of the
advantages of using BNs is the explainability making them easily understood by non-experts. Expert
knowledge though is easily implemented if available - a strong driver for Johansson and Falkman using
Bayesian Networks for detecting vessel anomalies, as they argued that often there is not suﬃcient data
with the characteristics needed for the task. The expert knowledge can be incorporated by including
a conditional dependence relation between speciﬁc variables. They deﬁned seven states; longitude,
latitude, heading, ∆heading, speed, ∆speed and object type, where ∆indicates the diﬀerence between
two succesive messages. They were able to detect some anomalies on simulated data, but others were
not possible to detect without also introducing a large number of false positives (Johansson and Falk-
man 2007).
A more complex implementation of the Bayesian Network was done by Mascaro et al. who included a
large number of states including information about weather conditions and vessel interactions (Mas-
caro, Korb, and Nicholson 2010). They trained two models in which one took the time-series nature
of the data into consideration where every time step was associated with a set of states. The other
model summarised the full track as a whole. They increased the anomaly performance but showed no
increased eﬀect of adding weather information. One big drawback of the Bayesian Networks remain
though, namely the sensitivity in assumptions for the deﬁning the states.
Neural networks have also been employed in the maritime anomaly detection task at an early stage.
Bomberger et al. used the fuzzy ARTMAP algorithm which works as a grid over a geographical area,
3
==PAGE:12==
1.1. RELATED WORK
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
in their case a harbor area. The junctions of the grid represents nodes in a neural network and the
grid edges are the weighted connections. They evaluated a 15 minutes temporal window in which the
weights between a start and end in the spatial grid was upweighted the more likely it was to occur
(Bomberger et al. 2006). Also using the fuzzy ARTMAP algorithm, although slightly modiﬁed, was
(Rhodes et al. 2005) where the normalcy of the velocity of the vessels was learned by clustering the
trajectories in each square. Although the fuzzy ARTMAP is an unsupervised method, with relatively
low computational cost, it is sensitive to the gridsize of the geographical area of interest. It is also,
unlike the BNs, diﬃcult to include static information about the vessels such as type and size (Tu et al.
2018).
The idea of dividing the region of interest into a grid and modelling the behaviour of the vessel within
each grid is though widely used in literature and collectively referred to as ”Geographic models” (Tu
et al. 2018). Another example of this approach is seen in (Laxhammar 2008) where the normalcy
in each square is found using a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) and the Expectation-Maximazation
(EM) algorithm to cluster momentary location, speed and course of the vessels. The results showed
that most anomalies detected were vessels crossing sea lanes or travelling in the opposite direction
of sea lanes. To ﬁnd more complex anomalies, they argue that more sophisticated models should be
used. It is also, as noted by (Kowalska and Peel 2012), a non-trivial task ﬁnding the optimal number
of mixing components for the GMM and can often lead to overﬁtting. Instead of ﬁnding anomalous
tracks as most methods introduced so far, Kowalska et al. use point-based anomaly detection. They use
two separate Gaussian Processes (GP) to predict the velocity in the horizontal and vertical direction
respectively, which combined gives them the predicted velocity at an unseen position. The sum of
the log-likelihood of the point in the trajectories can then indicate whether the track is behaving
abnormally or not. The Gaussian Process is contrary to GMMs non-parametric, albeit like the GMMs
have a high computational cost and poor scalability (Tu et al. 2018). In (Kowalska and Peel 2012)
this is addressed by Active Learning with some success.
For both the fuzzy ARTMAP and the GMMs some form of clustering of the trajectories is used.
Kowalska et al. makes a preprocessing simpliﬁcation in which they must assume only one shipping
lane is present at one position, mentioning that to accommodate multiple shipping lanes in one position
a clustering is necessary (Kowalska and Peel 2012). According to Nguyen et al. most methods for
anomaly detection in the maritime domain contains clustering at some point (Nguyen et al. 2019a).
One of those clustering methods widely used is the DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of
Applications with Noise). In its essence DBSCAN has two important hyperparameters; minPts (mini-
mum points) and ϵ. The algorithm recognizes points as either core points, density-connected points or
outliers. A point is categorized as a core point if at least minPts are within a distance of ϵ. Density-
4
==PAGE:13==
1.1. RELATED WORK
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
connected points are then either points directly reachable from the core points (i.e. within a distance
of ϵ) or reachable through another point (or points) in the cluster through a path to the core point
always with a maximum distance of ϵ. Density-connected points are then said to belong to the same
cluster, and any points not belonging to a cluster is deﬁned as noise (Giuliana Pallotta, Vespe, and
Bryan 2013).
The DBSCAN was one of the key components in the method proposed by Palotta et. al which they
named TREAD (Traﬃc Route Extraction and Anomaly Detection). Here they focus on a pre-speciﬁed
area and evaluate the events from the AIS messages from the vessels entering the area of interest. They
use the clustering of these events to create waypoints (e.g. stationary points, entry points, exit points)
which they then link to create a statistical representation of a route (Giuliana Pallotta, Vespe, and
Bryan 2013). The clustering is implemented in an incremental manner, and a Kernel Density Esti-
mation (KDE) of the predicted route is used for classifying anomalous behaviour. One of the main
disadvantages from the DBSCAN is much like the Baysian Networks the sensitivity of tuning the
hyperparameters.
This was addressed in (Zhao and Shi 2019) where they also clustered trajectories using the DBSCAN
and subsequently used a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to predict the route marking any devia-
tions from the learned normalcy as anomalous. They introduced a statistical approach for estimating
the hyperparameters decreasing the possible combinations of optimal choices signiﬁcantly. They de-
termine the core-distance as the distance to the closest point within the minPts and say that for a
ﬁxed minPts, ϵ should be the mode value of the inverse Gaussian Distribution. Their method though
proved sensitive to the quality of the sample vessels used in training. Further, the RNN used proved
diﬃcult to implement on shorter vessel tracks such as ﬁshing vessels.
The idea of using the minimum distance in minPts as the core distance is a concept of the OPTICS
algorithm which in itself is a generalization of the DBSCAN algorithm trying to overcome the hyperpa-
rameter sensitivity. Le Guillarme et al. created a model composing of three steps. First they perform
trajectory partitioning in which common parts of diﬀerent behaviours are treated as one trajectory.
They then cluster stop and move trajectories separately using the OPTICS algorithm to ﬁnd distinct
points of interest. Lastly, they create a two-scale normalcy model by adopting a graph structure. As
in the BNs, the nodes were the states of the model and the edges were the transition between states.
They modelled the transitions using a simple Markov Chain and deﬁned the states as a local activity
with the connections as a global model - hence, making it two-scale (Le Guillarme and Lerouvreur
2013).
Although the DBSCAN (with its various generalizations i.e. the OPTICS algorithm) is voluminous
in literature [see also Coscia et al. 2018; Varlamis et al. 2019] other clustering methods have been
5
==PAGE:14==
1.1. RELATED WORK
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
imposed also. One such example is (Zissis et al. 2020) who utilized K-means clustering of trajectories.
Often methods like DBSCAN is preferable to K-means as the number of clusters does not have to be
deﬁned in advance, but Zissis et al. propose simply chosing the number of clusters as the number of
origin-to-destination pairs available in data.
Nguyen et al. on the other hand argues that clustering methods results in a signiﬁcant loss of informa-
tion and believes that continuous latent states better capture the complexity of AIS data. Further they
question the fact that most state of the art methods, such as the TREAD, assume that the normalcy
learned by the model is homogeneous in the total areas of interest. To address these points their
proposed method GeoTrackNet introduces a latent space using a Variational Recurrent Neural Net-
work (VRNN) and an a contrario detector subsequently allowing for geographically speciﬁc anomalies
(Nguyen et al. 2019a; Nguyen et al. 2019b).
This thesis explores two models, both drawing inspiration from Nguyen et al.’s observation of increased
performance after an introduction of a latent space. The ﬁrst model is time invariant, handling each
trajectory as an image to be reconstructed through a Variational Autoencoder (VAE). The second
model is an implementation of the VRNN presented by Nguyen et al. (Nguyen et al. 2019a) and the
following chapter gives a detailed description of the theory behind both.
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Convolutional Variational Autoencoder
Using deep generative models to reconstruct normal images and using the reconstruction error as a
metric for detecting anomalies, has been widely applied in the medical domain. Baur et al. used deep
spatial autoencoding models to capture normality of Magnetic Resonance Images (MRIs) of the brain
and used the reconstruction error to detect anomalies (Baur et al. 2018). Zimmerer et al. also used
variational autoencoders for reconstructing medical images using a density-based scoring in addition
to the reconstruction error for anomaly detection (Zimmerer et al. 2018), and Chen et al. also used
the VAEs for detecting anomalies in brain images (Chen et al. 2018).
Letting the applications in the medical domain serve as motivation, the ﬁrst model to be explored
in this thesis is a Convolutional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE). The CVAE is the special case of
a variational autoencoder where the encoder and decoder consists of convolutional neural networks
(CNN). To fully grasp the architecture of this model, the idea behind VAE is explored in the following
sections as well as a deﬁnition of CNNs. But ﬁrst, a gentle introduction to Neural Networks, how to
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
train them and the idea behind backpropagation.
2.1.1
Neural Networks, training and backpropagation
The idea behind Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) originated in 1943 where McCulloch and Pitts,
tried to model the information processing of neurons in the human brain (McCulloch and Pitts 1943).
The models have since increased in sophistication but the general inspiration from the human brain
remains, with the ANNs also consisting of neurons processing information when activated.
The derivations in this section follows those in Bishop 2006, p. 227-244 and Herlau, N. Schmidt, and
Mørup 2018, p. 200-205. To simplify notation and derivations the network considered here is a simple
feed-forward neural network with an input layer, one hidden layer and an output layer as illustrated
in Figure 2.1. The network is categorized as a feed-forward NN because information only ﬂows from
the input x, through the hidden layer, to the output y, but does not include any feedback operations
in which the output y is fed back to the model. When a feedback is introduced, the neural network
becomes recurrent which is described in further detail in Section 2.2.1.
If D denotes the number of neurons in the input layer and K the number of neurons in the output
layer the neural network can be said to be a mapping such as f : RD →RK.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of a simple feed-forward neural network with D input dimensions and K output dimensions and
one hidden layer of size M.
Initially every neuron in the ﬁrst hidden layer is given an activation formulated with inspiration from
the simple linear regression, denoted a(1)
j ,
a(1)
j
=
D
X
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
(2.1)
where the superscript indicates that it is the activation of neuron j in the ﬁrst hidden layer and w
8
==PAGE:17==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
are the weigths and bias. Next the activation is transformed using a non-linear and diﬀerentiable
activation function, g,
z(1)
j
= g(a(1)
j )
(2.2)
It is the activation functions which introduce the non-linearity into neural networks and thus help
increase performance. Many diﬀerent activation functions exist, but for modern neural networks the
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) is often used. The ReLU is characterized by g(a) = max(0, a).
Now, linearly combining these activations in the same way as in Equation 2.1 gives the activations of
the output layer,
a(2)
k
=
M
X
j=1
w(2)
kj z(1)
j
+ w(2)
k0
(2.3)
Passing these through an output activation function gout gives the output of the network,
yk(x, w) = gout


M
X
j=0
w(2)
kj g
 D
X
i=0
w(1)
ji xi
!

(2.4)
where x and w are input and weight vectors respectively. The output activation function ensures a
transformation of the output to a useful quantity. As an example, using a sigmoid function as the
output activation would transform the output to range between 0 and 1, and is useful for classiﬁcation
problems, since the output can then be thought of as the probability of a given class. Please note, that
the bias parameters in Equation 2.4 are included in the weight parameters by adding an extra input
x0 = 1 (Bishop 2006, p. 229).
When training a neural network, optimal weights are sought that minimizes some speciﬁc loss function.
The general derivation of loss functions will be omitted from this thesis, and an arbitrary, smooth and
continuous loss function will simply be denoted as L(w). The training then consists of ﬁnding the best
value for w that minimizes L,
w∗= arg min
w
L(w)
(2.5)
Picturing the loss function as a surface located in weight space, a small step in weight space going
9
==PAGE:18==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
from w to w + λw would change the loss function as,
λL ≃λwT ∇L(w)
(2.6)
where ∇L(w) indicates the direction of greatest rate of increase in L(w) and wT is the transposed
weight vector. Given that the loss function is smooth and continuous the smallest value will occur where
∇L(w) = 0, unfortunately it is nearly impossible to ﬁnd an analytic solution to that equation (Bishop
2006, p. 237). Instead optimization methods are applied, most of which utilizes an initialization of
w(0) and then iteratively moving through weight space such as,
w(τ+1) = w(τ) + ∆w(τ)
(2.7)
where τ denote a given iteration. The choice of the weight vector update, ∆w(τ), gives rise to various
optimization algorithms. One of the traditionally most common algorithms is the gradient descent
where ∆w(τ) is the negative gradient of the loss function,
w(τ+1) = w(τ) −η∇L(w(τ))
(2.8)
where η deﬁnes the size of the step in the negative gradient direction called the learning rate. Often
loss functions are a sum over the loss function of every example in the training set, which for very
large datasets makes the computation of one gradient step become unfeasible (Goodfellow, Bengio,
and Courville 2016, p. 149). To solve this stochastic gradient descent is introduced, which updates the
weight vector based on one data-point, data-point number n, such that Equation 2.8 becomes,
w(τ+1) = w(τ) −η∇Ln(w(τ))
(2.9)
It is also possible to update the weight vector using a subset of samples called minibatches.
The
stochastic behaviour of stochastic gradient descent comes from the random selection of samples from
the training set.
Diﬀerent implementations of the stochastic gradient descent algorithm has been proposed, and in recent
advances in deep learning the Adam optimization has gained traction. The algorithm was introduced
in 2015 by Kingma and Ba, in which an exponential moving average of the gradient and the squared
gradient are updated with hyperparameters β1 and β2 controlling the exponential decay rates (Kingma
and Ba 2015). The Adam optimizer is used in this project.
10
==PAGE:19==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
After establishing how to optimize the weights of the network, the only outstanding is ﬁnding an
eﬃcient method to evaluate the gradients of the loss function throughout the network. To do this,
backpropagation is used. To formulate the scheme of backpropagation the deﬁnitions of the simple
feed-forward neural network introduced by Equation 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 are revisited. Let j be an
arbitrary hidden neuron receiving input from activation i in a previous layer. The activation of j can
from Equation 2.1 and 2.2 be described as,
aj =
X
i
wjizi
(2.10)
It is then assumed that Equation 2.10 and 2.2 has been successively calculated for all hidden and
output layers in the network. Next, the derivative of the loss function with regards to the weights
must be evaluated. Using the chain rule for partial derivatives gives,
∂Ln
∂wji
= ∂Ln
∂aj
∂aj
∂wji
(2.11)
made possible since Ln only depends on the weights from the summed input of aj to layer j. Introducing
the notation δj ≡∂Ln
∂aj and utilizing that 2.10 can be written as
∂aj
∂wji = zi gives,
∂Ln
∂wji
= δjzi
(2.12)
This shows that to evaluate the gradient, δj should simply be calculated for every hidden and output
neuron of the network. To perform this calculation, the chain rule is once more applied giving,
δj =
X
k
∂Ln
∂ak
∂ak
∂aj
(2.13)
where k is the dimension of the output layer.
Backsubstituting the deﬁnition of δj in Equation 2.13 and utilizing the deﬁnition of activation given
in Equation 2.3 gives the backpropagation formula,
δj =
X
k
δk
∂
∂aj

X
j
wkj · g(aj)


= g′(aj)
X
k
wkjδk
(2.14)
11
==PAGE:20==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
The δ’s at the output is simply the error for a speciﬁc neuron and hence is known. All other δ’s
of the network can then be found by propagating the errors backward and in combinations with the
activation of the given neuron the gradients can be evaluated, thus letting the network train (Bishop
2006, p. 244).
2.1.2
Variational Autoencoder
An Autoencoder is an unsupervised method using neural networks to map a given input from the
data space, X, to a latent space, Z, preserving as much information as possible while simultaneously
simplifying the data (Lempitsky 2020). The mapping to latent space is referred to as the encoder.
The model then seeks to inverse map the latent space back to an output with the same dimension as
the input also using a neural network referred to as the decoder. This way the latent representation
becomes a dimensionality reduction that can then be used as inputs in various other machine learning
tasks (Joshi 2020).
Mathematically this corresponds to learning a latent representation, z ∈Z, from a given input x ∈X
as,
z = ϕenc
φ
(x)
(2.15)
where ϕenc
φ
can be any neural network with learnable parameters φ. The decoder, ϕdec
θ
, then maps
z ∈Z back to the data space X, making the full autoencoder the composition of the two networks
(Lempitsky 2020). An illustration of the autoencoder can been seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of an autoencoder with an encoding neural network, a latent space of lower dimension than the
data space and a decoding neural network.
In order to train the network a reconstruction error is simply applied measuring the dissimilarity, ∆,
12
==PAGE:21==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
of the input and output as given in Equation 2.16 (Joshi 2020).
L(φ, θ) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∆(xi, ϕdec
θ
(ϕenc
φ
(xi)))
(2.16)
where xi denotes the i’th input of a dataset of size N.
Learning the output from the input is not necessarily useful in itself, but by setting restrictions on the
latent space the aim is to capture the most important aspects of the input. Restrictions could include
reducing the dimensions of Z compared to the dimension of the input. In the case of a linear decoder
and mean squared error as dissimilarity measure, the latent space would learn to span the subspace
as a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016, p. 500).
Since the latent space is learned directly from the training data, autoencoders often generalize poorly
to new data, resulting in reconstructions from the decoder that are implausible given the data space
(Cang et al. 2018). This happens because the autoencoders do not try to match the model distribution
with the data distribution. Looking at the latent space as a lower dimension manifold on which the
data lies and whose structure the encoder seeks to capture, this diﬃculty arises when the manifold is
not very smooth. A very large number of training examples would then be necessary in order to model
the structure of the manifold correctly, making it diﬃcult to generalize to unseen data (Goodfellow,
Bengio, and Courville 2016). Since many deep learning problems de facto work with highly complex
data structures the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) was introduced as a generative model to solve this
problem (Kingma and Welling 2014).
Now, instead of mapping the input to a point in latent space, the input is encoded as a distribution
over the latent space, p(z|x). The assumption here is, that data is generated by some random process
that includes the random variable z and generating an output is then the product of the conditional
distribution p(x|z) (Kingma and Welling 2014). It is assumed that the latent variable, z, follows a
prior distribution p(z) often chosen as a simple Gaussian (Chung et al. 2015; Kingma and Welling
2014).
Compared to the autoencoder where the goal was to create an output that mapped the input the best,
the VAE seeks to maximize the likelihood of x, p(x), as given in Equation 2.17 (Cang et al. 2018;
Doersch 2016).
p(x) =
Z
z
p(x|z)p(z)dz
(2.17)
In theory it should be possible to approximate p(x) by sampling a large number of samples from Z and
13
==PAGE:22==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
making the approximation p(x) ≈1
n
P
i p(x|zi) but in practice n would have to be very large making
Equation 2.17 intractable (Doersch 2016).
However, it is possible to see that p(x|z) will be close to zero for most z which gives the motivation
for the encoder p(z|x) that conditions the latent variable z on the input x, (Cang et al. 2018). This
true posterior density function can be expressed using Bayes Theorem,
p(z|x) = p(x|z)p(z)
p(x)
(2.18)
However, this posterior function is also intractable as it requires the evaluation of p(x). To overcome
this problem Variational Inference (VI) is used to approximate the posterior distribution (Abiri 2019).
In VI a complex distribution is approximated using optimization. In the case of the VAE, the ap-
proximation of the posterior is made by introducing the distribution q(z|x), an approximate posterior.
Through variational inference the distribution that best describes p(z|x) is sought for. In practice this
in done by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the true posterior and approximated
posterior (Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliﬀe 2017),
q∗(z|x) = arg minKL(q(z|x)||p(z|x))
(2.19)
where q∗describes the optimal approximation and the Kullback-Leibler divergence is deﬁnes as,
KL(q(z|x)||p(z|x)) = E[log(q(z|x))] −E[log(p(z|x))]
(2.20)
where all expectations are taken with respect to q(z|x).
Applying the formulation of p(z|x) given by Bayes Theorem in Equation 2.18, Equation 2.20 can be
rewritten as,
KL(q(z|x)||p(z|x)) = E[log(q(z|x)) −log(p(x|z) −log(p(z))] + p(x)
(2.21)
Looking at Equation 2.21 it is though clear that this also depends on p(x) which once more makes
the calculation intractable. Instead an alternative objective is optimized which is equivalent to the kl
up to an added contant. This alternative objective equals the negative kl from Equation 2.21 plus
log(p(x)) which is a constant with respect to q(z|x) and is referred to as the Evidence Lower BOund
14
==PAGE:23==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
(ELBO) (Abiri 2019; Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliﬀe 2017),
Lθ,φ(x) = E[log(pθ(x|z))] −KL(qφ(z|x)||p(z))
(2.22)
where θ refers to the parameters characterizing the decoder network and φ is the parameters of the
approximate posterior (Kingma and Welling 2014). Maximizing the ELBO is equivalent to minimizing
the kl divergence in Equation 2.20 and is used as the objective function during inference when training
the Variational Autoencoder (Abiri 2019; Doersch 2016).
Looking at the right hand side of Equation 2.22 the ﬁrst term measures the reconstruction error between
an input x and the reconstruction made from the latent variable z drawn from the conditioned latent
distribution q(z|x). The second term quantiﬁes the diﬀerence between this encoding distribution q(z|x)
and the distribution over the latent variables p(z) and acts as a regularizer (Cang et al. 2018; Kingma
and Welling 2014).
The steps of the VAE then includes mapping the input to a distribution over the latent space q(z|x).
A sample is then drawn from this distribution, z ∼q(z|x), and passed through the decoder to map
back into data space, p(x|z), and calculate the reconstruction error after which the weight of the
network can be updated by stochastic gradient descent. All the steps are feasible through the network
except backpropagating through the sampling z ∼q(z|x) (Soleimany 2020). To overcome this the
reparameterization trick is introduced.
The key idea behind the reparameterization trick is to express the random variable z drawn from the
latent distribution qφ(z|x) as a deterministic variable (Kingma and Welling 2014). This is done by
expressing z as a sum of a ﬁxed µ vector and a ﬁxed σ vector scaled by ϵ, where ϵ is a random constant
sampled from the prior distribution (Soleimany 2020). Often the approximated posterior is chosen to
be a multivariate Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance structure as,
qφ(z|x) ∼N(µ, σ2I)
(2.23)
where the µ and σ are outputs of the encoding non-linear function parameterized by φ. This makes
the latent variable after the reparameterization trick follow,
z ∼µ + σ ⊙ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
(2.24)
where ⊙represents the element-wise product (Kingma and Welling 2014). The full ﬂow of the Varia-
15
==PAGE:24==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
tional Autoencoder can be seen in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the layout for the Variational Autoencoder in which the encoder maps the input to a distribution
given by µ and σ (green). The decoder then draws a sample z (orange) from the distribution made by the encoder and
passes it through the decoder to create a reconstruction of x (yellow). Since backpropagation is not possible through
the step of sampling, the reparameterization trick is used in which a random constant ϵ sampled from the prior (grey)
is added.
2.1.3
Convolutional Neural Network
As mentioned in the introduction to this section the ﬁrst model explored in this thesis is the special
case of a VAE in which the encoder and decoder are parameterized by CNNs. To understand the
beneﬁts a CNN imposes remember ﬁrst the fully connected neural network discussed in Section 2.1.1.
Consider the case in which the input is a grid-like structure of dimensions 100 × 100, such as an
image, and the ﬁrst hidden layer contains 1000 neurons. Passing the image to the ﬁrst layer of the feed
forward network would require 100·100·1000 = 107 weights (and an additional 1000 parameters for the
bias terms). Training a neural network of this size would require a substantial computational power,
and the size of the training data would have to be very large in order to tune that many parameters
(Herlau, N. Schmidt, and Mørup 2018, p. 212). Convolutional neural networks address this issue
explicitly by convolving the input with a kernel creating a set of feature maps. In contrary to the fully
connected feed-forward neural network, the CNN have sparse interactions, accomplished by making
the kernel smaller than the input.
For a 2D image input I ∈Rm×n and 2D kernel K ∈Ri×j the convolution of the two are given as,
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(m, n)K(i −m, j −n)
(2.25)
The process of convolution is commutative meaning, that (I∗K)(i, j) = (K∗I)(i, j). This commutative
16
==PAGE:25==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
behaviour is achieved by ﬂipping the kernel as indicated by Equation 2.25, which is not generally an
important feature for convolutional neural networks. Instead many libraries for convolutional neural
networks use a related operation, the cross-correlation, which is also the case for the library Pytorch
used for setting the architecture of the neural networks used in this thesis.
The cross-correlation
between a kernel K and image I is given as,
S(i, j) = (K ∗I)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(i + m, j + n)K(m, n)
(2.26)
A given kernel can capture one kind of feature in the image such as edges or corners. For neural
networks multiple convolutional operations are run in parallel in order to capture multiple features.
For images the dimensions of the input is often 4D, with a dimension for the batchsize, one for the
height, one for the width and lastly one for the input channels. For an image in color there will be
three input channels for the red, green and blue intensity of each pixel. Grey-scale images on the other
hand only have 1 input channel (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016, p. 342).
The input kernel usually have the same dimensions as the image and the resulting convolutions in each
dimension is summed to a one-depth channel output feature map.
An illustration of convolving an image I ∈R6×6 with a kernel K ∈R3×3 is seen in Figure 2.4. Here
the kernel starts in the upper left corner and moves one step to the right until the edge of the image is
reached, after which it moves back to the left edge but one step down and once more makes its way to
the right edge of the image. This process is continued until the kernel has spanned the entire image.
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the convolutional operation used in CNNs. The kernel (orange) is elementwise multiplied and
summed with the input (blue) values in an incremental manner starting from the top left corner and moving left to
right, up to down until the bottom right corner is reached, ﬁnally creating the output (yellow).
In the example in Figure 2.4 the kernel moves with one step at every calculation. The step size in
which the kernel moves is referred to as the stride and is not limited to the size of 1 and may be
diﬀerent for each direction. It can be shown that any stride length diﬀerent than 1 will reduce the
dimensions of the data by a factor of the stride length (Rebala, Ravi, and Churiwala 2019, p. 189).
Another important feature of the convolutional operation for neural networks is the process of padding
17
==PAGE:26==
2.1. CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
in which the width and height of the image are padded with a given number of zeros. Without zero
padding the output will shrink with one pixel less than the kernel width (Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville 2016, p. 343), as seen in Figure 2.4 where the input of dimension 6 × 6 results in a feature
map of dimensions 4 × 4. This corresponds to a dimension reduction of 2 - one pixel less than the
kernel size.
To overcome this, zero padding is introduced as a method to control the kernel width and the size of
the output independently. In the case of the convolution seen in Figure 2.4 where no zero-padding
is added it is referred to as a valid convolution. Since the dimensions shrink for each convolutional
operation, it limits the number of convolutional layers applicable to the network. If the kernel size is
large, the shrinkage can happen at a larger rate than useful information is learned by the network.
If there is instead added enough zero-padding to the input, such that the output size remains constant,
it is referred to as same convolution. The down-side in this case is, that the pixels near the edge of
the image inﬂuence fewer pixels in the output than the pixels in the center of the input does.
Finally, there is the case where enough zeros are added for every pixel to be visited as many times as
the dimensions in the kernel. This is referred to as full convolution (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville
2016, p. 344).
In addition to the convolution operation creating a set of linear activations, two other processes are
important in the building blocks of the CNN. After the convolution, the layers are passed through a
non-linear activation such as the ReLU. This ensures that negative values are set to 0.
Lastly, the convolutions are pooled. Pooling summarizes nearby output values by a summary statistic
to produce a new output of fewer dimension. The name of the pooling technique typically indicates
the summary statistic applied - max pooling hence refers to passing only the maximum value in a
rectangular neighborhood, and average pooling passes the average of the outputs in a rectangular
neighborhood. The pooling operation ensures that the representation learned by the network become
approximately invariant to small local translations in the input.
Invariance is useful if it is more
important whether a feature is present than where exactly it is.
In general for an input with size i, padding p, kernel size k and stride s the size of the output will be
(Dumoulin and Visin 2016),
o = i + 2p −k
s
+ 1
(2.27)
For image classiﬁcation tasks, the output from the last convolutional layer is often ﬂattened and passed
through one or more fully connected layers creating an output with the same dimensions as categories
in the data. Activating the last layer with a softmax function could then give the probability of each
18
==PAGE:27==
2.2. VARIATIONAL RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
category.
2.1.4
Convolutional Variational Autoencoder
The CVAE is, as mentioned previously, a VAE where the encoder and decoder are characterized
by convolutional networks. All the same techniques as described in the section above holds for the
convolutional generative network, although the convolutional technique in the decoder is transposed.
A transposed convolution is obtained by swapping the forward and backward pass of a convolution.
Taking the transposed convolution of an input of size 2 × 2 with a 2 × 2 zero-padding and a kernel of
size 3 × 3 will give an output of 4 × 4, which corresponds to fully connected convolution. Generally it
holds, that for a convolution with stride s = 1, padding p = 0 and kernel size k there is an associated
transposed convolution described by k′ = k, s′ = s and p′ = k −1 and where the output size will be
(Dumoulin and Visin 2016),
o′ = i′ + (k −1)
(2.28)
Although the convolutional procedure can be reversed using the associated transposed convolution,
most pooling functions are invertible making it unfeasible to add an inverse pooling layer in the
generative network.
One approach to inverse the pooling layers are the ”un-pooling” method as
explained in (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017). For the implementations in this thesis, no pooling operations
are used in the encoding network and thus there is no need to implement inverse pooling operations
in the decoder, leaving the explanation of these outside the current scope.
2.2
Variational Recurrent Neural Network
The Variational Recurrent Neural Network (VRNN) was ﬁrst introduced by Chung et al. in 2015
to solve the problem of speech recognition (Chung et al. 2015) and has since been used for Machine
Translation (Su et al. 2018), speech separation (Chien and Kuo 2017), and speech synthesis (Lee et al.
2018) among others. Although the inspiration and application in literature mainly stems from the ﬁeld
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) it has also been applied to other time series problems such as
trajectory forecasting using AIS data (Nguyen et al. 2019a).
The VRNN is a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) that contains a VAE at every step (Chung et al.
2015), so in order to grasp the full VRNN model, the concepts of a RNN must ﬁrst be explored.
19
==PAGE:28==
2.2. VARIATIONAL RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.2.1
Recurrent Neural Network
The Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is a neural network designed to deal with sequential data
(Rebala, Ravi, and Churiwala 2019, p. 127). Contrary to other neural networks the RNN is dynamic
and handles data that changes over time. The architecture is closely related to that of the feed-forward
neural network, the only diﬀerence is, that the RNN uses the previous state of the model alongside
the input to calculate the new state (Joshi 2020, p. 123).
For the feed-forward network presented in the previous section the data considered was x ∈RD, but
for the sequential data used for the RNN, data can be represented as x ∈RT ×D where T is the length
of the time sequence. To simplify the derivation of the RNN, vector notation will thus be used instead
of the summations over neurons as in Section 2.1.1. Using vector notation on Equation 2.4 would give,
y = gout(W2 · g(W1 · X))
(2.29)
where W1 ∈RM×D are the weights from input to ﬁrst hidden layer and W2 ∈RK×M are the weights
to the output layer.
For the RNN, consider an output at a given time as the activation of a weighted hidden state,
yt = gout(Wh2 · ht)
(2.30)
where gout is the activation function of the output such as the sigmoid, Wh2 is the weights on the
output and the hidden state ht is conditioned on the previous state such as,
ht = gh(Wx · xt, Wh1 · ht−1)
(2.31)
The general architecture of the RNN can be seen in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the architecture of the Recurrent Neural Network in which the previous hidden state is passed
to the current timestep to instate a short term memory of the network.
20
==PAGE:29==
2.2. VARIATIONAL RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
By using the previous hidden state as input in the next timestep, it enables the model to have a short
term memory (Mikolov et al. 2011). The network is then trained using the backpropagation deﬁned
in Equation 2.14 (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016, p. 378; Rebala, Ravi, and Churiwala 2019,
p. 132).
One problem persisting with RNNs is the inability to store information for longer sequences. Since
every prediction is made based on the last few inputs, which were also predicted by the network, it
often becomes unstable, not able to rectify previous mistakes (Graves 2013, p. 2). Mathematically,
this is a result of backpropagating the gradients through many stages of the network, which will often
tend to make the gradients either vanish or explode.
Say the model consists of repeatedly multiplying by a matrix W, such as the weight matrices in the
RNN. Then after t timesteps, this corresponds to multiplying by W t. If W is a square matrix and has
an eigendecomposition such as W = V ΛV −1, where Λ is the diagonal matrix whose elements are the
eigenvalues of W, the following is clear,
W t = (V ΛV −1)t = V ΛtV −1
(2.32)
This shows that for any eigenvalue λi it will either explode if it is greater than a near absolute value
of 1 or contrarily vanish if it is smaller that 1.
One way to overcome this is by creating some paths through time with derivatives, that neither vanish
nor explode, accomplished by the introduction of gated RNNs (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville
2016, p. 404). The two main gated RNNs are the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter
and Urgen Schmidhuber 1997) and the Gated Recurrent Units (GRU). For the Variational Recurrent
Neural Network used in this thesis the LSTM is used.
The LSTM cell introduces three gates; the forget gate, the input gate and the output gate. The output
of the LSTM is then the new hidden state and a cell state, both carried to the next sequence. The full
ﬂow through the LSTM cell is illustrated in Figure 2.6.
The forget gate determines how much of the previous state should be conserved and how much should
be forgotten (Joshi 2020, p. 125). This is done by combining the current input with the previous
hidden state and passed through a sigmoid as,
ft = σ(Wxfxt + Whfht−1 + bf)
(2.33)
where Wxf and Whf are the weights on the input and hidden state respectively for the forget state and
21
==PAGE:30==
2.2. VARIATIONAL RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the ﬂow through the LSTM unit. The ﬂow starts in the bottom left corner where the input
is concatenated with the previous hidden state, passed through a sigmoid and multiplied with the previous cell state.
This constitutes the forget gate. The input gate also uses the concatenated input and previous hidden state and passes
them through both a tanh and sigmoid function, whereafter the outputs are multiplied. Adding the output from the
input gate with the output from the forget gate gives the new cell state. The output gate uses the newly created cell
state, the current input and previous hidden state to create the new hidden state of the model.
bf is the bias(Graves 2013, p. 5). This notation of weights remains the same through the formulation
of the gates.
Next is the input gate. This determines what new information should be allowed in the state (Joshi
2020, p.
125).
Again, the current input and the previous hidden state are combined and passed
through both a sigmoid and a tanh activation function after which they are multiplied together,
it = σ(Wxi1xt + Whi1ht−1 + bi1) · tanh(Wxi2xt + Whi2ht−1 + bi2)
(2.34)
The new cell state is then updated as follows,
ct = ftct−1 + it
(2.35)
The output gate then uses this newly calculated cell state alongside the current input and previous
hidden state to generate the output, or new hidden state, of the LSTM unit,
ht = σ(Wxoxt + Whoht−1 + bo) · tanh(ct)
(2.36)
22
==PAGE:31==
2.2. VARIATIONAL RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.2.2
Variational Recurrent Neural Network
The VRNN is designed to explicitly model latent dependencies over multiple timesteps while retaining
a ﬂexibility to model highly non-linear dynamics (Chung et al. 2015). The VRNN is a RNN that
contains a VAE at each step and conditions the VAE on the previous hidden state, making it possible
to model the dependencies of the latent random variables through multiple timesteps (Su et al. 2018).
Diﬀerently from the VAE both the input and latent space are passed through feature extractors, ϕx
τ(x)
and ϕz
τ(z) respectively, parameterized by simple linear neural networks. These feature extractors have
proven crucial for learning complex sequences.
Moreover, unlike the traditional VAE the prior distribution is not assumed to follow a simple Gaussian
but rather is conditioned on the previous hidden state of the model, formally,
zt ∼p(zt|ht−1)
(2.37)
The encoder is similarly conditioned on the previous hidden state such as q(zt|ϕ(xt), ht−1).
Further, the decoder is no longer only conditioned on the latent variable but also on the previous
hidden state,
xt ∼p(xt|ϕz
τ(zt), ht−1)
(2.38)
Finally, the RNN then updates its hidden state in the recurrence step as,
ht = f(ϕx
τ(xt), ϕz
τ(zt), ht−1)
(2.39)
The ﬂow through the VRNN is formulated in four steps.
1. Computation of the conditional prior using Equation 2.37
2. Inference of the approximate posterior by sampling z from q(zt|ϕ(xt), ht−1)
3. Running the generating function of Equation 2.38
4. Updating the hidden state of the RNN using Equation 2.39
23
==PAGE:32==
2.3. STATISTICAL TOOLS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Like the VAE, the loss function is the ELBO, but this time it is re-written in a step-wise manner
(Nguyen et al. 2019b; Su et al. 2018),
L(xt|ht−1, zt) = E[log(p(xt|ϕz
τ(zt), ht−1)] −KL[q(zt|ϕ(xt), ht−1)||p(zt|ht−1)]
(2.40)
An illustration of the ﬂow of the VRNN is seen in Figure 2.7.
(a) Step 1
(b) Step 2
(c) Step 3
(d) Step 4
(e) Combined
Figure 2.7: Illustration of VRNN ﬂow. In step 1 the prior is computed conditioned on the previous hidden state. In
step 2 the approximate posterior is formed conditioned on the input and the previous hidden state. A sample z is drawn
from the approximate posterior and together with the previous hidden state it is used to reconstruct x in step 3. Lastly
in step 4, the hidden state of the RNN is updated using the sampled latent variable z, the previous hidden state and the
input.
2.3
Statistical Tools
During the evaluation of the models, a few statistical tools are used. A short theoretic overview of
them will follow.
2.3.1
Monte Carlo Estimate
When training the Variational Autoencoder the ELBO is often approximated by a Monte Carlo Es-
timate. Monte Carlo sampling is the process of drawing samples from some distribution in order to
form a Monte Carlo estimate of a given quantity. Monte Carlo sampling becomes especially useful
when the sum or integral in a given calculation cannot be computed exactly, and instead lets the sum
or integral be an expectation under some distribution, and then approximate the expectation by an
average (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016, p. 588). If,
s =
X
x
p(x)f(x) = Ep[f(x)]
(2.41)
where p is a probability distribution over random variable x, then s can be approximated by drawing
24
==PAGE:33==
2.3. STATISTICAL TOOLS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
n samples of x from p and calculating the empirical average,
s = 1
n
n
X
i=1
f(x(i))
(2.42)
For the ELBO used in this thesis, the Monte Carlo estimate of both the reconstruction error and KL
divergence is used.
2.3.2
Statistical Tests
It is often useful to be able to state whether there is a diﬀerence between the groups, or samples, of
two observed variables. To this end, hypothesis testing is used. Here the mean of the samples are
compared, and it is tested whether there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two. Formally a null
hypothesis H0 is tested versus an alternative hypothesis H1 such as,
H0 : µ1 −µ2 = δ0
H1 : µ1 −µ2 ̸= δ0
(2.43)
where µ1 is the true mean of group 1, µ2 is the true mean of group 2 and δ0 is the diﬀerence in
means being tested for. Often δ0 = 0 which would correspond to testing whether the mean of two
distributions are equal.
Performing a level α two-sample t-test would then include calculating the test statistic, tobs which
follows a t-distribution with υ degrees of freedom using Equation 2.44 and Equation 2.45.
tobs = (¯x1 −¯x2) −δ0
q
s2
1
n1 + s2
2
n2
(2.44)
υ =

s2
1
n1 + s2
2
n2
2
(s1/n1)2
n1−1
+ (s2/n2)2
n2−1
(2.45)
Here ¯x is the sample mean and s is the sample standard deviation and n is the number of observations
in the group.
If the absolute test statistic is larger than the critical value for a given signiﬁcance level meaning
|tobs| > t1−α/2 the null hypothesis is rejected, and the alternative hypothesis can be accepted. For
25
==PAGE:34==
2.3. STATISTICAL TOOLS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
δ0 = 0 rejecting the null hypothesis equates stating a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the means of the
two groups investigated (Brockhoﬀet al. 2018, p. 172).
For this thesis the statistical tests will use a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05 and for all evaluations the
degrees of freedom renders a critical value of 1.96. An assumption for the t-test is, that the samples
being investigated must be normally distributed, however the sample size for the calculations in this
thesis are large enough to disregard this limitation.
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Experiments and Results
For training both models investigated in this thesis the DTU High Performance Computer (HPC) LSF
10 cluster was used. The code was written using Python 3.6 and for all neural networks the Pytorch
1.7.1 framework was used. All code used to produce the results of this thesis is available on Github:
https://github.com/mariegadeberg/AISOutlierDetection.git.
3.1
Datasets and Preprocessing
Many of the data preprocessing steps taken in this thesis is directly inspired by (Nguyen et al. 2019a).
In the paper the data used for anomaly detection was received by an AIS station located in Ushant, an
island in the English Channel. Their region of interest (ROI) was a rectangle from 47.5◦N to 49.5◦N
and 4◦W to 7◦W and was collected from January to March 2017, from July to September 2017 and
from January to March 2018, with more than 4.2 million AIS messages in each period.
This project revolves around the Danish maritime water, and to keep the ROI as close in size to that
in the paper and similar in seafare traﬃc type the area chosen spans from 54.5◦N to 56.5◦N and 13◦E
to 17◦E. This corresponds to the area around the Danish island of Bornholm. The data is collected
27
==PAGE:36==
3.1. DATASETS AND PREPROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
from the period January to March 2020 and after preprocessing this period contains 730.000 AIS mes-
sages and is comprised of tracks from both tanker and cargo ships with a total of 11.440 individual
trajectories. All paths until 10th of March were chosen as training set, paths from 11th of March till
20th of March were the validation set, and paths from 21st of March until 31st of March were the test
set. This results roughly in a 8:1:1 split.
Several preprocessing steps where taken to create as homogeneous a dataset as possible. First, discon-
tiguous voyages, identiﬁed as voyages with more than 4 hours between two successive AIS messages,
were split into separate tracks. Next, paths shorter than 4 hours were discarded and paths were cut
when extending beyond the ROI. As in the article the tracks were re-sampled to a resolution of 10-
minutes using a linear interpolation.
To spare the RNN for very long sequences a maximum duration for a path was set to 24 hours splitting
it into smaller paths if threshold was exceeded. To disregard moored vessels, tracks were discarded if
the speed was smaller than 0.1 knots for more than 80% of the time. Any speeds surpassing 30 knots
where set to 30 as done in (Nguyen et al. 2019a).
An illustration of some of the tracks in the dataset is shown in Figure 3.1. The processing of the inputs
to the CVAE and the VRNN diﬀer, and a detailed description of the separate methods follows.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of 100 trajectories from the dataset.
28
==PAGE:37==
3.1. DATASETS AND PREPROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
3.1.1
Data Representation for CVAE model
The CVAE model takes images as input, and each path must therefore be represented as an image.
This is obtained by one-hot encoding the longitude and latitude coordinates at each time-step and
multiplying the two vectors to create a matrix spanning the ROI. The matrices at each time-step is
then added together, creating a ﬁnal image in which coordinates where the ship stayed longer have
higher pixel values. An illustration of the process can be seen in Figure 3.2. Lastly, the images were
normalized making all pixel values span from [0;1]. Three example inputs can be seen in Figure 3.3.
The resolutions of the bins in the one-hot vector of the longitude and latitude must be included as
hyperparameters. In (Nguyen et al. 2019a) they suggest a resolution of 0.01◦for latitude and longitude
which is also used here. This make the dimension of the input images 201 × 402 passed to the model
in batches of 32.
Figure 3.2: Process of generating images of the AIS messages.
The one-hot encoding of the longitude and latitude
coordinate at each timestep is multiplied and summed over timesteps of the trajectory to create the ﬁnal image of the
path.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.3: Examples of images generated as inputs for the CVAE model
3.1.2
Data Representation for VRNN model
Unlike previous work that uses the AIS messages as a timeseries where the paths are represented by
its real-valued position and speed, Nguyen et al. proposes a novel representation of the AIS tracks.
They instead represent each AIS point as a ”four-hot” vector concatenating the one-hot encoding of
the latitude, longitude, SOG and COG of the message. They argue that this representation helps
29
==PAGE:38==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
disentangle both the geometric features and the phase patterns of the tracks. Again, the resolution of
the bins are included as hyperparameters. In addition to a resolution of 0.01◦for latitude and longitude,
they suggest 1 knot for SOG and 5◦for COG which is applied here as well. These hyperparameters are
a trade-oﬀbetween capturing critical information without making the network so big, that it becomes
too computationally expensive to run and gets prone to overﬁtting.
Representing the data for the project as four-hot vectors gives a dimension of 707 features. All ”four-
hot” vectors are normalized before being passed as input and a batchsize of 32 is used. Since the
lengths of sequences passed to the LSTM must be equal, all paths in a batch are shortened to equal
the length of the shortest path in batch.
3.2
CVAE
The ﬁrst model to be explored for anomaly detection in the maritime domain, was the CVAE. First
step was to train a CVAE to reconstruct a given track, after which anomalies could be identiﬁed as
routes diﬃcult to reconstruct by the model. Since there is no labelled data for anomalies in Danish
waters, a manual inspection of the detected anomalies is necessary. However, to get a metric for the
ability to detect outliers, fabricated anomalous tracks are also presented to the model, and the rate at
which they are ﬂagged as anomalies is reported.
3.2.1
Neural Network Architecture
The input to the model were greyscale images of dimension (1 × 201 × 402), where 1 refers to the
greyscale input channel. The encoder consisted of 5 convolutional layers with a stride of 2 and padding
of 1 in all layers. The kernel size varied from 3 to 4 and the channels were gradually increased to end
with a dimension of (256 × 7 × 13). The input was ﬂattened creating a tensor with a dimension of
23.296 which was passed through 2 linear layers resulting in a dimension of 200, namely 2 times the
latent state size of 100. All layers were activated using the ReLU activation function.
The decoder deconvolutes the latent variable of size 100 back to the dimension of the input through
ﬁrst two linear layers upscaling the dimensions, then unﬂattening the result and passing it through
5 transposed convolutional layers with the ReLU activation function between all layers. A simple
Gaussian distribution was used to parameterize both the prior and approximate posterior, whereas a
multivariate Bernoulli distribution was used in the generative network. An illustration of the archi-
tecture can be seen in Figure 3.4. The Adam optimizer was used with a learning rate of 0.0003 and
the Monte Carlo estimate of the ELBO was used as the objective function.
30
==PAGE:39==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the architecture of the CVAE model. Five convolutional layers are used to reduce the dimension
of the input to 256 × 7 × 13 after which it is ﬂattened and passed through two linear layers. The process is reversed for
the decoder using transposed convolution to continuously increase dimensions until that of the input is reached.
3.2.2
Results and Analysis
Trajectory Prediction
The result of training the model for 30 epochs are visualized in Figure 3.5. Here the ELBO which
is sought to be maximized is illustrated (a) alongside the KL divergence (b) which is sought to be
minimized. In (c) and (d) the same illustrations are shown without the ﬁrst epoch to better show
nuances of the training process. As expected the ELBO is maximized and the KL is initially minimized.
The increase in KL after the ﬁrst epoch could simply be an indicator that the model learns, that by
letting the approximate posterior deviate slightly from the prior, better results are obtained.
To visualize how well the model reconstructs paths, Figure 3.6 shows the original path, the logits cre-
ated by the decoder to parameterize the Bernoulli distribution and the logits transformed to probability
space. Since the logits represent where it is most likely to sample a 1 from the Bernoulli distribution,
Figure 3.6 shows that the decoder learns a distribution that is most likely to output 1’s where the true
path actually lies. The transformation to probability space is done to further illustrate this point, and
performed using,
p =
e(logit)
1 + e(logit)
(3.1)
where p indicates the probability, and e is the exponential. The complete reconstruction probability
is the sum of log probabilities of every pixel in the image. For the top example in Figure 3.6 the log
probability of the input is -204.18 and the bottom has a log probability of -157.11. The larger a log
probability the more certain the model is of the given input.
To further test the robustness of the model, the performance on corrupted paths was evaluated as well.
31
==PAGE:40==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
−4000
−3500
−3000
−2500
−2000
−1500
−1000
−500
ELBO
ELBO D ring Training
Training: Val e at last epoch: -222.1463
Validation
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0
20
40
60
80
100
KL divergence
KL divergence During Training
Value at last epoch: 17.7787
Validation
(b)
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
−360
−340
−320
−300
−280
−260
−240
−220
ELBO
ELBO During Training
Training: Value a  las  epoch: -222.1463
Validation
(c)
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
8
10
12
14
16
18
KL divergence
KL divergence During Training
Value at last epoch: 17.7787
Validation
(d)
Figure 3.5: ELBO (a) and KL Divergence (b) during training for 30 epochs, with the ﬁrst epoch omitted in (c) and (d).
As expected the ELBO is maximized and KL minimized, although the increase of the KL after the ﬁrst epoch could
indicate that the model learns to let the approximate posterior deviate slightly from the prior to gain the best results.
Two diﬀerent corruptions were made, one in which half the path was cut, corresponding to feeding the
model with the beginning or end of a path and making it reconstruct the remaining, and one in which
a random part of the path was blacked out. Examples of the two corruptions and reconstructed paths
are illustrated in Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.8. Here the true paths are shown alongside the corrupted
ones with corresponding logit and probability output from the model. The ﬁgures show that even
though the inputs are corrupted, the probabilities of the true paths does match the location of the
true paths. For the input image that has been cut, the model does not seem to predict the full length
of the true input, but does goes beyond the length of the corrupted input.
To further compare how the reconstruction of the corrupted paths compare to the reconstruction of
the true paths, the distribution of the summed log probabilities of the true inputs when the network
is presented with corrupted paths is illustrated in Figure 3.9.
32
==PAGE:41==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.6: Two examples of paths reconstructed using the CVAE model. Far left shows the true paths, middle shows
the logits outputted from the decoder parameterizing the Bernoulli distribution for the generative step, and far right
shows the logits translated to probability space. The top example has a log probability of the input of -204.18 and the
bottom examples has a log probability of the input of -157.11.
Figure 3.7: Example of an input in which half has been cut before passing to the model. Here the true path is shown
alongside the corrupted path in the top of the graph. The bottom shows the logits and probability from the distribution
learned by the decoder.
33
==PAGE:42==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.8: Example of an input in which part of the trajectory has been blackened before passing to the model. Here
the true path is shown alongside the corrupted path in the top of the graph. The bottom shows the logits and probability
from the distribution learned by the decoder.
Figure 3.9: Density plot of the log probability of the inputs for the true full path, and when the network has been
presented with corrupted input data by either cutting half of the paths out or blackening out part of the path. The
distributions for the corrupted paths lie lower than for the true paths, supporting the hypothesis that they are more
diﬃcult to reconstruct.
34
==PAGE:43==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
From Figure 3.9 it is clear that the distributions of log probabilities for the corrupted paths have a
lower mean and standard deviation than for the true paths, which would be expected. From this it
also appears that the model ﬁnds it more diﬃcult to reconstruct the path when half is missing, than
when a part it blacked out. Again, this may not be surprising, as there are more possible endings for
a half completed route, than for a route where the beginning and end is given.
The mean and standard deviation of the distributions are given in Table 3.1 alongside the test statistic
when comparing the distribution of log probabilities for the corrupted paths and the true paths.
The test statistic when running a two sample t-test for both corrupted paths are well above the critical
value of 1.96, and the mean of the distributions must then be considered diﬀerent from the mean of
the true path distribution.
Table 3.1: Mean and standard deviation of the distributions of log probabilities of the true path when given either the
true path as input or a corrupted path. The test statistic for a two-sample t-test tobs indicate that the distributions are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent as they are larger than the critical value of 1.96.
Distribution
Mean
Std
tobs
True
-206.81
66.26
-
Cut
-357.43
214.59
25.82
Blackout
-261.31
96.41
17.80
Anomaly Detection
To detect anomalies the log probabilities of the training data are used to determine a threshold. Any
path that receives a log probability lower than the threshold is ﬂagged as an anomaly such as,
X
m
X
n
logp(x) < τ →anomaly
(3.2)
where m×n is the dimension of x. The threshold is chosen as the 5th percentile of the log probabilities
in the training set evaluated at the last epoch of training, which here is -301.32.
Choosing this
threshold corresponds to an estimate of 5% anomalous track in the training set.
Using this threshold on the paths in the test set resulted in 5.7% being ﬂagged as anomalous. In Figure
3.10 paths from the test dataset are illustrated, colored red if they are ﬂagged as anomalies. Here it is
seen that the paths marked for anomalies are often routes partly or completely outside the shipping
lanes. This illustration also conﬁrms that the marked anomalies are paths not often present in the test
set. Some of the marked paths however do appear to follow the shipping lanes, which is common for
normal behaviour.
To further support the method of a global threshold to detect outliers, some fabricated outliers were
made and the models ability to ﬂag them as anomalies was investigated. Two diﬀerent altercations
35
==PAGE:44==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.10: Paths from the test set marked as anomaly if the log probability of the input is less than τ. Here it is seen
that many of the ﬂagged paths do travel in areas less populated by the test set, however some ﬂagged anomalies seem
to exhibit normal behaviour and should be investigated further.
were used to fabricate anomalous tracks. The ﬁrst method was ﬂipping the routes vertically often
creating routes in areas where no data has previously been presented to the model. The hypothesis is
that the model should be able to catch most of these anomalies. The second fabrication of anomalies
was made by shifting all routes 5 km north, while ensuring that the routes stayed within the ROI. If
it was not possible to shift them 5 km north they were shifted 5 km south. This corresponds to a shift
of 0.05◦latitude. Examples of the original path and the two fabricated anomalies are seen in Figure
3.11.
To investigate the performance on the anomalous datasets the distribution of the log probabilities
of the inputs are once more plotted with the log probability of the true inputs as reference. The
illustration is seen in Figure 3.12 with corresponding means and standard deviations in Table 3.2.
Again, the test statistic for comparing the mean of the anomalous log probability distributions to the
true log probability distribution indicate a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in means, as they are both above the
critical value of 1.96.
As expected, Figure 3.12 and Table 3.2 clearly shows that the model performs signiﬁcantly worse on
the ﬂipped inputs, and with the threshold for anomalies deﬁned previously, the model ﬂags 96.3% of
the paths as anomalous. The shifted routes on the other hand are more diﬃcult for the model to catch
as anomalies. One straightforward explanation for this could be, that shifting some routes 5 km may
not result in anomalous paths, as some of the shipping lanes has a width of around 5 km. It is however
36
==PAGE:45==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.11: Two examples of fabricated anomalies. Far left shows the original path, the middle shows the anomaly
created by ﬂipping the route vertically and the far right shows the anomaly created by shifted the path 5km north.
Figure 3.12: Density plot of the log probability of the inputs for the true full path, and when the network has been
presented with fabricated anomalies created by either ﬂipping the paths vertically or shifting the path 5km north. The
distributions suggest that using the reconstruction probability as a metric to ﬂag outliers would be very useful in the
case of the ﬂipped paths, but would not be able to mark all shifted paths as anomalous.
able to catch 53.7% of the shifted paths as anomalous using the threshold deﬁned earlier. Examples
of predicted anomalies for both the case of the ﬂipped and shifted routes can be seen in Figure 3.13
and Figure 3.14 respectively.
37
==PAGE:46==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Table 3.2: Mean and standard deviation of the distributions of log probabilities of the true path or an anomalous track.
The test statistic tobs if the result of a two-sample t-test in which the means of the anomalous distributions are compared
to the true distribution, and with both test statistics above the critical value of 1.96, the distributions must be considered
diﬀerent.
Distribution
Mean
Std
tobs
True
-206.81
66.26
-
Flipped
-1503.94
974.70
50.51
Shifted
-311.78
100.96
33.21
Figure 3.13: Example of an anomaly created by ﬂipping the route vertically. Here the true path is shown alongside the
anomalous path in the top of the graph. The bottom shows the logits from the distribution learned by the decoder, and
the logits transformed to probability space
However, the fabricated anomalies are often infeasible in reality, and would not be able to serve as
an indicator for how the model would deal with real-life anomalies, but merely as a proof of concept.
Looking at the ﬂipped route anomalies shown in Figure 3.15a the unfeasibility of the tracks become
apparent, as most of them run straight through in-land Sweden and across the island of Bornholm.
In Figure 3.15b the shifted route anomalies are shown, and although the trajectories here are not as
impractical as the ﬂipped route anomalies, they do also cross land creating routes where no ship would
be able to sail in reality.
To address this issue, there is a need for anomalous yet feasible trajectories. For this purpose trajec-
tories from passenger ships were used as the last anomalous behavior presented to the model. The
motivation behind using passenger ships as anomalies was, that they present real behaviour in the sea
but behave very diﬀerently than a tanker or cargo ship. Where it would be expected for many of the
passenger ship trajectories to lie in the path from Rønne to Ystad, this track would be highly unlikely
38
==PAGE:47==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.14: Example of an anomaly created by shifting the route 5 km north. Here the true path is shown alongside
the anomalous path in the top of the graph. The bottom shows the logits from the distribution learned by the decoder,
and the logits transformed to probability space
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.15: Illustration of the dataset of ﬂipped route anomalies (a) and the dataset of the shifted route anomalies (b).
The illustration clearly shows that many of the fabricated anomalies are infeasible in reality, and although valid as a
proof of concept, not useful as an indicator for the models performance on true anomalies.
for both tanker and cargo ships.
However, since the behaviour of the passenger ships diﬀers from that of the tanker and cargo ships,
the data preprocessing cannot be equal either. For passenger ships a trajectory was deemed as two
individual paths if the time interval between two successive AIS messages exceeded 30 minutes, in
comparison with 4 hours for the tanker and cargo ships. Furthermore, the minimum duration of a
39
==PAGE:48==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
trajectory was lowered from 4 hours to 15 minutes, and the maximum duration was lowered from 24
hours to 6 hours. The passenger ship trajectories were collected from January till March 2020 as for
the tanker and cargo ships. Figure 3.16 shows the ﬁnal passenger ship 856 trajectories.
Figure 3.16: Illustration of the routes of passenger ships presented to the model as anomalous behaviour.
Comparing Figure 3.16 to the shipping proﬁles seen in Figure 3.1 it is clear that although traﬃc in
the shipping lanes north of Bornholm are active in both, the passenger ship trajectories hold many
more routes connected to Rønne as well as from Sweden to Germany. If the model has in fact learned
a useful representation of the paths in the training set, the hypothesis is that the distribution of log
probabilities of the input when presented with passenger ships would be signiﬁcantly less than that of
the true cargo and tanker ships. However, looking at the distribution shown in Figure 3.17 this claim
is not supported. Even though the test statistic of 13.30 between the distributions indicate that they
are diﬀerent, it would have been expected that the passenger ships performed worse than the ship
types used in training and hence had a distribution of log probabilities lower than the true paths.
Figure 3.18 shows the trajectories in the passenger ship dataset marked as an anomaly if the log
probability of the input is less than τ.
40
==PAGE:49==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.17: Distribution of log probabilities of the input for cargo and tanker ships in the test set againt passenger
ships. In addition to not being clearly separable, the probability of the passenger ships actually lies higher than the true
ships from the test set.
Figure 3.18: Illustration of the passenger ship routes used as feasible anomalous tracks ﬂagged as anomalies if the log
probability of the input is less than τ. The long paths deviating signiﬁcantly from the behaviour of the cargo and tanker
ships are as expected ﬂagged as anomalies. However, many of the shorter paths close to Bornholm are not ﬂagged, as
would be expected.
41
==PAGE:50==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Looking at the paths marked as anomalies in Figure 3.18 it is clear that it is in fact the routes out
of Rønne or the ones crossing over multiple shipping lanes that are marked. A large majority of the
passenger ships routes happen to lie in the shipping lanes north of Bornholm which it would not be
expected for the model to ﬂag as anomalous. Nonetheless there are still some tracks around Bornholm
that clearly diﬀer from the ones on which the model was trained, and which should be ﬂagged as
anomalies as well.
These tracks are though signiﬁcantly shorter than many of the cargo and tanker ship tracks, which
exposes a weakness in the deﬁnition of anomalies. Since most of the pixels in the input images are
0 the log probability of a 0 is often much higher than that of a 1. Shorter paths will therefore have
a tendency to get a higher log probability of the input, because the number of pixels of which it is
likely to make mistakes on are simply less. Looking at the probabilities in Figure 3.6, which shows the
probability of a 1 for the true paths in the test set, it shows that even the highest probability of a 1 is
only 25%. This feature in itself is not an issue, but if the summed log probability of the pixels in the
image is used as a metric to ﬁnd anomalies, it becomes problematic if the paths vary much in length.
Looking back at Figure 3.10 showing some of the anomalies from the true test set, this may also explain
why some of the paths marked as anomalies seem to lie within the shipping lanes. Looking at the
lengths of the paths it is seen that they often span from one end of the ROI to the other, and the shear
fact that they are very long may be detrimental. Figure 3.19 supports this, showing the distribution of
path lengths for the normal and anomalous tracks of the test set with a test statistic when comparing
the mean of the two of 14.24 clearly indicating a diﬀerence in mean lengths.
Since the duration of the trajectory has a large inﬂuence on the probability of being classiﬁed as an
anomaly, it could indicate that a global threshold of reconstruction probability is not the best metric
to correctly ﬂag anomalies. Inspired by (Nguyen et al. 2019a) in which they set local thresholds for a
given geographic area, a simple approach taken in this thesis is setting local thresholds based on path
duration. Five separate thresholds were deﬁned, one for each 4 hour interval between 4 hours and 24
hours duration, as preprocessing has ensured that all trajectories lie within this time frame. The 5th
percentile of log probabilities of the paths in the training set falling within each interval was chosen
as the local thresholds. In Figure 3.20 the threshold for each interval is illustrated clearly showing the
linear dependency on duration.
42
==PAGE:51==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.19: Distribution of duration of trajectories split on whether the model ﬂags them as anomalous. Here it becomes
clear, that the general length of the anomalous tracks are longer than that of the ﬂagged normal tracks.
Figure 3.20: Thresholds for each 4 hour interval in the feasible span of duration from 4 hours to 24 hours. The linear
dependency between duration and the log probability for and input become very clear as a longer path renders lower log
probability.
43
==PAGE:52==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Applying these local thresholds on the paths from the test set made it possible to ﬂag some of the
shorter paths as anomalies too. In Figure 3.21 some of the ﬂagged anomalies are seen. Comparing
to Figure 3.10 where the anomalies were a result of a global threshold, Figure 3.21 shows fewer
trajectories running in the well-deﬁned shipping lanes ﬂagged as anomalies. Instead the anomalies
are predominantly trajectories crossing shipping lanes or deviating from them at points during the
journey.
Figure 3.21: Thresholds for each 4 hour interval in the feasible span of duration from 4 hours to 24 hours. The linear
dependency between duration and the log probability for and input become very clear as a longer path renders lower log
probability.
To further illustrate that the local thresholds lessen the importance of duration, the distribution of log
probabilites of paths ﬂagged as normal versus anomalous are seen in Figure 3.22. Although the test
statistic when comparing the means of the two distributions are 4.26 indicating a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in mean, the means are closer than for the same distributions when using a global threshold as seen
in Figure 3.19.
The results presented in this section indicate that it is possible to use a convolutional VAE to predict
ship trajectories, and subsequently use the reconstruction probability as an indicator for whether the
track could be classiﬁed as anomalous or not. However, certain problems arises when handling the
trajectories as images. First, if the lengths of the paths in the dataset are substantially diﬀerent, a
global threshold using the log probabilities of the input will favor shorter paths. This favoritism can
be lessened by introducing local thresholds based on duration of trajectories, but does not solve the
problem completely.
44
==PAGE:53==
3.2. CVAE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Figure 3.22: Distribution of duration of trajectories split on whether the model ﬂags them as anomalous when using
individual thresholds based on durations. The diﬀerence in means of the two distributions are less than for duration of
anomalous tracks when using a global threshold as seen in Figure 3.19.
Further, as seen when shifting the routes 5 km north, the model only ﬂags around half of the fabricates
trajectories as anomalous. One explanation presented for this could be, that shifting the paths does
not make them anomalous but merely moves them from one shipping lane to another, such as the ones
north of Bornholm. In practice, this would mean that the ship is sailing against traﬃc, but given that
the input is simply an image of the full trajectory, the model has no sense of direction.
Introducing time as a variable in the model would help overcome both these drawbacks seen by the
CVAE. By letting the input be one timestep at a time, the length of the route would not be as dominant
a factor, as the log probability is always evaluated for a single point. Additionally, the paths shifted
from one shipping lane to another would now appear anomalous as the ship would be travelling in the
wrong direction compared to the training set.
To incorporate the aspect of time into the model a VRNN is used, and the results are discussed in the
following sections.
45
==PAGE:54==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
3.3
VRNN for Trajectory Prediction
Using a VRNN for trajectory prediction and subsequent anomaly detection, was exactly the task per-
formed by (Nguyen et al. 2019a). The implementation in this thesis follows the approach in the article,
and the following sections gives an overview of the experimental setup as well as added modiﬁcations.
3.3.1
Neural Network Architecture
To model the hidden states in the VRNN an LSTM is used for the function f in Equation 2.39. It
is parameterized by a single hidden layer of size 100, with zt being a real-valued vector of the same
size. Both the prior and approximate posterior are Gaussian distributions parameterized by two fully
connected networks with one hidden layer of size 100. The generative distribution is a multivariate
Bernoulli also parameterized by a fully connected network of size 100 and the Monte Carlo estimation
of the ELBO is used as the objective function. The Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of
0.0003.
3.3.2
Results and Analysis
Running the settings as documented from the article on the dataset used in this thesis, did not result
in a useful trajectory prediction. The biggest initial problem was that the decoding network predicted
logits of 0 no matter the input. Looking at the loss, it is clear that it thresholds very quickly, learning
no additional information after the ﬁrst few epochs. Further, the KL divergence is very small and
approaches 0 during training. The loss and KL divergence can be seen in Figure 3.23.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
490.0
490.5
491.0
491.5
492.0
492.5
493.0
Loss
Loss During Training
Training: Value at last epoch: 490.0606
Validation
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
KL divergence
KL divergence During Training
Value at last epoch: 0.0055
Validation
(b)
Figure 3.23: Loss and KL divergence over 30 epochs for the VRNN. The loss seem to threshold very quickly as the KL
approaches 0.
46
==PAGE:55==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
From Figure 3.23 especially the small KL divergence stands out, as it could be an indicator of a
posterior collapse. For variational autoencoders with strong autoregressive decoders, the problem of
KL vanishing or posterior collapse has been a recurring problem (J. He et al. 2019; Long et al. 2020;
Zhu et al. 2020). The problem arises when the approximate posterior disregards information from the
data and simply collapses to the prior such as,
qφ(zt|xt) ≈p(zt)
(3.3)
In this case the latent variables, z, and the data, x, are independent and the variational autoencoder
has not learned a good representation of data as most of the modelling power of a VAE comes from a
strong coupling of x and z (Dieng et al. 2019; Hoﬀman D. and Johnson J. 2016). When this happens
the decoder gains no useful information from the latent space, and hence quickly learns to ignore it,
creating a critical local optimum. This results in little to no gradient signal between the decoder and
encoder with a KL term at zero (Bowman et al. 2015).
Besides the KL divergence, two common metrics are used, when investigating the performance of a
VAE; the mutual information (MI) between x and z under the approximate posterior, and the number
of active units (AU). The mutual information between x and z under the approximate posterior can
be determined as (J. He et al. 2019),
Iq = Ex∼pd(x)[KL(qφ(z|x)||p(z))] −KL(qφ(z)||p(z))
(3.4)
where pd(x) is the empirical distribution, and the aggregated posterior qφ(z) = Epd(x)[qφ(z|x)] (Dieng
et al. 2019) which can be approximated by a Monte Carlo estimate. A Monte Carlo estimate can
also be used to approximate KL(qφ(z)||p(z)) where samples from qφ(z) can be obtained by ancestral
sampling (J. He et al. 2019). The reason for looking at the mutual information between z and x under
the approximated posterior is further motivated in Section 3.3.4. A very small MI would indicate
independence between the data and the learned latent space and could therefore be an indicator of a
posterior collapse.
The second metric of interest is the number of Active Units (Burda, Grosse, and Salakhutdinov 2016).
The motivation behind this stems from observations of VAEs in which the eﬀective dimension of the
learned latent space is far below capacity. To quantify this eﬀect Active Units is introduced, following
the hypothesis that if a latent dimension has learned useful information about the data, its distribution
should change depending on the observation.
47
==PAGE:56==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
The activity of latent dimension i of latent variable z can then be measured as,
Ai = Covx(Ei∼q(i|x)[i])
(3.5)
where Cov is the covariance depending on x of the expectation E of the latent dimension under the
approximate posterior q.
A unit is then said to be active if Ai is above some thresholds. For this thesis a threshold of 10−2
is used following the approach given in (Burda, Grosse, and Salakhutdinov 2016). Little to no active
units indicates that the latent space has not learned useful information about the data and could hence
also be an indicator of posterior collapse.
The MI and AU for the implementation of the VRNN illustrated in Figure 3.23 are seen in Table 3.3
both strong indicators that a posterior collapse has indeed taken place.
Table 3.3: Mutual Information and Active Units of the implementation of VRNN
MI
AU
VRNN
0.014
0
Looking through the code published with the article from (Nguyen et al. 2019a), a few modiﬁcations
to the model are observed. In the following a brief description and discussion of these modiﬁcations
will be introduced as well as common methods used to alleviate the situation of a posterior collapse.
3.3.3
Network Wide Skip Connection
First implementation found in the code from (Nguyen et al. 2019a) is an addition of the dataset mean
transformed to logit space added to the logits output from the decoder before generating the Bernoulli
distribution of the generative network. Second, in the formulation of the approximate posterior the
mean from the prior is added to the mean from the encoder, before the Gaussian distribution of the
approximate posterior is made.
Both additions could be thought of as network wide skip connections. The use of skip connections, or
residual blocks, is one of the key elements in the paper by He et al. from 2015 in which they introduced
ResNet (K. He et al. 2015). With their model they addressed a well-known phenomenon seen when
training deep neural networks. A degradation problem has been observed in which, as the depth of the
network is increased, the accuracy of the network gets saturated whereafter it decreases rapidly. This
is hypothesized to be a result of vanishing gradients which creates a diﬃcult optimization problem. To
overcome this they add skip connections as a simple identity mapping from one layer in the network to
another. This way they explicitly let the layers in their network learn a residual mapping, namely the
48
==PAGE:57==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
diﬀerence between the input, x, and the underlying desired mapping, F(x), and argue that it should
make optimization easier. An example of a residual block is illustrated in Figure 3.24.
Figure 3.24: Example of a building block in residual learning, in which an identity mapping is added from one layer to
another
In (Fraccaro 2018) they use this exact logic to prevent very small KL-terms when training sequential
neural models with stochastic layers. Here they add the mean of the prior to the mean of the approxi-
mate posterior arguing that learning the residual of the means, improves inference by making it easier
for the inference network to discover changes in the generative network.
Adding skip connections to the generative model of a VAE was done in (Dieng et al. 2019), also as a
remedy for the posterior collapse, which could prove as motivation for the authors of adding the mean
logits to the generative network in (Nguyen et al. 2019a).
3.3.4
Posterior Collapse
One of the most popular methods for dealing with the posterior collapse is by implementing KL
annealing (Bowman et al. 2015). Here a variable weight, β, is added to the KL term in the ELBO
objective as seen in Equation 3.6.
Lθ,φ(x) = E[log(pθ(x|z))] −βKL(qφ(z|x)||p(z))
(3.6)
The weight is initially set to 0 and gradually increased after each epoch during training until it is 1
and the objective function once more becomes the proper lower bound. By doing this, the authors
argue that the model will initially learn to encode as much information in z as possible, and gradually,
as the weight is increased, smooth out the encoding and force them towards the prior. It corresponds
to annealing from an AE to a VAE. A variant of the KL annealing is the Cyclic Annealing proposed
by (Fu et al. 2019) in which β drops back to 0 and increases to 1 a number of times during training.
Looking deeper into the theoretical understanding of the collapse, (J. He et al. 2019) described two
49
==PAGE:58==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
collapse states to explain the drivers for the posterior collapse; the model collapse, and the inference
collapse. The model collapse happens when the true posterior equals the prior and happens for all
VAEs in the beginning of training when x and z are nearly independent under both the approximate
posterior and true posterior. In this case there is only one component in the training objective that can
install some dependency between x and z, namely the marginal log likelihood of the data. However,
it can be overwhelmed by the KL term, as the posteriors are pushed towards the prior to ensure
alignment.
The inference collapse is on the other hand when the approximate posterior equals the prior, and they
observe that this always happens before the model collapse. Their proposed method to handle the
collapse is an aggressive optimization of the inference network, but this has been observed to cost too
much training time compared to the orignal VAE (Zhu et al. 2020).
To address the issue of posterior collapse without additional training eﬀorts (Zhu et al. 2020) propose
to instead let the KL follow a distribution over the entire dataset, and show that it is suﬃcient to
keep the expectation of this positive to prevent KL vanishing. To derive this a diﬀerent formulation
of the KL divergence is needed. Since the prior of a VAE is often a Gaussian distribution, then the
KL between the prior and the approximate posterior can be written as,
KL = 1
2
n
X
i=1
(µ2
i + σ2
i −log(σ2
i ) −1)
(3.7)
where µi and σi are the mean and standard deviations of the approximate posterior.
Given that the KL is often found as the Monte Carlo estimate, Equation 3.7 can be written as,
KL = 1
2
n
X
i=1
 Pb
j=1 µ2
ij
b
+
Pb
j=1 σ2
ij
b
−
Pb
j=1 log(σ2
ij)
b
−1
!
(3.8)
The authors of (Zhu et al. 2020) then assume that the µi’s and σi’s of each latent dimension i follow a
certain distribution with ﬁxed mean and variance. That then turns the KL into a distribution of µi’s
and σi’s with expectation given as,
E[KL] ≥1
2
n
X
i=1
(Var[µi] −E2[µi])
(3.9)
where Var is the variance and E indicates the expectation. They argue, that if a positive lower bound
of E[KL] is guaranteed, posterior collapse will be prevented. From Equation 3.9 it is seen that E[KL]
only depends on the number of latent dimensions n and the mean and variance of the µi’s, which
50
==PAGE:59==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
gives the motivation to regularize the distributions of the µi’s by employing batch normalization. The
regularized µi can be deﬁned as,
ˆµi = γ µi −µBi
σBi
−ζ
(3.10)
where µBi and σBi are the mean and standard deviation of µi for a minibatch and µi and ˆµi are the
means of the approximate posterior before and after regularization respectively. In (Zhu et al. 2020)
they ﬁx γ and let ζ be a learnable parameter. By doing this, they ensure that the distribution of µi
has a mean of ζ and variance of γ2, allowing them to formulate a new lower bound,
E[KL] = n · (γ2 + ζ2)
2
(3.11)
This allows them to control the lower bound of the expectation of KL by γ.
3.3.5
Results After Model Modiﬁcations
To alleviate the vanishing KL term seen in Figure 3.23 the skip connections identiﬁed in the source
code were implemented alongside KL annealing. The loss, KL divergence, MI and AU after adding
skip connections and KL annealing can be seen in Figure 3.25.
Looking at Figure 3.25 the loss proﬁle indicates that the model does learn throughout training. The in-
creased MI and AU supports this, indicating some useful activation of the latent space. Unfortunately,
the KL divergence is even smaller than previously.
To get a sense of what the model has learned, Figure 3.26a show some reconstructed paths. A total
of 32 paths are plotted, each with an opaque factor of 0.1, thus heavier colored nodes and paths are
commonly predicted reconstructions. Figure 3.26b shows a heatmap of the matrix multiplication of
the mean longitude and mean latitude for comparison. This indicates, that the model has learned to
predict the mean of the routes. Further supporting this, is the longitude and latitude proﬁles seen
in Figure 3.27. Here a single path is illustrated, showing the logits of the generative network for the
longitude and latitude features respectively.
Every timestep is once more plotted with an opaque
factor of 0.1, resulting in a heavier colored line as indicator for commonly predicted values. Atop the
predicted logits the mean from the dataset is visualized very clearly showing, that most commonly it
is the mean proﬁle predicted. At the top of the graph is the one-hot encoding of the true path showing
where the peaks of the logit proﬁle should lie, had the model been able to predict the trajectories
correct.
51
==PAGE:60==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
−13.15
−13.10
−13.05
−13.00
−12.95
−12.90
−12.85
−12.80
Loss
Loss During Training
Training: Value at last epoch: -13.1260
Validation
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
KL divergence
KL divergence During Training
Value at last epoch: 0.0005
Validation
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Mutual Information
Mutual information
Value at last epoch: 1.2111
(c)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Active Units
Active Units
Value at last epoch: 64
(d)
Figure 3.25: Loss, KL divergence, MI and AU over 30 epochs after adding skip-connections and using KL annealing
for the ﬁrst 10 epochs. Although the loss indicates continous learning, as well as the increased mutual information and
active units, the KL converges to 0 within the ﬁrst few epochs.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.26: (Left) Reconstructed paths using VRNN model with skip connections trained for 30 epochs. The model
predominantly predicts position as the mean of the dataset which can be seen when comparing to a heatmap of the
matrix multiplication of the mean longitude and latitude vectors (right).
52
==PAGE:61==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.27: Longitude (left) and latitude (right) proﬁles of logits for at predicted path.
Heavier color indicates a
often predicted value, showing that more often that not, the logit proﬁle completely match that of the mean. At a few
timesteps other coordinates win indicated by the opaque spikes, but very rarely do they relate to the true coordinate of
the path.
53
==PAGE:62==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
To further get a sense of which components in the network have trouble learning, the gradients are
explored. As it is especially the presence of exploding or vanishing gradients that are of interest, the
95th quantile of the gradients at each step is visualized, to capture as much information as possible. In
Figure 3.28 the 95th quantile of the ﬁrst and last epoch is seen. All gradients seem to decrease rapidly
in the ﬁrst epoch, which is expected with the initial learning, but become very small very quickly.
Most noticeably though is the visualization of the last epoch. Here it appears that although very small
there is a gradient signal in all components except the encoder and decoder.
0
50
100
150
200
250
Steps
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
Parameter value
95th Quantile of Gradients 
 Through First Epoch of Training
['phi_x']
['phi_z']
['Prior']
['Encoder']
['Decoder']
['LSTM input']
['LSTM hidden']
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Steps
0.0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0008
0.0010
0.0012
Parameter value
95th Quantile of Gradients 
 Through Last Epoch of Training
['phi_x']
['phi_z']
['Prior']
['Encoder']
['Decoder']
['LSTM input']
['LSTM hidden']
(b)
Figure 3.28: Trace of gradients through ﬁrst (left) and last (right) epoch of training. Even though all gradients in the
end of training are small especially the gradients of the hidden layer of the LSTM stands out. From the ﬁrst epoch it
could appear that it is small from the beginning of training. Please note the diﬀerent scales of the y-axis.
The vanishing gradients of the decoder and encoder motivates a stronger regularization in that part
of the network. Thus the batch normalization of the approximate posterior is implemented with the
result illustrated in Figure 3.29 where γ is set to 0.6 as in (Zhu et al. 2020).
Although the KL
term thresholds at a larger value than previously, the proﬁles of the loss, MI and AU could indicate
unstable gradients, especially in the ﬁrst few epochs. Also, the MI is decreased indicating that the
model is not able to maintain the shared information learned between data and the latent space.
Further supporting unstable gradients is the 95th quantile of the gradients in the ﬁrst and last epoch
of training. As hypothesized, the gradients of the ﬁrst epoch appear unstable with near-exploding
behaviour. This is though not the case for the last epoch, indicating that the increase of gradients
was controlled during training.
The proﬁle of the gradients in Figure 3.30 diﬀer from those seen
in Figure 3.28 as there is now plenty of signal in both the prior and encoder, indicating that the
normalization has indeed added additional information to the latent space. Although it could appear
that the remaining components does not learn much with very small gradients, changing the scale so
it better compares to that seen in Figure 3.28 gives the result in Figure 3.30c. Here it is clear that the
decoder still has very small gradients, and the weights in the hidden state of the LSTM also seem to
54
==PAGE:63==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
vanish. Controlling the unstable gradient by gradient clipping resulted in similar results to the model
without batch normalization. Further, changing the learning rate did also not solve the problem.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
−13.0
−12.8
−12.6
−12.4
−12.2
−12.0
−11.8
Loss
Loss During Training
Training: Value at last epoch: -12.9918
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
KL divergence
KL divergence During Training
Value at last epoch: 0.0951
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Mutual Information
Mutual information
Value at last epoch: 0.1593
(c)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Epoch
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Active Units
Active Units
Value at last epoch: 33
(d)
Figure 3.29: Loss, KL divergence, MI and AU over 30 epochs for model with batch normalized inference. Note that
the validation curve for the loss and KL divergence has been omitted, as very large values in some of the ﬁrst epochs
corrupted the image.
55
==PAGE:64==
3.3. VRNN FOR TRAJECTORY PREDICTION CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
0
50
100
150
200
250
Steps
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Parameter value
95th Quantile of Gradients 
 Through First Epoch of Training
['phi_x']
['phi_z']
['Prior']
['Encoder']
['Decoder']
['LSTM input']
['LSTM hidden']
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Steps
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Parameter value
95th Quantile of Gradients 
 Through Last Epoch of Training
['phi_x']
['phi_z']
['Prior']
['Encoder']
['Decoder']
['LSTM input']
['LSTM hidden']
(b)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Steps
0.0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0008
0.0010
Parameter value
95th Quantile of Gradients 
 Through Last Epoch of Training
['phi_x']
['phi_z']
['Prior']
['Encoder']
['Decoder']
['LSTM input']
['LSTM hidden']
(c)
Figure 3.30: Trace of gradients through ﬁrst (top left) and last (top right) epoch of training for VRNN model with
batch normalized inference network, showing how the gradients seem to initially explode after implementing batch
normalization. The gradients in the last epoch are shown at a diﬀerent scale (bottom) to illustrate the activity in the
feature extraction networks as well as the weights on the input of the LSTM. The decoder and weight on the hidden
state of the LSTM seem to vanish completely.
56
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
This thesis has employed two deep neural network models in an attempt to reliably capture useful
information about ship trajectories, with the aim to reconstruct the trajectories and subsequently use
the reconstruction error as an indicator for anomalous behaviour.
The ﬁrst model was a Convolutional Variatioal Autoencoder with the trajectory as an image as input.
It was shown that the generative network of the model was able to learn separate logit landscapes
depending on the input, with a noticeably higher probability of occurrence of the path, in the parts of
the image in which the path was indeed present. To further test the robustness of the model, it was
presented with corrupted paths and the log probability of the true input was recorded. The distribution
of the summed log probabilities was used as a metric for comparison between the reconstruction abilities
given the diﬀerent corrupted paths. As expected the model performs worse when given a corrupted
path to reconstruct, however the experiment also showed, that the model had a more diﬃcult time
reconstructing paths, when half was missing, than when a given portion was cut out. Intuitively it
makes sense, that it is easier for the model to reconstruct a trajectory, when both the beginning and
end is given, than when the ending is completely open.
57
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
Another simple explanation could lie in the generation of the corrupted paths. Cutting half the path
away was a result of setting the last 2◦longitude to 0, and hence blackening them. The corrupted
paths in which a part was blackened, was created by choosing a point on the trajectory, and blackening
everything in a rectangle centering that point of 0.4◦latitude and 1◦longitude. Depending on the
position of the trajectories in the image a larger portion of the image may be cut away for the corruption
discarding half the image. This consequently make the part of the trajectory of which the model is
uncertain larger hence resulting in a lower log probability of the input.
Even though the two corruption methods may not be directly comparable, both resulted in a log
probability distribution signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of the true inputs, as shown by the two-sample
t-test.
Following an assumption that the model had indeed learned a useful representation of the cargo and
tanker ship routes, any routes diﬃcult to reconstruct could be indicators of anomalies. To ﬂag these
routes, a threshold of the summed log probabilities were set as the 5th percentile of the distribution
of summed log probabilities from the training set. A consequence of choosing this threshold is an
assumption that 5% of the paths in the training data are anomalies. In Figure 3.10 some of these
anomalies are visualized with the remaining test set as reference. Although it does appear that many
of the ﬂagged anomalies indeed behave diﬀerently than the other tracks in the test set, it is also
observed that some of the ﬂagged anomalies lie within the shipping lanes which characterizes the test
set. Manual inspection of each of the ﬂagged routes would be necessary in order to determine whether
they were indeed anomalous or not. As a remedy to avoid a large quantity of manual inspections, some
fabricated anomalies were presented to the model to see how it performed on those. Three diﬀerent
anomaly types were used two of which were fabricated and one which was simply trajectories from a
diﬀerent type of ship.
The performance on the two fabricated anomalies was very diﬀerent. For the ﬁrst fabrication the
routes from the test set had been ﬂipped vertically, and the model performed notably worse on these.
In fact, using the same threshold as applied on the true paths from the test set, let the model ﬂag
96.3% of the ﬂipped routes as anomalous.
The second fabricated anomaly shifted the routes from the test set 5 km north and here the model
ﬂagged 53.7% of the fabricated routes as anomalies. One easy explanation for the diﬀerence in ability
to ﬂag the routes as anomalies, compared to the ﬂipped routes, were hypothesized to be, that shifting
the routes 5 km north, for some trajectories simply move them into a diﬀerent feasible sea traﬃc area.
Shifting a trajectory from one shipping lane to another, should be marked as an anomaly, since the
ship in that case would be travelling against traﬃc, but when the model is independent of time, it
does not have a sense of direction, and is thus not able to ﬂag these paths as anomalies.
58
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
For both the ﬂipped and the shifted paths it holds, that many of the fabricated trajectories become
unrealistic, often indicating ships sailing across landmass. In order to draw conclusions about the
models ability to detect anomalies for real-world data, a need arose for anomalous yet feasible tracks.
To accommodate this, trajectories from passenger ships where presented to the model under the
hypothesis that the behaviour of passenger ships diﬀer so much from the behaviour of cargo and
tanker ships, that most of the tracks should be marked as anomalies. However, when looking at the
distribution of the summed log probabilities for the passenger ships, it was signiﬁcantly higher than
for the true test set.
Figure 3.18 shows the passenger ship trajectories with paths marked as an anomaly if the summed
log probability was less than the deﬁned threshold. The ﬁgure shows two important things. First,
although it was hypothesized that the passenger ship behaviour would diﬀer greatly from the behaviour
of cargo and tanker ships, this is not necessarily true for all passenger ship routes. In reality, the ﬁgure
illustrates that many of the passenger ship trajectories also lie within the well travelled sealanes used
by the cargo and tanker ships. The assumption of highly diﬀerent paths is hence not entirely valid.
Second, the ﬁgure shows that although the model only marks 4.5% of the passenger ships as anomalies,
it seems to ﬂag the routes that are indeed very diﬀerent than the cargo and tanker ship behaviour.
Examples of this includes trajectories running from Rønne on Bornholm to Ystad in Sweden, or
trajectories from Sweden to Germany. This suggest that other factors may be involved in making the
summed log probabilities of the passenger ship routes higher.
One hypothesis presented here, is that using the log probability of the input as an indicator for
performance comes with a drawback.
Since the model most often are presented with 0s the log
probability of a 0 is almost always higher than that of a 1, and thus shorter routes will be likely to
have a higher log probability. This theory was investigated further by looking at the distribution of
lengths for paths marked as normal in the test set versus paths marked as anomalies. A clear diﬀerence
between the two distributions were seen with the anomalous tracks being generally longer.
In an attempt to solve this side eﬀect of using a global threshold, local thresholds were introduced
based on the duration of the trajectories. The local thresholds were set as the 5th percentile of log
probabilities of routes with durations falling within the same 4 hour interval. In addition to showing a
clear linear dependency between log probabilities and trajectory duration, the local thresholds enabled
the model to ﬂag shorter paths as anomalies also. However, the problem was not solved completely
as there was still a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in means of durations for normal an anomalous tracks. As
for the global threshold, the local thresholds carry an assumption of 5% anomalous paths in each 4
hour interval of the training set, which is problematic in itself, since the number of trajectories in each
interval is not the same. To use these local thresholds properly, additional work should ensure, that
the data is fairly equal within each chosen interval.
59
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
This indicates that it could be beneﬁcial for the performance of the model, to chose a diﬀerent metric
for ﬂagging anomalies than the log probability of the input.
Although previous work has showed
improved performance when using reconstruction probability over reconstruction error (An and Cho
2015), it may come with some unwanted side eﬀects for the problem sought to be solved in this thesis.
In (Santhosh et al. 2018) they used a t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) of the
latent space of the Variational Autoencoder marking video object trajectories far from any cluster
of trajectories as anomalies. The idea of clustering trajectories was also introduced in Section 1.1
for many of the other approaches to trajectory prediction and anomaly detection for ships. Using a
clustering algorithm on the reconstructed paths could possibly alleviate the importance of trajectory
duration.
Another big drawback of the CVAE model is, that it disregards time completely. This poses some
additional challenges to the problem of anomaly detection using AIS messages. As already mentioned,
diﬀerentiating between direction of shipping lanes is not possible, when the model is not told from
which direction the trajectory begins. In addition to work as a remedy for the unfortunate signiﬁcance
imposed on the duration of trajectories, letting time being a variable in the model would also allow
for it to run in an online setting, unlike the CVAE which is required to run oﬄine. This is a necessity
for the CVAE as it uses the full trajectory for predictions, and hence the journey must have adjourned
before deploying the model.
To make predictions at every timestep the VRNN model was used. This model was used exactly for
the purpose of trajectory prediction and subsequent anomaly detection on AIS messages in (Nguyen
et al. 2019a), serving as a strong motivation to employ the model in this thesis. Regardless, the model
did not produce useful results.
Initially the model did not seem to learn a useful latent representation of the data manifested by a
very small KL divergence as well as low mutual information between the input and latent space and no
active units recorded. Given that the latent representation did not seem to learn proper information
about the input, it was hypothesized that it could be a result of a posterior collapse, a problem common
to variational autoencoders with strong autoregressive decoders.
Following this hypothesis, two skip connections were added to the model, and KL annealing was used
to kickstart a proper latent representation. Even though the loss was decreased during training and
the mutual information increased as the number of active units increased, the latent representation
learned of the data, resulted in a prediction of the dataset mean almost exclusively. Since the mutual
information and number of active units had increased, it could indicate that a posterior collapse was
no longer the problem, alas the KL divergence was still close to zero. Further investigations included
looking at the gradients of the model, as an eﬀort to locate the problematic parts of the network.
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
Here it was clear that neither the encoder nor decoder seemed to have much gradient signal, serving
as indicators that the model was having a hard time learning the complexity of the data.
Batch normalization of the approximate posterior was also used, as experiments in the literature
suggested that to be a solution. Even though this seemed to ignite some activity in both the prior and
encoder, the gradients of the decoder still did not indicate much learning.
More comprehensive methods against the posterior collapse was found in literature, and future work
could include implementing some of these. In both (McCarthy et al. 2020) and (Qian and Cheung
2019) they explicitly let the mutual information be a part of the model objective ensuring that it is
increased during training.
Another approach was taken in (Singh 2018). Here they used the fact that a VRNN becomes a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) if the autoregressive connections are removed. Since exact inference is possible
for HMMs, but not VRNNs, they optimize the inference network of an HMM and use it to initialize
the VRNN, eﬀectively solving the presence of a posterior collapse.
All these approaches handles the posterior collapse and should be further investigated to validate,
that it is in fact a posterior collapse that causes the diﬃculties in learning. Nevertheless, the ﬁnal
implementations did indicate that other factors were in play, since the KL did not vanish, the mutual
information rose as well as the number of active units. Given that the gradients of the LSTM also
seemed to vanish it could indicate that the temporal development of the paths was never learned.
Further supporting this is the reconstructions, which appear very discontinuous. Representing the
input data as four-hot vectors was a novel approach introduced by (Nguyen et al. 2019a) and not
used anywhere else in literature. One future work experiment should hence include changing the data
representation to see how the model performs, when the input is the real-values of longitude, latitude,
SOG and COG. To further motivate this investigation are the ﬁndings in (Ding et al. 2020) where
they also used the VRNN on AIS messages, but let the input be ∆t, ∆long, ∆lat, ∆SOG and ∆COG,
where ∆indicates the diﬀerence of the given variable between two successive timesteps. Their results
indicate, that they were able to use the VRNN to reliably predict future positions of a ship.
The preprocessing of the data, should for future work be thoroughly investigated, as some unwanted
properties of the trajectories could be introduced in the process. One example of such investigation
could include the time interval deﬁned to specify individual tracks and the subsequent resampling. For
this thesis the paths where split into two individual paths if the time interval between two successive
AIS messages surpassed 4 hours. The trajectory was then resampled with a frequency of 10 minutes
using a linear interpolation. This could in theory create tracks, where a big part is an interpolation
between two points, which could prove diﬃcult for the LSTM. A more thorough validation of the
dataset could hence also possibly alleviate some of the diﬃculties met by the VRNN.
61
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This thesis used deep neural networks for ship trajectory predictions and subsequent anomaly detection
using AIS data. Two models were proposed; a Convolutional Variational Autoencoder, and a Varia-
tional Recurrent Neural Network. By using the full trajectory image as input, the CVAE was able to
learn a latent space representation of the routes, which enabled reliable reconstructions. The recon-
struction probability was used as a metric for anomalous behaviour, and tested on diﬀerent fabricated
trajectories. The model proved very capable of detecting anomalies which are infeasible in reality,
but was less consistent for feasible trajectories. One explanation provided was that the reconstruction
probability could prove diﬃcult to use as metric for anomalous behaviour for trajectories of varying
length. As a readily implemented solution to this, local thresholds based on trajectory duration was
used, which partially solved the problem.
The second model was a VRNN which sought to predict points on the trajectories at each time-step.
The model was not successful and to the extend of this thesis it was not possible to teach the model
to predict time-steps with large deviations from the dataset mean. One explanation provided is, that
the varitational autoencoder present in every time-step experiences a posterior collapse, making it
impossible for the model to learn a useful latent representation of the input.
62
==PAGE:71==
List of Figures
2.1
Illustration of simple feed-forward neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Illustration of an autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Illustration of a variational autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Illustration of convolving an image with a kernel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Illustration of a recurrent neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Illustration of a LSTM cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Illustration of VRNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1
Illustration of cargo and tanker ship routes in the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Image generation process used to create inputs for the CVAE model . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Examples of paths as images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Illustration of the architecture of the CVAE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
ELBO and KL Divergence of Training CVAE for 30 Epochs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.6
Reconstructed Paths from CVAE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.7
Example of reconstructed path when half of the input has been cut . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
Example of reconstructed path when part of the input has been blacked out . . . . . . .
34
3.9
Density plot of the log probability of the true paths and corrupted paths . . . . . . . . .
34
3.10 Illustration of paths from the test set ﬂagged for anomalies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
63
==PAGE:72==
LIST OF FIGURES
LIST OF FIGURES
3.11 Examples of fabricated anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.12 Density plot of the log probability of the true paths and anomalous paths . . . . . . . .
37
3.13 Example of a reconstructed anomaly where the true path has been ﬂipped . . . . . . . .
38
3.14 Example of a reconstructed anomaly where the true path has been shifted . . . . . . . .
39
3.15 Visualization of ﬂipped and shifted anomalous tracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.16 Illustration of the passenger ship trajectories used as anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.17 Density plot of the log probability of the true paths and passenger ship paths . . . . . .
41
3.18 Illustration of passenger ship paths ﬂagged for anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.19 Density plot of durations for paths ﬂagged as normal versus anomalous when using a
global threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.20 Threshold for diﬀerent path durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.21 Threshold for diﬀerent path durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.22 Density plot of durations for paths ﬂagged as normal versus anomalous when using
individual thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.23 Loss and KL divergence for initial implementation of the VRNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.24 Illustration of a skip connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.25 Loss, KL divergence, MI and AU implementation of the VRNN with skip connections
and KL annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.26 Reconstructed paths and heatmap of mean of dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.27 Longitude and Latitude proﬁles of reconstructed paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.28 Gradients through ﬁrst and last epoch for VRNN with modiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.29 Loss, KL divergence, MI and AU for implementation of the VRNN with batch normal-
ized inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.30 Gradients through ﬁrst and last epoch for VRNN with batch normalized inference
. . .
56
64
==PAGE:73==
List of Tables
3.1
Mean, standard deviation and test statistic for distributions of log probabilities for the
true input and corrupted paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Mean, standard deviation and test statistic for distributions of log probabilites for true
and anomalous paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Mutual Information and Active Units of the implementation of VRNN . . . . . . . . . .
48
65
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1]
Najmeh Abiri. Statistical Inference with Deep Latent Variable Models. Tech. rep. Lund University,
2019.
[2]
Jinwon An and Sungzoon Cho. “Variational Autoencoder based Anomaly Detection using Re-
construction Probability”. In: SNU Data Mining Center (2015).
[3]
Christoph Baur, Benedikt Wiestler, Shadi Albarqouni, and Nassir Navab. “Deep Autoencoding
Models for Unsupervised Anomaly Segmentation in Brain MR Images”. In: CoRR abs/1804.04488
(2018). arXiv: 1804.04488.
[4]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[5]
David M. Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D. McAuliﬀe. “Variational Inference: A Review for
Statisticians”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 112.518 (Apr. 2017), pp. 859–
877.
[6]
N. Bomberger, B. Rhodes, M. Seibert, and A. Waxman. “Associative Learning of Vessel Motion
Patterns for Maritime Situation Awareness”. In: 2006 9th International Conference on Informa-
tion Fusion (2006), pp. 1–8.
[7]
Samuel R. Bowman et al. “Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space”. In: CoRR abs/1511.06349
(2015). arXiv: 1511.06349.
66
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8]
Per B. Brockhoﬀ, Jan K Møller, Elisabeth W Andersen, Peder Bacher, and Lasse E Christiansen.
Introduction to Statistics at DTU. 2018.
[9]
Yuri Burda, Roger Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. “Importance Weighted Autoencoders”.
In: ICLR (2016). arXiv: 1509.00519v4.
[10]
Ruijin Cang, Hechao Li, Hope Yao, Yang Jiao, and Yi Ren. “Improving direct physical properties
prediction of heterogeneous materials from imaging data via convolutional neural network and a
morphology-aware generative model”. In: Computational Materials Science 150 (2018), pp. 212–
221. arXiv: 1712.03811.
[11]
L. Cazzanti and G. Pallotta. “Mining maritime vessel traﬃc: Promises, challenges, techniques”.
In: OCEANS 2015 - Genova. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[12]
Xiaoran Chen, Nick Pawlowski, Martin Rajchl, Ben Glocker, and Ender Konukoglu. “Deep
Generative Models in the Real-World: An Open Challenge from Medical Imaging”. In: CoRR
abs/1806.05452 (2018). arXiv: 1806.05452.
[13]
Jen-Tzung Chien and Kuan-Ting Kuo. “Variational Recurrent Neural Networks for Speech Sep-
aration”. In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association, INTERSPEECH. Aug. 2017, pp. 1193–1197.
[14]
Junyoung Chung et al. “A Recurrent Latent Variable Model for Sequential Data”. In: CoRR
abs/1506.02216 (2015). arXiv: 1506.02216.
[15]
COM-EU. “Towards the integration of maritime surveillance: A common information sharing
environment for the EU maritime domain”. In: Commission of the European Communities 10.538
ﬁnal (2009).
[16]
Pasquale Coscia, Paolo Braca, Leonardo M. Milleﬁori, Francesco A.N. Palmieri, and Peter Wil-
lett. “Multiple Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Processes for Maritime Traﬃc Graph Representation”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 54.5 (2018), pp. 2158–2170.
[17]
Adji B. Dieng, Yoon Kim, Alexander M. Rush, and David M. Blei. “Avoiding Latent Variable
Collapse With Generative Skip Models”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) (2019). arXiv: 1807.04863.
[18]
Mengzhen Ding et al. “A Novel Approach on Vessel Trajectory Prediction Based on Variational
LSTM”. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Computer Appli-
cations (2020), pp. 206–211.
[19]
Carl Doersch. Tutorial on Variational Autoencoders. Tech. rep. 2016. arXiv: 1606.05908v2.
[20]
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Maxim Tatarchenko, and Thomas Brox. “Learning
to Generate Chairs, Tables and Cars with Convolutional Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 39.4 (2017). arXiv: 1411.5928.
67
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[21]
Vincent Dumoulin and Francesco Visin. A guide to convolution arithmetic for deep learning.
Tech. rep. 2016. arXiv: 1603.07285.
[22]
Marco Fraccaro. “Deep Latent Variable Models for Sequential Data”. In: DTU (2018).
[23]
Hao Fu et al. “Cyclical Annealing Schedule: A Simple Approach to Mitigating KL Vanishing”.
In: CoRR abs/1903.10145 (2019). arXiv: 1903.10145.
[24]
Miao Gao, Guoyou Shi, and Shuang Li. “Online Prediction of Ship Behavior with Automatic
Identiﬁcation System Sensor Data Using Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neu-
ral Network”. In: Sensors 18 (Nov. 2018).
[25]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.
org. MIT Press, 2016.
[26]
Alex Graves. “Generating Sequences With Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: CoRR (2013). arXiv:
1308.0850.
[27]
Junxian He, Daniel Spokoyny, Graham Neubig, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. “Lagging Inference
Networks and Posterior Collapse in Variational Autoencoders”. In: ICLR (2019). arXiv: 1901.
05534v2.
[28]
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. “Deep Residual Learning for Image
Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1512.03385 (2015). arXiv: 1512.03385.
[29]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learning and Data
Mining. 2018.
[30]
Sepp Hochreiter and J J Urgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short Term Memory”. In: Neural Compu-
tation (1997).
[31]
Matthew Hoﬀman D. and Matthew Johnson J. “ELBO surgery: yet another way to carve up the
variational evidence lower bound”. In: NIPS Workshop on Advances in Approximate Bayesian
Inference (2016).
[32]
Fredrik Johansson and G¨oran Falkman. “Detection of vessel anomalies - A Bayesian network
approach”. In: Proceedings of the 2007 International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor
Networks and Information Processing, ISSNIP (2007), pp. 395–400.
[33]
Ameet V Joshi. Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence an Introduction. 1. Springer, 2020.
[34]
Samira Kazemi, Shahrooz Abghari, Niklas Lavesson, Henric Johnson, and Peter Ryman. “Open
data for anomaly detection in maritime surveillance”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 40.14
(2013), pp. 5719–5729.
[35]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”. In: 3rd
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceed-
ings (2015), pp. 1–15. arXiv: 1412.6980.
68
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”. In: 2nd International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR. 2014. arXiv: 1312.6114v10.
[37]
Kira Kowalska and Leto Peel. “Maritime anomaly detection using Gaussian Process active learn-
ing”. In: 15th International Conference on Information Fusion, FUSION 2012 (2012), pp. 1164–
1171.
[38]
Rikard Laxhammar. “Anomaly detection for sea surveillance”. In: Proceedings of the 11th Inter-
national Conference on Information Fusion, FUSION 2008 (2008).
[39]
Nicolas Le Guillarme and Xavier Lerouvreur. “Unsupervised extraction of knowledge from S-AIS
data for maritime situational awareness”. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Information Fusion, FUSION 2013 (2013), pp. 2025–2032.
[40]
Joun Yeop Lee, Sung Jun Cheon, Byoung Jin Choi, Nam Soo Kim, and Eunwoo Song. “Acoustic
modeling using adversarially trained variational recurrent neural network for speech synthesis”.
In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Associa-
tion, INTERSPEECH September (2018), pp. 917–921.
[41]
Victor Lempitsky. “Autoencoder”. In: Computer Vision (2020).
[42]
Teng Long, Yanshuai Cao, Jackie Chi, Kit Cheung, and Borealis Ai. On Posterior Collapse and
Encoder Feature Dispersion in Sequence VAEs. Tech. rep. 2020. arXiv: 1911.03976v2.
[43]
Steven Mascaro, Kevin B Korb, and Ann E Nicholson. Learning Abnormal Vessel Behaviour
from AIS Data with Bayesian Networks at Two Time Scales. Tech. rep. 2010.
[44]
Arya D. McCarthy, Xian Li, Jiatao Gu, and Ning Dong. “Addressing Posterior Collapse with
Mutual Information for Improved Variational Neural Machine Translation”. In: Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) (2020), pp. 8512–8525.
[45]
Warren S. McCulloch and Walter H. Pitts. “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous
Activity”. In: Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5 (1943), pp. 115–133.
[46]
Tomas Mikolov, Stefan Kombrink, Lukas Burget, Jan Cernocky, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. “Ex-
tensions of Recurrent Neural Network Language Model”. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (2011), pp. 5528–5531.
[47]
Duong Nguyen, Rodolphe Vadaine, Guillaume Hajduch, Rene Garello, and Ronan Fablet. “A
multi-task deep learning architecture for maritime surveillance using AIS data streams”. In:
Proceedings - 2018 IEEE 5th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics,
DSAA 2018 (2019), pp. 331–340. arXiv: 1806.03972.
[48]
Duong Nguyen, Rodolphe Vadaine, Guillaume Hajduch, Rene Garello, and Ronan Fablet. “Geo-
TrackNet—A maritime anomaly detector using probabilistic neural network representation of
AIS tracks and a contrario detection”. In: CoRR (2019), pp. 1–10. arXiv: 1912.00682.
69
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[49]
Giuliana Pallotta, Michele Vespe, and Karna Bryan. “Vessel pattern knowledge discovery from
AIS data: A framework for anomaly detection and route prediction”. In: Entropy 15.6 (2013),
pp. 2218–2245.
[50]
Dong Qian and William K. Cheung. “Enhancing variational autoencoders with mutual infor-
mation neural estimation for text generation”. In: 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (2019), pp. 4047–4057.
[51]
Gopinath Rebala, Ajay Ravi, and Sanjay Churiwala. An Introduction to machine learning.
Springer, 2019.
[52]
Bradley J. Rhodes, Neil A. Bomberger, Michael Seibert, and Allen M. Waxman. “Maritime
situation monitoring and awareness using learning mechanisms”. In: Proceedings - IEEE Military
Communications Conference MILCOM 2005 (2005), pp. 646–652.
[53]
Maria Riveiro, Giuliana Pallotta, and Michele Vespe. “Maritime anomaly detection: A review”.
In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 8.5 (2018).
[54]
Kelathodi Kumaran Santhosh, Debi Prosad Dogra, Partha Pratim Roy, and Adway Mitra.
“Video Trajectory Classiﬁcation and Anomaly Detection Using Hybrid CNN-VAE”. In: CoRR
(2018). arXiv: 1812.07203.
[55]
Abdoulaye Sidib´e and Gao Shu. “Study of Automatic Anomalous Behaviour Detection Tech-
niques for Maritime Vessels”. In: THE JOURNAL OF NAVIGATION 70 (2020), pp. 847–858.
[56]
Rachid Singh. Sequential Discrete Latent Variables for Language Modeling. Tech. rep. Harvard
University, 2018.
[57]
Ava Soleimany. Deep Generative Models. 2020. eprint: http://introtodeeplearning.com/
slides/6S191{\_}MIT{\_}DeepLearning{\_}L4.pdf.
[58]
Jinsong Su et al. “Variational recurrent neural machine translation”. In: 32nd AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2018 (2018), pp. 5488–5495. arXiv: 1801.05119.
[59]
Enmei Tu, Guanghao Zhang, Lily Rachmawati, Eshan Rajabally, and Guang Bin Huang. “Ex-
ploiting AIS Data for Intelligent Maritime Navigation: A Comprehensive Survey from Data
to Methodology”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 19.5 (2018),
pp. 1559–1582. arXiv: 1606.00981v1.
[60]
Iraklis Varlamis, Konstantinos Tserpes, Mohammad Etemad, Am´ılcar Soares J´unior, and Stan
Matwin. “A network abstraction of multi-vessel trajectory data for detecting anomalies”. In:
EDBT/ICDT Workshops 2019 (2019).
[61]
Liangbin Zhao and Guoyou Shi. “Maritime Anomaly Detection using Density-based Clustering
and Recurrent Neural Network”. In: Journal of Navigation 72.4 (2019), pp. 894–916.
70
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[62]
Qile Zhu et al. A batch normalized inference network keeps the KL vanishing away. 2020. arXiv:
2004.12585.
[63]
David Zimmerer, Simon A.A. Kohl, Jens Petersen, Fabian Isensee, and Klaus H. Maier-Hein.
“Context-encoding variational autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection”. In: CoRR (2018),
pp. 1–13. arXiv: 1812.05941.
[64]
Dimitris Zissis, Konstantinos Chatzikokolakis, Giannis Spiliopoulos, and Marios Vodas. “A Dis-
tributed Spatial Method for Modeling Maritime Routes”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 47556–
47568.
71
