==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis on developing an immunobiosensor for alternariol detection
Development of Immunobiosensor for Alternariol
Detection in Food Samples
Author
Laura Kastell
Master student in Biotechnology, s153866
Supervisor and co-supervisor
Jenny Emnéus
Professor
Arto Heiskanen
Senior Researcher
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
DTU Bioengineering
January 24, 2021
==PAGE:2==
PREFACE
Acknowledgment
I would like to thank Jenny Emunéus, Professor and Arto Heiskanen, Senior Researcher for this great
opportunity to work on this project. Especially since it was a self-designed project of interest and is
in a new ﬁeld of mine. A great thanks goes to Arto Heiskanen, Senior Researcher for all the help with
theory and expertise throughout the project. I would like to give a great thanks to Claudy D’Costa,
PhD student for all the help and guidance in the laboratory during the entire thesis. For the laboratory
space, materials and chemicals used, I would like to thank the departments on DTU and the companies
Abvigens Inc for providing the antibody and the tracer, and Fermentek for providing the analyte for the
alternariol part. In this project, I have learned the ﬁeld of biosensors, new laboratory skills and how to
make good experimental data, but I have also learned many soft skills that is needed behind the scenes
of a project. Projects are about learning by doing, learning from your mistakes and maintaining your
optimism.
General Information
This project is based on the previous special project ’The Establishment of a Theoretical Biosensor Set-
up and Analysis for the Small Analyte Alternariol’ by Laura Kastell and text and information can be
reused in this master thesis. Especially, in the Introduction and in the section Theory and Background
Information. In the ﬁeld of biosensors, there is no overall textbook available, therefore a lot of the
information is given by the supervisors, especially by Arto Heiskanen, Senior Researcher, and is learned
through the course Development and analysis using Biosensors at DTU.
Funding
Since the biological elements of alternariol are expensive, ﬁnancial support has been applied for from
companies and foundations. This has been a great opportunity to learn how to contact ﬁrms, write
a short version of the project and learn how many you have to contact compared to what you might
get from it. The companies like Rynkeby, Heinz, Mou, Knorr, Svansø, DC Organic were contacted
since they could have had an interest in the safety issues due to their production or their marketing of
tomato products. Firms like Dansarc and Sensirion were contacted due to their interest in biosensors as
a ﬁeld. Companies like DanskBiotek and BioInnovation Institute were contacted due to their interest
in start-ups and new research. Foundations like Novo Nordisk Foundation and Salling fondene were
contacted as well. Unfortunately, no funding was granted for this project.
Signed January 24, 2021
Laura Kastell
It has been a great project and a great learning process!
Thank you!
i
==PAGE:3==
ABSTRACT
The focus of this thesis was to make basic research on alternariol detection using antibody based
biorecognition. Initially, the behaviour of the biological elements for alternariol were tested using ELISA
and afterwards applied on an electrode chip to construct an electrochemical biosensor. The focus was
on determining the setup parameters: sensitivity, i.e.
IC50 and the limit of detection, the matrix
eﬀect of tomato juice based on diﬀerent preparations, and the location of the analyte alternariol in
the product samples. The biosensor setup was characterised electrochemically, using electrochemical
techniques, impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry, in order to assess the successfulness of
electrode cleaning and modiﬁcations. Amperometric detection was used to determine the maximum
signal together with an analyte exposed in a competitive assay to validate the biosensor design and try
to form a calibration curve. In the project two analytes, cortisol and alternariol, were investigated and
it appeared that the behaviour of the two arrangements were quite diﬀerent. The results demonstrated
that even though the biosensor concept is theoretically a universal one, the regeneration process, the
behaviour of the analytes and their localization in the product samples diﬀered. This project showed
that the commercial antibody and tracer from Abvigen Inc could be used for a potential biosensor. This
project is a proof of concept and forms a starting point of the research leading to a potential alternariol
biosensor for applications in food industry, as a lot of interesting research was uncovered during the
thesis project. This project merely represented preliminary research, and there is still a long way to go
in the development of an industrial biosensor for the market.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
1
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1
Aim and Purpose of the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
3
2.1
Signiﬁcance of Fungal Toxins for Food Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Alternariol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Toxins Produced by the Alternaria Fungi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Alternaria, Mycotoxins and Tomato
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Criteria and Maximum Concentration Level in Food Products . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Choice of Biorecognition Element And Analytical Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Biorecognition Element Options
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Antibody as the Chosen Biorecognition Element
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Analytical Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Biosensor Construction and Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Immobilization of the Antibody and Biosensor Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Tracer Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.3
Electrochemical Detection and Diﬀerent Detection Techniques
. . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.4
Regeneration of the Biosensor with Protein G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Product Sample - Tomato Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.1
Sample Content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.2
Matrix, Handling and Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5
Alternariol Concentration in Diﬀerent Tomato Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
27
3.1
The General Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Experimental Equipment and Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Biological Elements and Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.3
Reagents and Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.4
Chemical Risk Assessment and Waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.5
Instrumentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.6
Short term- and Long term Storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
ELISA experiments - Cortisol and Alternariol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Optimization of Antibody- and Tracer Concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2
Orientation Optimization with Protein G
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.3
Analyte Calibration Curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.4
Matrix Eﬀect of a Tomato Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.5
Regeneration of the ELISA Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Electrochemical Detection - Cortisol and Alternariol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
3.4.1
The Manufacturing Process of the Chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4.2
The Physical Construction of the Biosensor System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.3
Electrode Cleaning, System Check and Output Observations
. . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.4
Biological Modiﬁcation of the Biosensor Setup on the Electrode . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4.5
Biosensor Detection - Reproducibility, Regeneration and Analyte Detection . .
45
4
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
50
4.1
ELISA Experiments - Cortisol and Alternariol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.1
Optimization of Antibody- and Tracer Concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.2
Orientation Optimization with Protein G
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.3
Analyte Calibration Curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.1.4
Matrix Eﬀect of a Tomato Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.1.5
Regeneration of the ELISA Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.2
Electrochemical Detection - Cortisol and Alternariol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.2.1
The Eﬀect of Electrode Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.2.2
Biological Modiﬁcation of the Biosensor Setup on the Electrode . . . . . . . . .
77
4.2.3
Biosensor Detection - Reproducibility, Regeneration and Analyte Detection . .
84
5
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
103
6
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
109
6.1
Industrial Biosensor-Based Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
6.2
Optimisation of the Biological Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
6.3
Future Research and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
7
APPENDIX
115
7.1
A.1 Various Food Groups - Contaminated with AOH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
7.2
A.2 Alternaria Mycotoxins - Name and Chemical Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
7.3
A.3 Design Setups with the Enzyme Acetylcholinesterase and Choline Oxidase
. . . .
117
7.4
A.4 Pulse Voltammetry Methods - NPV, DPV and SWV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
7.5
A.5 Contents of Tomato and Diﬀerent Tomato Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
7.6
A.6 Preparation and Storage of Biological Elements, Reagents and Chemicals . . . . .
122
7.7
A.7 Modiﬁcation of Chip 01 (WE a,b,c), Chip 02 (WE a,b,c) and Chip 03 (WE a,c) for
Cortisol Detection - Impedance spectra and CVs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
7.8
A.8 Modiﬁcation of Chip 07 (WE a,b,c), Chip 08 (WE a,b,c), Chip 09 (WE a,c) and
Chip 10 (WE a,b,c) for Alternariol Detection - Impedance spectra and CVs . . . . . .
135
References
146
iv
==PAGE:6==
INTRODUCTION
1
INTRODUCTION
Fungi are found throughout the world and have the main function in nature of facilitating the decaying
process of organic matter. In biotechnological industry, fungi are deﬁned as cell factories that produce
a wide variety of important compounds, we humans beneﬁt from.
Yet in other industrial sectors
such as the agricultural industry, fungi are viewed as a pestilence, since the decay causes reduced
crop yields, which results in lower income [1]. Fungi can also be deﬁned as a risk to human health if
consumed, due to their production of harmful secondary metabolites, called mycotoxins. Mycotoxins
are secreted from the fungi and can cause a signiﬁcant contamination of raw materials used in the food
industry, therefore there have been a large focus on how to detect them [2]. Alternariol is an example
of a mycotoxin which is mainly produced by the fungi group Alternaria and is reported to cause severe
health risks since it exerts the properties of mutagenicity, hemotoxicity and carcinogenicity [1, 3–6].
Alternaria spp. are ubiquitous and alternariol can therefore be found in a large range of foods and
feeds, among others tomatoes, which the fungi is a frequent invader of [3, 7]. The possibility of eating
a mouldy tomato is low, but due to limitations in the industry to sort rotten vegetables from the
production line, the occurrence of alternariol is probably more frequent in processed tomato products
[5, 8].
This is exacerbated, since the fungi infection can occur pre- and postharvest [9] and since
mycotoxins are kept very stable during the food processing [10]. In 2019, it has been stated by the
European Commission that the current maximum allowed concentration of alternariol is between 5
to 30 µg/kg depending on the food group, for instance, in processed tomato products the maximum
concentration is 10 µg/kg [1, 11]. Hence, analysis of alternariol in raw materials and processed food is
of utmost importance to ensure the products meet the current food safety standards. Alternariol is
not the only mycotoxin produced by Alternaria fungi, and has not recently been discovered but the
restriction in food-products are still under evaluation and not yet oﬃcially deﬁned.
Traditionally, detection of alternariol and other mycotoxins is done by HPLC or LC-MS, which requires
extensive sample pre-treatment and employment of expensive equipment. These analytical procedures
have high speciﬁcity and sensitivity, but they are also time-consuming, expensive, labour-intensive
and have to be performed in an advanced laboratory by trained personnel [2, 10].
Even though
electrochemical immunosensors have been studied and developed for many small toxins, a biosensor
speciﬁc for alternariol has not been found, only an immunosensor for alternariol monomethyl ether,
a derivative toxin of alternariol, has been discovered [12]. Biosensors have the potential to facilitate
faster and less labour-intensive detection and can be used in conjunction with raw material handling
or in food processing lines. It also has the advantage, that it can be operated by the staﬀon-site,
which makes the detection easier and more eﬃcient. The application of a biosensor will thusly free
companies from the costs associated with chromatography and the immediate result of the test will
ease supply lines, which makes the development of this type of biosensor of large commercial interest.
Potential customers are all companies in Europe that work with raw material, which can be infected
by the fungi, since they now have to control the level of alternariol in their products.
Page 1 of 151
==PAGE:7==
INTRODUCTION
Companies like Heinz, Knorr, Mou and others, that produce processed tomato products, such as
ketchup, tomato juice, tomato purée, tomato sauce and canned tomatoes could have special interest
in such a technology due to the new guide lines.
1.1
Aim and Purpose of the Project
The aim of this project is to develop an electrochemical immunobiosensor for detection of alternariol
in food samples with an industrial perspective and the project will serve as a proof of concept to
see if it is possible to make alternariol detection easier for the industry, than using the traditional
analytic methods such as HPLC and LC-MS. To develop a good biosensor, many separate parts such
as sampling, sample handling and detection are involved in the entire process and determines the value
of the biosensor. As this project has a short time frame, it is mainly focusing on the detection part
and on how to develop a biosensor setup, but some aspects like the matrix eﬀect are also considered
and tested, as it gives an idea of how important and crucial the other parts are for the detection. The
entire process is brieﬂy described and discussed as all parts are dependent on each other to make a
good industrial biosensor system.
The project comprises an initial ELISA-based testing of the available antibodies and tracers and the
function of a competitive assay for a small-molecular analyte. The project focuses on deﬁning the
starting information that is needed to understand how the biosensor setup works and behaves, which
includes testing the commercial antibody and tracer and attempts to locate where the analyte could be
in a commercial product sample. The project contains biosensing assays preformed with ELISA, that
can evaluate the balance of the biosensor setup, the crucial performance parameters, such as sensitivity,
i.e. IC50, limit of detection, and the matrix eﬀect from a tomato product, before testing the biosensor
setup with electrochemical detection. As the future vision is the development of an industrial biosensor,
it will include discussions of how sampling and sample handling including preparation methods and
pre-concentration are important in order to utilize a biosensor-based monitoring at a manufacturing
site. This thesis is considered as a starting point of the research and development, that can give rise to
other projects that all can be combined and ensure that a potential biosensor can come to the market.
Page 2 of 151
==PAGE:8==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
2
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
In this section, all of the theory and background information for the project are described to get an
overview of all the aspects from the analyte, biorecognition element, analytical approach, transducer,
and detection technique to the sample matrix and preparation.
This section provides all of the
necessary knowledge to start the project from scratch and to develop the necessary experiments and
carry them out.
2.1
Signiﬁcance of Fungal Toxins for Food Industry
2.1.1
Alternariol
The analyte of interest alternariol (AOH), has the chemical name 3,7,9-Trihydroxy-1-methyl-6H-
dibenzo-[b,d]pyran-6-one. It is classiﬁed as a mycotoxin and is among one of the major toxins produced
by the fungi group Alternaria, including the species A. alternata, A. arborescens, A. brassicae, A. bras-
sicicola, A. infectoria, A. radicina and A. tenuissima. AOH is a small compound of 258.3 Dalton,
within the class/group Benzopyrones/pyranones, more speciﬁcally deﬁned as a dibenzo-alpha-pyrone
(see the chemical structure of AOH in Figure 1). The toxicity of AOH has been proposed to be a
potential threat to human health and the degradation of the compound is diﬃcult due to its stability.
Detailed data is still missing on this subject, but it has currently been reported that AOH is stable
between room temperature and up to 100°C in a time period from several weeks to several minutes
depending on the temperature in both solids and liquid media, such as ﬂour, wine, and juice. Other
experiments showed that AOH can remain stable at 230°C in bread baking, but it has also been
proved, that the concentration can be signiﬁcantly reduced by applying a heat treatment at 121°C for
60 minutes [3, 4].
Figure 1
The molecular structure of AOH. Picture from Escrivá et al. [4].
Page 3 of 151
==PAGE:9==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Source of Alternariol
The main producer of alternariol is Alternaria, which is categorized as a fungal genus that is widespread
in nature and contains both pathogenic- and saprophytic species. What makes this genus so diﬃcult
to control is its ability to grow and produce toxins at a large range of temperatures and under
conditions that would be unfavourable for most fungi, including low water activity (aw), that refers to
“free” water available for microbial growth, and low temperatures. Even though, the optimal growth
temperature lies between 22-30°C, it has been reported that the fungi can grow in the range of 6.5 to
-5°C. Thereby, the Alternaria species can grow on commodities and cause spoilage during the storage
and transportation even if the commodities are kept cold e.g. refrigerated. This makes the fungi
diﬃcult to deal with when producing food products [4–6, 13, 14]. The Alternaria species have optimal
growth on pH between 4 to 5.4, are able to grow in low oxygen conditions (conc. 0.25%) and can
grow at a minimum aw down to 0.86. However, the growth rate of the fungi is proportional to higher
oxygen concentration and higher water activity (aw on 0.98) [5]. A normal strategy for a fungi is
to protect its survival by either having the ability to grow in harsh conditions or protecting itself
from other fungi and microorganisms by producing biologically active compounds such as mycotoxins.
As the Alternaria species have the ability to survive at low temperature, low oxygen level and low
water activity, it normally only spends its energy to produce toxins at a temperature between 15
to 30°C and at limiting water activity on 0.90. It has been reported that the optimal mycotoxin
production for Alternaria species depending on the strain and substrate was at around 25°C at an
aw on 0.98 [5]. The Alternaria species A. alternata is reported as the most important for mycotoxin
contamination of vegetables and fruits as it can infect both living plants and the harvested products
depending on which genetic form is active, pathogenic or saprophytic, respectively. In regards to food
safety, its saprophytic stage is considered as the main concern, since it is in this form it can colonize
the harvested commodities and produce large amounts of mycotoxins, which can end up in the ﬁnal
processed products without knowing [4, 15]. Even though, the main source for AOH is within the
Alternaria genus, it has been reported that other fungi have the ability to produce AOH as well, such
as Phomopsis spp. [3].
Colonization, Contamination and Toxicity of the Alternaria Fungi
The Alternaria species colonize a large range of plants and is capable of producing more than 70
mycotoxins, which play an important and positive role in the fungal pathogenicity towards the plants
and in commodities, but they also play a central adversarial role in food safety for both animals and
humans [4]. An important documented information is that the fungi can cause decay of both pre- and
post harvest [9] even under harsh conditions, which makes the control and prevention even harder to
handle. Alternaria mycotoxins, including AOH, are categorized as food contaminants and have been
found in a large range of food groups in both raw and processed form: grains and grain-based products,
vegetables and vegetable products, fruit and fruit products, vegetable oils, alcoholic beverages and
food for infants and small children (see the diﬀerent food groups that can be contaminated with AOH
in Appendix A.1 Various Food Groups - Contaminated with AOH, Figure 40) [1]. The presence of the
Alternaria fungi and the metabolites produced by it can cause problems both for agriculture, since
the fungi is a plant pathogen that can reduce the crop yields and thereby have a negative eﬀect on
Page 4 of 151
==PAGE:10==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
the economy of the farmers and the food processing industry, as well as for humans and animals,
since Alternaria mycotoxins have been documented to be harmful or have negative health eﬀect. The
toxicity of AOH is noted to cause mild acute eﬀects to mammalian cells, since the LD50 is higher
than 400 mg/kg of body weight for animals, where for unborn animals the mycotoxin is lethal at a
concentration level of 100 mg/kg of body weight [7]. The long term eﬀects are more serious as the
compound has adverse consequences on the genetics of the consumer, which deﬁnes how dangerous the
toxin is. Alternaria mycotoxins are reported to be cytotoxic, teratogenic, fetotoxic and carcinogenic
and thereby can contribute to cancer, more speciﬁcally human esophageal cancer in Africa and China,
where the contamination is high. They are also reported to be clastogenic, estrogenic and mutagenic
to both mammalian- and microbial cells and being tumorigenic in an experiment with rats [4].
AOH is documented to have a low acute toxicity. However, it is reported to be mutagenic, hemotoxic
and carcinogenic. Additionally, AOH can also act as an inducer of DNA double stand-breaks and cause
notable cytotoxicity to both mammalian- and microbial cells [1, 3–6]. Furthermore, AOH is a potent
inhibitor of the enzymes topoisomerase I and II, which handle over- or underwinding of DNA in the
cell [3] and is reported to have an estrogenic potential and have inhibitory eﬀect on cell proliferation
[4, 16].
2.1.2
Toxins Produced by the Alternaria Fungi
Alternariol is not the only mycotoxin produced by Alternaria spp.
and it is frequently found in
combination with other mycotoxins especially with alternariol monomethyl ether (AME), since they
share the same biosynthesis pathway. The group of Alternaria mycotoxins are very diverse and belong
to diﬀerent chemical classiﬁcations among which are steroids, pyranones, terpenoids, quinines and
other compounds containing phenolics or nitrogen. Within the group the major and most studied
mycotoxins are AOH, AME, altenuene (ALT), tenuazonic acid (TeA) and tentoxin (TEN). However,
in recent years the research has extended and other toxins have been discovered and identiﬁed (see
the chemical structures with names in Appendix A.2 Alternaria Mycotoxins - Name and Chemical
Structures, Figure 41). One group in particular is interesting, the perylenquinone derivatives such
as altertoxin (ATX) I to III, alterperylonol/alteichin (ALTCH) and stemphyltoxins (STE) I to III,
since it includes minor metabolites but yet is reported to be more toxic to mammalian cells than
AOH or AME. Alternaria spp. produce more compounds than shown in the Appendix A.2 Alternaria
Mycotoxins - Name and Chemical Structures, but due to lack of pure substances, no report on them
have yet been found and only the most studied toxins are available on the market.
Statistically,
according to around 60 studies, AOH and AME were analysed and detected in 80%, TEN in 50% and
ALT in 36% of the studies. The ATXs were analyzed and detected in 16%, where only a few studies
documented other metabolites such as asmacrosporin in 9%, and 3% included ALN, infectopyrone,
monocerin and AALs in total. In general, the statistical trend and most common toxins observed in
vegetables, fruits and derived products are AOH and AME, followed by the toxins TEN, TeA, ALT
and ATXs [4, 15], showing that AOH and AME the predominant ones.
Page 5 of 151
==PAGE:11==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
2.1.3
Alternaria, Mycotoxins and Tomato
Tomato is one of the most vulnerable vegetables/fruits to fungal decay due to their soft tissue and
thin skin [5, 8, 10, 17], and Alternaria is the fungi which is most frequently found on mouldy tomatoes
and creates black splotches on the surface of the tomatoes (see Figure 2) [5]. The fungal invasion
often appears during the ripening stage and the infection can occur either at the stem end or on the
commodity itself. If it is on the commodity it is most likely due to cracking of the skin either from
excessive moist in the growth phase, from chilling by storage or from a mechanical injury. Various
Alternaria species have been found to infect tomatoes, such as A. alternata, A. longipes, A. tenuissima
and A. arborescens (see the structure and spores of the A. alternata in Figure 2). Especially the A.
arborescens which causes stem canker, has been proved to genetically carry a pathogenicity factor
towards tomatoes [5, 15].
Tomatoes have beneﬁcial conditions for the fungi, since they have high
water content and slightly low pH value. The only factor, except for a rapid farm to market strategy
that can prevent or slow down the fungal growth and especially the production of mycotoxins, is
the temperature during transportation and storage. It has been reported that the toxin production is
limited at a temperature of 6°C and therefore is considered as the most safe and controlled temperature
to maintain for storage and transportation [5]. The main issue is not directly consumption of the
mouldy and toxin ﬁlled tomatoes, but rather their usage for processed products, such as juice, sauces,
pulp, puree, paste and concentrate, since there are limitations that prevent proper removal of the rotten
tissue in the current industrial process and it is too time consuming to remove decayed tomatoes before
the process [4, 5]. Even though some tomato products are put through a heating process, the toxins
are quite stable and can therefore be found in the commercial end product and thereby end up in the
human diet. It has been reported that 92-93% of analysed tomato products were contaminated by
AOH, AME, TEN and TeA [15].
Figure 2
A mouldy tomato and the fungi under a macro-and microscope. The fungi Alternaria creates black
splotches on the surface of the tomato (left). The fungi A. alternata under a macroscope (middle) and a microscope
(right), which shows the structure and spores. Pictures from Patriarca A. and Pinto V. F. [5].
2.1.4
Criteria and Maximum Concentration Level in Food Products
Alternaria mycotoxins are not newly found since EFSA has reported in 2011 [1] the potential health
risks for both humans and animals in food and feed, but due to lack of quantitative data on the risk
assessment related to the food safety, the maximum concentration levels have not been given until the
Page 6 of 151
==PAGE:12==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
European Commission proposed current indicative levels for AOH, AME and TeA in 2019 [11] (see
Table 1 for a range of food groups). It has to be said that these criteria on the maximum allowed
concentrations are not oﬃcial and are still under evaluation, thereby regulation is subject to change
when more data is made available. It has been stated that the concentrations of Alternaria mycotoxins
(AOH, AME and TeA) in commercial food products were between 1 to 8700 µg/kg, where the highest
levels of AOH and AME were among other products found in tomato paste [1, 4]. According to the
current data, the maximum concentration level for AOH in processed tomato products is 10 µg/kg,
while for AME and TeA it is 5 µg/kg and 500 µg/kg, respectively. These criteria sets new requirements
for the manufacturers and force them to develop new control protocols on their products to keep the
concentration levels below the allowed values.
Table 1
Current proposed indicative levels for alternariol and other mycotoxins from the European
Commission. Information given by the organisation Food Standards Agency [11].
Food group
(µg/kg)
Alternariol
(AOH)
Alternariol monoethyl ether
(AME)
Tenuazonic acid
(TeA)
Processed tomato products
10
5
500
Paprika powder
-
-
10000
Sesame seeds
30
30
100
Sunﬂower seeds
30
30
1000
Sunﬂower oil
10
10
100
Tree nuts
-
-
100
Dried ﬁgs
-
-
1000
Cereal based foods for infants
and young children
5
5
500
2.2
Choice of Biorecognition Element And Analytical Approach
2.2.1
Biorecognition Element Options
The key element in a biosensor is the biorecognition element, since it determines both selectivity and
speciﬁcity and thus directly impacts accuracy and sensitivity of measurements. Other concerns when
designing a biosensor are: the commercial availability of the biorecognition elements, whether or not
they can be bought or have to be specially produced for the purpose. How to make the design as
simple as possible and in the case of a small analyte and how to achieve high enough signal to ensure
a suﬃcient output. In this project, the goal is to keep the speciﬁcity and selectivity high, and thereby
only respond to the analyte of interest without being inﬂuenced by other interfering molecules. Since
the fungi Alternaria spp. are able to produce a lot of diﬀerent mycotoxins besides AOH, it is important
to choose a biorecognition element that can distinguish between them, to ensure that measurement
of the analyte of interest is as accurate as possible. Some mycotoxins are structurally very similar to
AOH, namely AME, ALT and altenuisol (AS) since they only diﬀer by a few functional groups, as can
be seen in Figure 3.
Page 7 of 151
==PAGE:13==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Figure 3
Toxins structurally similar to AOH. The toxins alternariol monoethyl ether (AME), altenuene (ALT)
and altenuisol (AS) shown together with alternariol (AOH) to see the structural similarity between them. Assumed
carbon numbers are included on all molecules. Picture adapted from Escrivá et al. [4].
To this analyte AOH, three diﬀerent kind of biorecognition elements have been considered for the
biorecognition, namely a receptor, an enzyme or an antibody.
Estrogen Receptor
Receptors are used everywhere in cellular systems. They are proteins which recognize and bind ligands,
typically small compounds. The binding between them initiates conformational change to the receptor
and typically leads to other biochemical reactions, also called signal transduction. It has been reported
that AOH can exhibit an estrogenic potential/activity and can bind to the human estrogen receptor
(ER) in both the α and β form, with a slight preference for the ER β. AOH can function as an agonist
towards the ER because it is structurally similar to certain estrogen-mimicking substances, as it is
a diphenolic compound. AOH can thereby mimic the estrogen steroid hormone estradiol (E2), and
trigger the estrogenic pathway. A study by L. Lehmann et al. 2006 showed that the binding of AOH
to the ER has a lower aﬃnity towards the receptor compared to E2, about 10,000-fold lower binding
to ER α and only 2500-fold lower binding to ER β. These results showed that AOH can function as
a pure ER agonist [1, 16], but that the sensitivity of such a biosensor would probably be quite low.
By using the ER as the biorecognition element in a biosensor, the presence of the AOH is detected
by it binding to it. The ER is normally present in a cell system, but since it has been possible to
isolate the ER and make it function properly, the design of a biosensor is simpler and faster, than
involving a whole cell on a transducer. One concern is that the ER has not been reported to have been
tested against the similar mycotoxins AME, ALT and AS. However, since the main factor is to have a
Page 8 of 151
==PAGE:14==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
diphenolic structure, the risk of binding aﬃnity for AME, ALT and AS is high. Theoretically, the ER
would not be speciﬁc enough for this biosensor design, since the speciﬁcity has not been experimentally
veriﬁed.
Enzyme Acetylcholinesterase
Historically, the enzyme Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) has widely been used to detect among others
nerve agents, insecticides, mycotoxins and drugs. It has been reported that AOH is a competitive
inhibitor towards the enzyme and thereby can decrease its activity depending on the concentration,
thereby, reducing the conversion of the substrate acetylcholine [18]. To use AChE as the biorecognition
element in a biosensor, the enzyme has to be connected with another enzyme that can convert the
product from AChE since it cannot be detected on its own. A possible helper enzyme could be Choline
oxidase (ChOX), which converts choline and oxygen to betaine and hydrogen peroxide respectively,
of which hydrogen peroxide could be detected electrochemically, as seen in the reaction of Equation 1
[19]
Acetylcholine AChE
−−−−→
H2O
Choline + Acetic acid →Choline ChOX
−−−−→
O2
Betaine + H2O2
(1)
Diﬀerent designs with the two enzymes AChE and ChOX could be made by using amperometry
as the electrochemical detection technique.
One design could detect the H2O2 production, either
with or without the use of Prussian Blue depending on what potential to detect at. Another design
would use a mediator for the detection, which is connected to the ChOX enzyme. When the enzyme
oxidizes choline, the oxidized form of the mediator is concomitantly reduced, and then reoxidized on
the electrode. See both designs in Appendix A.3 Design Setups with the Enzyme Acetylcholinesterase
and Choline Oxidase, Figure 42. One thing to remember is to choose a potential where the risk of
interfering reactions/compounds is low. The same issue occurs with this biorecognition element as
for the ER, because AChE has not been reported to have been tested against the similar mycotoxins
AME, ALT and AS. The risk is considered large, since their core molecular structure is the same and
all have hydroxyl groups. Theoretically, AChE would not be speciﬁc enough for this biosensor design,
since the speciﬁcity has not been experimentally veriﬁed.
Monoclonal Antibody
Elements from our own immune system are often used in order to protect us humans. Antibodies
are used widely in medical diagnostics, in immunodiagnostic techniques such as ELISA, for therapy
to treat disease and for biomedical research. They are used because of the high speciﬁcity towards
one compound called an antigen. It has been reported that the monoclonal antibody (mAb) 4G4
(subtype IgG2B) has a high aﬃnity against AOH and can recognize free analytes. It was reported in
an enzyme immunoassay that the mAB had a mean detection limit (IC20) of 35 +/- 6.9 pg/mL and a
mean IC50 of 108 pg/mL, with a quasilinear measurement range of 20-300 pg/mL. This actually makes
this method equally sensitive as the HPLC-MS/MS method when using stable isotopes [3]. Another
article reported three mAb strains that also speciﬁcally recognizes AOH, namely 8A7, 10B3 and 1D1,
where only the IC50 was measured for 1D1 and was reported as 4.2 ng/mL [20].
Page 9 of 151
==PAGE:15==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
By using an antibody as the biorecognition element in a biosensor, the presence of the AOH is detected
by its aﬃnity. Since the other Alternaria mycotoxins are structurally very similar, there have been
reports on cross reaction. In the case of mAb 4G4, it has a weak cross reaction with AME at 0.9%
determined by an enzyme immunoassay, but none with ALT or TeA [3]. In the case of mAb 1D1, it
was reported to have no cross reaction with AME, but has not been tested against ALT [20]. None of
the two antibodies have been tested against AS.
Due to the high speciﬁcity of the antibody as compared to the enzymatic reactions and receptors, the
antibody was selected as the preferred biorecognition element for further exploration.
2.2.2
Antibody as the Chosen Biorecognition Element
Antibodies (Ab), also known as immunoglobulins, are deﬁned as large proteins (150 kDa, size of 10
nm) that are shaped like a Y. They are deﬁned as host proteins that are produced and used by the
immune system as a response to intruders [21, 22]. These intruders that have the potential of harming
the body are called antigens and include pathogenic organisms like viruses, bacteria, fungi, and toxic
compounds like mycotoxins. What makes this strategy so eﬀective is that the production of antibodies
is very selective towards a speciﬁc antigen, thereby the intruder can be identiﬁed in the body for the
immune system and the T-cells or macrophages can destroy it. Antibodies are produced by B-cells and
are composed of two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains, which both have constant
and variable regions. It is these combined (heavy and light) variable regions that form the two speciﬁc
antigen-binding sites [22, 23]. There are ﬁve antibody isotypes divided into three groups in mammalian
cells, dimer IgA, pentamer IgM and monomer IgD, IgE and IgG, where the IgG is the most common
and represent approximately 75% of the antibodies [22].
The speciﬁcity of the antibody and the ability to produce and isolate them have opened the opportunity
for high speciﬁc tools that can be used in research and diagnostic applications. Antibodies can be
produced both as monoclonal and polyclonal depending on the production method. In general, the
production involves injections of the antigen into animals to evoke and thereby produce a high level
of antigen-speciﬁc antibodies in the bloodstream. When producing polyclonal antibodies, the blood
containing the antibodies is collected from the animal after several weeks of regular antigen injections.
After which the blood is separated into blood cells and plasma, which contains the antibodies and other
proteins. Finally, the plasma is heated to 65°C to destroy the contaminating proteins and isolate the
antibodies. Monoclonal antibodies can be produced in two ways either by the Hybridoma technology
or Recombinant technology. In the Hybridoma technology, antibody producing cells from the spleen
are isolated from an animal and fused with myeloma cells creating a hybridoma. The hybridoma
cells are then observed and the ones producing the correct antibodies are selected, grown and the
antibodies are harvested from the supernatant. In the Recombinant technology, the gene sequences of
the variable regions (heavy and light chains) are isolated and inserted into a plasmid system, which is
then transferred into mammalian cells like Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) and later puriﬁed [22]. No
matter what the choice of production is, it is important to make a characterization of the produced
antibody, which includes screening, where the antigen-binding antibody is identiﬁed, titering, where
the antibody concentration and assay titer are measured, and ﬁnally isotyping, where the class and
Page 10 of 151
==PAGE:16==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
subclass of the antibody are clariﬁed [21]. The antigen-antibody aﬃnity reaction can be aﬀected by
several factors, like temperature and pH. The optimal temperature depends on the chemical structure
of the epitope and which type of bonds that are involved in the interaction. The pH optimum for the
complex is more precisely between 6.5 to 8.4. If the pH is under or above these values, the complex
is heavily inhibited as, under extreme pH conditions, the antibody can have conformational changes
[24].
In an immunoassay as well as in an immunobiosensor, the fundamental factors that aﬀect the quality
are the aﬃnity and the speciﬁcity of the antibody and these properties depend on the structure of
the antigen [20].
When producing the speciﬁc antibody needed to detect the analyte of interest,
the analyte has to activate an immune response, but sometimes a small molecule like AOH cannot.
AOH can, however, form a hapten (<1 kDa), that is deﬁned as an incomplete antigen and has the
ability to form covalent bonds to a large carrier molecule, like a protein and thereby elicit an immune
response. Only when the small molecule and the carrier molecule are fused together, they can elicit
an immune response [22, 25, 26].
A hapten can be formed by a reaction between AOH and ethyl
4-bromobutyrate, which forms a butyrate spacer arm (lenght of 4 carbons) or between AOH and
formaldehyde. Depending on where the reaction occurs on the analyte, diﬀerent parts of the analyte
are exposed and diﬀerent antibodies can be produced [3, 20]. The Alternaria mycotoxins are very alike
in their core structure, but they are slightly diﬀerent due to the location of the functional groups. AOH
has three hydroxyl groups and one methyl group located on C3, C9, C11 and C1 respectively (see
Figure 3). Comparing AOH to AME and ALT, the hydroxyl group on C9 (carbon number in red in
Figure 3) of AME and ALT is methylated (-OCH3), where the two hydroxyl groups on C3 and C11 on
both are maintained. To produce a speciﬁc antibody for AOH, it has been suggested that the carrier
protein should be bound to either the hydroxyl group at C3 or C11, so the hydroxyl group on C9 is
exposed (see Figure 3). However, with this strategy there could be a cross reaction with the toxin AS,
since the toxin has a hydroxyl group on C9 [3, 20]. The toxin AS has not been reported to be produced
in high concentrations, like AME and ALT, by the fungi according to the research. Therefore, cross
reaction with AS may not cause a signiﬁcant error as with a cross reaction with AME or ALT.
The only factor that is signiﬁcant for the biosensor design is that the antibody is available and is
preferably commercially available. The described antibodies, mAb 4G4 (subtype IgG2B) and mAb
1D1, are not commercially available and can therefore not be bought for this project. However, two
monoclonal Anti-Alternariol antibodies have been found, both of which are produced in mice and have
reported functionality in ELISA assays and both produced in 2019. One antibody is sold from the
ﬁrm Creative Diagnostics [27], while the other is sold from the ﬁrm Abvigen Inc [28]. These antibodies
can both be used in this project.
2.2.3
Analytical Approach
In general when designing a biosensor, there are label- and label-free detection approaches. The label-
free techniques are Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), where the change in impedance
is generated by the analyte binding to the antibody, and Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) an op-
tical technique that detects the change in angle using polarized incident light. The label approaches
Page 11 of 151
==PAGE:17==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
comprise colorimetric sensing, ﬂuorescence sensing or electrochemical techniques like amperometry
or voltammetry, that measures an electrochemical response [22]. In this project, both the label-free
technique Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy and labeled techniques amperometry and cyclic
voltammetry were chosen.
The method Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is used to test the available antibodies and
the function of the chosen format of the immunoassay. ELISA is regarded as one of the most sensitive
immunoassay platforms [29] and is good for an initial start. It was used to evaluate the compatibility
of commercially bought antibody with the antigen, but also to test the optimal concentrations and
dilutions needed of all the elements used, for instance the antibody and tracer (analyte with enzyme
label). Usually, immunobiosensors are heterogeneous, which means that either the analyte or antibody
is immobilised on the electrode. They can be direct or indirect, which both have their advantages
and disadvantages. The format of the immunoassay can be both non-competitive and competitive
depending on which design is achievable. The non-competitive method could be a sandwich assay,
where one antibody is immobilised on the surface, the analyte attaches to it and then another antibody
with a label can bind to the analyte. The competitive method could be either with the analyte or
the antibody immobilised on the surface. With the analyte on the surface, the labelled antibodies are
either bound to the free analytes provided by the sample or to the analytes on the surface. With the
antibody on the surface, the analyte in the sample and the labelled analyte (tracer) competes for a
place on the antibody. In either case, the higher the analyte concentration in the sample, the lower is
the measured signal output [22, 30].
Since AOH is a very small molecule and needs a carrier protein to elicit an immune response, the chance
of it having more than one binding site towards the antibody is very low. Thereby, the sandwich assay
is not applicable here. However, the competitive method with the immobilised antibody could be
suitable since the exact binding site on the antigen has not yet been veriﬁed, which could cause issues
if the antigen was immobilised instead. This general method is shown in Figure 4 with both the
principle of ELISA and the principle of an electrochemical immunobiosensor. Both principles have
the same core where the antibodies are immobilized on a surface either in the bottom of a 96-well
plate or on an electrode, and the analyte present in the sample is competing with a tracer to get
a spot on the antibodies. The concentration of the tracer is known and theoretically, if there is a
high concentration of the analyte in the sample, the tracer constitutes a lower amount of the overall
concentration in the reaction mixture. Thereby, the tracer gets fewer spots on the antibodies. In the
principle of ELISA, the enzyme is converting a substrate into a product which changes the colour of
the ﬂuid, that can be detected by absorbance. If the level of analyte in the sample is high, the number
of enzymes (tracer) are low, thereby also the colour change will occur more slowly, and therefore the
colour after a predetermined time is lighter correlating with a low absorbance. The principle of an
electrochemical immunobiosensor is the same as ELISA, where an enzyme is converting a substrate
into a product.
However, instead of measuring the colour change, it is based on electrochemical
detection of the end-product on the electrode.
Page 12 of 151
==PAGE:18==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Figure 4
The competitive analytical approach. The analytical approach shown both with the principle of ELISA
and the principle of an electrochemical immunobiosensor. Theoretical picture made with Biorender.com.
2.3
Biosensor Construction and Function
2.3.1
Immobilization of the Antibody and Biosensor Setup
When designing a biosensor, the crucial parts for its performance are the orientation and the at-
tachment of the immobilized biorecognition element on the electrode [31]. However, depending on
the biorecognition element e.g enzyme or antibody, the distance between it and the electrode and the
distance between the biorecognition elements also have an inﬂuence. It is important that the biorecog-
nition element is at the right distance from the electrode and from the other biorecognition elements,
so that the measured molecule can reach the electrode and be detected. Therefore, the immobilized
molecules should not be too dense. To make a great biosensor all of these parts have to be optimized
and tested.
When designing an immunobiosensor, the sensitivity is highly dependent on the presentation of the
chosen antibody, and the best orientation is to expose the antigen binding sites towards the solution
containing the analyte and avoiding not covering them up. Antibodies have structurally two diﬀerent
ends, a Fab-end that contains the two antigen binding regions and a Fc-end, which is the crystallized
Page 13 of 151
==PAGE:19==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
and constant region. Like any other protein, antibodies are one long chain of residues and when folded,
the hydrophobic amino acids are internal, creating disulﬁde bridges and the hydrophilic amino acids are
external on the surface, exposing some functional groups including carboxylic, amino and hydroxylic
groups [31]. The goal is to achieve the right orientation of all the antibodies on the electrode, of which
the ideal is that the Fc of the antibody is faced towards the surface, also called "end-on".
Antibodies can be immobilised in various ways which both include random and speciﬁc orientation.
In general, there are three types of immobilization: adsorption, covalent coupling and aﬃnity.
• Adsorption is the simplest way of antibody attachment, but it is also uncontrolled and im-
mobilise the antibodies randomly. Adsorption occurs either by electrostatic interactions or hy-
drophobic interactions. A good example are microtiter plates, which utilise polymers to increase
the hydrophilicity and thereby binding antibody to the surface. One method used is the forma-
tion of self-assembled monolayers (SAM), where the goal is to either modify the surface chemistry
to enhance antibody adsorption or to form functional groups to use in a covalent attachment.
SAMs are usually created by molecules, which contain active functional groups in both ends [31].
• Covalent coupling is considered to ensure a robust immobilization combined with high density
and in some cases speciﬁc orientation and site-directed immobilisation. The covalent coupling
can be achieved through interactions by functional groups like amino, carboxylic, thiol or gly-
can moieties. Amino and carboxylic groups are essentially ubiquitous in an antibody and are
very common on the surface, thus making site-directed immobilization diﬃcult. This coupling
is normally made by the method N-ethyl-N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC)/N-
hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) and results in a robust amine bond formation. Since the antibody
has disulﬁde bridges in the hinge region, these can be reduced by TCEP or 2-MEA to reactive
thiol groups and make the immobilisation very speciﬁc. However, this reaction disrupts the
conformation of the antibody and divides it into two. The antibody is attached "side-on" on the
surface and can actually directly interact with a gold electrode. The coupling can also be made
by the glycan moiety on the Fc region through periodate oxidation [31].
• Aﬃnity is considered as an alternative and favourable immobilisation technique to promote a
speciﬁc orientation of the antibody. Some of the methods are using short nucleotide sequences
or Fc-binding aptamers and peptides for the attachment. Another strategy is to use proteins
(protein A and G) which can bind speciﬁcally to the Fc region of the antibody and thereby
achieve a speciﬁc orientation. Even though this method can create the desired orientation, there
are some issues using it as well. First of all, the method is reversible and it has been reported
that the protein can bind to Fab region in some cases and second, it has also been proved that
the proteins are not applicable to all antibodies. Another aﬃnity method is using the interaction
between biotin and avidin/streptavidin. Here the antibody is conjugated with biotin that can
bind to avidin/streptavidin, which is connected to the electrode and thereby form a speciﬁc
orientation [22, 31].
In this project, it is not feasible to test diﬀerent immobilization methods to determine which one is
the best, since the goal is to make a robust model that can be used as proof of concept. The only
Page 14 of 151
==PAGE:20==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
methods that can meet the criteria at this point are covalent coupling by the EDC/NHS reaction or
aﬃnity with protein A/G, since the available Anti-Alternariol antibody is not fused with biotin. The
covalent coupling by the EDC/NHS could form the wrong orientation as there are many amino groups
on the antibody other than those on the Fc end, whereas aﬃnity coupling with protein A/G could
be preferable since it speciﬁcally binds to the Fc region of the antibody. Using ELISA the antibody
is attached randomly to the well by absorption or physisorption. This is also the case when using
protein G to improve the orientation of the antibody, since the protein can attach randomly to the
well likewise by absorption. To immobilise the antibody on a gold electrode the two methods covalent
coupling and aﬃnity should be combined. Protein G can be attached to the gold electrode by a linker
like 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) or 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) which facilitate the link
between the gold electrode and protein G that is bound to the antibody (see Figure 5). Since the
linker molecules (MUA and MPA) have a thiol group (-SH), they can bind to the gold electrode.
Additionally, both molecules (MUA and MPA) have a carboxylic acid group at the opposite end that
can bind to protein G through the protein’s amine groups via an EDC/NHS reaction. Thereby, both
the aﬃnity method with protein G and covalent coupling by the EDC/NHS are used in the biosensor
design for this project.
Of utmost importance for the sensitivity of the biosensor is the distance
between the antibodies to allow for binding site availability. If protein G is not a part of the setup,
this can be solved by adding molecules, like 6-mercapto-1-hexanol (MH) with a hydroxyl group (-OH)
at the end, to the mixture along with the MUA molecules to allow for spacing between the MUA
molecules, so that the antibodies are more spread out and there is room for the tracer and analyte.
When using protein G, the proteins form a layer where the antibodies can attach. The layer of protein
G prevents dense packaging and ensures that the antibodies are still spread out. Therefore, when
using protein G only one type of linker like MPA should be used. MPA is shorter than MUH, which
ensures that the enzyme reaction is closer to the electrode surface.
Figure 5
Theoretical biosensor design. A. MPA is attached to the gold electrode and can through the EDC/NHS
reaction connect to protein G via the carboxyl acid group on MPA and the amine group on protein G. B. The biosensor
design, with the dense protein G layer linked by MPA, where there is space for the antibodies and analyte/tracer. The
overall construction of the biosensor with the immobilisation, orientation and competitive assay. Theoretical picture
made with Biorender.com.
Page 15 of 151
==PAGE:21==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
2.3.2
Tracer Choice
The labelled analyte used in the competitive analytical design is also called a tracer and is deﬁned
as the analyte of interest conjugated with a label, such as an enzyme. In this project, the tracer is
the analyte AOH conjugated with the enzyme Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), since the enzyme has
a fast catalytic rate, is very stable, cheap and is acknowledged as an industrial enzyme with great
potential [32, 33]. The analyte and the enzyme have to be conjugated by a chemical reaction, but what
is important is the location of the enzyme on the analyte. The enzyme should be placed such, that the
binding site towards the antibody is not blocked. Thereby, the ideal location of the enzyme should be
at the same place as where the carrier protein was connected during the antibody production, as the
same part of the analyte would then be exposed. Occasionally, the tracer can be bought commercially,
which is easier than doing the conjugation yourself, but there can still be complications. One problem
can occur if the antibody and the tracer are produced/bought from diﬀerent ﬁrms, since the binding
site then can vary or mismatch and thereby disrupt the analysis.
Two monoclonal Anti-Alternariol antibodies have been found but from two diﬀerent ﬁrms Creative
Diagnostics and Abvigen Inc. However, at the ﬁrm Abvigen Inc, a possible tracer, AOH-HRP, can be
bought, where the ﬁrm proposes a match between the Anti-Alternariol antibody ABN3459 and the
tracer AOH-HRP ABGH3459 [34]. It is reported by the ﬁrm that the antibody has a cross reaction
with AME at 5 ppb determined by ELISA, but that the antibody have not been tested against ALT
or AS. The Anti-Alternariol antibody ABN3459 from Abvigen Inc is therefore chosen for the biosensor
design.
The HRP Enzyme
HRP is ubiquitous in nature and has been found in animals, fungi, bacteria and plants. However,
the most used enzyme is known to be isolated from horseradish roots with a molecular weight of
approximately 44 kDa. It has at least seven isozymes depending on the isoelectric point and is deﬁned
as a glycoprotein as 18% of its structure contains carbohydrates. HRP is reported to be most stable
in the pH range of 5.0 to 9.0, with a pH optimum between 6.0 to 6.5. HRP is in the enzyme group
peroxidases which are classiﬁed as hydrogen peroxide degrading enzymes that in parallel oxidise a
wide range of both phenolic and non-phenolic substrates (R-H). The reaction of the enzyme is shown
in the Equation 2 [33, 35].
2R −H + H2O2 →2R◦+ 2H2O
(2)
HRP is widely used as a label in various applications, including ELISA, since it is small, stable and
has a low non-speciﬁc binding due to its glycosylation. However, the enzyme can also be inhibited
by various compounds: p–aminobenzoic acid, cyanide, sodium azide, dichromate, vanadate, hydroxy-
lamine, L–cystine, ethylenethiourea, sulﬁde, and the minerals/heavy metals Ni+2, Cd+2, Cu+2, Co+2,
Fe+3, Pb+2 and Mn+2 [35, 36].
HRP can be used as the label in both ELISA and the electrochemical detection and even use the same
substrate. In literature, the exact composition of the substrate solution may slightly vary but one
example, which is used in this project, is composed of 3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) combined
Page 16 of 151
==PAGE:22==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in citrate buﬀer (pH 5.6). When using this solution in electrochemical
applications a counter electrolyte solution has to be added such as 0.1 M KCl. The detection is based
on the redox reaction, and at the beginning the TMB is in a reduced form and colourless, where
the hydrogen peroxide is in an oxidized form. When the substrate solution (TMB, H2O2 and citrate
buﬀer) is mixed with the enzyme, the enzyme converts the hydrogen peroxide to water (see Equation
2), thereby reducing it, and at the same time, the TMB is oxidised and turning blue. Since the product
TMBox turns blue it can be determined by spectrophotometric detection, but due to it being oxidised,
it is also electrochemically detectable, as the TMB can be reduced at the working electrode [37].
2.3.3
Electrochemical Detection and Diﬀerent Detection Techniques
An electrochemical biosensor is basically a chemical sensor, where the recognition utilises a biochem-
ical mechanism on an electrochemical transducer. It is comprised of two components; a recognition
element i.e a biological receptor and a transduction element i.e a physico-chemical transducer also
called a detector, a sensor or an electrode. The recognition system converts the biochemical signal
from the receptor domain into an electronic signal, which is transferred to the electrical domain by the
transducer. The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has deﬁned a biosensor
as a self-contained integrated receptor-transducer device composed of a biological recognition element
i.e bioreceptor in direct spatial contact with a transduction element, which is providing quantita-
tive and semi-quantitative analytical information [22, 38]. The electrochemical signal transduction is
dependent on the transduction element and the transduction mechanism.
The Basics of the Electrochemical Techniques
In general, the study and application of chemical reactions takes place at the interface between an
electron conductor (electrode) and an ionic conductor (electrolyte solution). The reactions are pre-
dominantly driven by an applied potential and generate a current response. The principle is to measure
the transfer of electrons, which is equal to the generated current and the ﬂow of charge per time unit.
The current is a result of the electrochemical oxidation (donating electrons) or reduction (accepting
electrons) of electroactive species.
In a biosensor setup, there are three electrodes: a working electrode (WE), a reference electrode (RE)
and a counter electrode (CE), which are connected to an electrochemical instrument called a poten-
tiostat and are enclosed by an electrolyte solution, often a salt buﬀer. WE represents the construction
of the biosensor, where the biorecognition element is immobilised and the analyte concentration is de-
tected either directly or indirectly at a given potential. On the WE the chemical species can undergo
either an oxidation or a reduction reaction. The more negative the electrode potential is, the higher
is the electron energy of the electrode, which increases the driving force for reduction of a species.
The opposite applies to more positive potential, leading to oxidation. The CE, also called an auxil-
iary electrode, functions as the opposite of the WE and has complementary electrochemical reactions.
Thereby, if a species is oxidized at the WE any arbitrary ions or molecules are reduced on the CE.
The CE is made signiﬁcantly larger (around 10 times) than the WE to maximise the surface area for
the reaction and thereby avoid the CE becoming the bottle neck in the circuit. The potential drives
the oxidation/reduction, and the potential of the CE has to be lower than the WE when oxidation
Page 17 of 151
==PAGE:23==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
takes place at the WE and higher when reduction takes place on the WE. Both the WE and the CE
have to be made of inert material, to ensure that the material does not interfere and participate in
the electrochemical reaction. The WE can be made of diﬀerent materials either metals like Au or
Pt, carbon or graphene, or carbon-like-graphite or conducting polymers. However, the metal-like-Au
and carbon are most commonly used and especially metal is applied when the biosensor is used more
than once. The RE has its own well-deﬁned potential and should be kept very constant to maintain
biosensor functionality. The RE adjusts the potential of the WE and the potential of the WE is always
measured in respect to the RE. The RE uses the universal scale made from the standard hydrogen
electrode (SHE), which is used to calculate the potential and represents the standard electrode poten-
tial and the value of 0 V. The potentiostat allows adjustment of the potential at the WE and records
the electrons accepted or donated by the WE and measures the current. The CE balances the circuit,
where the electrolyte solution creates a ﬂow of ions and closes the electric circuit. All these parts are
packed together in the same unit and are usually of small sizes [22, 38].
The mass transfer of the species is very important for the measurement, since it can inﬂuence the
distribution towards the electrodes. The mass transfer is deﬁned by the Nernst-Planck equation, see
Equation 3, where the ﬁrst term is diﬀusion, second term is migration and third term is convection
[22].
Ji(x) = −Di
∂Ci(x)
∂x
−ziF
RT DiCi
∂φ(x)
∂x
+ Civ(x)
(3)
Diﬀusion is movement of species inﬂuenced by a gradient of a chemical potential. Migration is the
movement of charged species inﬂuenced by a gradient of an electrical potential. Convection is either
occurring naturally due to a density gradient, which can be caused by a concentration gradient or
temperature gradient, or by force due to a pressure gradient.
In a biosensor, the transfer modes
migration and convection should be eliminated or minimized or be used as a beneﬁt for the biosensor.
Where migration should be minimized as much as possible, convection can be controlled and thereby
be an advantage. Controlled convection is used in Flow-injection analysis (FIA) or in Lab-on-a-chip
(LOC) devices [22].
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
The principle behind Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy is to measure the impedance in a
given system, and thereby record the change in, for instance, the charge transfer resistance when a
new element is binding to the surface of an electrode. In this technique, a redox reaction is connected
to the working electrode and the presence of other elements is determined by the hindering of the
reaction and thereby increasing the charge transfer resistance to the redox reaction at the electrode
surface. In general, the electrode is a part of a circuit and the output is represented by a Nyquist plot
[39] (see Figure 6), where the semicircle represents the charge transfer resistance (Rct), that changes
in diameter in relation to the resistance detected in the system.
Page 18 of 151
==PAGE:24==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Figure 6
Impedance technique in theory. Showing a potential circuit model and output (the Nyquist plot), where
a possible redox reaction could be with the compound ferricyanide or hexacyanoferrate II/III. Figure information: Rs =
Resistance, Rct = Charge transfer resistance, ZW = Warburg impedance and mass transfer due to diﬀusion of reactants
and Cdl = Capacitance. Picture made with BioRender.com.
Impedance Spectroscopy can be used when modifying the biosensor setup, as each part has to be
established one part at a time. Using impedance measurements on the electrode, each attachment can
be attempted to be detected and validated before attaching the next element, which can contribute
to ensure that the biosensor setup is modiﬁed in the right way and order. For each attachment step,
the resistance of the system should theoretically increase, meaning that the diameter of the semicircle
increases. However, this is only valid if the immobilized molecule has negative charge or causes a
signiﬁcant steric hindrance for access of the redox species to the electrode surface. It has to be said
that outputs can diﬀer from the theory, as each biological element can aﬀect the resistance diﬀerently,
as it is not only the size of the element that counts, but also the presence of negatively and positively
charged groups.
Amperometry
In amperometry, the applied DC potential is kept constant while the current is measured as a function
of time with diﬀusion as the mass transfer mode. When a potential is poised at the WE, an initial
current peak appears charging the double layer capacitor. After the charging a decay of the capacitive
current takes place. The exponential decay of the capacitive current is fast and the current approaches
0 after a certain amount of time (see Figure 7). The residual remaining current that forms the so called
baseline is represented by ionic current, i.e. movement of ions in the electrolyte. The Faradaic current,
that represents the ﬂow of electrons or in other words is the current caused by the electrochemical
oxidation/reduction reaction of the molecules, is the measurement of interest, where the unwanted
side eﬀect is the capacitive current that is caused by ions accumulating close to the electrode. To
get a quantitative detection, the Faraday current is customarily determined after 5 time constants
has passed. This is done to ensure that the capacitive current does not inﬂuence the measurements
[22, 40] (see Figure 7). When the concentration of the electroactive species is increased the current
is also increased and vice versa (see Figure 7). The behaviour shown on Figure 7 is only when the
electroactive species is already present when the potential is applied.
Page 19 of 151
==PAGE:25==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Figure 7
Amperometry output for an oxidation. Output when using the Amperometry method showed both
for the capacitive current (red), the Faraday current (blue) and for increasing concentration of electroactive species.
For an output of reduction the curve is simply reversed and have a negative current. Theoretical picture made with
Biorender.com.
If the substrate are being pipetted in and the electroactive product is formed, i.e. there is no elec-
troactive species present prior to that, a ‘peak’ is obtained due to the transient appearance of the
electroactive species.
Meaning that there is no oxidation or reduction ongoing prior to that and
thereby no Faradaic current.
Voltammetry
In voltammetry as opposed to amperometry, the potential is changed continuously during the mea-
surement. The goal is still to measure the current caused by the electrochemical redox reaction of
the molecules. There are diﬀerent types of voltammetry: linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), cyclic
voltammetry (CV) and pulse voltammetry (PV). In LSV, the potential goes from low to high or vice
versa and forms a straight line, but as time passes it results in an i-E curve. When the potential
increases the current also increases, but only to a certain value, where the current decreases due to
mass transfer limitation (diﬀusion limitation) [22, 40, 41] (see Figure 8A and 8B). CV is very similar
to LSV, but is dependent on a switching potential. The forward sweep is identical to LSV, but at
a certain point the current is reversed and is swept back to the starting point, creating a “duck”-
shaped voltammogram (see Figure 8C). In CV, the performance diﬀers depending on the dimensions
of the electrode. When the electrode is smaller, there is the advantage that there is no mass transfer
limitation, the capacitive current is almost eliminated and small volumes can be used for the measure-
ment. In PV, one technique uses the principle where the potential is increased for each pulse (short
potential steps) and where the current is measured at a predetermined point during a pulse. The
method can create conditions where the capacitive current has a minimal eﬀect and where diﬀerent
oxidised molecules can be separated in the output. There are diﬀerent pulse voltammetry techniques
including normal pulse voltammetry (NPV), diﬀerential pulse voltammetry (DPV) and square wave
voltammetry (SWV). Each have their diﬀerences, advantages and disadvantages. NPV has a linear
baseline, where the potential is increased for each pulse and the current is measured at the end of
each pulse. DPV has a linear sweep, a constant pulse and the current is measured twice during each
Page 20 of 151
==PAGE:26==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
pulse period and this is plotted in peaks. SWV is very similar to DPV but has a reversed pulse. All
the techniques, principles and outcomes can be seen in Appendix A.4 Pulse Voltammetry Methods -
NPV, DPV and SWV, Figure 43 [22, 40, 41].
Figure 8
Voltammetry output. A. Shows the output for Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) in the beginning, where
the potential is increasing. B. Shows the i-E curve for Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), where both the capacitive
current and the Faraday current are marked together with the mass transfer limitation. C. Shows the output for Cyclic
voltammetry (CV), with ﬁrst the reduction and after the oxidation. Theoretical picture made with Biorender.com.
Which Detection Technique for What
In general, amperometry, linear sweep voltammetry and cyclic voltammetry are good methods when
working with proof of concept projects as they have high eﬃciency and are simple to use. They can
all be measured in stagnant solutions, but the outcome is analysed diﬀerently. To create a better
laboratory model or a biosensor that could be used in the industry, the methods Pulse voltammetry
(Normal, Diﬃcult, or Square) in stagnant solutions or Amperometry in a Flow-injection analysis (FIA)
would be preferable. In this project, impedance spectroscopy is used to characterise the biosensor
modiﬁcation together with cyclic voltammetry, since the techniques can test-control the electrode
cleaning process, the modiﬁcation and are able to justify whether the biosensor is constructed properly.
Amperometry is chosen to prove the concept, since the method can show how the biosensor performs
and functions when detecting the formed product with and without analyte present in a batch system.
If optimized, any pulse voltammetry method and amperometry could be used for the industrial design,
but for it to be feasible, the system has to be in a ﬂow system, so that the peak detection can occur
without stopping the enzyme reaction, as it will destroy the biointerface.
2.3.4
Regeneration of the Biosensor with Protein G
When designing a biosensor it could be of future interest to be able to reuse the sensor multiple
times. This method is called regeneration and is in principle a dissociation method, where the antigen
(analyte and tracer) are removed from the antibody, so that the antibody once again is ready to
detect a new sample. For the regeneration diﬀerent strategies can be used either highly basic (pH
9.5-11) or highly acidic (pH 1.8-3.8) buﬀers, or buﬀers mixed with an organic solvent or enzymes like
pepsin. It has been reported that solutions like 0.1 M glycine/HCl, 0.04 M NaOH or 0.1 M NaOH were
suitable buﬀers for an eﬀective regeneration. A speciﬁc example is a 1% DMSO glycine/HCl buﬀer
Page 21 of 151
==PAGE:27==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
(pH 2.3) which was reported to have 97% dissociation eﬀect and retained the binding aﬃnity of the
antibody for 14 assays [42, 43]. Adding glycine to the acidic buﬀer solutions helps the separation and
also minimizes the damage to the biorecognition element. This is due to glycine being a zwitterion in
solution with both negative- and positive charged regions, therefore it can reduce the thermodynamic
favourability of the binding in the bound state of the analyte and biorecognition element, and thereby
help breaking the bond between them. Even though the glycine separates the biological elements in
the biosensor, it can also protect them from the harsh acidic environment caused by the regeneration,
since it can bind to their surface and stabilize them [44].
The regeneration is diﬀerent when using protein G, since the dissociation is not only happening on the
antigen-antibody complex, but also can happen between the protein G and the antibody, since protein
G temporarily can lose its binding aﬃnity towards the antibody in harsh environmental conditions,
like low pH [45, 46]. It has been reported that incomplete regeneration can occur with protein G,
since the binding between the Ig antibodies and the protein G are very strong and not all of the
bound antibodies are removed in the regeneration [47, 48]. It has been reported that the impedance
baselines are not identical after removal of the antibodies [46], which could be due to this incomplete
dissociation between the protein and the antibody, but it could also be due to protein-parts from
denatured antibodies or protein G. To ﬁnd the correct reason, the surface on the electrode should
be investigated both to see if any antibodies are still bound to the protein G and to see if other
biological elements are stuck on the electrode. This could be done by either looking at the surface
of the electrode to identify the biological elements, or by deﬁning which bonds there are between the
elements. Protein G is a cell wall protein in the Streptococcus bacteria and have a wide reactivity
proﬁle since it can bind to a range of antibodies except for Ig class IgM. Protein G is speciﬁc for
antibodies in the IgG group with high binding aﬃnity for human IgG, rat IgG2a and mouse IgG2a
[48]. One goal with protein G could therefore be to create a universal electrode, since it is possible
to regenerate the electrode with only protein G attached. Since protein G can bind to many diﬀerent
antibodies, it is therefore possible to only use one electrode to detect many diﬀerent compounds.
Protein G is then not only used to optimise the orientation, but can also be the universal layer on
the electrode when talking about reused biosensors. Another goal could be to use the strong aﬃnity
binding between the antibody and protein G to make an reusable electrode, where the antibody stays
on and only the bond between the analyte and tracer is regenerated. Such a design could be well
optimised and be very speciﬁc towards one analyte which could make the detection even better.
2.4
Product Sample - Tomato Product
To ensure that the detection is as sensitive and accurate as possible, it is important to know what
the sample contains other than the analyte of interest, to ensure that any noise in the output, or
compounds that may impair the performance of the biosensor, can be removed. It is also essential to
know if the analyte of interest sits in a matrix with other compounds or is freely suspended in the
sample, since this can aﬀect the detection.
Page 22 of 151
==PAGE:28==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Moreover, the pH of the sample is an important factor to consider for the biological elements in the
biosensor and the concentration of the sample has to be in the range of detection. All of this can
determine if the detection needs a pre-step, like a pre-treatment or a pre-concentration regulation or
a pre-pH regulation.
2.4.1
Sample Content
The sample content is important to know as detailed as possible to determine which compounds that
could be a problem to the biosensor. Since the samples in this project are tomato and tomato products,
the contents are found for a raw tomato and for ﬁve diﬀerent products: peeled canned tomatoes, tomato
purée, tomato juice, tomato ketchup, and tomato soup (ready to eat/canned condensed), where the
compounds and their amounts are shown in Appendix A.5 Contents of Tomato and Diﬀerent Tomato
Products, Table 29, data from the databases Frida (DTU fooddatabase) [49] and MYFOODDATA
(Online database) [50]. In general, the contents are divided in vitamins, minerals including heavy
metals, carbohydrates, fats, amines, amino acids and organic acids, but not all of the compounds or
compound groups aﬀect the biosensor.
• One vitamin to be aware of is vitamin C/ascorbic acid since it can interfere and aﬀect the
biosensor negatively when working with enzymes. However, even though tomatoes have a content
of 13.7-15 mg vitamin C, this can be solved by detecting at a low positive potential or slightly
negative potential.
• Minerals including heavy metals can aﬀect the biological elements i.e. the antibody and the
enzyme, since they can bind to any available protein. They can thereby bind to the binding sites
of the antibodies and the active site on the enzymes which either can inhibit or block the process.
Especially, when tomatoes contain 6 out of 7 minerals/heavy metals reported to be inhibitory
for the HRP enzyme. The compound lycopene is put under this group even if it is categorised as
a carotenoid and is a natural pigment found in tomatoes. It can vary a lot in amount depending
on the product, since the concentration during the food process either decreases or increases
depending on the temperature used. Lycopene is reported to range from 2.5 to 200 mg per 100
g in raw tomato [50, 51]. Lycopene does not inﬂuence the biosensor or the biorecognition, since
it is not electrochemically active. However, it could have an eﬀect on the transducer by reducing
its reproducibility.
• Carbohydrates and fats can be a problem for the biosensor, since they can adhere to the
electrode surface and change the behaviour of the electrode. This is only a problem when the
electrode is reused, not if the electrode is disposable, i.e. for one-time-use.
• Amino acids are not considered to be a signiﬁcant problem, only cysteine can aﬀect the biosen-
sor negatively if gold is used as the electrode material. Cysteine can self-attach to the electrode
due to its thiol group (-SH) and maybe block the passageway for the electrochemical compound
towards the electrode. Some amino acids may be electroactive but as in the case for vitamin
C/ascorbic acid, they do not interfere when applying a slightly negative potential.
Page 23 of 151
==PAGE:29==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
When compounds in the sample have a negative eﬀect on the biological elements in the biosensor,
it also aﬀects the IC50 and the limit of detection (LOD) of the biosensor, which thereby aﬀects the
sensitivity and accuracy of the measurement.
2.4.2
Matrix, Handling and Preparation
In general, one of the biggest issues in food analysis are the eﬀects caused by the matrix interference.
The food matrix is often very complex and system speciﬁc, as every single biological matrix creates
diﬀerent challenges for each type of analytical approach. The matrix varies for each sample type and
it therefore demands diﬀerent preparation and management methodologies. The components present
in the matrix can aﬀect the result of the analysis, since they can inﬂuence the sensitivity, accuracy
and even the reproducibility, thereby, aﬀecting the response of the analysis, leading to inaccurate
quantiﬁcation and creating false positive and false negative results [52, 53].
To reduce the matrix eﬀect several preparation methods can be used like dilution or removal of the
interferences, where the unit operations centrifugation, ﬁltration and precipitation can clean-up the
sample. Using dilution as the preparation is by far the most common procedure, as it is the simplest
method that can easily be automated and integrated systematically. However, when using dilution as
the preparation strategy, the assay has to be highly sensitive, since the procedure as well as reducing
the interferences also reduces the concentration of the analyte of interest [53]. When deciding which
preparation method to use, it is important to know where the analyte is in the sample, and if it is
bound to other components. Since the current detection method for AOH is to extract the analyte
and measure the concentration by HPLC using methanol as the organic solvent [8, 54], alternariol
does not appear to be trapped in a matrix, but probably is dissolved freely in the sample. However,
it is a possibility that methanol acts as a solvent on the matrix particles and releases AOH to the
surrounding medium and isolates it. When using an HPLC, the sample has to be very clean to get
reliable results and this procedure could beneﬁt the detection in the biosensor as well. A pre-cleaning
in the preparation could make the biosensor more sensitive and more accurate, since most of the
matrix interferences are removed before the measurement on the electrode. Although the extraction
by an organic solvent is common and eﬀective, it is also highly toxic. The future goal is therefore to
try to avoid using solvents or ﬁnd another method which is more environmentally friendly.
The sample matrix and thereby the sample preparation varies from product to product mostly due to
the viscosity and particles, but the main goal is in any case to extract or isolate the analyte from the
rest of the sample matrix, lower the viscosity, and be able to measure the correct analyte concentration.
Therefore, preparing the product sample before injection by for example diluting it or centrifuging it
could be necessary, since the tomato product most likely contains many diﬀerent compounds and has a
thick consistency. This is done to ensure sensor-solution-contact, but one has to keep in mind that the
measurement has to be in the analytical range of the biosensor. One way of preparing the sample for
an antibody analytical method from tomato juice, tomato paste, tomato ketchup and whole tomatoes
are described below. The more simple the preparation is, the better for the industry, but it has to be
stated that these methods are not said to be the optimal choice of sample handling for an industrial
scale, as these methods are from scientiﬁc papers.
Page 24 of 151
==PAGE:30==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
• Tomato juice is deﬁned as a liquid with low viscosity. Therefore, the sample preparation is
very simple and only needs a dilution with PBS (Phosphate buﬀered saline) before analysis [3].
Another way of preparing a liquid product like orange juice, is to ﬁrst centrifuge (13000 rpm, 5
min) the sample, adjust the pH of the supernatant to around 7 and dilute 1:1 with PBS solution
before analysis [55].
• Tomato sauce, with the same viscosity as applesauce, needs more preparation. First it is mixed
by magnetic stirring with PBS for several minutes. Afterwards an aliquot is centrifuged and the
supernatant is analysed, either directly or in a diluted form [3].
• Tomato paste and tomato ketchup have high viscosity and have the same preparation as the
tomato sauce except for one step i.e ﬁltration of the supernatant after a centrifugation. A portion
of the product is mixed with either methanol or PBS, whereafter it is pH adjusted and is set for
magnetic stirring. After that the mixture is centrifuged and the supernatant is either ﬁltered
(tomato paste) or not (tomato ketchup) whereafter the portion is mixed with distilled water
and extracted with ethyl acetate. The organic solvent portion is put under heat to evaporate
the solvent and subsequently the residue is dissolved with PBS. The solution is analysed either
directly or in a diluted form [3].
• Whole tomatoes are cut into small pieces and homogenised. The preparation is the same as
for the tomato paste, except for the centrifugation before the ﬁltration. The sample is analysed
either directly or in a diluted form [3].
The pH of the sample could have an inﬂuence on the elements in the biosensor and should therefore
be adjusted before entering. Since the pH of tomatoes lies between 4 to 5 [56], the product samples
are probably too acidic for the biological elements, since the pH optimum for the HRP enzyme and
for the antibody-antigen complex is between 6.0 to 6.5 and between 6.5 to 8.4 respectively. A test
with diﬀerent pH buﬀer solutions would be preferred. If the sample is too acidic, the binding strength
between the antibody and antigen could be weakened, which can be exploited for biosensor regeneration
using highly acidic environments of around pH 2 [22].
When using the method ELISA, the 96-well plate is rinsed and the rest of the dirt and other harmful
compounds are removed before adding the enzyme, but when using a ﬂow based system the biosensor
cannot be rinsed in the same way. One way to clean the sample and maybe minimize the manual
preparation is to use a supported liquid membrane (SLM). The SLM roughly separates the "dirt"
from the analyte of interest, because the analyte AOH can diﬀuse through the membrane where other
compounds cannot. The pKa is important for the application of a SLM, and requires that the analyte
of interest is in its neutral state (uncharged) [57]. AOH should be neutral (uncharged) at a pH below
7 [58] and to have the pH limit at 7 is perfect in this biosensor setup, since the enzyme HRP and
the antibody-antigen complex have optimum under 7, which enables the use of SLM for pre-cleaning.
However, some of the compounds i.e small compounds can go through the membrane as well like the
similar toxins to AOH and can aﬀect the biosensor negatively. For an industrial biosensor, a minimum
degree of cleanness of the sample should be tested experimentally, so that the measurements are as
easy as possible.
Page 25 of 151
==PAGE:31==
THEORY AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
2.5
Alternariol Concentration in Diﬀerent Tomato Products
When testing the biosensor design both in ELISA and on the electrode, it is important not only
to know the maximum allowable concentration level from the European Commission, but also what
values to expect to ﬁnd if testing commercial products. From the EFSA Journal 2011 [1], diﬀerent
tomato products like tomato juice, tomato purée and tomato ketchup were tested for AOH in various
samples, which gives an interval of the AOH concentrations in each product.
The data for these
tomato products is shown in Table 2, were the full data for all food groups can be seen in Appendix
A.1 Various Food Groups - Contaminated with AOH, Figure 40.
Table 2
Tomato products and their AOH concentration. AOH concentrations in the tomato products: tomato
juice, tomato purée and tomato ketchup. ULD: under limit detection, LB: Lower bound and UB: Upper bound. Infor-
mation from ESFA Journal 2011 [1].
Tomato product
Sample number
Samples ULD
Mean LB [µg/kg]
Mean UB [µg/kg]
Tomato juice
25
22
1.1
2.1
Tomato purée
56
33
3.6
6.5
Tomato ketchup
32
13
1.5
2.8
It can be seen that a lot of the product samples have AOH concentrations under the detection limit
used. However, those samples that gave a positive result have an AOH concentration from 1.1 to 6.5
µg/kg, where tomato purée has the highest AOH concentration compared to the tomato juice and
tomato ketchup. The fact that tomato purée has the highest concentration is expected since it is a
more concentrated tomato product. It can be noted that none of the values are over 10 µg/kg, and
is thereby under the maximum allowed level of AOH as deﬁned by the European Commission. When
testing diﬀerent tomato products these values can be used as a reference.
Page 26 of 151
==PAGE:32==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.1
The General Approach
In general, this project proceeds as ELISA experiments that forms the basic conditions for the exper-
iments with the electrochemical detection on an electrode. Performing the ELISA experiments ﬁrst,
many conditions can be determined like the optimal concentrations of the antibody and tracer, how the
matrix of the sample can inﬂuence the detection range e.g. IC50 and the LOD, and how a regeneration
works and where the solution cleaves. ELISA can provide the basic knowledge and understanding of
the biosensor setup before introducing the electrode and the world of electrochemical detection.
The chosen Anti-Alternariol antibody and tracer are new on the market and has not yet been re-
ported in any literature. Additionally, they are, together with the analyte alternariol, quite expensive.
Therefore, a good strategy is to ﬁrst build up the experiments and protocols with other biological
elements that are well established. This is also done to learn the methods and the theory, but it was
also done to form good experimental protocols before experimenting with the elements for alternariol.
The optimal strategy would be to ﬁnd an analyte very similar to alternariol, as the chance of them
preforming almost identically in the experiments are quite high. One analyte, with associated anti-
body and tracer, was already purchased in the department and is structurally similar to alternariol,
namely cortisol. Cortisol is deﬁned as a stress hormone and is secreted in urine, sweat and saliva by
humans and animals. Alternariol and cortisol have more in common than their similar structures,
since they can bind to receptors in the same category, namely steroid receptors [59]. Alternariol can
mimic the compound estradiol and can therefore bind to the estrogen receptor [1, 16], where cortisol
can bind to the glucocorticoid receptor [60] (see the compound structures for alternariol, estradiol
and cortisol in Figure 9). Cortisol is a ﬁne choice, since the analyte with related antibody and tracer
are well known, well optimized and have been reported in many scientiﬁc papers even in relation to
lab-on-a-chip experiments [61]. Therefore, the experiments with cortisol should give promising results.
Figure 9
The structures of alternariol, estradiol and cortisol. Shows the structural similarity between alternariol
(AOH), estradiol (E2) and cortisol (CS). It can be seen that the three compounds have the same core structure. Pictures
from Escrivá et al.[4] and online sources.
Page 27 of 151
==PAGE:33==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The project starts with experiments with cortisol to get an understanding of how the protocol and
experiments works, and how to design the experiments in the best way possible, to ensure that when
the protocols have to be transferred to AOH, the experiments have the highest chance of success. When
it comes to the biosensor, the setup is the same for both analytes, since the detection is measured for
the end-product of the HRP enzyme reaction and is not deﬁned by a speciﬁc antibody or analyte.
3.2
Experimental Equipment and Materials
3.2.1
Materials
ELISA
A 96-well Maxisorp plate from Thermo Scientiﬁc was used to perform the ELISA tests. SealPlate
ﬁlm from Excel Scientiﬁc delivered by Sigma-Aldrich was used to cover the plate while incubating.
Tomato juice (Batch no. H3451:661425 used for cortisol experiment and Batch no. H4021:661425
used for alternariol experiments) bought at the supermarket from Rynkeby was used to perform the
matrix test. Two diﬀerent tomato juices had to be used, since the expiration date of the ﬁrst juice
passed between the experiments.
Electrochemical Detection
The AQ electrodes were made in the clean room at DTU Nanolab. A poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA) holder with a printed circuit board (PCB) of copper with pogo pins made at the department
was used to hold the electrodes and connect the potentiostat.
3.2.2
Biological Elements and Chemicals
Anti-Cortisol monoclonal antibody (10-C30D, IgG2a), stock 1.2 mg/mL obtained from Fitzgerald
stored in aliquots at -20°C. Tracer (65-IC08, C-HRP), stock 1 mg/mL with Horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) obtained from Fitzgerald stored at 4°C. Cortisol, stock 10 mM in DMSO, obtained from Sigma-
Aldrich stored at 4°C. Anti-Alternariol monoclonal antibody (Anti-AOH AB, clone: BE329), stock 4.5
mg/mL, obtained from Abvigen Inc stored in aliquots at -20°C. Tracer (AOH-HRP) with Horseradish
peroxidase (HRP), stock 1.2 mg/mL, obtained from Abvigen Inc stored at -20°C for long term and 4°C
for short term. Alternariol, stock in DMSO, obtained as powder (5 mg) from Fermentek, Cfm Oskar
Tropitzsch GmbH, main stock 40 nM stored at -20°C and working stock 1 nM stored at 4°C. Protein
G (P4689 stock 1 mg/mL, P19459 stock 2 mg/mL) obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and Thermo Fisher
stored in aliquots at -20°C for long term and at 4°C for short term. It is proven by the department
that the diﬀerent protein G have the same eﬀect. The preparation of the biological elements are shown
in Appendix A.6 Preparation and Storage of Biological Elements, Reagents and Chemicals.
Analyte Solubility - Use of Diﬀerent Organic Compounds
When the analyte arrived, it came in powder form and had to be mixed with a liquid to be used
in the experiments. Often the analytes are soluble in diﬀerent organic compounds like DMSO, pure
ethanol, methanol and dimethylformanide (DMF). However, the solubility also determines the end-
concentration of the mixed solution.
Each organic solvent has its advantages and disadvantages.
DMSO can be used, but it has potential risks, since it is suspected of damaging reproduction and
Page 28 of 151
==PAGE:34==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
organs, and readily penetrate skin and may carry other dissolved chemicals into the body. DMSO is
ﬂammable and it freezes at 4°C, which can be a disadvantage. However, DMSO is least ﬂammable
among the solvents mentioned. Ethanol can also be used, but methanol should be avoided, due
to the high safety risk, as methanol is extremely toxic to humans. Ethanol and methanol have the
disadvantage that they can evaporate, which can change the analyte concentration in the solution.
Both compounds have the advantage that they can be stored at -20°C without freezing, but are both
ﬂammable. DMF can also be used, but like methanol, DMF also has a high risk of potential health
eﬀects like liver injury and cancer [62]. Acetone could also be used, but it has potential risks, since
it is suspected of damaging reproduction and organs.
It is ﬂammable and can form an explosive
atmosphere, since the ﬂash point is below 30°C, but it does not freeze at -20°C.
The organic solvent can inﬂuence the ﬁnal concentration of the analyte solution, for example the
solubility of alternariol is 0.5 mg/mL in ethanol, 5 mg/mL in methanol, 30 mg/mL in DMSO and
in DMF and 5 mg/mL in acetone [63, 64]. Thereby, the ﬁnal concentration for the solution can be
higher when using DMSO or DMF compared to ethanol, methanol and acetone. DMSO was decided
to be the solvent for both cortisol and alternariol. In general, since the analytes is highly insoluble
in aqueous solutions, it is possible that when an aliquot of the stock solution in DMSO is added
into a buﬀer solution, the analytes may partially stick to the surface of the pipette, thereby causing
concentration errors in the prepared solutions. With this knowledge, it has to be mentioned that the
analyte concentrations determined in this project are theoretical, since it was not possible to check
the standard deviation of the concentrations along the x-axis and thereby the real concentrations.
3.2.3
Reagents and Chemicals
PBS (Phosphate Buﬀered Saline, pH 7.4) from Sigma-Aldrich was stored at room temperature. PBST
(Phosphate Buﬀered Saline (pH 7.4) from Sigma-Aldrich and 5% Tween20 from Sigma-Aldrich) mixed
to a concentration of 0.5% stored at room temperature and was primarily used to minimise non-speciﬁc
binding. Coating buﬀer (mix of Na2CO3, NaHCO3 and MilliQwater) 0.25 M pH 9.6, citrate buﬀer
0.04 M pH 5.6, citrate buﬀer 0.04 M with 0.1 KCl from Sigma-Aldrich and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
1%, all stored at 4°C. 3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) from Sigma-Aldrich, stored under vacuum
in the dark at room temperature. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) from Sigma-Aldrich, that was used to
mix the TMB substrate and the two analytes (cortisol and alternariol), was kept at room temperature.
Sulfuric acid (H2SO4) 4N from Sigma-Aldrich was stored at room temperature. Sodium hydroxide
solution (NaOH) 1 M from Sigma-Aldrich was kept at room temperature. Regeneration solution 0.4
M glycine-HCl pH 2.2 was freshly made for the purpose and kept at 4°C for short term storage. Ferri-
Ferrocyanide solution prepared by mixing K3[Fe(CN)6] and K4[Fe(CN)6] in PBS, both from Sigma-
Aldrich, was covered with aluminum foil and stored at room temperature. 3-mercaptopropionic acid
(MPA) from Sigma-Aldrich was stored at room temperature.
MES buﬀer pH 6 (mix of MES (2-
(N-Morpholino) ethanesulfonic acid from Sigma-Aldrich and NaCl from Sigma-Aldrich) was covered
with aluminium foil and stored at 4°C. N-ethyl-N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) and
N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) both from Sigma-Aldrich were stored at -20°C under vacuum.
Page 29 of 151
==PAGE:35==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The preparation of the reagents is shown in Appendix A.6 Preparation and Storage of Biological
Elements, Reagents and Chemicals.
3.2.4
Chemical Risk Assessment and Waste
In this project, the chemical risk assessment is highly important, especially since it involves working
with a mycotoxin in concentrated amounts, that can have serious consequences for one’s future health,
and many other chemicals and materials like silicon that can be dangerous to handle. Therefore, it
was required at all times when working to wear a lab coat, gloves and goggles. To wear a mask was
only necessary when mixing the analyte alternariol due to the risk of inhaling, since it was in powder
form and could not be mixed under a fume hood, as the powder was too close to the bottleneck. If
a fume hood had been used, it could have resulted in product loss and dispersion of the mycotoxin,
that could become dangerous for others. As many of other chemicals used in the project are health
hazards, the handling when using them and the chemical waste disposal were important matters to
ﬁnd information about before starting the experiments.
3.2.5
Instrumentation
ELISA
Plate washer (Wash 12) from CAPP was used for emptying the 96-well plate through suction. Shaker
(OS-10) from Biosan and shaker (PMS-1000i) from Grant-bio were used in the washing procedure.
Microplate reader Spark from TECAN was used to read the absorbance. Centrifuge (rotor FiberLite
ﬁxed angle) from Thermo Scientiﬁc was used to centrifuge the tomato juice. A pH meter (MA 5736)
from Iskra was used to measure the pH of the prepared tomato juice samples. The program GraphPad
Prism Version 9.0.0 was used to generate the graphs for the report and make the analysis to determine
the IC50 and the limit of detection. The analysis of the sigmoidal calibration curves obtained in ELISA
is made by a 4-parameter logistic equation in GraphPad Prism Version 9.0.0.
Electrochemical Detection
Electrochemical measurements were performed using a PalmSens4 potentiostat with associated equip-
ment and controlled in a computer through PSTrace 5.5 for the data collection software. A plasma
surface cleaner from diener was used to clean the electrode surfaces. Microplate reader (EL800) from
BIO-TEK Instruments INC. was used to read the absorbance.
The program Excel were used to
generate the graphs for the report.
3.2.6
Short term- and Long term Storage
ELISA
If the enzyme reaction was not stopped with sulfuric acid, the 96-well plate containing the biological
elements could be kept with PBS buﬀer for long term storage at 4°C.
Electrochemical Detection
When the electrodes were modiﬁed it was important that they were kept moist as much as possible.
When performing experiments with the electrodes, they were kept in the PMMA holder and covered
Page 30 of 151
==PAGE:36==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
with PBS for short-term storage at room temperature and for long-term (overnight) at 4°C. If the
electrodes were kept for later experiments but not used in current experiments, they were stored at
4°C in a plastic petri dish covered with PBS and wrapped in paraﬁlm. In both cases the liquid was
covered so that no evaporation could occur. PBS was generally kept in long-term storage but not
PBST, as the added Tween20 could act as a detergent, get stuck to the chip and interrupt in the next
experiment.
3.3
ELISA experiments - Cortisol and Alternariol
The ELISA experiments were ﬁrst done for cortisol to get an idea of the procedures which could then
be transferred to ELISA experiments with alternariol. The ﬁrst experiments were to ﬁnd the best
antibody-tracer concentrations and to see if protein G had a positive inﬂuence. The next experiment
was made as a competitive ELISA to produce the calibration curve and determine the value of IC50.
Subsequently, the matrix eﬀect was tested with a tomato product to see what preparation that was
needed before injection.
Finally, the regeneration of the biosensor setup was tested to see where
in the setup the regeneration solution was cleaving. The product (TMBox) could be determined by
spectrophotometric detection since it changed colour from colourless to blue, which could be detected
at 630-650 nm, but the enzyme reaction could also be stopped with acid turning the colour from blue
to yellow, which could be detected at 450 nm.
3.3.1
Optimization of Antibody- and Tracer Concentrations
An ELISA was run to see which antibody- and tracer concentrations were optimal to use. A series of
antibody concentrations were used as well as a series of tracer concentrations. This experiment was
done in triplicates and a "blank" solution was included to deﬁne the background.
Protocol
The Maxisorp plate was coated with antibody (10-C30D or Anti-AOH AB). Coating buﬀer and anti-
body were mixed and diluted into diﬀerent concentrations in tubes and 100 µL of each dilution was
transferred to the plate except for the blank, where 100 µL of PBST was added instead. The plate
was covered and kept overnight (17 hours) at 4°C. PBST and tracer (65-IC08 or AOH-HRP) were
mixed and diluted into diﬀerent concentrations in tubes. The plate was washed four times with PBST
by the standard procedure: throw liquid out, wash with 200 µL of PBST, shake for 2 minutes at 180
rpm and remove buﬀer using suction by the CAPP plate washer and tap 3-4 times on paper to dry.
Afterwards, 100 µL of each tracer dilution was transferred to the plate. The plate was covered and
kept at room temperature for 30 minutes. Within the 30 minutes the substrate solution H2O2-TMB
was made by mixing citrate buﬀer (98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%). The substrate solution was
mixed by vortex and kept in the dark until use. The plate was washed four times with PBST by the
standard procedure. Subsequently, 100 µL of the substrate solution was added to each well, covered
and kept under aluminum foil at room temperature for 30 minutes. Lastly, 50 µL of H2SO4 4N was
added to each well to stop the reaction. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm by a TECAN Spark
microplate reader.
Page 31 of 151
==PAGE:37==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.3.2
Orientation Optimization with Protein G
An ELISA was run with protein G to see if the orientation of the antibody could be used to optimise
the antibody- and tracer concentrations. The most promising tracer dilutions from the experiment
described in 3.3.1 Optimization of Antibody- and Tracer Concentrations were used. A broader series
of antibody concentrations were used to get a saturation in both ends of the scale. The protein G
optimization had already been investigated at the department and one concentration (1/160 ∼6.25
µg/mL) were chosen for the experiment. This experiment was done in triplicates and a "blank" solution
was included to deﬁne the background.
Protocol
The Maxisorp plate was coated with protein G (P4689 or P19459). Coating buﬀer and protein G
(1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL) were mixed for the speciﬁc dilution and 100 µL was transferred to the plate.
The plate was covered and kept overnight (17 hours) at 4°C. PBST and antibody (10-C30D or Anti-
AOH AB) were mixed and diluted into diﬀerent concentrations in tubes. The plate is washed four
times with PBST by the standard procedure: throw liquid out, wash with 200 µL of PBST, shake for
2 minutes at 180 rpm and remove buﬀer using suction by the CAPP plate washer and tap 3-4 times
on paper to dry. Afterwards, 100 µL of each antibody dilution was transferred to the plate except
for the blank column, where 100 µL of PBST was added instead. The plate was covered and kept at
room temperature for 30 minutes. PBST and tracer (65-IC08 or AOH-HRP) were mixed and diluted
into diﬀerent concentrations in tubes. The plate was washed four times with PBST by the standard
procedure. Subsequently, 100 µL of each tracer dilution was transferred to the plate. The plate was
covered and kept at room temperature for 30 minutes. Within the 30 minutes the substrate solution
H2O2-TMB was made by mixing citrate buﬀer (98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%). The substrate
solution was mixed by vortex and kept in the dark until use. The plate was washed four times with
PBST by the same procedure. Afterwards, 100 µL of the substrate solution was added to each well,
covered and kept under aluminum foil at room temperature for 30 minutes. Lastly, 50 µL of H2SO4 4N
was added to each well to stop the reaction. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm by a TECAN
Spark microplate reader.
3.3.3
Analyte Calibration Curve
A competitive ELISA was run to get the range of the detection and to get the IC50 and the limit
of detection of the biosensor design. This experiment used the optimal protein G concentration and
the optimal antibody concentration and tracer concentration found at around 0.70 absorbance in the
previous experiment in section 3.3.2 Orientation Optimization with Protein G to ensure that the
values were in the useful absorbance range. This experiment was only made with protein G, since it
was proved that the protein had a signiﬁcant impact on the assay performance. This experiment was
done in triplicates and a "zero" solution and a "blank" solution were added, since the "zero" gives the
maximum signal obtained without analyte and the "blank" deﬁnes the background. If the signal of
the competitive assay did not reach the same absorbance as for the "zero" solution, the concentrations
of the analyte, antibody or tracer could be unbalanced. To bring it into balance, one had to go a step
back and optimise either the antibody concentration or the tracer concentration or change the analyte
Page 32 of 151
==PAGE:38==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
concentration range. It is important that the absorbance values were in the useful absorbance range
with a maximum absorbance of 1, where around 90% of the light is absorbed to get a decent signal
for the IC50.
Protocol
The Maxisorp plate was coated with protein G (P19459). Coating buﬀer and protein G were mixed
for the speciﬁc concentrations and 100 µL is transferred to the plate. The plate was covered and kept
overnight (17 hours) at 4°C. Before passing the 17-hour window, three solutions were prepared: PBST
and antibody (10-C30D or Anti-AOH AB) were mixed to the speciﬁc concentration, PBS and analyte
(cortisol or alternariol) were mixed into a series of concentrations, and PBST and tracer (65-IC08
or AOH-HRP) were mixed to the chosen concentration, all done in tubes and kept at 4°C until use.
The analyte concentrations as well as the tracer concentrations were doubled, since they get diluted
by each other on the plate. When the 17 hours had passed, the plate was washed four times with
PBST by the standard procedure: throw liquid out, wash with 200 µL of PBST, shake for 2 minutes
at 180 rpm and remove buﬀer using suction by the CAPP plate washer and tap 3-4 times on paper
to dry. Afterwards, 100 µL of the antibody concentration was transferred to the plate except for the
blank column, where 100 µL of PBST was added instead. The plate was covered and kept at room
temperature for 30 minutes. The plate was washed four times with PBST by the standard procedure.
Subsequently, 50 µL of the analyte were quickly added to the plate, except for zero and blank, 50 µL
of tracer was quickly added to the plate including "zero" and "blank" and 50 µL of PBST was added
to the "zero" and the "blank". The plate was covered and kept at room temperature for 30 minutes.
Within the 30 minutes the substrate solution H2O2-TMB was made by mixing citrate buﬀer (98%),
H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%). The substrate solution was mixed by vortex and kept in the dark
until use. The plate was washed four times with PBST by the standard procedure. Afterwards, 100
µL of the substrate solution was added to the plate, covered and kept under aluminum foil at room
temperature for 30 minutes. Lastly, 50 µL of H2SO4 4N was added to the plate to stop the reaction.
The absorbance was measured at 450 nm by a TECAN Spark microplate reader.
3.3.4
Matrix Eﬀect of a Tomato Product
An experiment was conducted to test how the matrix of a tomato product could aﬀect the mea-
surement, the IC50 and the limit of detection. First, diﬀerent preparation methods were tested and
evaluated, and then the best candidate was used for a competitive ELISA to form an analyte calibra-
tion curve identical to the one made with buﬀer solution described in section 3.3.3 Analyte Calibration
Curve, where the samples were spiked with analyte. The same conditions for protein G, antibody and
analyte were used, so that the results would be comparable. The test product was tomato juice from
the brand Rynkeby and the experiment was done in triplicates.
Pretest before Experiment
Diﬀerent preparation methods were investigated and compared to raw tomato juice: 1) tomato juice
diluted 1:10 with PBS, 2) tomato juice supernatant after centrifugation (5 min, 13000 rpm), 3) tomato
juice supernatant after centrifugation (5 min, 13000 rpm) and diluted 1:1 with PBS and 4) tomato
juice supernatant after centrifugation (5 min, 13000 rpm) and ﬁltrated (pore size 0.22 µm). The pH of
Page 33 of 151
==PAGE:39==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
each solution was measured, to determine if the solutions had to be adjusted before use. The solution
diluted 1:10 with PBS was chosen, as it is the simplest preparation and as the whole matrix (particles
and liquid) is included (justiﬁcation in the result section). The pH of the sample is important, since
a low pH could aﬀect the aﬃnity of the biological setup. The product sample should therefore have a
pH around 6.5-7.0, as buﬀer solutions have a pH of 7.3. If the product sample was too acidic the pH
was adjusted with 1 M NaOH.
Protocol
This experiment followed the same protocol as for the analyte calibration curve described in section
3.3.3 Analyte Calibration Curve, but instead of using PSB in the analyte concentration series, 1:5
diluted tomato juice was used. The dilution of the tomato was only 1:5, since the tomato juice was
diluted by the tracer on the plate and would therefore become 1:10 times diluted when mixed. When
tracer and analyte were added to the plate, tracer and pure 1:5 diluted tomato juice were added in
the "zero" and "blank" solutions instead of tracer to create the same conditions. It is very important
to vortex the solutions with tomato juice before use to obtain a homogeneous mixture at all times,
since the particles tend to precipitate with time. The pH of the diluted 1:10 with PBS tomato juice
solution was around 6.5 and was therefore not adjusted with NaOH before use.
The Particle Eﬀect
Experiments were performed to test the inﬂuence of the particles on the biosensor setup. The ﬁrst
experiment tested the eﬀect of three diﬀerent preparation methods: diﬀerent dilutions of raw tomato
juice from 1:1 dilution to 1:100 dilution, supernatant from centrifuged tomato juice (undiluted), and
ﬁltrated supernatant from centrifuged tomato juice (undiluted) on the biosensor setup. The same
conditions for centrifugation and ﬁltration were used as described in the subsection Pretest before Ex-
periment. This experiment was done for cortisol, as it was assumed that cortisol and alternariol would
perform similarly. A second experiment exploring the particle eﬀect was performed with alternariol,
as it looked like the particles could have a signiﬁcant importance on the analyte location of alternariol
in the matrix. In both experiments a "zero" solution and a "blank" solution were included as controls,
and the experiments were performed in triplicates.
Protocol for Experiment with Cortisol
The Maxisorp plate was coated with protein G (P19459). Coating buﬀer and protein G were mixed for
the speciﬁc concentrations and 100 µL was transferred to the plate. The plate was covered and kept
overnight (17 hours) at 4°C. Before the 17-hour window had passed, three parts were prepared: the
antibody (10-C30D) solution, the tracer (65-IC08) solutions and the diﬀerent tomato juice solutions.
Three tracer solutions were prepared, since the supernatant from the centrifuged tomato juice, and
ﬁltrated supernatant from the centrifuged tomato juice should remain undiluted when added on the
plate.
Therefore, one tracer was made with PBST, one with supernatant and one with ﬁltrated
supernatant. Only the tracer with PBST was doubled in concentration. For the tomato juice solutions,
raw tomato juice and PBS were mixed into the diﬀerent dilutions all in doubled concentrations, since
the solutions would be diluted on the plate by the tracer. Here it was assumed that the dilutions
under 1:10 had to be pH adjusted before they were mixed with tracer on the plate, since the 1:10
Page 34 of 151
==PAGE:40==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
dilution had a pH of 6.5. The raw tomato juice used for the 1:1 dilution and the 1:2.5 dilution used
for 1:5 dilution were made and adjusted with 1 M NaOH to a pH between 6.5-7.0. All the solutions
(antibody, tracer and tomato juice) were made in tubes and kept at 4°C until use. When the 17 hours
had passed, the plate was washed four times with PBST by the standard procedure: throw liquid
out, wash with 200 µL of PBST, shake for 2 minutes at 180 rpm and remove buﬀer using suction
by the CAPP plate washer and tap 3-4 times on paper to dry. Afterwards, 100 µL of the antibody
concentration was transferred to the plate except for the blank column, where 100 µL of PBST was
added instead. The plate was covered and kept at room temperature for 30 minutes. The plate was
washed four times with PBST by the standard procedure. Subsequently, 50 µL of PBST was added to
the "zero" solution and the "blank" solution, 50 µL of each of the diﬀerent tomato juice dilutions were
added, 50 µL of the tracer made from PBST were added to the "zero" solution, "blank" solution and
the wells with the diﬀerent tomato juice solutions and 100 µL of the supernatant tracer and 100 µL
of the ﬁltrated supernatant tracer were added to the plate. The plate was covered and kept at room
temperature for 30 minutes. Within the 30 minutes the substrate solution H2O2-TMB was made by
mixing citrate buﬀer (98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%). The substrate solution was mixed by
vortex and kept in the dark until use. The plate was washed four times with PBST by the standard
procedure. Afterwards, 100 µL of the substrate solution was added to the plate, covered and kept
under aluminum foil at room temperature for 30 minutes. Lastly, 50 µL of H2SO4 4N was added to the
plate to stop the reaction. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm by a TECAN Spark microplate
reader.
Protocol for Experiment with Alternariol
This experiment was performed in order to conﬁrm a hypothesis on where the analyte could be located
in the sample matrix and if the particles could have a signiﬁcant importance. As the choice of sample
handling was decided to be diluted tomato juice (1:10), since it includes both the liquid and the
particles, an experiment with tomato juice without any particles could give an indication of where
the analyte could be located in the sample matrix and if the particles could have an impact, as the
sample was spiked after the preparation.
This experiment followed the same protocol as for the analyte calibration curve described in section
3.3.3 Analyte Calibration Curve, but instead of using PBS in the analyte concentration series, ﬁltrated
supernatant made from tomato juice was used without any dilution. The tracer solution was also made
with the ﬁltrated supernatant, as the solution should not be diluted on the plate. When tracer and
analyte were added to the plate, the tracer and pure ﬁltrated supernatant were added in the "zero"
and "blank" solutions instead of tracer to create the same conditions. It is very important to vortex
the solutions with tomato juice before use to obtain a homogeneous mixture at all times, since the
particles tend to precipitate with time. The pH of the ﬁltrated supernatant solution was adjusted
with 1 M NaOH to around 6.5 before use.
3.3.5
Regeneration of the ELISA Setup
A regeneration on an ELISA plate was done to investigate which bond the solution would cleave, since
it could be either between the analyte/tracer and the antibody or between the antibody and protein
Page 35 of 151
==PAGE:41==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
G or between the protein G and the plate. This experiment was done to conﬁrm the theory and to
determine how the biosensor setup could be reused maybe for multiple tests instead of one-time-use.
This experiment was done by ELISA, as it is easier to track the signal and thereby, determine which
eﬀect the regeneration has on the setup. In this experiment, it was important to ﬁnd the similarities
between the ELISA plate and the biosensor, so that the results could be transferred between the
two methods. The decision was to use 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 as the regeneration solution on the
biosensor setup.
The analyte was not included, since the tracer and analyte should have similar
binding towards the antibody. However, there could of course be some diﬀerence due to the presence
of HRP. This experiment was only done for cortisol with protein G (P4689), antibody (10-C30D)
and tracer (65-IC08). The experiment had the following conditions: protein G:1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL,
antibody: 1/800-1/51200 ∼1.5 µg/mL-0.023 µg/mL and tracer: 1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL. These values
were chosen based on the previous experiments described in section 3.3.2 Orientation Optimization
with Protein G. The experiment was done in triplicates and a "blank" solution was included.
Protocol
The ﬁrst part of the experiment followed the same protocol as described in section 3.3.2 Orientation
Optimization with Protein G except for the last step and the absorbance conditions, since the reaction
was not stopped before the measurement of the absorbance and the absorbance was measured at 650
nm instead of 450 nm, as the colour remains blue. After 30 minutes of substrate incubation, the
absorbance was measured and used as reference point. The second part of the experiment was the
regeneration. After the control measurement, the plate was washed four times with PBST by the
standard procedure: throw liquid out, wash with 200 µL of PBST, shake for 2 minutes at 180 rpm
and remove buﬀer using suction by the CAPP plate washer and tap 3-4 times on paper to dry. Then
100 µL of the regeneration solution (0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2) was added to each well, covered and kept
at room temperature for 30 minutes. Within the 30 minutes the substrate solution H2O2-TMB was
prepared by mixing citrate buﬀer (98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%). The substrate solution was
mixed by vortex and kept in the dark until use. The plate was washed four times with PBST by the
same procedure. Afterwards, 100 µL of the substrate solution was added to each well and the plate
was covered and kept under aluminum foil at room temperature for 30 minutes. The absorbance was
measured at 650 nm. This measurement showed if the regeneration was successful. If the regeneration
was favourable the experiment could go on. The third part of the experiment was to see where the
acid was cleaving and the plate was divided into three sections: protein G (1-3 well), antibody (4-6
well), and tracer (7-9 well) to represent each cleaving site. This plate setup is shown in Figure 10.
Three diﬀerent solutions were added at the same time to diﬀerent parts of the plate multiple times.
The entire procedure is shown in Table 3 including what was added, the waiting period and when
the absorbance (650 nm) was to be measured. Subsequently, 100 µL was added for every solution in
each step and the plate was washed with PBST by the standard procedure after each step. When the
procedure was fulﬁlled with the last measurement after step number 8, the plate was washed by the
standard procedure and PBST was added to each well and stored at 4°C to withhold the setup intact
if reused.
Page 36 of 151
==PAGE:42==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 10
The plate setup during the experiment. The ﬁgure shows how the 96-well plate is divided for the
regeneration experiment. From A to H were diﬀerent antibody concentrations and a blank solution, whereas from 1-
3 focus on protein G, from 4-6 a focus on the antibody and from 7-9 a focus on the tracer in relation to where the
regeneration solution would cleave. Picture made with BioRender.com.
Table 3
The entire procedure for the regeneration experiment.
The table shows every step, addition and
waiting period of the regeneration experiment for each focus: protein G, antibody and tracer.
On plate
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
Step 9
Protein G
(1-3 well)
Protein G
(100 µL)
Wait 30 min.
Antibody
(100 µL)
Wait* 30 min.
Tracer
(100 µL)
Wait* 30 min.
Substrate
(100 µL)
Wait* 30 min.
Measure abs.
PBST
(100 µL)
Antibody
(4-6 well)
Antibody
(100 µL)
Wait 30 min
Tracer
(100 µL)
Wait* 30 min.
Substrate
(100 µL)
Wait* 30 min.
Measure abs.
PBST
(100 µL)
-
PBST
(100 µL)
Tracer
(7-9 well)
Tracer
(100 µL)
Wait 30 min.
Substrate
(100 µL)
Wait* 30 min,
Measure abs.
PBST
(100µL)
-
PBST
(100 µL)
-
PBST
(100 µL)
* Wait in darkness.
The Potential Regenerative Eﬀect of Substrate
This experiment was done in continuation of the regeneration experiment to see if the substrate could
assist in regenerating the biosensor since it contains two weak acids at a ﬁnal pH of 5.6. The hypothesis
was that the substrate solution could regenerate the setup (cleave oﬀthe tracer) and thereby lower
the absorbance, if measured again.
Protocol
Since it was an experiment that was done in continuation of the regeneration experiment, the same
plate setup was used in this experiment, but only the columns representing the tracer were used (7-9
well). The absorbance measurement made after the regeneration was used as the starting-point for this
experiment. The plate was washed four times with PBST by the standard procedure: throw liquid
out, wash with 200 µL of PBST, shake for 2 minutes at 180 rpm and remove buﬀer using suction
Page 37 of 151
==PAGE:43==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
by the CAPP plate washer and tap 3-4 times on paper to dry. Afterwards, 100 µL of the substrate
solution was added to the plate, covered and kept under aluminum foil at room temperature for 30
minutes. At this time, the plate had been through two rounds of substrate addition. The absorbance
was measured at 650 nm by a TECAN Spark microplate reader. The plate was washed four times
with PBST by the standard procedure. Subsequently, 100 µL of the substrate solution was added
to the plate, covered and kept under aluminum foil at room temperature for 30 minutes. At this
time, the plate had been through three rounds of substrate addition. The absorbance was measured
at 650 nm by a TECAN Spark microplate reader. To see if the signal could be restored, 100 µL of
tracer was added and the plate was covered and kept at room temperature for 30 minutes. The plate
was washed four times with PBST by the standard procedure. Afterwards, 100 µL of the substrate
solution was added and the plate was covered and kept under aluminum foil at room temperature for
30 minutes. The absorbance was measured at 650 nm by a TECAN Spark microplate reader. The
plate was washed by the standard procedure and PBST was added to each well and stored at 4°C to
hold the setup intact if reused.
3.4
Electrochemical Detection - Cortisol and Alternariol
3.4.1
The Manufacturing Process of the Chip
The design of the AQ chip is made by the department and was chosen, as it could provide triplicates
in one measurement, since it has three working electrodes (see Figure 11). In this project, it was not
possible to fabricate the chips myself, as the training had been too time consuming. Therefore, the
chips were produced by Claudy D’Costa, Ph.D student at the department. However, to understand
how the chips were fabricated, the fabrication procedure is reviewed here. The ﬁnal chip design and a
sketch of it with relevant markings of each electrode part are shown in Figure 11 and has the reference
code "3E_SUAQ_17jul20_01".
Figure 11
The chip design. The AQ chip design showed both as real life picture and as a sketch with marked parts
of the working electrodes, the counter electrode and the reference electrode. The counter electrode and the reference can
shift places. Drawing of the chip is made with BioRender.com.
Protocol
In general, the fabrication procedure is based on the method lithography, using a negative tone pho-
toresist to create the main pattern for metal deposition to deﬁne the electrodes, connection leads and
contact pads for interfacing to a potentiostat, as well as to pattern openings in the passivation layer
Page 38 of 151
==PAGE:44==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
to deﬁne the active electrode areas and contact pads. Electron-beam (E-Beam) evaporation was used
to deposit the chromium adhesion layer (20 nm) and gold (200 nm) as the chosen metal to cover the
working-, counter- and reference electrode as well as leads and contact pads. The chips were made in
the clean room at DTU Nanolab and the protocol for the fabrication is described below.
• 1. Spin Coating. The spin coating of photoresist is done on a substrate, which has been pre-
treated to make it more hydrophobic that ensures good adhesion of the resist. Resist deposition,
spin coating and a post-coating bake (also called softbake), which is applied in order to drive out
solvent from the resist ﬁlm. The used substrate is silicon wafer (single side polished; diameter
of 100 mm, thickness of 525 +/- 25 µm) covered with 1 µm of SiO2, which are pre-treated with
1,1,1,3,3,3 Hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) vapour priming. The resist, AZ nLOF 2020, is spin
coated at 3300 rpm for 30 seconds. The post-coating bake is performed at 110°C for 60 seconds
to obtain a ﬁnal resist thickness of 1.5 µm.
• 2. UV Exposure. This step includes both a mask alignment followed by UV exposure, where
the mask is ﬁrst aligned properly on the resist and then the resist coated wafer is exposed
with UV at the wavelength of 365 nm. The mask is covering the areas to be metallised. The
parameters used for the process are the following: exposure mode soft contact, exposure dose
104 mJ/cm2 and exposure time 9.4 seconds at 11 mW/cm2.
• 3. Post Exposure Bake (PEB). As a negative tone photoresist is used, a post exposure bake
is needed to thermally activate/assist the catalytic process of the resist. The PEB is performed
at 110°C for 60 seconds immediately followed by development.
• 4. Development. As a negative tone photoresist is applied, the exposed resist becomes insol-
uble in the development solution. The process consists of three steps: a developer, a rinse with
H2O and a spin drying. As the mask has covered the electrode pattern with connection leads
and contact pads, the resist in those areas remains soluble and disappears during the develop-
ment, whereas the surrounding resist becomes insoluble and remains on the wafer. The used
development method is single puddle for 60 seconds with the developer Tetramethylammonium
hydroxide (TMAH).
• 5.
Metal Deposition – Chromium and Gold. Electron-beam (E-Beam) evaporation is
applied for the metal deposition (Cr – 20 nm; Au – 200 nm). E-Beam heats up the solid metal,
e.g. gold and turns it into vapour. The vapour of gold is led to the wafer and adheres on the
previously deposited chromium, covering the entire wafer surface, i.e. aeras where the photoresist
was removed during development as well as the surface of the remaining photoresist.
• 6.
Lift-oﬀ.
The lift-oﬀprocess is applied to remove the unwanted metal that covers the
remaining photoresist. It is done by dissolving the remaining resist that lies under it. It is
during this process that the electrode pattern with connection leads and contact pads of gold
will appear as seen in Figure 11. This is done in acetone by using ultrasonic agitation in intervals
of 3x20 minutes.
Page 39 of 151
==PAGE:45==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
• 7.
Passivation.
The passivation is used to cover the connection leads that should not be
exposed during the experiments so that they are not involved in the measurements. This is done
as it is very important that the electrode area is well deﬁned. This part is using a negative tone
photoresist and comprises the same steps described above except for metal deposition and lift-oﬀ.
In this case, the mask is covering the areas for the working electrodes, the counter electrode, the
reference electrode and the contact pads, but not the connection leads, as they have to be passive
during the measurements. The resist on the electrode areas and contact pads will be dissolved
during the development and disappear, whereas everything else remains insoluble and covered.
The process conditions are as follows: a spin coating process using resist SU-8 at 2000 rpm for 30
seconds, a post-coating bake at 50°C for 15 min with cooling down to 20°C, a UV exposure with
the parameters mode soft contact, exposure dose 250 mJ/cm2 and exposure time 22.72 seconds
at 11 mW/cm2, a post-exposure bake at 50°C for 60 min and a manual development step of 3.5
minutes or less with the developer mr-Dev 600 for both the ﬁrst dip and the ﬁnal dip.
• 8.
Inspection. At the end, the wafer is inspected using an optical microscope, where the
pattern of metallised structures are inspected.
• 9. Wafer dicing. Each wafer contains 12 electrode chips with dimensions 13 x 18 mm2. In
order to obtain the individual chips, the wafers are diced using a Disco dicing saw equipped
with a rotating diamond blade. The chip dimensions to be diced can be programmed using the
computer interface of the system.
3.4.2
The Physical Construction of the Biosensor System
The physical construction of the biosensor is separated into diﬀerent parts that all together create
the biosensor system from the electrodes (transducer) to the data recording, which can be seen in
Figure 12. The chips were placed in a specialised poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) holder with
room for up to four chips. For each chip, there is a well for electrolyte, which is designed such that
all the electrodes, reference, counter and working, are present in the same well at all times. Silicone
rubber O-rings were used to form a liquid tight sealing between the chips and the holder in order to
eliminate leaking of the electrolyte to the contact pads. To connect the potentiostat and measure the
electrochemical output, a printed circuit board (PCB) with copper leads and pogo pins was placed
onto the PMMA holder and tightened with screws to the PMMA holder. This system performs the
experiments in stagnant solutions, also called a batch system, as there is no ﬂow and each injection and
wash have to be done manually, which can give varying results. Since the PMMA holder is constructed
to have room for four chips, more than one experiment can be conducted at the same time.
Page 40 of 151
==PAGE:46==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 12
Physical construction of the biosensor. The biosensor system connected from the chips to the data
potentiostat and via Bluetooth connection to a laptop computer. The electrode chips are shown in the PMMA holder
with and without the PCB. Drawing of the whole biosensor system is made with BioRender.com with some online
elements.
3.4.3
Electrode Cleaning, System Check and Output Observations
When the chips are coming out from the clean room, the chips are usually very clean. However,
before using a chip for testing, it is a good procedure to clean it, so that the performance is as good
as possible. Together with the cleaning it is also good to check the overall function of the biosensor
system before performing the experiments, as there are many separate parts that have to work together
to give proper data.
Electrode Cleaning
The primary purpose of the electrode cleaning is to remove any organic contamination from the surface
that can interfere with its performance. There are diﬀerent ways of cleaning clean room fabricated
electrodes: chemical cleaning with organic solvents (e.g. ethanol or acetone) or inorganic oxidising
agents (e.g. hydrogen peroxide/KOH or piranha solution), electrochemical cleaning in acid or base
and cleaning with oxygen or air plasma. Even though the chemical or electrochemical cleaning are the
most popular, they can be either too harsh cleaning procedures, potentially able to harm micro- and
nanoelectrodes, or ineﬀective. Plasma cleaning can however, remove any organic contamination from
electrode surface without aﬀecting its properties and has the beneﬁt of being "all directional", which
means that every part of the surface that is exposed to it is aﬀected by it [65, 66]. As plasma cleaning
Page 41 of 151
==PAGE:47==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
is not using any organic solvents, this treatment is also more environmentally friendly and safer in
terms of health. To clean the electrodes, plasma treatment with air was applied and the eﬀect of
the cleaning was tested electrochemically before and after the treatment by impedance measurements
and cyclic voltammetry. The normal procedure is to softly clean the electrodes with acetone, ethanol
(70%) and MilliQwater after coming out of the clean room and before using other cleaning processes.
The procedure of the plasma treatment was to run for around an hour. This time period was however
excessive, but is done to ensure a proper cleaning.
Protocol
The chips were taken out of the clean room and brought into the laboratory.
A chip to be used
for biosensor development was cleaned with acetone, ethanol (70%) and MilliQwater and dried by
using N2. The chip was then placed in the PMMA holder and the performance of the electrodes was
assessed by applying 300 µL of Ferri-Ferrocyanide solution to acquire an impedance spectrum and a
CV. Afterwards, the chip was washed with MilliQwater, removed from the PMMA holder and dried
by using N2. The chip was then placed on a glass plate and treated with plasma for four runs of 16
min (around 64 minutes). After the treatment the chip was placed again in the PMMA holder and
the performance of the electrodes was again assessed as mentioned above. Impedance should decrease
when applying plasma treatment, showing decrease in diameter of the semicircle. In CVs, the peak
current should increase.
System Check and Output Observations
When the cleaning is checked, it is also possible to check the overall performance of the biosensor
system and conﬁrm that there is no leakage and that the connections work as expected. The question
is how to see if there is an error in the system. To spot possible errors, it is important to know what
to expect from the used electrochemical detection methods like impedance spectroscopy and cyclic
voltammetry, as the outputs can indicate if there is an error or not.
The technique impedance spectroscopy can be used to check if the system and cleaning are ideal,
as the known trend (behaviour and shape) of the output can give a hint of errors and what is causing
them. The trend is related to the semicircle, which is either decreasing or increasing depending on
what is happening. When the electrodes are cleaned with for example plasma treatment, the diameter
of the semicircle should decrease, but when adding biological elements in the modiﬁcation, as for
example the protein G, the diameter of the semicircle should increase. The trend of the plot is not
just dependent on the size of the modiﬁcation, but it is also dependent on how many negative charged
groups that are present, which can have an inﬂuence on how the plot is behaving. It is not only the
diameter of the output that is important, also the shape of the tail, the starting point of the semicircle
in the diagram and the form of the semicircle can indicate if there are errors. The tail represents
diﬀusion impedance (Warburg impedance) and if the tail in impedance spectra is not visible, it means
that the electrode is not functioning well because the it is either dirty or otherwise malfunctioning.
If the plot is shifting, so that the starting point of the semicircle is shifting during the experiment, it
can be due to contact errors in the system. However, it is normal that the detection starts a bit from
zero, as there is a solution resistance in the system.
Page 42 of 151
==PAGE:48==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The technique cyclic voltammetry can also be used to check the system as the shape of the output
and its location in the diagram indicates whether something is wrong. The expected output shape is
the "duck" formation, with a the peak to peak separation not far away from the theoretically expected
value of about 59 mV at 25°C derived from the Nernst equation. This theoretical value is hard to
achieve in reality, but the value can be used as a rule of thumb, and values around 100 mV to 150 mV
are still acceptable when measuring on an unmodiﬁed electrode. The location of the output in the
diagram depends on what the reference electrode is made of. Since the electrode surface is made of
gold, the middle of the plot is expected to occur at around zero potential [V]. Indications of possible
errors can be; if the plot does not have any peaks or if the plot is shifted a few hundreds of mV and is
not located around zero potential [V]. However, the exact reason for the error can not be determined
directly from the plot and with CV one has to trouble shoot a bit to ﬁnd the cause of the error. The
error could be due to not proper cleaning or loose connections in the system or a leak that interferes
with the connections. One should however expect that the scans are overlapping and that during
the modiﬁcation of the biological setup, the CV is most likely moving away from the optimal peak
conditions and the "duck" shape is ﬂattened out, meaning that the peaks are decreasing, the peak to
peak separation is increased and the "duck" shape disappears. This tendency is normal and the peaks
should decrease and the shape deform with the additional modiﬁcation.
Even though the system is checked, ﬁxed and functions as expected, it is always good to be aware of
errors, as they can appear with time and give incorrect data.
3.4.4
Biological Modiﬁcation of the Biosensor Setup on the Electrode
When the biological modiﬁcation is built up on the electrode, it is modiﬁed in individual steps, that in
the end form the biosensor setup. Each modiﬁcation step, except for the modiﬁcation with EDC-NHS,
was characterised by impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry so that each modiﬁcation could
be observed and documented. They were only documented once for each analyte, as it is believed
that all the measurements in between could have an eﬀect on the ﬁnal performance for some analytes.
There is no direct evidence for this hypothesis, but it is seen as a precaution as well as that it saves
time and eﬀort.
Practical information
The modiﬁcation of the biosensor setup was using MPA to form the self-assembled monolayer on the
electrode, as the compound is soluble in both ethanol and aqueous solutions compared to MUA/MH,
which are only soluble in ethanol. As MPA is soluble in water, it makes the modiﬁcation procedure
easier. However, this does not imply that MPA is the optimal linker to use for a ﬁnal biosensor. In
this modiﬁcation, no blocking was used like ethanolamine, as it is considered as a precaution step
and is therefore not necessary when only proving the concept of the biosensor. However, when using
blocking the risk of getting false positives decreases, as the tracer cannot stick to something other
than the antibody. The concentrations used for the antibody and tracer modiﬁcations were increased
compared to the ELISA experiments, as the modiﬁcation on the electrode has not been tested in detail
before and the surface behaviour is not fully known.
Page 43 of 151
==PAGE:49==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The experiments were divided into three parts: electrode preparation, electrode modiﬁcation and
control test of the biosensor setup by absorbance measurement. For each washing step, suction by
vacuum was applied, except for the modiﬁcations of ﬁrst chips.
It was proved in a regeneration
experiment of the ﬁrst chips that removing the solutions and washing by a pipette gives large variations
in the outcomes.
Protocol
Electrode Preparation
Each chip was prepared by plasma cleaning for around 1 hour and the electrodes together with the
system were checked by impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry by using 300 µL of Ferri-
Ferrocyanide solution.
Electrode Modiﬁcation
The MPA solution is prepared and kept at 4°C until use. The electrodes on the chip to be used for
modiﬁcations and system were tested and if they functioned as intended, the chip was washed with
MilliQwater and 250 µL of 80 mM MPA was added. The chip was covered with a lid, so that no dirt
could get on it and so that the solution would not evaporate during the incubation. The electrode
was kept for a minimum of 2 hours at room temperature or overnight (around 18 hours) at 4°C.
From experience it was known that the MPA layer is formed within the ﬁrst 2 hours. However, to
ensure the attachment the chip can be kept overnight in the refrigerator. The EDC-NHS solution
was prepared in MES buﬀer (pH 6) with the ﬁnal concentrations of 200 mM EDC and 50 mM NHS,
mixed by vortex and kept at 4°C until use. It is important that the solution is freshly prepared and
that the mixing is done just before adding the solution onto the electrodes. When the incubation was
ﬁnished, the MPA was removed and the chip was washed with MilliQwater. Salt formation from the
MPA could appear on the chip and to ensure that all the salt is removed, the chip was taken out
from the PMMA holder and washed more thoroughly. Before putting the chip back into the PMMA
holder, it was important that the chip was dried as thoroughly as possible without touching the gold
electrode parts. The MPA formation on the electrode was characterised by impedance spectroscopy
and cyclic voltammetry by adding 300 µL of Ferri-Ferrocyanide solution. Before going on to the next
modiﬁcation step, the electrodes were washed with MilliQwater and lastly with MES buﬀer, as the
next solution added was prepared in MES buﬀer. Afterwards, 300 µL of EDC-NHS solution was added,
and the chip was covered and kept for 45 minutes at room temperature. As the EDC-NHS formation
is not that stable, this step was not characterised electrochemically. When the incubation was done,
EDC-NHS solution was removed and the chip was washed with MES buﬀer and lastly with PBS, as
the next solution to be added was prepared in PBS buﬀer. The protein G (P4689 or P19459) solution
was prepared and kept at 4°C until use. Protein G solution was added, and the chip was covered and
kept for 45 minutes at room temperature. After the incubation, the protein G solution was removed
and the chip was washed with PBS. The protein immobilisation on the electrodes was characterised
by impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry by adding 300 µL of Ferri-Ferrocyanide solution.
Before going on to the next modiﬁcation, the chip was washed with PBST, as the next solution to
be added was prepared in PBST buﬀer. PBST was also used to ensure that excess protein did not
adhere on the sides of the well. The antibody (10-C30D or Anti-AOH AB) solution was prepared and
Page 44 of 151
==PAGE:50==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
kept at 4°C until use. The antibody was added and the chip was covered and kept for 30 minutes
at room temperature. After the incubation, the antibody solution was removed and the chip was
washed with PBST. The attachment of the antibody molecules on the electrodes was characterised
by impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry by adding 300 µL of Ferri-Ferrocyanide solution.
Before going on to the next modiﬁcation step, the chip was washed with PBST, as the next solution
to be added was prepared in PBST buﬀer. PBST was also used here to ensure that excess antibody
did not adhere on the sides of the well. The tracer (65-IC08 or AOH-HRP) solution was prepared
and kept at 4°C until use. The tracer was added and the chip was covered and kept for 30 minutes at
room temperature. After the incubation, the tracer solution was removed and the chip was washed
with PBST. The attachment of the tracer was characterised by impedance spectroscopy and cyclic
voltammetry by adding 300 µL of Ferri-Ferrocyanide solution.
Control Test of the Biosensor Setup by Absorbance
To check the modiﬁcation on the electrode and check if it is properly built, the biosensor setup was
tested with the substrate by measuring the absorbance. The substrate solution (mixture of citrate
buﬀer (98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%)) was prepared and the tube containing the solution was
covered with Al foil and kept at room temperature until use. The chip was washed with PBST, and
300 µL of substrate solution was added. The chip was covered with aluminium foil and kept for 30
minutes at room temperature. A 96-well plate and the spectrophotometer were prepared to measure
the absorbance at 630 nm, when the solution had turned blue. When the incubation was ﬁnished, the
substrate solution including the product was mixed in the well by pipetting and 250 µL was transferred
to a 96-well plate. The absorbance was measured at 630 nm and if the colour of the solution was
blue, the biosensor setup had tracer attached, indicating that the modiﬁcation had been completed
correctly.
Conditions for Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy and Cyclic Voltammetry
• The impedance spectroscopy conditions: Scan type ﬁxed with an E dc of 0.00, an E ac of 0.01
V and a frequency scan at 71 frequencies with 10 points/decade in the frequency range from 0.1
Hz to 1000000 Hz.
• The cyclic voltammetry conditions: Various potential range were applied from -0.25 V - 0.25 V
to -0.6 V - 0.6 V depending on the behaviour of the output. E step of 0.01 V with a scan rate
of 0.1 V/s. The number of scans was 3 as a minimum.
3.4.5
Biosensor Detection - Reproducibility, Regeneration and Analyte Detection
When the biosensor setup was fully constructed and control tested, the next step was to get the
maximum signal obtained with only the tracer present, as it would be used as a reference point when
the electrode is exposed to analyte. Even though the regeneration of the electrode was not considered
as the essential part of this project, as the biosensor would not necessarily have to be reused in
industry, its regeneration was important when collecting the fundamental data for the calibration
curve of the biosensor. As the electrode can act diﬀerently, due to variation in the modiﬁcations on
the surface, it could give more realistic results if using the same electrode to detect the maximum
Page 45 of 151
==PAGE:51==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
signal when only applying the tracer and later detecting the signal when the biosensor is exposed
to the analyte in a competitive assay. That way, the data would then be more connected, since the
decreased signal in the competitive data could be directly compared with the reference point of the
maximum signal of the same biosensor. The goal is to ﬁnd stable signals for both the maximum
signal and each analyte exposure, and achieve repeatability. However, as the chance of getting exact
repeatable signals is low, the goal for this project is to obtain a repeatable signal range. This is a harsh
goal to reach for an immunobiosensor, as it depends highly on the regeneration process, that has the
tendency to vary in output. To examine if there is a repeatable trend, the colour of the product was
ﬁrst used, as was also used in ELISA, since it is an easy approach to evaluate the performance of the
electrodes with constructed biosensor, before moving on to electrochemical detection. However, it has
to be noted, that the area that contributes to the absorbance measurements is larger than the area of
one individual electrode used in electrochemical detection, since the colour formation includes all the
electrodes, whereas the area included in the electrochemical detection is only one working electrode.
As was also applicable for the biological modiﬁcation, suction by vacuum was applied for each washing
step.
Protocol - Reproducibility and Biointerface Behaviour when Regenerated
The ﬁrst task was to obtain a stable signal range for the maximum signal, as it is used as reference
point before moving on to the analyte detection. After the modiﬁcation of the biosensor setup and
the control test of the modiﬁcation, the goal was to deﬁne the value for the maximum signal of the
electrode. To ﬁnd the maximum signal, the value was tested multiple times, which included that
the setup was regenerated after each detection step.
Here diﬀerent regeneration procedures were
investigated using both the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and the substrate solution
(pH 5.6), as they both showed regeneration eﬀect during ELISA for cortisol. It was assumed that the
tracer and later the analyte were primarily removed and that only new tracer needed to be added to
re-establish the maximum signal.
The general approach was to ﬁnd the maximum signal and investigate how the regeneration and setup
behave for the two analytes cortisol and alternariol. To understand the behaviour of the biointerface,
the performance was ﬁrst tested by absorbance using the colour formation of the product, as the
method could give a more deﬁned value before testing the performance by electrochemical detection.
Diﬀerent strategies were used to investigate the behaviour of the biointerface on the electrode and the
regeneration possibilities. As this project is a proof of concept, the conditions were not optimized, but
the focus was on investigating the biosensor potential.
Repeatability of the Maximum Signal by Absorbance - Regeneration Solution
This procedure utilised the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and absorbance measurements
to validate the outcome. The electrodes were modiﬁed with the tracer for 30 minutes at room temper-
ature before the experiment was started. The tracer was removed and the chip is washed with PBST,
whereafter 300 µL of the regeneration solution was added for 30 minutes at room temperature. The
amount added and the time were not optimised. The substrate solution was prepared (mixture of
citrate buﬀer (98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%)), covered with aluminium foil and kept at room
Page 46 of 151
==PAGE:52==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
temperature until use.
After the incubation, the regeneration solution was removed and the chip
is washed with PBST, whereafter 300 µL of the substrate solution is added. The chip was covered
with aluminium foil and kept for 30 minutes at room temperature. The substrate solution and the
formed product were mixed in the well by pipetting, 250 µL was transferred to a 96-well plate and the
absorbance was measured at 630 nm. This procedure was repeated at least three times, to see if there
was a trend of stability. The baseline for the regeneration was also investigated by adding substrate
solution again after one of the measurements.
Repeatability of the Maximum Signal and Baseline by Absorbance - Substrate Solution
This procedure utilised the substrate solution (pH 5.6) for the regeneration and absorbance to validate
the outcome. The electrode was modiﬁed with the tracer for 30 minutes at room temperature before
the experiment was started. The substrate solution was prepared (mixture of citrate buﬀer (98%),
H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%)), covered with aluminium foil and kept at room temperature until
use. After the incubation, the tracer was removed and the chip was washed with PBST, whereafter
300 µL of the substrate solution was added. The chip was covered with aluminium foil and kept for
30 minutes at room temperature. The substrate solution and the formed product were mixed in the
well by pipetting, 250 µL was transferred to a 96-well plate and the absorbance was measured at
630 nm. After that, the rest of the substrate solution was removed and the chip was washed with
PBST, whereafter a new substrate solution (300 µL) was added for 30 minutes to see how eﬀective the
substrate was compared to the regeneration solution and to deﬁne a possible baseline. The substrate
solution and the formed product were mixed in the well by pipetting, 250 µL was transferred to a
96-well plate and the absorbance was measured at 630 nm. This procedure was repeated at least three
times, to see if there was a trend of repeatability.
Protocol - Maximum Signal and Analyte Exposure by Electrochemical Detection
This experiment was only performed for the analyte alternariol, as it is the primary analyte of the
project. The regeneration strategy was to use both the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
and the substrate solution, as it was proved that the regeneration solution could not fully regenerate
the alternariol biosensor by itself, as the biointerface of the alternariol biosensor was observed to be
more rigid than the biointerface for cortisol detection. Amperometry was used as the technique for
the electrochemical detection, as the reaction of the product formation is continuous and is happening
in a batch system. The goal was to measure the maximum signal for the chosen working electrode and
to detect the reduction current (negative) upon addition of the substrate when various concentrations
of the analyte alternariol had been introduced. The purpose was to create a calibration curve deﬁning
the detection range of the biosensor. The main approach was to get a point for the maximum signal
where the tracer dominates, a middle point where the tracer and analyte competes equally and a
point where the analyte dominates. This curve was a simple version of a calibration curve, but it
has the potential of proving that the biosensor could detect that the analyte is present and could
decrease the signal generated by the tracer. This experiment could also provide information regarding
the optimal concentrations (i.e protein G, antibody, tracer, and analyte) for the competitive assay.
The choice of which regeneration method to use was decided during the experiment and do not follow
a deﬁned procedure. During the electrochemical detection with amperometry, the colour formation
Page 47 of 151
==PAGE:53==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
of the product was also determined by absorbance measurements to obtain a reference point for the
obtained electrochemical signal.
Maximum Signal by Electrochemical Detection and by Absorbance
To get a maximum electrochemical response with amperometry, the electrode was modiﬁed with tracer
for 30 minutes at room temperature before the detection was started. During the last 10 minutes of
the incubation, the substrate solution (mixture of citrate buﬀer with 0.1 KCl (98%), H2O2 (0.4%)
and TMB (1.6%)) was prepared, this time also including 0.1 KCl as supporting electrolyte. After
the incubation, the tracer was removed and the chip was washed with PBST. The potentiostat was
connected, citrate buﬀer with 0.1 KCl (200 µL) was added to the chip and the amperometric detection
was started. It was expected that within the ﬁrst 100 seconds a line would be formed near zero current.
When the line was stable, 20 µL of the substrate solution was added and a peak appeared indicating
the formation of the product. The detection was performed for 500 seconds as the product formation
was continuous. After the electrochemical measurement, the substrate solution including the product
was mixed in the well by pipetting and 150 µL was transferred to a 96-well plate and the absorbance
was measured at 630 nm. The amperometric measurements was repeated 3 times to see the trend, as
it was expected that the citrate buﬀer with 0.1 KCl could remove the tracer during the 500 seconds.
Between the measurements, the chip was washed with citrate buﬀer with 0.1 KCl 3 times. To see the
eﬀect of the experiment and to know what the value was before the regeneration, the signal after the
detection was measured by adding 300 µL substrate solution (mixture of citrate buﬀer (98%), H2O2
(0.4%) and TMB (1.6%)). The chip was covered with aluminium foil and kept for 30 minutes at room
temperature. The substrate solution including the product was mixed in the well by pipetting, 250
µL was transferred to a 96-well plate and the absorbance was measured at 630 nm.
Analyte Exposure by Electrochemical Detection and by Absorbance
The basis for this experiment was the calibration curve obtained by ELISA and it was expected that
the same principal in the procedure could apply here. However, the concentration of the tracer was
higher but combined with diﬀerent analyte concentrations. After the maximum signal was obtained,
the electrode was regenerated by applying both regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and
substrate solution (pH 5.6) multiple times with PBST wash between until the absorbance was as low
as possible, so that the competition could be as equal between the tracer and the analyte as possible.
After that, the chip was washed with PBST, before the analyte and tracer were added and kept for
30 minutes at room temperature. During the last 10 minutes of the incubation, the substrate solution
(mixture of citrate buﬀer with 0.1 KCl (98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%)) was prepared. After
the incubation, the analyte and tracer solution were removed and the chip was washed with PBST
to remove excess elements. The potentiostat was connected, citrate buﬀer with 0.1 KCl (200 µL) was
added to the chip and amperometric detection is started. After 100 seconds or when the line was
stable, 20 µL of the substrate solution was added and a peak appeared indicating the formation of
the product. The detection was performed for 500 seconds as the product formation was continuous.
After the electrochemical measurement, the substrate solution including the product was mixed in
the well by pipetting and 150 µL was transferred to a 96-well plate and the absorbance was measured
at 630 nm. The amperometric measurement was repeated 3 times to see the trend. Between the
Page 48 of 151
==PAGE:54==
MATERIALS AND METHODS
measurements, the chip was washed 3 times with citrate buﬀer containing 0.1 KCl. To see the eﬀect
of the experiment and to compare the value to the maximum signal before the next regeneration, the
signal after the detection was measured by adding 300 µL substrate solution (mixture of citrate buﬀer
(98%), H2O2 (0.4%) and TMB (1.6%)). The chip was covered with aluminium foil and kept for 30
minutes at room temperature. The substrate solution including the product was mixed in the well
by pipetting, 250 µL was transferred to the 96-well plate and the absorbance was measured at 630
nm. This procedure was performed for diﬀerent analyte concentrations and also with diﬀerent tracer
concentrations, as it was suspected that the tracer had an advantage compared to the analyte when
competing for the antibody binding sites, as the regeneration could not bring the absorbance down to
under 0.100.
Electrochemical Conditions for Amperometry
• The amperometry conditions: Program chronoamperometry with the E dc at -0.15, as the
product gets fully reduced at this value (data not shown). The current sampling time was 0.1
seconds and the total duration was 500 seconds.
Page 49 of 151
==PAGE:55==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
All the results and data obtained from both the ELISA experiments and from the experiments on the
electrodes with the electrochemical detection for both analytes, cortisol and alternariol, are presented,
described and discussed in this section. The ELISA experiments form the fundamental data of the
biosensor setup before implementing it on an electrode and testing it by electrochemical detection.
The main results are from the experiments with alternariol, where the experiments with cortisol are
used as reference of what to expect, as the biological elements for cortisol are highly optimised and
used on the market compared to the biological element of alternariol. As the biological elements for
alternariol are very expensive, all of the protocols were ﬁrst done and optimised on cortisol.
4.1
ELISA Experiments - Cortisol and Alternariol
In this section, all of the ELISA results for both cortisol and alternariol are presented and described.
Optimization of antibody- and tracer concentrations together with the orientation optimization with
protein G, the analyte calibration curve by the competitive ELISA and the experiments showing
the matrix eﬀect and the particle eﬀect are performed for both cortisol and alternariol, where the
regeneration experiment only is made for cortisol as the tendency is assumed to be identical for every
setup.
4.1.1
Optimization of Antibody- and Tracer Concentrations
This section presents the results of the optimal antibody- and tracer concentrations, where the anti-
bodies are physisorbed randomly on the bottom of the wells. To evaluate which antibody- and tracer
concentration that would be optimal, a series of antibody concentrations as well as a series of tracer
concentrations were applied.
Results for Cortisol
This experiment was carried out with seven antibody concentrations from 1/500 ∼2.4 µg/mL to
1/32000 ∼0.0375 µg/mL and four tracer concentrations 1/3000 ∼0.33 µg/mL, 1/6000 ∼0.167
µg/mL, 1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL and 1/12000 ∼0.083 µg/mL. The overall result is presented in Figure
13.
Page 50 of 151
==PAGE:56==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 13
Optimal antibody- and tracer concentrations with random orientation for cortisol. The graph
presents the data for four diﬀerent tracer concentrations (TR:1/3000 ∼0.33 µg/mL, TR:1/6000 ∼0.167 µg/mL,
TR:1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL and TR:1/12000 ∼0.083 µg/mL) in relation to the antibody concentrations from 1/500
to 1/32000 ∼2.4 µg/mL to 0.0375 µg/mL. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
The expected result for this experiment was a smooth curve, where the absorbance would be halved
for every antibody concentration. However, this was not achieved. It can be seen, that a drastic drop
from the antibody concentration 1/500 to 1/2000 ∼2.4 µg/mL to 0.6 µg/mL occurred and that the
rest of the results were all around zero absorbance. This tendency was investigated and the experiment
was remade several times, even with a "zoom in" version of the range from 1/500 to 1/2000, but the
result turned out to be the same (data not shown). Even though all the reagents, biological elements
and chemicals should have functioned properly, there was one concern whether or not the antibody
had been stored properly, since it had been stored at 4°C for several mouths and not kept at -20°C for
long term storage. A new antibody solution was therefore ordered, but the result, nevertheless, still
remained the same. This odd tendency could be due to the orientation of the antibodies in the well,
even though there should statistically be enough binding sites available even in a random orientation.
From this result, using random orientation, the optimal antibody concentration was in the range of
1/500 ∼2.4 µg/mL to 1/1000 ∼1.2 µg/mL and the optimal tracer concentration could be all of the
tested options, since it depends on which antibody concentration was chosen.
For the next experiment with speciﬁc orientation provided by protein G, the two tracer concentrations
1/9000 and 1/12000 were chosen, as it was assumed that protein G could improve the data signiﬁ-
cantly and that the data points obtained with these tracer concentrations would remain in the useful
absorbance range.
Page 51 of 151
==PAGE:57==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Results for Alternariol
This experiment was carried out with an increased concentration for both the antibody and the tracer
compared to the cortisol experiment, since the activity was unknown. The experiment was carried out
with the antibody concentrations from 1/200 to 1/12800 ∼22.5 µg/mL to 0.35 µg/mL, and with four
tracer concentrations 1/1000 ∼1.2 µg/mL, 1/2000 ∼0.6 µg/mL, 1/4000 ∼0.3 µg/mL and 1/8000 ∼
0.15 µg/mL. The overall results are presented in Figure 14.
Figure 14
Optimal antibody- and tracer concentrations with random orientation for alternariol. The graph
presents the data for four diﬀerent tracer concentrations (TR:1/1000 ∼1.2 µg/mL, TR:1/2000 ∼0.6 µg/mL, TR:1/4000
∼0.3 µg/mL and TR:1/8000 ∼0.15 µg/mL) in relation to the antibody concentrations from 1/200 to 1/12800 ∼22.5
µg/mL to 0.35 µg/mL. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
Even though the experiment with cortisol cannot be compared directly to the experiment with al-
ternariol, there is some resemblance in the assay behaviour, as the same tendency for the curves is
occurring. The same "drop" can be observed in the curve which rapidly tends towards zero. One factor
that is very notable is the activity, as the activity of the antibody and the tracer are both lower for
alternariol compared to the biological elements for cortisol. When comparing the result, it can be seen
that the absorbance given by an antibody concentration of 1/500 ∼2.4 µg/mL with the tracer con-
centration of 1/3000 ∼0.33 µg/mL for cortisol gave a value over 2, whereas the absorbance obtained
by the antibody concentration of 1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL with the tracer concentration of 1/1000 ∼1.2
µg/mL for alternariol gave a value under 1. This indicates that the activity of the biological elements
for alternariol were not as active as the biological elements used for cortisol.
It can be seen from this result, that something was limiting the assay, as the absorbance was under 1
at very high concentrations for both the antibody and tracer, and this limiting factor could be due to
both parts. It can be seen that increasing the antibody concentration did not improve the situation, as
Page 52 of 151
==PAGE:58==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the absorbance remained the same for the antibody concentrations 1/200 ∼22.5 µg/mL and 1/400 ∼
11.25 µg/mL. However, the signal increased with the increased tracer concentrations. This behaviour
could be due to the low activity for both the antibody and tracer or just one of them, but it could
also be due to the binding aﬃnity between them. This binding aﬃnity could be poor and could result
in losing tracer during the washing procedure.
For the next experiment with speciﬁc orientation provided by protein G, the two tracer concentrations
1/2000 and 1/4000 were chosen, as it was assumed that protein G could improve the data as it did
for the experiments with cortisol. It was assumed that the data points obtained with these tracer
concentrations would remain in the useful absorbance range as they were clearly below 1.
4.1.2
Orientation Optimization with Protein G
Theoretically, protein G binds to the Fc-end of every Ig antibody, but one question remains, namely,
if protein G can improve the results.
In order words, how much less antibody and tracer could
be used to gain the same response. This section presents the results of the optimal antibody- and
tracer concentrations when introducing speciﬁc orientation by protein G. To evaluate if protein G could
improve the result and which concentrations that would be optimal, a series of antibody concentrations
and two tracer concentrations were applied based on the results obtained with the random antibody
orientation presented above.
Results for Cortisol
This experiment was carried out with the protein G concentration of 1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL, antibody
concentrations of 1/200 to 1/102400 ∼6 µg/mL to 0.012 µg/mL and the tracer concentrations of
1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL and 1/12000 ∼0.0833 µg/mL. The antibody concentrations were chosen to
cover a wide range and the tracer concentrations were chosen based on the results presented in section
4.1.1 Optimization of Antibody- and Tracer Concentration, since the tracer concentrations 1/9000 and
1/12000 gave an absorbance around 1. It was assumed that protein G would improve the results, and
that data points obtained with these tracer concentrations together with protein G would remain in
the useful absorbance range. The overall result is presented in Figure 15.
Page 53 of 151
==PAGE:59==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 15
Optimal antibody- and tracer concentrations with speciﬁc orientation by protein G for cortisol.
The data presents two diﬀerent tracer concentrations (TR:1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL and TR:1/12000 ∼0.0833 µg/mL) in
relation to the antibody concentrations from 1/200 to 1/102400 ∼6 µg/mL to 0.012 µg/mL. The results are presented
by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
The result conﬁrms that protein G improved the data, which means that the orientation of the antibod-
ies has an impact, since the absorbance around 1 could be obtained at lower antibody concentrations,
such as 1/1600 ∼0.75 µg/mL and 1/3200 ∼0.375 µg/mL, at the same tracer concentration 1/9000
∼0.11 µg/mL. This tendency was the expected output, since the curve is smoother and did not have
that drastic drop as was seen with the random orientation. This result could imply that the tendency
for the previous result, may have been due to the orientation of the antibody. From this experiment,
it can be determined that protein G should be used in future experiments for cortisol in both the case
of ELISA and the biosensor setup on the electrode, as it improved the results signiﬁcantly. To deter-
mine the optimal antibody- and tracer concentration for the analyte calibration curve, a point around
0.70 in absorbance should be a good indication, since the signal most likely will remain in the useful
absorbance range. The optimal conditions chosen for the analyte calibration curve were, therefore,
the antibody concentration of 1/3200 ∼0.375 µg/mL and the tracer concentration of 1/9000 ∼0.11
µg/mL. It was expected that the best output has the highest value at around 1 in absorbance and
that the "zero" solution, where only the tracer is present, could help determine the highest possible
absorbance for the setup.
To see the improvement achieved through the speciﬁc orientation compared to the random orientation,
the data from both experiments with the tracer concentration of 1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL are shown in
Figure 16.
Page 54 of 151
==PAGE:60==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 16
Comparison of the results obtained with random antibody orientation with speciﬁc orientation
by protein G for cortisol. The data presents the results from the tracer concentration TR:1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL
in relation to the antibody concentrations from 1/200 to 1/102400 ∼6 µg/mL to 0.012 µg/mL obtained with random
orientation and with speciﬁc orientation by protein G. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard
deviations.
Results for Alternariol
This experiment was carried out with the protein G concentration of 1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL, antibody
concentrations of 1/100 to 1/102400 ∼45 µg/mL to 0.044 µg/mL and the tracer concentrations of
1/2000 ∼0.6 µg/mL and 1/4000 ∼0.3 µg/mL. The antibody concentrations were chosen to obtain
saturation in both ends of the curve and the tracer concentrations were chosen based on the results
presented in section 4.1.1 Optimization of Antibody- and Tracer Concentration. It was assumed that
protein G would improve the results, as it improved the results for the experiment with cortisol, and
that the data points obtained with the chosen tracer concentrations together with protein G would
remain in the useful absorbance range. The result is presented in Figure 17.
Page 55 of 151
==PAGE:61==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 17
Optimal antibody- and tracer concentrations with speciﬁc orientation by protein G for alternar-
iol. The data presents two diﬀerent tracer concentrations (TR:1/2000 ∼0.6 µg/mL and TR:1/4000 ∼0.3 µg/mL) in
relation to the antibody concentrations from 1/100 to 1/102400 ∼45 µg/mL to 0.044 µg/mL. The results are presented
by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
This experiment conﬁrms that protein G also improved the result for alternariol, but not as signiﬁcantly
as it did for the experiment with cortisol. However, protein G improved the orientation of the antibody
as indicated by the higher absorbance, especially for the antibody concentrations from 1/200 to 1/1600,
which can be seen in Figure 18, where the data with random orientation and speciﬁc orientation are
compared for both tracer concentrations. The exact explanation for this improvement is unclear, but
it could be that the speciﬁc orientation by protein G made the antibody binding sites more available
for the tracer. Hence, more tracer could bind and give a higher absorbance. It can be seen that protein
G improved the data, but mostly when it comes to the absorbance and not in terms of lowering the
antibody concentration. Even though something is still limiting the assay either due to low activity of
the biological elements or poor binding aﬃnity, protein G did enhance the result, which means that
future data could be improved.
To determine the optimal antibody- and tracer concentration for the analyte calibration curve, a point
around 0.70 in absorbance should be found. However, the only point that is around 0.70 (exact value
is 0.64) in absorbance, is from the tracer concentration of 1/4000 with an antibody concentration
of 1/400 and this was therefore chosen. As a point in between the two tracer concentrations would
be preferable, it was decided to perform the analyte calibration curve experiment with the antibody
concentration 1/400 and the tracer concentrations 1/3000 and 1/4000, since it was believed that the
1/3000 could provide a higher maximum absorbance and thereby give a more decent signal for the
IC50. It was expected that the result obtained with the tracer concentration of 1/3000 would have
Page 56 of 151
==PAGE:62==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
a maximum absorbance closer to 1 and that the "zero" solution, where only the tracer was present,
could help determine the highest possible absorbance for the setup.
Figure 18
Comparison of the results obtained with random antibody orientation with speciﬁc orientation
by protein G for alternariol. The data presents the results from the tracer concentration (TR:1/2000 ∼0.6 µg/mL)
to the left and the tracer concentration (TR:1/4000 ∼0.3 µg/mL) to the right in relation to the antibody concentrations
from 1/100 to 1/102400 ∼45 µg/mL to 0.044 µg/mL obtained with random orientation and with speciﬁc orientation by
protein G. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
4.1.3
Analyte Calibration Curve
By performing a competitive ELISA with speciﬁc orientation by using protein G, an analyte calibration
curve for the setup could be achieved and the IC50, the limit of detection (LOD), and the sensitivity
of the ELISA design be determined. This analyte calibration curve could also be used to determine
the analyte concentrations of unknown samples.
In general, the lower the value of the IC50 and LOD the more eﬀective the binding and recognition
of the antigen by the antibody are. The low values reﬂect a high sensitivity of the biosensor design,
meaning that the sensor is very eﬀective at low concentrations. The values are correlated with the
competition in the assay and are only reliable if the competition is equivalent between the tracer and
analyte. The values are also correlated with the concentration of the antibody used for the experiment
which has to be taken into consideration, if obtained results are compared. The term IC50 originates
from inhibition or drug eﬀect studies, but is also applied for immunoassays due to the mathematical
resemblance between the obtained response curves, the sigmoidal curve.
In an immunoassay, the
IC50 refers to a concentration that causes 50% saturation of the antibody binding sites. The LOD
is calculated by taken 90% of the maximum absorbance to ensure that the limit is in the conﬁdence
range of the detection and do not include any noise or errors.
Page 57 of 151
==PAGE:63==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
How sensitive should the biological setup be to fulﬁll the given criteria?
When having a maximum concentration level for the analyte present in the sample, it is important
to determine if the biosensor setup can cover the range of detection needed, also when the sample
preparation is considered. The present maximum concentration level from the European commission
for alternariol is 10 µg/kg, equivalent to 38.72 nmol/L ∼38.72 nM.
Results for Cortisol
This experiment was carried out with protein G (1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL), and an antibody concentration
of 1/3200 ∼0.375 µg/mL, but with diﬀerent tracer concentrations of 1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL and 1/6000
∼0.167 µg/mL and a diﬀerent set of analyte ranges, as the assay was improved over multiple attempts
to obtain the best possible calibration curve. The overall result with both tracer concentrations are
presented in Figure 19.
Figure 19
Analyte calibration curves with speciﬁc orientation by protein G for cortisol with diﬀerent
tracer concentrations. The data presented are made from a competitive ELISA with speciﬁc orientation by protein G.
The optimal antibody concentration used is AB:1/3200 ∼0.375 µg/mL and the data is shown for two tracer concentrations
TR:1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL and TR:1/6000 ∼0.167 µg/mL, to show that the top of the curve increased in absorbance
with the increased tracer concentration. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
The data obtained with the tracer concentration of 1/9000 made a ﬁne sigmoidal curve, as seen in
Figure 19, but it was believed that the result could be improved, since the maximum absorbance
value only reached 0.7. Therefore, the tracer concentration was increased to 1/6000, which also gave
a ﬁne sigmoidal curve, as seen in Figure 19, but had a higher maximum absorbance value on 0.9,
which increased the absorbance of the IC50 to a decent value. However, as the tracer concentration
was increased, the IC50 and LOD of the ELISA design also increased a bit. The analysis of the data
obtained with the tracer concentration of 1/6000 ∼0.167 µg/mL gave an IC50 of 1.463 nM, and a
Page 58 of 151
==PAGE:64==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
LOD of 0.207 nM, which veriﬁes that this ELISA setup was very sensitive and could determine low
analyte concentrations. In general, this was a very good result, as the shape of the curve is sharp and
the error bars narrow for almost every data point.
Results for Alternariol
This experiment was carried out with protein G (1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL), and an antibody concentration
of 1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL, but with two tracer concentrations of 1/4000 ∼0.3 µg/mL and 1/3000 ∼
0.4 µg/mL, as it was believed that a tracer concentration of 1/4000 could give a low maximum
absorbance. The analyte range was chosen based on the experiments made with cortisol, but as the
biological elements are still new, the analyte concentration range was changed from 400 nM - 0.2048
pM to 2 µM - 1.024 pM, to ensure that the curve reaches a plateau in both ends. The overall result
with both tracer concentrations are presented in Figure 20.
Figure 20
Analyte calibration curves with speciﬁc orientation by protein G for alternariol with diﬀerent
tracer concentrations. The data presented are made from a competitive ELISA with speciﬁc orientation by protein G.
The optimal antibody concentration used is AB:1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL and the data is shown for two tracer concentrations
1/3000 ∼0.4 µg/mL and TR:1/4000 ∼0.3 µg/mL to show that the top of the curve increased in absorbance with the
increased tracer concentration. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
These results showed ﬁrst of all that the protocol for cortisol could be transferred to alternariol, and
that the changed analyte range was not a necessary act, as the other range would also have matched.
It can be seen that the results obtained with the tracer concentration 1/4000 ∼0.3 µg/mL had a low
maximum absorbance, but it was not expected to only reach 0.5. It was expected that the data for
the tracer concentration of 1/3000 ∼0.4 µg/mL had reached a higher maximum absorbance around 1,
but it only reached 0.6. Although the maximum absorbance signal is a bit low, it can be determined
that there is a trend, as the increased tracer concentration increases the absorbance. Hence, a tracer
Page 59 of 151
==PAGE:65==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
concentration of 1/2000 or 1/1000 could give an absorbance closer to 1 and a higher absorbance at
the IC50. When comparing these results to the ones obtained with cortisol, the curves for alternariol
are shifted to the right, which indicates a higher IC50 and a higher LOD.
The analysis of the data with the tracer concentration of 1/3000 ∼0.4 µg/mL gave an IC50 of 10.71
nM, and a LOD of 2.155 nM, which veriﬁes that the ELISA setup is not as sensitive as the one for
cortisol. This biosensor setup can still measure low analyte concentrations, but there is deﬁnitely
room for improvement and optimization of the biological elements for alternariol, as the IC50 is
around seven times higher than that for cortisol. As a biosensor using these biological elements in
high concentrations can have diﬃculties in detecting low concentrations in pure buﬀer solution, it is
interesting to see how the matrix of a tomato product inﬂuences the setup. In general, this was a nice
result, as the shape of the curves are sharp, but some of the error bars could be brought down.
4.1.4
Matrix Eﬀect of a Tomato Product
When designing a biosensor, it is important to investigate how the matrix of the product sample can
aﬀect the biological elements, and hence, e.g. the IC50 and LOD, compared to using a buﬀer solution.
One question is always about which preparation of the product sample that would give the most
correct concentration of the analyte and the minimum matrix eﬀect for the biosensor. One sample
type was investigated namely tomato juice from the brand Rynkeby. This product was chosen, since
it has the simplest preparation process of all the described tomato products, being suitable for this
proof of concept project. It is important to say that a matrix analysis has to be made for every sample
type, even for diﬀerent tomato juices, to evaluate the eﬀect of each type of matrix on the biosensor
setup.
Tomato Juice Preparation
Based on former preparation strategies described in the theory, diﬀerent preparation methods were
investigated and compared to raw tomato juice: 1) tomato juice diluted 1:10 with PBS, 2) tomato
juice supernatant after centrifugation (5 min, 13000 rpm), 3) tomato juice supernatant after centrifu-
gation (5 min, 13000 rpm) with a dilution of 1:1 with PBS and 4) tomato juice supernatant after
centrifugation (5 min, 13000 rpm) and ﬁltration (pore size 0.22 µm), also called ﬁltrated supernatant.
The diﬀerent preparations are presented in Figure 21 and are all compared to raw tomato juice in
viscosity, transparency and colour. The pH of the diﬀerent preparations was measured, since it can
determine if the solution pH has to be adjusted with 1 M NaOH before use. The pH values can be
seen in Table 4.
Page 60 of 151
==PAGE:66==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 21
Diﬀerent preparations of tomato juice. A: Raw tomato juice, B: Tomato juice diluted 1:10 with PBS,
C: Tomato juice supernatant after centrifugation (5 min, 13000 rpm), D: Tomato juice supernatant after centrifugation
(5 min, 13000 rpm) with a dilution of 1:1 with PBS and E: Tomato juice supernatant after centrifugation (5 min, 13000
rpm) and ﬁltration (pore size 0.22 µm) also called ﬁltrated supernatant.
Table 4
pH value of the diﬀerent tomato juice preparations from the two diﬀerent tomato juices.
Preparation
Raw
Diluted 1:10
Supernatant
Supernatant
& diluted 1:1
Filtrated
supernatant
pH value
4.35 or 4.50
6.48 or 6.40
4.34
4.63
4.34
As demonstrated in Figure 21, raw tomato juice is highly viscous, opaque, red and contains many
small particles. When diluting the raw tomato juice 1:10 with PBS, the liquid gets less viscous, more
transparent and yellow, but the small particles remain. The centrifugation separated the liquid from
most of the particles, which made the supernatant less viscous, but still leaving it opaque and red.
When the supernatant was diluted 1:1 with PBS, the liquid became more transparent, the colour
lighter and the amount of particles were minimized compared to the undiluted supernatant. When
the supernatant was ﬁltered the colour turned yellow and the liquid became very transparent and
clean of particles. The pH of the raw tomato juice (pH 4.35) was expected as the pH of tomato lies
between 4-5, but it can be seen that diluting it with PBS increases the pH. The pH of the sample
is important, since a low pH can aﬀect the aﬃnity of the biological setup, as the optimal pH for the
antigen-antibody complex is between 6.5-8.4, the optimal pH for the HRP enzyme is between 6.0-6.5
and since a low pH is used to regenerate the setup. The product sample should therefore have a pH
around 6.5-7.0. This pH range would also form almost the same conditions as used in the experiment
with buﬀer solution (pH 7.30-7.40), and thereby ensures that the results are comparable. Depending
on the preparation, the solution may need pH adjustment with 1 M NaOH before use.
How can the Particles Aﬀect the Measurement?
The particles can inﬂuence the biosensor in various of ways. One could be with the sample colour,
since some molecules and particles can be connected with the colour. Therefore, the colour could
aﬀect the absorbance measurements when using ELISA, if the colour is not washed away properly.
The colour, which is detected, is either blue or yellow, where the colour of the product sample is either
red, light red or yellow depending on the preparation method. As a yellow substance is detected at
450 nm, while a red substance is detected at around 525 nm, the colour of the product does not seem
to be a problem, unless using the ﬁltrated supernatant, as the preparation turns the solution yellow.
Page 61 of 151
==PAGE:67==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
However, this will be reﬂected in the "blank" solution that is included in the experiment. The particles
can also aﬀect the measurement by either blocking the light of the spectrophotometer or by blocking
the binding sites of the antibodies or by blocking the active site of the enzyme, since the particles
can stick to the bottom of the wells or to the biological elements. Another way of aﬀecting is, that
the particles could attract the analyte, as both analytes are hydrophobic, and bind the analyte in
their matrix. If this is the case, it is possible that the diﬀerent preparation methods can aﬀect the
ﬁnal concentration of the analyte, since unit operations like centrifugation and ﬁltration separate the
particles from the liquid that is used as the sample for ELISA and for the biosensor. Thereby, some
of the analyte can be lost and give a wrong indication of the concentration and other preparation
methods have to be used to extract and isolate the analyte. Tomato juice contains a lot of particles,
which is shown by a large pellet after centrifugation and a blocked ﬁlter. The essential questions that
need to be answered are where the analyte is located in the product sample after the homogenising
and food processing, and how it is ensured that all of the analyte present is isolated in the solution,
that is injected into the biosensor.
The Chosen Preparation Method
The chosen preparation method was tomato juice diluted 1:10 with PBS, since both the particles and
the liquid are present, and the eﬀect of both can be investigated. It is also the simplest preparation of
the product as it only takes a dilution and no pH adjustment, which could be useful for the industry,
as it could easily be implemented in an automatic ﬂow system. When using this preparation method,
the dilution could bring the analyte concentration under the limit of detection, which could give false
negatives, as the real analyte concentration cannot be quantiﬁed [53]. This has to be considered and
investigated, as it can cause a signiﬁcant problem, if the biosensor is not sensitive enough, which
could be the case here. Since the maximum allowed level of alternariol is 10 µg/kg equivalent to 38.72
nM, could the dilution factor of 10 be a realistic dilution factor, as a sample with this concentration
can be diluted 10 times and still give a value of 3.872 nM, which is over the LOD obtained with
pure buﬀer solution. Alternariol concentrations found in tomato juice is, however, in the range of
1.1 µg/kg to 2.1 µg/kg, equivalent to 4.26 nM to 8.13 nM. If such sample matrices are diluted 10
times, the concentration may range from 0.426 nM to 0.813 nM, which is most likely under the limit
of detection, when using the present biological elements obtained from Abvigen Inc in a biosensor.
The chosen preparation methods depend on the sensitivity of the biosensor and at which alternariol
concentration it has to respond, but also on the viscosity and matrix of the product.
Results for Cortisol
To test the matrix eﬀect of tomato juice on cortisol detection could be beneﬁcial, as the experiment
will reﬂect the real matrix eﬀect with minimum background response, since cortisol is not normally
present in tomato products and since the analytes are very alike. When the experiment is done with
alternariol and its biological elements antibody and tracer, already existing alternariol (if any) in the
sample could aﬀect the result as the tomato juice is spiked with the analyte after the preparation.
Page 62 of 151
==PAGE:68==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Matrix Eﬀect
The experiment of the matrix eﬀect was performed with tomato juice diluted 1:10 with PBS with the
conditions of a protein G (1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL), an antibody concentration of 1/3200 ∼0.375 µg/mL
and a tracer concentration of 1/6000 ∼0.167 µg/mL. The result is presented in Figure 22 (left).
Figure 22
Analyte calibration curve with speciﬁc orientation by protein G for cortisol with the matrix
eﬀect of diluted tomato juice with comparison. The data presented are made from a competitive ELISA with
speciﬁc orientation by protein G and tomato juice diluted 1:10 (D:10x) with PBS to determine the matrix eﬀect of
the setup. The optimal antibody- and tracer conditions are used: AB:1/3200 ∼0.375 µg/mL and TR:1/6000 ∼0.167
µg/mL. The ﬁgure shows both the data for the matrix eﬀect to the left, and the compared data with the diﬀerent matrix
of buﬀer solution and diluted tomato juice to the right. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard
deviations.
In the experiment, some practical diﬃculties were observed, as the particles tended to precipitate
in the solutions and had to be regularly mixed during the experiment, but also since the particles
sometimes blocked the pipette tip and one had to be very attentive to the volume. Even though the
tomato juice gave some practical complications, the result turned out well, with a sharp shape and
small errors bars.
The analysis of the data gave an IC50 of 1.435 nM, and a LOD10 of 0.267 nM, which veriﬁed that
the ELISA setup even in the presence of diluted tomato juice is very sensitive and can determine
low analyte concentrations.
To see where the tomato juice had an eﬀect, the result is compared
with the results from the analyte calibration curve obtained with pure buﬀer solution (see Figure 22,
right). When comparing the results, it can be seen that the matrix of the diluted tomato juice aﬀects
the maximum absorbance, as the maximum of the curve is decreased from around 0.9 to around
0.7, thereby, having an absorbance reduction of around 23%. However, when comparing the IC50
and the LOD, the matrix had almost no eﬀect. Both values were nearly the same as those in pure
buﬀer solution: IC50: 1.463 nM in buﬀer solution and 1.435 nM in tomato juice diluted 1:10 with
Page 63 of 151
==PAGE:69==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
PBS; and LOD: 0.207 nM in buﬀer solution and 0.267 nM in tomato juice diluted 1:10 with PBS.
It can be seen that the LOD increased a bit when using the diluted tomato juice. This result could
indicate that the pH of the diluted tomato juice is in the right range and was not too low, as the
IC50 is almost unchanged compared to the IC50 obtained with pure buﬀer solution. Too low a pH
could have the risk of aﬀecting the binding aﬃnity. Since the IC50 was almost unchanged it indicates
that the binding aﬃnity of the antibody was probably not aﬀected by the diluted tomato juice. The
lowered maximum absorbance could have several reasons. One reason might be that the tomato juice
could contain compounds, that can prevent the absorbance of the product and thereby aﬀect the
measurement by the spectrophotometer, or that a compound reacts with the product and thereby
lowers the absorbance. Another reason could be that the tomato juice contains proteins which block
some of the binding sites on the antibody. It has been proven in literature, that proteins from a
matrix can bind to antibodies and block the binding sites. Such protein-antibody binding has been
reported to interfere with the accuracy of immunoassays [67].
Another reason could be, that the
tomato juice consists of compounds which either aﬀect the enzyme by inhibition, so that the activity
is decreased, or aﬀect the enzyme reaction by acting as the substrate, which competes with TMB,
and the related product cannot be detected at the wavelength of 450 nm. In literature, it has been
reported that a possible reason for reduced absorbance or reduced colour development is caused by
inhibition of the enzyme and its activity [53]. One group of compounds that could be the reason for
the decreased enzyme activity is heavy metals. Heavy metals are proven to exert an inhibitory eﬀect
on microorganisms, where the general consensus states that the toxicity of heavy metals are caused by
their interactions with nucleic acids and proteins, such as enzymes. It has been proven in literature
that the inhibition mode of heavy metals is reversible and uncompetitive, and that diﬀerent heavy
metals have diﬀerent levels of inhibition. Especially Hg+2 causes high degree of enzyme inhibition [68].
Tomato and tomato products have diﬀerent heavy metals in their contents, among them also those that
have been reported to inhibit the HRP enzyme (see the content of tomatoes and tomato products in
Appendix A.5 Contents of Tomato and Diﬀerent Tomato Products). If these heavy metals are present
in the liquid, they could potentially inhibit the HRP enzyme and cause the reduced absorbance.
This hypothesis was questioned, since it was assumed that the heavy metals would also aﬀect the
antigen-antibody complex, thereby aﬀecting the IC50, which is in this experiment unchanged. It has
been proven in literature that heavy metals can induce changes in the aggregation performance and
behaviour of the antibody and the formation of the antigen-antibody complex, as they can aﬀect the
hydrodynamic properties. It is therefore unexpected, that research showed that the antibody-antigen
binding activity is unaﬀected by the presence of the heavy metals even at ’non-physiological’ high
concentrations [69]. It is therefore possible that the heavy metals only aﬀect the HRP enzyme and
not the binding activity of the antigen-antibody complex, resulting in similar IC50, but at a reduced
maximum absorbance. However, this hypothesis could be wrong, and it could be that the heavy metals
would aﬀect the whole biological setup and not only the enzyme. To ensure that the heavy metals are
the main actor in this decreased maximum absorbance, it has to be investigated and validated, since
it also could be a combination of several reasons, e.g. both proteins blocking the binding sites and
inhibition of the HRP enzyme, as the absorbance reduction (23%) is signiﬁcant even when the tomato
juice was diluted 1:10, considering that the heavy metals would also be diluted 10 times.
Page 64 of 151
==PAGE:70==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
If the tomato juice only aﬀects the measurement by the spectrophotometer, this problem would disap-
pear when measuring the product of the enzyme reaction electrochemically on the electrode. However,
if compounds in the tomato juice are blocking the binding sites or inhibit the enzyme or compete with
the substrate, the issue will also appear in the electrochemical detection. One other problem that
could occur when applying the electrode is if some compounds from the tomato juice bind to the
electrode surface and block the detection of the product.
The results showed overall that the matrix of the diluted tomato juice does not aﬀect the biosensor
setup for cortisol as negatively as it could. This result is quite decent.
Particle Eﬀect - Experiment for Cortisol
A particle experiment was performed to investigate the eﬀect of the particles on the biological setup
and if there is a trend in the behaviour when using diﬀerent dilutions of the raw tomato juice and
particle-free solutions like the supernatant and the ﬁltrated supernatant of the tomato juice. The
hypothesis was that the more particles there are present, the more negative is the eﬀect and the lower
measured absorbance.
Before the experiment, the pH had to be adjusted in some of the prepared tomato juice solutions
with 1 M NaOH, so that the average pH was around 6.5-7.0. Since the pH of tomato juice diluted
1:10 with PBS was measured to be around 6.5 (see Table 4), it was assumed that the solutions with
lower tomato juice concentrations would have a pH value in the correct range. Therefore, only the
solutions to create the dilution 1:1 e.g. raw tomato juice, dilution 1:5 e.g. dilution 1:2.5 on the plate,
the supernatant and ﬁltrated supernatant solutions were pH adjusted. Table 5 contains the starting
pH of the diﬀerent preparations, the added amount of 1 M NaOH and the ﬁnal pH. Since this pH
adjustment was necessary, small variations in the dilutions could appear.
Table 5
pH adjustment before the experiment of the prepared tomato juice solutions. The pH adjusted for
the prepared tomato juice solutions: raw tomato juice, dilution 1:2.5, supernatant and ﬁltrated supernatant, showing
the start pH, added amount of 1 M NaOH and the ﬁnal pH.
Preparation
Initial volume
Start pH
Amount of NaOH added
Final pH
Raw tomato juice
7 mL
4.33
240 µL
7.00
Diluted 1:2.5
5 mL
4.84
55 µL
6.57
Supernatant
8 mL
4.35
270 µL
6.63
Filtrated supernatant
8 mL
4.33
250 µL
6.57
The experiment of the particle eﬀect was performed with biological elements of cortisol, as it would
give the minimum background eﬀect. The tomato juice preparations were diluted tomato juice from
1:1 to 1:100 mixed with PBS, supernatant and ﬁltered supernatant. The overall result is presented in
Figure 23, but the data point for dilution 1:5 was excluded, as it was an outlier.
Page 65 of 151
==PAGE:71==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 23
The particle eﬀect of tomato juice with cortisol, the trend of the matrix behaviour with diﬀerent
preparation methods. The data presented for the particle eﬀect includes an interval of tomato juice dilutions from
1:1 to 1:100 mixed with PBS, supernatant and ﬁltrated supernatant. The ﬁgure only shows the ﬁxed data, as the data
point diluted 1:5 is seen as an outlier. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations
The experiment showed some expected and unexpected results. The expected results was to see the
trend of increased absorbance from the least diluted (dilution 1:1) to the most diluted (dilution 1:100)
solution of tomato juice, and to see that the most diluted tomato juice still had an eﬀect compared
to the absorbance obtained with the pure buﬀer solution. This made sense, since the particles and
other compounds that could aﬀect the setup were diluted more and more. The unexpected results
were from the supernatant and ﬁltered supernatant, since they were expected to perform best among
the tomato preparations, as there were no particles present in the solutions. Nevertheless, they both
had the lowest absorbance of around 0.65. This indicates that the particles themselves are not the
main contributors to the reduced absorbance observed in tomato products as compared to pure buﬀer
solution. This behaviour could be due to the solutions. The supernatant and ﬁltered supernatant
were not diluted, which makes the compounds in the sample more concentrated. It could also be due
to the centrifugation, as the used force (13000 rpm) could have forced a release of compounds, that
could aﬀect the setup even more negatively than when they were bound to the particles. Another
reason for the general behaviour of the decreased signal, could be due to proteins in the tomato juice,
since proteins can pass through a ﬁlter with the pore size of 0.22 µm corresponding to a microﬁltration
[70], and block the binding sites of the antibody, causing the low absorbance. The slightly diﬃcult
ﬁltration implies that the supernatant of the tomato juice still contains a large amount of proteins [71]
even after centrifugation. The correct reason for the behaviour is uncertain and has to be investigated.
Page 66 of 151
==PAGE:72==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
If the reason of this trend is not only due to dilution, but also due to the centrifugation releasing
compounds from the particles. The already suspected heavy metals could also be the reason here,
since it has been proved in literature that the metal ion concentration in digested sludge can be
increased as the centrifugal force is increased [72]. The increased metal concentration could cause
increased enzyme inhibition. This hypothesis has to be investigated, since the preparation methods
can aﬀect the biological elements e.g. HRP enzyme and thereby the detection of the analyte. This
result reﬂects that a higher dilution factor gives a higher absorbance, as the particles and other harmful
compounds are diluted, which is closer to the value obtained with pure buﬀer solution. It has been
reported in literature, that less than 10% absorbance reduction could be an acceptable interval [53].
The dilution 1:10 has a absorbance reduction of around 23%, but it seems like a higher dilution factor
like 1:20 or 1:40 could decrease the absorbance reduction to under 10%. However, this is only relevant
if dilution is the optimal preparation method to use. Either way, the sensitivity of the biosensor must
be capable of handling the preparation and a possible dilution factor as the quantiﬁcation depends on
the LOD.
It can be seen that the absorbance of the 1:10 dilution with PBS has a higher absorbance in this
experiment compared to the other experiment examining the matrix eﬀect. This was not expected, as
they should be identical, but the diﬀerence could be due the fact that it was performed in two diﬀerent
experiments with diﬀerent protocols, as the analyte cortisol was applied to create the calibration curve
but was not used in the experiment of the particle eﬀect. It could also be due to the tomato juice
solutions not being identical, since the tomato juice was not eternally homogenized.
Results for Alternariol
Even though alternariol could be present in the sample of the tomato juice and thereby caused dis-
turbance in the experiment, it would be good to determine if the matrix had the same eﬀect on the
biological elements for alternariol as it had for cortisol, when using tomato juice diluted 1:10, as it
is these elements a potential biosensor should use. This experiment would also give a more realistic
picture of how alternariol is behaving in the matrix, i.e. if alternariol is behaving like cortisol and if
dilution is the right sample preparation method.
Matrix Eﬀect
The experiment of the matrix eﬀect was performed with tomato juice diluted 1:10 with PBS with the
conditions of a protein G (1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL), an antibody concentration of 1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL
and a tracer concentration of 1/3000 ∼0.4 µg/mL. The analysed data is presented in Figure 24 (left).
Page 67 of 151
==PAGE:73==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 24
Analyte calibration curve with speciﬁc orientation by protein G for alternariol with the matrix
eﬀect of diluted tomato juice with comparison. The data presented are made from a competitive ELISA with
speciﬁc orientation by protein G and tomato juice diluted 1:10 (D:10x) with PBS to determine the matrix eﬀect of the
setup. The optimal antibody- and tracer conditions are used: AB:1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL and TR:1/3000 ∼0.4 µg/mL.
The ﬁgure shows both the data for the matrix eﬀect to the left, and the compared data with the diﬀerent matrix of
buﬀer solution and diluted tomato juice to the right. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard
deviations.
In this experiment, the same practical diﬃculties with the particles were observed as in the experiment
with cortisol. As the matrix with alternariol was expected to behave equally to what was observed for
cortisol, it was expected that the matrix of the diluted tomato juice would have the same eﬀect, where
the absorbance was decreased and the IC50 and LOD remained almost unchanged. However, instead
of decreasing the absorbance, the signal increased signiﬁcantly as compared to the analyte calibration
curve made for alternariol in pure buﬀer solution, as the maximum signal went from around 0.6 to
around 1.1 (see Figure 24, right). The increased absorbance, means that more tracer is bound to the
antibody than analyte, which could indicate that the amount of analyte is decreased. If this is the
case, the competition is unbalanced, since the tracer has an advantage in the assay. This result could
indicate that the preparation method, where the tomato juice is only diluted is not the best choice,
as it looks like alternariol is lost somewhere in the matrix.
The analysis of the data gave an IC50 of 28.269 nM and a LOD of 0.874 nM, which diﬀers from
the values obtained with pure buﬀer solution. The IC50 is around 3 times higher, whereas the LOD
is around 2.5 times lower. This analysis seems to be inﬂuenced by mathematical artefacts as the
normal tendency is that when IC50 increases, the LOD increases as well, which was not the case in the
experiment. This statistical inﬂuence, which led to the lowered LOD, could be due to the shape of the
curve. It is not that sharp and the maximum absorbance values of the curve at the low concentrations
do not form a clear plateau. Since the LOD is calculated as 90% of the maximum absorbance, the value
Page 68 of 151
==PAGE:74==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
may decrease. However, the standard deviation for the data points at the upper bound of the curve
do allow for a straight line similar to the one obtained with buﬀer solution. Therefore, this tendency
to a higher maximum top point might just be an illusion from the analysis and the variable data. As
this assay is suspected to be unbalanced and the analysis of the data is suspected to be inﬂuenced by
mathematical artefacts, one should stay critical of the results, especially of the values for IC50 and the
LOD. The eﬀect of the matrix cannot be determined by this experiment, as the hypothesis of analyte
being lost is creating an unbalanced assay. However, this experiment can give an indication of where
the analyte could be in the sample matrix and which consequences the preparation method could have
on the ﬁnal concentration.
This experiment show that even when the analytes are structurally similar, they can act diﬀerently
in a sample matrix, as alternariol clearly behaves diﬀerently in the diluted tomato juice than cortisol
does.
These observations also indicate, how important the sample handling is and how diﬀerent
analytes can have diﬀerent optimal preparation, as the wrong preparation method can give a wrong
ﬁnal concentration of the analyte and thereby give a false negative result. The main understanding
when the two analytes cortisol and alternariol were compared structurally, was that cortisol is more
hydrophobic than alternariol, but due to this experiment is seems to be the opposite. To this point it
is also believed that the more hydrophobic the analyte is, the more it would be bound to the particles
in the tomato juice to avoid the aqueous solution. To better understand the results, the Log P value,
which determines the lipophilicity of a compound, was found for both analytes and it turned out that
the main understanding was wrong. The value for cortisol is lower than for alternariol, as the value is
1.79 and 2.7 respectively [73, 74]. This could explain the loss of analyte, as there is a greater chance
that alternariol binds to the particles than there is for cortisol. A hypothesis is therefore, that the high
absorbance was because most of the analyte got bound to the particles in the tomato juice and got
washed away together with them in the assay. As the diluted tomato juice is spiked, it is possible to
verify the hypothesis and determine if the analytes are lost due to the particles. Such an experiment
would include a tomato juice solution where the particles are removed before spiking with analyte,
like the ﬁltrated supernatant.
Particle Eﬀect - Experiment for Alternariol
As the hypothesis was that alternariol was bound to the particles in the tomato juice, an experiment
was conducted with ﬁltrated supernatant from the juice, as it is the most particle free solution obtained.
One factor to consider was that this solution is suspected of having a higher concentration of harmful
compounds than the diluted version, as it is non-diluted and has been through centrifugation, which
could have released compounds from the particles into the supernatant. If the hypothesis about the
particles was correct, the result, especially the IC50 and the LOD, should be closer to the result
obtained with pure buﬀer solution, as the analyte should be able to compete equally with the tracer.
The ﬁltrated supernatant was prepared with the same procedure as described in section 4.1.4 Matrix
Eﬀect of a Tomato Product, with a centrifugation (13000 rpm, 5 min) and a ﬁltration (pore size 0.22
µm). The solution was pH adjusted before use, as the pH should be around 6.5-7.0. The start pH,
added amount of 1 M NaOH and the ﬁnal pH are shown in Table 6. It can be seen that more 1
Page 69 of 151
==PAGE:75==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
M NaOH had to be added compared to the previous pH adjustment, this is due to the volume as it
increased from 8 mL to 15 mL.
Table 6
pH adjustment before the experiment of the ﬁltrated supernatant from tomato juice. The pH
adjusted for the tomato juice solution ﬁltrated supernatant, showing the start pH, added amount of 1 M NaOH and the
ﬁnal pH.
Preparation
Initial volume
Start pH
Amount of NaOH added
Final pH
Filtrated supernatant
15 mL
4.33
515 µL
6.48
This experiment of the particle eﬀect was performed with ﬁltered supernatant from tomato juice with
protein G (1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL), an antibody concentration of 1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL and a tracer
concentration of 1/3000 ∼0.4 µg/mL. The analysed data is presented in Figure 25.
Figure 25
Analyte calibration curve with speciﬁc orientation by protein G for alternariol to view the
particle eﬀect of tomato juice for alternariol. The data presented are made from two diﬀerent competitive ELISA
with the matrix of pure buﬀer solution and ﬁltrated supernatant from tomato juice. The optimal antibody- and tracer
conditions are: AB:1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL and TR:1/3000 ∼0.4 µg/mL with protein G. The analyte calibration curves
are compared to show that the maximum absorbance obtained is decreased when using ﬁltrated supernatant from tomato
juice, but that the shape is alright, and that the IC50 is in the same range. The results are presented by the absorbance
and with standard deviations.
This experiment indicates that the particles in the tomato juice could have a signiﬁcant importance
when performing the assay with alternariol. As expected, due to the ﬁltrated supernatant probably
having a higher concentration of harmful compounds, the maximum absorbance went down from 0.6
for pure buﬀer solution to around 0.3, with the consequence that the absorbance at the IC50 and
LOD were also in the lower end of the useful absorbance range. Although the maximum absorbance
decreased, the IC50 and the LOD were close to the ones obtained with pure buﬀer solution, as the
Page 70 of 151
==PAGE:76==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
analysis gave an IC50 of 9.862 nM and a LOD of 1.446 nM. Both values were decreased a bit, as the
values obtained for pure buﬀer solution were an IC50 of 10.71 nM and a LOD of 2.155 nM. This result
indicates that the competitive assay is most probably in balance, and that the analyte and tracer are
competing equally. Large error bars for some of the data points are visible and are believed to be
due to practical problems during the experiment, as the ﬁltered supernatant solution tended to foam
when being pipetted. This foam could be caused by the proteins in the solution and the ﬁltration, as
it was observed that the solution foamed after going through the ﬁlter. The curve has a sharp form,
but the upper part could be even sharper, if the large errors were eliminated.
This experiment illustrates that the particles in the tomato juice attracts the analyte alternariol and
traps it within their matrix. This experiment also showed that diﬀerent preparation methods can have
an inﬂuence on the ﬁnal alternariol concentration and have diﬀerent advantages and disadvantages.
The dilution preparation has the advantage that the harmful compounds are decreased, wheres the
disadvantage is that the particles can aﬀect the ﬁnal alternariol concentration. The ﬁltered supernatant
from the tomato juice has the advantage of not having any particles aﬀecting the ﬁnal alternariol
concentration, but have the disadvantages of having a high concentration of harmful compounds,
which has an eﬀect on the absorbance and having a centrifugation step, where analyte could be lost.
This experiment could indicate that alternariol is trapped into the tissue of the tomato, when the
fungi is growing on it and exporting the toxin, which points to that the best preparation methods
could be to isolate the toxin from the sample to avoid getting false negative results.
4.1.5
Regeneration of the ELISA Setup
A regeneration experiment of the ELISA setup with the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
was performed to determine where the acid would cleave. This experiment could also determine which
theory that is correct and which goal for the biosensor could be made a reality. This experiment was
made with ELISA, since it is easier to determine the result than using an electrochemical response.
Since protein G can bind strongly to every Ig antibody and since the antigen-antibody complex
should work in the same way, it is assumed that the regeneration performs equally for all assays.
This experiment was performed as identical as an experiment on the electrode, but one diﬀerence is
that protein G was covalently bound to the electrode, whereas the protein is attached to the well by
physisorption. The covalent binding should be stronger than physisorption. An initial experiment
was run to get an idea of the time needed for a full regeneration, and the experiment showed that 12
minutes were not enough (data not shown). Therefore, the time was increased to 30 minutes, but this
time could be optimised, since the precise regeneration time is probably between these limits.
Results for Cortisol
This experiment was performed with the biological elements for cortisol detection, which will create
the fundamental understanding of the regeneration.
Only tracer was used to save analyte.
The
experiment was divided into three scenarios depending on where the solution could cleave: either
between the plate and protein G or between protein G and the antibody or between the antibody and
the tracer/analyte. The enzyme reaction was not stopped with acid, since the setup had to be reused
and the absorbance is detected at 650 nm (colour blue) [75]. The results are presented at Figure 26.
Page 71 of 151
==PAGE:77==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 26
Regeneration in three diﬀerent scenarios: focus on protein G, focus on antibody and focus on
tracer. The three diﬀerent scenarios are displayed with the reference signal, the signal after 30 minutes of regeneration
solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and the restored signal after either adding new protein G, antibody and tracer or adding
new antibody and tracer or only adding new tracer. The experiment had the following conditions: protein G:1/160 ∼
6.25 µg/mL, antibody: 1/800-1/51200 ∼1.5 µg/mL-0.023 µg/mL and tracer: 1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL. The results are
presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
The results were a bit surprising, since the hypothesis was that the antigen-antibody complex was
stronger than the binding between protein G and the antibody. The results indicated that the antigen-
antibody complex was the primary target for the regeneration solution. This is shown in Figure 26
- focus on tracer, since the signal could almost be restored by only adding new tracer. However, the
non-identical signal could be due to missing antibodies or simple variation. The scenario with focus on
the antibody, Figure 26 - focus on antibody, shows a higher restored signal after adding new antibody
and tracer, which could indicate that more antibodies were attached to protein G than before. This
could imply that the 30 minutes of incubation was too short or that the antibody concentration was
too low to ﬁll in every binding site on protein G. Both results demonstrate that protein G remains
Page 72 of 151
==PAGE:78==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
attached to the plate, since the restored absorbance had the same tendency. The scenario with focus
on the protein G, Figure 26 - focus on protein G, shows that by adding new protein G, antibody and
tracer, the same absorbance could be restored, where the small diﬀerence in the absorbance could
be due to variation in the experiment. From this experiment, it was proposed that the regeneration
solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 primarily cleaved oﬀthe tracer/analyte in the ELISA setup and left
protein G and antibody attached.
A hypothesis could be that applying a force could rip oﬀthe
antibody from protein G. This idea is based on existing protein G antibody puriﬁcation kits which
use almost the same regeneration solution or elution buﬀer (0.2 M gly-HCl buﬀer pH 2.5), but uses
spin columns and a centrifugation step (10 min, 10000g) to isolate the antibodies [48]. As the time
limit in the project was short, this hypothesis was not veriﬁed.
The Potential Regenerative Eﬀect of Substrate
As a side experiment, it was interesting to see if a weaker acid like the substrate solution itself with
a pH of 5.6 could function as a regeneration solution. If the substrate could cleave of the tracer and
wash it away before the substrate could be converted and detected, this could have an inﬂuence if
using a ﬂow system for the biosensor. This experiment was only performed in continuation of the
regeneration experiment using the same plate setup, where biological elements for cortisol detection
and the standard substrate solution were used. The experiment to determine the eﬀect of the substrate
was performed only with focus on the tracer, as this experiment only had to validate the hypothesis
and since it was observed that the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 mainly cleaved between
the antibody and the tracer. The result is present in Figure 27.
Figure 27
Regeneration eﬀect of the substrate with focus on the tracer. The tracer scenario is displayed
with the reference signal, the signal after two additions of substrate (60 minutes incubation time), the signal after three
additions of substrate (90 minutes incubation time) and the restored signal after adding new tracer. The experiment
had the following conditions: protein G:1/160 ∼6.25 µg/mL, antibody: 1/800-1/51200 ∼1.5 µg/mL-0.023 µg/mL and
tracer:1/9000 ∼0.11 µg/mL. The results are presented by the absorbance and with standard deviations.
Page 73 of 151
==PAGE:79==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results from this experiment demonstrated the same pattern as for the regeneration experiment
with 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2, where the signal could be restored by only adding new tracer to the well.
However, what this experiment also showed is that the substrate decreased the signal signiﬁcantly
after two additions (60 minutes of incubation time) and even more after three additions (90 minutes
of incubation time).
The absorbance was almost as low as the one obtained after 30 minutes of
incubation with the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2.
Thereby, the substrate solution
could act as a regeneration solution and actually regenerate the setup by removing the tracer over
multiple additions and 90 minutes of incubation.
In the search for literature, describing a TMB-H2O2 solution with a more neutral pH, it was found
that the HRP enzyme actually can shift pH optimum to a more acidic pH range, when the H2O2
concentration is increased in the substrate solution. It was demonstrated that the highest HRP enzyme
activity was achieved with a H2O2 of 1.3 mmol/L and at a pH range between 3.8 and 4.4 [75], which
is a lower optimal pH than found in other sources. This could mean that the substrate solution could
be optimised, and simultaneously optimise the HRP enzyme performance. However, performing the
assay at this pH range could inhibit the antigen-antibody binding and regenerate the setup by cleaving
oﬀthe HRP enzyme, while the detection is happening. In a ﬂow system, this would mean that the
HRP enzyme could be washed away before it has converted the substrate into product. Nonetheless,
this could change the view of the incubation time when using the electrochemical detection, since it
could be possible to only incubate a few minutes at a low pH and still get an acceptable signal without
inhibiting or regenerating the setup. This has to be investigated and validated.
4.2
Electrochemical Detection - Cortisol and Alternariol
In this section all of the results for the electrochemical detection are presented including the clean-
ing eﬀect by plasma treatment, modiﬁcation characterised by impedance measurements and cyclic
voltammetry, maximum signal and analyte exposure in a competitive assay detected by absorbance
and amperometry. As the area of the electrode chamber is of diﬀerent size compared to the wells in
a 96-well plate used in ELISA and since protein G is bound diﬀerently, the results cannot directly be
correlated. It is important to note that these experiments were performed to prove the concept of the
project, and are not optimised.
4.2.1
The Eﬀect of Electrode Cleaning
The plasma treatment with air plasma was used to clean the electrodes before the modiﬁcation. The
electrochemical methods impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry were used to characterise
the cleaning process from only cleaning the chip with acetone, ethanol (70%) and MilliQwater to use
of plasma treatment for 1 run (16 minutes) and 4 runs (64 minutes). The electrode cleaning is an
important step, as it sets the starting conditions for the construction of the biointerface.
Page 74 of 151
==PAGE:80==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
General Approach for All Electrodes
To show the eﬀect of the plasma treatment compared to cleaning with acetone, ethanol (70%) and
MilliQwater and see the eﬀect between how long the electrode was plasma treated, the impedance
spectra and CVs are presented for one working electrode (WEc) on one chip (02) in Figure 28 and
Figure 29, respectively, and the CV parameters are summarised in Table 7.
Figure 28
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) evaluation of electrode cleaning (chip 02, WEc). The eﬀect
of the diﬀerent cleaning methods: 1) Acetone, ethanol and MilliQwater, 2) Plasma treatment 1 run (16 minutes) and 3)
Plasma treatment 4 run (64 minutes). The impedance spectra were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
It can be seen that the charge transfer resistance, Rct, (diameter of the semicircle) is decreasing during
the cleaning process from around 5 kW after cleaning with acetone, ethanol (70%) and MilliQwater
to around 1 kW after using plasma treatment for 16 minutes to around 0.4 kW after using plasma
treatment for 64 minutes.
It can be seen from the CVs in Figure 29 that the shape of the CVs is getting better, i.e. the peak
values are getting more identical and that the peak to peak separation decreases after each cleaning
process, the details of which are presented in Table 7.
Page 75 of 151
==PAGE:81==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 29
The CVs from the electrode cleaning (chip 02, WEc). The eﬀect of the diﬀerent cleaning methods: 1)
Acetone, ethanol and MilliQwater, 2) Plasma treatment 1 run (16 minutes) and 3) Plasma treatment 4 run (64 minutes).
The CV outputs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 7
The information from the CVs (chip 02, WEc). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
from the diﬀerent cleaning methods 1) Acetone, ethanol and MilliQwater, 2) Plasma treatment 1 run (16 minutes) and
3) Plasma treatment 4 run (64 minutes).
Cleaning method
Peak values [mA]
Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Acetone, Ethanol & MilliQwater
0.024 and -0.017
290
Plasma treatment 1 run (16 min)
0.062 and -0.057
120
Plasma treatment 4 run (64 min)
0.076 and -0.071
110
It can be conﬁrmed that 1 run of plasma cleaning (16 minutes) is improving the response in both the
impedance spectra and CVs compared to only cleaning with acetone, ethanol (70%) and MilliQwater.
However, it can be seen that 4 runs of plasma cleaning (64 minutes) improved the results even further,
but the optimal time for the plasma treatment probably lies in between and if known could save
time and energy. The general trend for all the electrodes was that they were cleaned very well when
using plasma treatment for 64 minutes. These results indicate that the plasma cleaning is working as
expected and that electrodes are as clean as possible before the modiﬁcation. Plasma treatment for
64 minutes was chosen as the cleaning method, but in one case (chip 09) the plasma treatment was
increased to 80 minutes, as the cleaning was not proper at only 64 minutes.
Page 76 of 151
==PAGE:82==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2.2
Biological Modiﬁcation of the Biosensor Setup on the Electrode
This experiment follows the modiﬁcation to make sure that the setup is constructed correctly. Impedance
measurements were used as the main method for characterising the modiﬁcations of the biosensor
setup. However, impedance, speciﬁcally Rct, does not always increase for each modiﬁcation, even
though when more elements are immobilized on an electrode, it could be expected to increase. This
is due to that impedance is also aﬀected by how many negatively charged groups that are present. If
there is an excess of positive charge present, the Rct can actually decrease due to the modiﬁcation.
What is important is that one sees a change. Cyclic voltammetry was also used to characterise elec-
trode modiﬁcations, since the current peaks of CVs tend to decrease when the number of modiﬁcation
layers increases. CVs are also good when evaluating if the system works as intended in voltammetric
detection, as the CV is plotting the oxidation and reduction current on the working electrode. This
experiment had the purpose of recording every step and seeing how the impedance spectra and CVs
change after each modiﬁcation. It has to be noted that documenting each step can have a negative
eﬀect on the overall performance of the electrode.
Due to the fabrication of the chips and the PMMA holder, the modiﬁcation is done on all the electrodes
(counter, reference and working electrodes) and the surrounding area, as the chamber in the PMMA
holder is designed to display all electrodes and as the silicon and electrodes (counter and reference)
are not manufactured with a protein repellent resist. This means that the entire area that is exposed
to the modiﬁcation can be modiﬁed, and not only the working electrodes, which is what is actually
desired. This has the consequence, when test controlling the modiﬁcation through absorbance and
comparing the absorbance with the results from electrochemical detection, the absorbance is measured
for the whole area in the chamber, whereas electrochemical detection only responds to the area of the
chosen working electrode. Thereby, the absorbance can be used as an indication, but not as a precise
quantitative value for only the working electrodes. This problem is not optimised in this project,
but has to be considered if the project is taken further.
It was also observed that especially the
impedance diﬀers between the working electrodes, which could be due to each modiﬁcation on the
working electrodes not being identical in relation to how many MPA-linkers and proteins that are put
on the surface, which can be seen in the following results and in Appendix A.7 Modiﬁcation of Chip
01 (WE a,b,c), Chip 02 (WE a,b,c) and Chip 03 (WE a,c) for Cortisol Detection - Impedance spectra
and CVs and in Appendix A.8 Modiﬁcation of Chip 07 (WE a,b,c), Chip 08 (WE a,b,c), Chip 09
(WE a,c) and Chip 10 (WE a,b,c) for Alternariol Detection - Impedance spectra and CVs.
Results for Cortisol
To get some practice and to test out the protocol for the modiﬁcation, the biological elements for
cortisol biosensor were used before experimenting with the biological elements for alternariol biosensor
as was done in the ELISA experiments.
Modiﬁcation of Chip 01, 02 and 03 and End-point Absorbance Measurement
For these modiﬁcation steps the following conditions were used: protein G (P4689) concentration
1/320 ∼3.125 µg/ml (300 µL), antibody (10-C30D) concentration of 1/800 ∼1.25 µg/mL (100 µL)
and tracer (65-IC08, C-HRP) concentration 1/3000 ∼0.33 µg/mL (100 µL). After preparation, all
Page 77 of 151
==PAGE:83==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the used solutions, the biological components, were stored at 4°C. The washing steps were done using
of a pipette instead of vacuum suction. Due to large variations in the subsequent experiments when
determining the maximum absorbance, the washing method was changed (data shown in the later
section of the results). Each modiﬁcation step was characterised for these chips.
The acquired impedance spectra and CVs are presented for chip 03 WEb are presented on Figure 30
and Figure 31, respectively, and the CV parameters are summarised in Table 8. The results for the
other working electrodes (WE a,c) of chip 03 and the results for the other chips 01 (WE a, b and c)
and 02 (WE a, b and c) are presented in Appendix A.7 Modiﬁcation of Chip 01 (WE a,b,c), Chip 02
(WE a,b,c) and Chip 03 (WE a,c) for Cortisol Detection - Impedance spectra and CVs, but all results
are included in the analysis.
Figure 30
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps (chip 03,
WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treatment, MPA,
protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
The general trend for the impedance response was that the Rct increased as the modiﬁcation progressed
as expected, especially after adding protein G, antibody and tracer. However, it can be seen in some
cases that after addition of MPA the Rct had almost the same Rct as after the plasma treatment. This
can be due to the acid actually contributing to the cleaning of the electrode. It can be observed that
the working electrodes on the same chip were having diﬀerent maximum Rct, even though the starting
point was the same. This diﬀerence is very clear for chip 01, as the WEa reached a much higher end
Rct (around 40 kW) than the two other working electrodes WEb (around 18 kW) and WEc (around
13 kW).
Page 78 of 151
==PAGE:84==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 31
CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps (chip 03, WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for
construction of cortisol biosensor and CVs: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The CV outputs
were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 8
The information from the CVs (chip 03, WEb). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA]
Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.070 and -0.064
120
After adding MPA
0.070 and -0.064
140
After adding protein G
0.038 and -0.044
250
After adding antibody
0.004 and -0.020
390
After adding tracer
0.005 and -0.020
390
For the CVs, the expected trend was also observed, as the peaks decreased, the peak to peak separation
increased and the "duck" shape got more deformed with each modiﬁcation step. Nevertheless, having
oxidation and reduction peaks. However, it can be observed that some of the peaks are ﬂattened out
so much that no value could be obtained. Generally, the behaviour of CVs corresponded well with the
behaviour of the impedance spectra.
The end-point absorbance values for the chips 01, 02 and 03 after all the modiﬁcation steps are
presented in Table 9.
Page 79 of 151
==PAGE:85==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 9
The end-point absorbance values after the modiﬁcation (chip 01, 02 and 03). The absorbance (abs.)
was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
01
0.190
02
0.137
03
0.064
The end-point absorbance for all the chips 01, 02 and 03 were quite low, especially for chip 03. There
may be several reasons for this: It could be that (i) acquisition of the impedance spectra and the CVs
between each modiﬁcation step had a negative eﬀect on the biosensor setup, (ii) the washing using
a pipette was insuﬃcient, (iii) the concentration of the biological elements was not correct, or the
biomolecules in the previously prepared stored solutions were not active.
Modiﬁcation of Chip 04, 05 and 06 and End-point Absorbance Measurement
New chips were prepared with the main purpose of characterising the eﬀect of electrode preparation
on the acquisition of impedance spectra and CVs and the characterization was performed after all the
modiﬁcation steps by absorbance measurement. Therefore, in this experiment, each modiﬁcation step
was not characterised individually during the modiﬁcation. The chips had also the purpose of testing
washing with the vacuum suction instead of washing with a pipette, and how well the regeneration
process could be performed. For the modiﬁcations the following conditions were used: protein G
(P4689) concentration 1/320 ∼3.125 µg/ml (300 µL), antibody (10-C30D) concentration of 1/800 ∼
1.25 µg/mL (100 µL) and tracer (65-IC08, C-HRP) concentration 1/1000 ∼1 µg/mL (200 µL). The
tracer concentration and amount were increased to ensure saturation. All the used solutions of the
biological elements were freshly prepared, expect for the protein G solution, which was stored at 4°C.
The end-point absorbance values for the chips 04, 05 and 06 after all the modiﬁcation steps are
presented in Table 10.
Table 10
The end-point absorbance values after the modiﬁcation (chip 04, 05 and 06). The absorbance
(abs.) was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
04
0.760
05
0.931
06
1.112
When comparing the end-point absorbance for this modiﬁcation in Table 10 to the one recorded for
chips 01, 02 and 03 in Table 9, the values are highly increased. As a lot of factors were changed at
once, the increase can be due to diﬀerent reasons. One reason could be the washing with the vacuum
suction, as all of the liquid was removed. Another reason could be the freshly prepared antibody
solution. However, this was already tested in ELISA and showed that the activity of the antibody
Page 80 of 151
==PAGE:86==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
10-C30D should be maintained even after a month of storage at 4 °C. Another reason could be the
increased concentration of the tracer.
It was tested whether the amount of tracer had an eﬀect by testing if the setup could be saturated with
only 100 µL instead of 200 µL, as it could save tracer solution. The absorbance values are presented
in Table 11 for chips 04, 05 and 06.
Table 11
The end-point absorbance values after the modiﬁcation with 100 µL of tracer (chip 04, 05 and
06). The absorbance (abs.) was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
04
0.590
05
0.824
06
1.054
With only adding 100 µL of tracer, the absorbance decreased a bit, but the values were still quite
high. This indicates that the setup was saturated quite well with 100 µL of tracer at a concentration
of 1/1000 ∼1 µg/mL. The optimal tracer concentration and added tracer amount were not further
investigated.
Results for Alternariol
As the modiﬁcation protocol showed good results for construction of the cortisol biosensor, the same
protocol was used for the electrode modiﬁcations for construction of the alternariol biosensor.
Modiﬁcation of Chip 07, 08, 09 and 10 and End-point Absorbance Measurement
Four chips were modiﬁed to ensure that at least one succeeded, as the biological elements of alternariol
were expected to perform worse than cortisol. For this modiﬁcation the following conditions were
used: protein G (P4689) concentration 1/320 ∼3.125 µg/ml (300 µL), antibody (Anti-AOH AB)
concentration of 1/400 ∼11.25 µg/mL (100 µL) and tracer (AOH-HRP) concentration 1/1500 ∼
0.8 µg/mL (200 µL). The tracer concentration was increased compared to the ELISA experiment to
ensure saturation together with 200 µL of tracer. The solution for protein G and the antibody were
old preparations, which for the antibody was due to a low total volume of the remaining antibody
stock. However, the tracer solution was freshly prepared. All the used biological solutions were stored
at 4°C. Each modiﬁcation step was characterised and washing by vacuum suction was applied.
The acquired impedance spectra and CVs for chip 09 WEb are presented in Figure 32 and Figure 33,
respectively, and the CV parameters are summarised in Table 12. The results for the other working
electrodes (WE a,c) of chip 09 and the results for the other chips 07 (WE a, b and c), 08 (WE a, b
and c) and 10 (WE a, b and c) are presented in Appendix A.8 Modiﬁcation of Chip 07 (WE a,b,c),
Chip 08 (WE a,b,c), Chip 09 (WE a,c) and Chip 10 (WE a,b,c) for Alternariol Detection - Impedance
spectra and CVs, but all results are included in the analysis.
Page 81 of 151
==PAGE:87==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 32
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps (chip 09,
WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treatment (80
min instead of 64 min only applied for chip 09), MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra were
acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
The general trend for the impedance response was that the Rct increased as the modiﬁcation process
progressed. However, it did seem like the protein G modiﬁcation step had the tendency to have a
diameter closer to the one acquired after the MPA modiﬁcation step than to the spectrum acquired
after the antibody modiﬁcation step. Actually, the protein G modiﬁcation on chip 10, WE a,b and c,
had a smaller diameter than the spectrum recorded after the MPA modiﬁcation. This behaviour was
diﬀerent from the modiﬁcation with the biological elements for cortisol biosensor. It was observed that
there was a good similarity between the working electrodes on all of the chips both in the behaviour
of each modiﬁcation step and in the maximum diameter obtained after adding the tracer.
Page 82 of 151
==PAGE:88==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 33
CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps (chip 09, WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for
construction of alternariol biosensor and CVs: plasma treatment (80 min instead of 64 min only applied for chip 09),
MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The CV outputs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 12
The information from the CVs (chip 09, WEb). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment (80 min instead of 64 min only applied for chip 09), MPA, protein G,
antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA]
Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (80 min)
0.068 and -0.070
120
After adding MPA
0.071 and -0.065
140
After adding protein G
0.063 and -0.069
140
After adding antibody
0.049 and -0.062
230
After adding tracer
0.049 and -0.055
330
For the CVs, the expected trend was also observed, as most of the peaks decreased except for some
of the peaks for MPA which increased, the peak to peak separation increased and the "duck" shape
got a bit more deformed with each modiﬁcation step. However, the shape did maintain its form well,
so that the peak values for the oxidation and the reduction could be obtained. It can be seen that
the protein G modiﬁcation generally had its peak to peak separation maintained at almost the same
value as the one obtained after the MPA, which was unexpected. Generally, the behaviour of the CVs
corresponded well with the behaviour of the impedance spectra.
The end-point absorbance values for the chips 07, 08, 09 and 10 after all the modiﬁcation steps are
presented in Table 13.
Page 83 of 151
==PAGE:89==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 13
The end-point absorbance values after the modiﬁcation (chip 07, 08, 09 and 10). The absorbance
(abs.) was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
07
1.278
08
1.480
09
1.335
10
1.444
Even though every modiﬁcation step was characterised, the end-point absorbance was very high (see
Table 13), even higher than for cortisol, which was unexpected as the behaviour was the opposite in
the ELISA experiments. It can also be seen that the four chips had similar end-point absorbance,
which indicates that the modiﬁcation was done very identically. A reason for better performance could
be how protein G is bound to the surface, as in ELISA the protein is bound by physisorption and on
the gold electrodes it is bound covalently. It is presumed that the Anti-Alternariol antibody causes
conformational changes to the protein, when bound to it, which causes the protein to be released
from the well in ELISA, as the binding by physisorption is not as strong as the covalent bonding.
However, to validate this hypothesis one has to investigate the surface when modifying. What can be
established from the results is that the biological elements for AOH are performing better on the gold
electrode than in the 96-well plate, which is very positive in the light of using the biological elements
for a biosensor detecting alternariol.
4.2.3
Biosensor Detection - Reproducibility, Regeneration and Analyte Detection
In the industrial detection, it is not necessary to reuse the chip, but what is important is that the
diﬀerent chips behave identically so that the output can be trusted when applying diﬀerent chips
each time.
However, for the biosensor system, it is necessary to have a calibration curve, as the
system requires a reference when determining unknown toxin concentrations in the product samples. A
calibration curve depends on repeatable data points and a stable electrode behaviour when regenerated,
and therefore is one of the goals to understand the trend of the electrode behaviour. Here absorbance
of the formed colour was widely used as it is an easy and tangible method.
This experimental setup was implemented so that detection is done at the modiﬁed electrodes where
the aﬃnity based biorecognition occurs. However, in many ﬂow systems, the site for biorecognition
and detection are separated, so that product formation is made in one chamber and the formed
product is transferred to the electrode located in another chamber, where the detection happens. This
divided system has its advantages and disadvantages, as the modiﬁcation cannot block the access of
the electrochemically active product from the electrode surface, but if the substrate has regeneration
properties, it can release tracer into the liquid causing the enzyme reaction to continue when the liquid
is transferred to the detection chamber. This can give variation in the results even in an automatic
system. However, what is important is to keep the standard deviations at a minimum. It is expected
that all chips do not have a good continuous signal range or continuous stability throughout the
Page 84 of 151
==PAGE:90==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
multiple regeneration runs, as the pH of the regeneration solution can be harmful for the biointerface.
It is therefore also expected that the standard deviations could be quite large.
However, around
10% is considered acceptable, as it is generally hard to get repeatable results from immunobiosensors.
The absorbance of the formed colour is mainly to check the system and how it is behaving before
introducing electrochemical detection.
Reproducibility and Biointerface Behaviour when Regenerated
The goal for these experiments was to get repeatable data and try to understand how the biointerface
behaves when using the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and the substrate solution (pH
5.6), as the substrate can act as a light regeneration solution. The aim was to determine a trend of
stability and how the chips are regenerated in the best way and if there is a general method that is
applicable for all analytes.
Results for Cortisol - Chips 01, 02, 03, 04, 05 and 06
The biological elements for the cortisol biosensor, were also used to experiment on, before transferring
it to the biological elements needed for alternariol biosensing.
First, the washing with pipette was investigated to get repeatable maximum absorbance to evaluate
the method. Since the end-point absorbance was very low after the modiﬁcation of chip 01, 02 and
03, it was decided to increase the amount of the tracer to 200 µL instead of 100 µL, however the
concentration of 1/3000 ∼0.33 µg/mL remained. As the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
was working in the ELISA experiments, it was also used to regenerate the setup on the electrodes.
Hence, the tracer was removed and the antibody and protein G were left on the electrode surface.
After the regeneration (reg. 1), new tracer (200 µL) and substrate were added and the absorbance
was measured. The absorbances are presented in Table 14. It can be observed that the absorbance
increased a lot, when a larger amount of tracer was used, which could indicate that there were more
binding sites available on the antibodies when only using 100 µL tracer (conc. 1/3000). To see the
eﬀect of the washing with a pipette, the setup was regenerated again (reg. 2) and new tracer (200 µL)
and substrate were added. These results are also represented in Table 14 for comparison.
Table 14
The absorbance values after regeneration, increased tracer amount and eﬀect of washing by
pipetting (chip 01, 02 and 03). The absorbance (abs.) values after regeneration and increasing of the tracer amount
from 100 µL to 200 µL and the eﬀect of the washing with a pipette when comparing repeatable maximum absorbance.
The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
(Reg. 1, 200 µL tracer)
Abs. value
(Reg. 2, 200 µL tracer)
01
0.678
0.376
02
0.398
0.571
03
0.568
0.347
From these results, Table 14, it could be concluded that the washing with pipette gave large variations
in the results and had to be replaced by the more eﬀective method using suction by vacuum.
Page 85 of 151
==PAGE:91==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To check the new washing method by vacuum and inspect the repetition rate of the maximum signal,
an experiment was performed by only adding tracer and substrate. The experiment was repeated three
times and the measured absorbance was presented in Table 15 together with the average absorbance,
standard deviation (SD) and relative standard deviation in percentage (RSD %).
Table 15
Repeatable maximum absorbance with only tracer and substrate added using washing by vac-
uum (chip 01, 02 and 03). The results for the experiment of repeatable maximum absorbance signal for chip 01, 02
and 03 using washing by vacuum with the calculated average, standard deviation (SD) and relative standard deviation
in percentage (RSD %). The absorbance (abs.) was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
Ex. 1
Abs. value
Ex. 2
Abs. value
Ex. 1
Average
SD
RSD (%)
01
0.217
0.208
0.199
0.208
0.009
4.327
02
0.300
0.281
0.293
0.291
0.010
3.298
03
0.249
0.210
0.227
0.229
0.020
8.551
The experiments gave promising results, as the RSD was under 10% for all the three chips. This
experiment proved that the washing method by vacuum is an eﬀective method that can give repeatable
results when only adding tracer and substrate anew. From this experiment it can also be seen that
the chips could perform almost equally as indicated by the average absorbance of 0.243.
As the washing method was approved, an experiment was conducted to see how the biointerface be-
haved and if the maximum absorbance could be repeatable when the regeneration solution 0.4 M
gly-HCl pH 2.2 was used. The experiment was repeated three times and the measured absorbance
is presented in Table 16 together with the average absorbance, standard deviation (SD) and rela-
tive standard deviation in percentage (RSD %) for each chip and between the chips in the diﬀerent
experiments.
Table 16
Repeatable maximum absorbance when using regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 (chip
01, 02 and 03). The results for the experiment of repeatable maximum absorbance signal for chip 01, 02 and 03 when
using the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 with the calculated average, standard deviation (SD) and relative
standard deviation in percentage (RSD %) for each chip and between the chips in the diﬀerent experiments.
The
absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
Ex. 1
Abs. value
Ex. 2
Abs. value
Ex. 3
Average
SD
RSD (%)
01
0.217
0.213
0.261
0.230
0.027
11.563
02
0.211
0.231
0.283
0.242
0.037
15.379
03
0.227
0.152
0.306
0.228
0.077
33.726
Average
0.218
0.199
0.283
SD
0.008
0.041
0.023
RSD (%)
3.702
20.841
7.942
Page 86 of 151
==PAGE:92==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This experiment showed some variation for each chip, as the RSD was over 10% for all the chips even
when vacuum suction was applied. However, the variation decreased when observing the absorbance
between the chips in each experiment, as the RSD were under 10% for experiment 1 and experiment
3. The RSD was also under 10% for experiment 2, if the result (abs. 0.152) is excluded. As there was
a trend of an increased absorbance after the regeneration, the baseline for the regeneration solution
0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2. was checked, as it was suspected that the increased absorbance could be due
to a incomplete regeneration. However, to get the baseline, substrate needs to be added twice and is
expected to have an inﬂuence on the end-point absorbance. The baseline for the regeneration solution
0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 with the additional inﬂuence from the substrate is presented in Table 17 together
with the experimental results that are also presented in Table 16.
Table 17
Baseline for the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 (chips 01, 02 and 03). The absorbance
(abs.) for the baseline when using regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl with the additional inﬂuence from the substrate.
The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
Ex. 1
Abs. value
Ex. 2
Abs. value
Ex. 3
Abs. value
Baseline (Reg. gly-HCl)
01
0.217
0.213
0.261
0.081
02
0.211
0.231
0.283
0.072
03
0.227
0.152
0.306
0.051
The baseline for the regeneration of all the chips were almost around zero absorbance (background
absorbance is normally around 0.050), thereby removing almost every tracer from the setup. However,
this did not explain the large RSD in the experiment.
After this experiment it was not possible to restore the maximum absorbance (data not shown). It is
believed to be due to the long regeneration time with both the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl
pH 2.2 and substrate solution for over an hour had not only removed all the tracer, but also some of
the antibodies. It was therefore decided to add antibody (conc. of 1/800 ∼1.25 µg/mL, 200 µL) to
all the chips over night. Luckily, it was possible to restore the signal with almost the same absorbance
values. To eliminate the tracer being the problem or the limitation, a new solution was prepared with
an increased concentration 1/1000 ∼1 µg/mL, same amount added. Even though the experiment
was unplanned, observations could be retrieved from it. When comparing the results gained from the
maximum absorbance when using the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and the regained
absorbance value when antibody was added anew, it can be seen that chip 01 had a better RSD (9.878
%), chip 02 still had the tendency to have an increased absorbance after each regeneration, and chip
03 had a very ﬂuctuating behaviour. The results are presented in Table 18 together with the relative
standard deviation in percentage (RSD %).
Page 87 of 151
==PAGE:93==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 18
The restored absorbance signal after adding antibody anew and comparison (chip 01, 02 and
03). The absorbance value obtained after adding antibody anew overnight with a comparison (calculated RSD %) to
the obtained maximum signal when regenerated with 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2. The absorbance (abs.) was measured at
630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
Ex. 1
Abs. value
Ex. 2
Abs. value
Ex. 3
Abs. value
Antibody anew
RSD (%)
01
0.217
0.213
0.261
0.219
9.878
02
0.211
0.231
0.283
0.382
27.623
03
0.227
0.152
0.306
0.131
38.976
As it was unclear what regeneration eﬀect the substrate had on the setup, it was tested how well the
substrate could regenerate the setup alone without any regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2.
The results are presented in Table 19.
Table 19
The regeneration eﬀect of the substrate solution (chip 01, 02 and 03). The regeneration eﬀect of
the substrate on the setup for cortisol. The absorbance (abs.) was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped
with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
Ex. 1
Abs. value
Ex. 2
Abs. value
Ex. 3
Abs. value
Antibody anew
Abs. value
Reg. eﬀect substrate
01
0.217
0.213
0.261
0.219
0.060
02
0.211
0.231
0.283
0.382
0.064
03
0.227
0.152
0.306
0.131
0.047
It was observed that the substrate solution had a similar regeneration eﬀect as the regeneration solution
0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2, which was an important information as it means that the substrate alone can
be used to regenerate the setup, which both saves time and material as the whole process with 0.4 M
gly-HCl pH 2.2 could be excluded. From the previous results, it can been seen that regenerating the
setup with only substrate solution gave better repeatable results than when using the regeneration
solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 together with the substrate, but the reason is unknown. However,
since the substrate solution could be used as the regeneration solution, it is possible to optimise the
procedure. It would be beneﬁcial for the biosensor if the electrode could be reused.
It was decided to test if the substrate could create a stable baseline with an absorbance close to
zero and regain a stable maximum absorbance, as this procedure then could be used to create the
calibration curve. However, it was believed that the chips 01, 02 and 03 could have been damaged
during the experiment, and that this experiment had to be performed on new chips. Chips 04, 05 and
06 were used for this purpose. For this experiment, the tracer amount was decreased to 100 µL, as it
was proved on the chips 04, 05 and 06, that the setup could be saturated almost as well as with 200
µl when using the tracer concentration of 1/1000 ∼1 µg/mL.
Page 88 of 151
==PAGE:94==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results including the maximum absorbance and the baselines after regenerating with the substrate
solution are presented in Table 20 together with the average absorbance, standard deviation (SD) and
relative standard deviation in percentage (RSD %) for each chip.
Table 20
The maximum absorbance and baseline from the regeneration eﬀect of the substrate solution
(chip 04, 05 and 06). The maximum absorbance (abs.) for chip 04, 05 and 06 together with the baseline that presents
the regeneration eﬀect of the substrate on the setup with the calculated average, standard deviation (SD) and relative
standard deviation in percentage (RSD %). The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped
with acid.
Maximum absorbance
Chip no.
Abs. values
Ex. 1
Abs. values
Ex. 2
Abs. values
Ex. 3
Average
SD
RSD (%)
04
0.590
0.649
0.788
0.676
0.102
15.046
05
0.824
0.969
0.964
0.919
0.082
8.957
06
1.054
1.041
0.952
1.016
0.056
5.466
Baseline (substrate regeneration)
Chip no.
Abs. values
Ex. 1
Abs. values
Ex. 2
Abs. values
Ex. 3
Average
SD
RSD (%)
04
0.055
0.062
0.084
0.067
0.015
22.586
05
0.099
0.126
0.157
0.127
0.029
22.793
06
0.149
0.152
0.161
0.154
0.006
4.055
From the results, it can be seen that the substrate had the ability to regenerate the setup down to an
average absorbance around 0.100, which is quite good. It can be seen that the maximum absorbance
could be restored for all the chips with a RSD (on average) of around 10% after an almost completed
regeneration with only the substrate solution. For the baseline, the absorbance tended to increase
with the number of experiments for each chip which also lead to a high RSD for chip 04 and 05 on
around 22%. It can be seen that chip 06 had a great score through all three experiments with a RSD
for the maximum absorbance on 5.466% and a RSD for the baseline absorbance 4.055%. However,
the substrate solution only regenerated the chip to an absorbance around 0.150 and not to around
0.050, which was the desired value. This experiment proved that the substrate solution could almost
completely regenerate the setup for cortisol and restore the maximum absorbance. As this regeneration
procedure worked well for the experiment with cortisol, this procedure was used for to regenerate the
setup for alternariol detection.
Results for Alternariol - Chips 07, 08, 09 and 10
As the substrate solution could regenerate the setup for cortisol, it was decided to test if the substrate
had the same eﬀect for the setup with biological elements for the alternariol biosensor and could create
a stable baseline with an absorbance close to zero and regain a stable maximum absorbance.
Page 89 of 151
==PAGE:95==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results including the maximum absorbance and the baselines after regenerating with the substrate
solution are presented in Table 21 together with the average absorbance, standard deviation (SD) and
relative standard deviation in percentage (RSD %) for each chip.
Table 21
The maximum absorbance and a baseline from the regeneration eﬀect of the substrate solution
(chip 07, 08, 09 and 10). The maximum absorbance (abs.) for chip 07, 08, 09 and 10 together with the baseline that
presents the regeneration eﬀect of the substrate on the setup with the calculated average, standard deviation (SD) and
relative standard deviation in percentage (RSD %). The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not
stopped with acid.
Maximum absorbance
Chip no.
Abs. values
Ex. 1
Abs. values
Ex. 2
Abs. values
Ex. 3
Average
SD
RSD (%)
07
1.278
1.119
1.129
1.175
0.089
7.577
08
1.480
1.276
1.212
1.323
0.140
10.582
09
1.335
1.182
1.144
1.220
0.101
8.285
10
1.444
1.361
1.227
1.344
0.109
8.147
Baseline (substrate regeneration)
Chip no.
Abs. values
Ex. 1
Abs. values
Ex. 2
Abs. values
Ex. 3
Average
SD
RSD (%)
07
0.785
0.741
0.718
0.748
0.031
4.159
08
0.771
0.857
0.782
0.803
0.061
7.570
09
0.921
0.962
0.870
0.918
0.029
3.159
10
0.718
0.957
0.881
0.852
0.169
19.836
It can be seen that the substrate solution did not have the same regeneration eﬀect for the setup
for alternariol biosensing, as it had for the setup for cortisol biosensing. The baseline absorbance
values were only reduced by 30-50%. However, it can be seen that the RSD for both the maximum
absorbance and the baseline for all the chips were on average under 10%, expect for the baseline of
chip 10, which had a RSD on around 20%. Even though the substrate could not regenerate the setup
for alternariol, the experiment had good reproducibility. This experiment did show, however, that
the substrate cannot regenerate the setup for alternariol biosensing in 30 minutes, but maybe could
be supported by the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 or multiple additions of substrate.
It was therefore tested if the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 had an eﬀect on the setup
for alternariol biosensing or if it could have a harming eﬀect. Only one chip was selected for the
experiment, as it was believed that the regeneration solution could harm the setup. The regeneration
solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 was added after the baseline was deﬁned. Hence, the chip had already
undergone substrate addition twice for 30 minutes. Therefore, this experiment could not deﬁne the
speciﬁc eﬀect for only the regeneration solution. However, it was expected that the ﬁnal absorbance
value from this experiment would be around zero. The regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
was added (30 minutes) followed by the substrate solution (30 minutes) and the maximum absorbance
Page 90 of 151
==PAGE:96==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
was regained by adding tracer anew. The results for both the regeneration including the regeneration
solution and the substrate solution and the restored maximum absorbance are presented in Table 22
(chip 10).
Table 22
Regeneration eﬀect from both a mixture of 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and substrate solution
and the regained maximum absorbance (chip 10). The absorbance (abs.) after a regeneration with both the
regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 (30 minutes) and the substrate solution (30 minutes) and the regained
maximum absorbance after adding tracer anew.
The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not
stopped with acid.
Chip no.
Abs. value
Reg. eﬀect
(gly-HCl, substrate)
Regained
Max. absorbance
10
0.417
1.401
From these results, it can be seen that it was very diﬃcult to regenerate the setup for alternariol
biosensing compared to the setup for cortisol biosensing.
However, it appeared, though, that the
regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 did not have any harmful eﬀect as the maximum absorbance
was restored to around the same absorbance value, which was positive. In general, the regeneration
strategy with the substrate solution and the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 worked
diﬀerently when using diﬀerent biological elements. The reason why is unknown.
Maximum Signal and Analyte Exposure by Electrochemical Detection and Absorbance
The maximum signal and later analyte exposure were detected by amperometry, which is suitable for
detecting the continuous reaction of product formation. The product formation continues since the
enzyme reaction cannot be stopped without destroying the biointerface of the electrode. It is expected
that the product, TMBox, from the enzymatic reaction is reduced on the working electrode generating
the current in the negative range when the potential -0.15 is applied. The output is expected to have a
current peak, when the substrate solution is injected on the electrode using a pipette, and then settle
afterwards to a value that corresponds to the amount of TMBox present. It is expected that when
the setup is exposed to the analyte and thereby conducting a competitive assay with the tracer, the
settling current will be less negative, as there is less TMBox in the solution. As it is hard to determine
a correct value from these outputs, the proof of concept of the biosensor is based on the view and
comparison of the outputs. The electrochemical detection with amperometry was only done for the
alternariol biosensor setup as it was the main focus of the project. The aim of this experiment was
to prove the concept of the biosensor and deﬁne the maximum signal, the trend and the behaviour
when exposed to the analyte. As it was proved to be diﬃcult to regenerate the setup for alternariol
biosensing, determination of the maximum signal by electrochemical detection and a full regeneration
were ﬁrst done on chip 10, as it was the one with the highest maximum absorbance. This experiment
would give an idea of the possibilities for a calibration curve.
Page 91 of 151
==PAGE:97==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Results for Alternariol - Chip 10
The main strategy was to ﬁrst measure the maximum signal by electrochemical detection to have the
reference where only tracer was introduced. Afterwards, the setup was attempted to be regenerated
and a competitive assay was introduced, where the setup was exposed to the analyte. The absorbance
was measured parallel with the electrochemical detection to have a reference that gives a picture of
what was happening on the entire chip, as amperometry only detected what was happening at the
chosen working electrode. The absorbance was also used during the regeneration to see the progress
and the maximum absorbance was also measured again after amperometry to see its eﬀect.
One
working electrode (WEb) in the middle of the chip was chosen to prove the concept. The maximum
signal measured by electrochemical detection for the working electrode WEb over multiple runs is
presented in Figure 34 together with the measured absorbance during the amperometry in Table 23.
Figure 34
Amperometry outputs for the maximum signal in multiple runs (chip 10, WEb). The maximum
signal by amperometric detection in multiple runs from I to VII for alternariol on WEb of chip 10.
Table 23
Absorbance values for each run during amperometry (chip 10). Absorbance values for each run
from I to VII taken after the measurement with amperometry. The absorbance presents the entire chip when 20 µL of
substrate was added. The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Absorbance values for run I to VII
Chip no.
Abs. value
Run I
Abs. value
Run II
Abs. value
Run IV
Abs. value
Run V
Abs. value
Run VI
Abs. value
Run VII
10
0.166
0.152
0.143
0.141
0.121
0.116
Page 92 of 151
==PAGE:98==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Firstly, it can be seen that the runs I and II have a more unstable curve than the other runs, which
makes it diﬃcult to see a correct settlement. However, at around 400 seconds both runs (I and II)
do have a current of around -0.5 µA. In general, when observing all the runs with their respective
absorbance values there is a trend of decreased signal for the working electrode and absorbance for the
chip with the increased number of runs. Hence, the tracer may have been removed by the substrate
and washed away between the runs.
However, the tracer removal was random, as the decreased
amperometric measurement (see Figure 34) was not correlated with the overall drop in absorbance
for the entire chip (see Table 23). To see if it was possible to restore the maximum signal after the
loss of tracer during the multiple amperometry measurements, tracer was added for 15 minutes and
the maximum signal was again measured by amperometry. The results are presented in Figure 35
together with the measured absorbance after each amperometry in Table 24.
Figure 35
Amperometry outputs for the restored maximum signal comparison (chip 10, WEb).
The
maximum signal by amperometric detection and comparison between runs I, II and the restored maximum signal after
the tracer had been added anew.
Table 24
Absorbance values for run I, II and the restored absorbance after amperometry (chip 10, WEb).
Absorbance values for the runs I and II compared to the restored signal after adding tracer anew for 15 minutes taken
after the measurement with amperometry. The absorbance presents the entire chip when 20 µL of substrate was added.
The absorbance was measured at 630 nM, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Absorbance - run I, run II and restored
Chip no.
Abs. value
Run I
Abs. value
Run II
Abs. value
Restored signal
10
0.166
0.152
0.111
Page 93 of 151
==PAGE:99==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
It can be seen that the maximum signal got restored and that the output had a more stable curve.
However, the absorbance value measured after amperometry was not restored, which supports the
fact that the electrochemical detection only detected on the chosen working electrode, whereas the
absorbance measurement gives the output for the entire chip. If the two measurements should correlate,
the design of the PMMA holder should be changed. After this the maximum absorbance for the chip
was tested to see if the biointerface had been damaged during the amperometric measurements. The
absorbance was measured to 1.179, which was bit lower than the average maximum absorbance of
1.344 for chip 10. This could be due to the tracer incubation was only 15 minutes and not 30 minutes.
To see the eﬀect of analyte exposure in a competitive assay, the setup had to be regenerated as much
as possible. This was done in a combination of both the regeneration buﬀer 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
and the substrate solution pH 5.6 in multiple laps. The entire regeneration process is shown in Table
25 with the starting point and the absorbance for each lap.
Table 25
The regeneration process (chip 10). The regeneration process for chip 10, where both the regeneration
solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 (300 µl) and the substrate solution pH 5.6 (300 µL) were used in combination where the
starting point is the maximum absorbance after amperometry (AM) for the maximum signal. The absorbance is used
to see the results in the process. The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Regeneration process for chip 10
Laps
Method
Time
Absorbance value
0
Starting point - maximum absorbance after AM
-
1.179
1
Reg. solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
40 minutes
-
2
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
1.318
3
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.875
4
Reg. solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
40 minutes
-
5
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.935
6
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.571
7
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.351
8
Reg. solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
30 minutes
-
9
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.220
It can be observed that the regeneration process was long and that the absorbance values, especially
after using the regeneration solution, were increasing rather than decreasing.
The reason why is
unknown. The regeneration process was stopped at the absorbance 0.220, as it seemed to be the
lowest value that could be obtained. The real value was probably lower as the substrate used for the
last measurement also had an eﬀect.
A competitive assay with the analyte exposure was performed even though some tracer remained and
could interfere with the results, thereby having an advantage in the competitive assay. The aim was
to ﬁnd a middle point for a possible calibration curve and the analyte concentration was determined
based on the ELISA experiment to be 16 nM. The procedure was done in accordance with ELISA,
Page 94 of 151
==PAGE:100==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
where the analyte and tracer was injected 50/50, hence 100 µL analyte solution and 100 µL tracer
solution.
The tracer concentration was kept at 1/1500 ∼0.8 µg/mL. The concentrations are not
optimised. However, this experiment was performed to see the decreased eﬀect on the amperometry
signal caused by the analyte exposure. The end-point absorbance of the competitive assay after the
amperometric measurement was also determined for comparison. The result from the competitive
assay with the analyte concentration of 16 nM is presented together with the maximum signal in
Figure 36 together with the measured absorbance after the amperometry in Table 26. The result for
the restored maximum signal was used for the comparison as it had the most stable curve.
Figure 36
Amperometry output for the competitive assay with analyte exposure and a comparison with
the maximum signal (chip 10, WEb). The results from a competitive assay with an analyte exposure to 16 nM of
alternariol with a comparison with the maximum signal (restored maximum signal - tracer added anew for 15 minutes)
by amperometric detection for alternariol on chip 10.
Table 26
Absorbance values for the maximum signal and the competitive assay with analyte exposure
after the amperometry (chip 10). Absorbance values for the maximum signal (restored signal after adding tracer
anew for 15 minutes) and for the competitive assay with analyte exposure to 16 nM of alternariol taken after the
measurement with amperometry. The absorbance presents the entire chip when 20 µL of substrate added. The absorbance
was measured at 630 nm, as the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Absorbance - Max. signal and competitive assay
Chip no.
Abs. value
Max. signal
Abs. value
Competitive assay
10
0.111
0.184
Page 95 of 151
==PAGE:101==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Even though the tracer had an advantage the analyte with the concentration of 16 nM decreased the
signal signiﬁcantly from around -0.5 µA to around -0.16 µA at 400 seconds. The absorbance for the
entire chip after the amperometry did however increase compared to the maximum absorbance, which
was unexpected, but supports that the absorbance for the entire chip did not correlate with the area
of the working electrode. The reason why is unknown. The same trend with the decreased signal after
multiple amperometric measurements did also appear here. However it is believed that both the tracer
and analyte were removed equally during the runs. The end-point absorbance after the amperometric
measurement of the competitive assay was determined to be 0.636, which indicates a reduction of 46%.
This experiment did prove the concept that the electrochemical signal was decreased when exposed
to the analyte alternariol in a competitive assay with the tracer.
Results for Alternariol - Chip 07, 08, 09 and 10
To understand the diﬀerences between the working electrodes on the chips and try to create a cali-
bration curve with more points with less remained tracer after the regeneration, the maximum signal
by amperometry was also tested for chips 07, 08 and 09 for the working electrode b. For comparison
all of the maximum signals by amperometry for chips 07, 08, 09 and 10 are presented in Figure 37
together with the measured absorbance after amperometry in Table 27.
Figure 37
Amperometry outputs and comparison for the maximum signal (chip 07, 08, 09 and 10 WEb).
The comparison of the maximum signals for WEb of chips 07, 08, 09 and 10 amperometric detection. The maximum
signal for chip 10 was the restored maximum signal - tracer added anew for 15 minutes.
Page 96 of 151
==PAGE:102==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 27
Absorbance values for the maximum signal after amperometry (chip 07, 08, 09 and 10). Ab-
sorbance values for the maximum signal for chip 07, 08, 09 and 10 taken after the measurement with amperometry. The
absorbance presents the entire chip when 20 µL of substrate was added. The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as
the reaction was not stopped with acid.
Absorbance - max. signal
Chip no.
Abs. value
Max. signal
07
0.148
08
0.117
09
0.172
10
0.111
It can be seen that the maximum signal for WEb on the diﬀerent chips varied a lot, which means that
the modiﬁcation on the working electrode b for each chip were unequal even if the overall maximum
absorbance were very similar. Again, the absorbance after amperometry for the entire chip did not
correlate with the signal obtained from the area of the working electrode. Even though the maximum
signal varied, one chip was chosen for the purpose of creating a calibration curve with less remained
tracer after the regeneration, namely chip 09, as it had the highest maximum signal of around -0.15
µA at 400 seconds compared to chip 07 of -0.10 µA and to chip 08 of -0.03 µA.
Results for Alternariol - Chip 09
Chip 09 was chosen to attempt to create a calibration curve with regeneration containing at least three
points: one point of the maximum signal dominated by the tracer, one point of a competitive assay
containing 50/50 tracer and analyte and one point of almost no signal dominated by the analyte.
Before the regeneration and data creating for the calibration curve, one experiment was conducted to
investigate if there was any variation in the results when using the manual injection by pipette even
though it was the same pipette and the same person who performed the injection. The comparison of
the maximum signals by amperometry for chip 09 WEb are presented in Figure 38.
Page 97 of 151
==PAGE:103==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 38
Amperometry outputs and comparison for the maximum signal to view the variation in manual
injection (chip 09 WEb). The comparison of the maximum signals for WEb on chip 09 by amperometric detection
to view the variation in manual injection even when the same pipette and person performed the injection.
It can be observed that the manual injection has its variations, especially in the current peak imme-
diately after the injection. However, the end current almost reached the same value between 400 and
500 seconds. This variation could be due to the substrate amount varying when manual injected, as a
droplet could get stuck in the pipette. This points to that an automatic system is preferred, so these
variations could be eliminated.
The regeneration process together with the calibration curve experiments for chip 09 are presented in
Table 28 with the absorbance values to keep track. The calibration points measured by amperometry
for chip 09 working electrode b are presented in Figure 39. The measured absorbance after amperom-
etry is not shown as it was proved that the data was pointless, as the amperometric measurements for
the electrode did not correlate with the absorbance for the overall chip. The end-point absorbance for
the entire chip after the entire experiment is presented in Table 28 and the restored maximum signal
by amperometry after the entire experiment is also presented in Figure 39.
Page 98 of 151
==PAGE:104==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 28
The regeneration process and the calibration points over multiple days (chip 09). The regeneration
process and calibration points (cali.) for chip 09 (WEb) performed over multiple days. Both the regeneration solution
0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 (300 µl) and the substrate solution pH 5.6 (300 µL) were used in combination. The starting
point was the maximum absorbance after amperometry (AM) of the maximum signal. The storage of the chip was also
included. The absorbance was used to see the results in the process. The absorbance was measured at 630 nm, as the
reaction was not stopped with acid.
Regeneration process for chip 09
Laps
Method
Time
Absorbance value
Date
08.12.20
0
Starting point - maximum absorbance after AM
-
1.098
1
Reg. solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
30 minutes
-
2
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
1.115
3
Opened PMMA and changed O-rings
-
-
4
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.789
5
Reg. solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
30 minutes
-
6
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.554
Storage
PBS buﬀer
Overnight
-
Date
09.12.20
7
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.165
8
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.134
Cali. point
Incubation
Tracer →Conc. 1/1500 amount 100 µL
Analyte AOH →Conc. 16 nM amount 100 µL
Amperometry measurement
Incubation
30 minutes
AM
500 seconds
-
9
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.799
Storage
PBS buﬀer
Overnight
-
Date
10.12.20
10
Reg. solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
30 minutes
-
11
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.193
12
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.135
Cali. point
Incubation
Tracer →Conc. 1/1500 amount 100 µL
Analyte AOH →Conc. 400 nM amount 100 µL
Amperometry measurement
Incubation
30 minutes
AM
500 seconds
-
13
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.723
14
Reg. solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2
30 minutes
-
Continued on next page
Page 99 of 151
==PAGE:105==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 28 – Continued from previous page
Regeneration process for chip 09
Laps
Method
Time
Absorbance value
15
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.655
16
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.399
17
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.223
18
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.138
Cali. point
Incubation
Tracer →Conc. 1/1500 amount 100 µL
Analyte AOH →Conc. 2 µM amount 100 µL
Amperometry measurement
Incubation
30 minutes
AM
500 seconds
-
19
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.527
Storage
PBS buﬀer
Overnight
-
Date
11.12.20
20
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.162
21
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.165
Cali. point
Incubation
Tracer →Conc. 1/3000 amount 100 µL
(50 µL 1/1500 and 50 µL buﬀer solution)
Analyte AOH →Conc. 2 µM amount 100 µL
Amperometry measurement
Incubation
30 minutes
AM
500 seconds
-
22
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.446
23
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.249
24
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.143
Cali. point
Incubation
Tracer →Conc. 1/3000 amount 100 µL
(50 µL 1/1500 and 50 µL buﬀer solution)
Analyte AOH →Conc. 10 µM amount 100 µL
Amperometry measurement
Incubation
30 minutes
AM
500 seconds
-
25
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.437
Storage
PBS buﬀer
Overnight
-
Date
14.12.20
26
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
0.115
27
Tracer 200 µL
30 minutes
-
28
Substrate solution pH 5.6
30 minutes
1.273
Continued on next page
Page 100 of 151
==PAGE:106==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 28 – Continued from previous page
Regeneration process for chip 09
Laps
Method
Time
Absorbance value
Restored
Max. signal
Incubation
Tracer →Conc. 1/1500 amount 200 µL
Amperometry measurement
Incubation
30 minutes
AM
500 seconds
-
Figure 39
Amperometry outputs for a calibration curve with maximum signal and analyte exposure (chip
09, WEb). The calibration curve for WEb on chip 09 by amperometric detection, where the maximum signal was tested
before and after the analyte exposure. The working electrode was exposed to ﬁve diﬀerent competitive assays where the
analyte concentration (AOH) increased and the tracer (T) concentration decreased.
In general, this experiment was a long process with at least 16 hours of incubation time, where the
regeneration process varied a lot. It was observed that the regeneration was easier or that the absorbance
dropped drastically, when the chip had been standing with PBS overnight. This could be due to the
time having an inﬂuence, but it could also be due to the PMMA holder possibly had been opened and
the PMMA holes cleaned with tissue paper, since the risk of a small leakage during the night was high.
The only record of this is between the dates 11.12.20 and 14.12.20. It was suspected that the tracer and
analyte were not washed away by PBST, but were more likely adhering on the insides of the PMMA
well or other places, as the analyte is highly hydrophobic. The Log P value of the analyte could also
be an explanation on the substrate regeneration properties, as the biosensor for cortisol could easily
be regenerated by the substrate whereas the biosensor for alternariol could not. Hence, that the Log
Page 101 of 151
==PAGE:107==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
P value could have an inﬂuence on the regeneration process, as it can aﬀect the washing. This could
also explain the unrestored maximum signal, as the analyte was not washed away and was blocking the
recognition sites for the tracer added anew. It is not only the buﬀer solution PBST and the regeneration
solutions that have to be investigated, but also the material used to make the PMMA holder to ensure
that the material can repel the analyte.
It can be seen that the calibration curve obtained with amperometry did not match with the calibration
curve obtained in ELISA, as the high analyte concentrations of 2 µM and 10 µM in combination with
1/3000 tracer should not have given any signal at all. However, these small signals at -0.035 µA and
-0.025 µA could be due to the starting advantage that the tracer had, as the absorbance could only
be regenerated to around 0.140 on average. To illuminate this point the surface of the chip could be
investigated before and during the competitive assay.
What can be observed from this experiment is the decreased signal as the analyte concentration was
increased, which proves the potential of the biosensor, as the setup and signal are aﬀected by the
analyte alternariol being present. However, it can be seen that there is a need for more experiments,
as the problems of optimal concentrations for a balanced competitive assay together with the possible
hydrophobic problem in the washing step are not solved. To make a good biosensor without taking the
sample matrix into account, these issues have to be investigated and resolved. A practical issue is the
measuring time. It can be seen for most of the amperometry measurements that the curve is rather
stable within the 500 seconds, but for the ’maximum signal before the exposure’, the curve is not as
stable as desired within 500 seconds. This could indicate that the measuring time should be longer than
500 seconds.
Page 102 of 151
==PAGE:108==
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
5
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this work, new commercial biological elements for alternariol i.e. antibody and tracer, were tested
and used to create an immunobiosensor for the detection of alternariol in food samples where the focus
was on tomato products. However, this biosensor could be used for various food groups if the right
sample handling approaches are found for the given products. As the biological elements for alternariol
were new, quite expensive and had not been tested in any scientiﬁc research before, a highly known
similar analyte, cortisol, with associated antibody and tracer was used as a reference and to test
out the protocols and experiments before transferring it to alternariol detection. To have a reference
analyte was important as the methods used could be evaluated for diﬀerent analytes involving the
various behaviours of the biological elements. The thesis had the focus of making a basic tests with
ELISA and afterwards try out the biological elements on electrode chips. It appears that the behaviour
in the two approaches were quite diﬀerent. The focus was on deﬁning the parameters, such as the
sensitivity, i.e., IC50 and the limit of detection (LOD), together with the matrix eﬀect of diﬀerent
preparations and the location of the analyte alternariol in the product sample of tomato juice. The
biosensor setup was tested electrochemically. The modiﬁcations were characterised with impedance
spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry. The maximum signal together with an analyte exposure in a
competitive assay were tested by amperometry to see the concept and try to form a calibration curve.
This project served as a proof of concept and a lot of interesting research were discovered during the
thesis work. However, there is still a long way to go in the development of an industrial biosensor on
the market.
In this research, experiments were carried out with ELISA to ﬁnd the optimal antibody- and tracer
concentrations or dilutions and to see if a speciﬁc antibody orientation using protein G compared to a
random orientation using physisorption in the 96-well plate had an eﬀect on the eﬃciency of the ELISA
setup. When using random orientation, the results for both cortisol and alternariol in ELISA were not
remarkable, but did, however, indicate that the biological elements for alternariol were not as active as
the biological elements for cortisol. When shifted to speciﬁc orientation with protein G, it was possible
to conﬁrm that the protein improved the results especially for cortisol, whereas the improvement was
not as signiﬁcant for alternariol, meaning that the orientation of the antibodies could have an impact.
For cortisol, it meant that lower antibody- and tracer concentrations could be used in conjunction with
protein G. For alternariol protein G mostly increased the overall absorbance signal and did not lower
the required antibody concentration signiﬁcantly. What was interesting was the diﬀerence between
the improvement for the two analytes, as it seems like there is something still limiting the assay for
alternariol, that is not limiting the assay for cortisol. For alternariol the limitation could be due to
low activity of the biological elements or poor binding aﬃnity of the antibody, which only could be
solved in the production stage. However, protein G did enhance the results. Therefore, protein G was
considered as a central part of the biosensor setup.
To ﬁnd the sensitivity of the biosensor setup in the form of IC50 and the LOD, the analyte calibration
curve was produced, and the vision was that the setup could fulﬁl the given criteria for alternariol
from the European commission of 10 µg/kg ∼38.72 nM. The setup for cortisol had an IC50 of 1.463
Page 103 of 151
==PAGE:109==
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
nM and a LOD of 0.207 nM, which veriﬁes an overly sensitive setup that can determine low analyte
concentrations. For alternariol, the same trend was observed with a low maximum absorbance, and
the analyte calibration curve shifted to the right compared to cortisol, which meant an increased IC50
of 10.71 nM and a LOD of 2.155 nM, which indicate that the setup was less sensitive. The cortisol
setup was actually seven times more sensitive than the setup for alternariol in ELISA, but the assay
in buﬀer solution did still fulﬁl the criteria. However, this result was a bit worrying when the matrix
from a tomato product had to be introduced, as the normal tendency of the matrix was to decrease the
sensitivity even more. The preparation of the tomato juice was important to investigate and evaluate
its eﬀect. Especially the eﬀect of the particles, as they could aﬀect the measurements in various ways,
but in particular since the particles could attract the analyte, as the analyte AOH is hydrophobic.
This could have an inﬂuence, if the preparation involved a centrifugation or ﬁltration step. The key
factor for a correct measurement of the toxin is to know where it is located in the product sample. This
means that the biosensor would be useless if the right preparation were not found. The ﬁrst chosen
preparation method was 1:10 dilution of tomato juice with buﬀer as both the liquid and particles
were present and the eﬀect of both could be investigated. It was also chosen since it was the simplest
variant with no pH adjustment or other operations needed. However, the dilution could bring the
analyte concentration under the LOD and give false negatives if the biosensor is not sensitive enough.
This indicates that the preparation method also highly depends on the sensitivity of the biosensor.
The matrix eﬀect of the diluted tomato juice was not a problem for the setup with cortisol, as the
IC50 and LOD remained the same and only aﬀected the maximum absorbance with a reduction of
23%. Reasons for this are many. However, it is believed to be due to, as other scientiﬁc research
has hypothesized, that the reduced absorbance is caused by inhibition of the enzyme and its activity.
The compounds responsible could be heavy metals, as tomato products have diﬀerent heavy metals
in their contents and as the metals are proven to exert an inhibitory eﬀect represented as toxicity in
their interactions with proteins including enzymes. It is proved in literature that heavy metals can
aﬀect the enzyme without aﬀecting the antigen-antibody complex, as the IC50 was not aﬀected. It
is however believed that there are several reasons for the reduced absorbance, as a reduction of 23%
is a signiﬁcant amount when the metals are reduced 10 times. It has been seen in literature that an
eﬀective strategy used naturally by plants to counter various metals’ inhibitory eﬀects is an increase
in peroxidase expression as a defensive response to the decreased signal [33]. If the HRP can tolerate
the heavy metals, the preparation could stay simple as the heavy metals do not have to be removed.
As the particles were worth exploring, the particle eﬀect was investigated, and the results were unex-
pected, as the supernatant and ﬁltered supernatant from tomato juice had the highest matrix eﬀect.
This was suspected to be due to no dilution and due to that the force used in the centrifugation
could release compounds like the heavy metals from the particles, which was backed up by scientiﬁc
research. This suggests that the preparation methods should avoid involving centrifugation and ﬁl-
tration, as it is showed to have a negative inﬂuence if the product matrix was discarded without any
extraction of the analyte. The tomato juice diluted 1:10 with buﬀer had, however, a great impact
on the setup for alternariol, as the analysis of the data gave an IC50 of 28.269 nM, which is 3 times
higher than the assay performed in pure buﬀer solution. However, the LOD did decrease to 0.874
Page 104 of 151
==PAGE:110==
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
nM, which was abnormal as the usual trend is that when IC50 increases, the LOD increases as well.
This experiment was believed to be unbalanced and inﬂuenced by mathematical artefacts, which gave
incorrect results, as it is believed that a loss of the analyte caused disturbance in the assay and did
not give a suﬃcient indication. This indicated, however, two things: that the two analytes behaved
diﬀerently in the same matrix and a possible location of the alternariol analyte. The diﬀerences are
believed to be due to the Log P value, as the value is higher for AOH, indicating that the attraction
to the particles is higher. This was only found out since the diluted tomato juice was spiked with
alternariol before running the experiment. Even though, the eﬀect of the matrix was inconclusive,
the experiment was highly important, as a possible location of the analyte was found, which is a very
important factor. The analyte location together with the particle eﬀect was investigated further with
the ﬁltered supernatant of tomato juice and the experiment gave useful data and had an IC50 of 9.862
nM and a LOD of 1.446 nM, even though the absorbance was reduced as expected. This contributed
to the hypothesis that the particles in tomato juice could attract the analyte alternariol and traps it
within their matrix, concluding that the preparation has a great impact on the ﬁnal alternariol con-
centration. As the experiments are spiked with analyte after the preparation has happened, it cannot
be concluded where the analyte is located in the sample or how the preparation method is aﬀecting the
analyte concentration, but only give a hint of where it most probably is and how the matrix made by
the diﬀerent preparations aﬀects the biosensor setup. To determine this, the sample should be spiked
before the preparation, as that would be a more realistic picture of where the analyte would be in a
real product sample and how the preparation is aﬀecting the ﬁnal concentration. Other experiments
could also be made to investigate, which compounds are present in the solution and test their eﬀect
on the biological elements. This analysis has to be made for every product, even diﬀerent tomato
products, to evaluate the eﬀect of the matrix. Every product matrix can inﬂuence the biosensor dif-
ferently. The toxin detection is only made for the ﬁnal processed tomato product, but maybe it would
be good to know if the mass of peeled tomatoes is contaminated before using them and making them
into a product. Hence, the matrix eﬀect for raw tomatoes also has to be investigated. The matrix
eﬀect and the analyte location are key to a good biosensor and to have a correct indication of them,
the matrix should be investigated more. The regeneration process was also investigated by ELISA,
as the output is easier to determine in this method as compared to using electrochemical detection.
The experiment had the purpose of determining where the regeneration solution could cleave as it
has great inﬂuence on how strenuous the adding process will be after the regeneration. Using ELISA
for this purpose also has its downsides as the protein G is bound diﬀerently in the well compared
to the electrode, meaning that acid could have diﬀerent eﬀects depending on the experiment. The
results showed that the primary target for the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 was the
antigen-antibody complex when 30 minutes of incubation was used. In this process, the substrate also
showed regenerative properties and could regenerate the setup for cortisol quite well after 60 minutes
of incubation. It was concluded that both the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and the
substrate solution could be used to regenerate the setup for cortisol and thereby also for alternariol,
as it was assumed to have the same eﬀect on various antigen-antibody complexes. The regeneration
process is not optimised, and both the solution and the incubation time can be investigated.
Page 105 of 151
==PAGE:111==
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In the experiments done with electrochemical detection and absorbance as a reference, the ﬁrst part
was the cleaning process and its eﬀect.
The used cleaning method was air plasma treatment for
minimum 64 minutes, which had a great eﬀect on the electrodes compared to cleaning the electrodes
with a combination of acetone, ethanol and MilliQwater resulting in a small charge transfer resistance
in impedance measurements and a peak to peak separation of around 100 mV in cyclic voltammetry.
The biological modiﬁcation of the chips was done for both cortisol and alternariol, but the ﬁnal results
turned the view around as the data for alternariol performed better than cortisol when modiﬁed on the
gold electrode compared to the 96-well plate, as the end-point absorbance for the chips was higher.
In general, the modiﬁcation went well for both analytes and their associated biological elements.
However, the modiﬁcation behaved a bit diﬀerently, as the modiﬁcation for protein G did not exhibit
as signiﬁcant increases in charge transfer resistance for alternariol as compared to cortisol. This is
believed to be variance that was not related to the biological elements, but more a variance in the
detection, as the used protein G solution was the same. The better performance for alternariol could,
however, be due to how protein G was bound to the surface, as it is covalently bound on the electrode
compared to being bound by physisorption in ELISA. One hypothesis could be that the antibody for
alternariol induces conformational changes in protein G when the two connect, which may result in
release of protein G if it is bound by physisorption. Hence, the covalent binding made between the
gold electrode and protein G is stronger, being able to withstand when the antibody is bound to it.
This presumption is not validated, as the surface of the electrode has not been investigated in detail.
It could be established, however, that the biological elements for alternariol had a better performance
and exhibited higher activity with protein G on a gold electrode than in a 96-well plate, which in the
light of a future biosensor is very positive.
The reproducibility and behaviour of the biointerface when this was regenerated were also investigated
using absorbance measurements, as it is important for a possible calibration curve to have a low
relative standard deviation and precise signal repetition. It was possible to get repeatable maximum
signals with an RSD under 10% for the cortisol chips when only applying tracer after a regeneration
with substrate for 30 minutes. However, the RSD was over 10% when the regeneration solution 0.4
M gly-HCl pH 2.2 was used together with the substrate and an increased trend in the absorbance
was observed. The reason was believed to be incomplete regeneration. To check this, the baseline
absorbance after application of the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 was tested and found
to be quite low, indicating that the solution anyhow caused a complete regeneration after 30 minutes
with a followed two additions of substrate for 30 minutes. The reason for the large RSD is unknown.
As the maximum absorbance could not be restored, it was suspected that the long regeneration time of
1.5 h had disturbed the biointerface and removed not only the tracer but also the antibody. However,
the restored maximum absorbance, after incubating with antibody solution overnight, did give a
better picture of the trend, as one chip got a better RSD, another chip had the tendency to have an
increased absorbance after each regeneration, and the last chip had a very ﬂuctuating behaviour. As
the regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 seemed to have a “bad” inﬂuence on the biointerface
for cortisol detection, the regeneration eﬀect of the substrate was investigated with good results, as
the substrate alone could regenerate the chip to almost zero absorbance. Hence, the substrate can
Page 106 of 151
==PAGE:112==
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
regenerate the biosensor setup for cortisol and provide repeatable maximum absorbance with RSD
10%, although the baseline level varied from run to run. However, these experiments proved that
the substrate had the desired regeneration eﬀect with less damaging eﬀect on the biointerface for
cortisol. The same regeneration strategy was used on the biosensor setup with alternariol, but the
setup could not be regenerated by only applying the substrate solution. This proved that diﬀerent
biological elements for diﬀerent analytes behaved diﬀerently and can thereby not be regenerated by
the same procedure. The regeneration solution 0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 had to be tested on the setup,
but it could not regenerate the setup for alternariol detection in a combination with substrate solution
when they were applied once. This means that the regeneration strategy for alternariol biosensing had
to be a combination of the regeneration solution and the substrate solution added in multiple runs.
The maximum signal and later analyte exposure were investigated in terms of electrochemical detec-
tion by amperometry and by absorbance measurements, where a possible regeneration procedure was
tested. The main strategy was to measure the maximum signal to have a reference, whereafter the
setup was tried regenerated, down to an absorbance between 0.100 and 0.200, and a competitive assay
with analyte was introduced. The ﬁrst observation was that there was a trend of decreased signal for
the chosen working electrode and absorbance for the chip with increased number of runs of amperomet-
ric detection, as the tracer was being removed by the substrate solution and wash away between the
runs. It was observed, however, that the tracer removal was random, as the observed decreased amper-
ometric current response did not correlate with the decrease in absorbance. Another observation was
that the maximum signal could be restored, but that the absorbance could not, which proves that the
two measurement methods cannot correspond in the given design. The reason is that electrochemical
detection only addresses the chosen working electrode, whereas absorbance measurements address the
entire chip. The regeneration process was long with multiple incubations in the regeneration solution
0.4 M gly-HCl pH 2.2 and substrate solution (pH 5.6). It was hard to get the overall chip absorbance
down to zero absorbance, leaving the tracer with a start advantage in the competitive assay, which is
not optimal for a calibration curve. However, the purpose of this project was to prove the concept of
the biosensor and not optimise the conditions. It was proven that an analyte exposure decreased the
amperometric current response. The statistical variation in the amperometric detection between the
chips was also investigated, as the modiﬁcation could vary on the working electrode. Four diﬀerent
working electrodes (WEb), each on a diﬀerent chip, were tested. The variation in the maximum signal
was large in the maximum signal, indicating that the modiﬁcation of the working electrodes could
vary a lot and a batch of chips could have a huge variation after fabrication and modiﬁcation. A
potential calibration curve was generated, where an increasing exposure to the analyte was introduced
combined with a regeneration step in between. Again, the setup was not fully regenerated and the
overall average absorbance was on average around 0.140. This means that the tracer had a small
advantage in the assay. However, it was observed that the regeneration was easier when the chip had
been standing with PBS overnight, which could be either due to the incubation time or to the fact
that the PMMA holder possibly had been opened and the PMMA holes cleaned with tissue paper,
since the risk of a small leakage did appear quite often. This led to the suspicion that the tracer and
analyte were not washed away by PBST but had more likely been physisorbed on the sides of the
Page 107 of 151
==PAGE:113==
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
PMMA well or other places, as the analyte alternariol is highly hydrophobic. Furthermore, the Log P
value was also suspected of having an inﬂuence on the regeneration process, as the setup for cortisol
was more easily regenerated than the setup for alternariol. This was not clariﬁed, however, the reason
must be investigated. It could be seen that the calibration curve obtained with amperometry did not
match the calibration curve obtained in ELISA, but the concept of alternariol biosensor functioned as
expected, although it was tested only in buﬀer solution and not optimised.
This project showed that the commercial alternariol antibody and tracer from Abvigen Inc could be
used for a potential biosensor. However, considering the needed further development and optimisation,
it would be far in the future the biosensor could be on the industrial market. However, this project
could achieve its goal and be the starting point of the research leading to a potential alternariol
biosensor for applications in food industry. As this project had two analytes to investigate, it also
illuminated that even though the biosensor concept is universal, being able to utilise any antibody
and associated tracer, the regeneration process, behaviour of the analyte, and the localization of the
analyte in the product samples could diﬀer. In general, immunobiosensors have been investigated for
many years, but are still hard to develop as it is diﬃcult to make repeatable data with a low RSD with
these kinds of sensors. A biosensor setup like the one used in this project is not a new development.
However, the used biological elements for alternariol are new and have never been tested before in a
biosensor setup.
Page 108 of 151
==PAGE:114==
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
6
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
6.1
Industrial Biosensor-Based Monitoring
The goal for this project is to make the fundamental research that could be used in the development
of a fully automatic ﬂow-based biosensor system, that can be used and operated by anyone. The
ambition is that the system could automatically pick up the sample from any solution, prepare it and
perform the detection of the toxin within an acceptable time period. However, to achieve this goal a
lot of research has to be done for every part of the system, as each part, like sampling, sample handling
and detection, have to be studied and optimized to accomplish a good industrial biosensor. The most
crucial part is still, however, what sampling handling or preparation method that will contribute to
the most correct estimation of the toxin concentration and have less eﬀect on the biological elements.
The eﬀects of the sample matrix and the preparation method to segregate all of the toxin are the key
factors to develop a good biosensor. Unfortunately, diﬀerent product matrices can require diﬀerent
preparation approaches and thereby complicate the goal for an universal automated system, as each
product type and product brand diﬀer in content and structure.
Sampling and Sample Handling when used for Industrial Measurement
When measuring something industrially, the scale of the batch is always large, which means that the
sampling and sample handling also can become quite complicated, as the test should be representative
for the whole batch.
Sampling is about having a representative sample for the entire product volume tested and the
question is how to get that? This has to be investigated as the representative number of samples and
the volume of each have to be determined compared to the batch volume tested. Another question is
when to collect the samples as it depends on when the test is relevant for the industry. As the guideline
policy from the European commission states, a food group, such as ’processed tomato products’, could
refer to the processed tomatoes that are used for the production and not only for the ﬁnalised product
like tomato juice.
Thereby, it could be an advantage for the industry to test the raw materials
like the processed tomatoes before they are mixed into the ﬁnal product. This could save energy,
time, materials and money, as if the processed tomatoes are highly contaminated, the batch could
be eliminated before spending the eﬀorts of producing the end-product. Nonetheless, it is important
to remember that alternariol can be present in various food groups that could be used to make the
ﬁnalised product and the concentration of the toxin could therefore increase under production. This
means that the company has to test either every raw material before use or just the ﬁnal product with
the risk of discarding the batch if highly contaminated.
Sample handling is about how to isolate or extract the toxin most eﬀectively from the solid or
liquid part, and how to match the total extractable concentration with the sensitivity of the biosensor.
Sample handling can be determined by the available sensitivity of the biosensor or it can determine
which sensitivity the biosensor should achieve. As the maximum allowed concentration for processed
tomato products is 10 µg/kg, the measurement of the toxin has to be per kilogram. However, it is
important that the volume from the product is handleable for the biosensor. It is therefore essential to
Page 109 of 151
==PAGE:115==
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
ﬁnd out where the analyte is located in the product and how to isolate it into an appropriate volume
that still has a toxin concentration in the analytical range of the biosensor. A rule of thumb here
could be that a higher sensitivity of the biosensor can decrease the volume needed for the detection,
as at least 1 kg of tomatoes with a high alternariol concentration is needed if the biosensor setup is
not sensitive enough.
The handling of the sample is deﬁned as a sort of pre-step, where the analyte is isolated or extracted
from the product, but the question is how to do this most eﬀectively and still have the simplicity
of the system in mind? How to get view of the potential toxicity of 1 kg product and how to bring
down the volume, but still keep the concentration over the limit of detection? To decide which sample
handling method that is the best to isolate this analyte, the ﬁrst questions to answer are how the toxin
is distributed in the tissue of the tomato and how to get the toxin out? The most common and highly
eﬀective way of extracting analytes is by an organic solvent, but due to the toxicity of the chemicals,
this project focused on how the matrix of a tomato product could aﬀect the biological elements in the
biosensor. This was done in order to see if it was possible for the biosensor to function even in the
presence of the matrix, as the future goal is to minimise the use of organic solvents and ﬁnd more
environmentally friendly extraction methods. However, by only using for example dilution, there is a
potential risk of getting too low a concentration of the toxin so that it gives false negatives and even if
it is a simple preparation, it also increases the volume. Experiments also proved that the toxin binds
to the particles in the tomato product, when it is only diluted, which causes the analyte cannot be
detected. To use an extraction pre-step seems beneﬁcial even if the process gets more complicated,
as the toxin can be extracted from the matrix e.g. particles and be pre-concentrated before entering
the biosensor. This ensures that both the volume can be decreased as the concentration of the toxin
is increased and that the matrix of the sample has no eﬀect on the biosensor setup or on the ﬁnal
toxin concentration. An extraction method such as Pressurized Hot Water Extraction (PHWE) could
be used, as the water transmutes into a non-polar state above a speciﬁc temperature and pressure,
making the water vapour able to extract non-polar/hydrophobic compounds like AOH. PHWE is a
feasible green extraction method which can trap the analyte and remove it from the sample matrix
[76]. Another method like solid phase extraction can also be used as the analyte can be trapped in
a column and be eluted into a smaller volume, hence extracting and concentrating of the analyte at
the same time. These methods can pre-concentrate the toxin and are more environmentally friendly
than using an organic solvent. However, the eﬀectiveness towards alternariol has to be investigated.
A pre-concentration step also depends on the activity and sensitivity of the biological elements used
in the biosensor, as it could be a necessary step if the sensitivity of the biosensor is low.
All parts including sampling, sample handling and detection have to match together, as the usability of
the biosensor is not suﬃcient without proper representative sampling and eﬀective sample handling.
It has to be mentioned that even though a pre-step with pre-concentration is implemented before
detection by the biosensor, this approach would most likely still facilitate faster detection than using
HPLC or another analytical method that requires well-equipped laboratory with skilled personnel.
Page 110 of 151
==PAGE:116==
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation and Use of the Biosensor at the Factory
What the industry is looking for is a ’point of care’ sensor that can be used on site and is so simple
that it can be used by anyone. This is a concept that requires minimal to no sample preparation
without any washing step. The premise is very much like a pregnancy test, where the urine facilitates
the washing and the ﬂow in one go [77]. However, in pregnancy test the transducer is not electronic,
but has the transduction in terms of the color formation which can be read with eyes, also called
a lateral ﬂow biosensor. Although, the analytical principle behind a pregnancy test is good as it is
simple to use with no sample preparation, it is hard to transfer it to this project, as the sample types
are very diﬀerent and it is very diﬃcult to determine anything without any sample handling. The
concept ’point of care’ is taken into account, as the biosensor should be present at the production site,
so that the measurement and result can be obtained within a short period of time. The biosensor will,
however, never fully realize the ’point of care’ concept.
Since the world is focusing on recycling, the question about the chip being disposable or be reused
multiple times arises in the future aspects. It is pointed out by the industry that they do not want
to reuse the chips in general, as the risk of getting a false negative or false positive result is highly
concerning [77]. Thereby, believing that one-time-use of the chips will give more accurate results.
When the sample is a food product, it includes both carbohydrates, fats and other compounds that
have the potential to stick to the electrode and make the detection imprecise, only making the error
larger for every reuse. There is also a risk when using the regeneration process, since it can leave
debris from the biological elements, that also can stick to the electrode and disturb the measurement.
All of these compounds can also bind to the biological elements and interfere with the accuracy of the
measurement. To make the reused electrode preferable in the mind of the regeneration process, the
process together with the amount of the biological elements have to be optimised, so that the error
is minimised in relation to occupying all the possible positions on the antibodies and ensure that the
solution only cleaves at one spot like between the antigen-antibody complex. However, the reuse of
the chips also depends on the sample handling. If the analyte is extracted from the matrix, there will
be less compounds that could stick to the chips and inﬂuence the measurement. For now, the chips for
a future biosensor are not reused, as the reused chips apart from having a higher risk of false negative
also are time consuming, since the chips have to be regenerated properly. However, for industrial use,
it is important to know the statistical behaviour of the batch of chips, meaning that the modiﬁcation
on each chip has to be nearly identical. As the regeneration process is not reliable yet, as seen in this
project, it would be best to have one-time-use electrodes, despite the fact that a chip could be reused
multiple times. A reused chip is in a better agreement with the world goal of trying to reuse materials.
To ﬁnd the best user-method, all of these issues have to be investigated and veriﬁed.
A biosensor for detection of a toxin like alternariol, could be used as an alarm system for the control
of the products and if the contamination of alternariol is around the maximum concentration limit,
the sample could go to an external laboratory to get another quantiﬁcation via HPLC before throwing
anything out, if the company needs a second opinion. However, the right sample handling of the
product and the toxin has to be found before one can be sure that the results are correct. While
seeking for funding for the biological elements used in this project, a lot of companies where contacted,
Page 111 of 151
==PAGE:117==
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
it was made clear that a lot of the food companies get their raw materials, like peeled tomatoes, tested
by another organisation, which is responsible for the control and veriﬁcation, meaning that the ﬁnal
product is not tested. In the case of the brand Rynkeby, the organisation used by their juice department
is Sure Global Fair (SGF), which is assigned in the AIJN (European Juice Association) [78]. For a ﬁrm
like Rynkeby, a biosensor could be a great opportunity, as no external company has to be involved.
For other companies, where the ﬁnal product is a mixture of diﬀerent ingredients, the biosensor could
also be used as a ﬁnal test for their products, so they are reassured not to bring any toxic food to the
market. In all, an optimal biosensor system could be beneﬁcial, but would the companies like to have
the responsibility and test the product on site or are they paying their way out?
6.2
Optimisation of the Biological Elements
Use another Peroxidase Enzyme
In literature combined with the experimental results, it has been proved that the peroxidase enzyme
could be an important factor for the biosensor, as it seems to be inﬂuenced by the sample matrix and
by the content and pH of the substrate solution. Therefore, it could be beneﬁcial to use a peroxidase
enzyme that is more tolerant towards the matrix and has an optimal pH closer to the optimal pH of
the antigen-antibody complex. This could be one way of ﬁnding the optimal conditions for the entire
biological setup.
In nature, there are many diﬀerent peroxidase enzymes, that can oﬀer resistance towards diﬀerent salts,
organic solvents, temperatures and heavy metals, but also towards a wide pH range [33]. Especially,
the tolerance towards compounds like heavy metals could be useful in this project, as heavy metals
are suspected to be the cause of the decreased enzyme activity, when examining the matrix eﬀect
of tomato juice. However, it has to be considered that maybe not all the demands can be fulﬁlled,
as the enzyme could have high tolerance towards the heavy metals but does not have the right pH
optimum. One peroxidase found that could be considered is isolated from a citrus lemon tree. This
peroxidase is reported to have a pH optimum at pH 5, be activated by Mn2+, Na+, Mg2+, Zn2+ and
Ca2+, be tolerant towards Cs2+, Cd2+ and Ni2+, and can retain 30-50% of its activity in presence of
50% methanol, ethanol and isopropanol [33]. This peroxidase can withstand many diﬀerent metals,
which could help retaining the enzyme activity, but it has a pH optimum a little lower than requested.
One problem is that a tracer constructed with an alternative peroxidase like the one from the citrus
lemon tree could probably not be commercially available without having it specially designed for the
purpose.
Expand the Selection of the Antibody
As other similar mycotoxins both in structure and in toxicity are present in contaminated food together
with alternariol, it could be beneﬁcial to expand the selection of the antibody, so that the biosensor
could detect more than one toxin at a time and give an average measurement. This proposal was
suggested by Wang et. al. 2018 [20] for the toxins AOH and AME, which makes good sense, since
they are structurally similar, are potential health threats and are often found together, as they have a
common biosynthesis pathway. The idea is that instead of avoiding the other toxins, as there always
will be a cross reaction, it could be better to accept them. Even if, the biosensor becomes less accurate,
Page 112 of 151
==PAGE:118==
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
this approach could provide a wider toxin range, which would be very useful, especially if the biosensor
should work as an alarm system. The only factor to be aware of is that the toxins can have diﬀerent
maximum concentration levels e.g. in processed tomato products AOH has the maximum allowed
concentration at 10 µg/kg, whereas AME has the maximum at 5 µg/kg, which the biosensor has to
take into account. The biosensor has to report an alarm at the lowest maximum concentration level,
where an HPLC can be included to determine the amount of each toxin and thereby determine if the
criteria are met.
6.3
Future Research and Outlook
As this project is a proof of concept project, there is a long way to a functional industrial biosensor
that can be marketed to companies. To take this project to the next level an outlook on the future
research is presented, where the ﬁnal goal is to test the toxin concentration in real life samples to
prove that the biosensor is working and can be utilized in practise.
• Find the best Sample Handling.
To determine the best way to handle the samples, it is important to determine the location
the analyte occupies in the product sample, meaning which part of the product that needs to
be kept. When knowing this it is also easier to determine the matrix eﬀect on the biological
elements. This research could also help determine how sensitive the biosensor has to become.
The location of the analyte in the product sample is a key factor. However, it is important that
the goal to keep the whole biosensor system as simple as possible is achieved.
• A better Chip Fabrication and PMMA Holder Design.
The electrode design or manufacturing process is highly important, as it determines the modi-
ﬁcation. Due to the design of the PMMA holder used in this project, the modiﬁcations made
during the preparation of the working electrode were replicated over the entire chip area, which
is unfavourable. To resolve this there are two approaches: one is to make the chip surface except
for the working electrode repellent towards proteins and molecules, so that the modiﬁcation is
only made on the working electrodes. Another is to design the PMMA holder in such a way that
the modiﬁcation only appears on the working electrodes, but when detecting electrochemically
can be opened up so that all electrodes (counter, reference and working) are present in the same
chamber.
• Observe and Inspect the Surface when Modiﬁed and Regenerated.
To get an idea of how the modiﬁcation and regeneration works and behaves, an observation
and inspection of the electrode surface would be preferable. To achieve this, a highly sensitive
instrument has to be used, which is maybe not available.
• Flow system, Regeneration process and Calibration Curve.
In a batch system there is a lot of manual pipetting and especially in the injection of the substrate
it causes some issues in the electrochemical detection, as the manual injection can be observed in
the signal. Therefore, also to get the biosensor closer to an industrial use, the biosensor should
be tested in a ﬂow system. Along with that, the concentrations for the antibody, tracer and
Page 113 of 151
==PAGE:119==
FUTURE PERSPECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION
analyte can also be optimised, so that the function of the setup is balanced. A ﬂow system
can test the biosensor setup and determine how it is regenerated and probably get a better
calibration curve, as the accuracy and reliability can be improved. When the rough model of
the ﬂow system is established and the optimal conditions are determined, the sample handling
and matrix eﬀect could be introduced together with a SLM membrane, if there is a need for it
or if the preparation method allows for it. To back up the gained data, an HPLC analysis could
be used, especially when testing unknown samples.
Page 114 of 151
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX
7
APPENDIX
7.1
A.1 Various Food Groups - Contaminated with AOH
Figure 40
Table clippings from EFSA Journal 2011 [1] of AOH concentrations (µg/kg or µg/L) in various
food groups. Table text taken directly from the journal, but only shown for AOH and not the other mycotoxins. Quote
"Mean concentration (µg/kg or µg/L) of AOH, AME, TeA and TEN in the food groups considered for the calculation of
dietary exposure. If all data in a food group were left censored, or the number of samples was below 5, the food group was
not included in the calculation of dietary exposure (grey shaded cells)." and the notes for the table "AOH: alternariol;
AME: alternariol monomethyl ether; TeA: tenuazonic acid; TEN: tentoxin; N: number of samples; LC: left censored data
(values below the limit of detection or limit of quantiﬁcation); LB: lower bound; UB: upper bound; - : no data available."
Page 115 of 151
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX
7.2
A.2 Alternaria Mycotoxins - Name and Chemical Structures
Figure 41
Alternaria mycotoxins. Diﬀerent Alternaria mycotoxins with name and chemical structure. Picture from
Escriva et. al. [4].
Page 116 of 151
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX
7.3
A.3 Design Setups with the Enzyme Acetylcholinesterase and Choline Oxidase
Figure 42
Design setups with the enzyme Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and Choline oxidase (ChOX).
A. Design uses Prussian Blue to detect the reaction. B. Design uses a mediator to detect the reaction. In both designs
the mycotoxin AOH (if present) inhibits the reaction.
Page 117 of 151
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX
7.4
A.4 Pulse Voltammetry Methods - NPV, DPV and SWV
Figure 43
Pulse voltammetry methods. Diﬀerent Pulse voltammetry methods: Normal pulse voltammetry (NPV),
Diﬀerential pulse voltammetry (DPV) and Square wave voltammetry (SWV), showed with their principle, sample period
and output. Picture given by the supervisor.
Page 118 of 151
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX
7.5
A.5 Contents of Tomato and Diﬀerent Tomato Products
Table 29
Contents of Tomato and Diﬀerent Tomato Products. Overview over the content of raw tomato and
diﬀerent tomato products: peeled canned tomatoes, purée, juice, ketchup and soup (ready to eat or canned condensed).
Data combined from the databases Frida (DTU fooddatabase) [49] and MYFOODDATA (Online database) [50] in
rounded numbers.
Tomato and Tomato Products’ Contents
Compound
Tomato, raw
Peeled
Purée
Juice
Ketchup
Soup
Unit
Vitamins
Cont./100g
Vitamin A
42.01/82.7
N/A/29.3
26/61.2
N/A/25.9
N/A/49.9
20/56
µg/RE
Vitamin E
0.54-1.10
0.74
1.96-2.30
0.574
1.50
0.50
mg
α-tocopherol
1.10
0.74
2.30
0.574
1.50
N/A
mg
Vitamin K/K1
7.92/7.90
N/A
3.40/N/A
N/A/7.90
N/A
4.70
µg
Vitamin B1
0.04-0.07
0.045
0.04-0.10
0.047
0.04
0.07
mg
Vitamin B2
0.0159
0.550
0.05-0.08
0.031
0.05
0-0.04
mg
Vitamin B3
0.6-0.73
0.577
1.30-1.48
0.67
0.6
0.88-1.10
mg
Vitamin B5
0.067
N/A
0.733
N/A
N/A
N/A
mg
Vitamin B6
0.07-0.09
0.111
0.12-0.18
0.111
0.13
0.07-0.09
mg
Vitamin B9
15-31
24
11-72
6
5
0-12
µg
Vitamin C
13.7-15
7.4-11.3
9-10.6
45.0-61.7
2.94
12.9-53
mg
Pantothensyre
0.04
0.230
0.250
0.250
0.250
0.120
mg
Biotin
2.26
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
N/A
µg
Carotene, β
449-992
352
306-734
311
599
235
µg
Carotene, α
101
N/A
0
N/A
N/A
0
µg
Choline
6.71
N/A
17.60
N/A
N/A
12.77
mg
Lycopene
2573.02
N/A
21754
N/A
N/A
10920
µg
Lut. + zeaxanthin
123.02
N/A
0
N/A
N/A
90
µg
Minerals
Cont./100g
Sodium, Na
5.03-6.50
143-149
28-433
221-262
941.18-1090
377-695
mg
Potassium, K
216-237
188
439-798
192-235
0-376
210-562
mg
Calcium, Ca
7.4-10
17-31
18-19.8
10-12.9
0-18.5
11-12.97
mg
Magnesium, Mg
6.5-11
11
23-30
10
18
6-14
mg
Phosphorus, P
24-26.9
19
40-41.9
23.6
34.4
27-31
mg
Iron, Fe
0.238-0.268
0.33-0.97
0.6-1.8
0.417-0.430
0-0.600
0.61-1.40
mg
Copper, Cu
0.043-0.067
0.110
0.150-0.280
0.110
0.150
0.07-0.2
mg
Zinc, Zn
0.093-0.201
0.300
0.200-0.360
0.300
0.200
0.194-0.2
mg
Continued on next page
Page 119 of 151
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX
Table 29 – Continued from previous page
Tomato and Tomato Products’ Contents
Compound
Tomato, raw
Peeled
Purée
Juice
Ketchup
Soup
Unit
Iodine, I
0
0
2.2
0
0.9
N/A
µg
Manganese, Mn
0.086-0.134
0.086
0.16
0.086
0.16
0.14-0.2
mg
Chromium, Cr
0.400
0.036
5
2.8
5
N/A
µg
Selenium, Se
0.300
0.099
0.400-0.720
0.099
0.400
2.97
µg
Nickel, Ni
0.700
0.568
30.0
5.1
30
N/A
µg
Mercury, Hg
0.80
0
0.10
0.75
0.10
N/A
µg
Arsenic, As
0.04
0.029
1
0.85
1
N/A
µg
Cadmium, Cd
0.25
1
2
1.10
2.0
N/A
µg
Lead, Pb
0.3
9.0
13
0.4
13.0
N/A
µg
Fluoride, F
2.28
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
µg
Carbohydrates
Cont./100g
Frutose
1.34-1.72
N/A
2.36
N/A
N/A
N/A
g
Glucose
1.27-1.46
N/A
2.44
N/A
N/A
N/A
g
Cellulose
0.7
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
g
Lignin
0.3
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
g
Starch
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1.10
N/A
g
Crude ﬁber
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.4
g
Total
-
3.2
-
-
-
-
g
Fats
Cont./100g
M.saturated
0.03-0.06
0.055
0.031
0.009
0.441
0.14-0.26
g
M.unsaturated
0.036
0.036
0.024
0.006
0.291
0.345
g
P.unsaturated
0.08-0.15
0.149
0.09-0.1
0.025
1.188
0.16-0.77
g
Omega 3
0.003-0.014
0.014
0.004-0.009
0.002
0.108
0.03-0.13
g
Omega 6
0.08-0.14
0.135
0.08-0.09
0.02
1.08
0.13-0.64
g
Amines
Cont./100g
Histamine
0.18
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
mg
Tyramine
0.40
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
mg
Serotonin
0.32
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
mg
Amino acids
Cont./100g
Isoleucine
18.1-32
56
31.2-38
35
72
47
mg
Leucine
24.8-28
48
46-51
31
101
79
mg
Lysine
26.9-32
56
48-49
35
96
39
mg
Continued on next page
Page 120 of 151
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX
Table 29 – Continued from previous page
Tomato and Tomato Products’ Contents
Compound
Tomato, raw
Peeled
Purée
Juice
Ketchup
Soup
Unit
Methionine
6-8
13
9.2-12
9
22
18
mg
Cystine
6-8.7
10
3-10
6
10
22
mg
Phenylalanine
19-26.9
33
34-44
21
77
55
mg
Tyrosine
14.1-26
44
21.2-22
28
30
34
mg
Threonine
19-26.9
33
37.2-41
21
72
42
mg
Tryptophan
6-7
12
11-11.2
7
16
16
mg
Valine
18.1-20
35
33.2-41
22
77
52
mg
Arginine
20.8-26
44
32-33
28
62
47
mg
Histidine
11-14.1
19
24-25.2
12
48
29
mg
Alanine
18-26.9
31
44-52
20
77
45
mg
Aspartic acid
80-134.9
136
206-207
87
370
128
mg
Glutamic acid
190-430.9
326
589-658
207
1200
616
mg
Glycine
18.8-20
35
27.2-28
22
58
42
mg
Proline
14.8-22
38
31-36
24
62
107
mg
Serine
25-26.2
42
39.2-49
27
86
63
mg
Betaine
0
N/A
0.4
N/A
N/A
N/A
mg
Organic acids
Cont./100g
Benzoic acid
0.03
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
mg
Page 121 of 151
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX
7.6
A.6 Preparation and Storage of Biological Elements, Reagents and Chemicals
Biological Elements
Antibody
When the antibody arrives, the solution is divided into aliquots (20 µL) in 0.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and
stored at -20°C for long-term storage. When antibody is used in an experiment one aliquot is dried up,
used and then stored at 4°C for short-term storage. Should avoid multiple freeze-thaw cycles.
Tracer
The tracer is stored at 4°C or at -20°C depending on the companies recommendation and should be
used as quickly as possible during experiments so that the temperature is kept around 4°C. One could
divide the solution into aliquots (20 µL) in 0.5 mL Eppendorf tubes to avoid contamination, this was
done in case of alternariol, but not for cortisol.
Analyte
The analyte (cortisol and alternariol) arrives in powder format and is stored at -20°C before it is mixed
with an organic compound like DMSO or other, so that there is no risk of inhaling the analyte and
so that the analyte can be used in the experiments. The analyte cortisol is mixed with DMSO to a
concentration of 10 mM and stored at 4°C, and the analyte alternariol is also mixed with DMSO to a
main stock with the concentration of 40 nM and stored at -20°C, where the working stock of 1 mM is
kept at 4°C.
Example of mix the analyte alternariol: The main stock was mixed in the original bottle delivered from
the company, where it was decided that a main stock should be 40 nM, as this would be durable for the
experiments. The analyte amount obtained was 5 mg.
The standard formula:
m(g) = Q(mol/L) · Mw(g/mol) · V olume(L) →V olume(L) =
m(g)
Q(mol/L) · Mw(g/mol)
(4)
The calculation:
0.005 g
0.04 mol L−1 · 258.2 g mol−1 = 0.000 484 L ∼484 µL
(5)
Thereby, adding 484 µL of DMSO to the 5 mg alternariol powder for a main stock of 40 mM. The
solution is mixed by vortex and it is ensured that all the powder is dissolved in the DMSO. The main
stock is stored at -20°C.
To have a more suitable solution for the experiments, a work solution of 1 mM was made in a glass
bottle were 25 µL of the main stock is mixed with 975 µL of DMSO. The bottle was marked, covered
in aluminium foil and kept at 4°C.
Page 122 of 151
==PAGE:128==
APPENDIX
Reagents used for both ELISA and Electrochemical Detection
Tween20 al 5%
Tween 20 (5%) is made by adding Tween 20 to MilliQwater and if necessary add 10 g of NaN3. The
solution is mixed and kept at 4°C.
Example of mix:
25 mL of Tween 20 + 500 mL MilliQwater = 500 mL Tween 20 (5%)
(6)
PBST
PBST is made by mixing PBS (Phosphate Buﬀered Saline) from Sigma Aldrich and 5% Tween20 to a
concentration of 0.5%. PBST is stored at room temperature. PBS is kept at room temperature whereas
the Tween20 is kept at 4°C.
Example of mix:
495 mL of PBS + 5 mL of Tween20 (5%) = 500 mL PBST
(7)
Coating buﬀer
Coating buﬀer pH 9.6 (0.25 M) is made by dissolving 3.975 g of Na2CO3 and 7.32 g NaHCO3 in 500
mL of MilliQwater. The solution is adjusted to pH 9.6 and kept at 4°C for long-term storage. For
the experiments, the concentration of the coating buﬀer is decreased to 0.05 M with MilliQwater, pH
adjusted to 9.6, ﬁltered and kept at 4°C for long-term storage.
Example of diluting - 500 mL solution of 0.05 M:
100 mL coating buﬀer (0.25 M) + 400 mL MilliQwater = 500 mL coating buﬀer
(8)
Citrate buﬀer
Citrate buﬀer pH 5.6 (0.2 M) is made by dissolving 34 g of sodium citrate in 500 mL of MilliQwater.
The solution is adjusted to 5.5 with acetic acid, ﬁltrated and kept at 4°C for long-term storage. For the
experiments the citrate buﬀer is diluted to a concentration of 0.04 M by mixing with Milli-Q water.
Example of diluting - 200 mL solution of 0.04 M:
200 mL · 0.04 M
0.4 M
= 20 mL
(9)
Thereby, taken 20 mL of the 0.4 M citrate buﬀer and mix it with 180 mL of Milli-Q water to a solution
of 200 mL of 0.04 M citrate buﬀer.
3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine
The stock of 3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) (concentration) is stored under vacuum in the dark.
For the experiment TMB powder is mixed with DMSO to a concentration of 0.6%. The solution is
Page 123 of 151
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX
mixed in a glass tube, wrapped in aluminium folie and kept at room temperature in darkness. Only
exposed to light when mixing the substrate for the experiments.
Example of mixing - 1 mL solution:
Around 6 mg of TMB into 1 mL of DMSO = 1 mL of TMB 0.6%
(10)
The TMB powder and DMSO is mixed by vortex.
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
For the experiments hydrogen peroxide (1%) is used. The solution is made by mixing with hydrogen
peroxide 30% to a 1% solution and the solution is kept in a plastic tube at 4°C for long-term storage.
Example of mix and dilution - 3 mL solution:
100 µL of H2O2 30% and ﬁll up to 3 mL with MilliQwater
(11)
Regeneration solution gly-HCl
The regeneration solution gly-HCl pH 2.2 is made fresh for the experiment and stored at 4°C for short-
term storage. The solutions is a mix of glycine, HCl and MilliQwater to a concentration of 0.4%.
Example of mix - 20 mL solution:
20 mL · 75.07 MW of glycine = 600.56 mg of glycine
(12)
20 mL · 10ln(2.2) = 122.8 µL of HCl
(13)
Thereby, mixing around 600.56 mg of glycine, 122.8 µL of HCL into 20 mL of MilliQwater. The solution
is mixed by vortex.
Ferri-Ferrocyanide solution
Ferri-Ferrocyanide solution made by a mix of K3Fe(CN)6 and K4Fe(CN)6 in PBS. The solution is covered
with aluminium foil and kept at room temperature.
Example of mix - 50 mL solution:
164.6 mg of K3Fe(CN)6 + 211.2 mg of K4Fe(CN)6 in 50 mL of PBS
(14)
MPA solution
The 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) 80 mM is made by mixing MPA solution with MilliQwater. As
the buﬀer is mixed, it should be used, but else it can be stored at 4°C for a short term storage (not
recommended).
Page 124 of 151
==PAGE:130==
APPENDIX
Example of mix - 2 mL solution:
1982.58 µL of MilliQwater is mixed with 17.42 µL of MPA = 2 mL of MPA solution
(15)
MES buﬀer
MES buﬀer (mix of MES (2-(N-Morpholino) ethanesulfonic acid) from Sigma Aldrich and NaCl from
Sigma Aldrich in MilliQwater) adjusted to pH 6. When a large solution is made, it is ﬁltrated, covered
with aluminium foil and stored at 4°C. For the solution the ﬁnal concentrations is 100 mM for MES
and 200 mM NaCl in MilliQwater.
Example of mix - 2 mL solution :
Of MES (MW: 206.73 g/mol) →41.346 mg in 1 mL MilliQwater
(16)
Of NaCl (MW: 58.44 g/mol) →11.688 mg in 1 mL MilliQwater
(17)
The two solutions of 1 mL is mixed into one solution of MES buﬀer of 2 mL.
EDC and NHS in MES buﬀer
N-ethyl-N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) are both
from Sigma-Aldrich and are stored at -20°C under vacuum. For the solution the ﬁnal concentrations
are 200 mM for EDC and 50 mM for NHS in MES buﬀer and the concentration is therefore doubled in
the calculations as the two separate solutions are mixed into one. The compounds are taken out from
the freezer and put in vacuum for around 30 minutes before the amounts are measured and noted. The
compounds are put under vacuum again before going into the freezer for long term storage.
Example of mix - 2 mL solution:
Of EDC (MW: 191.70 g/mol) →76.68 mg in 1 mL MES buﬀer
(18)
Of NHS (MW: 115.09 g/mol) →11.509 mg in 1 mL MES buﬀer
(19)
The two solutions of 1 mL are mixed into one solution (EDC-NHS) of 2 mL.
As there is no need for 2 mL solution and since it is hard to take the exact amount of each, the volume
can be adjusted in relation to the amount.
Equation used:
The volume needed =
Amount (mg)
Concentration (mM) · MW (g/mol) · factor from L to µL = Volume in µL (20)
Page 125 of 151
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX
Example of mix:
Of EDC (MW: 191.70 g/mol) →amount taken 41.1 mg
(21)
Calculating the volume needed =
41.1mg
400mM · 191.70g/mol · 106 = 535.99 µL ∼536 µL
(22)
Thereby, 536 µL of MES buﬀer is added to the 41.1 mg of EDC.
Of NHS (MW: 115.09 g/mol) →amount taken 4.5 mg
(23)
Calculating the volume needed =
4.5mg
100mM · 115.09g/mol · 106 = 390.99 µL ∼391 µL
(24)
Thereby, 391 µL of MES buﬀer is added to the 4.5 mg of NHS.
To make the EDC-NHS solution with the ﬁnal concentration of 200 mM EDC and 50 mM of NHS, the
limiting volume is deciding the total volume of the solution. The limit is the NHS solution of 391 µL.
Thereby, the EDC-NHS solution is made by taking 391 µL of the EDC and mixing it into the 391 µL
of NHS.
Citrate buﬀer with 0.1 M KCl
Citrate buﬀer (0.04 M) containing 0.1 M KCl pH 5.6 is made by dissolving 3.73 g of KCl in 500 mL of
0.04 M Citrate buﬀer. The solution is adjusted to 5.6 with acetic acid, ﬁltrated and kept either at 4°C
for long-term storage or at room temperature for short-term storage.
Example of mixing - 500 mL solution of 0.04 M with 0.1 M KCl:
Calculating the grams needed of KCl = Molar needed (mol/L) · MW (g/mol) · volume (L)
(25)
→0.1 mol/L) · 74.5513 g/mol · 0.5 L = 3.73gKCl
(26)
Page 126 of 151
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX
7.7
A.7 Modiﬁcation of Chip 01 (WE a,b,c), Chip 02 (WE a,b,c) and Chip 03
(WE a,c) for Cortisol Detection - Impedance spectra and CVs
Chip 01, (WE a,b,c)
In the following, all impedance spectra and CVs are presented for each working electrode on chip 01
together with the summarised CV parameters.
Chip 01, WEa
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 44 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 30.
Figure 44
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 01, WEa). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treat-
ment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 30
The information from the CVs (chip 01, WEa). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.076 and -0.071
110
After adding MPA
0.069 and -0.058
140
After adding protein G
NA
NA
After adding antibody
NA
NA
After adding tracer
NA
NA
Page 127 of 151
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX
Chip 01, WEb
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 45 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 31.
Figure 45
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 01, WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treat-
ment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 31
The information from the CVs (chip 01, WEb.) The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.077 and -0.075
120
After adding MPA
0.071 and -0.066
130
After adding protein G
NA and -0.010
NA
After adding antibody
NA and -0.011
NA
After adding tracer
NA and -0.006
NA
Page 128 of 151
==PAGE:134==
APPENDIX
Chip 01, WEc
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 46 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 32.
Figure 46
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 01, WEc). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treat-
ment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 32
The information from the CVs (chip 01, WEc.) The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.077 and -0.069
120
After adding MPA
0.068 and -0.059
130
After adding protein G
NA and -0.018
NA
After adding antibody
NA and -0.017
NA
After adding tracer
NA and -0.016
NA
Page 129 of 151
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX
Chip 02, (WE a,b,c)
In the following, all impedance spectra and CVs are presented for each working electrode on chip 02
together with the summarised CV parameters.
Chip 02, WEa
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 47 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 33.
Figure 47
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 02, WEa). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treat-
ment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 33
The information from the CVs (chip 02, WEa). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.068 and -0.065
100
After adding MPA
0.062 and -0.057
130
After adding protein G
0.024 and -0.030
260
After adding antibody
0.002 and -0.020
350
After adding tracer
0.003 and -0.020
360
Page 130 of 151
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX
Chip 02, WEb
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 48 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 34.
Figure 48
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 02, WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treat-
ment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 34
The information from the CVs (chip 02, WEb). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.074 and -0.064
130
After adding MPA
0.070 and -0.063
140
After adding protein G
0.008 and -0.023
280
After adding antibody
0.006 and -0.021
290
After adding tracer
0.003 and -0.021
290
Page 131 of 151
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX
Chip 02, WEc
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 49 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 35.
Figure 49
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 02, WEc). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treat-
ment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 35
TThe information from the CVs (chip 02, WEc). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.077 and -0.071
110
After adding MPA
0.070 and -0.064
130
After adding protein G
0.020 and -0.031
260
After adding antibody
0.012 and -0.025
270
After adding tracer
0.009 and -0.024
270
Page 132 of 151
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX
Chip 03, (WE a,c)
In the following, all impedance spectra and CVs are presented for each working electrode on chip 03
together with the summarised CV parameters.
Chip 03, WEa
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 50 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 36.
Figure 50
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 03, WEa). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treat-
ment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 36
The information from the CVs (chip 03, WEa). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.070 and -0.062
100
After adding MPA
0.056 and -0.047
130
After adding protein G
0.047 and -0.047
210
After adding antibody
0.021 and -0.027
260
After adding tracer
0.018 and -0.026
260
Page 133 of 151
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX
Chip 03, WEc
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 51 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 37.
Figure 51
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 3, WEc). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of cortisol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma treatment,
MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer. The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-Ferrocyanide.
Table 37
The information from the CVs (chip 03, WEc). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.059 and -0.048
130
After adding MPA
0.064 and -0.048
110
After adding protein G
0.039 and -0.033
230
After adding antibody
NA and -0.018
NA
After adding tracer
NA and -0.019
NA
Page 134 of 151
==PAGE:140==
APPENDIX
7.8
A.8 Modiﬁcation of Chip 07 (WE a,b,c), Chip 08 (WE a,b,c), Chip 09 (WE
a,c) and Chip 10 (WE a,b,c) for Alternariol Detection - Impedance spectra
and CVs
Chip 07, (WE a,b,c)
In the following, all impedance spectra and CVs are presented for each working electrode on chip
07together with the summarised CV parameters.
Chip 07, WEa
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 52 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 38.
Figure 52
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 07, WEa). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 38
The information from the CVs (chip 07, WEa). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.076 and -0.065
100
After adding MPA
0.070 and -0.062
160
After adding protein G
0.062 and -0.069
160
After adding antibody
0.048 and -0.056
300
After adding tracer
0.044 and -0.050
380
Page 135 of 151
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX
Chip 07, WEb
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 53 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 39.
Figure 53
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 07, WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 39
The information from the CVs (chip 07, WEb). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.076 and -0.071
110
After adding MPA
0.069 and -0.061
160
After adding protein G
0.060 and -0.070
170
After adding antibody
0.036 and -0.058
240
After adding tracer
0.043 and -0.046
380
Page 136 of 151
==PAGE:142==
APPENDIX
Chip 07, WEc
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 54 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 40.
Figure 54
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 07, WEc).
Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 40
The information from the CVs (chip 07, WEc). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.076 and -0.071
110
After adding MPA
0.069 and -0.061
170
After adding protein G
0.062 and -0.071
160
After adding antibody
0.050 and -0.060
300
After adding tracer
0.045 and -0.052
380
Page 137 of 151
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX
Chip 08, (WE a,b,c)
In the following, all impedance spectra and CVs are presented for each working electrode on chip 08
together with the summarised CV parameters.
Chip 08, WEa
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 55 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 41.
Figure 55
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 08, WEa.) Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 41
The information from the CVs (chip 08, WEa). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.070 and -0.074
110
After adding MPA
0.072 and -0.066
120
After adding protein G
0.060 and -0.066
160
After adding antibody
0.052 and -0.061
270
After adding tracer
0.046 and -0.051
389
Page 138 of 151
==PAGE:144==
APPENDIX
Chip 08, WEb
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 56 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 42.
Figure 56
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 08, WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 42
The information from the CVs (chip 08, WEb). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.072 and -0.074
110
After adding MPA
0.068 and -0.062
150
After adding protein G
0.060 and -0.067
160
After adding antibody
0.054 and -0.063
250
After adding tracer
0.038 and -0.053
300
Page 139 of 151
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX
Chip 08, WEc
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 57 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 43.
Figure 57
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 08, WEc).
Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 43
The information from the CVs (chip 08, WEc). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.073 and -0.074
110
After adding MPA
0.071 and -0.062
140
After adding protein G
0.059 and -0.067
150
After adding antibody
0.046 and -0.065
230
After adding tracer
0.022 and -0.054
270
Page 140 of 151
==PAGE:146==
APPENDIX
Chip 09, (WE a,c)
In the following, all impedance spectra and CVs are presented for each working electrode on chip 09
together with the summarised CV parameters.
Chip 09, WEa
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 58 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 44.
Figure 58
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 09, WEa). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 44
The information from the CVs (chip 09, WEa). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (80 min)
0.067 and -0.072
120
After adding MPA
0.072 and -0.066
130
After adding protein G
0.061 and -0.068
150
After adding antibody
0.048 and -0.059
250
After adding tracer
0.046 and -0.055
330
Page 141 of 151
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX
Chip 09, WEc
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 59 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 45.
Figure 59
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 09, WEc).
Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 45
The information from the CVs (chip 09, WEc). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (80 min)
0.068 and -0.071
120
After adding MPA
0.072 and -0.064
140
After adding protein G
0.060 and -0.068
130
After adding antibody
0.051 and -0.062
220
After adding tracer
0.040 and -0.056
300
Page 142 of 151
==PAGE:148==
APPENDIX
Chip 10, (WE a,b,c)
In the following, all impedance spectra and CVs are presented for each working electrode on chip 10
together with the summarised CV parameters.
Chip 10, WEa
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 60 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 46.
Figure 60
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 10, WEa). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 46
The information from the CVs (chip 10, WEa). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.070 and -0.066
100
After adding MPA
0.069 and -0.065
150
After adding protein G
0.060 and -0.071
130
After adding antibody
0.044 and -0.063
220
After adding tracer
0.040 and -0.058
290
Page 143 of 151
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIX
Chip 10, WEb
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 61 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 47.
Figure 61
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 10, WEb). Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 47
The information from the CVs (chip 10, WEb). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.068 and -0.072
110
After adding MPA
0.073 and -0.065
130
After adding protein G
0.063 and -0.069
130
After adding antibody
0.055 and -0.067
220
After adding tracer
0.037 and -0.064
250
Page 144 of 151
==PAGE:150==
APPENDIX
Chip 10, WEc
The impedance spectra and CVs are presented in Figure 62 and the CV parameters are summarised in
Table 48.
Figure 62
Impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) and CVs for the electrode cleaning and modiﬁcation steps
(chip 10, WEc).
Modiﬁcation steps for construction of alternariol biosensor and its impedance response: Plasma
treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
The impedance spectra and CVs were acquired by using Ferri-
Ferrocyanide.
Table 48
The information from the CVs (chip 10, WEc). The peak values and peak to peak separation values
for each modiﬁcation step: plasma treatment, MPA, protein G, antibody and tracer.
Modiﬁcation step
Peak values [mA] Peak to peak separation value [mV]
Plasma treatment (64 min)
0.072 and -0.066
110
After adding MPA
0.069 and -0.062
150
After adding protein G
0.062 and -0.070
150
After adding antibody
0.058 and -0.069
220
After adding tracer
0.007 and -0.064
220
Page 145 of 151
==PAGE:151==
References
[1]
Efsa Panel and Food Chain. “Scientiﬁc Opinion on the risks for animal and public health related
to the presence of Alternaria toxins in feed and food”. In: EFSA Journal, vol. 9, no. 10 (2011),
pp. 1–97. issn: 18314732. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2011.2407.
[2]
Estéfani P. Simão et al. “Biosensor based on cysteine monolayer and monoclonal antibody for
speciﬁc detection of aﬂatoxin b1 in rice”. In: Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society, vol. 27,
no. 6 (2016), pp. 1040–1047. issn: 16784790. doi: 10.5935/0103-5053.20150361.
[3]
Yvonne Ackermann et al. “Widespread occurrence of low levels of alternariol in apple and tomato
products, as determined by comparative immunochemical assessment using monoclonal and
polyclonal antibodies”. In: Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, vol. 59, no. 12 (2011),
pp. 6360–6368. issn: 00218561. doi: 10.1021/jf201516f.
[4]
Laura Escrivá et al. “Alternaria Mycotoxins in Food and Feed: An Overview”. In: (2017). doi:
10.1155/2017/1569748.
[5]
Andrea Patriarca and Virginia Fernández Pinto. “Alternaria”. In: Reference Module in Food
Science, no. June (2018). doi: 10.1016/b978-0-08-100596-5.22572-9.
[6]
Francesco Crudo et al. “Co-occurrence and combinatory eﬀects of alternaria mycotoxins and
other xenobiotics of food origin: Current scenario and future perspectives”. In: Toxins, vol. 11,
no. 11 (2019). issn: 20726651. doi: 10.3390/toxins11110640.
[7]
Silvana Da Motta and Lucia M. Valente Soares. “A method for the determination of two Al-
ternaria toxins, alternariol and alternariol monomethyl ether, in tomato products”. In: Brazilian
Journal of Microbiology, vol. 31, no. 4 (2000), pp. 315–320. issn: 15178382.
[8]
Birgitte Andersen and Jens C. Frisvad. “Natural occurrence of fungi and fungal metabolites
in moldy tomatoes”. In: Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, vol. 52, no. 25 (2004),
pp. 7507–7513. issn: 00218561. doi: 10.1021/jf048727k.
[9]
Yelko Rodríguez-Carrasco et al. “Development and validation of a LC-ESI-MS/MS method
for the determination of alternaria toxins alternariol, alternariol methyl-ether and tentoxin in
tomato and tomato-based products”. In: Toxins, vol. 8, no. 11 (2016). issn: 20726651. doi:
10.3390/toxins8110328.
[10]
Miguel Ángel Pavón et al. “PCR-based assay for the detection of Alternaria species and correla-
tion with HPLC determination of altenuene, alternariol and alternariol monomethyl ether pro-
duction in tomato products”. In: Food Control, vol. 25, no. 1 (2012), pp. 45–52. issn: 09567135.
doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2011.10.009.
[11]
Food Standards Agency. June 2019 Stakeholder Update on Rapidly Developing Policy on Food
Contaminants Environmental and Industrial Contaminants Acrylamide. url: https://www.
food.gov.uk/news-alerts/consultations/june-2019-stakeholder-update-on-rapidly-
developing-policy-on-food-contaminants.
[12]
Yan Man et al. “A simple, highly sensitive colorimetric immunosensor for the detection of al-
ternariol monomethyl ether in fruit by non-aggregated gold nanoparticles”. In: Analytical and
Bioanalytical Chemistry, vol. 410, no. 28 (2018), pp. 7511–7521. issn: 16182650. doi: 10.1007/
s00216-018-1369-z.
==PAGE:152==
References
[13]
Cristina Juan, Souheib Oueslati, and Jordi Mañes. “Evaluation of Alternaria mycotoxins in
strawberries: quantiﬁcation and storage condition”. In: Food Additives and Contaminants - Part
A Chemistry, Analysis, Control, Exposure and Risk Assessment, vol. 33, no. 5 (2016), pp. 861–
868. issn: 19440057. doi: 10.1080/19440049.2016.1177375.
[14]
Bart P.H.J. Thomma. “Alternaria spp.: From general saprophyte to speciﬁc parasite”. In: Molec-
ular Plant Pathology, vol. 4, no. 4 (2003), pp. 225–236. issn: 14646722. doi: 10.1046/j.1364-
3703.2003.00173.x.
[15]
Simona M. Sanzani, Massimo Reverberi, and Rolf Geisen. “Mycotoxins in harvested fruits and
vegetables: Insights in producing fungi, biological role, conducive conditions, and tools to manage
postharvest contamination”. In: Postharvest Biology and Technology, vol. 122 (2016), pp. 95–
105. issn: 09255214. doi: 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2016.07.003.
[16]
L. Lehmann, J. Wagner, and M. Metzler. “Estrogenic and clastogenic potential of the mycotoxin
alternariol in cultured mammalian cells”. In: Food and Chemical Toxicology, vol. 44, no. 3 (2006),
pp. 398–408. issn: 02786915. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2005.08.013.
[17]
Hyang Burm Lee, Andrea Patriarca, and Naresh Magan. “Alternaria in food: Ecophysiology,
mycotoxin production and toxicology”. In: Mycobiology, vol. 43, no. 2 (2015), pp. 93–106. issn:
20929323. doi: 10.5941/MYCO.2015.43.2.93.
[18]
Hassan Osman and Mohamed Osman. “Dual Eﬀect of Alternariol on Acetyl Cholinesterase and
Monoamineoxidase Extracted from Diﬀerent Parts of Rat Brain”. In: Journal of High Institute
of Public Health, vol. 38, no. 4 (2008), pp. 723–733. doi: 10.21608/jhiph.2008.20960.
[19]
Šárka Štěpánková and Katarína Vorčáková. “Cholinesterase-based biosensors”. In: Journal of
Enzyme Inhibition and Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 31 (2016), pp. 180–193. issn: 14756374. doi:
10.1080/14756366.2016.1204609.
[20]
Jianyi Wang et al. “A novel hapten and monoclonal antibody-based indirect competitive ELISA
for simultaneous analysis of alternariol and alternariol monomethyl ether in wheat”. In: Food
Control, vol. 94, no. March (2018), pp. 65–70. issn: 09567135. doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2018.
06.027.
[21]
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc. Introduction to Antibody Production and Puriﬁcation. url: www.thermofisher.
com/dk/en/home/life-science/antibodies/antibodies-learning-center/antibodies-
resource-library/antibody-methods/introduction-antibody-production-purification.
html (visited on 08/07/2020).
[22]
DTU employees, especially Jenny Emunéus, Professor and Arto Heiskanen, Senior Researcher,
attending and teaching the course "Development and analysis using Biosensors". Information
giving by course modules and supervising from the supervisors.
[23]
Kenneth Murphy and Casey Weaver. Janeway ’ S 9 Th Edition. 2017, pp. 1–277. isbn: 9780815345053.
doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-2116-9.
[24]
MERCK. An Introduction to Antibodies: Antibody-Antigen Interaction. url: www.sigmaaldrich.
com/technical-documents/articles/biology/antibody-antigen-interaction.html (vis-
ited on 08/14/2020).
Page 147 of 151
==PAGE:153==
References
[25]
Creative Diagnostics Blog. Immunogen, Antigen, Hapten, Epitope, and Adjuvant. url: www.
creative-diagnostics.com/blog/index.php/immunogen-antigen-hapten-epitope-and-
adjuvant/ (visited on 08/07/2020).
[26]
ScienceDirect. Hapten. url: www.sciencedirect.com/topics/immunology-and-microbiology/
hapten (visited on 08/07/2020).
[27]
CD Creative Diagnostics. Anti-Alternariol monoclonal antibody. url: www.creative-diagnostics.
com/alternariol-antibody-263023-144.htm (visited on 08/11/2020).
[28]
Abvigen. Antibody pairs - Mouse anti-Alternariol Monoclonal Antibody. url: www.abvigen.com/
Products/Antibody/Antibody-pairs/ABN3459.html (visited on 08/11/2020).
[29]
MyBioSource.com. What is ELISA? (Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay). url: www.mybiosource.
com/learn/ELISA (visited on 08/10/2020).
[30]
MBL Life science. The principle and method of ELISA. url: ruo.mbl.co.jp/bio/e/support/
method/elisa.html (visited on 08/10/2020).
[31]
Nicholas G. Welch et al. “Orientation and characterization of immobilized antibodies for im-
proved immunoassays (Review)”. In: Biointerphases, vol. 12, no. 2 (2017), p. 02D301. issn:
1934-8630. doi: 10.1116/1.4978435.
[32]
Yuan Gao, Yingzhu Zhou, and Rona Chandrawati. Metal and Metal Oxide Nanoparticles to
Enhance the Performance of Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). 2020. doi: 10.
1021/acsanm.9b02003.
[33]
Veda P Pandey et al. “A Comprehensive Review on Function and Application of Plant Per-
oxidases”. In: Biochemistry & Analytical Biochemistry, vol. 06, no. 01 (2017), p. 308. issn:
2161-1009. doi: 10.4172/2161-1009.1000308.
[34]
Abvigen. Hapten - Alternariol, HRP. url: www.abvigen.com/Products/Protein/Hapten/
ABGH3459.html (visited on 08/13/2020).
[35]
MERCK. Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP) Enzymes. url: www.sigmaaldrich.com/life-science/
metabolomics/enzyme-explorer/analytical-enzymes/peroxidase-enzymes.html (visited
on 08/13/2020).
[36]
Manfred Watzele, Bernd Buchberger, and Claudia Kirr. INHIBITION OF PEROXIDASE EN-
ZYMATIC ACTIVITY. 2014.
[37]
Lisa-Marie Wagner et al. “Simulation and Performance Optimization of an Amperometric His-
tamine Detection System”. In: Proceedings, vol. 2, no. 13 (2018), p. 853. issn: 2504-3900. doi:
10.3390/proceedings2130853.
[38]
Daniel Thevenot et al. “Electrochemical biosensors: recommended deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation”.
In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics, Elsevier, vol. 16 (2001), pp. 121–131. doi: 10.1081/AL-
100103209,hal-01084678.
[39]
Marco Grossi and Bruno Riccò. “Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) for biological analysis
and food characterization: A review”. In: Journal of Sensors and Sensor Systems, vol. 6, no. 2
(2017), pp. 303–325. issn: 2194878X. doi: 10.5194/jsss-6-303-2017.
[40]
PalmSens Compact Electrochemical Interfaces. Capacitive Current. url: www.palmsenscorrosion.
com/knowledgebase/capacitive-current/ (visited on 08/20/2020).
Page 148 of 151
==PAGE:154==
References
[41]
Department of Chemical Engineering University of Cambridge and Biotechnology. Linear Sweep
and Cyclic Voltametry: The Principles. url: www.ceb.cam.ac.uk/research/groups/rg-
eme/Edu/linear-sweep-and-cyclic-voltametry-the-principles (visited on 08/20/2020).
[42]
Huangxian Ju and Vivek Babu Kandimalla. Biosensors for pesticides. Elsevier Inc., 2008, pp. 31–
56. isbn: 9780123737380. doi: 10.1016/B978-012373738-0.50004-0.
[43]
V. B. Kandimalla et al. “Regeneration of ethyl parathion antibodies for repeated use in im-
munosensor: A study on dissociation of antigens from antibodies”. In: Biosensors and Bioelec-
tronics, vol. 20, no. 4 (2004), pp. 903–906. issn: 09565663. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2004.03.027.
[44]
J. A. Goode, J. V.H. Rushworth, and P. A. Millner. “Biosensor Regeneration: A Review of
Common Techniques and Outcomes”. In: Langmuir, vol. 31, no. 23 (2015), pp. 6267–6276. issn:
15205827. doi: 10.1021/la503533g.
[45]
A. Kausaite-Minkstimiene et al. “Comparative study of random and oriented antibody immo-
bilization techniques on the binding capacity of immunosensor”. In: Analytical Chemistry, vol.
82, no. 15 (2010), pp. 6401–6408. issn: 00032700. doi: 10.1021/ac100468k.
[46]
Wei Chen, Yu Lei, and Chang Ming Li. “Regenerable leptin immunosensor based on protein G
immobilized au-pyrrole propylic acid-polypyrrole nanocomposite”. In: Electroanalysis, vol. 22,
no. 10 (2010), pp. 1078–1083. issn: 10400397. doi: 10.1002/elan.200900536.
[47]
Chia Chen Chang et al. “Comparative assessment of oriented antibody immobilization on surface
plasmon resonance biosensing”. In: Journal of the Chinese Chemical Society, vol. 60, no. 12
(2013), pp. 1449–1456. issn: 21926549. doi: 10.1002/jccs.201300116.
[48]
BIO-RAD. PROTEUS Protein G Antibody Puriﬁcation Handbook Mini & Midi spin columns.
Tech. rep. 2016, Issue 5 1–49.
[49]
DTU Fødevareinstituttet. Frida fooddata.dk. url: frida.fooddata.dk/ (visited on 08/27/2020).
[50]
MYFOODDATA. MYFOODDATA - Free Tools to Understand What You Eat. url: www.myfooddata.
com/ (visited on 08/27/2020).
[51]
M. Mayeaux et al. “Eﬀects of cooking conditions on the lycopene content in tomatoes”. In:
Journal of Food Science, vol. 71, no. 8 (2006), pp. 461–464. issn: 00221147. doi: 10.1111/j.
1750-3841.2006.00163.x.
[52]
May L Chiu et al. “Matrix Eﬀects-A Challenge Toward Automation of Molecular Analysis”. In:
JALA - Journal of the Association for Laboratory Automation, vol. 15, no. 3 (2010), pp. 233–
242. issn: 15355535. doi: 10.1016/j.jala.2010.02.001.
[53]
Nanju A Lee et al. “A Rapid Aﬂatoxin B1 ELISA: Development and Validation with Reduced
Matrix Eﬀects for Peanuts, Corn, Pistachio, and Soybeans”. In: Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry, vol. 52, no. 10 (2004), pp. 2746–2755. issn: 00218561. doi: 10.1021/jf0354038.
[54]
C. A. Fente et al. “Determination of alternariol in tomato paste using solid phase extraction and
high-performance liquid chromatography with ﬂuorescence detection”. In: Analyst. Vol. 123. 11.
1998, pp. 2277–2280. doi: 10.1039/a804587i.
[55]
Madalina Tudorache and Jenny Emnéus. “A micro-immuno supported liquid membrane assay (µ-
ISLMA)”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 21, no. 8 (2006), pp. 1513–1520. issn: 09565663.
doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2005.07.002.
Page 149 of 151
==PAGE:155==
References
[56]
KLOGKOST. PH-værdier i udvalgte fødevarer. url: klogkost.dk/fakta/vitaminer/1008-
ph-vaerdier-i-udvalgte-fodevarer.html (visited on 08/27/2020).
[57]
Madalina Tudorache, Izabela Anna Zdrojewska, and Jenny Emnéus. “Evaluation of progesterone
content in saliva using magnetic particle-based immuno supported liquid membrane assay (m-
ISLMA)”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 22, no. 2 (2006), pp. 241–246. issn: 09565663.
doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2006.01.002.
[58]
Eszter Fliszár-Nyúl et al. “Interactions of mycotoxin alternariol with cyclodextrins and its re-
moval from aqueous solution by beta-cyclodextrin bead polymer”. In: Biomolecules, vol. 9, no.
9 (2019). issn: 2218273X. doi: 10.3390/biom9090428.
[59]
Margaret E. Wierman. “Sex steroid eﬀects at target tissues: Mechanisms of action”. In: American
Journal of Physiology - Advances in Physiology Education, vol. 31, no. 1 (2007), pp. 26–33. issn:
15221229. doi: 10.1152/advan.00086.2006.
[60]
Robert H Oakley and John A Cidlowski. The biology of the glucocorticoid receptor: New signaling
mechanisms in health and disease. 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.09.007.
[61]
Vinitha T. U. et al. “A new polymer lab-on-a-chip (LOC) based on a microﬂuidic capillary ﬂow
assay (MCFA) for detecting unbound cortisol in saliva”. In: Lab on a Chip, vol. 20, no. 11 (2020),
pp. 1961–1974. issn: 14730189. doi: 10.1039/d0lc00071j.
[62]
CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Preventing Adverse Health Eﬀects from Ex-
posure to Dimethylformamide (DMF). url: www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/90-105/default.html
(visited on 09/28/2020).
[63]
Cayman. “Product Information: Alternariol”. 2019.
[64]
Fermentek Ltd. Alternariol. url: www . fermentek . com / product / alternariol (visited on
10/28/2020).
[65]
Lee M. Fischer et al. “Gold cleaning methods for electrochemical detection applications”. In:
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 86, no. 4-6 (2009), pp. 1282–1285. issn: 01679317. doi: 10.
1016/j.mee.2008.11.045.
[66]
Shashank Vasudevan et al. “Leaky Optoelectrical Fiber for Optogenetic Stimulation and Electro-
chemical Detection of Dopamine Exocytosis from Human Dopaminergic Neurons”. In: Advanced
Science, vol. 6, no. 24 (2019). issn: 21983844. doi: 10.1002/advs.201902011.
[67]
Xiudan Wang et al. “The matrix interference to the immunoassay of food samples: The eﬀect of
some proteins in aquatic products”. In: Food and Agricultural Immunology, vol. 27, no. 2 (2016),
pp. 230–241. issn: 14653443. doi: 10.1080/09540105.2015.1086317.
[68]
Bongiwe Silwana et al. “Amperometric determination of cadmium, lead, and mercury metal
ions using a novel polymer immobilised horseradish peroxidase biosensor system”. In: Journal
of Environmental Science and Health - Part A Toxic/Hazardous Substances and Environmental
Engineering, vol. 49, no. 13 (2014), pp. 1501–1511. issn: 15324117. doi: 10.1080/10934529.
2014.937169.
[69]
Rogert Bauer et al. Inﬂuence of heavy metal ions on antibodies and immune complexes investi-
gated by dynamic light scattering and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ¨ ¨. Tech. rep. 1997,
pp. 98–108.
[70]
ThermoFisher. FAQs-FILTRATION. Tech. rep.
Page 150 of 151
==PAGE:156==
References
[71]
Ph.D. Biocompare Robin Clark. At Least 11 Things You Didn’t Know about Filtration (but
you should, because you probably do it all the time). url: www . biocompare . com / Bench -
Tips/350574- At- Least- 11- Things- You- Didn- t- Know- about- Filtration/ (visited on
10/11/2020).
[72]
A El-Aassar, D Kitcher, and C F Forster. “The release of heavy metals from digested sludge by
centrifugation”. In: Environmental Technology (United Kingdom), vol. 19, no. 5 (1998), pp. 537–
542. issn: 1479487X. doi: 10.1080/09593331908616710.
[73]
FooDB. Showing Compound Cortisol (FDB021888). url: www.foodb.ca/compounds/FDB021888
(visited on 11/09/2020).
[74]
A. Rico-Yuste et al. “Analysis of alternariol and alternariol monomethyl ether in foodstuﬀs by
molecularly imprinted solid-phase extraction and ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry”. In: Food Chemistry, vol. 243, no. September 2017 (2018), pp. 357–
364. issn: 18737072. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.09.125.
[75]
H. Gallati and H. Brodbeck. “Peroxidase aus Meerrettich: Kinetische Studien und Optimierung
der Aktivitätsbestimmung mit den Substraten H2O2 und o-Phenylendiamin”. In: Clinical Chem-
istry and Laboratory Medicine, vol. 20, no. 4 (1982), pp. 221–226. issn: 14374331. doi: 10.1515/
cclm.1982.20.4.221.
[76]
Chin Chye Teo et al. “Pressurized hot water extraction (PHWE)”. In: Journal of Chromatography
A, vol. 1217, no. 16 (2010), pp. 2484–2494. issn: 00219673. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2009.12.
050.
[77]
SENSIRION - The Sensor Company. Information given by the company via a mail correspon-
dence during the funding process.
[78]
Eckes Granini and Rynkeby Foods. Information given by the company via a mail correspondence
during the funding process.
Page 151 of 151
