==PAGE:1==
CHANGES IN MICROSTRUCTURE OF
 CEMENT BASED MATERIALS WITH 
FLY ASH ON CHLORIDE INGRESS
An Experimental Study of
Rune Malthe Knudsen & Anne Sofie Hyldtoft Olsen 
MASTER OF SCIENCE IN 
 CIVIL ENGINEERING 
 
JANUARY 2021 
 
==PAGE:2==
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
RUNE M. KNUDSEN M.Sc. Stud. Polyt. in
Civil Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark.
B.Sc.
in Civil Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark within
the topic of frost resistance of Portland Ce-
ment Pervious Concrete (PCPC). Technical
competences within concrete technology and
marine structures.
ANNE SOFIE. H. OLSEN M.Sc. Stud. Polyt.
in Civil Engineering at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark.
B.Sc.
in Civil Engineer-
ing at the Technical University of Denmark
within the topic of frost resistance of Portland
Cement Pervious Concrete (PCPC). Techni-
cal competences within concrete technology
and structural analysis of buildings.
==PAGE:3==
Changes in Microstructure of
Cement Based Materials with fly ash
on Chloride Ingress
An Experimental Study
Master of Science in Civil Engineering
January 2021
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Anne Soﬁe Hyldtoft Olsen - s153750
Date
Rune Malthe Knudsen - s153997
Date
i
22-01-2021
22-01-2021
==PAGE:4==
DTU Byg
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Telephone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary
Present study investigates the diﬀerences in microstructure of cement based
materials with ﬂy ash on chloride ingress. Three separate mixtures with
and without ﬂy ash substitution were exposed to an accelerated chloride mi-
gration test (cf. NT BUILD 492). The tested mixtures included reference
specimens of ordinary Portland cement and specimens with 23 and 35% of
the binder substituted with ﬂy ash. All specimens were cured for 28 days.
Paste specimens were tested using X-ray Fluroscence (XRF), X-ray Diﬀrac-
tion (XRD), Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Dynamic vapor sorption
(DVS) and a desiccator method. Cup test was performed on mortar speci-
mens to investigate the vapor transport properties.
X-ray diﬀraction and thermogravimetric analysis indicate the formation of
Friedel’s salt from monocarbonate and chloride ions. The study shows that
formation of Friedel’s salt is decreasing with increasing ﬂy ash content. The
carbonate phases; calcite, hemicarbonate and monocarbonate are detected
from XRD, but no clear correlation between varying ﬂy ash content and
carbonate phases could be established. The ﬁndings emphasizes the impor-
tance of considering ﬂy ash blends as ternary systems, consisting of cement,
ﬂy ash and limestone ﬁller, which introduces carbonate phases.
Small deviations between the pore volume distribution of the respective spec-
imens were found based on the sorption isotherms. However, the tendency
for all specimens is that chloride exposure reﬁnes the pores and thus results
in larger volume of ﬁner pores and less volume of bigger pores. This trend
was slightly more pronounced for ﬂy ash blends. Transport properties es-
timated from the cup test show that chloride exposure enhance transport
properties of the specimens. The reference specimens made from ordinary
Portland cement has a higher water vapor ﬂow rate.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Følgende studie beskæftiger sig med mikrostrukturelle ændringer af cement
baserede materialer med ﬂyveaske ved kloridindtrængning. Prøver med og
uden ﬂyveaske blev indledningsvist udsat for en accelereret klorid migrations
test (jf. NT BUILD 492). Referenceprøver blev lavet med Portland cement
og i ﬂyveaskeprøverne er cementen substitueret med hhv.
23 % og 35 %
ﬂyveaske af den totale bindermasse. Forudgående for testning hærdede alle
prøver i 28 dage. Pastaprøver blev testet med X-ray Fluroscens (XRF), X-
ray Diﬀraktion (XRD), Thermogravimetrisk analyse (TGA), dynamisk fugt
sorption og en desikatormetode. Et kopforsøg blev foretaget på mørtelprøver
for at undersøge fugttransportegenskaberne.
Resultaterne fra røntgendiﬀraktion og termogravimetrisk analyse viser at
monocarbonat reagerer med kloridioner og danner Friedel’s salt.
Studiet
viser at indeholdet af ﬂyveaske reducerer mængden at dannet Friedel’s salt.
XRD bekræfter tilstedeværelsen af karbonatfaserne; hemikarbonat, monokar-
bonat og calcit, men der kan på baggrund af dette studie ikke etableres
nogen klar sammenhæng mellem ﬂyveaskeindhold og karbonatfaserne. Re-
sultaterne understreger vigtigheden af at betragte pasta med ﬂyveaske som
tertiære systemer bestående af cement, ﬂyveaske og kalkﬁller.
Kalkﬁller
introducerer karbonatfaserne.
Resultaterne fra sorptionsisotermerne viser kun en lille ændring i porerfor-
delingen for prøver med og uden ﬂyveaske. Tendensen for samtlige prøver
er, at klorideksponering raﬃnerer porerne, hvilket vil sige at de større porer
bliver til ﬂere mindre porer. Kopforsøget på mørtelprøver viser at kloridek-
sponering øger vanddampspermeabilitetkoeﬃcienten og at prøver med ﬂy-
veaske har lavere koeﬃcienter end referenceprøverne.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
Present study was performed at the Department of Civil Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark. The project proceeded from August
2020 until January 2021. Small diﬃculties with the intended experimental
program were encountered as a consequence of the partial lockdown caused
by the COVID-19 pandemic. This thesis is submitted as the ﬁnal project
of the master’s degree in civil engineering from the authors, Anne Soﬁe
Hyldtoft Olsen and Rune Malthe Knudsen. The extent of this master thesis
is 60 ECTS points equally distributed between the two mentioned students.
We would like to express our gratitude to Associate Professor Marianne
Tange Hasholt at the Technical University of Denmark for letting us write
our Master thesis with her proﬁcient supervision. Thank you for techni-
cal guidance and for detailed and constructive comments throughout this
project and throughout our time as students. We would also like to thank
Associate Professors, Wolfgang Kunther and Kurt Kielsgaard Hansen for
guidance regarding some of the experimental setups. We also wish to ex-
press our sincerest thanks to PhD student, Jennifer Anette Canul Polanco
at the Technical University of Denmark for invaluable help and guidance
beyond the expectable.
The time Jennifer has invested in our project is
gratefully appreciated. Furthermore, we would like to thank technicians and
laboratory staﬀat the Department of Civil Engineering. During the project
we have been in contact with a variety of diﬀerent people, without whose
support and advice this thesis would not have been possible.
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
AFm (C4A¯SH12)
Ca4Al2O6(SO4)·14H2O (Monosulfate).
AFt (C6A ¯S3H32)
Ca6Al2(SO4)3(OH)12·26H2O (Ettringite).
C–S–H
Calcium Silicate Hydrate, 3CaO·2SiO2·4H2O.
C2S
Dicalcium Silicate, 2CaO·SiO2 (Belite).
C3A
Tricalcium Aluminate, 3CaO·Al2O3 (Aluminate).
C3S
Tricalcium Silicate, 3CaO·SiO2 (Alite).
C4AF
Calcium Aluminoferrite, 4CaO·Al2O3·Fe2O3 (Ferrite).
CC
Calcium Carbonate, CaCO3 (Calcite).
CH
Calcium Hydroxide, Ca(OH)2 (Portlandite).
C¯SH2
Calcium Sulfate Dihydrate, CaSO4·2H2O (Gypsum).
FA
Fly Ash.
FS
Friedel’s Salt, Ca4Al2Cl2(OH)12·4H2O.
K
Potassium oxide, K2O.
N
Sodium oxide, Na2O.
CBW
Chemically Bound Water.
CCN
Cement Chemical Notation.
DTG
Diﬀerential Thermogravimetry.
DVS
Dynamic Vapor Sorption.
LOI
Loss On Ignition.
OPC
Ordinary Portland Cement.
RH
Relative Humidity.
SCM
Supplementary Cementitious Materials.
TGA
Thermogravimetric Analysis.
w/b
Water-to-binder ratio.
w/c
Water-to-cement ratio.
XRD
X-Ray Diﬀraction.
XRF
X-Ray Fluorescence.
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Ordinary Portland Cement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Fly Ash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Hydration Products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Pore Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Water in Cement Paste
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Moisture Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Chloride Ingress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Hypothesis
14
4
Methodologies
15
4.1
Chloride Ingress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Arresting Hydration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
X-Ray Fluorescence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
X-Ray Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
Thermogravimetric Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6
Sorption Isotherm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.7
Cup Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Materials and Methods
22
5.1
Composition, Mixing and Casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Chloride Migration Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Arresting Hydration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
X-Ray Fluorescence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.5
X-Ray Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.6
Thermogravimetric Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.7
Sorption Isotherm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.8
Cup Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Results and Discussion
34
6.1
Chloride Migration Test of Paste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
X-Ray Fluorescence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
X-Ray Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Thermogravimetric Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Sorptions Isotherms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6
Cup Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.7
Chemical Changes during Chloride Ingress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.8
How does Chloride Ingress alter the Microstructure? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Conclusion
58
8
Further Research
59
Appendix
65
vii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
”We don’t have plan B because there is no planet
B. We have to work very hard, very seriously and
urgently.
This is what I am telling, not only as
Secretary-General, but as a citizen of this world.”
– UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon
E
ngineering is the activity of applying scientiﬁc knowledge to solve everyday problems. How-
ever, problems are perpetual and therefore the role of engineers are ever changing.
In
September 2015, a meeting was held in New York City. 193 nations stood united while facing
the challenge of our generation. In unity they overlooked diﬀerences and agreed upon adopting
the "Post-2015 development agenda" at the United Nations 68th General Assembly [1]. This
agenda outlines 17 goals for sustainable development. The aim; is to protect, improve and pre-
serve planet earth for future generations. In the agenda paper, the United Nations emphasize
the importance of obtaining these goals without compromising human development and while re-
ducing poverty. Consequently, success rely on green transition, through reducing anthropogenic
CO2-emissions, to diminish the harmful eﬀects of global warming.
CO2-emissions originate from a variety of sources, and the construction industry is one of the
main contributors. Nonetheless, awareness has in recent years focused on the production and
consumption of cement and cement based materials. The cement industry is anticipated to
be responsible for 6-8% of the total anthropogenic CO2-emission [2]. Henceforth, the nations
of the world placed the civil engineer in an essential position on that September day in 2015.
A position where the civil engineer has the responsibility to act and to include the sustainable
development goals at the essence of all work. The CO2-emissions are problematic and emphasize
the importance of solutions that contribute to reduce the carbon footprint associated with
cement production [3, 2]. Supplementary cementitious materials present such a solution as they
reduce the needed quantity of cement. Research indicates that replacing part of the cement with
supplementary cementitious materials as binder can reduce CO2-emission with up to 30-40%,
without compromising the performance of the concrete [2].
Understanding the properties of supplementary cementitious materials in concrete is important
to ensure durability. The aim of the present thesis is to uncover new information regarding ﬂy
ash, which is a well known and recognized supplementary cementitious material [4], in order to
reduce the environmental impact of concrete. The Post-2015 development agenda outlines 17
goals which are not all of relevance for this study. The work can be related to the sustainable
development goals 9 and 11.
9 th
Build resilient infrastructure, promote sustainable
industrialization and foster innovation
11th
Make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Fly ash was ﬁrst proposed in combination with cement in 1914 and has since seen increasing
usage all over the world [5]. The material is a bi-product from coal ﬁred power plant, that would
otherwise have to be deposited, if not utilized in concrete. The use of ﬂy ash in concrete thus
reduces cement consumption and prevent the deposition of potential harmful powder. Replacing
cement with ﬂy ash in concrete does however impose new challenges regarding durability. The
eﬀect of substitution of ﬂy ash has been studied since it was ﬁrst proposed, but there are still
1
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
gaps in the knowledge about its inﬂuence on concrete structures. Especially understanding the
relation between microstructure and transport properties is important to predict the behavior
of the concrete. The availability of ﬂy ash might decrease as countries switch coal based energy
with sustainable sources. However, although ﬂy ash might be an admixture that in the future
will belong to the past, the importance of understanding its eﬀects is of high concern in order to
gain knowledge about good candidates for supplementary cementitious materials in the future.
This master thesis builds upon a series of previous studies conducted at the Technical University
of Denmark. These studies have prompted questions and pointed to problems with high volume
ﬂy ash concrete in combination with chloride ingress. The problem with chloride in concrete
is an important issue, because the presence of chlorides is inevitable in coastal regions and in
cold weather climates where deicers are used to secure roads. Structures not durable to chloride
ingress in these areas will have a shorter lifetime on the expense of the climate and the economy.
Chloride ingress in concrete is known not only as a damage mechanism but also as a microstruc-
tural altering process [6]. Understanding how chloride ions change the microstructure and alter
the transport properties is the single most important factor in predicting servicelife for reinforced
concrete structures [7]. Thus, great value can be transferred if optimization of concrete in this
regard can be accomplished. The presence of chloride ions in the pore solution breaks down the
passive ﬁlm that protects the reinforcement bars. This process can cause severe corrosion. Cor-
rosion is a problem because it causes a signiﬁcant reduction in shear strength and compromise
the integrity of the structure. Chlorides in concrete can be present in two ways, either as free
ions in the pore solution or as bound ions in the paste matrix. However, the extensive pozzolan
reaction in high volume ﬂy ash concretes seems to alter certain features. Especially changes in
the chloride ion binding can alter the transport properties [6].
Hasholt et al.
(2019) [8] showed that concrete with high ﬂy ash content had reduced frost
resistance compared to the reference ordinary Portland cement specimens. The strength was in
the same range and the ﬂy ash blends had a suﬃcient air content to be classiﬁed as frost resistant.
This raises concern about the frost resistance of high-volume ﬂy ash blends in chloride exposed
environments. The paper concluded that the ﬁndings point towards a changed chemical reaction
with chlorides when ﬂy ash is present. The study also found that a concrete surface exposed
to chloride changed density and permeability. It was suggested that this changed density and
permeability would lead to a changed resistance of the exposed specimen. This hypothesis was
conﬁrmed by Olsen (2020) [9]. Here, specimens with 50 % ﬂy ash substitution in the binder
performed worse in the accelerated freeze-thaw test even though the compressive strength of the
specimens was higher. This further supports that chemical reactions where chlorides take part
might inﬂuence the frost resistance of ﬂy ash blended specimens.
Wolter (2020) [10] observed that the quantity of Friedel’s salt in chloride exposed specimens
with and without ﬂy ash was approximately the same. One of the hypotheses in her study
was: that if Friedel’s salt is formed from monosulfate, the excess sulfate ions would be bound
as ettringite. Thus, it was expected that a higher amount of ettringite could be detected in
chloride exposed specimens. This hypothesis was not conﬁrmed and especially chloride binding
in ﬂy ash blends was concluded to be a topic for further research. The study also found that the
ordinary Portland cement specimens after chloride exposure contained more calcium carbonate
than specimens without chloride exposure and specimens made with ﬂy ash substitution.
The objective of the present thesis is to examine the microstructure of cement based materials
with ﬂy ash before and after chloride ingress. The study is conducted based on the ﬁndings of
the above mentioned studies. However, accepted and proposed theory on the subject is likewise
important to develop a hypothesis and plan the experimental work.
Henceforth, the exact
hypothesis of this study will be developed in Section 3, after the theory section.
2
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
“You never get something for nothing.”
– Lecturer in concrete technology at DTU
T
he following chapter concerns the hydration and transport properties of cement based
materials, that will be the base for further work in this thesis. In some places in this thesis,
cement chemical notation is used to describe chemical compounds and chemical reactions. The
Cement Chemical Notation (CCN) used is presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Cement chemical notation (CCN) [11, 12].
CCN
C
S
A
F
H
K
N
¯C
¯S
Chemical formula
CaO
SiO2
Al2O3
Fe2O3
H2O
K2O
Na2O
CO2
SO3
2.1
Ordinary Portland Cement
Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) is produced from natural materials with a high content of
Calcium Carbonate (CC) such as limestone, chalk, seashells, etc. [4]. During the manufacturing
of OPC, the material is transformed into various compounds of calcium. These compounds are
called clinker minerals. The four main cement clinker minerals of interest are; alite (C3S), belite
(C2S), aluminate (C3A), and ferrite (C4AF). In the present report the clinker minerals will
be called by their cement chemical notation presented here in parenthesis or by their clinker
mineral nickname; alite, belite, aluminate, and ferrite. Their exact chemical composition and
chemical names can be seen under Abbreviations.
When anhydrous Portland cement is mixed with water, the clinker minerals react and form
various solid phases [4, 13].
The composition of hydration products depends on the clinker
composition of the cement.
As an example, the composition of the four clinker mineral in
Aalborg Portland Rapid Cement is presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Clinker mineral composition in Aalborg Portland Rapid cement [14].
C3S
C2S
C3A
C4AF
Content in Rapid Cement [%]
53
20
8
12
As it can be seen from Table 2, the clinker minerals account for 93 % of the content in cement
according to "Cement og Beton Håndbogen" [14]. In the declaration of performance for Aalborg
Portland Rapid Cement [15] it says, that the clinker mineral content account for minimum 95 %
and up to 100 % of the cement. The remaining 0-5 % is a combination of added limestone ﬁller
and up to 4 % SO3, which is a designation of the gypsum content (C¯SH2). Furthermore, some
sodium oxide (N) and potassium oxide (K) may be present in small quantities as a bi-product
from the clinker mineral production.
3
==PAGE:13==
2
THEORY
2.1.1
Alite
Alite (C3S) is the most important clinker mineral in Portland cements [16]. Alite reacts with
water and forms the major hydration products: Calcium Silicate Hydrate (C-S-H) and Calcium
Hydroxide (CH), where C-S-H is the main contributor to the strength of cement paste [4] (cf.
Section 2.3 Hydration Products). The hydration reaction of alite is shown in Eq. (1).
2 C3S + 6 H →C3S2H3 + 3 CH
(1)
From stoichiometric calculations, it can be found that alite produces 39 % CH and 61 % C-S-H
based on the mass-% [4]. It has been shown that about 70 % of the alite has reacted within the
ﬁrst 28 days and practically all of it has reacted within the ﬁrst year of hydration [16]. Hence,
it is commonly said that alite contributes both to early and late strength development but is
essential for the early age strength [17].
2.1.2
Belite
Belite (C2S) forms similar hydration products as alite, but the diﬀerence in the two clinker
minerals should be found in their reaction rate and the chemical stoichiometric equations. The
reaction is shown in Eq. (2).
2 C2S + 4 H →C3S2H3 + CH
(2)
Belite produces 18 % CH and 82 % C-S-H based on the mass-% [4]. Hence, one could be tempted
to think that belite is a larger strength contributor than alite. This is also true if looking at the
ultimate strength of cement paste, but the reaction rate of belite is much slower than for alite.
Within 28 days of hydration only approx. 30 % of belite has reacted and after 1 year about 90 %
[16]. The strength development for the four clinker minerals is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Strength development of cement paste [17].
From Figure 1 it can be seen that alite is the largest contributor to the strength of cement paste in
the time frame relevant for construction (typically up to 28 days). Even though hydrated belite
forms more C-S-H, the hydration time is also an important parameter to take into considerations.
Hence, you never get something for nothing. Alite and belite supplement each other and are
both important for strength development. Hydrated belite also contributes to the durability of
hardened cement paste [4]. Since CH can be dissolved in acidic environments, the low content
of CH formed from the hydration of belite makes the cement paste less vulnerable to acidic and
sulfate waters. This will be elaborated in Section 2.3 Hydration Products.
4
==PAGE:14==
2
THEORY
2.1.3
Aluminate
Aluminate (C3A) can form diﬀerent reaction products depending on the environment of the
hydration [18]. The reaction of aluminate and water is extremely fast and the reaction products;
C3AH6, C4AH19, and C2AH8 cause ﬂash set without the required strength properties [4]. For
this reason gypsum is added in cement. The presence of sulphate ions slows down the reaction,
and results in a reaction with a overall pattern similar to that of alite [19].
Hydration of aluminate with water and gypsum is a multi-step reaction, where aluminate ﬁrst
reacts with gypsum to form ettringite (C6A¯S3H32).
The second reaction takes place when
gypsum is used up. Then aluminate reacts with ettringite formed from the ﬁrst step and forms
monosulfate (C4A¯SH12). If there is still more aluminate present and all the ettringite has been
used up, a third reaction between the produced CH from the silicate reactions and aluminate
may take place. The product of the third reaction is a hydrogarnet phase which has diﬀerent
possible compositions [18]. The most common is C4AH13 which also is the one shown here. The
three steps of the hydration of aluminate are shown in Eq. (3)-(5).
C3A + 3 C¯SH2 + 26 H →C6A¯S3H32
Step 1:
(3)
2 C3A + C6A¯S3H32 + 4 H →3 C4A¯SH12
Step 2:
(4)
C3A + CH + 12 H →C4AH13
(Step 3:)
(5)
As shown in Figure 1, aluminate has a positive eﬀect on early age strength development. The
full hydration of aluminate takes several months depending on the temperature and water to
binder ratio [20]. A variety of diﬀerent theories explaining the mechanism of retardation of
aluminate by gypsum exist [4, 18, 20]. This is still an ongoing investigation, but the bottom line
is, that gypsum is added to avoid quick and ﬂash set. It should also be mentioned, that sulfate
ions have an accelerating eﬀect on the silicates, and therefore an upper limit of gypsum is a
necessity for the cement composition. The optimum gypsum content of cement is determined
from a test where maximum strength and minimum shrinkage is the main aim [4].
2.1.4
Ferrite
The fourth clinker mineral in cement is ferrite (C4AF). Its hydration reaction is similar to the
reaction of C3A, but the reaction rate of C4AF, when gypsum is present, is slower than for
C3A [20]. The ﬁrst step of the reaction of ferrite with water and gypsum forms ettringite, but
also portlandite (CH), iron hydroxide, and possibly (FH3) are formed. The diﬀerence between
the ﬁrst step reaction of ferrite compared to aluminate is that some of the A are substituted
by F, which means that the formed ettringite is no longer on its pure form. Ettringite formed
from ferrite hydration is therefore called AFt to allow for this disparity which is shown in Eq.
(6). The same goes for the formed monosulfate in the step 2 reaction whereas monosulfate will
be entitled AFm shown in Eq. (7). As for aluminate, ferrite does also have the possibility of
forming a hydrogarnet phase shown in Eq. (8).
C4AF + 3 C¯SH2 + 30 H →
AFt
z
}|
{
C6(A, F)¯S3H32 +CH + (FH3)
Step 1:
(6)
2 C4AF + C6(A, F)¯S3H32 + 12 H →
AFm
z
}|
{
3 C4(A, F)¯SH12 +2 CH + (2 FH3)
Step 2:
(7)
C3AF + CH + 15 H →C4(A, F)H13 + (FH3)
(Step 3):
(8)
5
==PAGE:15==
2
THEORY
2.2
Fly Ash
Supplementary Cementitious Materials (SCM) appear increasingly inevitable as the cement
industry advance towards a more sustainable future. Commonly used SCMs include Fly Ash
(FA) that is a bi-product from burning pulverized coal. Even as FAs availability is decreasing
due to the sustainable transition, it is important to understand its properties, so that knowledge
might be transferred to other SCMs.
Fly ash is a ﬁne powder with a particle size in the range of 1-100 µm [21]. Figure 2 illustrates a
cluster of ﬂy ash in which spherical, glassy particles are present. The particles are formed under
high temperatures inside a coal furnace, followed by rapid cooling as the suspended particles
are carried away by exhaust gasses. The solid particles also have a hollow counterpart called
cenospheres. Chemically FA consists primarily of amorphous alumio-silicate and varying calcium
content. FA might also include a small amount of unburned coal and diﬀerent metals.
Figure 2: The solid ﬂy ash particle (Left picture taken from [22] ).
1○Mulite.
2○Exterior glass hull.
3○Vessiles.
4○Interior glass matrix.
Because of the variation in the composition and properties of ﬂy ash, it is necessary to distinguish
between diﬀerent types. In the Western world, the classiﬁcation of ﬂy ash is primarily carried out
in compliance with EN 450 [23] or ASTM C618 [24]. The two major categories in ASTM C618
is class F and C, whereas the hardening properties are the most signiﬁcant diﬀerence. Class C
has both pozzolanic and cementitious properties, where class F only has pozzolanic properties.
Similarly, the European standard sets a series of criteria for ﬂy ash to ensure quality. Here,
the classiﬁcation in diﬀerent categories is based on loss on ignition (cf. Section 4.5). EN 450
does not cover high calcium FAs but requires free and reactive CaO to be below 1.5% and 10%,
respectively. Hence, EN 450 conforming ﬂy ashes generally correspond to ASTM Class F.
Due to the calcium oxide requirement in EN 450 [23] the FA can be assumed to contribute
to the cement paste as a pure pozzolan reactive. The pozzolan reaction, in which FA reacts
with hydration products, is complex due to the unpuriﬁed nature of industrial bi-products.
Nevertheless, the reaction can be simpliﬁed to alumio-silicate and calcium reacting with CH
to produce C–S–H and calcium-aluminate hydrates. The reactions are generally slower, thus
causing slower strength development. The reaction uses CH from the cement hydration, which
would otherwise be vulnerable to depletion during moisture exposure.
The reaction can be
simpliﬁed to Eq. (9) [4].
Pozzolan + CH
Slow
−−−→C-S-H
(9)
The slower nature of the pozzolan reaction contributes by altering certain features. Firstly, slow
reactions lead to slower strength development and heat liberation in the paste. Secondly, the
reaction is lime consuming (i.e. consuming CH in the process) which improves durability in aci-
6
==PAGE:16==
2
THEORY
dic environments. Thirdly, the reactions products ﬁll up capillary spaces which reﬁne porosity
and improve strength [4]. Table 3 gives an indication of likely outcomes with increasing FA
content in the binder. Many of the mentioned properties are interconnected and highly time
dependent because of the slower pozzolan reaction.
Table 3: Commonly achieved outcomes with increasing ﬂy ash content in the binder. The table is based
on ﬂy ashes that conform to EN 450 or class F ﬂy ash in accordance with ASTM C618 [5, 18, 25, 26].
Input
Outcome
Note
Increased ﬂy ash content
Increase ↑
Pore tortuosity
-
Setting time
-
Reﬁned porosity
1○
Decrease ↓
Permeability
1○
Conductivity
1○
Heat of hydration
2○
Strength development rate
-
Risk of bleeding
-
Pore solution pH
3○
1○The porosity, permeability, and connectivity of high volume ﬂy ash concrete are highly dependent
on the age from casting. At early age, the features may be opposite with high ﬂy ash substitution.
2○Due to the slower nature of the pozzolan reaction, the heat of hydration will also be lowered, but
it should also be mentioned that the pozzolan reaction is also more vulnerable to temperature
diﬀerences and is likely to happen very slow at low temperatures.
3○Pastes with 40, 50 and 60 % ﬂy ash were tested and compared to a OPC-reference. The pore
solution was found to drop from pH 13.9 to 12 for 21 days old paste with 60 % FA[26].
The pore distribution is important regarding transport properties. Research has found that the
development and reﬁnement of pores in ﬂy ash paste is highly time dependent. Manmohan et al.
(1981) [27] found that the pore distribution changes when comparing OPC-paste and FA-paste
at 28 days and 1 year of age. They showed that the porosity is higher for the 30 % FA blended
paste after 28 days, but after 90 days the opposite is observed, except for the very ﬁne pores.
The changes in microstructure are important for the transport properties concerning ingress
of chloride and other substances. Research conducted with rapid chloride penetration test (cf.
ASTM C1202 [28]) have shown that chloride permeability of a 56 % FA-concrete being nearly
double that of a OPC concrete at 28 days. The trend was found to reverse around 180 days of
age. This tendency is likely due to the slower nature of the pozzolan reaction. However, altering
cement chemistry due to the presence of ﬂy ash regarding chloride ingress and chloride binding
is not yet completely understood [5].
2.3
Hydration Products
Ions from dissolved OPC and FA form a series of hydrates (cf.
Section 2.2 and 2.1) [18].
Hydration of OPC can be considered a binary system consisting of the clinker mineral part
and the limestone ﬁller part. FA introduces a third part and hence, FA blended pastes can
be described as ternary system.
The primary hydration products; C–S–H and portlandite
(CH) are accompanied by smaller amounts of ettringite (AFt (C6A ¯S3H32)) and monosulfate
(AFm (C4A¯SH12)) as described in Section 2.1. The limestone ﬁller part contributes mainly
with monocarbonate and the FA part forms additionally C–S–H.
7
==PAGE:17==
2
THEORY
2.3.1
Calcium Silicate Hydrate (C–S–H)
Calcium Silicate Hydrate (C–S–H) is the main solid phase in hydrated OPC-paste making
up 50-60 % of solid volume [4]. C–S–H has a non-deﬁnite stoichiometry and is by deﬁnition
the name of any amorphous or poorly crystalline calcium silicate hydrate [16]. The dashes in
its name indicate the non-deﬁnite stoichiometry. C–S–H is the primary contributor to the
long-term strength and durability of the paste, hence the value of its presence [4].
C-S-H is an amorphous gel, that binds aggregates and cement paste together in a strong matrix.
During the hydration process, the main amount of mixing water is bound as C–S–H. The
nature of this compound contributes greatly to the pore structure and transport properties [18].
The amorphous properties of C–S–H also give good abilities to absorb and bind ions. This
process is in general described as very important for chloride ion binding in cement paste [6].
The growth of C-S-H is still an ongoing investigation, where the old protective membrane theory
battles the dissolution theory [29, 30, 31]. However, there is consensus about how C-S-H is
formed with an inner product and outer product. The formation of C-S-H will be explained
brieﬂy in the present section.
Figure 3: Formation of C-S-H. 1○Anhydrous cement grain.
2○Outer product of C-S-H precipitation
on the cement grain surface.
3○Outer precipitation of C-S-H in needle shape covering the surface.
4○
Inner product of C-S-H formation [18, 29].
In Figure 3 an anhydrous cement grain
1○reacting with water is shown. The dissolved ions in
the solution will start to form clusters in the original water ﬁlled spaces on the surface of the
cement grain, hence the name, outer product 2○. This happens within the ﬁrst hours of reaction
and causes the setting of the paste [18]. At some point the cement grain will be covered by outer
products
3○and the reaction rate will become slower [31]. Finally, inner products will start to
grow in the boundary layer between un-reacted cement and outer products
4○. Some minerals
(i.e. Mg, Fe, and Si) will not migrate as easily through outer products, hence the Ca/Si ratio
of inner products tend to be lower than for outer products [4]. Inner products are denser than
outer products and will be generated at a lower rate than outer products. Despite the initial
diﬀerences of inner and outer products, it has been shown that over time, the two products will
be very similar and C-S-H will behave more like a homogeneous gel with the same porosity.
2.3.2
Calcium Hydroxide (CH)
Calcium Hydroxide (CH), also called Portlandite, occupies up to 20-25 % of the solid volume in
hardened Portland cement [4]. CH is a hydration product of alite, belite, and ferrite and has a
deﬁnite stoichiometry that structures in layers and form hard crystals with a hexagonal-prism
morphology [4, 16, 18]. Despite the deﬁnite structure, CH typically appears in diﬀerent sizes
and shapes dependeing on the space available [32, 18]. It has been shown that CH grows as
prisms without the spatial constraints [33]. A representation of CH is shown in Figure 4.
8
==PAGE:18==
2
THEORY
Figure 4: CH formation in available spaces.
Larger CH crystals are non-beneﬁcial since they possess less adhesion capacity due to lower
surface area and tend to form oriented structures [4]. CH contributes limited to the mechanical
properties but has a large impact on the durability of the material. The durability is altered
by lowered alkalinity which depends on the concentration of Na+, K+ and OH–. The high
alkalinity of cement paste is mainly obtained from CH [4, 18]. Furthermore, CH is prone to
depletion if not consumed elsewhere [34]. Fortunately, CH is a vital component in the pozzolan
reaction (cf. Section 2.2).
2.3.3
AFm and AFt phases
The calcium sulfoaluminate hydrates, such as ettringite and monosulfate typically makes up
15-20% of the solid volume in hardened Portland cement paste [4]. AFm and AFt phases are
formed by the reactions of C3A and C4AF. These phases is commonly considered not to aﬀect
the mechanical properties of concrete [4, 18]. However, in regard to chloride ingress, these phases
are very important as they are the primary contributors to the formation of Friedel’s salt.
As preliminary outlined in Section 2.1.4, the naming of AFm and AFt takes the disparity between
the content of A or F into account, but in the terms, AFm and AFt lies also the diﬀerent anions
(e.g. sulfate, carbonate, aluminosilicate, and chloride) that could be bound in the phase [35].
The m and t respectively indicate whether it is a Al2O3-Fe2O3-mono or tri phase [35, 36].
Eq. (3) and (6) show that ettringite is formed from the hydration of aluminate phases (C3A and
C4AF). Ettringite is typically the ﬁrst hydrate to crystallize and the precipitation of ettringite
contributes to stiﬀening, setting and early strength development [4]. Ettringite is formed in the
original water ﬁlled spaces [32]. After sulfate depletion, the remaining unhydrated aluminate
phases will react with ettringite and start to form AFm-phases instead where the increased
aluminate ions in the solution can be bound.
A common representation of the AFm-phases is [Ca2(Al, Fe)(OH)6]·X·xH2O where X equals the
exchangeable anion and x denotes the aﬃliated amount of water molecules [35, 36]. The most
common AFm phases in concrete are monosulfate and monocarbonate which is usually produced
from the AFt phase if calcite is present [37]. If chloride is present some AFm phases can form
Friedel’s salt, which will be elaborated in Section 2.7.1. As shown in the reaction equation
for aluminate and ferrite (cf. Eq. (4) and (7)), it is commonly accepted that aluminates and
ferrites second step reaction forms monosulfate. However, most cements have an added content
of limestone ﬁller, and studies have shown that the presence of limestone ﬁller seems to favor
the formation of monocarbonate rather than monosulfate [38].
9
==PAGE:19==
2
THEORY
2.4
Pore Structure
The pore structure of cement based materials comprises a complex network of interconnected
pores.
The pore system is among the most essential concrete characteristics as it governs
moisture transport and sorption along with freeze-thaw durability. Shortly after casting, the
formation of pores initiates as the hydration products start to develop and creates interlocked
spaces between the solids [4, 39, 18].
The largest pores, called entrapped air voids, can be formed already during casting. These
pores do not participate in the moisture transport, since they tend to remain air ﬁlled. Their
size is in the range of millimeters [4], and they weaken the structure in relation to strength.
The entrapped air voids do not promote the transport properties and will not be further reﬁned
during hydration [18].
The beneﬁcial pores in concrete are smaller.
Entrained air bubbles
are usually in the size range of 50-200 µm [4] and these pores are crucial for the freeze-thaw
durability. However, since they are also empty, they do not inﬂuence the transport properties.
The essential pores for the transport of moisture are even smaller and ﬁlled with water. When
the paste starts to hydrate, the spaces not ﬁlled by solid material will be water ﬁlled, and these
spaces are called the capillary pores. The capillary pores vary in shape and size in the range of
0.01-5 µm [4]. The size and shape of these pores depends on the original distance and location
of the anhydrous components and the degree of hydration. The transport of moisture and ions
(e.g. chloride ions) mainly happens in these pores. Transport of ions can happen in two ways,
either through water ﬂow or ionic movement in still water due to diﬀusion or migration [40].
Additionally to the capillary pores are the interlayer spaces. The interlayer spaces are even
smaller and do not have a large eﬀect on the strength nor permeability. Figure 5 illustrates
a possible visualization of the pore system for cement paste. The large areas between C-S-H
gel can be considered capillary pores while the C-S-H spikes themselves can overlap and form
interlayer spaces.
Figure 5: Pore structure.
However, when aggregates are added into the mix, a zone binding the aggregates to the paste is
formed. This zone is called the Interfacial Transition Zone (ITZ), and its composition is diﬀerent
than for pure paste. ITZ has a higher porosity and a lower content C-S-H [4]. Nevertheless, this
zone will not be extensively examined in this thesis but is of interest for the transport properties.
A study carried out by Linderoth (2020) [18] found that the ITZ zone should have little eﬀect
on the sorption properties. This theory was supported by Neville (2011) [11].
Blending FA into the binder changes the pore system. FA is known to increase the tortuosity of
the pore system. This is due to the fact that C-S-H formed by the pozzolan reaction is diﬀerent
from C-S-H formed by OPC. Hence, it is expected that increasing FA in the binder will reﬁne
the pore structure and reduce the connectivity [18].
10
==PAGE:20==
2
THEORY
2.5
Water in Cement Paste
Classiﬁcation of water in cement paste is typically based on the degree of ease with which it can
be removed from the system [4, 11]. Sorption isotherm is the relation between water content and
relative humidity under isothermal conditions. In desorption, the relative humidity determines
which pores that will be emptied. Smaller and smaller pores are emptied as the RH is lowered.
The easiest water to remove from the system is the capillary water. The capillary water is
present as free water in the capillary pores. This water is not aﬀected by the attractive force
from the solid surface of the hydration products [4]. Contrary to the capillary water is the
adsorbed water that is under the inﬂuence of attractive forces from the solid products. The
adsorbed water, close to the solid surface, requires lower RH to remove from the system. A
large part of the adsorbed water is lost when hydrated cement paste is dried to 30 % RH.
As shown in Figure 5 the overlapping of C-S-H spikes forms interlayer spaces. These spaces are
ﬁlled with water called interlayer water. This water is diﬃcult to remove but it is possible if the
paste is dried below 11 % RH. The C-S-H gel shrinks considerably if this water is removed [4].
Lastly, is the chemically bound water. Water is chemically bound in cement paste as a result of
the hydration process in which the clinker minerals react with water particles. Water is often
present in excess amounts, so it is often not a constraint for the reaction itself. It is generally
excepted that the chemically bound water is non-evaporable and that it can only be removed
by heating [4, 11]. Even though the chemically bound water is mainly removed by temperature
increases, Linderoth (2020) [18] suggests that low RH can also eﬀect part of the C-S-H, AFm and
AFt phases. Hence, it is diﬃcult to distinguish between which type of water, that is removed at
the diﬀerent RHs. The estimation of chemically bound water depends on the degree of hydration
and the method used to remove the evaporable water (cf. Section 4.2) [18].
Adding ﬂy ash to the paste will aﬀect the amount of chemically bound water especially the
content at early age, as the pozzolan reaction is slow and does not bind much water except
for the water bound in CH. The present project analyzes 28 days old pastes. It is therefore
expected, to see less bound water in the FA paste specimens.
2.6
Moisture Transport
Moisture transport can be deﬁned as the process in which water passes through the pore struc-
ture [18].
The process can be roughly divided into two; Liquid water transport because of
pressure diﬀerence, described by Darcy’s law, and water vapor transport because of diﬀerence
in vapor content, described by Fick’s law [41, 18]. The dominant transport process is determined
by the moisture conditions. This concept is shown on Figure 6 [18].
Figure 6: Possible moisture transport scenarios.
1○Pure liquid ﬂow,
2○Pure vapor transport and
3○Combination of water ﬂow and vapor transport [18].
Figure 6 outlines possible transport mechanisms in the pore structures. The exact mechanism
is diﬃcult to assess as the diﬀerent connectivity and tortuosity is likely to aﬀect the transport.
However, it is likely a combination of liquid transport and vapor diﬀusion (cf. Figure 6b) [18].
Despite this, it is generally accepted to only apply Fick’s law when assessing the transport, since
the boundary conditions for a traditional situation often rely on vapor pressure only [41].
11
==PAGE:21==
2
THEORY
Investigation of moisture transport becomes increasingly interesting for FA blends. Sorption
isotherms only asses the pore distribution but do not give information about the connectivity
and tortuosity.
FA blends are known to have less connectivity and larger tortuosity, which
inﬂuence the transport properties. The pozzolan reaction of FA does not signiﬁcantly ﬁll pore
volume but rather reﬁne it. The exact reason for this is still to be fully understood [18].
2.7
Chloride Ingress
Chloride ingress is essential for predicting the service life of reinforced concrete [7]. Free chloride
ions can break down the protective ﬁlms at reinforcement bars, which can cause corrosion
of the reinforcement bars [4]. Chloride-induced corrosion is a recognized durability problem
for reinforced concrete exposed to deicers and seawater [6]. Dissolved chloride ions in these
areas are likely to penetrate the concrete, thus shortening the service life [42, 7, 6]. The main
transport mechanisms of chlorides are diﬀusion, capillary suction, permeation, and migration [7].
Diﬀusion is induced by the concentration gradient, capillary suction due to the capillary action,
permeation is induced by the pressure gradient and migration happens due to an electrical
potential gradient [43].
Another important factor in chloride transport is the binding process in which ions are bound
in the cementitious material. Binding reduces the number of free ions in the pore solution and
alters the transport properties. Hence, understanding chloride binding is important for service
life predictions, and precise modeling can potentially save money [6].
2.7.1
Chloride binding
Free Cl–-ions in the pore solution are accompanied by chloride binding products. Literature
suggests three main binding products: Absorption of Cl– in the C-S-H phase, the formation
of Friedel’s salt (Ca4Al2(OH)12Cl2 · 4 H2O), and to some extent the formation of Kuzel’s salt
(Ca4Al2(OH)12Cl(SO4)1/2 · 5 H2O) [6]. The formation of Kuzel’s salt is rarely observed, unlike
Friedel’s salt that seems inevitable.
Friedel’s salt can theoretically be formed through several reactions. The most recognized is the
transformation of monosulfate as seen in Eq. (10). This reaction causes smaller solid volume and
thus increased porosity [10]. It can be seen in Eq. (10) how sulfate ions (SO4
2–) are released
into the pore solution. The free sulfate ions will react with more monosulfate if portlandite
(Ca(OH)2) is present and form ettringite (Ca6Al2(SO4)3(OH)12 · 26 H2O).
Monosulfate
z
}|
{
Ca4Al2SO4(OH)12·6H2O +2Cl−→
Friedel’s salt
z
}|
{
Ca4Al2(OH)12Cl2·4H2O +SO4
2−+ 2H2O
(10)
The addition of limestone ﬁller in OPC (i.e. up to 5% Aalborg Portland Rapid cement) also
introduces monocarbonate. The willingness of monocarbonate to bind chlorides is disputed, but
multiple articles point to the diﬃculties of incorporation Cl– in monocarbonate phases [44, 6].
Ipavac et al. (2013) [44] found decreasing chloride binding with increasing limestone ﬁller and
attributed it to these diﬃculties.
Shi et al.
(2017) [45] did, however, ﬁnd evidence for the
phenomenon by thermogravimetric analysis. The possible reaction would look like Eq. (11).
Monocarbonate
z
}|
{
Ca4Al2CO3(OH)12·5H2O +2Cl−→
Friedel’s salt
z
}|
{
Ca4Al2(OH)12Cl2·4H2O +CO3
2−+ H2O
(11)
12
==PAGE:22==
2
THEORY
The free carbonate ions (CO3
2–) could be problematic as they can initiate carbonation of
the paste.
It is also likely that Friedel’s salt can be formed from strätlingite like phases
(Ca4Al2SiO2(OH)10·3H2O) which would produce free SiO2
2– [45]. Another interesting yet non-
understood phase is mullite (3 Al2O32SiO2). Mulite comes from ﬂy ash and together with Cl–
and calcium it is likely to produce Friedel’s salt.
Literature regarding chloride ingress in high volume ﬂy ash concrete and quantiﬁcation of how
chloride is bound are sparse. However, studies have been carried out. Thomas et al. (2011) [46]
examined diﬀerent SCMs, including FA, and found that SCMs signiﬁcantly alter the chloride
binding capacity of cement paste. Included in this study were specimens with 25 % FA substitu-
tion in the binder and with w/b = 0.5. They found that ﬂy ash blends showed increased binding
of chlorides, but they were not able to establish a relationship between alumina content and
the binding capacity. The lack of correlation was attributed to the fact that aluminate-silicate
crystals like mullite (cf. Figure 2) might not be able to react with Cl– ions. The study also
suggests that if free chlorides are lost through leaching a portion of the bound chlorides is likely
released. However, part of the binding is irreversible.
It is generally recognized that ﬂy ash reduces the permeability of concrete through a reﬁnement of
the pore structure. The reﬁnement of pores contributes to lower migration rate and penetration
depth [5].
Jain et al.
(2009) [25] proposed that the tortuosity altering nature of FA will
inﬂuence the ingress process. This alteration might also inﬂuence the binding process. Curing
age is likewise an important factor. FA pastes have been found to cause higher chloride ingress
at early age due to the slow pozzolan reaction [47].
The other important binding process is the absorption of Cl– into the C-S-H phase. This is
recognized to make up a considerable portion of the total binding. However, the eﬀect on the
gel itself is not properly understood. The absorption could cause transport altering properties
in the paste. Also, the formation of extra C-S-H in FA blends can increase binding capacity as
the gel can absorb more chlorides [46, 25]. In general terms, it can be expected that the amount
of bound chlorides increases in FA blends.
13
==PAGE:23==
3
Hypothesis
“If we knew what it was we were doing, it would not
be called research, would it?”
– Albert Einstein
I
n continuation of the ﬁndings obtained by studies of Hasholt et al. (2019) [8], Wolter (2020)
[10], and Olsen (2020) [9] (cf. Section 1), the scope of this study is to further investigate
how chlorides are bound in cement paste. Furthermore, investigating how the substitution of ﬂy
ash in the binder alters the transport properties and microstructure of the paste in comparison
with cement paste without ﬂy ash.
The hydration reactions of OPC and the pozzolanic reaction of ﬂy ash, both form the main solid
phase of the binder; C-S-H. However, ﬂy ash has a diﬀerent chemical composition than OPC,
and the pozzolanic reaction uses CH to form C-S-H. Fly ash blended pastes will consequently
also have a diﬀerent composition and properties, but how these diﬀerences will manifest if
the specimens are exposed to chlorides is not well understood.
An important piece in the
puzzle is the understanding of how chloride is bound in OPC and FA blends. The changed
chemical composition is one thing that might shed some light on the issue. A more physical
approach is to look directly at the diﬀerences in transport properties. Based on previous ﬁndings
and the generally accepted theory within this topic, the following hypotheses of this study are
established.
1. When cement paste is exposed to chlorides, free chlorides react with mono-
carbonate and form Friedel’s salt, whereby carbonate ions are released. The
carbonate ions take part in new reactions. It is the reaction of the carbonate
ions that are diﬀerent, depending on if ﬂy ash is present in substantial amounts.
2. Chloride ingress will alter the microstructure of hardened paste diﬀerently, de-
pending on whether the specimen contains ﬂy ash or not.
In this project, the hypotheses will be investigated by using the following test methods. The
rapid chloride migration test NT BUILD 492 [48] will be used for chloride exposure. In addition,
the current during the NT BUILD 492 test will be logged continuously throughout the exper-
iment, to see how the resistance of the specimens progresses. Hydration of the specimens will
be stopped prior to some of the experiments to obtain results comparable to the literature of
diﬀerent samples at the same age. Compounds in paste samples and anhydrous compounds will
be estimated using ﬂuorescent X-ray and phases in paste samples and anhydrous compounds
will be estimated using X-ray diﬀraction. The thermogravimetric analysis will also be used to
identify diﬀerent phases and to identify the amount of chemically bound water. Two diﬀerent
methods to obtain sorption isotherms will be executed to obtain knowledge about the pore
structure, and the moisture transport properties will be examined by a cup test.
The theory behind each used method will be explained in Section 4 and the actual materials
used and methods performed will be elaborated in Section 5.
14
==PAGE:24==
4
Methodologies
“Before anything else, preparation is the key to success”
– Alexander Graham Bell
T
he methods performed and the materials used will be explained in Chapter 5. The intended
purpose of this chapter is to provide additional background knowledge about the methods.
The relevant equations will be shown, and the choice of methods will be argued.
4.1
Chloride Ingress
A variety of test methods for chloride ingress exist. The methods are divided into; long- and
short-term methods. Diﬀerent tests have both advantages and disadvantages, and the choice
of method should be based on the experimental situation [49]. Long-term methods are time
consuming but imitate natural conditions well. Short-term methods are widely used because of
the reduced duration. The two commonly used short-term methods are ASTM c1202: Rapid
chloride permeability test [28] and NT BUILD 492: Rapid migration test [48]. Both use an
electric ﬁeld to migrate chloride ions into the specimens and they are both widely used in the
literature [25, 5, 47]. In the Nordic countries, there is a tradition of using NT BUILD 492 [48].
NT BUILD 492 [48] states that results should be expressed in means of the non-steady-state
migration coeﬃcients, Dnssm [·10−12m2/s]. This coeﬃcient is used to assess the migration when
chloride diﬀusion is caused by an external electrical ﬁeld and can be calculated with Eq. (12).
Dnssm = 0.0239 · (273 + T) · L
(U −2) · t
·
 
xd −0.0238
r
(273 + T) · L · xd
U −2
!
(12)
Where, T [°C] is the average temperature of the initial and ﬁnal temperature of the anolyte
solution, L [mm] is the thickness of the sample, U [V] is the applied voltage, t [hr] is the test
duration, and xd [mm] is the measured penetration depth [48]. Higher coeﬃcients mean that the
chlorides migrate more easily through the sample. The measured current, I [A] can be converted
into resistance by Ohm’s law. Furthermore, the resistance R [Ω/mm] can be normalized with
the length of the specimen [9], as shown in Eq. (13).
R = U
I /L
(13)
Chloride concentration in the ingress zone decreases gradually from the exposed surface. In
Figure 7 by Tang et al. (1995) [50] a comparison of the theoretical and experiment ingress zone
is shown. The experimental ingress zone shown in Figure 7 is obtained from a study made by
Andrade et al. (1994) [51]. A detectable limit of Cl– is estimated from a study by Otsuki et
al. (1993) [52]. Otsuki et al. found that the color change of 0.1 M AgNO3 happens when Cl–
content is above 0.15 % by weight of cement. The limit is converted to suitable measures from
the relevant cement content in the study, and with the assumption that the concrete density is
2400 kg/m3. The detectable limit is shown together with the theoretical and experiment ingress
zone in Figure 7.
15
==PAGE:25==
4
METHODOLOGIES
Figure 7: Theoretical and experimental Cl– distribution [50] and estimated detectable limit.
The examination of the color change of 0.1 M AgNO3, ﬁnds that concrete specimens exposed to
NT BUILD 492 [48] would have a chloride content of 0.018 75 % by mass of concrete.
4.2
Arresting Hydration
When studying hydrated paste one of the most important parameters aﬀecting its microstructure
is the pretreatment and preparation of the sample [53]. The two largest concerns are how the
sample is cured and how the hydration process is stopped. In the following, the main focus will
be on how hydration is stopped since curing is more well regulated by the DS/EN standards.
A variety of diﬀerent methods such as oven drying, freeze drying, and solvent exchange methods
can be used to stop the hydration. Zhang et al. (2011) [54] conducted a study to compare the
diﬀerent methods for arresting hydration of paste. They found isopropanol exchange followed
by ambient drying was the best known method to preserve the microstructure with minimal
eﬀect on the composition of paste. However, they also emphasize that there is no known drying
procedure, that will inhibit any chemical and/or physical eﬀect.
The advantage of solvent exchange is that it preserves the chemically bound water in the hy-
drates, preserves the microstructure, and removes soluble ions from the pore solution [55]. Sol-
vent exchange, preferable with isopropanol, is the suggested pretreatment for XRD, MIP, and
TGA, but for TGA it is best followed by a replacement of isopropanol with diethyl ether, due to
lower boiling point and therefore minimizing the amount of organics absorbed to the hydrates
[55]. After stopped hydration, the desired analysis should be performed as quickly as possible
to avoid part of the hydrates being destroyed [55].
4.3
X-Ray Fluorescence
X-Ray Fluorescence analysis (XRF) gives an indication of the chemical composition of the
sample. The technique uses X-rays to bombard the compounds’ inner shells, thereby removing
an electron. Electron shell theory then ascribes that an electron from the other shell will jump
to ﬁll the missing spot, and in the processes, it emits a unique signal. The signal can be detected
and compared to existing data to determine bulk composition [56]. The limitation of XRF is
that it only gives the chemical composition of the analyzed sample and not the mineral phases.
Moreover, most XRF-instruments have limited ability to detect the ﬁrst 11 elements in the
periodic system. For geologic samples, where metals are usually present in their oxidized state,
this will cause the total detectable mass to be lower than 100 % mainly due to the absence of
detectable oxygen. Some XRF-instruments use a conﬁguration with a quantiﬁcation algorithm
that takes this into account by stoichiometric calculations of the oxides. Others only give the
output of the detected compounds, hence the analyst must convert the detected element to its
oxidized compound manually.
16
==PAGE:26==
4
METHODOLOGIES
4.4
X-Ray Diﬀraction
X-Ray Diﬀraction (XRD) is one of the most prominent techniques for analyzing crystalline
materials like cement. The method utilizes that crystalline structures diﬀract X-rays in diﬀerent
angles and hence produces a sample diﬀractogram [57].
The ﬁrst step of XRD analysis is phase identiﬁcation. Here, an obtained diﬀractogram from the
anhydrous powder sample is compared to a database, to identify known phases. The position of
peaks can be related to the symmetry and unit cell size of each phase. Diﬀerent intensities in a
complex diﬀractogram are relatable to the mass percentage of each phase. This mass percentage
can be estimated with the Rietveld method.
Rietveld uses the least square method to reduce the diﬀerence between the measured diﬀrac-
togram and the calculated diﬀraction proﬁle. This can be illustrated in a diﬀerence plot which is
a representative of the precision of the ﬁt. Parameters, like the goodness of ﬁt and the weighted-
proﬁle R-factor, are likewise indications of the precision. However, no threshold values exist,
and the visual ﬁt is still an important part of the Rietveld analysis [58]. Especially when it
comes to conﬁrming that all peaks are identiﬁed. In a Rietveld analysis the intensity at location
i, is summed over the p phases in the mixture, and k presents the plane indices (h,k,l). The
method can be described with Eq. (14) as done by Saoüt et. al. (2010) [58].
yci =
X
p
"
Sp
X
K
pKLK |FK|2 Φ (ΘiK) PK
#
+ ycbi
(14)
Where, yci is the calculated intensity of the ith step, Sp is the scale factor, pK is the multiplicity
factor, LK is the Lorentz and polarization factor, FK is the structure factor, Φ is the proﬁle
function, PK is the preferred orientation function and ycbi is the calculated intensity of the ith
step of the background [58]. Eq. (14) is minimized using least square reﬁnement by Eq. (15).
X
i
(yi −yci)2
yi
(15)
The amorphous content of a specimen can be determined using the external standard method,
also known as the G-factor method. A well deﬁned crystalline material (e.g. corundum) can
be used to establish the amorphous content for reﬁnement of other samples. Afterwards, the
G-factor can be calculated with (16).
G = SsρsV 2
s µs
Cs
(16)
Where, Ss is the scale factor of the standard, ρs is the density of the unit cell, Vs is the unit
cell Volume, µs is the Mass Attenuation Coeﬃcient (MAC) and Cs is the standards crystalline
percentage. The G-factor can be used to rescale the crystalline percentage with Eq. (17).
wj = SjρjV 2
j µj
G
(17)
Where the j subscript stands for the phase to be rescaled. The rescaled weight percentage also
needs to be adjusted for the bound water. This approach will be the same as for TGA results
and will be explained in Section 4.5.
17
==PAGE:27==
4
METHODOLOGIES
4.5
Thermogravimetric Analysis
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) can be used to determined the chemically bound water in
cementitious paste. It is also possible to determine certain phases based on the temperature
zone in which they release H2O or CO2 [18]. TGA is done by placing the sample in a chamber
and gradually raising the temperature while measuring the mass loss under a constant ﬂow of
nitrogen.
The mass loss as a function of temperature is called the TG-curve, and from this graph, the
total amount of CBW can be determined as the specimens total mass loss at 600◦C. In this
temperature range phases decompose into H2O. For temperatures above 600◦C it is expected
that phases decompose into CO2.
Diﬀerential Thermogravimetry (DTG) is the derivative of TGA. The peaks of a DTG graph at
diﬀerent temperatures can be assigned to diﬀerent thermal reactions of respective minerals and
hydrates [53]. Dehydration, decarbonation, and oxidation are generally associated with a mass
change, that can be seen on a DTG-curve. This is a powerful tool to see how small changes in a
cementitious system (e.g. chloride exposure or substitution of SCM) will aﬀect the composition
of solids. In Figure 8 the DTG curve of typical solids for cementitious systems is shown [53].
Figure 8: DTG of typical solids for cementitious systems from Lothenbach et al. [53].
It is shown at which temperature the respective phases decompose. For example, portlandite
dehydroxylates (Ca(OH)2→CaO+H2O) at approx. 460 °C and main water loss of ettringite is
around 100 °C. The AFm phases (monosulfate, monocarbonate, Friedel’s salt, and strätlingite)
have a layered structure with loosely bound water which typically can be seen on the DTG as
several peaks. On Figure 9 the DTG curves for the AFm phases are shown separately [53]. From
Figure 9 it can be seen that the main peaks of monocarbonate and monosulfate are very similar,
and care should be taken when trying to distinguish between the two phases.
Even though the peaks shown in Figure 9 and 8 look deﬁnite for each of the phases they
represent, one could imagine that when all or some of these peaks are present in a cementitious
paste sample, the demarcation of each phase becomes more diﬃcult, and therefore care should be
taken if trying to quantify each phase. Lothenbach et al. (2016) [53] suggest that quantiﬁcation
is limited to gypsum, portlandite, and calcite.
18
==PAGE:28==
4
METHODOLOGIES
Figure 9: DTG of AFm phases from Lothenbach et al. [53].
As shown on Figure 8, portlandite decomposes between 400 and 500 °C. The mass loss
(MLTGA:400-500) in this temperature range is due to the evaporation of water, which can be
used to calculate the amount of portlandite present. This can be done from Eq. (18) where the
molar masses of portlandite (MCa(OH)2=74 g/mol) and water (MH2O=18 g/mol) are used [53].
mCa(OH)2 = MLTGA:400-500 · MCa(OH)2
MH2O
(18)
In the same way the amount of calcite (CaCO3) can also be estimated from the DTG curve.
CaCO3 decomposes to CaO and CO3 above 600 °C. The mass loss above 600 °C (MLTGA:>600)
can together with the molar mass of CaCO3 (MCaCO3=100 g/mol) and CO2 (MCO2=44 g/mol)
give an estimation of the (CaCO3) content shown in Eq. (19).
mCaCO3 = MLTGA:>600 · MCaCO3
MCO2
(19)
Furthermore, several studies have used TGA and DTG to determine the amount of Friedel’s salt
[6, 45]. In Figure 9 it can be seen that Friedel’s salt (FS) have three peaks. The peak around
230-380 °C corresponds to the mass loss of the main water layer [6]. Due to the crystal structure
of FS there are 6 water molecules in the main water layer, hence a factor 6 is introduced in the
calculation of the amount of FS, shown in Eq. (20). Additionally, a baseline made from a non-
chloride exposed sample is introduced when determining the mass loss due to FS (MLTGA:FS).
In Eq. (20) the molar masses of FS (MFS=561.3 g/mol) and water (MH2O =18 g/mol) are used.
mFS = MLTGA:FS ·
MFS
6 · MH2O
(20)
Sample mass of the solid fraction is changing during hydration. Therefore, the results from Eq.
(18), (19) and (20) need to be normalized with Eq. (21) so they are expressed as g per 100 g
paste. It is normalized with the total mass loss from 0-600 °C based on the TGA and w/b.
mnorm =
m
MLTGA:>600 · (1 + w/b)
(21)
It should be mentioned, that there are many factors that could inﬂuence the result from TGA.
Some of the important factors are the heating rate, the amount of solid, gas ﬂow rate, and the
19
==PAGE:29==
4
METHODOLOGIES
pretreatment of the sample.
Therefore, it is commonly not a good idea, to compare peak
intensities and mass estimations of diﬀerent phases obtained in one laboratory with results
obtained elsewhere. When doing TGA, a golden rule is to do the same procedure in an almost
neurotic way. Lothenbach et al. (2016) [53] suggest a heating rate of 10-20 °C/min and a purging
gas rate of 30-50 ml/min. When analyzing anhydrous compounds a sample mass of 20 mg is
suggested. For paste samples with more phases, a sample mass above 50 mg is recommended.
TGA is also used to determine the Loss on Ignition (LOI) of anhydrous components. LOI is
the mass loss percentage when a cementitious material is heated to 950 °C [59, 60]. Low LOI
is a part of the speciﬁcation for the cement to avert too high amounts of carbonate minerals
e.g. limestone ﬁller (CaCO3). Water also contributes to higher LOI as it can be bound in for
example gypsum (CaSO4·2 H2O) and released when heated. If free lime (f-CaO) in cement is
exposed to moisture prior to intentional hydration it can hydrate to form Ca(OH)2, which may
absorb CO2 and form CaCO. This will also lead to higher LOI.
4.6
Sorption Isotherm
Water vapor sorption isotherms is an acknowledged method for studying the pore structure of
cement based materials [61]. Through sorption isotherm one is able to determine the water as a
function of (RH). The most common two methods are the desiccator method and the sorption
balance. The diﬀerence in the two methods is both the equipment and the time required, but
the principle of the two methods is the same. However, a study by Linderoth (2020) [61] found
a substantial diﬀerence of up to 10 % between the two methods. The diﬀerence was pronounced
within the range of 50-30 % RH.
Saturated salt solutions have the ability to provide air of deﬁnite relative humidities, which is
the principle of the desiccator method describe in DS/EN ISO 12571 [62]. When the saturated
salt solution is placed in a desiccator, the RH of the air is determined by which salt that is
used. Having more desiccators with samples from the same specimen inside exposed to diﬀerent
relative humidities and weighing their mass until equilibrium is obtained, is the basics of the
desiccator method. The method is time consuming and, as the RH for each salt is also sensitive
to the temperature, the test setup should be done in a climate chamber at a known temperature.
A Dynamic Vapor Sorption (DVS) balance is another well accepted method to determine the
sorption isotherm.
The beneﬁts of this method is that it is less time consuming and able
to determine both a desorption isotherm and an adsorption isotherm graph.
However, care
should be taken by interpreting the results of an adsorption isotherm, since drying from a prior
desorption measurement will alter the structure and composition of the tested sample.
The DVS equipment gradually increases or decreases the RH inside a chamber where a sample
is placed, and the mass is then monitored continuously for the diﬀerent RHs. The beneﬁcial
shorter measurement time of the DVS also comes with a downside.
Due to this, the mass
equilibrium of the sample is generally not achieved for all RHs. To consider this, an exponential
curve ﬁtting could be done. However, it should be mentioned that the exponential trend is only
applicable for very high and low RHs. For the intermediate RHs complete sorption kinetics are
slower and does not follow an exponential trend [18].
4.7
Cup Test
Based on the assumption that the transport mechanism is solely based on Fick’s ﬁrst law, it can
be examined through a cup test. The cup test investigates moisture transport properties and
can be an important supplement to the sorption isotherms. The test method is often used and
exist in many diﬀerent forms [41, 63, 64, 65].
20
==PAGE:30==
4
METHODOLOGIES
In this thesis the experiment is based on the setup described by Hansen (2015) [65] and DS/EN
ISO 12572 [63] (cf. Section 5.8). The ﬁnal mass change rate for each successive weighing is
calculated as the average of the last 5 measurements with Eq. (22) and (23). The cup test can
be considered in equilibrium when each of the 5 measurements is within 5% of G.
G =
P5
n=1
(m2−m1)
(t2−t1)
5
(22)
g = G
A
(23)
Where, G [kg/s] is the average mass change rate, m1 and m2 are the masses at the given time
t1 and t2 in respectively [kg] and [s], A [m2] is the exposed surface area of the sample, and g
[kg/(m2 · s)] is the water vapor ﬂow rate. Due to the nature of the experiment (cf. Section 5.8),
the water vapor ﬂow rate needs to be corrected for masked edges with Eq. (24) and (25).
gme = 4 · d
π · S · ln
 
2
1 + exp
  −2π·b
d

!
· g
(24)
gcorr = g −gme
(25)
Where, gme [kg/(m2 · s)] is the ﬂow rate from masked edged, d [m] is the specimen thickness,
S [m] is the hydraulic diameter of the cup opening, b [m] is the width of the masked edges and
gcorr is the corrected water vapor ﬂow rate. The corrected g is used in Eq. (26) to calculate a
new G for further calculations.
Gcorr = gcorr · A
(26)
The water vapor pressure diﬀerence across the specimen is calculated with Eq. (27) and (28).
ps = e23.5771−
4042.9
T −37.58
(27)
∆p =
RH1
100 · ps

−
RH2
100 · ps

(28)
Where, ps [Pa] is the saturation vapor pressure, T [K] is the average measured temperature,
RH1 and RH2 is the relative humidities on the two sides of the specimen [%] and ∆p [Pa] is
the water vapor pressure diﬀerence across the specimen. The water vapor permeance can be
calculated and corrected for the air layer below the specimen. This is done with Eq. (29).
Wcorr =
1
A·∆p
Gcorr −ds
δs
(29)
Where, Wcorr [kg/(m2sPa)] is the the water vapor permeance for the sample alone, ds [m] is
the thickness of the air layer and δs is the water vapor permeability coeﬃcient for stagnant air
in this thesis assumed to be 195 · 10−12kg/(m · s · Pa). The water vapor permeability coeﬃcient
for the material can be found with Eq. (30).
δ = Wcorr · d
(30)
Finally, the water vapor ﬂow rate can be calculated by using Fick’s ﬁrst law for a one dimensional
diﬀusion, as shown in Eq. (31).
gtotal = δ · ∆p
d
(31)
21
==PAGE:31==
5
Materials and Methods
“Explaining your work in a concrete way is an
achievement within itself.”
– Anne Soﬁe Hyldtoft Olsen
A
variety of tests were performed to examine the diﬀerence of using pure Ordinary Portland
Cement (OPC) and Fly Ash (FA) substitution in the binder. Three diﬀerent pastes and
two mortar mixtures were cast. Reference specimens were cast only with OPC as binder and
are named OPC. The specimens with ﬂy ash substitution are named FAXX, where XX is the
percentage of ﬂy ash in the binder (cf. Section 5.1). Some specimens were also exposed to
chlorides. As will be described later in Section 5.2, the specimens were cut to obtain a non-
chloride exposed part (I), and a part that has been exposed to chlorides (II) in a chloride
migration test. An overview of the diﬀerent tests and naming is shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Overview of diﬀerent test performed on respective specimens.
⋆Cup test was performed on
mortar samples (cf. Section 5.8).
ID
Stored in
Ca(OH)2
Migration test
XRF
XRD
TGA
Sorption
isotherm:
Desiccator
Sorption
isotherm:
DVS
MIP
Cup test⋆
Paste samples
OPC (I)
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
OPC (II)
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
FA23 (I)
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
FA23 (II)
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
FA35 (I)
×
×
×
×
FA35 (II)
×
×
×
×
Mortar samples
M_OPC (I)
×
×
M_OPC (II)
×
×
M_FA23 (I)
×
×
M_FA23 (II)
×
×
From Table 4 it can be seen that a specimen of OPC and FA23 with and without chloride
exposure are investigated for each test. All paste specimens except the ones used for sorption
isotherms were processed in order to stop hydration prior to XRD, TGA, MIP, and XRF. The
procedure of stopping the hydration is explained in Section 5.3.
Furthermore, additional paste samples with increased FA content (FA35) were examined by
TGA, XRD, and DVS. Due to the time limitation of this project is was only possible to execute
the full experimental program on FA23 specimens, even though the eﬀects of higher ﬂy ash
substitution are of great interest. Sorption isotherms on OPC and FA23 specimens were done
both by the desiccator method and with a dynamic sorption balance (DVS).
22
==PAGE:32==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The mortar specimens were solely cast to investigate moisture transport properties more ex-
tensively. Since the main experimental program was done on paste specimens, the forthcoming
sections will contain information about paste specimens. The mixing, casting, and pretreatment
of the mortar samples will be introduced in Section 5.8.
In the forthcoming sections, readers should be familiar with the indexation. Specimens not
exposed to chloride will be referred to as "I", and specimens exposed to chloride during the
migration test will be referred to as "II".
5.1
Composition, Mixing and Casting
In the current study, the main objective was to investigate the diﬀerence between concrete with
and without ﬂy ash. Therefore the constituents were kept to a minimum to avoid disturbance
from other admixtures or aggregates. It has previously been demonstrated that aggregates have
little eﬀect on the pore structure [39], hence the pore structure of concrete could be investigated
on paste samples. The constituents used for the paste are listed in Table 5.
Table 5: Information about used materials.
Material
Brand Name
Description
Density [kg/m3]
Cement
Aalborg Portland
RAPID CEM I 52.5 N (Certiﬁed i.a.w. [66])
3140
Fly Ash
Emineral
EmiFlyveAske B4 (Certiﬁed i.a.w. [23])
2300
Water
-
Demineralized water
1000
The chemical composition of the used materials provided by the manufactures has previously
been presented by Hasholt et al. [8] and is shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Chemical composition of powders [% of powder mass].
Compound
CaO
SiO2
Al2O3
Fe2O
SO3
Na2O eq
Cl–
LOI
Cement
64.5
19.7
5.2
3.8
3.3
0.6
≤0.05
1.7
Fly Ash
3.9
56.4
21.6
5.4
0.6
2.9
≤0.05
2.1
Two diﬀerent paste mixtures were designed with and without ﬂy ash (FA). The amount of ﬂy
ash substitution was chosen based on other studies [25, 8, 39, 6], whereby it was concluded
that substitution of FA by 23 % of the binder would be suﬃcient to see a considerable diﬀerence
between OPC paste and paste with FA. However, since OPC and FA23 showed many similarities,
a paste consisting of 35 % FA of the binder content, was also designed to investigate the critical
limit of ﬂy ash substitution.
The water-to-binder (w/b) was ﬁxed at 0.45 for all specimens, where the binder consist of both
cement and ﬂy ash (OPC+FA). Fixed w/b was chosen prior to water-to-cement (w/c) to avoid
the complication of using the right eﬃciency factor k, when using a supplementary cementitious
material (SCM). Since the paste samples are to be evaluated on a microscopic level, the strength
reduction is of minor concern in this study. The mixture proportions for the pastes are shown
in Table 7 for a paste volume of 0.4 liter.
23
==PAGE:33==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The paste was mixed using high shear mixing in accordance with ASTM C1738 [67]. The con-
stituents were weighed on a scale with 0.01 g accuracy. Before mixing, the dry binder materials
were homogeneously stirred together. The paste was mixed on a Waring Commercial; 8011S -
Lab Blender, with "no load" rotation speeds of resp. 15 800 rpm and 22 000 rpm (cf. Appendix
A). According to ASTM C1738/1738M [67] speeds of resp. 4000 rpm and 10 000 rpm should be
used, but since the actual speed ratings with paste in the blender could not be tracked, "no load"
speeds of 15 800 rpm and 22 000 rpm were chosen for low and high speed mixing, respectively.
Table 7: Mixture proportions for 0.4 liter paste.
ID
w/b [ - ]
Water [kg]
Cement [kg]
Fly ash [kg]
OPC
0.45
0.2348
0.5219
-
FA23
0.45
0.2268
0.3876
0.1163
FA35
0.45
0.2225
0.3214
0.1731
The temperature of the room and mixing water were measured prior to mixing (cf. Appendix
A). Mixing water was poured into the blender and low speed was turned on. Dry materials were
added within 30 s and paste was mixed on low speed for an additional 30 s. Mixing was stopped
and set to rest for 150 s before mixing at high speed for 30 s.
The paste was cast in lightly oiled Ø22 mm × 120 mm tube moulds with a bung used in each
end to seal the sample. The mould was gradually ﬁlled while gently tapping with the ball of a
hand to avoid large air voids in the paste sample. When the specimen has been properly sealed,
it was placed in a rotation machine situated in a climate chamber (23 °C) for the ﬁrst 24 hrs of
curing to avoid separation of the sample. The specimen was stored in the climate chamber for
a total of 28 days. The specimen was demoulded and sealed in airtight bags on the 17th day of
curing due to a limited number of moulds (cf. Appendix A).
5.2
Chloride Migration Test
The Chloride migration test was carried out according to NT BUILD 492 [48] after 28 days of
curing. NT BUILD 492 prescribes cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 100 mm and a length
of 50 mm. The paste specimens in the present study had a diameter of 22 mm and cutting was
done to obtain the prescribed length of 50 mm in accordance with NT BUILD 492 [48]. The
cuttings of the specimen are shown in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Cutting of paste specimen prior to migration test.
The cutting of the specimens was done with a water cooled Struers Discotom-65 saw.
The
accurate length of piece II was measured in three diﬀerent places, and the averaged is noted
and can be seen in Appendix B. After sawing, excess water was wiped oﬀ, and the three pieces;
I, II, and I were put into a vacuum container. The pressure was kept at approx. 25 mbar for
24
==PAGE:34==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3 hrs before saturated Ca(OH)2 solution was sucked into the container to fully immerse the
pieces. The solution was made of demineralized water and Ca(OH)2. The vacuum was kept
for an additional hour before allowing air to enter the container by opening the valve. The
pieces were kept in the solution for 18 hours. Piece II was removed from the solution and excess
Ca(OH)2 solution was wiped oﬀ. I-pieces remained in the reservoir with Ca(OH)2 while chloride
migration test on piece II was done.
Piece II was placed in the sleeve shown in Figure 11. The sleeve was specially designed and
cast in silicone elastomer [68]. The sleeve was designed with a diameter of 22 mm in the bottom
part to perfectly match the diameter of the piece to avoid leakage along the perimeter.
Figure 11: Specially designed silicon elastomer sleeve for migration test. Cross section of the sleeve
in 3D (left) and with measures (right).
A container with an inclined bed of 32° was ﬁlled with approx. 12 l of 10 % NaCl as a catholyte
solution. The specimen enclosed by the sleeve was placed on the inclined bed in the container
and the anolyte solution was poured on top. The anolyte and catholyte solutions were kept
at the same water level to avoid any moisture transport induced by hydrostatic pressure. The
anolyte solution was made by 12 g NaOH in 1 l demineralized water resulting in a 0.3 N NaOH
solution. An anode was immersed in the anolyte solution and connected to the positive pole
of the power supply. The cathode, placed underneath the specimens on the inclined bed, was
connected to the negative pole of the power supply. The test setup is illustrated in Figure 12.
The temperatures of the room, anode solution, and cathode solution were measured and noted.
1○Rubber sleeve.
2○Anolyte 0.3 N NaOH Solution.
3○Catholyte 10 % NaCl Solution.
4○Anode.
5○Cathode.
6○Test container.
Figure 12: Test setup for chloride migration in accordance with NT Build 492 [48] with the exception
of specimen size (cf. Figure 11).
25
==PAGE:35==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The current was recorded by reading the display of the power supply and from a more precise
electronic data collector designed for this purpose. The date collector made it possibly to track
the current during the experiment in order to examine the change in conductivity throughout
the experiment.
The power supply was preset to 30 V and turned on to record the initial current through the
specimen. From the initial current the voltage to apply was read of Table 8. Due to the changed
geometry of the specimens the test voltage stated in NT BUILD 492 [48] had to be converted
into suitable measures for the smaller specimens used in this study. This conversion was done
from the chloride exposed surface area of the intended specimens and the actual specimens used.
The ratio between the two diﬀerent surface areas was calculated and used to reduce the initial
current (cf. Appendix B). The converted test entities can be seen in Table 8.
An initial experiment showed that the initial current at 30 V was above 17.42 mA. According
to NT BUILD 492 [48] this would result in a test duration of 6 hrs. However, the test duration
was changed and ﬁxed to 24 hrs to ensure a proper chloride penetration depth. This was done
to ensure enough chloride penetrated material to perform the later experiments.
Table 8: Converted test voltage and duration time for paste specimens used in present test i. a. w.
NT BUILD 492 [48].
Initial current
Applied voltage
Possible new initial current
Test duration
l30V [mA]
U [V]
l0 [mA]
t [hrs]
l0 < 0.24
60
l0 < 0.48
96
0.24 ≤l0 ≤0.48
60
0.48 ≤l0 ≤0.97
96
0.48 ≤l0 ≤0.73
60
0.97 ≤l0 ≤1.45
48
0.73 ≤l0 ≤0.97
50
1.21 ≤l0 ≤1.69
24
0.97 ≤l0 ≤1.45
40
1.21 ≤l0 ≤1.94
24
1.45 ≤l0 ≤1.94
35
1.69 ≤l0 ≤2.42
24
1.94 ≤l0 ≤2.90
30
1.94 ≤l0 ≤2.90
24
2.90 ≤l0 ≤4.36
25
2.42 ≤l0 ≤3.63
24
4.36 ≤l0 ≤5.81
20
2.90 ≤l0 ≤3.87
24
5.81 ≤l0 ≤8.71
15
2.90 ≤l0 ≤4.36
24
8.71 ≤l0 ≤17.42
10
2.90 ≤l0 ≤5.81
24
l0 ≥17.42
10
l0 ≥5.81
6
The specimen was removed from the reservoir and dismantled from the sleeve. Following, the
specimen was rinsed with demineralized water and excess water removed. Two specimens were
tested in parallel, one was used to documented ingress depth, the other for further testing.
Ingress depth was documented by initially making a longitudinal cut with a saw to encourage a
clean perpendicular splitting. The specimens were then split axially with a hammer and chisel
into two pieces.
Penetration depth was measured by spraying a 0.1 M AgNO3 solution on the freshly split surface
from a distance of approx. 30 cm. After 10 min a white surface consisting of AgCl precipitations
was visible on the surface, the depth of the white surface is measured roughly as shown in
Appendix B. After measuring penetration depth, the samples were tossed and not used for
further examinations.
26
==PAGE:36==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.3
Arresting Hydration
The hydration was stopped by removing the pore solution in the paste. The followed procedure
was suggested by Lothenbach et al. (Chapter 5, [53]). This procedure is the recommended
pretreatment for Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA), and this procedure was used prior to
XRF, XRD, TGA, and MIP. The hydration of each specimen was stopped after ended migration
test, so all specimens had the same curing age.
The specimen was crushed quickly with a hammer and put into a glove box with a ﬂow of CO2-
free air to avoid carbonation. This box is shown in Figure 13a. The specimen was ground using
mortar and pestle. The ground sample was then sieved to ensure particle size < 0.150 mm.
(a) Glove box
(b) Fume hood
Figure 13: Equipment used for arresting hydration.
1○Rubber gloves,
2○Flow of CO2-free air to
avoid carbonation,
3○Morter and pestle,
4○0.150 mm sieve,
5○Vacuum pump,
6○Büchner funnel,
7○Excess solution,
8○Isopropanol,
9○Dietehylether.
The powder sample was mixed with 10 ml of isopropanol per gram and set to rest for 15 min to
remove the pore solution. The isopropanol was removed from the suspension by ﬁltrating in a
Büchner funnel connected to a vacuum pump (cf. Figure 13b). Furthermore, the solid is clensed
for excess isopropanol by adding 1 ml diethyl ether per 10 ml isopropanol. The vacuum pump
was applied until the color of the sample was lighter, which took approx. 15 min. The powder
sample was then placed in a petri dish, spreaded out, and dried in a 40 °C oven for 10 minutes.
The equipment used and actual measures for each specimen where hydration has been arrested,
is provided in Appendix C.
5.4
X-Ray Fluorescence
X-Ray Fluorescence analysis (XRF) was performed to identify the chemical composition prior
to analyzing XRD data. The analysis was performed by a technician at the laboratories of the
Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. Paste powder (cf.
Table 4) and anhydrous composites (i.e. cement and ﬂy ash) was analyzed.
XRF analysis was conducted on an Epsilon4 model from PANalytical. The powders were loaded
into circular polyester holders coated in the bottom with plastic wrap. The holders have a height
and diameter of 28 mm. The height of each sample was measured with a caliper, and the mass
of each sample was measured on a scale and put into the program of the XRF analysis.
The samples were analyses as powder samples on the program setting "Omnia", which looks
after all elements in the periodic system except for the ﬁrst 8 elements. The ﬁrst 8 elements
are undetectable by XRF analysis, and the instruments have limited ability to precisely and
accurately measure the abundances of elements with Z < 11 [69].
27
==PAGE:37==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.5
X-Ray Diﬀraction
X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) was conducted to determine the proportion by mass of diﬀerent crys-
talline phases. Powder samples of paste (cf. Table 4) as well as anhydrous composites (i.e.
cement and ﬂy ash) was examined. Sample preparation was done in accordance with Section
5.3 for the paste samples and composite materials were correspondingly grinded and sieved to
ensure the same particle size as the pulverized paste samples.
Powder was back loaded into circular sample holders with a diameter of 26 mm used in the
XRD equipment (cf. Appendix E). In order to reduce preferred orientation of the powder and
to ensure a uniform surface of the sample [57].
The measurements were carried out using a X’Pert PRO diﬀractometer from the manufacturer
PANalytical. The model uses Bragg-Brentano θ-2θ geometry with a ﬁxed goniometer radius
of 240 mm.
The source is CuKα1 x-rays generated using 40 mA and 45 kV tube operating
conditions. The conﬁgurations of the diﬀractometer can be seen in Figure 14.
Figure 14: Conﬁguration of Diﬀractometer [70].
The soller slit of the incident beam has a radius of 0.04 rad and the incident anti-scatter slit
were ﬁxed at 1◦. The incident divergence slit was programmed to a distance of 140 mm from
the sample with a irradiated length of 10 mm. A ﬁxed incident beam mask with the length of
10 mm was used and air scattering was reduced by a beam knife for MPD systems [57].
The diﬀracted x-ray goes through an anti-scatter slit ﬁxed at 1◦and was limited in axial di-
vergence by a soller slit with a radius of 0.04 rad. Before entering the receiver the beam goes
through a 0.02 mm thick kβ-ﬁlter made of nickel. The data was received continuously by a linear
position-sensitive X’Celerator detector with a active length of 2.122◦2θ.
During measurements the sample was spinning around the vertical axis of the goniometer in a
rate of 8 sec/spin (approx. 7 rpm), to improve particle statistics. Data collection were executed
over an angular range of 5 ◦to 70 ◦2θ in steps of 0.0167 ◦2θ. The time at each step was 1 min
resulting in a total measurement time of approximately 30 min. A report from actual XRD
analysis conﬁrming the above mentioned settings is provided in Appendix E
28
==PAGE:38==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.6
Thermogravimetric Analysis
Thermogravimetric analysis TGA was performed to identify bound water, portlandite, calcite
and Friedel’s salt [53]. The powdered samples (cf. Table 4) together with the anhydrous com-
posites; cement and ﬂy ash have been analyzed thermogravimetrically.
Paste samples were
prepared in accordance with Section 5.3 and the anhydrous composites were not processed.
The analysis was performed on a NETZSCH STA 449 F3 Jupiter Simultaneous Thermal Analysis
instrument (cf. Appendix F and technical speciﬁcation [71]). The schematic principles of the
equipment is shown in Figure 15. Initial calibration of the equipment was done with empty
crucibles and set to "correction" to correct for heat expansion and the buoyancy caused by the
protective gas ﬂow. For the actual measurements on powder specimens, the equipment was set
to "correction+sample" to subtract the calibration curve measurements.
Figure 15: NETZSCH STA 449 F3 Jupiter Simultaneous.
1○Heating element,
2○Sample crucible,
3○Reference crucible,
4○Protective tube,
5○Insulation tube,
6○Exhaust gas outlet,
7○Balance
system,
8○Hosting device,
9○Gas inlet.
The analysis was run by placing the preferable powder mass (cf. Section 4.5) in an aluminiu-
moxide (Al2O3) crucible with a weight of 141.2
6.7 mg (cf. Appendix F). Measurements were
done under constant ﬂow of N2 as the protective gas with a ﬂow rate of 30 ml/min [53]. Tem-
perature inside the furnace was controlled by signals from thermocouples placed underneath the
crucibles. The equipment measures temperatures underneath the sample and reference crucible
to account for the delay caused by sample heating. Both crucibles were positioned with forceps
and the mass of the crucible and sample was tared and stored before starting the analysis.
Temperature was increased from 30 to 1050◦C with intervals of 10 ◦C/min. Hence, the test took
approximately 1 hr and 45 min followed by an cooling period of equal length.
The obtained TG data and the derivative of the curve (DTG) was extracted for further analysis.
The DTG data was smoothed using Savitzky–Golay ﬁlter to lower data scatter and to make
important peaks more visible. Savitzky–Golay ﬁlter uses the principle of least-squares smoothing
to reduce scatter. In presented case the method was applied in MatLab by using the build-in
"sgolayﬁlt" function with a third degree polynomial and with a frame length of 521. Smoothing
was based on a subjective best ﬁt with focus on reproducible data (cf. Appendix F).
29
==PAGE:39==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.7
Sorption Isotherm
Sorption isotherms were obtained by the desiccator method and from Dynamic Vapor Sorption
(DVS). Due to the time of one DVS measurement addressed in Section 4.6, the analysis was
performed on samples cast at diﬀerent time but performed such that the hydration time of
each sample was coincident with one another (cf. Table 4). The time horizon of the desiccator
method is dependent on the time required for specimens to be in equilibrium, and therefore the
1st cast was chosen for this test.
Prior to sorption analysis, the saturated samples were grounded using mortar and pestle to pass
a 0.150 mm sieve inside a fume cabinet under a ﬂow of CO2-free air to prevent carbonation. A
saturated solution of potassium sulfate (K2SO4) was placed inside the fume cabinet 7 days before
grinding to ensure RH of approx. 98 % to prevent the samples from drying during grinding.
5.7.1
Desiccator method
The desiccator method was performed in accordance with DS/EN ISO 12571 [62] to determine
desorption isotherms. The experimental setup can be observed in Figure 16. Prior to the test,
saturated salt solutions were mixed with distilled water and placed in each of their respective
desiccators. Due to limited sample material, the ﬁve diﬀerent salt solutions shown in Table 9
was chosen. Desiccators with salt solutions and empty cups were placed in a climate chamber
at 20 ◦C for 7 days before the experiment was initiated to ensure stable conditions.
Table 9: The relative humidities obtained from saturated salt solutions at 20 ◦C [62].
Desiccator
Saturated Salt Solution
Relative Humidity [%]
1
Lithium Chloride (LiCl)
11.31
0.31
2
Potassium Acetate (KC2H3O2)
22.51
0.32
3
Magnesium Chloride (MgCl2)
33.07
0.18
4
Sodium Chloride (NaCl)
75.57
0.40
5
Potassium Nitrate (KNO3)
94.62
0.66
The sample was weighted to an accuracy of 0.01 % and approx. 1-2 g was placed in a cup for
each of the ﬁve diﬀerent RHs (cf. Appendix G). The cup and lid were weighed before placing
the sample. The open cups were placed in their corresponding desiccator so that each specimen
was stored at ﬁve diﬀerent RHs. Desiccators were sealed with vacuum of approx. 100 mbar to
minimize carbonation and placed in a climate chamber at 20 ◦C to ensure stable conditions.
1○Desiccator.
2○Cup.
3○Sample.
4○Cup lid.
5○Salt solution.
6○Thermometer.
7○Scale.
Figure 16: Experimental setup for the desiccator method [62].
30
==PAGE:40==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The cups were weighed every 2 weeks. According to DS/EN ISO 12571 [62] the cups should be
weighted until the last 3 consecutive measurements changed less than 0.1 % of the total mass
per day. When measuring the samples, the lid for each cup was put on the cup immediately
after opening the desiccator.
5.7.2
Dynamic Vapor Sorption Method
Dynamic Vapor Sorption was conducted on a DVS Advantage from Surface Measurement sys-
tems (cf.
Appendix G). The instrument continuously measures the mass with an analytical
balance during exposure to predeﬁned relative humidities. The predeﬁnes RH levels were ob-
tained by demineralized water and a vapour humidiﬁer. The schematics of the equipment is
shown in Figure 17. Before using the instrument, the balance was calibrated with a 100 mg
ultra class stainless steel weight made by Troemner.
Figure 17:
Dynamic Vapor Sorption.
1○Gas inlet,
2○Solvent and vapour humidiﬁer,
3○Gas
transfer,
4○Temperature and RH probes,
5○Sample holder,
6○Analytical balance,
7○Opening
mechanism,
8○Reference sample.
Approx. 10 mg of the crushed specimen was placed in the sorption balance holder and mea-
surements were started. The designed program has a predeﬁned RH-sequence at 20 ◦C. The
program starts at 94 % RH and performs desorption of the specimen by slowly lowering the RH
in the predeﬁned RH steps. The upper RH limit of the experiment is a constrain enforced from
the instrument since higher relative humidities could result in condensation inside the sorption
balance. When the program reaches 11 % RH, the desorption of the specimen stops. Then an
adsorption isotherm of the specimen is conducted back to 94 % RH. The program is deﬁned
with the relative humidities corresponding to the salts used in the desiccator method with the
exception of one extra step at RH = 53 %.
The DVS program was designed to have a maximum duration of 7 days. Each RH-step was
limited to take 15 hrs, so the program continues to the next RH after 15 hrs or if the mass change
per minute is less than 0.0001 (dm/dt [%/min]). The RH-sequence and the maximum time steps
of the measurement are shown in Table 10.
Table 10: Relative humidities and maximum time duration at each step for the DVS measurement.
RH [%]
94
75
53
33
22
11
22
33
53
75
94
Time [hrs]
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
31
==PAGE:41==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.8
Cup Test
The cup test was performed to determine the water vapor transmission properties of mortar
specimens.
Henceforth, a new specimen type and casting technique are introduced in this
section (i.e. mortar specimen instead of paste). The casting of mortar specimens was done in
accordance with DS/EN 196-1 [72]. The same materials as listed in Table 5 was used together
with CEN-Normsand EN 196-1 (Density; 2640 kg/m3). The DS/EN 196-1 reference mix was
adjusted using Lyse’s rule to obtain a w/b ratio, corresponding to the paste specimens. The
mortar mixture can be seen in Table 11.
Table 11: Mortar mixture modiﬁed from DS/EN 196-1 [72]. Constituents is given in kg/m3mortar.
ID
w/b [ - ]
Water
Cement
Fly ash
Sand
M_OPC
0.45
251
558
-
1507
M_FA23
0.45
247
423
127
1485
The mixing procedure proposed in DS/EN 196-1 was changed to account for available equipment.
Mixing was done on a TEDDY BEAR Varimixer conforming to the standard and thus having
two speed settings (i.e. low speed: 140
5 rpm and high speed: 285
10 rpm). The mixing
procedure is explained in the list beneath:
0 s - 15 s
Water added to the anhydrous materials
while mixing on low speed.
15 s - 30 s
Hand mixing with a spoon to release trap-
ped material from the bottom of the bowl
30 s - 45 s
Mixing on low speed.
45 s - 75 s
Adding sand while mixing on low speed.
75 s - 105 s
Mixing on high speed.
105 s - 195 s
Mixture resting
195 s - 225 s
Finale mixing on high speed
The mortar was cast in Ø100 moulds. Moulds were ﬁlled and vibrated one third at a time to
remove larger air voids. Samples were demoulded after 24 hr and placed in air tight bags before
being cured for additionally 27 days in a climate chamber at 23◦C.
Figure 18: Cutting of mortar specimens.
1○Part of cylinder not used for further testing.
2○Chloride
exposed sample used to check penetration depth.
3○Chloride exposed specimen and penetration depth
marked with darker color.
4○Unexposed specimen.
32
==PAGE:42==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The mortar cylinder was sawed as shown in Figure 18. This was done to obtain a non-chloride
exposed disc sample (I) and two discs that could be chloride penetrated from migration test
(II), where one on them solely was used to check the penetration depth. Chloride migration test
was performed on the specimens in accordance with NT BUILD 492 [48] with the only exception
that the test duration was ﬁxed at 48 hr. The changed test duration was based on an initial
experiment showing chloride penetration depth of approx. 1 cm for 24 hr exposed specimens.
The experimental setup was designed with in-house equipment and based on standardized prin-
ciples described in DS/EN ISO 12572 [63] and ASTM E96-90 [64]. The setup can be observed
in Figure 19. The saturated disc samples were measured in four places to control the height and
the mass of each disc was noted down. Rubber gaskets were placed between the cup and the
disc to ensure unidirectional vapour transport through the sample. A saturated KNO3-solution
with 94% RH was placed inside the cup. The initial mass of the cup setup was measured to the
accuracy of
0.001 g before placing the cup in a desiccator. Relative humidity of 75% was main-
tained inside the desiccator with a saturated NaCl-solution. Furthermore, the desiccator was
equipped with 10 g Soda lime Carbosorb to prevent carbonation, a fan to ensure air circulation,
and a relative humidity sensor. The fan runs 5 min every hour to distribute the relative humidity
uniformly. The desiccator was placed in a 19 ◦C climate chamber to control the environment.
Figure 19:
Test setup for cup test:
1○Cup lid,
2○Saturated KNO3-solution,
3○Disc sample,
4○Grid to prevent overtopping during weighting,
5○Rubber gasket,
6○Ventilation fan,
7○Carbon
absorption agent,
8○Relative humidity sensor,
9○Saturated NaCl-solution.
The cups were removed from the desiccator every 14 days to measure the mass.
The time
duration of these measurements was minimized to prevent carbonation due to contact with
atmospheric air. The specimens were considered to be in equilibrium when the mean of ﬁve
successive determinations of the mass change per time did not change more than
5 % of the
average mass change rate (cf. Section 4.7). The experimental setup is elaborated in Appendix H.
33
==PAGE:43==
6
Results and Discussion
“Tell me and I forget. Teach me and I remember.
Involve me and I learn.”
– Benjamin Franklin
R
esults shown in this section will be discussed and argued continuously for the diﬀerent
experiments. An interdisciplinary discussion of the diﬀerent obtained results, in regard to
the hypothesis, will be provided in Section 6.8 and 6.7.
6.1
Chloride Migration Test of Paste
Current data for all paste specimens was logged during the chloride migration experiment (cf.
Section 5.2, i.e. NT BUILD 492 [48]). This was done to observe possible transport diﬀerences
between specimens with- and without ﬂy ash. Current data can be observed on Figure 20. It
should be noted that the applied voltage was ﬁxed at 10 V for all experiments and that the
current was measured on two specimens at a time.
(a) Current data for OPC specimens.
(b) Current data for FA specimens.
Figure 20: Current data from NT BUILD 492 [48]. The initial drop of the currents are shown on a
reﬁned scale.
On Figure 20a the ﬁve black curves show the logged current data for the OPC reference speci-
mens. In Figure 20b the four red curves represent the FA23 specimens and the three green curves
are FA35 specimens. The diﬀerent number of red and black curves is caused by a measurement
error for the fourth chloride migration experiment with a FA23 specimen. The error occurred
due to a big air void that caused current readings to max out when chloride ions penetrated all
the way through the specimen. The discarded data and picture documentation can be observed
in Appendix B. Air voids of this magnitude were not observed elsewhere.
It can be seen from the zooms provided in Figure 20, that the logged current experience an initial
drop within the ﬁrst 10 min. This drop is attributed to delays in the measuring equipment.
Furthermore, it was noticed that the curves are systematically displaced in chronological order
34
==PAGE:44==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
with the date they were obtained. In other words, the top graph in both Figure 20a and 20b are
from the ﬁrst experiment executed, the second highest graphs are from the second experiment
and so on. This could indicate that the measurement device was gradually fatigued, that the
casting process of the specimens was improved, or it could simply just be a coincidence. However,
it should still be noted that the curve shape seems similar for the same specimens.
Two curves on Figure 20b have more noise, which is attributed to an unsteady power supply.
Between the experiments, the power supplies were both replaced and changed, but the reason
for the noise was not found. Nevertheless, the diﬀerence in regards to the current between FA
and OPC is still signiﬁcant. Since R is inversely proportional to I through Eq. (13). This means
that when the current decreases, the resistance of the specimens increases correspondingly since
the voltage was kept constant throughout the experiment.
The current data for the OPC specimens have a more or less steady progress the ﬁrst 5-10 hours.
Then it decreases gradually for a period and this tendency ﬂattens out towards the end of the
test. The high current at the beginning of the test means that chloride ions penetrate easily
through the specimen, which indicates a more porous microstructure at this stage. The current
decrease occurs because some of the products, that are formed from the chloride ions, interact
with the paste. These products could likely ﬁll up the pores and thus causing a lowered current.
It is also likely that the chemical composition of the pore liquid is changed, which also inﬂuences
the conductivity of the sample. This topic will be dealt with in the last paragraph of this section.
For FA specimens the progress of the current data does not follow the same pattern as the
reference OPC. The ﬁrst thing to notice is that the current is generally lower than for the OPC
samples. This means that the resistance of the FA specimens is generally higher. It is therefore
expected that it should be harder for the chlorides to penetrate through the specimens. This
could have something to do with the reduction of the pore size or more tortuous pores in FA
specimens [25, 18]. The current slightly increase after the initial drop, which means that the
resistance decreases. Thus, indicating that the specimen becomes more permeable. This is an
interesting observation that is not seen for the OPC specimens. A possible explanation could
lie in the hydration process of ﬂy ash blended systems which is a two step reaction process. The
hydration of OPC proceeds faster than the pozzolan reaction, hence the ﬁrst step is hydration
of cement, and the second step is the ﬂy ash hydration (cf. Chapter 2). The decrease of the
resistance in the FA blended specimens thus indicates that the solids from the reaction products
of ﬂy ash are more soluble.
The non-steady-state migration coeﬃcient, Dnssm was calculated from the measured ingress
zone and Eq. (12). The measured penetration depth is shown in Appendix B together with the
calculations of Dnssm. It should be mentioned, that the measuring method of the ingress zone
is not in accordance with NT BUILD 492 [48]. The smaller samples made it diﬃcult to take the
average of 7 diﬀerent ingress depths, and the accuracy is not within 0.1 mm. Instead, only one
ingress depth was estimated with a caliper and the accuracy is approx. 0.5 mm.
Table 12: Chloride ingress depth, non-steady-state migration coeﬃcients and averaged electrical re-
sistance based on the current measurements and calculated from Eq. (12) and Eq. (13).
OPC(II))
FA23(II)
FA35(II)
xd
[ mm ]
10.4
0.6
11.8
0.4
13.6
0.6
Dnssm
[ ·10−12 m2/s ]
12.9
0.8
15.2
0.8
18.0
1.0
Ri
[ Ω/mm ]
34.0
1.7
41.6
1.7
45.7
2.4
Rf
[ Ω/mm ]
37.9
1.8
43.0
1.6
47.4
1.6
∆R
[ % ]
11.4
3.3
3.6
35
==PAGE:45==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The initial current was measured for each specimen before initiating the experiment. The initial
drop in current was eliminated by not taking the ﬁrst 20 current measurements into account in
the following way. The percentage drop of the ﬁrst 20 measurements was used to correct the
initial current measured on each specimen. The electrical resistance was calculated by Eq. (13)
based on the current. The average of the initial resistance is assigned Ri in Table 12. Likewise,
a ﬁnal reading of the current was done after the experiment, and from this, an average ﬁnal
resistance, Rf was calculated for each of the diﬀerent specimen types.
The calculated initial and ﬁnal resistances shown in Table 12 is calculated as resistance per
mm specimen. The changed resistance ∆R is shown as the percentage increase of the initial
resistance. From the results shown in Table 12, it can be seen that the resistance becomes
higher with more ﬂy ash replacement. The increased resistance of ﬂy ash blended cement is also
expected from the theory (cf. Section 2.7.1). As suggested earlier this is likely because of the
ﬁller eﬀect of ﬂy ash and the reduction of the pore size and/or more tortuous pores.
The migration coeﬃcients in Table 12 are increasing with increased FA content, which is caused
by the higher ingress zones of the FA specimens. This ﬁnding is rather contradictory to the
observed higher resistance of the FA specimens. If the FA specimens have higher resistance, why
would the migration coeﬃcient then be higher? The lowered pH of FA specimens would cause
the chlorides to be more easily bound, but the higher resistance of the FA specimens implies
that the free chloride ions would ﬁnd it more diﬃcult to penetrate through the specimen.
The current on Figure 20 is a measure for the total conductivity of the specimens and is thus
inﬂuenced by the ion mobility in the pore solution.
However, diﬀerent ions have diﬀerent
transport properties. In chemistry, this phenomenon is known as electrophoresis [73]. The ionic
mobility in a solution is inﬂuenced by the viscosity of the solution, characteristics of the ions
themselves, and the applied electrical ﬁeld [74]. For the present study this means that if the
reaction seen in Eq. (11) happens, CO3
2– does not necessarily have the same drift velocity
through the specimen as Cl–. This will aﬀect the current and the chloride penetration depth
diﬀerently. Therefore, electrical resistance and penetration depth are not necessarily proportional.
6.2
X-Ray Fluorescence
The data obtained from the XRF analysis of all the elements that were detected are shown in
Appendix F. Since the ﬁrst 8 elements in the periodic table are non-detectable, the total sum
of the analyzed powder samples does not add up to 100 %. The total percentage of species
detected by XRF for the diﬀerent powder samples is shown in Table 14 as "Raw data". Since
the elements in cementitious material (both anhydrous and hydrated powder) are bound in
oxides, the amount of oxide can be calculated for each detected compound from stoichiometric
calculations.
The relevant compounds where the oxides are assumed to be present are the
following; Na2O, MgO, Al2O3, SiO2, SO3, K2O, CaO, TiO2, MnO2, and Fe2O3.
An example of the stoichiometric calculation is shown in Table 13, where it is assumed that a
detectable mass of 10 g silicon (Si) is found with XRF. Natural silicon exists as silicon dioxide
(SiO2) at ambient conditions, and then the total mass of SiO2 can be determined.
Table 13: Example of stoichiometric calculation of SiO2.
Si
+
2 O
→
SiO2
Mass, m [g]
10.0
11.4
21.4
Molar mass, M [g/mol]
28.1
15.0
60.1
Amount of pure substance, n [mol]
0.36
0.71
0.36
36
==PAGE:46==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In other words, if 10 g silicon is detected it corresponds to ≈21.4 g SiO2 in the analyzed sample.
The actual calculations for the data obtained by XRF are shown in Appendix F. The total
percentage of detected compounds with the calculated oxides taken into account are shown in
Table 14 as "Calculated with oxides".
Table 14: Detected compound percentage [Detectable mass-% of sample].
Cement
Fly ash
OPC(I)
OPC(II)
FA23(I)
FA23(II)
Raw data
67.0
39.8
60.4
68.3
55.7
55.6
Calculated with oxides
98.8
71.4
88.9
95.5
83.8
82.8
The "Raw data" from XRF shows, that for both cement and ﬂy ash, less than 70 % of the mass
is recognized as elements in the periodic system with Z > 8. Both the "Raw data" and the
calculated "Relevant with oxides" also shows that the XRF has a lower detection rate for both
anhydrous ﬂy ash and ﬂy ash blended pastes. Contradictory, the detection rates for chloride
exposed specimens are higher for OPC specimens, and somewhat the same or slightly lower for
FA specimens. If the relevant oxides are taken into account, the total mass of pure anhydrous
cement is close to 100 %, thus indicating that the oxide assumption is a reliable way to determine
the total content in pure cement. The detectable mass-% is lower for the paste samples, which
is also expected since non-detectable bound water is present in the paste samples.
The chemical composition from the manufacturers of the used cement and ﬂy ash was presented
in Table 6 (cf. Section 5.1). In Table 15 the chemical composition obtained from XRF and
with the oxides added to the relevant compounds is shown. The chemical composition from the
manufacturer is shown again and a weighted averaged for a blend of ﬂy ash and cement (23/77)
was calculated. This weighted average was also calculated for the anhydrous compounds with
the intention to make comparisons to the paste sample with 23 % ﬂy ash substitution. Besides
the results from XRF, the LOI found from TGA is also shown in Table 15, to compare with the
data from the manufacturer.
Table 15:
Chemical composition obtained from XRF [% of powder mass].
⋆Calculated weighted
average from 77 % cement and 23 % ﬂy ash.
CaO
SiO2
Al2O3
Fe2O
SO3
MgO
TiO
MnO2
Na2O
eq.
Cl–
LOI
From manufacturer
Cement
64.5
19.7
5.2
3.8
3.3
-
-
-
0.6
≤0.05
1.7
Fly Ash
3.9
56.4
21.6
5.4
0.6
-
-
-
2.9
≤0.05
2.1
Blend⋆
50.5
28.2
9.0
4.2
2.7
-
-
-
1.1
≤0.05
1.8
Anhydrous compounds
Cement
76.7
9.7
2.2
5.8
3.0
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.03
1.8
Fly Ash
3.6
36.6
12.1
12.3
0.7
0.4
1.0
0.1
1.7
0.04
0.9
Blend⋆
59.8
15.9
4.5
7.3
2.5
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.6
0.3
1.6
The presented numbers in Table 15 show that the obtained chemical composition for the anhy-
drous components does not conform with that of the manufacturer. For cement, the calcium
and iron contents are considerably larger than expected. The silicon and aluminum content
detected from XRF is less than half of the expected value. This could indicate that XRF has
diﬃculties detecting compounds with low atomic numbers. The same tendency is observed for
37
==PAGE:47==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
ﬂy ash, where the detected mass of silicon and aluminum is much lower and the detected mass
of iron is higher than expected. The LOI for anhydrous cement corresponds with the declared
LOI from the manufacture, but for ﬂy ash, it is considerably lower.
It was expected that the XRF results of the anhydrous components would not deviate more
than approx. 10 % from that of the manufacturers. Hence, it is questionable whether the results
obtained are reliable. Nevertheless, the diﬀerent results obtained for the paste samples shown
in Figure 21 still gives an indication of what happens with the composition of elements in the
paste if ﬂy ash is added and if the specimens are chloride exposed.
Figure 21: Oxides composition of paste samples from XRF
As expected, it can be seen from Figure 21 that the ﬂy ash containing specimens have a higher
content of silicon, aluminum, and iron. The content of calcium is decreased considerably and the
content of gypsum is also smaller for FA specimens. An interesting observation is the content of
chloride. From the theory, it was expected that more chloride would be bound in FA specimens,
but the results from XRF show that the chloride content is almost the same with a small lead
in the OPC specimens.
6.3
X-Ray Diﬀraction
HighScore Plus© software from Panalytical was used to analyze the observed XRD diﬀrac-
tograms. The software can assist in determining crystalline phases in each sample and with
estimating weight distributions. The wt-% can be found by whole pattern Rietveld reﬁnement
as described in Section 4. Initial phase search was limited by the chemical compounds found by
the XRF analysis. The complete reﬁnement strategy can be seen in Appendix E.
38
==PAGE:48==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Crystallographic information ﬁles (.CIF) was provided by the Inorganic Crystal Structure Data-
base (ISCD) under the Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure (web version 4.5.0) and
used to carry out the Rietveld reﬁnement. Every crystalline structure has a designated ISCD-
number. Numbers used in the present report was found in the literature and the selection was
based on data quality and publication year [57, 58] (cf. Appendix E). The ﬁles for hemicarbonate
and aluminate was provided by the Crystallography Open Database, which is an open source
database under the University of Cambridge [75]. The Leibniz Institute does not recognize these
ﬁles and consider them incomplete. This might be a source of error in the Rietveld reﬁnement.
However, the overall trend should not be aﬀected and it was concluded that leaving out these
structures would cause signiﬁcant uncertainties.
Figure 22a and 22b present the crystalline phase distribution and the amorphous content of
anhydrous RAPID AALBORG CEMENT©(CEM I 52.5N) and ﬂy ash from Emineral. The
found composition of clinker minerals can be compared to Table 2. Here, it can be seen that the
composition is as expected, with the exception of aluminate (C3A). 8 wt-% C3A was expected,
but only 4.6 wt-% is estimated from XRD. Saoüt et al. (2010) [58] studied the application of
Rietveld reﬁnement on anhydrous cement and discovered that C3A is often underestimated with
up to 0.6 wt-%. Also, the anhydrous material was not taken from a new bag so the possibility
of contamination can not be rejected.
(a) Rapid Cement (OPC).
(b) Fly Ash (FA).
Figure 22: Composition of the anhydrous compounds based on XRD Rietveld analysis. The distribu-
tion is made with a calculated G-factor of G=1.69 · 10−53.
Other major clinker mineral phases like alite, belite and ferrite is often overestimated due to
preferred orientation [58]. This is probably the case of alite in Figure 22a. The detected calcite
most likely originates from the up to 5% limestone ﬁller and the bassanite comes from the added
gypsum. The total clinker mineral content of the 4 main clinker minerals only add up to 90 wt-%
on Figure 22a. This is slightly lower than the proclaimed 93 wt-% (cf. Table 2). However, the
Rietveld analysis has uncertainties and the goodness of ﬁt for the anhydrous cement is 2.7. The
number of overlapping phases in cement furthermore adds to the complexity of the reﬁnement
which promotes uncertainties in the estimation [57].
The data obtained in this project has
furthermore not been good enough to quantify diﬀerent polymorphs of the same phases like
alite M1 and M2 as proposed by Saoüt et al. (2010) [58].
Figure 23 shows the Rietveld reﬁnement results for all paste samples. It can be seen that the
amorphous content increases with increasing ﬂy ash replacement. This was expected because
ﬂy ash is highly amorphous as seen on Figure 22b. It is evident that chloride exposure by NT
39
==PAGE:49==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
BUILD 492 increases the amorphicity. This can be attributed to the formation of amorphous
binding products and will be discussed later. The increased amorphicity also inﬂuence the total
wt-%. The two main crystal phases in harden paste, i.e., ettringite and portlandite, gradually
make up less of the total mass with increasing FA content and with chloride exposure. The AFm
phases are harder to detect accurately in XRD due to their lower crystallinity and variation in
composition.
Quantiﬁcation of cementitious paste by Rietveld analysis is consequently not
as reliable as for strong crystalline phases. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is better to
detect these phases, but due to the almost equal chemical shifts of the diﬀerent AFm phases,
the distinction between them is still not possible [38]. This redistribution, due to increased
amorphicity, is also likely to be the reason for the decreasing quartz content in FA specimens.
However, the tendency looks opposite for the mullite phase. The reason for this is not known.
Figure 23: Composition of the paste samples based on XRD Rietveld analysis. The distribution is
made with a calculated G-factor of G=1.72 · 10−53.
Another interesting observation from XRD is that monocarbonate decreases when chlorides are
present. This indicates that the reaction in Eq. 11 does indeed proceed and monocarbonate
reacts with Cl– to form Friedel’s salt. This conforms with the ﬁnding by [45] and rejects the idea
that this reaction does not occur as proposed by [44]. It can also be seen that the mentioned
reaction seems to be inhibited in FA blends. The exact reason for this remains unknown, but
it is likely that the chloride ion ﬁnds it more favorable to react with amorphous compounds. It
is also possible that the increased tortuosity of FA blends makes the distribution of chlorides
more uneven and thus the reaction proceeds slower. The transformation of monocarbonate to
Friedel’s salt will release a carbonate ion (CO3
2–) that is likely to form calcite or a calcite like
phase. This is not conﬁrmed by the XRD. However, some of the carbonates might react to form
amorphous calcium carbonate that would not be detected by the XRD.
From Figure 23 it can also be seen that Friedel’s salt is decreasing with increasing FA content.
Decreasing amounts of Friedel’s salt do not necessarily indicate less chloride binding. It simply
indicates that the binding does not happen as Friedel’s salt. Based on increasing amorphicity
and the presented theory it is evident to assume that some of the chloride ions are absorbed by
the C-S-H gel as previously proposed [6]. Nevertheless, it is not unlikely that other amorphous
binding products may form.
40
==PAGE:50==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The quantiﬁcation through the external standard method uses the MAC coeﬃcient for calcu-
lation. The most correct approach for the calculations would be to calculate the MAC based
on the XRF as the sum of the oxides weight percentage multiplied with the density. However,
due to doubt about the correctness of the XRF results the XRD calculated MAC was used.
Attention should be paid to the sample preparation process, where carbonation and heat devel-
opment are to be avoided. The comminution process used in this thesis is developed based on
a literature study. Previously, wet grinding has been used to prevent heat development. This
might be damaging because the process is likely to cause decomposition of the hydrated phases
[57]. It is generally suggested that the powder should be of a particle size < 5 µm. However,
during the present experiment, the samples were not sieved to this size because sieving is likely
to withhold harder particles, thus creating a systematic error.
Figure 24:
Observed diﬀractograms for paste samples.
Signiﬁcant peaks and peaks of interest
is pointed out.
E=Ettringite, H=Hemicarbonate, M=Monocarbonate, F=Ferrite, CH=Portlandite,
A=Alite, B=Belite, Q=Quartz and FS=Friedel’s salt.
41
==PAGE:51==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The actual diﬀractograms for paste samples can be observed in Figure 24. The diagrams give
a good impression about the crystalline phase layout but also visualize some of the major
drawbacks with the reﬁnement of complex multi-phase systems. The peak overlap problem is
to some extent accounted for by the Rietveld reﬁnement, but it still has limitations in severe
overlap cases. One of these cases is shown with and without chloride exposure in Figure 25.
Figure 25: Zoom of the problematic area 10.5-12 2θ degrees from FA35.
During chloride exposure, Friedel’s salt (FS) is formed. FS’s main peak is located very close to
hemicarbonate leading to signiﬁcant overlap. However, visual examination of the peaks conﬁrms
that hemicarbonate seems to decrease. This is not seen on the Rietveld reﬁnement results and
thus hemicarbonate is possibly overestimated for FA35(II). The wide shape of the FS peak does
furthermore indicate that hemicarbonate is still present in the sample.
From Figure 25 it is also evident that monocarbonate actually decrease in chloride exposed
samples. In the Figure, it can be seen that the main peak of monocarbonate around 11.75°
2θ decreases when FA35 is exposed to chlorides. From its secondary peak shown in Figure 24
around 24° 2θ it can also be seen that this is the same trend for all chloride exposed specimens.
Hence, this tendency is conﬁrmed both by visual examination and by whole pattern Rietveld
analysis. This means that the reaction, shown in Eq. (11), actually occurs which causes CO3
2–
ions to leak into the pore solution. CO3
2– ions might react with calcium to form calcite or
amorphous calcium carbonate. The formation of calcite is not directly conﬁrmed by the XRD.
42
==PAGE:52==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6.4
Thermogravimetric Analysis
The TG and DTG curve for the anhydrous compounds RAPID AALBORG CEMENT©(CEM
I 52.5N) and ﬂy ash from Emineral is presented in Figure 26. The peaks of gypsum, portlandite,
and carbonated phases are shown on the DTG graph for rapid cement in Figure 26a. As it can
be seen in the Figure, only small amounts of water are released from the anhydrous compounds
in the temperature range from 0-600 °C. This conﬁrms that it is indeed anhydrous compounds,
and no signiﬁcant hydration has occurred.
(a) Cement
(b) Fly ash
Figure 26: TG and DTG for the anhydrous compounds.
The preliminary study of the anhydrous compounds was executed to lay the foundation for the
later paste analysis by verifying that the compounds have the expected phases. From Figure
26a it can be seen that the expected phases of gypsum, portlandite, and carbonated phases
are present in the cement. If assuming that all the carbonated phases shown in Figure 26a
are calcite this corresponds to a calcite content of 3.1 %, which is acceptable according to the
requirement of maximum 5 % limestone ﬁller. An example of how phases are quantiﬁed from the
DTG graph is shown later. The high content of carbonated phases could inﬂuence the results
of the paste specimens. Additionally, an indication of hydration is shown by the presence of
portlandite. This is likely due to moisture exposure from the atmospheric environment during
storage or handling of the sample.
The anhydrous ﬂy ash shows little mass reduction undergoing TGA measurement (cf. Figure
26b).
This was not expected either, since FA is formed through the intense heat of a coal
furnace, where the temperature reaches 1200 °C [17]. It is therefore not prone to further mass
reduction from heat exposure by TGA, which is only up to 1050 °C. The moisture released from
0-600 °C is below 0.5 % and can be attributed to the atmospheric conditions, that the FA has
been stored in. The mass reduction from 600-1050 °C is diﬃcult to quantify but is most likely
attributed to the presence of unburned coal. The ﬂy ash from Emineral is a Category A ﬂy ash,
which means that the LOI should be lower than 5 % by mass according to DS/EN 450-1 [23].
It is therefore not unlikely that the mass reduction from 600-1050 °C is caused by the residue of
unburnt coal.
The average TGA and DTG curves for all paste samples are shown in Figure 27. The average
consists of three measurements for each sample type. The graphs for each sample can be observed
in Appendix F where it can be seen the triple measurement are almost identical. From Figure
27 it can generally be seen that the content of portlandite and ettringite is decreasing with in-
43
==PAGE:53==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
creasing FA content. This was also expected since these phases are formed from cement hy-
dration and with increasing ﬂy ash content, the cement content is correspondingly lowered.
Furthermore, the pozzolan reaction uses portlandite which would further reduce the amount of
portlandite in the FA containing specimens.
Figure 27: Average TG and DTG results form all tests. Marked areas can be observed on Figure 28.
According to Figure 27 it also looks like the chloride exposure alters the content of ettringite.
For OPC and FA23 the shift of the curves between chloride and non-chloride exposed specimens
are in the same range (cf. marked area
1○on Figure 27). A zoom of this shift will be provided
in Figure 28a. What can be seen in Figure 27 is, that the decreased ettringite content from
chloride exposure is more pronounced for FA35 specimens. The peaks around 150 °C marked as
area
2○are slightly ambiguous in the view provided in Figure 27. In Figure 28b a closer view
on this peak will be shown and the phases causing the peak will be examined.
The peak in the temperature range of 600-750 °C is caused by decarbonation of calcite. The
connection between ﬂy ash, chloride exposure and amount of calcite is rather inconclusive from
Figure 27, but this will be examined later. Furthermore, a peak in the temperature range of
800-1000 °C is observed. The reason for this mass loss is unknown and could not be explained
from any available literature known to the authors. However, the peak likely comes from a
compound that decomposes into carbon dioxide because of the high temperature. Unburned
coal could likewise be a possibility but both FA blends and OPC samples show some extent of
reduction. The peak does however look more pronounced for the chloride exposed specimens
with ﬂy ash.
44
==PAGE:54==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Ettringite peak.
(b) Ambiguous peak.
Figure 28: DTG curves from marked areas on Figure 27. Legends is consistent with Figure 27.
In Figure 28a, a zoom of the ettringite peak is shown. The peak area does include multiple phases
like C-S-H and monocarbonate, but it is widely recognized that the presence of ettringite controls
the magnitude of the peak [53]. As mentioned earlier, FA blends show decreasing amounts of
ettringite compared to OPC because FA substitution decrease the amount of ettringite formed
from C3A and C4AF. Observing the eﬀect of chloride exposure shows that chloride ingress causes
the ettringite peak to increase. This could be explained by the transformation of monosulfate
into Friedel’s salt (FS). This reaction would free a sulfate ion as seen in Eq. (10). The free
sulfate ion can react with more monosulfate and calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) to form more
ettringite. This was proposed by Wolter (2020) [10] and can be seen in Eq. (32).
Monosulfate
z
}|
{
Ca4Al2SO4(OH)12·6H2O +2Ca(OH)2+2SO4
2−+18H2O →
Ettringite
z
}|
{
Ca6Al2(SO4)3(OH)12·26H2O (32)
However, it is unlikely that this reaction should be more pronounced for FA35 specimens since
less monosulfate is present from the beginning. Unless there is some other compound in FA
that reacts with free chloride or sulphate ions to form ettringite, the observation from Figure
27 with higher ettringite content in FA35(II) compared to FA35(I) cannot be explained.
The ambiguous peak on Figure 27 and 28b in the temperature range from 130-190 °C is clearly
diﬀerent for chloride exposed samples. The peak that is visible around 170 °C is likely to be
monocarbonate. After chloride exposure this peak becomes smaller, which might conﬁrm that
monocarbonate reacts with chloride to form Friedel’s salt (cf. the reaction shown in Eq. (11)).
Around 150 °C the curve is shifted downwards after chloride exposure. This is ascribed to the
ﬁrst layer of water that evaporates from Friedel’s salt. The diﬀerence in Friedel’s salt content
between OPC and FA is not clear from the ﬁrst layer of water that evaporates from FS (peak
around 150 °C).
However, the peak of FS is slightly larger for OPC samples.
This is later
conﬁrmed by calculating the mass loss from the main peak of FS (cf. Figure 29 and Table 16).
The amount of non-overlapping phases can be calculated based on the amount of H2O or CO2
that is released during heating. The baseline for this type of calculation is established based on
visual ﬁt and is vulnerable to the operators’ experience. Henceforth, some uncertainties exist
regarding the repeatability of this type of calculation [53].
45
==PAGE:55==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 29 shows how diﬀerent phases are quantiﬁed from their mass loss. For estimations of
Friedel’s salt the baseline is established as the DTG of the non-chloride exposed counterpart.
Quantiﬁcation of FS relies on the assumption that the observed diﬀerence, between (I) and (II)
is only due to the formation of FS. This assumption is conﬁrmed by observing the temperature
zone on Figure 8 and 9. Only monosulfate has a coinciding peak that could inﬂuence the result.
The calculation methodology for FS is likewise common in literature [6, 45].
Figure 29: Areas used for phase calculations based on DTG data. Example from FA23(II).
The content of the three quantiﬁable phases shown on Figure 29 can be calculated from Eq.
(18), (19), (20) and (21) shown in Section 4.5. An example of the calculation of the portlandite
content is shown beneath.
mCH = MLTGA:400-500 · MCa(OH)2
MH2O
=
CH-area: Fig.29
z
}|
{
1.98 g/100g ·74 g/mol
18 g/mol = 8.09 wt%
(33)
The result from Eq. (33) is rescaled to account for the degree of hydration with Eq. (34). Hence,
the weight percentage is in unit g per 100 g paste.
mCH,norm =
mCH
MLTGA:>600 · (1 + w/b) =
8.09 wt%
77.72 wt% · (1 + 0.45) = 7.2 wt%
(34)
The weight percentage of each phase is calculated for each DTG graph and the averaged results
are shown in Table 16.
For FA35 only one measurement was done.
Hence, the results are
not mean values, and no standard deviation is shown in Table 16 for FA35. Furthermore, the
percentage diﬀerence between (I) and (II) is calculated to shown what happens with each phase,
when the specimen is chloride exposed.
In Table 16 it can be observed that the chemically bound water (CBW) is decreasing with
increasing FA content. This was expected and is likely due to the nature of the pozzolan reaction
which does not consume water (cf. Section 2.5). No clear relationship can be established between
CBW and chloride exposure. However, for OPC and FA35 samples it seems to increase.
The CH content decreases with increasing FA content. This can be attributed to the smaller
amounts of alite and belite and the consumption of CH by the pozzolan reaction, as stated by
Eq. (1), (2) and (9). The portlandite content decreases after chloride exposure for both OPC
and FA23. This tendency is not observed for FA35, where the portlandite content is the same
46
==PAGE:56==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
before and after chloride exposure. The calcite content is highest for chloride exposed OPC
specimens, but also without chloride exposure OPC has a slightly higher calcite content than
FA23 and the calcite content of FA35 is very low. After chloride exposure, the calcite content
increases signiﬁcantly for all specimens. This ﬁnding supports the reaction shown in Eq. (11),
where monosulfate reacts with the chlorides and releases a CO3
2– ion. The ﬁnding implies that
the CO3
2– ion further react with calcium to form calcite.
Table 16: Average values of Chemically Bound Water (CBW), portlandite (CH), calcite (CC) and
Friedel’s Salt (FS). ∗Only one experiment. The value is not an average and has no standard deviation.
CBW
CH
CC
FS
OPC(I)
[ wt-% ]
23.8
0.6
10.9
0.3
1.4
0.1
-
OPC(II)
[ wt-% ]
24.1
0.6
9.6
0.3
2.7
0.3
2.6
0.4
∆OPC
[%]
+ 1.3
−12.5
+ 98.3
-
FA23(I)
[ wt-% ]
21.4
0.2
8.3
0.2
1.2
0.3
-
FA23(II) [ wt-% ]
21.2
0.8
6.8
0.3
1.8
0.4
2.0
0.1
∆FA23
[%]
−0.9
−17.4
+ 51.1
-
FA35(I)
[ wt-% ]
10.6
3.3
0.5
-
FA35(II) [ wt-% ]
12.5
3.3
1.3
1.8
∆FA35
[%]
+ 17.9
+ 0.3
+ 160.0
-
FS is only observed in specimens exposed to chlorides, which was expected because it is a binding
product of chloride ions. As it was also expected from Figure 27 the amount of FS seems to
become lower with increasing FA content. This might conﬁrm the theory presented by Thomas
et al. (2011) [46] on the idea that aluminate-silicate crystals like mullite is not able to react
with Cl– ions to form FS. In regards to this, it should be noted that it is still possible that more
chloride binding occurs because chloride can be bound in C-S-H.
6.5
Sorptions Isotherms
Sorption isotherms were obtained from the desiccator method and the sorption balance. Desorp-
tion isotherms can be utilized to estimate the pore size distribution of the paste samples. The
present thesis focuses on desorption curves instead of adsorption curves because the specimens
are in saturated conditions before the start of the experiments. The lowest RH in the experi-
ment is 11 % because lower RH could inﬂuence and destroy the pore system [18]. This weight is
considered the dry weight of the samples in these experiments. Hence, the obtained results are
shown as moisture content normalized with the obtained moisture content at RH=11 %.
6.5.1
Desiccator Method
Figure 30 shows the desorption curves from the desiccator method. It can be observed that the
pore system changes due to chloride exposure. In the RH range of 11-22 % chloride exposure
increase the volume of the smaller pores. This could be explained by a pore reﬁning chemical
reaction in the paste due to the chloride ions. For larger pores, the trend is diﬀerent, which
will be discussed further in combination with results from the sorption balance. The chloride
exposed samples indicate that the FA blends have a higher volume of pores than OPC samples.
Based on the desorption isotherms from the desiccator method it can be seen that non-chloride
exposed samples with and without ﬂy ash follow a similar pattern. The samples are only 28
days, so it could be expected that the reﬁnement of the pores from the pozzolan reaction is not
yet fully developed [39]. However, the trend is not very pronounced in the obtained results.
47
==PAGE:57==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 30: Sorption isotherms determined from desiccator method.
The sample size in the desiccator method should be of 10 g acc. to DS/EN ISO 1257 [62]. In
this study the sample at each RH varies between 0.88 g and 1.81 g. The mass could not be larger
due to the limited chloride penetrated sample from the migration test.
6.5.2
Dynamic Vapor Sorption
Results from the sorption balance can be observed in Figure 31. Primary results are shown
as desorption isotherms (i.e. bright colors on Figure 31) because the samples started in near
saturated conditions. The adsorption isotherms (i.e. dotted lines on Figure 31) are likely to
include uncertainties as the pore system could be damaged at this stage.
Figure 31:
Sorptions isotherms determined from sorption balance.
The dashed curves mark the
adsorption and the bright colors are the desorption.
48
==PAGE:58==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The data shown in Figure 31 is given as the average of the ﬁnal 10 data points for each relative
humidity. The mass equilibrium curves for samples in relation to each RH can be observed
in Appendix C. Among others, Linderoth et al. (2020) [39] used an exponential function to
estimate the ﬁnal equilibrium at each RH. However, in this article they point to the fact, that
sorption curves do not follow this function in certain RH ranges. Furthermore, the method is
highly dependent on the visual ﬁt of the parameters, and therefore the sorption isotherms in the
present thesis were not corrected by this ﬁtting method. The obtained accumulated moisture
volume can be seen in Figure 32, where the moisture content at each of the diﬀerent RH ranges
is also shown.
Figure 32: Accumulated pore volume for the diﬀerent RH intervals.
When observing FA blends and OPC regarding chloride ingress, the distribution of pore volume
above RH 45 % change in opposite directions. It is evident that chloride ingress increase the
volume of pores in the lower RH range of 11-33 %. This can be observed on Figure 31 and 32.
Figure 32 illustrate that the volume of the pores in the RH range of 33-53 % decreases. This
implies that the microstructure of the system is restructured by the reﬁnement of the pores in
the RH range of 33-53 %. That chloride ingress increase the volume of small pores could be
explained by binding products reﬁning the pore system. The tendency is most pronounced for
chloride exposed FA blends. The sorption balance hence conﬁrms that diﬀerent microstructural
altering processes are taking place in FA blends compared to reference OPC. In the RH range
above 53 % the samples follow a similar slope, which indicates that the chloride exposure does
not inﬂuence the volume of pores in this RH range.
The adsorption isotherms on Figure 31 shows that all samples follow a similar pattern during
the adsorption. This tendency indicates that considerable damage has been inﬂicted to the pore
system during the desorption. The damage likely happened at low RH because the diﬀusion
force is biggest in this range. However, if damage happens during higher relative humidities
it will cause an error in the results at lower RH. The extent of this error is not known, but
desorption isotherms are commonly accepted as a strong tool with little error.
6.5.3
Comparison
On Figure 30 and 31, it can be seen that at approximately RH 33 % the same tendency can be
observed for both experiments. As explained in Section 4.6 it was expected that results from the
two methods would variate with up to 10 %, mainly in the RH range of 30-50 % [61]. Observing
Figure 30 and 31, conﬁrms the diﬀerence.
The sorption balance shows a greater volume of
smaller pores compared to the desiccator method, which estimates more pore volume at higher
49
==PAGE:59==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
RH. The desiccator method generally estimates more pore volume as it can be seen on the
diagrams in Figure 33. The volume of pores at the RH range from 22-33 % and 33-53 % from
the sorption balance has been combined, to compare with the results from the desiccator method.
(a) Desiccator method.
(b) Sorption balance.
Figure 33: Accumulated pore volume based on water vapor from the desorption isotherms.
The diﬀerence between the two methods have been studied by Linderoth (2020) [18] but no
exact correlation or reason was established. The study points to the considerable diﬀerence in
sample mass as a possible explanation. Another reason could be the much shorter time steps of
the sorption balance that do not allow the sample to reach equilibrium. However, more research
is needed to establish the exact reason for the diﬀerence and this is not the objective of this
thesis. The diﬀerence in results between the desiccator method and the sorption balance is
generally attributed to the known diﬀerence between the two methods.
The mixing procedure plays an important role in the formation of the pore structure.
The
eﬀect of high shear mixing on the reaction time is not well understood. A study by Han et al.
(2015) [76], did however ﬁnd evidence that high shear mixing might increase the hydration rate.
Hence, it is likely that the pore structure of the 28 day old specimens in the current study is more
developed compared to other studies. In the further discussion of the results in this project,
the results from the sorption balance will primarily be used. This choice was made because
both methods show the same tendencies, but the sorption balance seems to have a more reﬁned
estimation of the small pore volume. Both the desiccator method and the sorption balance show
that this area is of interest regarding chloride ingress (cf. Figure 30 and 31).
6.6
Cup Test
Cup test was performed on mortar specimens as explained in Section 5.8 and the measurements
and calculations is provided in Appendix H. Two tests were performed for each specimen type.
The ﬁrst is called cast 7 and the second is referred to as cast 8. As the naming implies, the two
tests are from two diﬀerent casts, but the respective OPC and FA23 specimens from each cast
are the same and have the same curing age.
6.6.1
Chloride Migration Test on Mortar Samples
Chloride migration test was performed on some specimens prior to the actual cup test. Due to
voltage limitation of the data logger equipment, the current could not be logged continuously
throughout the experiment. Initial and ﬁnal currents were noted for all specimens. The non-
steady-state migration coeﬃcient, Dnssm were calculated from the measured ingress zone and
50
==PAGE:60==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Eq. (12). The measured penetration depth is shown in Appendix H. The ingress zone is not
measured in accordance with NT BUILD 492 [48], but estimated with a caliper and picture
examination. For FA specimens from cast 7, the ingress zone was very U-shaped (cf. Appendix
H ), which implies that the clamps to secure the sleeve around the specimen was not tightened
suﬃciently. The estimated penetration depth and migration coeﬃcients are shown in Table 17.
From Table 17 it can be seen that the chloride penetration depth of FA23 from cast 8 is higher
than for the OPC specimens. The voltage was higher for the FA23 specimens and therefore the
penetration depths of OPC and FA23 cannot be compared directly. Disregarding FA23 from
cast 7 due to the described errors, it can be seen that the migration coeﬃcients of OPC and
FA23 lie within the same range. There is a big measurement error attached to the penetration
depth since the chloride proﬁle varied a lot throughout the specimens (cf. Appendix H ).
Table 17: Chloride ingress depth, non-steady-state migration coeﬃcients and averaged electrical re-
sistance of mortar samples.
M_OPC(II)
M_FA23(II)
Cast 7
Cast 8
Cast 7
Cast 8
xd
[ mm ]
29
30
(33)
37
Dnssm
[ ·10−12 m2/s ]
10.1
10.7
(9.2)
10.4
U
[ V ]
20
25
Ri
[ Ω/mm ]
6.3
0.5
7.7
1.7
Rf
[ Ω/mm ]
6.9
0.5
6.7
0.9
∆R
[ Ω/mm ]
0.6
0.3
-1.1
0.3
The voltage and the calculated average resistance is also shown in Table 17. It is interesting to
see that the change in resistance is not the same for OPC and FA23 specimens. The resistance
increases for the OPC specimens and for FA23 it decreases.
6.6.2
Moisture Transport
The cup test was performed on disc specimens. In Figure 34 the measurements are shown and
the last ﬁve mass decreases used to calculate the water vapor ﬂow rate are highlighted.
(a) Cast 7
(b) Cast 8
Figure 34: Mass loss during the cup test.
51
==PAGE:61==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 34 is shown, to display that the mass loss measured every week is close to linear at
the end of the experiment. This implies that the moisture transport through the specimens is
close to equilibrium as prescribed by DS/EN ISO 12572 [63]. However, if studying the last ﬁve
measurements more carefully, the diﬀerence in mass loss between the ﬁrst and the last is approx.
0.11 g, whereas the average diﬀerence between each of the ﬁve measurements is only 0.03 g (cf.
Appendix H ). Furthermore, if looking at the single mass loss at each weighing, the mass loss
decreases from measurement to measurement. This shows, that the moisture transport was not
completely constant, but due to the time limitations, the experiment had to be stopped. A more
steady moisture transport could have been obtained if the experiment had been continued.
Figure 34 shows the initial mass of the assembled cup. Since both the mass of the cups and
the amount of salt solution variate from specimen to specimen (cf. Appendix H ), this ﬁgure
is not a measure of the diﬀerence in densities of the specimens. The density of each specimen
was calculated based on an initial measurement of dimension and mass. The approximated
densities of the mortar specimens are provided in Appendix H. The densities of the discs vary
from 2190-2290 kg/m3, but no pattern between chloride or non-chloride exposed specimens nor
OPC and FA23 specimens were found.
The water vapor ﬂow rate is calculated from the average mass loss of the ﬁve last measurements
as explained in Section 5.8, with the reduction from masked edges. The calculated water vapor
ﬂow rates are shown in Appendix H where it can be seen that the and the two diﬀerent exper-
iments show the same tendency. The average of the two tests is therefore shown in Figure 35.
The chloride exposed specimens have a higher ﬂow rate and ﬂy ash containing specimens have
a lower ﬂow rate than OPC specimens.
Figure 35: Water vapor ﬂow rate [ ·10−7kg/m2s].
The reduced water ﬂow rate of FA23 specimens implies that the pore structure is diﬀerent from
that of the OPC specimens. The reduced moisture transport means that the permeability of
the FA23 specimens is less pronounced than for OPC specimens. As outlined in Section 2.6, FA
blends are known to increase the tortuosity and decrease the connectivity of the pores, which
will inhibit the moisture transport through the pores. This theory is supported by the ﬁndings
of this experiment. Since smaller and more tortuous pores will impede the moisture content, the
results shown in Figure 35 implies that the FA23 specimen has more tortuous or fewer pores.
As also shown in Figure 35, the moisture transport is enlarged by chloride exposure. However,
the enlargement does not seem to be more pronounced for FA23, so according to this study, the
chloride exposure is not more detrimental for the moisture transport for FA blended specimens
than for regular OPC specimens. The ﬁndings show evidence of a more permeable structure
due to chloride ingress which could be due to reduced solid material and bigger pores.
52
==PAGE:62==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6.7
Chemical Changes during Chloride Ingress
The diﬀerence between chloride exposed FA blends and OPC specimens are investigated chem-
ically through XRF, XRD, and TGA. The ﬁndings from the XRF implies that slightly less
chloride is bound in FA blends. This ﬁnding is supported by XRD and TGA, which estimate
more Friedel’s salt in OPC samples. It is important to notice that decreasing amounts of Friedel’s
salt does not necessarily means less chloride binding since part of the Cl– binding happens in
the C-S-H gel [6]. The results from XRF is rather questionable and XRD and TGA do not
show all Cl– binding products. Hence, the total diﬀerence in chloride binding in FA and OPC
specimens is not found in this study.
Results from XRD and TGA both show that portlandite and ettringite decrease with increas-
ing FA content. This is expected because both phases are formed from the clinker minerals.
With decreasing cement content due to the substitution of ﬂy ash, these reaction products will
correspondingly decrease. Estimation of portlandite from XRD and TGA show similar trends
as shown in Figure 36b. XRD estimates slightly more portlandite than TGA but it is likely
that TGA underestimates due to the decomposition of C-S-H. Concerning chloride ingress, both
XRD and TGA show that portlandite decrease even more for both OPC and FA specimens. The
ettringite peak increases after chloride exposure for all specimens. Results from TGA further-
more show that the amount of ettringite in FA35 increases more after chloride exposure than
for OPC and FA23 (cf. Figure 27). The peak of ettringite in the thermogravimetric analysis is
however not only a measure of ettringite and the observation was not supported by results from
x-ray diﬀraction. This indicates that the larger release of water around 100 °C for FA35(II) is
more likely attributed to changed amounts of C-S-H and monocarbonate.
(a) Calcite
(b) Portlandite
(c) Friedel’s salt
Figure 36: Comparison of TGA and XRD results for selected compounds.
The results from the thermogravimetric analysis in Table 16 shows that calcite levels after
chloride exposure increase signiﬁcantly with 98.3, 51.1, and 160% for OPC, FA23 and FA35,
respectively. However, the calcite levels from TGA are not in agreement with the XRD ﬁndings
as shown in Figure 36a. The diﬀerence from the 1:1 trend is illustrated in Figure 36a. The ﬁgure
shows that the TGA-detected calcite content is generally higher than the content estimated from
XRD. In the XRD analysis, only FA23 samples have increasing calcite content due to chloride
exposure. The reason why TGA shows higher levels of calcite could be explained by the presence
of amorphous calcite. Amorphous compounds are non-crystalline and would not be detected by
53
==PAGE:63==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
XRD but TGA can detect them. If more amorphous calcite is generally present after chloride
exposure, this could likewise explain why all samples have an increasing amorphicity after chlo-
ride exposure (cf. Figure 23). The carbonate ion could also react to form hemicarbonate. This
would explain why the content of hemicarbonate increases after chloride exposure as shown in
Figure 23, but this reaction is not supported by the literature.
Figure 27 shows a peak in the range of 800-1000 °C. This peak is related to the release of carbon
and not water because of the high temperature. The exact reason for this peak is not known,
but it is possible that it belongs to binding products that come from carbonate ions. Another
suggestion for this peak is a simple combustion process, even though the protective nitrogen
ﬂow should reduce the risk by removing the oxygen. Studies have shown that unburnt coal
from ﬂy ash burns at these temperatures and release CO2. Even with the lack of oxygen, it
is still possible because the high temperature might cause other compounds to release oxygen
[53]. However, the exact reason for the release of carbon in this peak is not established during
the experiments and should be investigated further. The XRD did not conﬁrm the presence of
graphite (i.e. main crystalline compound of coal) but it could be present in smaller amounts.
The quantity of AFm phases like monosulfate and monocarbonate are challenging to measure due
to their amorphous nature but play an important role regarding chloride ingress as described in
the theory (cf. Section 2). The ﬁrst hypothesis of present study especially concerns the capability
of monocarbonate to form Friedel’s salt as it can be observed in Eq. (11). Results from the XRD
on Figure 23 reveals that the amount of monocarbonate decreases due to chloride exposure. This
trend is more noticeable for the OPC references compared to FA blended samples. Nevertheless,
quantifying how much of the produced Friedel’s salt that comes from monocarbonate is diﬃcult
because XRD only detects the crystalline part of monocarbonate. Figure 36c compare Friedel’s
salt quantiﬁcation’s from thermogravimetric analysis and XRD. The results of the amount of
Fridel’s salt determined from the two methods show a good correlation, although TGA estimates
slightly less FS than XRD. The diﬀerence could be attributed to uncertainties in the assumption
that FS can be quantiﬁed from TGA solely on the dehydration of the main water layer. Both
methods conﬁrm that less Friedel’s salt is formed in FA blends.
The results from TGA (cf.
Figure 27 and 28a) shows that the amount of monocarbonate
decreases due to chloride exposure. However, it should be noted that the monocarbonate peak
is situated in a temperature range, where other compounds decompose too. Henceforth, the
quantiﬁcation by TGA can only be accomplished based on visual examination and no direct
comparison to the results obtained from XRD can be made (like the ones shown in Figure 36).
Based on presented observations for monocarbonate from TGA and XRD, there is evidence
that the reaction in Eq. (11) occur since the amount of monocarbonate decreased after chloride
exposure. This does conform to the ﬁnding by Shi et al. (2017) [45]. The reaction will release
a carbonate ion that might react with compounds like calcium to form calcite (cf. Eq. (35)).
CO3
2−+ Ca2+ →CaCO3
(35)
Ions that are released from Eq. (35), impose a change to the paste pore solution that is of
interest regarding the accelerated chloride migration test, NT BUILD 492 [48]. Ion compounds
move because of the electric ﬁeld and it is unlikely that they will migrate with the same ve-
locity. In chemistry, this phenomenon is called electrophoresis. However, the phenomenon of
electrophoresis has not been studied in this thesis but should be studied further. If the reaction
shown in Eq. (11) does occur and the carbonate is more easily transported, they might migrate
through the specimen into the anolyte solution and will therefore not be detectable in the paste
sample. In that case, the migration test will not imitate natural conditions and the ﬁnding might
not embody naturally occurring events. This migration is furthermore likely to be diﬀerent in
54
==PAGE:64==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
OPC and FA blends because of the microstructure. The sorption isotherms in Figure 32 and
the cup test results on Figure 35 explain this subject and it can be seen that the transport
properties are somehow diﬀerent. This means that released ions are transported in diﬀerent
ways and shows the importance of the pore systems tortuosity and connectivity.
The above mentioned ﬁndings are less clear when observing the tendencies regarding the amount
of ﬂy ash substitution. It can be concluded that if monocarbonate reacts to form Friedel’s salt,
this reaction appears to be less pronounced for FA blends. Since less monocarbonate is present
in FA blends initially, the reaction would be more limited. However, observing XRD results on
Figure 23 shows that FA23 have higher levels of monocarbonate compared to the reference OPC.
The results can however be disputed because of XRDs diﬃculties to quantify AFm phases.
This dissertation aims to answer two central questions regarding diﬀerent alterations from chlo-
ride ingress in OPC and FA blends. The ﬁrst hypothesis relates to the chemical processes, which
have been discussed in this section. The following hypothesis was proposed.
• When cement paste is exposed to chlorides, free chlorides reacts with mono-
carbonate and form Friedel’s salt, whereby carbonate ions are released. The
carbonate ions take part in new reactions. It is the reaction of the carbonate
ions that are diﬀerent, depending on if ﬂy ash is present in substantial amounts.
Concerning the ﬁrst hypothesis, there is evidence of the reaction seen in Eq.
(11), but the
reaction appears less pronounced for FA blends. Henceforth, limestone ﬁller added to cement
does inﬂuence the properties regarding chloride ingress in cement paste and FA blends. The
ﬁnding emphasizes the importance of considering ﬂy ash pastes as a ternary compound system
that consists of cement, limestone ﬁller, and ﬂy ash. The reaction releases a carbonate but the
whereabouts of this ion is not clear based on the experimental program. Some evidence can be
found for diﬀerent amounts of products being formed in OPC compared to FA blends. However,
the extent to which the reaction (cf. Eq. (11)) occur remains to be shown.
6.8
How does Chloride Ingress alter the Microstructure?
The chloride exposed specimens in this study were mainly paste specimens. For the cup test,
also mortar specimens were chloride exposed, but the current during the migration test could
not be logged continuously.
The current of FA blends and OPC did not undergo the same
change during chloride exposure. For the paste specimens the resistance increased noticeably
more for OPC than for FA23 and FA35 (cf. Figure 20). It was also seen that the resistance of
FA blends decreased a bit at the beginning of the chloride migration test. For mortar specimens,
the resistance of OPC increased whereas the resistance of FA23 decreased (cf. Table 17).
Olsen (2020) [9] made a similar study on concrete specimens. In his mix design, he took the
correction factor for ﬂy ash substitution into account, which means that results from these FA
specimens are not directly comparable with the results for FA specimens in the current study.
However, if calculating w/b without any correction factors for his FA20 specimens, they have the
same w/b as the FA23 specimens in the present study. Olsen found increasing initial resistance
with increasing ﬂy ash content. For both paste and mortar specimens in this study, the initial
resistance of FA blends was also higher than that of OPC. This shows that there already before
chloride exposure is a diﬀerence between whether the specimens contain ﬂy ash or not.
Olsen (2020) [9] also found that the ﬁnal resistance of FA specimens is lower than the initial.
This complies with the ﬁndings of our study done for mortar specimens. The reason for the
diﬀerent trends of ∆R for FA paste and mortar specimens is attributed to the diﬀerence between
paste and mortar/concrete specimens and the mixing procedure. The paste specimens in the
55
==PAGE:65==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
present study are prepared with high shear mixing and the mortar specimens are prepared with
a mixing procedure similar to DS/EN 196-1 [72]. When Tang et al. [77] suggested the chloride
migration test in 1995, they found that the pore structure of paste specimens is ﬁner than for
concrete, especially for specimens with high w/c. The high shear mixing and ﬁner pore structure
of paste specimens in combination with the diﬀerent densities in the ITZ are likely to cause the
diﬀerent change in resistance between FA paste and mortar specimens.
Regarding the change of Dnssm for FA blended paste, the chloride migrations test showed that
increasing FA content increased the non-steady-state migration coeﬃcient. From the observed
higher resistance of FA blends, it was expected that this would have been the other way around.
The literature also generally observe the opposite tendency than what is observed for the paste
specimens [9, 25]. Jain et al. (2009) [25] used respectively 10 and 20 % class F ﬂy ash replace-
ment, and found that for 28 days concrete specimens the Dnssm decreased from approx. 10 m2/s
for OPC specimens to approx. 7 m2/s with 20 % ﬂy ash replacement [25]. The calculated Dnssm
on mortar specimens did not show any clear tendency between FA and OPC after chloride expo-
sure. The results of the chloride migrations test on paste specimens was a rather contradictory
observation which imposes the question of, whether the diﬀerent ion velocity of Cl– and CO3
2–
would inﬂuence the measured current. If this is the case, this could shed light on why the Dnssm
and the measured resistance show conﬂicting results.
Baert et al. (2008) [47] did however also ﬁnd increasing Dnssm with increasing ﬂy ash substitu-
tion for 1 month old specimens. In their study, concrete specimens of OPC and specimens with
substitution of low calcium ﬂy ash were compared in the NT BUILD 492 migration test. The
study expected that the FA blends would have a reduction of pore sizes, which would lead to
less permeable paste. The study also points out that concrete with ﬂy ash would be more vul-
nerable to carbonation, which was also conﬁrmed by the RILEM TC report by Greve-Dierfeld
et al. (2020) [78]. This will increase the porosity of the specimens and thus inﬂuencing the
structures resistance on chloride ingress [47]. In their study, the one month old FA35 has a
Dnssm of approx. 9.5 ·10−12m2/s and OPC has Dnssm of approx. 8 ·10−12m2/s. However, this
trend is reversed for specimens cured for 12 month. Here, Dnssm for FA35 and OPC are approx.
2 ·10−12m2/s and 6 ·10−12m2/s respectively. This ﬁnding shows that the pore reﬁnement from
FA substitution might not be as pronounced for 1 month old specimens, which could explain
why the migration coeﬃcients for FA blends in the present study are higher than OPC.
Another explanation to the conﬂicting increased resistance but higher Dnssm value of FA blends
could be found from the ﬁndings in the study by Yuan et al. (2008) [79]. In this study, it is
shown that even a small alteration of the pH will lower the concentration of chlorides in the
color changed ingress zone. Due to the lowered pH in FA blends, it is possible that the measured
ingress zones in FA blends cannot be compared directly with the ingress depths of OPC, since the
chloride concentration where the color change occurs is not the same for the diﬀerent specimens.
In other words, if measuring the penetration depth of FA blends and OPC at the same chloride
concentration, the chloride penetration depth of FA blends actually might be lower. This would
cause the actual Dnssm to be lower as well. The chloride migration test performed in this study
did however overall show evidence that the microstructure of both hardened paste and mortar
was altered diﬀerently depending on if the specimens contain ﬂy ash or not.
The pore structure and the transport properties were examined through sorption isotherms and
a cup test. The results from the sorption isotherms show that the total porosity of FA blends
was slightly higher than of OPC. Linderoth (2020) [18] did a similar study of the eﬀect of ﬂy
ash replacement on the pore structure with desorption isotherms. His study shows that for 28
days old specimens, the ﬂy ash blends had more pore volume in the range of RH=70-95 % and
less in the range of RH=11-70 %. The same tendency is somewhat seen on Figure 31 and 32.
FA35(I) and FA23(I) show less pore volume in the range of RH=11-33 % and more volume in
56
==PAGE:66==
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the range of RH=33-94 %, compared to OPC(I). Linderoth points to the pozzolan reaction as
pore reﬁning and ascribes it to the fact that larger Ca(OH)2 crystals are replaced with ﬁne
C-S-H gel. Based on Figure 31 it would be expected that the more porous microstructure of FA
samples would lead to higher moisture transport which was further studied by a cup test.
The results from the cup test did however show that the water vapor ﬂow rate was lower for FA
blends (cf. Figure 35). An interesting result which might also support the increased electrical
resistance of FA blends found for both paste and mortar samples by NT BUILD 492. Linderoth
(2020) [18] did a similar study of FA containing specimens, and observed that his FA blends
also have a reduced water vapor ﬂow.
In his study, the reduction was however much more
pronounced than in this study. The moisture transport of his FA15 and FA35 at 20 °C was
reduced from 4 m2/s for OPC to 1.5 and 0.8 m2/s, respectively. Linderoth also attributed the
decreased moisture transport to the changed tortuosity in FA blends. FA reacts slower than
OPC, and FA thus forms its products in the available spaces after the OPC reaction, causing a
more reﬁned structure by ﬁlling up the largest pores [18]. The overall trend for the FA blend
could thus be that the microstructure is less permeable before chloride exposure.
The water vapor ﬂow rate increases 31.0 % for OPC specimens and 26.5 % for FA23 specimens
due to chloride exposure. This shows that the moisture transport in FA blends will be less
aﬀected by chloride ingress than OPC. From the sorption isotherms presented in Figure 31 the
reason for this is however not completely clear. If looking at the total porosity after chloride
exposure the volume of pores in the OPC specimen is decreased and increased for FA blends.
From this ﬁnding, one would expect that the moisture transport was reduced for chloride exposed
OPC specimens and increased for chloride exposed FA specimens, which is not the case. If
looking at the reﬁnement of pores both OPC and FA blends get a larger amount of pores in the
range of RH 11-22 % and less in the range of RH 33-75 %. It is therefore more likely that the
changed impact on chloride ingress for OPC and FA blends is not due to the pore reﬁnement,
but rather because of more torturous pores in FA blends. This can be related to the second
hypothesis that is formulated this way.
• Chloride ingress will alter the microstructure of hardened paste diﬀerently, de-
pending on whether the specimens contain ﬂy ash or not.
Overall, the sorption isotherms indicate that FA blends would have a more permeable structure,
but the cup test did not support this ﬁnding. This shows that some other diﬀerence between
chloride exposed FA blends and OPC specimens is likely the reason. This diﬀerence could be
found in the tortuosity and connectivity in the pores of FA blends.
57
==PAGE:67==
7
Conclusion
“I alone cannot change the world, but I can cast a
stone across the water to create many ripples.”
– Mother Teresa
T
he experimental work comprehend thermogravimetric analysis, X-ray diﬀraction, X-ray
ﬂuorescence, sorption isotherms and a cup test to examine specimens exposure to chlorides
by NT Build 492 [48]. Specimens included a reference OPC and specimens with 23% and 35% of
the binder substituted with ﬂy ash. The test methods are found to provide useful insights on the
microstructure and pore structure and can be recommended for future research within this ﬁeld.
A future in which supplementary cementitious materials (SCM) appears increasingly attractive
to reduce the anthropogenic CO2-emission. Even though, the consumption of ﬂy ash as SCM is
decreasing, understanding its properties is crucial in order to come up with better alternatives
for SCMs in the future. However, the project also points to diﬃculties in quantifying phases with
overlapping peaks in thermogravimetric analysis and to X-ray diﬀraction’s limitations regarding
correct estimation of amorphous AFm phases. Based on the test methods it can be concluded
that the used methods give an overall picture of the processes in the specimens but more reﬁned
analyses are needed.
Thermogravimetric analysis and X-ray diﬀraction show evidence of monocarbonate reacting
with chloride ions to form Friedel’s salt. This reaction will release a carbonate ion into the
pore solution. From the results of the TGA measurements, the amount of calcite increased
with respectively 98, 50, and 160% for OPC, FA23, and FA35 samples after chloride exposure.
Thus, indicating that the released carbonate ion reacts to form calcite. This ﬁnding was not
supported by the XRD results, but this increased phase in the TGA measurement is a carbonate
phase, and the authors attribute the diﬀerence between XRD and TGA to XRDs inability to
detect amorphous phases and to the uncertainties about the Rietveld reﬁnement methodology.
However, more research is needed to estimate to which extend monocarbonate reacts and if the
released ion reacts diﬀerently in ﬂy ash blends. TGA and XRD furthermore show that the main
crystalline chloride binding product is Friedel’s salt. OPC specimens form more Friedel’s salt
than FA specimens, and the level of Friedel’s salt decreases with increasing ﬂy ash substitution.
However, it can not be concluded based on this study that ﬂy ash bind fewer chloride ions. It
can only be concluded that it does not happen as Friedel’s salt.
Based on the sorption isotherms and the results from the cup test, it can be concluded that
chloride ingress reﬁnes the pore structure and enhance transport capabilities. With chloride
exposure the water vapor ﬂow rate increases 31.0 % for OPC specimens and 26.5 % for FA23
specimens. This show that the moisture transport in FA blends will be less aﬀected by chloride
ingress than OPC for specimens cured for 28 days. Sorption isotherms showed that the pore
structure detected in the range of 33-53 % is reﬁned since the volume of pores in the RH range
decreased and more volume at RH 11-33 % was detected after chloride exposure. This reﬁne-
ment process was slightly more pronounced for FA samples, but no clear relationship between
increasing ﬂy ash content and the pore reﬁnement was established. The total volume of pores
detected from the dynamic vapor sorption was lower for OPC samples than for samples with ﬂy
ash substitution, but the moisture transport of OPC specimens was higher than of specimens
with ﬂy ash substitution. The authors therefore point to the connectivity and tortuosity of the
pores as being more important for the transport properties.
58
==PAGE:68==
8
Further Research
“Many of life’s failures are people who did not realize
how close they were to success when they gave up.”
– Thomas A. Edison
T
he topic of ﬂy ash substitution and the microstructural changes in the concrete when added
is not fully understood. The slow nature of the pozzolan reaction is something that is not
investigated by this study since all specimens were tested after 28 days. It would be interesting
to do the experimental work of this thesis on the same OPC and FA specimens cured for 6 month
and 1 year. This might show more interesting ﬁndings in the change of the solid products and
microstructure depending on the ﬂy ash content.
As outlined in the discussion of the migration experiment, the non-steady-state migration coeﬃ-
cient and the electrical resistance did not match very well in this study. The cause of this would
be relevant to investigate further. Whether it is the lowered pH in the FA specimens causing
a larger measured penetration depth, the release of carbonate ions causing the resistance to
be higher for FA blends, or a third explanation should be investigated further. This could be
investigated by determining the amount of carbonate in the anolyte solution of NT Build 492 or
by measuring the actual chloride content at diﬀerent penetration depths after exposure. For an
investigation of the phenomenon of electrophoresis, the authors suggest that this could be done
as a mixed study between civil engineering and chemical engineering. A study on the diﬀerence
between paste and mortar/concrete specimens could also be of interest.
Based on the XRF results shown in Section 6.2, it is suggested that XRF of pastes with ﬂy ash
is prone to further research. The authors did not ﬁnd the expected amount of compounds in
the anhydrous cement and ﬂy ash and thus do not trust the results obtained. A study on how
to determine the composition of paste samples by use of the XRF available at the Technical
University of Denmark is hence needed.
The volume of diﬀerent pore sizes is investigated through sorption isotherms. Initially, it was
anticipated that the pore structure should be examined from Mercury Intrusion Porosimetry
(MIP), but due to technical issues and the Corona situation, this part of the study was not
performed. An investigation of the pore structure by a MIP test would be a great supplement
to the sorption isotherms.
As suggested by Wolter (2020) [10] it would also be of great interest to investigate the binding
of chlorides more carefully in OPC and FA blends. As previously mentioned only binding of
chlorides as Friedel’s salt is investigated in this study. However, the binding of chlorides in the
amorphous C-S-H and/or other binding products would be a relevant topic of further research.
59
==PAGE:69==
References
[1] The General Assembly of the United Nations, Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 25th September 2015. the United Nations, 2015. New York.
[2] J. Skibsted and R. Snellings, “Reactivity of supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs)
in cement blends,” Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 124, p. 105799, 2019.
[3] J. G. Olivier, G. Janssens-Maenhout, M. Muntean, and J. A. Peters, “Trends in global
CO2 emissions,” tech. rep., Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency Institute for
Environment and Sustainability of the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre, The
Hague, Netherlands, 2014.
[4] P. K. Mehta and P. J. Monteiro, Concrete: Microstructure, Properties, and Materials. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2014.
[5] M. Thomas, “Optimizing the use of ﬂy ash in concrete,” tech. rep., University of New
Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada, 2007.
[6] C. Qiao, P. Suraneni, T. N. Ying, A. Choudhary, and J. Weiss, “Chloride binding of ce-
ment paste with ﬂy ash exposed to CaCl2 solutions at 5 and 23°C,” Cement and Concrete
Composites, vol. 97, pp. 43–53, 2019.
[7] L. Bertolini, “Steel corrosion and service life of reinforced concrete structures,” Structure
and Infrastructure Engineering, vol. 4, pp. 123–137, 2008.
[8] M. T. Hasholt, K. U. Christensen, and C. Pade, “Frost resistance of concrete with high
contents of ﬂy ash - a study on how hollow ﬂy ash particles distort the air void analysis,”
Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 119, pp. 102–122, 2019.
[9] K. L. Olsen, “Frost resistance of concrete with supplementary cementitious materials
(SCM),” Master’s thesis, Dept. Civil Eng., Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyn-
gby, Denmark, 2020.
[10] S. Wolter,
“Interaction between concrete and freezing medium during accelerated
freeze/thaw testing,” Master’s thesis, Dept. Civil Eng., Technical University of Denmark,
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, 2020.
[11] A. M. Neville, Properties of Concrete. Harlow: Pearson Education, 2011.
[12] N. Winter, Clinker: Cement Chemistry Notation. Understanding Cement, 2005. [Online]
https://www.understanding-cement.com/notation.html [Accessed Dec. 11 2020].
[13] D. Marchon and R. J. Flatt, “Mechanisms of Cement Hydration,” in Science and Technology
of Concrete Admixture (D. Marchon, ed.), ch. 8, pp. 129–146, Zürich: Elsevier, 2016.
[14] Aalborg Portland, Cement og Beton: Håndbogen om Cement, Beton og Mørtel, 21 ed., 1
2014. [Danish].
[15] Aalborg Portland, Ydeevnedeklaration, Nr. 9806/04-02-DoP. Aalborg, Dec. 16, 2017 [Dan-
ish].
[16] H. F. Taylor, Cement Chemistry. London: Academic Press, 1990.
[17] AalborgPortland, Betonhåndbogen. Aalborg: Dansk Betonforening, 2013. [Danish].
60
==PAGE:70==
[18] O. Linderoth, Hydration, Pore Structure, and Related Moisture properties of ﬂy ash blended
cement-based materials. PhD thesis, University of Lund, Lund, Sweden, 2020.
[19] K. L. Scrivener and A. Nonat, “Hydration of cementitious materials, present and future,”
Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 41, pp. 651–665, 2011.
[20] P. C. Hewlett and M. Liska, Lea’s Chemistry of Cement and Concrete. Oxford: Elsevier,
2019.
[21] K. Sideris, H. Justnes, M. Soutsos, and T. Sui, “Fly ash,” in Properties of Fresh and
Hardened Concrete Containing Supplementary Cementitious Materials (E. Gruyaert, ed.),
ch. 2, pp. 55–98, Heidelberg: Springer, 2018.
[22] S. Tripathy, “Development of a novel hybrid polymer composite with coir dust and ﬂy ash
reinforcements and investigation of its dielectric nature,” tech. rep., Delhi Public School,
Odisha, India, 2012.
[23] Danish Standards Association, DS/EN 450: Fly ash for concrete - Pat 1: Deﬁnition,
speciﬁcations and conformity criteria, 2019.
[24] ASTM International, ASTM C618-19: Standard Speciﬁcation for Coal Fly Ash and Raw
or Calcined Natural Pozzolan for Use in Concrete, 2019.
[25] J. A. Jain and N. Neithalath, “Chloride transport in ﬂy ash and glass powder modiﬁed
concretes – inﬂuence of test methods on microstructure,” Cement and Concrete Composites,
vol. 32, pp. 148–156, 2010.
[26] Y. M. Zhang, W. Sun, and H. D. Yan, “Hydration of high-volume ﬂy ash cement pastes,”
Cement and concrete composites, vol. 22, pp. 445–452, 2000.
[27] D. Manmoham and P. K. Mehta, “Inﬂuence pore size pastes of pozzolanic, slag, and chemical
admixtures on distribution and permeability of hardened cement pastes,” ASTM Interna-
tional, pp. 63–67, 1981.
[28] ASTM International, ASTM c1202-19: Standard Test Method for Electrical Indication of
Concrete’s Ability to Resist Chloride Ion Penetration, 2019.
[29] A. Bazzoni, Study of early hydration mechanisms of cement by means of electron microscopy.
PhD thesis, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Schweiz, 2014.
[30] K. L. Scrivener, P. Juilland, and P. J. Monteiro, “Advances in understanding hydration of
portland cement,” Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 78, pp. 38–56, 2015.
[31] K. L. Scrivener, A. Ouzia, P. Juilland, and A. K. Mohamed, “Advances in understanding
cement hydration mechanisms,” Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 124, p. 105823, 2019.
[32] S. Diamond, “The microstructure of cement paste and concrete - visual primer.,” Cement
and Concrete Composites, vol. 26, pp. 919–933, 2004.
[33] I. Galan, F. Glasser, C. Andrade, and D. B. Herrero, “Dissolution of portlandite.” Confer-
ence: International Congress on the Chemistry of Cement, 2011.
[34] B. Lagerblad, “Svensk kärnbränslehantering ab leaching performance of concrete based on
studies of samples from old concrete constructions,” tech. rep., Swedish Nuclear Fuel, Solna,
Sweden, 2001.
[35] T. Matschei, B. Lothenbach, and F. P. Glasser, “The AFm phase in portland cement,”
Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 37, pp. 118–130, 2007.
61
==PAGE:71==
[36] P. Feng, C. Miao, and J. W. Bullard, “Factors inﬂuencing the stability of AFm and AFt
in the Ca-Al-S-O-H system at 25° c,” Journal of the American Ceramic Society, vol. 99,
pp. 1031–1041, 2016.
[37] F. Bellmann, J. Majzlan, K. D. Grevel, E. Dachs, and H. M. Ludwig, “Analysis of thermody-
namic data of calcium aluminate monocarbonate hydrate,” Cement and Concrete Research,
vol. 116, pp. 89–94, 2019.
[38] B. Lothenbach, G. L. Saout, E. Gallucci, and K. Scrivener, “Inﬂuence of limestone on the
hydration of portland cements,” Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 38, pp. 848–860, 2008.
[39] O. Linderoth, P. Johansen, and L. Wadso, “Development of pore structure, moisture sorp-
tion and transport properties in ﬂy ash blended cement-based materials.,” Construction
and building materials, vol. 261, 2020.
[40] P. A. Claisse, The transport properties of concrete and the equations that describe them.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2014.
[41] M. Saeidpour and L. Wadso, “Moisture diﬀusion coeﬃcients of mortar in absorption and
desorption.,” Cement and concrete research, vol. 83, pp. 179–187, 2016.
[42] K. Yamato, A. Sasaki, T. Ito, and I. Yoshitake, “Resistance properties to chloride ingress
of standard-cured concrete made with an admixture incorporating rich SiO2 and Al2O3,”
International Journal of Concrete Structures and Materials, vol. 14, p. 16, 2020.
[43] L. Bertolini, B. Elsner, P. Pederferri, and R. P. Polder, “Transport properites in concrete,”
in Corrosion of Steel in Concrete: Prevention, Diagnosis, Repair (L. Bertolini, ed.), ch. 2,
Weinheim: Willey-vcn, 2004.
[44] A. Ipavec, T. V. aand R. Gabrovšek, and V. Kaucic, “Chloride binding into hydrated
blended cements: The inﬂuence of limestone and alkalinity,” Cement and Concrete Re-
search, vol. 48, pp. 74–85, 2013.
[45] Z. Shi et al., “Friedel’s salt proﬁles from thermogravimetric analysis and thermodynamic
modelling of portland cement-based mortars exposed to sodium chloride solution,” Cement
and Concrete Composites, vol. 78, pp. 73–83, 2017.
[46] M. D. Thomas, R. D. Hooton, A. Scott, and H. Zibara, “The eﬀect of supplementary ce-
mentitious materials on chloride binding in hardened cement paste,” Cement and Concrete
Research, vol. 42, pp. 1–7, 2011.
[47] G. Baert, E. Gruyaert, K. Audenaert, and N. D. Belie, eds., Chloride ingress in high-volume
ﬂy ash concrete, Magnel Laboratory for Concrete Research, Ghent University, Ghent, Bel-
gium, 2008.
[48] Nordtest, NT BUILD 492: Concrete; mortar and cement-based repair materials: Chloride
migration coeﬃcient from non-steady-state migration experiments, 1999.
[49] K. Stanish, R. Hooton, and M. Thomas, “Testing the chloride penetration resistance of
concrete: A literature review,” tech. rep., Dept. Civil Eng., University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada, 2001.
[50] L. Tang and L. O. Nilsson, “A discussion of the paper "calculation of chloride diﬀusivity
in concrete from migration experiments, in non-steady-state conditions" by,” Cement and
Concrete Research, vol. 25, pp. 1133–1137, 1995.
62
==PAGE:72==
[51] C. Andrade, M. A. Sanjun, A. Recuero, and O. Rio, “Calculation of chloride diﬀusivity in
concrete from migration experiments, in non steady-state conditions,” Cement and Concrete
Research, vol. 24, pp. 1214–1228, 1994.
[52] N. Otsuki, S. Nagataki, and K. Nakashita, “Evaluation of the AgNO3 solution spray method
for measurement of chloride penetration into hardened cementitious matrix materials,”
Construction and Building Materials, vol. 7, pp. 195–201, 1993.
[53] B. Lothenbach, P. Durdziński, and K. D. Weerdt, “Termogravimetric analysis,” in A Prac-
tical Guide to Microstructural Analysis of Cementitious Materials (K. Scrivener, ed.), ch. 5,
pp. 177–211, Boca Rato: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis, 2016.
[54] J. Zhang and G. W. Scherer, “Comparison of methods for arresting hydration of cement,”
Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 41, 2011.
[55] B. Lothenbach, F. Winnefeld, and A. shhöler, “Sample preparation,” in A Practical Guide to
Microstructural Analysis of Cementitious Materials (K. Scrivener, ed.), ch. 1, pp. 177–211,
Boca Rato: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis, 2016.
[56] J. M. Guthrie, “Overview of x-ray ﬂuorescence,” Archaeometry Laboratory, 2017. [online]
https://archaeometry.missouri.edu/xrf_overview.html [Accessed Nov. 22 2020].
[57] K. Scrivener, R. Snellings, and B. Lothenbach, A Practical Guide to Microstructural Anal-
ysis of Cementitious Materials; X-ray powder diﬀraction applied to cement. Boca Rato,
Florida: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis, 2016. Chapter 4, pp. 107-177.
[58] G. L. Gwenn, V. Kocaba, and K. L. Scrivener, “Application of the reitveld method to the
analysis of anhydrous cement,” Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 41, pp. 133–148, 2010.
[59] J. F. Lamond and J. H. Pielert, Signiﬁcance of tests and properties of Concrete and
Concrete-Making Materials. West Conshohocken: ASTM International, 2006.
[60] Danish Standards Association, DS/EN 196-2: Methods of testing cement – Part 2: Chem-
ical analysis of cement, 2013.
[61] O. Linderoth, Hydration, pore structure, and related moisture properties of ﬂy ash blended
cement-based materials. PhD thesis, University of Lund, Lund, Sweden, 2020. Paper IV.
[62] Danish Standards Association, DS/EN ISO 12571: Hygrothermal performance of building
materials and products - Determination of hygroscopic sorptions properties, 2013.
[63] Danish Standards Association, DS/EN ISO 12572: Hygrothermal performance of building
materials and products - Determination of water vapour transmission properties - Cup
method, 2016.
[64] ASTM International, ASTM E96-16: Standard Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission
of Materials, 1990.
[65] K. K. Hansen, Vanddampspermeabilitet for gipsplade. Technical University of Denmark,.
lecture handouts [Danish].
[66] Danish Standards Association, DS/EN 197-1: Cement - Part 1: Composition, speciﬁcations
and conformity criteria for common cements, 2012.
[67] ASTM International, ASTM C1738/C1738M-19: Standard Practice for High-Shear Mixing
of Hydraulic Cement Pastes, 2019.
63
==PAGE:73==
[68] Dow Corning, Product Information: SILASTIC 9161 RTV Silicone Elastomer, 1 ed. Ref.
no. 01-1125A-01.
[69] K. Wirth, M. College, and A. Barth, Indiana University Purdue University, Indianapolis.
Geochemical Instrumentation and Analysis. [Online] web: https://serc.carleton.edu/
research_education/geochemsheets/techniques/XRF.html [Accessed: otk. 22 2020].
[70] N. Doebelin, Lesson 2: Diﬀractometers and Phase Identiﬁcation. RMS Foundation, Bet-
tlach, Switzerland, 2013. [Online] https://www.profex-xrd.org/?page_id=68 [Accessed
Sep. 13 2020].
[71] NETZSCH,
STA
449
F3
Jupiter:
Technical
Speciﬁcations.
[Online]
https://www.netzsch-thermal-analysis.com/en/products-solutions/
simultaneous-thermogravimetry-differential-scanning-calorimetry/
sta-449-f3-jupiter/ [Accessed Nov. 05 2020].
[72] Danish Standards Association, DS/EN 196-1: Methods of testing cement – Part 1: Deter-
mination of strength, 2016.
[73] G. W. Gray, “Electrophoresis,” Scientiﬁc American, vol. 185, pp. 45–53, 1951.
[74] V. Magendira, “Electrophoresis,” tech. rep., Islamiah College, Vaniyambadi, India, 2016.
[75] N. Day and P. Murray-Rust, Crystallography Open Database. University of Cambridge and
the Crystallography Open Database, 2020. [Online] http://www.crystallography.net/
cod/index.php [Accessed Dec. 12 2020].
[76] D. Han and R. D. Ferron, “Eﬀect of mixing method on microstructure and rheology of
cement paste,” Construction and Building Materials, vol. 93, pp. 278–288, 2015.
[77] L. Tang and L. O. Nilsson, “A new approach to the determination of pore distribution by
penetrating chlorides into concrete,” Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 25, pp. 695–701,
1995.
[78] S. von Greve-Dierfeld et al., “Understanding the carbonation of concrete with supplemen-
tary cementitious materials: a critical review by RILEM TC 281-CCC,” Materials and
Structures, vol. 53, 2020.
[79] Q. Yuan, C. Shi, F. He, G. D. Schutter, K. Audenaert, and K. Zheng, “Eﬀect of hydroxyl
ions on chloride penetration depth measurement using the colorimetric method,” Cement
and Concrete Research, vol. 38, pp. 1177–1180, 2008.
64
==PAGE:74==
Appendices
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A1
Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A4
Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A18
Appendix D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A23
Appendix E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A30
Appendix F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A41
Appendix G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A45
Appendix H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A56
65
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
Documentation of Mixing and Casting of paste samples
This appendix contains additional information on the used equipment for the
mixing and casting. A non-traditional European casting procedure was cho-
sen for the casting of the paste samples to get a more liquid homogeneous
paste.
The mixing procedure follows ASTM C1738/C1738M-19 for high
shear mixing of hydraulic cement paste. However, this procedure requires
a blender with a rotation speed of respectively 4000 rpm and 10 000 rpm.
The blender used in this study has a "no-load" rotation speed of respec-
tively 15 800 rpm and 22 000 rpm. These values were obtained through mail
correspondence with Waring Commercial Lab Products.
This appendix also contains pictures taken at the actual mixing and casting
of the paste samples showing the mixing procedure illustrative. The tem-
peratures of the room and mixing water when casting paste samples are also
provided in this appendix.
Content
Waring Commercial, 8011S - Lab blender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A2
Mixing and casting procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A2
Overview of casting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A3
Demoulding and sealing in bags. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A3
A1
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX A
Waring Commercial, 8011S - Lab blender
Figure 37: Waring Commercial, 8011S - Lab blender; Used for mixing paste samples
Table 18: Segment of the LAB CATALOG PRODUCT INFORMATION obtained from mail corre-
spondence with Operations Director Tom Tremblay for Waring Commercial Lab Products.
Model Number
Voltage [V]
Speed (low) [rpm]
Speed (High) [rpm]
Approvals
8011S
220-240
15 800
22 000
RoHS
Mixing and casting procedure
(a) Equipment
(b) Mixing
(c) Casting
Figure 38: Mixing and casting of paste specimens
A2
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Overview of casting
The identiﬁcation of the sample is shown in Table 19 together with the dates of casting. Two
of each mixtures (OPC and FA23) were cast ﬁve times with one or two weeks in between. The
casting dates was chosen to analyze the samples in diﬀerent ways at the same curing age. One
of samples for each mixture were exclusively used to examine the chloride penetration depth
and the other one was used for further testing. Later on FA35 samples were cast with 6 days
in between. Table 19 additionally contains the temperatures of the room at casting and of the
mixing water.
Table 19: Overview of dates and temperatures
OPC_1
FA23_1
OPC_2
FA23_2
OPC_3
FA23_3
OPC_5
FA23_5
OPC_6
FA23_6
FA35_9
FA35_10
Date of Casting
24-08-20
31-08-20
07-09-20
21-09-20
28-09-20
20-10-20
26-10-20
Time of Casting
7:50
8:15
7:55
8:25
7:50
8:10
7:50
8:10
8:00
8:20
10:15
8:15
Date of
10-09-20
17-09-20
24-09-20
08-10-20
15-09-20
06-11-20
12-11-20
de-moulding
Temperature
Room [◦C]
22
23
22
23
23
21
22
Mixing water [◦C]
22
22
22
22
22
22
23
22
22
22
20
21
De-moulding and sealing in bags
(a) De-moulding
(b) Device for sealing bags
(c) Sealed specimen
Figure 39: De-moulding and sealing of specimen
A3
==PAGE:78==
Appendix B
Chloride Migration test and penetration depth
This appendix contains additional information of the used equipment for the
chloride migration test. The saw used to cut the sample prior to migration
test is shown together with pictures at the actual cut specimen. Besides
the used equipment for the migration test this appendix also contains the
calculated ratio between the surface area of the specimens required in NT
Build 492, and the speciﬁc surface area used in present test. This ratio is
used to convert the initial current from NT Build 492 into suitable measures
for the present test performed in this study. Furthermore, the procedure for
splitting of the sample after end migration test is also shown with pictures.
Additionally, the measurements of sample size, current and voltage measure-
ments before and after the migration test is also attached in this appendix.
Content
Pictures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A5
Initial current NT Build conversion; Paste sample . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A6
Pictures; Splitting the sample. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A6
Chloride Penetration Depth. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A7
Current for FA23_5B(II) specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .A10
Calculation of migration coeﬃcients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .A10
1st cast specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .A11
2nd cast specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A12
3rd cast specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A13
5th cast specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A14
6th cast specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A15
9th cast specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A16
10th cast specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A17
A4
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Sawing of the specimen
(a) Saw; Struers Discotom-65
(b) Sample sawed into items
Figure 40: Saw used for cutting and sample cut into items.
Vacuum pump and desiccator
(a) Vacuum pump
(b) Vacuum desiccator
(c) Valve
Figure 41: Vacuum desiccator and pump
Chloride migration test set-up
(a) Piece II in sleeve
with anolyte solution
(b) Pipette to apply anolyte
solution (Ca(OH)2) on top
(c) Reservoirs with specimens attached
to current logging device and computer
Figure 42: Chloride Migration test
A5
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX B
Converting initial current from NT Build 492 into suitable measures
The values for the initial current stated in the standard NT 492 is converted into suitable
measures by calculation of the ratio between the surface area of the specimens required in the
standard, and the speciﬁc surface area used in present test. The Initial current provided in the
standard is the converted into the current used in present test by dividing the standard value
with the ratio calculated.
Table 20: Dimensions of test specimens from NT Build and present study
Diameter of specimens acc. NT BUILD 492
100 mm
Diameter of specimens in present study
22 mm
Surface area of specimens acc. NT BUILD 492
7854 mm2
Surface area of specimens in present study
380 mm2
Ratio
20.66
Splitting the sample
(a) Initial longitudinal cut
done with a saw
(b) The approx. 1 mm deep
cut after sawing
(c)
Splitting sample with
hammer and chisel
Figure 43: Splitting of the sample
A6
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Chloride Penetration Depth
Specimens with the index B was used to check the chloride penetration depth by spraying with
silver nitrate. The actual experiments was done on the specimens with index A. The penetration
depths of the B specimens is show and this is used as reasoning for how much of specimen A
could be used for experiments. After chopping of the estimated chunk of specimen that should
be penetrated with chlorides, the remaining piece of specimens A was then split to verify that
only chloride penetrated specimen was used.
Specimens; OPC_1A(II), OPC_1B(II), FA23_1A(II) and FA23_1B(II)
(a) Penetration depth of OPC_1B(II) and FA23_1B(II)
(b) Check
Figure 44: Chloride penetration depth of B-specimens and check on used A-specimens for experiments
Specimens; OPC_2A(II), OPC_2B(II), FA23_2A(II) and FA23_2B(II)
(a) Penetration depth of OPC_2B(II) and FA23_2B(II)
(b) Check
Figure 45: Chloride penetration depth of B-specimens and check on used A-specimens for experiments
A7
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX B
Specimens; OPC_3A(II), OPC_3B(II), FA23_3A(II) and FA23_3B(II)
(a) Penetration depth of OPC_3B(II) and FA23_3B(II)
(b) Check
Figure 46: Chloride penetration depth of B-specimens and check on used A-specimens for experiments
Specimens; OPC_5A(II), OPC_5B(II), FA23_5A(II) and FA23_5B(II)
(a) Penetration depth of OPC_5B(II) and FA23_5B(II)
(b) Check
Figure 47: Chloride penetration depth of B-specimens and check on used A-specimens for experiments
Specimens; OPC_6A(II), OPC_6B(II), FA23_6A(II) and FA23_6B(II)
(a) Penetration depth of OPC_6B(II) and FA23_6B(II)
(b) Check
Figure 48: Chloride penetration depth of B-specimens and check on used A-specimens for experiments
A8
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Specimens; FA35_9A(II) and FA35_9B(II)
(a) Penetration depth of FA35_9B(II) and FA35_9D(II)
(b) Check
Figure 49: Chloride penetration depth of B- and D-specimens and check on used A- and C-specimens
for experiments
Specimens; FA35_10A(II), FA35_10B(II), FA35_10C(II) and FA35_10D(II)
Figure 50: Chloride penetration depth of of FA35_10A(II) and FA35_10B(II)
A9
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX B
Current for FA23_5B(II) specimen and reason.
(a) Current for FA23_5B(II)
(b) Big hollow void in FA23_5B(II)
Figure 51: Reason to take this current measurement out of data
In Figure 51 the current measurement from the migration test on FA23 specimens is shown. As
it can be seen the current is stable on almost 16 mA through out the experiment. The current
read of from the display on the power supply also showed a constant current through out the
experiment, this was however on 17 mA. It seems that the logger has reached its maximum,
which we had been told from the technician should be around 15 mA. The specimen had a larger
hollow void and had not been cast correctly. Therefor this current measurement has been taken
out of the results. In Figure 47a the penetration depth on the hollow specimen FA23_5B(II) is
shown. When during the actual further testing, specimen FA23_5A(II) was used instead, and
as it can be seen on Figure 47b only chloride penetrated material has been used.
Calculation of migration coeﬃcients
A10
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
A11
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX B
A12
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B
A13
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX B
A14
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B
A15
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX B
A16
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX B
Chloride Migration Test: 
Paste samples
10th cast specimens
FA35_10A 
(II)
FA35_10B 
(II)
Clock; De-moulded
10:13
10:15
Length1 [mm]
48,42
51,42
Length2 [mm]
48,47
51,57
Length3 [mm]
48,48
51,37
Av. Length [mm]
48,46
51,45
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Clock; Pressure applied
Clock; Pressure constant at 27mbar
Clock; Essicator shut off
Clock; Start to fill with Ca(OH)2
Clock; Filled with Ca(OH)2
Clock; Pressure applied
Clock; Pressure achieved 28mbar
Clock; Air allowed in
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Cahode solution Temperature [⁰C]
Anode solution Temperature [⁰C]
19
19
Voltage pre-set 
Initial current [mA]
14
13
Corrected applied voltage [V]
New current, start (Each) [mA]
4
4
Software; New current, start (Each) [mA]
4,54
4,00
New current, start (Both) [mA]
Software; New current, start (Both ) [mA]
Clock; When starting test 
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Clock; When reading of Temperature
Cahode solution Temperature [⁰C]
Anode solution Temperature [⁰C]
18
18
Clock; When reading of current
Current, end (Both) [mA]
Software; Current, end (Both) [mA]
Current, end (Each) [mA]
4
3
Software; Current, end (Each) [mA]
4,32
3,83
Clock; When ending test
Approx Penetration Depth [mm]
13
12
23/11 - 25/11   2020
Vacuum 
23-11-2020
19
10:34
10:41
13:41
13:43
13:44
13:44
13:50
15:10
Migration
24-11-2020
20
19
30 V
10
8
8,35
09:00
09:07
25-10-2020
18
8
8,00
19
09:05
09:06
A17
==PAGE:92==
Appendix C
Procedure for Arresting Hydration
This appendix contains pictures taken from arresting of the hydration. The
used equipment and the procedure are shown. Additionally, this appendix
contains the actual date, time, and quantities of powder, isopropanol, and
diethyl ether.
Content
Pictures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A19
2nd and 3rd cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A20
4th and 6th cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A21
9th cast. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A22
A18
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX C
(a)
Equipment
for
cruching,
grinding and sieving
(b) Crushing the sample with a
hammer
(c)
Fume Cabinet with equip-
ment placed inside
Figure 52: Crushing the sample and putting it into the glove box
(a) Fume Cabinet
(b) Grinding
(c) Sieving
Figure 53: Grinding and sieving done in glove box
(a) Equipment for ﬁltrating sus-
pension in fume hood
(b) Filtrating the suspension in a
Büchner funnel
(c) Color of the sample becomes
lighter
Figure 54: Filtrating the suspension in a fume hood
A19
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX C
A20
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX C
A21
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX C
A22
==PAGE:97==
Appendix D
X-ray Fluorescence
This appendix contains the raw data from XRF analysis. The raw data can
be seen in the columns under the grey headers. Furthermore, calculations
of the oxides mass-% is calculated from stoichiometric calculations for the
relevant compounds. This is shown in the columns under the yellow headers.
Content
Rapid Cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A24
Fly Ash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A25
OPC(I) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A26
OPC(II) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A27
FA23(I) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A28
FA23(II) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A29
A23
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX D
A24
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX D
A25
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX D
A26
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX D
A27
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX D
A28
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX D
A29
==PAGE:104==
Appendix E
X-Ray Diﬀraction
This appendix contains information in regard to the XRD analysis and the
Rietveld reﬁnement. Included is the experimental setup together with ob-
tained diﬀractograms and the calculated counterpart. Diﬀerence plot and
values used for calculations is also shown.
Content
Pictures of equipment and sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A31
Report from analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A32
Reﬁnement strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A33
Diﬀractograms and diﬀerence plots. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A35
Rietveld reﬁnement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A38
A30
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX E
Sample preparation
(a) Tools for sample preparation
(b) Preparation of sample
(c) Prepared sample
Figure 55: Preparation of the sample for XRD
XRD
(a) PANalytical X’Pert Pro diﬀractometer
(b) Fixed slits
Figure 56: Equipment for XRD
Figure 57: PANalytical X’pert Pro diﬀractometer with explanations
A31
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX E
Figure 58: Report XRD
A32
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX E
Rietveld reﬁnement
The following section includes the rietveld reﬁnement strategy used in present thesis.
The
reﬁnement is done using HighScore Plus software from PANalytica. Henceforth, this section
will be presented with the terminology used in the software. The basic concepts however, is
likely the same across diﬀerent softwares.
Reﬁnement of anhydrous cement
• The individual phases is determined with the ’search and match’ function. identiﬁed peaks
is correlated with literature studies to ensure that the ﬁndings is reliable.
• The background was reﬁned using a polynomial function with four coeﬃcients and the 1/x
term. Furthermore the specimen displacement factor was applied to be reﬁned.
• The zone between 0 and 7 2θ was excluded from the reﬁnement. This was done as no
peaks exist in this area and the background is likely to have a poor ﬁt within the small
angle zones.
• All phase scale factors was reﬁned together with their unit cells. Variation of the unit cells
was constrained at 1%.
• The W-parameter of the cagliotti formula was applied for major phases. However w was
not applied for calcite and carbon compounds. The w-parameter is constrained between
0.0001 and 0.2.
• The U- And V-parameter of the cagliotti formula was applied for major phases like alite
and belite. The application of these parameters is based on visual examination of the ﬁt
together with the diﬀerence plot.
• If the peak shape was still not satisﬁed an ’split shape and width’ asymmetry function
was applied.
• For major phases like alite and belite preferred orientation was observed. March-Dollase
correction was constrained between 0.7 and 1. In the case of large diﬀerences spherical
harmonics was applied. Coeﬃcients is chosen based on their eﬀect on the diﬀerence plot.
Reﬁnement of anhydrous Fly Ash
• The individual phases is determined based on search and match and literature studies.
• The background was reﬁned using the available background due to the large amorphous
content.
• The approach was besides the background reﬁnement similar to that of the anhydrous
cement.
Reﬁnement of paste samples.
• The individual phases is determined based on search and match together with literature
studies.
• The background was reﬁned using the available background due to the large amorphous
content.
• The zone between 0 and 7 2θ was excluded from the reﬁnement.
A33
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX E
• Anhydrous compounds was imported from the reﬁned ﬁles.
Calcite was left out and
imported as new. The phases shown in Table 21 was imported into the respective paste
sample ﬁle and a reﬁnement was run only for scale factors.
• The Rietveld analysis was run a couple of times.
• If the phase showed zero, the main peak of the phase was investigated from the Search
table by Lothenbach et al. [57].
• If the main peak was not signiﬁcant, the phase was deleted from ﬁle.
• The Rietveld analysis was run a couple of times until the Rwp did not change.
• Preferred orientations was applied for the portlandite phase. Double March-Dollase was
applied with the ﬁrst factor (1,0,-1) and second (0,0,1).
• The Rietveld analysis was run a couple of times until the Rwp did not change.
Table 21: Crystalline phases and the corresponding crystal ﬁle used in the Rietveld reﬁnement.
Phase name
Chemical formula
ICSD no.
Note
Alite M3
Ca3SiO5
94742
Aluminate cubic
Ca3Al2O6
Open source. non-ISCD
Ferrite
Ca2Al1.35Fe0.651O5
98836
Brownmillerite
Ca2Al0.99Fe1.01O5
98839
Ferrite
Ca2Al0.55Fe1.45O5
98830
Calcite
CaCO3
73446
Bassanite
Ca(SO4)(H2O)0.5
79529
Belite β
Ca2SiO4
81096
Mulite
Al2.34Si0.66O4.83
158098
Quartz
SiO2
200721
Crystal quartz
SIO2
10078
Hematite
Fe2O3
201096
Hemicarbonate
Ca4Al2(OH)12(OH)(CO3)0.5(H2O)5
Open source. non-ISCD.
Monocarbonate
Ca4Al2(OH)12(CO3)(H2O)5
59327
Friedel’s salt
Ca2Al(OH)6Cl(H2O)
62363
Ettringite
Ca6Al2(SO4)3(OH)12(H2O)26
155395
Portlandite
Ca(OH)2
202220
Monosulfate
Ca2Al(OH)6((SO4)0.5(H2O)3)
100138
Strätlingite
Ca2Al((AlSi)1.11O2(OH)12(H2O)2.25
69413
Aragonite
CaCO3
170225
Vaterite
Ca(CO3)
15879
Corundum
Al2O3
77810
A34
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX E
Figure 59: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for OPC. The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
Figure 60: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for Fly Ash. The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
Figure 61: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for OPC(I). The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
A35
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX E
Figure 62: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for OPC(II). The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
Figure 63: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for FA23(I). The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
Figure 64: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for FA23(II). The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
A36
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX E
Figure 65: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for FA35(I). The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
Figure 66: Observed and calculated diﬀractrogram for FA35(II). The diﬀerence plot is likewise shown.
A37
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX E
A38
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX E
A39
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX E
A40
==PAGE:115==
Appendix F
TGA
This appendix contains an overview of all TGA that has been done in this
study. The date, time and mass of crucible and powder is provided in Table
22. The missing crucible masses were due to some recalibration of the TGA
equipment, which the undersigned had nothing to do with and did not know
how to ﬁx.
TG and DTG graphs is provided for all samples. In Figure 67, 68 and 69
one of each sample is plotted together for each of the sample sets. In Figure
70 all the OPC samples are plotted together and in Figure 71 all the FA23
are plotted together.
Content
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A42
1st set of TGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A42
2nd set of TGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A43
3rd set of TGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A43
All OPC samples shown together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A44
All FA23 samples shown together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A44
A41
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX F
Overview of Thermogravimetric analysis
Table 22: Overview of samples analyzed thermogravimetric. The date and start time is shown together
with the mass of the crucible, and the mass of the sample.
ID
Date
Start time
Crucible mass
Sample mass
Anhydrous
compounds
Empty crucible
15-09-2020
09:30
139.0430
-
CEM
15-09-2020
15:08
134.5610
36.8670
Fly Ash
02-10-2020
08:45
144.3791
42.7648
Blend
02-10-2020
14:38
144.4595
48.0570
1st set of
paste
samples
OPC_2A (I)
30-09-2020
10:55
135.5095
55.3160
OPC_2A (II)
30-09-2020
13:55
140.6075
59.1838
FA23_2A (I)
01-10-2020
09:16
147.8700
49.8436
FA23_2A (II)
01-10-2020
15:17
138.3375
52.6220
2nd set of
paste
samples
OPC_3A (I)
08-10-2020
14:10
137.4060
57.9675
OPC_3A (II)
08-10-2020
10:42
138.7560
69.3350
FA23_5A (I)
21-10-2020
13:03
-
62.0745
FA23_5A (II)
21-10-2020
10:04
-
66.4202
3rd set of
paste
samples
OPC_5A (I)
23-10-2020
08:10
-
54.3195
OPC_5A (II)
23-10-2020
11:11
-
68.3981
FA23_6A (I)
29-10-2020
10:59
-
52.3070
FA23_6A (II)
29-10-2020
08:08
-
56.3425
FA35 paste
samples
FA35_9C (I)
20-11-2020
14:25
-
55.2230
FA35_9C (II)
20-11-2020
08:00
-
64.8938
Results from Thermogravimetric analysis
Figure 67: TG and DTG for complete set of paste samples (OPC_2A(I), OPC_2A(II), FA23_2A(I)
and FA23_2A(II))
A42
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX F
Figure 68: TG and DTG for complete set of paste samples (OPC_3A(I), OPC_3A(II), FA23_5A(I)
and FA23_5A(II))
Figure 69: TG and DTG for complete set of paste samples (OPC_5A(I), OPC_5A(II), FA23_6A(I)
and FA23_6A(II))
A43
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX F
All OPC samples shown together
Figure 70: Graphs of OPC paste samples with and without chloride exposure.
All FA samples shown together
Figure 71: Graphs of paste samples with ﬂy ash with and without chloride exposure.
A44
==PAGE:119==
Appendix G
Sorption Isotherm: DVS and Desiccator
This appendix contains information regarding the experimental work with
estimating sorption isotherms. Two methods is included in present appendix,
the desiccator method and the sorption balance method (DVS).
Results from DVS measurements that describes the degree of equilibrium
can be seen on Figure 74 to Figure 81.
Content
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A46
Desiccator test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A46
DVS test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A46
Degree of equilibrium OPC(I). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A47
Degree of equilibrium OPC(II). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A48
Degree of equilibrium FA23(I) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A49
Degree of equilibrium FA23(II) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A50
Degree of equilibrium FA35(I) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A51
Degree of equilibrium FA35(II) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A52
Sorption Isotherm: Desiccator method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A53
A45
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX G
Preparation of specimens for Sorption Isotherm
Table 23: Overview of time during preparation of specimens for Sorption Isotherm.
OPC_1(II)
OPC_1(I)
FA_1(II)
FA_1(I)
OPC_2(I)
FA_3(I)
FA_6(II)
FA35_9(II)
FA35_10(II)
Date
23-09
23-09
23-09
23-09
30-09
07-10
28-10
19-11
25-11
Out of reservoir
10:20
11:52
11:12
12:22
9:24
9:25
9:37
8:33
9:25
In Glove box
10:23
11:54
11:15
12:25
9:26
9:27
9:39
8:36
9:27
In Desiccators
10:56
12:15
11:36
12:48
-
-
-
-
-
In DVS
10:52
-
-
-
9:36
9:38
9:46
8:42
9:34
Sorption isotherm; Desiccator test setup
Figure 72: Desiccator test setup
Sorption Isotherm; DVS
(a) DVS Advantage
(b) Filled specimen prior to DVS
(c) Hanging specimen in DVS
Figure 73: Preparation of the sample for DVS.
A46
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX G
Degree of equilibrium; DVS: OPC(I)
Figure 74: Desorption equilibrium curves of OPC(I).
Figure 75: Adsorption equilibrium curves of OPC(I).
A47
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX G
Degree of equilibrium; DVS: OPC(II)
Figure 76: Desorption equilibrium curves of OPC(II).
Figure 77: Adsorption equilibrium curves of OPC(II).
A48
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX G
Degree of equilibrium; DVS: FA23(I)
Figure 78: Desorption equilibrium curves of FA23(I).
Figure 79: Adsorption equilibrium curves of FA23(I).
A49
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX G
Degree of equilibrium; DVS: FA23(II)
Figure 80: Desorption equilibrium curves of FA23(II).
Figure 81: Adsorption equilibrium curves of FA23(II)..
A50
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX G
Degree of equilibrium; DVS: FA35(I)
Figure 82: Desorption equilibrium curves of FA35(I).
Figure 83: Adsorption equilibrium curves of FA35(I).
A51
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX G
Degree of equilibrium; DVS: FA35(II)
Figure 84: Desorption equilibrium curves of FA35(II).
Figure 85: Adsorption equilibrium curves of FA35(II).
A52
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX G
A53
==PAGE:128==
APPENDIX G
A54
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX G
A55
==PAGE:130==
Appendix H
Cup Test
This appendix contains additional information about how the cup test was
executed. The mixer; TEDDY BEAR Varimixer is shown and sawing of the
specimens prior to migration test together with the test setup for migra-
tion test is also shown. This appendix also showns how the cup test was
set up and the penetration depth of the chloride exposed specimens is also
documented.
The measurements and calculations of the actual cup test is provided on the
pages A62-A67.
Content
Mixer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A57
Preparation for Migration Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A57
Migration Test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A57
Migration Test: 7th cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A58
Migration Test: 8th cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A59
Chloride Penetration Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A60
Sawing Discs for Cup Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A61
Assembling Cup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A61
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A61
Cup test 7th cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A62
Cup test 8th cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A63
RH in desiccators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A64
Density calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A65
Cup test: Calculations of water vapor ﬂow rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A66
Deviations of mass losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A67
A56
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX H
Mixing equipment
Figure 86: TEDDY BEAR Varimixer; Used for mixing mortar samples
Preparation for migration test
(a) Sawing mortar sample into 50 mm discs.
(b) Mortar samples is desiccator
Figure 87: Preparation for migration test on mortar samples
Migration test
(a) Mortar sample in sleeve
(b) Test setup
Figure 88: Migration test on mortar samples
A57
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX H
Chloride Migration Test: 
Mortar samples 
7th cast specimens
M_OPC    
7A (II)
M_OPC   
7B (II)
M_FA23   
7A (II)
M_FA23   
7B (II)
Clock; De-moulded
10:25
10:25
10:36
10:36
Length1 [mm]
49.09
49.10
48.56
48.56
Length2 [mm]
49.26
48.79
48.90
48.89
Length3 [mm]
49.28
48.97
49.26
48.84
Av. Length [mm]
49.21
48.95
48.91
48.76
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Clock; Pressure applied
Clock; Pressure constant at 27mbar
Clock; Essicator shut off
Clock; Start to fill with Ca(OH)2
Clock; Filled with Ca(OH)2
Clock; Pressure applied
Clock; Pressure achieved 27mbar
Clock; Air allowed in
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Cahode solution Temperature [⁰C]
Anode solution Temperature [⁰C]
19
19
19
19
Voltage pre-set 
Initial current [mA]
95
104
85
82
Corrected applied voltage [V]
New current, start (Each) [mA]
63
67
71
68
New current, start (Both) [mA]
Clock; When starting test 
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Clock; When reading of Temperature
Cahode solution Temperature [⁰C]
Anode solution Temperature [⁰C]
20
20
20
20
Clock; When reading of current
Current, end (Both) [mA]
Current, end (Each) [mA]
60
62
87
83
Clock; When ending test
Approx Penetration Depth [mm]
-
29
-
33
02/11 - 05/11   2020
Vacuum 
02-11-2020
20
11:15
11:20
14:25
14:26
14:30
14:31
14:36
15:38
Migration
03-11-2020
20
19
19
30 V
20
25
129
139
10:49
05-11-2020
20
10:43
20
20
10:44
122
170
10:46
A58
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX H
Chloride Migration Test: 
Mortar samples 
8th cast specimens
M_OPC    
8A (II)
M_OPC   
8B (II)
M_FA23   
8A (II)
M_FA23   
8B (II)
Clock; De-moulded
10:11
10:11
10:30
10:30
Length1 [mm]
49.87
47.67
49.1
49.89
Length2 [mm]
49.99
47.77
49.24
48.32
Length3 [mm]
50.4
47.98
49.20
46.92
Av. Length [mm]
50.09
47.81
49.18
48.38
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Clock; Pressure applied
Clock; Pressure constant at 28mbar
Clock; Essicator shut off
Clock; Start to fill with Ca(OH)2
Clock; Filled with Ca(OH)2
Clock; Pressure applied
Clock; Pressure achieved 28mbar
Clock; Air allowed in
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Cahode solution Temperature [⁰C]
Anode solution Temperature [⁰C]
20
20
20
20
Voltage pre-set 
Initial current [mA]
107
93
72
85
Corrected applied voltage [V]
New current, start (Each) [mA]
69
60
58
70
New current, start (Both) [mA]
Clock; When starting test 
Date 
Room Temperature [⁰C]
Clock; When reading of Temperature
Cahode solution Temperature [⁰C]
Anode solution Temperature [⁰C]
21
21
21
21
Clock; When reading of current
Current, end (Both) [mA]
Current, end (Each) [mA]
60
54
64
78
Clock; When ending test
Approx Penetration Depth [mm]
-
30
-
37
09/11 - 12/11   2020
Vacuum 
09-11-2020
20
10:55
11:00
14:04
14:05
14:09
14:10
14:15
15:17
Migration
10-11-2020
20
19
19
09:06
20
20
09:09
113
142
09:10
30 V
20
25
127
129
09:09
11-11-2020
21
A59
==PAGE:134==
APPENDIX H
Chloride Penetration Depth
Specimens used to check the chloride penetration depth by spraying with silver nitrate. The
actual experiments was done on other specimens. the specimens with index A. The penetration
depths is shown and this was used to ensure that more than 10 mm of the specimen had been
proper penetrated with Cl– ions.
Specimens; M_OPC_7B(II) and M_FA23_7B(II)
(a) Penetration depth on M_OPC_7B(II)
(b) Penetration depth on M_FA23_7B(II)
Figure 89
Specimens; M_OPC_8B(II) and M_FA23_8B(II)
(a) Penetration depth on M_OPC_8B(II)
(b) Penetration depth on M_FA23_8B(II)
Figure 90
A60
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX H
Sawing discs for cup test
(a) Sawing disc for cup test
(b) Disc for cup test
Figure 91: Discs
Assembling cup
Figure 92: Assembling cup. 1) Bowl ﬁlled with saturated KNO3 solution is put in the bottom part
of the cup and wire mesh is put on top to avoid splashes on the specimen when weighting samples.
2) Rubber gasket is placed before placing the sample. 3) Specimen and additional rubber gsaket. 4)
Another rubber gasket to ensure make it easier for the cup to slide when closing tight
Test setup
(a) Filling salt solution and weighting cups
(b) Test setup
Figure 93: Cup test setup
A61
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX H
A62
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX H
A63
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX H
A64
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX H
A65
==PAGE:140==
APPENDIX H
A66
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX H
A67
==PAGE:142==
.
==PAGE:143==
