==PAGE:1==
Web of Trroq 
Estimating Trust in Open Source Software
M.Sc. Thesis 
Mads Fjederholt
January 2021
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master Thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Computer Science & Engineering.
Signed:
Mads Fjederholt (s162889)
Kongens Lyngby, January 24, 2021
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
A big thanks to my thesis supervisor, Associate Professor Christian Damsgaard Jensen,
for his valuable guidance throughout this process.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Open source software has become increasingly ubiquitous in all of modern software, and
this presents a challenge: how does one assess the trustworthiness of open source software?
This thesis attempts to answer this question by proposing the framework TrustWeb for
assessing the trustworthiness of open source software, with a focus on Python software.
Previous works within the ﬁeld of trustworthiness in software is presented, and the most
relevant frameworks and theories are extracted for further use. Trust is deﬁned within a
software context, based on the idea of internal and external trust, and how these are con-
ceptualized in software, and the infrastructure surrounding the software. The proposed
framework combines static analysis of Python source code with rigorous analysis of the
GitHub data- and metadata surrounding the source code. To evaluate the framework,
a working Python implementation has been developed and tested on over 300 Python
repositories on GitHub. The results reveal a framework that is capable of estimating the
appropriate level of trust in a given piece of open source software. Finally, we discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of both the framework and the implementation itself.
==PAGE:6==
Content
1
Introduction
1
2
Motivation & Background
2
2.1
What is Open Source? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Growth in Recent Years
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Security & The Supply Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.1
The left-pad Incident . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Typosquatting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Related Works
8
3.1
Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
CodeTrust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.2
TSMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
SQO-OSS & Alitheia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.4
OSSMeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Metrics or Sub-frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
ISO 25010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Analysis
16
4.1
Deﬁning Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.1
Internal vs. External trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Requirements of Model and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Background on Important Data Sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.1
GitHub
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.2
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures - CVE . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
External Trust
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Internal Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5.1
Intent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5.2
Quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5.2.1
Source Code Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.2.2
A Word on Static Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5.2.3
Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.2.4
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5.2.5
Maintainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5.2.6
Quality of Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5.2.7
Dependency Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5.2.8
Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5.2.9
Licenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6
Aggregating Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.7
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.7.1
Notable parts of the implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.7.1.1
Fetching data from followed users . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.7.1.2
Discovering vulnerabilities, malicious activity and bad li-
censes in dependencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:7==
4.7.1.3
Calculating the quality of the contributors . . . . . . . .
64
5
Evaluation
65
5.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2
Correlations & patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Discussion
74
6.1
Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2
Performance of Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.3
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7
Conclusion
80
8
Future Work
81
Bibliography
82
9
Appendix
88
9.1
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
9.2
Appendix B - bandit plugins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
9.3
Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
9.4
Appendix E - Source code, database and diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Since the inception of the ﬁrst open source licenses in the 1980s, open source software
(OSS) has been ubiquitous. If one was to snap one’s ﬁngers and remove all open source
software from the world, the digital world as we know it would grind to a halt. The
internet would stop functioning, smartphones would be useless and almost all embedded
electronics, such as smart appliances, industrial robots and even modern cars would cease
to function. Open source has come a long way from Richard Stallman’s ﬁrst forays into
free software in the mid-1980s, and open source is now produced by amateur programmers,
world class engineers, and everyone in-between.
In 2020, the security company Synopsys surveyed 1,253 modern codebases and found that
99% of the codebases contained open source software [1, p. 14]. In fact, the surveyed
codebases contained an average of 445 open source components [1, p. 8]. More ominously,
73% of the codebases surveyed contained at least one known vulnerability, and 49%
contained high-risk vulnerabilities [1, p. 19]. This begs the question - what software can
we trust, and what can’t we trust? After all, the levels of quality control diﬀer wildly
with regards to open source software, and there is no set way of producing trustworthy
software. The software engineers who implement software in their codebases rarely have
time to sift through the code of each and every library to assess its trustworthiness. More
often than not, it’s a question of "shooting ﬁrst, and asking questions later". Modern
applications are getting increasingly more complicated and relying on an ever larger web
of external software components [1, p. 8]. This has led to the question:
Can one measure the trustworthiness of a given piece of open source software,
without the need to manually examine it?
While many tools exist for assessing reliability, security, and other individual parts, few
exist for estimating overall trustworthiness.
While some has been developed through
the years, few have provided prolonged real-world usability. In fact, most methods for
assessing trustworthiness end up deprecated and abandoned, and no tools has of yet
become a staple in the developers toolkit when assessing trustworthiness of software.
In order to develop such a tool, this thesis will attempt to answer the question posed
above by ﬁrst examining the evolution of open source software, and the current state
of open source. We will then deﬁne what trust means in a software context, and what
factors inﬂuence trust. After deﬁning trust, we examine the individual parts of a software
project and attempt to quantify and measure those that contributes to trust. To form-
alize these contributions to trustworthiness, we introduce a model for evaluating trust in
open source software, speciﬁcally within the domain of GitHub, the world largest software
repository registry [2]. This conceptual model, henceforth called TrustWeb, is then imple-
mented in Python. To contain the scope to a reasonable degree, only Python software will
be evaluated by the implementation, but the framework is developed with a language-
agnostic approach, allowing implementation (with some adaptation) with the majority of
mainstream programming languages in mind. To evaluate both the framework and the
implementation, we assess the trustworthiness of over 300 Python repositories found on
GitHub. Lastly, we present and interpret these results, and attempt to provide an answer
to the question of whether or not trustworthiness is measurable in open source software.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Motivation & Background
2.1
What is Open Source?
This thesis centres around the concept trust in open source software and a deﬁnition open
source software is therefore necessary. The Open Source Initiative (OSI) has deﬁned a
set of parameters that software must comply to, in order to be considered ’open source’:
1. Free Redistribution. The license shall not restrict any party from selling or giving away
the software as a component of an aggregate software distribution containing programs
from several diﬀerent sources. The license shall not require a royalty or other fee for such
sale.
2. Source Code. The source code must be available, and must not be deliberately obfuscated.
3. Derived Works. The license must allow modiﬁcations and derived works, and must allow
them to be distributed under the same terms as the license of the original software.
4. Integrity of The Author’s Source Code. The license may restrict source-code from being
distributed in modiﬁed form only if the license allows the distribution of "patch ﬁles" with
the source code for the purpose of modifying the program at build time. The license must
explicitly permit distribution of software built from modiﬁed source code. The license
may require derived works to carry a diﬀerent name or version number from the original
software.
5. No Discrimination Against Persons or Groups.
6. No Discrimination Against Fields of Endeavor.
7. Distribution of License. The rights attached to the program must apply to all to whom
the program is redistributed without the need for execution of an additional license by
those parties.
8. License Must Not Be Speciﬁc to a Product. The rights attached to the program must not
depend on the program’s being part of a particular software distribution. If the program is
extracted from that distribution and used or distributed within the terms of the program’s
license, all parties to whom the program is redistributed should have the same rights as
those that are granted in conjunction with the original software distribution.
9. License Must Not Restrict Other Software. The license must not place restrictions on
other software that is distributed along with the licensed software.
For example, the
license must not insist that all other programs distributed on the same medium must be
open-source software.
10. License Must Be Technology-Neutral. No provision of the license may be predicated on
any individual technology or style of interface.
[3]
In practice, OSS is often thought to be software where the source code is freely available,
and an explicit license to use and modify the software has been given.
2
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Growth in Recent Years
Over the years, open source has slowly but steadily gained mainstream traction. Gone are
the days where proprietary software was considered more secure, and of higher quality. In
fact, OSS has been pervasive for a while now. In 2005, a survey of US software companies
revealed that 87% of companies incorporated OSS in their codebase [4]. In 2016, that
number had climbed to 96% [5], and in 2020 a report found that 99% of businesses use
OSS in their code base [1].
Over the years, OSS has ﬁrmly established itself in the professional realm. The majority
of the worlds web-servers run Linux (or a derivative) [6], and the content on those servers
is largely served by OSS applications, such as Apaches HTTP server, and data is then
saved in open source database schemes, such as MySQL or SQLite.
But as the adoption of open source has grown over the years, so have issues of security.
In their yearly risk assessment of open source adoption, Synopsys (formerly Black Duck
Software) found that 75% of code bases contained some sort of public vulnerability (up
from 60% in 2018), and 49% contained high-risk vulnerabilities (as apposed to 40% in
2018) [1]. Interestingly, lack of proper updates seem to be an issue for many companies,
as the average age of a vulnerability found in codebases audited by Synopys was 4.5 years,
indicating that companies have a hard time keeping their software up to date. Either
worryingly or amusingly, the oldest vulnerability found by Synopsys was 22 years old
(CVE-1999-0061).
In the context of this thesis, there are two primary takeaways from recent reports on
OSS adoption:
1. The use of OSS is rising, and have reached a level of ubiquitousness unseen before.
2. A majority of codebases contain public vulnerabilities, and many contain high-risk
vulnerabilities.
As important as the increase in adoption of OSS, is the increase in numbers of OSS
projects. npm, a package manager for JavaScript (JS) libraries recently hit 1.000.000
packages, and as seen in ﬁgure 1, the growth has been explosive and the amount of
packages has almost tripled in three years.
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1. Growth of npm [7]
Similarly, PyPI, the most popular package manager for Python [8], has seen almost
exponential growth in the amount of new Python packages published each month [9], as
ﬁgure 2 illustrates.
Figure 2. Number of new PyPI packages on a monthly basis [9]
The growth of open source and the increasing demand highlights the core problem this
thesis attempts to answer - how does one assess the trustworthiness of open source soft-
ware? The sheer amount of packages and libraries has exploded and deciding what library
will ﬁt your speciﬁc need when presented with thousands of packages can be diﬃcult. In
the worst-case scenario, it can make your application vulnerable to attacks. As open
source grows, so do the vulnerabilities in the software and the complexity of the supply
chain. This has resulted in a string of recent attacks, that have highlighted the needs for
controls and a way to establish trust within the ecosystems.
2.3
Security & The Supply Chain
Before delving into recent security breaches within OSS, it’s important to deﬁne what
the term open source supply chain refers to. For this, we turn to the Linux Foundation’
4
==PAGE:12==
2020 report Open Source Software Supply Chain Security, in which the OSS supply chain
is deﬁned as such:
[...] most organizations leverage high-quality and freely-available open source
software (OSS) to create the bulk of their software products, with propriet-
ary software either acting as the “glue” that holds the various pieces of OSS
together, or as a unique service or function sitting on top of it.[...] Further, be-
cause OSS is designed and written not only by individuals or even individual
companies, but often by multiple if not dozens of discrete and distributed de-
velopers working together, software “suppliers” run the gamut from hobbyists
to multi-billion dollar companies. Every highly successful open source project
has been built via an open framework of voluntary contributors by software
engineers who devote their own time or their company’s time to improve the
project. [10]
The supply chain can be seen as the all-encompassing relationship between Developers,
Repositories, Package Dependency Managers (such as npm and PyPI), and End
Users, and as the next section will demonstrate, security issues can stem from anywhere
in this chain.
Figure 3. OSS supply chain [10]
2.3.1
The left-pad Incident
On March 22 2016, websites and web apps around the world started breaking. One of the
most popular packages on npm, the primary package manager for JavaScript libraries,
had gone missing, and as a result any package depending on this missing package broke.
Thus the eﬀects of one missing package would ripple out and many systems refused to
function correctly. The package was left-pad, a simple, 17 line long piece of code that
left-justiﬁed text for users, and the creator of left-pad had decided to suddenly pull
his library from npm, resulting in chaos [11]. Following a dispute over the naming of
another library, kik, long-time npm contributor and open source evangelist Azer Koçulu
decided to pull all his libraries from npm (including left-pad), breaking any other pack-
5
==PAGE:13==
age that might depend on any of his previously published ones. left-pad was simple,
and the source code was available, so a new, similar package was almost immediately
made available by another developer, but the incident highlighted two important prob-
lems pertaining to package dependency managers such as npm.
The ﬁrst issue is connected to the dispute that made Koçulu pull his packages in the
ﬁrst place. Koçulu had begun work on a new JS library, kik, and recently published this
to npm. Not long after, he was contacted by a lawyer representing Kik [12], the company
behind the popular messaging app of the same name. Kik was a copyrighted name, the
lawyer explained, and asked Koçulu to rename his package as Kik was soon publishing
their own JS package on npm, and wanted the Kik name for themselves. Koçulu refused,
and in not-so-polite words told Kik that he would not give up the name. Kik contacted
npm in an attempt to solve the dispute, and npm sided with Kik and turned the package
name over to them. It’s important to know that while packages on npm are open source,
npm is not. npm Inc. is a venture-backed company (acquired by GitHub in 2020 [13]),
and determined to turn a proﬁt. As such, it’s beholden to corporate entities and not
singular open source proponents such as Koçulu. npm siding with Kik angered Koçulu,
who then pulled all his packages from npm, wreaking havoc on thousands of systems.
This highlights the issue of corporate interests in the open source supply chain; the soft-
ware is open source, but the distributor maintains monetary interests and as such will
not always act on behalf of the community it represents, instead siding with corporations.
The second issue pertains to the amount of systems that broke. Modern software systems
are so highly dependent on libraries, that in turn are dependent on other libraries, that
the systems become brittle and the slightest changes, such as left-pad being pulled, can
upset entire ecosystems. One of the most popular JavaScript libraries, Babel, depended
on left-pad, and as such broke during the incident. Developers and users were left ask-
ing: should developers hold the power to take down the majority of JavaScript systems
just by pulling a simple package? npm founder Isaac Schlueter highlights the fact that
a new package was available within 10 minutes as a testament to how well the system
works [11], but one could wonder if a replacement would have been as quick if the missing
library was react-js, a 1620 contributor, +200.000 line large project [14].
2.3.2
Typosquatting
In 2016, Nikolai Philipp Tschacher, a 25-year old college student from Hamburg, success-
fully inﬁltrated package repositories for Python (PyPI), Ruby (RubyGems) and JavaS-
cript (npm). He identiﬁed the 214 most downloaded packages on the three registries,
created his own packages with similar names, and uploaded them to the registries. In-
cluded in his own package was also a small script to contact a webserver of his, to verify
that installation of his script took place. Over several months, his benign code was ex-
ecuted over 45.000 times on 17.000 unique domains [15]. Included in these domains were
.gov domains (owned by the US government), and .mil domains (owned by the US mil-
itary).
The method utilized by Tschacher is known as typosquatting, a method that relies on
6
==PAGE:14==
users typing in the wrong name for a domain, or in this case, a software package. In
2017, PyPI was once again under a similar attack. On the 9th of September, Slovakia’s
National Security Authority put out a notice [16] that malicious PyPI packages had re-
cently been published to the registry. These packages featured similar names to other
popular packages, once again attempting to lure users in by typosquatting. The packages
themselves contained the same code as the package they were typosquatting as, but also
the addition of extra (relatively benign) code. The packages were promptly removed from
the registry by PyPI, but by then the packages had been installed by thousands of users
[17].
Typosquatting, and speciﬁcally typosquatting PyPI, highlights another problem in the
OSS supply chain. How do you prevent malicious actors from piggy-backing on authen-
tic packages, and users from being infected with malicious code? One solution is more
oversight, ie. a tighter control over the submission process on the part of PyPI. However,
submission to PyPI is handled by two active administrators [17], and most work is done
on a volunteer-basis. PyPI themselves state:
As such, it doesn’t currently have resources for some of the proposed solutions
such as actively monitoring or approving every new project published to PyPI.
Historically and by necessity we’ve relied on a reactive strategy of taking down
potentially malicious projects as we’ve become aware of them. [17]
Since the incidents in 2016 and 2017, typosquatting has remained a threat to trust in
PyPI and other package managers. In august 2020, a french Python developer was hit by
a typosquatted PyPI package - the extremely popular HTTP request package requests
had been emulated by another package, request. The developers machine was infected
by a trojan and only later found out the code was malicious. No formal statement was
put out by PyPI, and over 12.000 users downloaded the package [18].
7
==PAGE:15==
3
Related Works
Much work has been done on the topic of trustworthiness in software, some of it focusing
on open source software. This section will present the most relevant works on the subject
of trust, but also related works that examine the quality of software. For clarity, the
following section is divided into two parts: 1) whole frameworks which attempt to model
trustworthiness and/or quality of entire systems, and 2) research on individual metrics
or attributes of software, that could in some way contribute to the aforementioned trust
and/or quality.
3.1
Frameworks
3.1.1
CodeTrust
CodeTrust is the name later given to the framework developed by Michael B. Nielsen in
his Master thesis Quality and IT Security assessment of Open Source Software Projects
[19]. Henceforth, the later paper summarizing Nielsen’s thesis work, CodeTrust: Trusting
Software Systems [20], will be used as a reference point.
CodeTrust initially served as an inspiration for this thesis, but deviates in many import-
ant ways. To better understand how, a quick summarization of CodeTrust is necessary. If
you boil CodeTrust down to its core, it essentially attempts to gauge the trustworthiness
of a piece of open source software by assigning a trust score to the software. This score is
a combination of diﬀerent sub-scores attained through analysing three components of the
software; team analysis, security analysis and maintainability analysis. See ﬁgure 4 for an
illustration of this. All of the three analyses then break down into smaller components.
As an example, the security analysis breaks down to a security score, which in turn breaks
down to several other scores, such as a severity score and a vulnerability score.
Figure 4. Overview of the CodeTrust metrics [21]
These three parts then make up the trust score, and attempts to establish trustworthiness
of open source software projects. However, several unaddressed problems are present in
several of the scores that make up the ﬁnal score. Much of the security score is created on
the basis of previously registered CVE entries related to the software. A CVE (Common
Vulnerabilities and Exposures) entry is an entry in a vulnerability database maintained by
the MITRE corporation that functions as the de facto database on public vulnerabilities
in software [22]. An entry into the CVE database is usually made after a vulnerability
has been found and patched. And herein lies the problem with basing too much of a
security score on already ﬁxed issues; why should there necessarily be any correlation
8
==PAGE:16==
between the existence of previously discovered security vulnerabilities, and existence of
currently unknown security vulnerabilities? CodeTrust does not present evidence of any
connection between patched security vulnerabilities and existing ones, only an inference
that the amount of CVE entries registered should correlate to the developers ability to
create secure software. But herein lies yet another problem: CVE entries are usually only
made on popular software, ie. software that sees major usage. This means that for small
software projects, there rarely exist any CVE entries, as the software has not been as
thoroughly tested as larger projects. Thus, the security score produced by CodeTrust is
only really applicable to projects with multiple CVE entries, which excludes exactly the
software projects that can be hard to trust: the small and untested projects.
To attempt to make up for the possible lack of CVE entries on a given project, Code-
Trust falls back on user evaluations [20, p. 65]. Amounts of users of a given open source
project is usually diﬃcult to obtain and CodeTrust relies on data from OpenHub (a ser-
vice run by security ﬁrm Synopsys, that gathers data on open source projects), the value
of which is subject to large changes. As an example, react, a very popular JavaScript
framework developed and open sourced by Facebook [23], as of writing has a total of
10 users on OpenHub [24]. On GitHub however, where the source code for react is
hosted, over 4.700.000 repositories depend on react [25]. Many other examples of these
discrepancies between OpenHub and GitHub data exist [26] [27] [28] [29]. OpenHub data
is used extensively in CodeTrust but the data is not trustworthy, which in turn produces
an un-trustworthy security score by CodeTrust. To summarize, CodeTrust relies on CVE
entries and/or users on OpenHub for much of its security score, and there exist little
evidence that either correlates with the trustworthiness of the software analysed.
3.1.2
TSMT
In 2017, Li et al. presented TSMT, a trustworthiness-measurement tool for C++ projects,
based on their own research [30, p. 2]. The model presented relies on Common Weakness
Enumeration (CWE) data, community sourced vulnerability samples from real world
code (also operated by MITRE, the same organization that manages CVEs [31]). In
the case of Li et al., they speciﬁcally rely on C++ weaknesses presented in the CWE
database, and then rank these based on their impact on trustworthiness. While they do
not present many speciﬁc instances of CWEs they implement, they do specify on their
own metrics for evaluating trustworthiness, a metric based on McCabes now-infamous
complexity measure, cyclomatic complexity [32]. Cyclomatic complexity measures the
amount of independent paths through a given method, class or program. The measure
has been hotly debated since its inception, and many have questioned the usability of
cyclomatic complexity, with regards to predicting faults. In fact, cyclomatic complexity
has been proven [33, p. 4] to have no real bearing on the amount of bugs found in a
system - see ﬁgure 5 for an illustration of this.
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 5. Number of defects in the NAG Fortran library vs. cyclomatic complexity [33,
p. 4]
Given the evidence against cyclomatic complexity as a predictor of software faults, it is
concerning how Li et al. rely on the metric. They seem to infer arbitrary error rates to
certain complexities, as seen in ﬁgure 6.
Figure 6. TSTMs described relationship between CC and error rates [30, p. 3]
To infer unproven error rates to a decidedly controversial metric such as cyclomatic com-
plexity makes it diﬃcult to trust TSMT as a framework for analyzing the trustworthiness
of software.
3.1.3
SQO-OSS & Alitheia
Alitheia is the result of a two-year long European project called SQO-OSS, a project that
explored the relationship between measurable software metrics and the quality of said
software. Alitheia attained something not entirely common within the ﬁeld of metrics-
based software evaluation - it was released as a working, open source software tool, under
the name Alitheia-core [34]. Alitheia ran from 2008-2014, where the last commit was
made, and the project was later archived.
The project functions much like other metrics-based evaluation systems, in that it ana-
lyzes source code based on a certain set of metrics, that in some way measure (or are
expected to measure) the quality of a system. Figure 7 illustrates the basic architecture
of Alitheia.
10
==PAGE:18==
Figure 7. Model of the Alitheia core [35, p. 9]
In the paper Evaluating the Quality of Open Source Software, Spinelli et al.
outline
the results of their work on Alitheia and the SQO-OSS project. The result includes a
complete model for measuring quality, based on a range of abstract attributes, such as
analyzability, testability, stability etc. These attributes then break down in to practical,
actual measurements. The attribute eﬀectiveness, for example, breaks down to two met-
rics; Number of critical bugs ﬁxed in the last 6 months and Number of bugs ﬁxed in the
last 6 months. In total, 10 attributes break down to a total of 44 software metrics [35,
p. 24]. While its diﬃcult to ascertain just how eﬀective Alitheia is at measuring quality,
Spinelli et al. present evidence for the inclusion of their metrics, and the validity of these
[35, p. 24]. The question is then, if the combination of individually proven metrics result
in a singular, proven-by-proxy system.
3.1.4
OSSMeter
OSSMeter represents the work by Almeida et al. [36] and is in many ways similar to Ali-
theia. OSSMeter analyses source code, communication channels, bug tracking systems
and more to decide "whether an open source software (OSS) project meets the required
standards for adoption in terms of quality, maturity, activity of development and user
support" [36, p. 2]. Exactly how it does this is unfortunately hard to tell. The only
scientiﬁc paper that describes OSSMeter is the paper OSSMETER: Automated Meas-
urement and Analysis of Open Source Software from 2015, and the paper only describes
the very basic workings of OSSMeter. There is presented no evidence behind the few
metrics presented. Instead, the team behind OSSMeter chose to publish what seems to
be extensive documentation on all the inner-workings of OSSMeter on their now-defunct
website, ossmeter.com. It’s possible to view the website through archive.org, but all of
the documentation was only made available through a long-abandoned API. Develop-
ment on the GitHub page also ceased in 2017, without any real warning. In fact, the
project was a collaboration between several universities and open source organizations,
and has been abandoned without any statement from anyone within the group. Much
the same happened with Alitheia - the project was seemingly just abandoned without
any publicised reason.
11
==PAGE:19==
However, scouring the source code on GitHub reveals many of the metrics used. Useful,
even if the evidence or reasoning behind these are lacking. Similarly to Alitheia, OSS-
Meter relies on download and commit data from SourceForge, severity and response time
to bugs, active contributors, data from commits and so on. Without any evidence behind
these metrics, however, it’s diﬃcult to assess OSSMeter in any meaningful way.
3.2
Metrics or Sub-frameworks
Metrics and sub-frameworks (collections of metrics that measure individual attributes of
a system) are plentiful. This section will only describe a handful of the ones most relevant
to this thesis.
One of the most sought-after metrics in OSS seems to be the community or contributor
score. All of the frameworks in the previous section attempts to somehow score or judge
the contributors or community behind a project, with varying success. As an example,
CodeTrust scores a contributor with a formula based on number of commits multiplied
by the historical security score of a project [20, p. 67]. OSSMeter and Alitheia uses
commits but also utilizes response-times on bug trackers [36, p. 5] [35, p. 15] and similar
metrics. What all frameworks have in common is that they present little evidence for
how community members actually impact the quality or trustworthiness of a system.
Bai et al. attempts to rectify this lack of evaluation in their paper Multi-Dimensions
of Developer Trustworthiness Assessment in OSS Community [37]. Bai et al. presents a
rather comprehensive framework for scoring the "value" of contributors on a OSS project.
A contributors value is seen as the sum of four primary attributes, Collaboration index,
Community inﬂuence, Technical skill and Development contribution [37, p. 78]. The at-
tribute Development contribution is similar to what other frameworks utilize in terms of
raw commits - more interesting is the two softer metrics, Collaboration index and Com-
munity inﬂuence. These are based on developers interactions with the community, such
as them changing the state of an open issue, posting comments which are then judged
more positively or negatively according the amount of "thumbs up" or "thumbs down"
the post receives, and other factors. Before applying the framework to 10 contributors on
an OSS project, Bai et al. manually scored each contributors ability to produce quality
code, and ranked these. The framework correctly predicted quality contributors in 9 out
of 10 cases [37, p. 78].
Maintainability is another ambiguous metric that many have attempted to quantify and
classify.
Historically, maintenance of codebases represent large parts of the time and
spending allotted for a software project [38, p. 1]. Classifying exactly what makes for a
good or bad system to maintain remains a popular research question. This question is
inherently hard to answer: how, exactly, do you prove that one system is "maintainable"
and one is not? In their seminal paper from 1994 on maintainability, Using Metrics to
Evaluate Software System Maintainability, Coleman et al., tries to pinpoint exactly what
makes a system hard or easy to maintain [38]. This resulted in the HPMAS framework,
developed in collaboration with HP. HPMAS scores a software project based on a num-
ber of metrics, most importantly Halstead volume. Halstead volume counts the distinct
12
==PAGE:20==
number of operators and operands in a codebase, and Coleman et al. cites Halstead as
being the most important metric when judging maintainability:
"In spite of the current research trend away from the use of Halstead metrics,
all tests clearly indicated that Halstead‘s volume and eﬀort metrics were the
best predictors of maintainability for the HP test data." [38, p. 46].
Somewhat unique to the paper on HPMAS, is that Coleman et al. got to implement the
framework and prove its eﬀectiveness on large codebases supplied by HP. HP engineers
were asked to rank the maintainability of a system - these were engineers knowledgeable
about the software processes HP used - and the results were checked against the main-
tainability index devised by the HPMAS framework. The result was a correspondence
between a high maintainability index (which is positive) and the rankings made by HP
engineers [38, p. 48]. HPMAS remains one of the cornerstones on the research made
within the ﬁeld of software maintainability.
Related to maintainability is the concept of technical debt. Technical debt can be seen
as a metaphor for "not-quite-right" code [39, p. 94] and generally refers to the "debt" a
project accumulates when implementing new code. Consider this scenario: a developer
is tasked with implementing a new feature in a codebase, and is on a tight deadline. To
make the deadline, the developer needs to cut some corners - the code written does not
conform as well to company standards as it should. These standards can be factors such
as modularity, readability, the amount of duplicate code and so on. So the developer
makes the deadline after taking a few shortcuts with regards to the quality of the code.
However, at some point down the line, that newly implemented code is likely to go under
some form of maintenance. The amount of time or resources that inevitable maintenance
takes is then related to the amount of technical debt present in the code [40, p. 1]. As
such, technical debt is often hard to avoid when implementing new features in a codebase.
3.3
ISO 25010
Arguably the most popular, or adapted, framework for software quality is provided by
ISO, the International Organization for Standardization. The most recent revision, ISO
25010, provides a framework consisting of two models, one for Quality in use and one for
Product quality. Quality in use refers to quality from a users perspective, and the degree
to which a software product will achieve a speciﬁc goal [41, p. 493]. Product quality then
refers to the "static and dynamic properties of software" [41, p. 493]. Roughly speaking,
Product quality can be seen as a predictor of Quality in use - the former is seen from the
developers perspective, the latter from the users’.
Overall, ISO 25010 consists of 13 characteristics and 40 sub-characteristics. This hier-
archy is illustrated in ﬁgure 8.
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 8. ISO25010 [41, p. 495]
ISO 25010 represents an evolution of industry standards, and is the successor to the previ-
ous quality model, ISO 9126. The overall model remains the same, with a few interesting
tweaks. Previously, security was a sub-characteristic to functionality and compatibility
did not exist [42]. The latest version of ISO 9126 was released in 2001, while ISO 25010
was released in 2011 [41, p. 493]. In that 10 year span, IT and software engineering
evolved at incredible speeds, and subsequently security as a ﬁeld became increasingly
important. One might wonder why security was not considered an overall characteristic
of software quality back in 2001, but its eventual "promotion" in ISO 25010 suggests that
ISO places more importance in the concept of security than before.
What ISO 25010 might lack in practical granularity, it makes up for in sheer breadth.
ISO 25010 attempts to map every single aspect of quality, on both the developers’ and
users’ side, but interpretation is left to the organization utilizing the model. As such, ISO
25010 is more of a helping hand than a practical framework; it’s all the questions that
ought to be asked when building a software system, and not how they should be answered.
ISO 25010 deﬁnes characteristics in a software system, but the weighing of individual
characteristics is not deﬁned - it varies from organization to organization. However, work
has been done in order to map what characteristics developers look for when implement-
ing open source software, and how they weigh them. In 2011, Lavazza et al. surveyed 151
OSS stakeholders and analyzed what characteristics of a system software developers pri-
14
==PAGE:22==
oritize, and which they don’t [43]. Many of the characteristics are reminiscent of the ones
deﬁned in ISO 25010, such as reliability, maintainability and security. Both for-proﬁt and
non-proﬁt organizations were surveyed, and while the preferences of these diﬀer in a few
areas (primarily ones concerning return-on-investment or other economic factors), many
were consistent across sectors. Distinctions between roles in the organization were also
made, so upper-management, project managers and developers were all surveyed and the
diﬀerences presented [43, p.73]. The 5 most sought-after characteristics in OSS were:
1. Reliability
2. Degree to which an OSS product satisﬁes/covers functional requirements
3. Satisfaction
4. Interoperability
5. Interoperability issues [43, p. 71]
A total of 37 [43, p. 70] factors were considered, and while otherwise important factors
such as security and performance did not make it into the top 5, they were still considered
important. Not entirely unexpected, size and distribution channel were considered the
two least important factors.
15
==PAGE:23==
4
Analysis
4.1
Deﬁning Trust
This thesis centres around the issue of trust in software, and to establish whether or not a
piece of software is trustworthy, we ﬁrst have to deﬁne what trust is in a software context.
Trust (verb): to rely on the truthfulness or accuracy of - Merriam Webster
Deﬁnition [44]
It may seem rudimentary to begin at the dictionary deﬁnition of trust, but as trust in
software remains somewhat subjective and no one truth exists, it seems appropriate to
start with the word itself. Software, for the most part, produces output. Examples of
output include your browser presenting the website you requested, a character in a game
jumping after you press a button or your printer printing whatever page you wanted
printed. Every input a user performs should result in a corresponding output - cause and
eﬀect. It’s in this link between input and output that much of trust in software lies. If I
press this button, does the system produce the eﬀect it proclaims to produce?
The important distinction here lies in the promise and fulﬁllment of the input/output
link. The system presents the user (ideally), with the result of an action (the output)
before that action is taken (the input). An example of this is the save option in software.
The software promises that if I select this action, it will save my work and I can resume
it at some other point. This corresponds with the dictionary deﬁnition - "truthfulness
or accuracy of". Problems arise, however, when the promise the software presents to the
user is unclear or ambiguous. By now most of us know what to expect when saving a ﬁle
- either a new ﬁle is created on the system, or we update an existing one, and our work is
saved. But consider another scenario: suppose a user sends a message to another user on
Facebook. The user types in a message and clicks send. The system presents a promise
of delivering the message to the user, and that promise is usually fulﬁlled as expected.
Behind the scenes however, the system is also logging the metadata of the communica-
tion between the users. It’s screening, interpreting and cataloguing the keywords in the
message to better proﬁle the users and their needs, to better serve ads and monetize their
information exchange. This output is not presented, at least in clear terms, to the user
who sent the message. The system presented a clear promise of sending whatever message
was in the text ﬁeld to the speciﬁed user, not also sending the information in the message
to a 3rd party, in order to better serve advertisements to both users. This unexpected
output of the action should erode trust in a system, provided the user is informed about it.
From a security perspective, this deﬁnition of trust as seen as the link between input and
output also seems valid. As an example, take the PyPI library Colorama [45]. Colorama
makes it easy for developers to produce colorful output in command line interfaces. The
promise here, then, is easy access to colors in terminals.
However, another package,
identical to Colorama, had been uploaded under the name Colourama. This new package
made the same promises as the old one, to color output in a terminal, but also scanned
the users clipboard for Bitcoin addresses every 500 ms [46]. This output, the attempt to
steal user information, was obviously never promised to the user, and a large breach of
16
==PAGE:24==
trust took place (the package was later removed from PyPI).
As we saw in the example with two users communicating over Facebook, trust in the
system disappeared because of the discrepancy between the promise and the fulﬁllment
on the software’s part. However, this discrepancy was intended by the developer - if
they presented Facebook users with the full consequences of their actions every time
they wanted to perform an action, users would likely lose signiﬁcant amounts of trust in
Facebook (or maybe not, but that’s a diﬀerent challenge altogether). But barring bad
intentions from developers, what are the likely causes in erosion of trust in software? As
trust is the correspondence of input and output of a system, then the most likely cause
of distrust in software is a mismatch between input and output.
In a software context, unexpected output usually takes the form of bugs or system faults.
Consider the following scenario: Developer Bob has created a print function that allows a
user to print the current page they’re reading. This print function is bound to a button.
Alice wants to print the page she’s reading and thus presses the print button. But the
page does not print. Bob intended it to, but a fault in the system causes a lack of output.
As a result, Alice now trusts the system slightly less. Thus, trust can also be eroded by
bugs or faults in software, simply because these can prevent the output from matching
the input. As it turns out, Bob didn’t test his print-system beforehand, and thus trust
was lowered due to a lack of quality.
Thus, trust in software can be summed up as:
A correspondence between what the user expects a system to output, and
what it actually outputs.
This, in turn, is aﬀected by two factors:
1. The developer clearly communicates what output a given input will result in.
2. The system is of high enough quality such that bugs or faults will not create unex-
pected output.
These two factors are what creates (or erodes) trust in software, and it is these two factors
this thesis will attempt to quantify in open source software.
4.1.1
Internal vs. External trust
Trust rarely exists in a vacuum. For many, trust comes in the form of external trust -
you trust something because a person or source you trust, trusts that something. That
something can be another person, an institution, a piece of software, or really, anything.
This concept of external trust is nothing new in the context of computer science. Whenever
you visit a website, your browser will attempt to assess the trustworthiness of that website
by checking the website’s certiﬁcate with a trusted 3rd party. If that 3rd party cannot
verify the trustworthiness of the website, it tries another 3rd party, and so on (this is
only part of the way trust is assessed, but the important part is the web of trust that is
consulted during assessment). In fact, trust is essential in computing, and begins as soon
17
==PAGE:25==
as you press the power button on your computer and the secure boot mechanism begins.
However, in the context of open source software, there does not seem to exist a function-
ing, implementable framework for establishing external trust in a piece of software.
In order to create one, or at least attempt to, we must examine what external factors we
as users or developers deem important in terms of trust. Some of these include:
1. Someone we trust uses the software. This seems to be an obvious marker for
trust, but often we do not know anyone we trust, who uses whatever software we’re
currently examining.
2. Someone whose work we trust uses the software. A logical extension of
the ﬁrst paragraph, we might not know anyone speciﬁc who uses a given piece of
OSS, but we already trust an existing piece of software and are likely to trust the
creator of said softwares instinct on the matter. Many developers know who Linus
Torvalds are, and are likely to trust something he trusts. Few people know who
Richard Levitte is but they often trust his work on OpenSSL (Levitte is the most
proliﬁc contributor to the OpenSSL project over the last 20 years [47]). We trust
his work enough to implement it in thousands of system, so it seems logical we
should trust his instinct on other software.
3. Enough people use the software. This might seem like something of a fallacy
- why should we trust something, just because other people use it? An example
can help illustrate. You are tasked with ﬁnding a Python library for converting
FLAC ﬁles to MP3. You ﬁnd two libraries capable of this. From what you can
gather on the surface, they’re identical in all aspects except library A has 50 users,
and library B has 50.000 users. Most developers would likely choose option B - all
things equal, we tend to trust the more popular option.
The factors listed are not exhaustive and purposefully left slightly abstract.
A later
section will deﬁne these external factors in detail, with a practical implementation in
mind.
18
==PAGE:26==
4.2
Requirements of Model and Implementation
Having deﬁned trust, we now deﬁne the requirements of a model that has the goal of
gauging trust in a piece of software. These are then used to evaluate both the model and
the implementation of the model.
The model and implementation should:
1. Estimate the level of external trust put into the software by outside actors. This
external trust should be seen from the perspective of the user requesting the estim-
ation.
2. Estimate the level of internal trust found in the source code. This should be based
on static analysis of the source code, and should perform analysis of the attributes
of the source code that contribute to the concept of trust.
3. Further estimate the level of internal trust found in the metadata surrounding
the software, such as data fetched from the site hosting the software (GitHub, for
example).
This data is classiﬁed as being internal as it relates to the internal
development and growth of the project.
4. Estimate the intent of the developer.
Investigate whether or not the developer
might have "bad" intentions or in general intentions with the software that are not
communicated clearly to the user.
5. Combine all of the above-mentioned metrics into one ﬁnal, meaningful trust score
that communicates to the user the complete aggregated amount of trust uncovered
during the analysis of the repository and the data surrounding it. The score should
provide a suﬃcient level of granularity, separating not only trustworthy and un-
trustworthy software, but provide a sliding scale on which the trustworthiness is
placed.
19
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Background on Important Data Sources
Throughout this thesis, a number of data sources will be leveraged in order to calculate
trust in software. The following section details two of the most important, GitHub and
MITREs CVE database.
4.3.1
GitHub
Many communities for open-source software exist, but GitHub remains, by far, the largest
and most popular for OSS, with over 44 million new repositories created in 2019 alone [48].
Other popular communities include SourceForge, GitLab and BitBucket, but the focus of
this thesis will remain on GitHub, as it hosts and manages the majority of popular OSS
projects. These include the source code for Linux [49], Python [50] and all of the Apache
Foundation’s projects [51]. Besides just hosting and version control, GitHub features a
host of related functionality, such as:
1. Issues, allowing users and contributors to follow a projects development by provid-
ing a system for tracking bugs and requested features.
2. Pull requests, allowing reviews of contributions before merging them with the
master.
3. Insights. A multitude of insights are provided by GitHub, such as statistics on
contributors, graphs of projects dependent on a given project, graphs of a project’s
individual dependencies, number of forks of a project and so on.
Other than metrics for individual projects, GitHub supports a massive developer com-
munity, allowing users to promote their projects on the site, and oﬀers social-network
capabilities, such as the ability to follow other users. Data on most of the features de-
scribed are available through the GitHub REST API, which will be used extensively in
the later implementation phase.
20
==PAGE:28==
4.3.2
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures - CVE
Vulnerabilities in software erode trust, and throughout this thesis we will present met-
rics that rely on vulnerability data. The de facto method for assessing, classifying and
cataloguing these vulnerabilities is the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE)
database. Great importance is placed on these vulnerabilities and therefore a brief ex-
amination of what a CVE is necessary.
Maintained by the non-proﬁt organization MITRE and funded by the US government,
MITREs CVE project is the largest publicly available vulnerability database, and as of
January 2021 the database contains 147.130 vulnerabilities [52]. A CVE represents a
vulnerability in a software system, and contains the following attributes:
• An id, of the form "CVE - YYYY - NNNN", where "YYYY" represents the year
the vulnerability was made public (not necessarily discovered) and "NNNN" the
numerical sequence system employed by MITRE. An example ID is CVE-2017-0144,
which refers to the vulnerability nicknamed "EternalBlue", which was leveraged in
both the WannaCry ransomware from 2017 [53], and the NotPetya incident later in
2017 [54].
• A description of the vulnerability, containing information on vulnerable systems,
versions and related CVEs.
• References to documents detailing the vulnerability, and possible exploits leveraging
the exploit.
• A link to the vulnerability in the National Vulnerability Database (NVD).
As mentioned in the last point, CVEs are also entered into the NVD, a database main-
tained by the US government. NVD contains additional details but just as important,
NVD assigns a numerical severity score to the vulnerability. This score gives an immediate
idea of how serious a certain vulnerability is, on a scale from 0-10, with 10 being of critical
severity. The severity score is an aggregated score based on the following characteristics
of the vulnerability (temporal and environmental scores omitted for brevity):
1. Attack Vector (AV). Represents how "close" an attacker has to be to utilize the
vulnerability. A vulnerability requiring physical access to a machine is, for example,
much less severe than a vulnerability exploitable over the public internet.
2. Attack Complexity (AC). Either high or low, represents how complex the attack
is. Higher complexity means a lower severity score, as attackers need to prepare
more thus thinning the pool of potential attackers.
3. Privileges required (PR). The access privileges required of the attacker in order
to utilize the vulnerability. Low privileges mean a higher severity score.
4. User interaction (UI). The degree of work an attacker has to put in before the
vulnerability can be exploited, such as making another user click a link in an email.
5. Score (S). Whether or not a vulnerable component can access components outside
its own authorized scope.
21
==PAGE:29==
6. Conﬁdentiality Impact (C). The degree to which the vulnerability might grant
access to otherwise conﬁdential information.
7. Integrity Impact (I). The degree to which the vulnerability erodes protection
of the integrity of systems, making it possible for attackers to modify or delete
information.
8. Availability Impact (A) The degree to which the vulnerability allows the attacker
to alter the availability of a system, such as denying users access to a given service.
[55]
As NVD contains much-needed extra information on CVEs, the MITRE CVE database
and NVD often go hand-in-hand when assessing a vulnerability. Not all vulnerabilities
are created equal, so when examining vulnerabilities in a system the severity is often as
important (if not more) than the base number of vulnerabilities. It only takes one critical
vulnerability to grant an attacker total access, whereas an attacker might struggle to
carry out any worthwhile attacks if given 10 low-impact vulnerabilities.
22
==PAGE:30==
4.4
External Trust
Trust in the context of a social network is a complicated subject, and highly dependant
on the limitations of the platform in question. This thesis is focused on projects hos-
ted on GitHub, and our deﬁnition of a trust network therefore falls within the domain
of GitHub. As such, our network is deﬁned by relatively simple interactions; users can
follow one another (one does not need to "accept" another person following them, as on
other networks), and in general the platform is focused more on the communities around
speciﬁc projects, than communities themselves. However, a social hierarchy of sorts still
exist. Popular users (often contributors to projects deemed important by other users)
are followed by other, often more anonymous users, who look to the more popular ones
for cutting-edge information. This can be deﬁned as cognitive trust [56, p. 47], a form
of trust placed by a trustor onto a trustee, based on reason and rational behaviour. This
is similar to what we’ve seen before - we follow other users whom we expect to exhibit
rational behaviour, and contribute to or use OSS that they deem trustworthy.
To model trust in a social network, it’s important to understand the properties of trust.
Seen through the lens of the GitHub community, some of these properties are:
1. Context speciﬁc. A user might follow an expert on JavaScript UI-frameworks, but
will look elsewhere for advice on programming secure embedded systems in C. This
is because trust is context speciﬁc and we don’t necessarily trust someone in the
context of scenario A, just because we trust them in scenario B.
2. Propagative. Trust is non-transitive [56, p. 48], but is still propagative. As an
example, Alice trusts Bob. Bob trusts Charlie. Alice does not know Charlie, but
because she trusts Bob, she trusts Charlie more than if she didn’t trust Bob - but
she does not trust Charlie as much as Bob. This relates well to the cognitive type
of trust. We expect people we deem rational and reasonable to only trust other
rationable, reasonable people.
3. Subjective. This might seem self-explanatory, but trust in social networks are sub-
jective, and we place diﬀerent types of trust in diﬀerent people. This, however, is
diﬃcult to model within our context.
4. Asymmetrical. This is especially true in highly-hierarchical networks like GitHub,
where experienced "thought-leaders" often lead the way. Trust is not necessarily
mirrored. One might trust another user, but the user does not have to trust back in
equal amounts. GitHub tends to attract software developers and enthusiasts from
all skill-levels, and often developers with decades of experience ﬁnd themselves
followed by university students or hobbyists with little experience.
[56, p.48]
When compared to other social networks, like Facebook, GitHub is fairly rudimentary.
One can follow others and these can follow back. The API does not oﬀer "friendship-
age", and it’s hard to quantify the relationship between two users.
So reducing the
above-mentioned properties to a metric calculated using data from the GitHub API is
not straight-forward. We can’t provide context - users are not classiﬁed as such, so we
23
==PAGE:31==
can’t judge whether or not a user is necessarily an expert in something. We also cannot
judge how asymmetric a friendship is because the subjective thoughts the users have of
each other are not encoded in the API. We can, however, make use of the propagative
property of trust. Figure 9 illustrates this relationship, where Alice trusts Bob who in
turn trusts the repository in question. This trust propagates to Alice, who then trusts
the same repository as Bob (but not as much).
Figure 9. Propagation of trust
To reduce the scope of computing trust in this context, followers will only be considered
one link away. Connected trust can be deﬁned in a number of ways. For this, we need to
examine the diﬀerent types of trust a user can place in a given OSS repository, which in
turn is derived from the actions users can take regarding a repository. These actions all
indicate some form of trust placed by a user in a given repository. However, the amount
of trust is not equal among the actions. On GitHub, these include:
1. Watching a repository.
A user watching a repository will be notiﬁed of all
conversations regarding the repository. Low level of trust.
2. Starring a repository. This is akin to a GitHub bookmark, saving the repository
in one’s library for later access. Low level of trust.
3. Forking a repository. Forking is a general term that applies to all open source.
In short, it creates a spin-oﬀof the original code, that the user can then work on
separate from the original. As an example, Ubuntu can be considered a fork of
Debian. Medium level of trust - a fork can be created by a user in attempts to
rectify untrustworthy parts of the original, but often it would indicate some level
of trust placed in the original.
4. Dependants. Although not always available, GitHub oﬀers info on what other
repositories depend on a given repository. Thus, a repository Charlie has made
can depend on one Bob has made. If Alice then trusts Charlies repository, she
should - to some degree - also trust Bobs repository. High level of trust, as the
trustworthiness of one’s own work (in part) now depends on this dependency.
24
==PAGE:32==
5. Contribute to a repository. Users can contribute to repositories in diﬀerent
ways. High level of trust. Work on OSS is, in large part, completely voluntary and
it would seem unreasonable for someone to work on a project they do not deem
trustworthy.
Table 1 formalises these levels of trust for later use.
Action
Level of trust
Watching
1
Starring
1
Forking
4
Contributing to
8
Depending on
10
Table 1: Trust levels
Values themselves are only meaningful in relation to one another, and is meant to express
magnitude of trust. If a developer depends on a speciﬁc repository for their work, then
that indicates a much higher degree of trust than if they’ve bookmarked that speciﬁc
repository for later review.
Lastly, some degree of trust must come from the absolute amount of trust actions on a
repository, regardless of whether or not a connection exists. A repository with thousands
of stars will inevitable seem more trustworthy than one with two stars, even though one
might not be connected with anyone who have starred the project. Thus, we also sum the
total amount of trust actions (from table 1) on the repository, regardless of connections.
This form of trust will be referred to as unconnected trust. Unconnected trust will have a
lesser impact than connected trust. Having deﬁned levels of trust, we can now formalize
external trust as such:
ExternalTrust =
i
X
fi2R
(SfiR) + UTR
(1)
SfR =
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
10 3pfk
if f 2 (Rd)
8 3pfk,
if f 2 (Rc)
4 3pfk,
if f 2 (Rf)
3pfk,
if f 2 (Rw _ Rs)
(2)
UTR = 20
3
r
( 1
16(10Rd + 8Rc + 4Rf + Rs)
(3)
Equation 1 sums trust over a given list of followed users (size i), where f = followed user,
R = given repository and SfiR the individual score calculated. UTR refers to the uncon-
nected trust on a given repository R, i.e. related to the absolute amount of dependents,
contributors, forks, stars and watchers on a repository. Computing connected trust then
25
==PAGE:33==
takes linear time, while computing unconnected trust takes constant time. The running
time is then O(n), where n is the amount of users followed.
Equation 3 refers to the computation of unconnected trust, which sums factors of depend-
ents, contributors, stars and forks of a given repository. These are then multiplied by
1
16
to reduce their signiﬁcance. We then take the cube root of the sum to scale the result
and multiply by 20 to get a value in a suitable range for the ﬁnal trust computation.
Unconnected trust is then capped at 300, meaning any score above gets set to 300.
Equation 2 computes trust placed in a given repository R, by a given user f, where Rw =
watchers of R, Rf = forks of R, Rc = contributors to R, Rd = dependents on R and k =
total number of followers of user f. The conditional expression is evaluated from the top
down, so the ﬁnal score corresponds to the highest possible that evaluates true. Thus,
only one statement will result in a score - if a user both depends, contributes to, forks
and watches a repository, the "most valuable" action counts. Not all followed users are
created equal, and to gauge the amount of trust one can place in a followed user, we look
at the amount of followers a followed user has, k. A regular user without many followers
(and thus, without trust) will count for less than more established users. For example,
the author of this thesis currently has 2 followers, while Linus Torvalds has over 124.000
followers. All things being equal, most if not all software developers would probably place
more trust in Torvalds than the author of this thesis. However, scaling is still needed as
Torvalds now gains dis-proportionally more trust than others. In fact, without scaling,
we would trust a user with 4 followers 4 times as much as a user with 1 follower. To slow
down the growth of trust over time we take the cube root of the total amount of followers.
Table 2 illustrates the scaling of trust. Other scales, such as logarithmic, was considered
but cube root strikes a good balance between taming growth while still allowing a larger
diﬀerence between small and large amounts of followers than log growth.
Followers
Trust before
Trust after
1
1
1
2
2
1.3
10
10
2.2
400
400
7.4
130.000
130.000
50.7
Table 2: Trust values before and after taking the cube root of amount of followers
Given a user and a repository, we can now use equation 1, 2 and 3 to assign an external
trust score to the given repository, seen from the perspective of the given user. We now
move on to internal trust.
26
==PAGE:34==
4.5
Internal Trust
As examined in section 4.1, trust consist of two parts; intent and quality.
Intent is
whether or not a developer hides, changes or obfuscates output of a given piece of OSS,
where users are unaware of this. Quality relates to whether or not a given output matches
an input in a way the developer intended to. If a button-press should print the current
page and a user presses the button without the page printing, then that is considered a
failure of the system and most often is correlated with the quality of said system. Figure
10 illustrates how internal trust works, and will serve as a guide throughout this section
as we deﬁne the components that make up intent and quality.
Figure 10. Model of internal trust
4.5.1
Intent
Intent is inherently diﬃcult to measure or evaluate, as it’s often not clear what the
intentions are on the developers part. If a developer releases an OSS application that, for
example, blocks access to certain websites, then we as a user will have to assume that’s
what the application does.
However, many examples exist of developers claiming an
application outputs X, but behind the scenes it outputs both X and Y, where Y can be
both benign or malicious. Several examples can be seen in section 2.3. Measuring intent
is then the same as measuring the output of an application, and making sure it matches
the expected output presented to the user. This is again a diﬃcult task, as we don’t
always know the output in advance. We can, however, make simple assumptions and
present data to the user that might make it easier to gauge the output of an application.
In many of the examples found in section 2.3 the malicious output was related to remote
access, or the application sending data to an outside party. If an application converts
27
==PAGE:35==
PNG images to JPEG, it probably shouldn’t contact an outside IP address every 10
seconds.
So, one of the signs of malicious code is unwarranted network access, and
detecting this should in theory be easy - we run the application and use a networking
tool like Wireshark to detect network access. However, the model developed in this thesis
evaluates OSS repositories and any dependencies of these. For this we need to rely on
static code analysis, as actually running and evaluating the OSS code programmatically
is outside the scope of this thesis. Running the code relies on building the source, setting
up the proper environment and then accessing features that runs the code. Doing this
automatically is a much more complicated task than performing static analysis.
Fortunately, we can still detect some network access from a static point of view. Related
work on the subject suggests examining language-speciﬁc API calls [57, p. 152] in the
code, for example the libc package used in UNIX systems to handle networking in
C/C++. As the implementation produced in this thesis revolves around Python, one
could statically detect calls to Python speciﬁc networking libraries, in an attempt to
gauge network activity - these will be detailed further in the implementation section of
this thesis.
Detecting network activity, however, is not necessarily a red ﬂag. Many applications that
one usually wouldn’t assume need network activity do so to check for updates. In order
to best avoid false positives, we can check for known malicious domains in some of the
many frequently updated databases containing these [58] [59]. We can now assert, with
some degree of conﬁdence, if a given repository contains malicious code with network
capabilities.
Other malicious activities can hide in the source code of an application, but as most (if
not all) eventually rely on some sort of networking to communicate back to a malicious
host, this thesis will only examine network-based malicious code and not look at other
areas such as usage of rootkits or credential-manipulation [57, p. 154].
Calculating a numerical score for intent presents a challenge. How do you score intent
on a numerical scale? To this end, we assign a large, negative value to intent, indicating
a large amount of distrust. Equation 4 formalises this, where I = intent.
I =
(
−1000,
if malicious network activity detected
0,
otherwise
(4)
As with other forms of static analysis, false positives are a possibility. However, the score
should not necessarily prevent the user from using the software entirely, but serve as a
warning or prompt to investigate the software further before putting it to use. After all,
rather err on the side of caution than implement a potentially malicious piece of software
in an otherwise legitimate codebase.
4.5.2
Quality
As seen from ﬁgure 10, quantifying quality relies on a much larger amount of metrics
than intent, at least within the scope deﬁned for this thesis. Some will rely on static
code analysis, others, such as quality of community, will rely on data gathered from the
28
==PAGE:36==
public GitHub API. The ﬁnal result will be a quality score that sums up all the factors
that make up quality within the scope of trust outlined in this thesis.
4.5.2.1
Source Code Quality
Statically measuring and analyzing quality of source code has been a long contended
ﬁeld, with decades worth of research. But before diving headﬁrst into analysis of code,
we must deﬁne what makes up quality of source code. For this, we turn to ISO 25010,
brieﬂy examined in section 3.3. ISO 25010 proposes 13 overall characteristics that make
up quality of software, and 40 sub-characteristics that together deﬁne quality. Not all are
created equal, however, and not all are easily quantiﬁable and measurable.
Before selecting characteristics and attempting to measure them, we need to take an-
other brief step back and determine what kind of qualities we’re looking for. ISO 25010
deals with quality across its entire spectrum, from security and performance across softer
characteristics such as satisfaction and its sub-characteristics. We are only interested in
quality characteristics that impact the trustworthiness of a given piece of OSS software,
thus quality is seen through the lens of trust. This means we are not concerned to a
great degree with the softer metrics, such as satisfaction. To use an analogy, one might
well consider the plushness of the seats in a new car, or its paint-job, to be a measure
of quality. However, when quality is examined as a factor of trustworthiness, we are
unconcerned with the polish of the chassis and mostly focused on the mechanical and
structural side of things. Softer seats might indicate quality, but they do not indicate
trustworthiness. For this reason, we select only characteristics from ISO 25010 that are
deemed to have a meaningful impact on the trustworthiness of OSS.
To help guide our choices and weighting of characteristics, we turn to the work by Lavazza
et al., in their 2011 paper "A Survey on Open Source Software Trustworthiness". Brieﬂy
examined in section 3.3, their work surveyed 151 developers and ranks quality character-
istics after how much they aﬀect trust among developers [56]. Lavazza et al. deﬁnes 37
characteristics, ranked from "absolutely fundamental", to "totally irrelevant" - these are
then placed in one of 5 categories:
• Quality
• Development
• Customer
• License
• Economic
[56, p. 71]
As we are only interested in quality metrics, metrics belonging to other categories are
not presented here. We are also not interested in metrics deemed "somewhat irrelevant"
or "totally irrelevant" by developers, and for this reason we omit the metrics standard
architecture, localization and human interface, complexity, patterns, self-containedness
and size. The following list contains all the original quality metrics (ranked in accordance
29
==PAGE:37==
with importance) found in the work by Lavazza et al., and table 3 details the selection
process for the metrics relevant in this context.
1. Reliability
2. Degree to which an OSS product satisﬁes/covers functional requirements
3. Interoperability
4. Maintainability
5. Standard compliance
6. Performance
7. Usability
8. Security
9. Portability
10. Reusability
11. Modularity
12. Standard architecture
13. Localization and human interface
14. Complexity
15. Patterns
16. Self-containedness
17. Size
30
==PAGE:38==
Metric
Measure-
able with
static analysis
Relevancy
in regards
to trust
Comment
Reliability
X
High
Bug detection via static analysis
can help determine unreliable software
Degree to which an
OSS product
satisﬁes/covers
functional requirements
x
High
Requires measurement of output,
and quantiﬁable requirements
Interoperability
x
High
Saradhi et al. ﬁnds little evidence of
static metrics correlating
with interoperability [60, p. 2593]
Maintainability
X
Medium
Measurable with a variety of tools and models,
such as the concept of technical debt
Standard compliance
X
Low
Static analysis can enforce compliance to standards.
However, these standards tend to be arbitrary and
function more as a way to homogenize code bases within
an organization
Performance
x
Medium
Measuring performance in any meaningful way
requires executing the software
Usability
x
Medium
Usability is subjective and not analysable
through static analysis
Security
X
High
Security can be measured in a variety of way, from
unsafe use of functionality to unnecessary use of
certain capabilities, such as networking
Portability
x
Medium
Portability is highly dependent on language
and platform, and is outside the scope of this thesis
Reusability
X
Low
Related to modularity and will be treated as one metric
Modularity
X
Low
See reuseability
Standard architecture
x
Low
Similar to standard compliance
Table 3: Metrics and their relevancy to trust
31
==PAGE:39==
As the model deﬁned in this thesis relies on static analysis, only metrics analyzable
through static analysis will be chosen for further examination. Also, we ﬁlter out metrics
that are hard to quantify in the context of individual source code bases, such as standard
compliance, seen in table 3. Lastly, we forego reusability and modularity, as these are
deemed somewhat irrelevant by the survey conducted by Lavazza et al. We are going to
make one ﬁnal adjustment to the list of quality metrics. In the original survey, security
ranked below both reliability and maintainability. In the context of how we have previ-
ously deﬁned trust, this will not work: lack of security can have much more drastic eﬀects
on the output of an application than maintainability can. While maintainability most
certainly is important in OSS, it does not directly impact the output of an application -
only the maintenance. While an argument can be made that lack of maintainability now
can impact the correctness of output in the future, security is still deemed more critical
to the integrity of the output. Therefore, we now adjust the rankings of security and
maintainability, and the ﬁnal three metrics are:
1. Reliability - high importance
2. Security - high importance
3. Maintainability - medium importance
The rankings will help us weigh the later metrics when a score for source code quality
is calculated. We now deﬁne each metric and how it will be calculated in the context of
trustworthiness.
4.5.2.2
A Word on Static Analysis
Before we dive into measuring the previously listed metrics, it’s necessary to explore
exactly how we measure these.
Ideally, we could take a language-agnostic approach
when analysing source code and develop methods for measuring within any programming
language. In reality, however, it’s not so simple. While metrics such as maintainability can
be analyzed from a more abstract perspective, reliability and security inevitably rely on
language-speciﬁc methods, which we will explore when examining each individual metric.
To contain the scope of this thesis, language-speciﬁc methods are limited to Python.
Expanding the language-speciﬁc analysis to other languages is relatively straight-forward,
but as it provides little academic value to present more language-speciﬁc methods, we
limit ourselves to Python.
When calculating both reliability and security, the tools implemented utilize an abstract
syntax tree or AST. As the name implies, an AST structure abstracts away details of
the source code in question and builds a tree over the abstract syntactic structure of the
source code [61, p. 74]. The tree then contains branching parts of the source code, with
leaves corresponding to variable assignments and function invocations. Figure 11 gives
an example of an AST structure.
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 11. An example of a simple AST structure. [61, p. 75]
4.5.2.3
Reliability
In our deﬁned context of trust, reliability is key. Reliability directly determines whether
or not the output matches the expected output. Given the same input, the software
should always produce the same output, and in the same amount of time. Reliability is
then directly linked to the concept of software faults, or bugs. A bug, by deﬁnition, is
a fault that changes the expected outcome to the unexpected, and bugs therefore aﬀect
reliability in a major way. As such, we can deﬁne reliability to be "the non-presence of
bugs", and measure the amount of bugs to predict reliability.
Measuring bugs, or even predicting the amount of bugs in code, is a long-studied ﬁeld with
plenty of controversy. One of the most infamous and hotly debated metrics for measuring
software faults is cyclomatic complexity, ﬁrst introduced by Thomas J. McCabe in 1976,
in his now often-referenced paper A Complexity Measure [32]. Cyclomatic complexity
measures the paths one can take through a method or function, in eﬀect measuring unique
branches in the code. The more if and else statements, the higher the complexity.
Intuitively, this link between cyclomatic complexity and the presence of bugs makes
sense - as the paths through a program increases, so should the places bugs can arise.
Some academics have even claimed that "Complex code contains more defects" [62, p.
36], going so far as providing unsubstantiated ﬁgures claiming the link between amount
of bugs present in the code and the cyclomatic complexity in the code. See ﬁgure 12 for
an example of this.
Often, however, no evidence of such as link is presented, and bold inferences are instead
made without any basis. Figure 12, for example, is not backed by empirical evidence.
ISO 26262, an ISO standard outlining software standards within the automotive industry,
proposed "Enforcement of low complexity" as the number 1 most important topic to be
covered by modelling and coding guidelines [63, p. 8]. Again, no evidence was provided.
Mentions in academic papers and ISO 26262 has helped perpetuate the myth the complex
software is inherently more bug-prone.
As mentioned in section 3.1.2, Les Hatton has published several, evidence backed papers
stating no correlation between number of defects and cyclomatic complexity (see ﬁgure
5 for plot detailing this). Backing this rejection of cyclomatic complexity as a measure
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 12.
Link between bugs and cyclomatic complexity, as presented by Mark
Schroeder [62]
of reliability is Martin Shepperds 1988 paper A critique of cyclomatic complexity as a
software metric. After presenting empirical evidence against cyclomatic complexity as a
complexity measure, Shepperd states that "Cyclomatic complexity fails to convince as a
general software complexity metric" [64, p. 35]. He goes on to say:
"It is arguable that the search for a general complexity metric based upon
program properties is a futile task. Given the vast range of programmers, pro-
gramming environments, programming languages and programming tasks, to
unify them into the scope of a single complexity metric is an awesome task.
A more fruitful approach might be to derive metrics from the more abstract
notations and concepts of software designs. This would have the additional
advantage that design metrics are available earlier on in the software devel-
opment process." [64, p. 35]
With cyclomatic complexity debunked, we move on to other language-agnostic metrics
for indicating reliability. Again, however, we are bound to be disappointed - the work of
Hatton and Hopkins and their examination of over 20 years of development on the Fortran
library NAG ﬁnds little to no evidence of other generic metrics indicating reliability [65,
p. 14]. They state:
"Divining reliable predictive relationships between the expected number of de-
fects and structural parameters such as those presented here does not look
particularly promising based on this dataset" [65, p. 14]
Some of the metrics examined (other than cyclomatic complexity) includes:
• goto statements
• Maximum nesting level of if statements
• Dangling else/if
• Number of declared objects actually use
• Number of subroutines in a ﬁle
34
==PAGE:42==
• Number of executable lines of code
• Number of undeclared variables
• Total number of operator tokens
• Number of executable lines of code
[65, p. 4-5]
Interestingly, the only metric that provided any indication of the presence of bugs was
Number of executable lines of code. Figure 13 illustrates this.
Figure 13. Correlation between # of defects and log(executable lines of code) [65, p.
14]
Executable lines of code, however, is not very applicable when analysing code, and only
proves what one could already logically deduce: in general, the longer the code, the more
bugs are likely to be found.
This section has examined language-agnostic metrics and how little correlation there
seems to be between generic code metrics and amount of defects in the software. That
does not mean that we can’t use static analysis to explore reliability of code, only we now
have to rely on language-speciﬁc patterns to ﬁnd these unreliable parts. As this thesis is
limited to Python, only Python related patterns will be examined. To avoid reinventing
the wheel, we will rely on well-established tools for static analysis.
Python and static analysis
Python is a strongly, dynamically typed language, and is not compiled to machine code
until execution [66]. This lack of compilation (to machine code) until execution means
there is no compiler to catch common type-errors before runtime, as with C/C++, Java
and many other languages. For this reason, Python is very suited for static analysis, as
we can catch these type errors before actually running the code, avoiding runtime errors.
35
==PAGE:43==
Many tools exist for statically analyzing Python code, the most popular being PyLint.
PyLint helps detect code smells, bad practices, style errors and, most importantly for
us, programming errors. In a rather simple test conducted by Gulabovska et al., PyLint
outperformed other static analysis programs, such as PyFlakes, Frosted, MyPy and others
[67, p. 9] in ﬁnding programmatic errors that would’ve otherwise resulted in runtime
errors, if left unchecked. To give a brief example of a common error that usually remains
until runtime in Python, consider the following:
import random
message = "Hi there !
I
l i k e
s t a t i c
analysis "
# Generate a random number between
0.0 and 1.0
i f random . random () > 0 . 5 :
# Call an undefined
v a r i a b l e
print ( mesage )
The code above will generate runtime errors half of the times it’s executed, and generate
no errors the other half. The reference to the misspelled variable mesage is not caught
before runtime, resulting in unexpected behaviour. PyLint catches such an error (other
analysers also do), eﬀectively acting as a compiler does in languages such as C, warning
the user that something is wrong.
PyLint catches a long list of errors not caught before runtime, and can reduce the amount
of errors present in Python code before publication. As such, checking code with PyLint
can help estimate reliability. A full list of rules used for analysing code can be found
in the appendix.
Conveniently, PyLint provides a score after analysing the provided
source code. This score (modiﬁed to exclude warnings, refactors and convention errors)
is deﬁned as such:
Sc = 10.0 −((float(5 ⇤error)/statement) ⇤10) ⇤3
(5)
[68]
In equation 5, S is the ﬁnal score given, c is the code provided, error is amount of
errors found and statement is total amount of statements in the code. Equation 5 is not
bounded by 0, and the initial range before scaling is −40 to 10, where −40 represents
an error in every single statement in the code, and 10 represents no errors found. The
score is multiplied by 10 to get a score with a ceiling of 100, and then multiplied by 3
to increase the weight reliability has on the ﬁnal trust score. The reasons for scaling the
metric up will be explored further in later sections.
PyLint oﬀers a fast, easy to use method for catching the most egregious errors in the
code. However, we will never be able to use static analysis to catch all errors before
runtime - Turing’s halting problem has proven that [69]. As such, our reliability score
will only be an approximation of the real truth, a heuristic to help us decide whether or
not to trust an application.
36
==PAGE:44==
4.5.2.4
Security
In the context of OSS, the concept security can mean several things, however in this
section we’ll limit ourselves to statically analysing code for known security vulnerabilities.
Later sections will touch on other security aspects, such as the security of dependencies.
Static analysis has long been used for catching security ﬂaws in source code, and remains
highly relevant to this day. But in a development scenario, static analysis is only a small
step in a larger chain of actions designed to minimize security risk. Figure 14 illustrates
this chain.
Figure 14. Security and the software development cycle [70, p. 3]
In our context of security, static analysis checks for unsafe use of methods, classes and
variables. These are typically known in advance, i.e. deﬁned as known security vulner-
abilities. A classic example of this is string-copy method strcpy() found in C, where
unsafe usage might result in dangerous overﬂow errors. Other cases include hardcoded
credentials, lack of neutralization of input and general lack of input validation. In fact,
all of the mentioned security ﬂaws are found in MITREs Common Weakness Enumera-
tion list, containing the 25 most prevalent security ﬂaws found in software [71]. Static
analysis can help catch many of the vulnerabilities found on the CWE list, but not all
developers necessarily rely on static analysis when developing OSS. For this reason, we
perform static analysis as a safety measure, "in case the developer didn’t".
Not all vulnerabilities are created equal, however. As deﬁned by Chess & West, two high
level groups of security defects exist:
• Generic defects. These are the ﬂaws that can occur in almost any program written
in a given language. The strcopy issue is an example of this; all programs written
in C/C++, regardless of their purpose or semantics, are vulnerable to a buﬀer
overﬂow. How much it will aﬀect the security of the program will obviously diﬀer
greatly, but the ﬂaw itself can be present no matter the context of the program.
[61, p. 14]
• Context-speciﬁc defects. Defects that are only considered defects within a cer-
tain context. Chess & West provides a good example: a credit card processing
system should never display the numbers entered on the screen, and should comply
with the PCI Data Protection Standard. However, there exists no standard func-
tions or data types in C/C++ for storing and handling credit card data, and as
such every program will handle this diﬀerently. [61, p. 14]
37
==PAGE:45==
Additionally, a case can be made for some ﬂaws only being present in certain represent-
ations of the program. As an example, an overﬂow error is present in the source code,
while other ﬂaws such as the concept of "trust" between systems are usually only present
in the more abstract design of the system. Figure 15 deﬁnes four diﬀerent defects, that
are either generic or context speciﬁc, and found either in the design or the source code
of the program.
Figure 15. Matrix of defect type and visibility [61, p. 15]
As we have no real means of assessing the design of a given piece of OSS, and we are
unable to execute the software in a meaningful way, only generic defects will be considered
when performing static analysis. Fortunately, static analysis is most suited for generic
defects. Just how eﬀective static analysis is at catching security ﬂaws will inevitably
vary from language to language. Java and C/C++ are statically, compiled languages,
meaning type errors will be caught by the compiler and are nonetheless deﬁned in the
code, making static analysis of these errors easy. Python, our chosen language for this
thesis, is dynamically typed and only compiled at runtime, meaning type errors are
very much a possibility. On the other hand, Python employs the concept of arbitrary
precision when dealing with integers, making buﬀer overﬂow errors impossible (at least
in pure Python, it’s still possible in C-style ﬁxed precision libraries such as pandas or
numpy [72]). Such discrepancies between languages means there are no hard truth as to
how many security ﬂaws found on the CWE list that static analysis will catch. However,
studies performed in C/C++ and Java suggest that between 30-60% of CWEs can be
caught by using a combination of two or more static analysis tools [73, p. 19].
One of the most serious vulnerabilities any program can contain is unsafe use of cryp-
tography. These include unsafe use of cryptographic modes (such as blowﬁsh or ECB),
unsafe key lengths (such as RSA 512 bit keys, broken in 1999 [74]) or broken hashing
methods, such as MD5 which was proven susceptible to collisions 24 years ago [75].
Fortunately, many of these cryptographic modes and algorithms are present across pro-
gramming languages, meaning we can detect them regardless of language. Additionally,
38
==PAGE:46==
catching them is made relatively easy using static analysis, as these are often imported
from widespread cryptographic libraries and the syntax for using them is usually the
same regardless of program. As an example, creating a cipher using ECB mode in Py-
thon usually entails importing the ubiquitous cryptography library cryptography and
creating the cipher with the function call ciphers.modes.ECB. Thus, scanning for these
is simple.
Unfortunately, scanning for homegrown cryptography is much harder. Seen from a secur-
ity perspective, homemade cryptography algorithms present a two-pronged security issue:
they’re unsafe - making your own cryptography from the ground up is highly discouraged
("don’t roll your own" [61, p. 409]), and as they rely on custom syntax we can’t use static
analysis to detect mode, key length and so on. For this reason, scanning and detecting
homemade cryptography is outside the scope of this thesis. It’s also doubtful how big the
problem is, as developers tend to take the easy way and creating your own cryptographic
algorithm is by no means an easy task.
We’ve established that we want to detect generic defects and unsafe cryptographic use,
speciﬁcally in Python. For this we rely on the library bandit by PyCQA (Python Code
Quality Authority), a widespread Python tool used to cover a large area of typical security
vulnerabilities. bandit builds an AST structure and then utilizes a collection of plugins
to scan the nodes in the AST. Writing custom plugins is possible, but as we’re interested
in the most generic defects we will only rely on the default collection of plugins. A full
list of the plugins used can be found in appendix B. Some noteworthy plugins include:
• Test for SSL use with bad version used. Detects usage of older, unsafe versions
of SSL, such as TLS v1, v1.1, SSL v2 and SSL v3.
• Test for Telnet usage. Telnet is considered unsafe and should not be used.
• Test for various unsafe crytography. Several unsafe uses are covered, such as
blowfish, md5 and usage of ECB modes. Key length is also checked.
[76]
Using bandit allows us to rule out the most severe and generic security ﬂaws in a given
piece of Python OSS. bandit outputs a list of faults discovered, on the scale low, medium,
high. It also outputs a conﬁdence score, also from low to high. To incorporate it into
our ﬁnal trust score, then, we need to convert it to a numeric value and scale it. There
is also a need to proportionally convey the seriousness of a vulnerability with the score
high, and the conﬁdence in said score. For this, we need to take a moment to address the
concept of false positives within the context of our calculation of trust.
False positives and false negatives are both very real threats to the validity of results
obtained via static analysis. In case of scanning for security vulnerabilities, a false positive
is a ﬂag for a vulnerability that isn’t there. For example, the hashing algorithm MD5
should not be used for hashing passwords, as its easily breakable. However, using MD5 to
generate checksums for internal usage might not pose the same immediate danger as using
it for passwords would. Other false positives could be usage of subprocess.Popen() in
Python. Allowing execution of external shell scripts poses a potential threat, but if all it
does is install a dependency or unzip some ﬁles, then the danger was exaggerated.
39
==PAGE:47==
For this thesis and the model developed, however, false negatives are a much bigger threat
than false positives. The purpose of scanning for potential vulnerabilities is to prompt
the users themselves to pay attention and move with caution. We want to encourage
them to manually check what the program needs to execute external shell scripts for.
SecScore =
n
X
vi2C
8
>
<
>
:
−50,
if vi = high
−25,
if vi = medium
−10,
if vi = low0
(6)
SecScore =
(
SecScore,
if SecScore > −500
−500,
otherwise
(7)
Equation 6 deﬁnes how security is scored, where vi is vulnerability i (discovered by
bandit) in source code C, out of n vulnerabilities. We then score the vulnerabilities
numerically according to the severity deﬁned by bandit. Equation 7 then sets a ceiling
on the score by limiting it to no less than -500. This is by design, to limit the impact
of the security score. With the security score calculated, we move on to the ﬁnal source
code metric, maintainability.
4.5.2.5
Maintainability
Many attempts has been made to quantify maintainability and its eﬀects on source code.
Few have come close to proving a correlation between software metrics and how they aﬀect
maintainability. First, we need to deﬁne, or at least contain, the term maintainability,
and why it matters for the quality of the code.
"Maintainability represents the ”degree of eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency with
which a product or system can be modiﬁed to improve it, correct it or ad-
apt it to changes in environment, and in requirements” - ISO/IEC 25010,
2011 [77]
Maintainability is unique in the sense that it does not aﬀect the quality of the program
in the here and now, such as reliability and security does, but instead hinders future
eﬀorts to improve upon the program. If, for example, a program exhibits low reliability
and needs undergo severe changes to ﬁx critical bugs, maintainability is the main factor
(besides the amount of bugs) aﬀecting how fast or slow these changes are made. In that
way, maintainability has an eﬀect on both reliability and security, in that it directly
impacts measures taken to improve these other metrics.
Several frameworks exist for calculating maintainability in source code, each with their
own caveats. As seen in section 3.2, maintainability index (MI ) was created in cooper-
ation with Hewlett-Packard, resulting in the seminal paper Using Metrics to Evaluate
Software System Maintainability from 1994. The paper remains one of the most cited
within the ﬁeld of software maintainability, however some problems have arisen since its
inception. Heitlager et al. [78] presents a thoroughly convincing case as to why MI might
not be very useful after all. To better understand the case against MI, the full formula
is necessary:
40
==PAGE:48==
171 −5.2 ln HV −0.23CC −16.2 ln LOC + 50.0 sin
p
2.46 ⇤COM
(8)
Where HV is Halstead Volume, CC is cyclomatic complexity, LOC is lines of code and
COM is the optional parameter of percentage of lines of comments per module.
Some of the key arguments against MI, as presented by Heitlager et al. includes:
• Root-cause analysis. MI is a composite number, and as seen from the formula
its not entirely clear exactly how one would improve a low MI score.
• Average complexity. Cyclomatic complexity, as taken across an entire system
might be very misleading. Java getter and setters, for example, have a complexity
of 1, lowering the complexity of the entire system and masking high risk parts of
the code.
• Comment. The implication that more comments in the code is inherently better
is logical, but remains ﬂawed. Code might simply be commented out, inﬂating the
number. Lines of comments might also be high because the complex code requires
more explaining. Finally, little evidence exist of a strong correlation between lines
of comments and maintainability. This might have even been acknowledged in the
creation of MI, as the parameter is optional.
• Understandability. Little is presented in the original paper on why some con-
stants are included, and how these were arrived at. Why does COM occur under a
square root? Why the sin function?
[78, p. 32-33]
Other criticisms have been aimed at MI, speciﬁcally its reliance of program length [77]
as a measure of maintainability. The inclusion of LOC directly ties MI to length of the
code, and as cyclomatic complexity is also directly correlated to the length of the program
[79] the end result seems very skewed towards total lines of code. Surely, maintainability
should be possible even for large programs. As shown by Molnar et al., MI inevitably
goes down as lines of code increases [77, p. 8], meaning MI will always be higher for
smaller programs.
The case against MI is strong enough for us to discard it for our purposes. Fortunately,
more nuanced frameworks exist.
"Shipping ﬁrst time code is like going into debt. A little debt speeds devel-
opment so long as it is paid back promptly with a rewrite. [...] The danger
occurs when the debt is not repaid. Every minute spent on not-quite-right
code counts as interest on that debt." - Ward Cunningham on The WyCash
Portfolio Management System in 1993 [80, p. 2]
Coined in 1993 and borrowed from the ﬁnancial industry, technical debt introduced the
concept of debt in code, and the eﬀects it has on organizations. Debt accumulates over
time as maintenance activities are neglected in favour of new functionality [40], and tech-
nical debt then refers to the time it would take to remedy this lack of maintenance.
41
==PAGE:49==
Usually, "not-quite-right" code is introduced to create new functionality without hav-
ing to necessarily follow best practice within an organization. Figure 16 illustrates the
problem many developers are faced with during tight deadlines.
Figure 16. The common dilemma leading to technical debt
Technical debt was never oﬃcially formalised in a manner that allowed one to scan code
and produce a ﬁnal score, as with MI, and exists more as an abstract and informal way
to look at the problem of maintainability. Usually, technical debt results in code smells,
coding patterns that aﬀect maintainability. Some of these include:
• Blob class. A large class with many diﬀerent responsibilities, monopolising re-
sources.
• Class data should be private. Classes should not expose their private data to
other parts of the program.
• Functional decomposition. A class making poor use of inheritance and poly-
morphism, implementing few methods.
• Spaghetti code. A class without structure that declares long methods without
parameters.
[81, p. 2]
Note that these are only examples of code smells, and that the ﬁeld remains somewhat
subjective. Also important to note is that these are not indicators of where errors occur
(as we’ve seen previously, predicting bugs in code is very diﬃcult), but indicators of code
that might be hard to maintain. Most developers have likely seen examples of these code
smells, like overly long methods with too many diﬀerent responsibilities. Not only are
these hard to debug, they’re also hard to write meaningful tests for.
One of the advantages of technical debt over MI is the fact that it functions independently
from the length and size of the program. This is best illustrated by the work of Molnar
et al., in which three diﬀerent maintainability classiﬁers (maintainability index, technical
debt and the ARiSA method) was tested on three diﬀerent open source software packages
and their development across several versions [77]. Over the years the programs grew in
length as features were added, and MI decreased (remember, a higher MI is supposed to
mean better maintainability) regardless of other factors, while technical debt remained
42
==PAGE:50==
the same, or in some case fell after deliberate measures to increase maintainability was
taken.
Figure 17. Maintainability according to the three models in the application FreeMind,
over a span of 16 years (2000-2016). The spike around v0.8.0 represents a large refactoring
of the code. [77, p. 8]
As seen in ﬁgure 17, technical debt has remained largely the same in the open source ap-
plication FreeMind (regardless of lines of code), while MI has steadily fallen. Interestingly,
the spike at version 0.8.0 refers to the technical debt incurred after a large refactoring of
the codebase. Some versions after 0.8.0, the debt introduced in the refactoring (which
brought the overall length of the program signiﬁcantly down) was largely removed.
As a note, one might wonder why the ARiSA model is not examined further in this
section. The simple answer is that very little literature exists on the model, and static
analysers incorporating the model are rare. Therefore, the focus remain on the tried and
tested concept of technical debt.
As technical debt is somewhat informal in its deﬁnition, others have stepped in to form-
alise it. The SQALE model exists as an intermediary between the informal and formal,
by deﬁning models and indices that help quantify technical debt [82]. The next step is
then to implement SQALE in a language-speciﬁc library to classify debt found in actual
source code. Fortunately, this has been done in the well-established static analysis tool
SonarQube. SonarQube can be used with a variety of diﬀerent programming languages
and relies on the SQALE deﬁnition of technical debt to score the code provided [83].
For all technical debt scanning, we will rely on SonarQube (the open source, community
version) and the score it generates. SonarQube relies on 81 code smell indicators, and
a link to the list of these rules can be found in the appendix A. The score provided by
SonarQube is on the scale A-E, with A representing very little technical debt (a debt
ratio of under 5%) and E representing an abundance of debt (over 50% debt ratio) [83].
After scanning, we convert the score given by SonarQube to a numerical score, to better
ﬁt with our overall goal of computing trust. For our purposes, we will refer to technical
debt as a measure of maintainability in our model, so any mention of technical debt is to
be considered synonymous with our contextual deﬁnition of maintainability.
43
==PAGE:51==
TD =
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
100,
if SQScore = A
80,
if SQScore = B
60,
if SQScore = C
40,
if SQScore = D
0,
if SQScore = E
(9)
Equation 9 deﬁnes this numerical conversion, where SQScore refers to the score output
by SonarQube’s scan for technical debt. Technical debt, in this context, is synonymous
with maintainability, and as we now have a way of numerically scoring this, we move on
to the next component, the quality of the community.
4.5.2.6
Quality of Community
Open source software is wholly reliant on the community, and without the community
there would be no open source. For that reason, the quality of the community behind
a given piece of OSS is essential to the quality of the software. In this section we will
attempt to quantity the community maintaining a GitHub repository, and score the
quality of said community, using a wide range of metrics and inﬂuencing factors. Before
diving in, however, we deﬁne a more abstract view of a given community.
Figure 18. Basic tasks of a OSS community
Figure 18 illustrates the basic workings of a OSS community.
Our task then, is to
quantify how these tasks are being performed within a community, to gauge its quality.
The GitHub API oﬀers a wealth of information on community activities, so the primary
challenge becomes ﬁnding and ﬁltering the relevant data, and aggregating it to something
towards our overall goal of assessing trust. Fortunately, some research has already been
conducted in this area. As presented in section 3.2, Bai et al., have created a framework
for assessing trustworthiness of OSS communities, based on a variety of factors.
To
understand why it might be relevant in our context, a further examination of the work
by Bai et al. is necessary. Their work deﬁnes the Developer Assessment Model (DAM ),
a model and framework for ranking the quality of contributors to OSS projects [37]. The
DAM consists of four primary attributes, as seen in ﬁgure 19, and these attributes are
44
==PAGE:52==
deﬁned by data either mined from the metadata of the software repository, or from the
webpage maintaining community activities.
Figure 19. The DAM model [37, p. 77]
In DAM, a contributor is evaluated using the following formula:
C =
4
X
i=1
WiXi
(10)
Where w1, w2, w3, w4 = wcollaboration, wtechnical, winfluence, wcontribution, and Xi denotes a set
of weights calculated for each attribute [37, p. 78]. Table 4 contains these weights.
Attribute
Weight
Integer
weight
Collaboration index
0.0098
1
Technical skill
0.0206
2
Community
inﬂuence
0.0143
2
Development
contribution
0.0196
2
Table 4: Weights assigned to the four attributes [37, p. 79]
Scores for each attribute are calculated by iterating over the relevant data (GitHub issues
and comments, or repository data) and adding the scores up. Table 5 contains these
scores. Some of the scores are based on interactions with other users and the concept of
levels is deﬁned. Levels are deﬁned as such:
1. Level 1: Once a user registers for membership in the community, the user is assigned
to this level.
45
==PAGE:53==
2. Level 2: A user with a single post that has at least ﬁve thumbs-ups or a user with
100 or fewer submissions is assigned to this level.
3. Level 3: A user who is a project manager or has a single post with at least 20
thumbs-ups or a user who has more than 100 submissions is assigned to this level.
[37, p. 78]
Within the context of GitHub, we are unable to see when a user joins a speciﬁc community,
as in level 1.
Therefore, any user not eligible for level 2 or 3 is assigned to level 1.
Also, in level 3 the concept of project manager is mentioned - we cannot determine who
is managing a given project, so we substitute this for the repository owner (at least
somewhat interchangeable). Lastly, scores are normalized. This is done using equation
11, where xi represents the current users initial score of attribute i before normalization,
x⇤
i is the normalized score of the attribute and ximax and ximin represents the maximum
and minimum initial scores of this attribute for all users. The normalized score will put
each score on a scale of 0 - 1.0, with 0 being the lowest encountered thus far within that
community, and 1.0 being the largest.
x⇤
i =
xi −ximin
ximax −ximin
(11)
Attribute
Source
Evidence
Score
Collaboration
index
Software
repository
Leave a message to defect
+1
Change the issue state
+1
Webpage
Reply the message
+1
Reply the post
+1
Community
inﬂuence
Webpage
The number of followers
+1
Technical skill
Webpage
Thumbs-down the post
-1
The post has been thumbs-up by
level 1 users
+2
The post has been thumbs-up by
level 2 users
+3
The post has been thumbs-up by
level 3 users
+4
The post has been thumbs-down
by level 1 users
-1
The post has been thumbs-down
by level 2 users
-1.5
The post has been thumbs-down
by level 3 users
-2
Development
contribution
Software
repository
Commit the code
+2
Commit the document
+2
Update the down-ratio of issue
+1
Release the issue
+1
Table 5: Scores for actions associated with attributes [37, p. 78]
46
==PAGE:54==
As mentioned in section 3.2, Bai et al.
tested the DAM and correctly ranked 9 out
of 10 users selected at random, by ﬁrst scoring these manually (i.e. assessing who is a
"high-quality" member of a community and who is not) and then applying the DAM.
As mentioned in their work, the model is still considered something of a prototype, and
would need further studies assessing its accurateness. For our purposes, it functions well
as an approximation of the quality of contributors on a project. However, we are less
interested in ranking contributors in relation to other contributors within the same pro-
ject, and more interested in ranking repositories in relation to other repositories. To this
end, we modify the usage of ximax and ximin. Previously, these related to the min and
max values of diﬀerent attributes within the pool of contributors in a single community.
Instead, we now deﬁne ximax and ximin as being the maximum and minimum val-
ues of the respective values across all contributors encountered, regardless
of community. With this small modiﬁcation, normalizing the scores in eﬀect creates
a ranking system of all repositories encountered. If a contributor has a xtechskill of 1.0,
then that contributor has the highest tech skill encountered thus far, of all contributors
assessed, across all communities.
This adaption makes it possible to compare contributors across communities, which ﬁts
our purposes. It does however also create a problem: scores are computed in relation
to the minimum and maximum values of attributes encountered. Thus, if we scan 10
communities, and each community contains new maximum values, then the previous
calculations are incorrect. A score of 1.0 in a given attribute signals that this contributor
has the highest value of this attribute, out of all contributors assessed. If the maximum
values of the diﬀerent attributes found in 10 communities increase in order of assessment,
then all contributors will score 1.0, as they are the top-performing "thus far". Having
10 communities containing new maximum and minimum values in order of assessment is
not very likely, but still plausible. To combat this problem, we will assess a large number
of communities in search of maximum and minimum values, before actually calculating
the community score. Thus, more representative maximum and minimum values will
be available before we commence "real" scans of communities, and communities will be
ranked in accordance with these pre-scanned minimum and maximum values. We will
examine this further in a later section detailing the implementation.
Figure 20. Community assessment and its components
As seen from ﬁgure 20, we gauge the quality of the community by ﬁrst assessing the
quality of the individual contributors, and then measuring diﬀerent kinds of response
times. Contributors might be of high quality, and might contribute high quality work,
47
==PAGE:55==
but a community’s responsiveness is just as critical when new bugs are found in the
software. Quality does not matter if no one takes action on newly reported ﬂaws in the
code. For this, we deﬁne the metric responsiveness:
ravg =
Ptotalissues
i=1
Rit −Pit
totalissues
(12)
R =
(
100 −ravg if ravg 100
0, otherwise
(13)
In equation 12 we deﬁne the average response time to issues related to a given repository,
where Rit is the time of response to the issue by a contributor, to issue i, and Pit is the
time the issue was originally posted. In 13 we then ﬂip the value and bound it between
0-100. Thus, a R value of 99 is considered exceptionally good (average response time to
issues is then 1 day), and an R value of 0 is considered relatively bad. A response can be
a comment, a state change or the act of labeling an issue.
Finally, we aggregate the score for quality of contributors and response time in equation
6, where R is responsiveness, C is quality of contributors and Q is quality of community.
Q = R + C
(14)
4.5.2.7
Dependency Security
Dependencies are ubiquitous in modern software, and almost impossible to avoid when
examining OSS. Importantly, they perform functions vital to the software they are in-
cluded in, and represent an almost equally important avenue for trust or distrust, as their
parent software do. After all, even the most secure and trustworthy software in the world
fails if it depends on an outdated version of a library ﬁlled with security holes. To get
an idea of how many dependencies the average Python repository relies on, we conduct
a quick (and not very scientiﬁc) experiment. Using the website randomrepo.com, we get
5 random Python repositories on GitHub. We then scan these for dependencies (and the
dependencies of dependencies, and so on), using the tool johnnydep, a Python code scan-
ner that creates Python dependency trees of packages. The result, over 5 repositories, is
an average of 19 dependencies per repository.
Every dependency included represents some uncontrollable risk that the developer takes
on when including them. It is, in essence, unknown code included in your own known
code, and not all developers examine 3rd party libraries with the necessary diligence,
and therefore ﬂaws and faults can lie unnoticed. Worse yet, one needs to keep these
dependencies updated, as security holes and bugs are patched out. Some code-hosts,
such as GitHub, will at times warn users if a repository relies on old, unsafe versions of
dependencies. But this requires GitHub to actually know what dependencies repositories
rely on, something that is not always possible. Package managers can sometimes mitigate
this. In Python for example, dependencies with unspeciﬁed versions are always resolved to
the newest (and most often, safest) version of the dependency. However, some developers
48
==PAGE:56==
specify versions of the dependencies required, sometimes requiring a version equal to or
newer than, but sometimes also specifying a speciﬁc, non-negotiable version required
that might later turn out dangerously outdated. The advantage of specifying a version
required for a dependency (and not allowing newer or older versions) should be obvious -
the developer is primarily interested in having the dependency work as intended with the
software in development, and future versions might break this relationship. But given the
huge disadvantages of specifying exact versions required, it is something all developers
should avoid if possible.
Classifying and scoring these dependencies represents a challenge. Do we apply all the
metrics deﬁned in this thesis to each dependency, and dependencies of dependencies?
Unfortunately, such a cascading model would quickly grow out of hand. As an example,
the Python deep learning package pytorch-geometric has 55 dependencies in total (in-
cluding cascading dependencies) and calculating a trust score for each would be too
time-consuming an activity.
Instead, we rely on only the most necessary of scan, namely the one representing the
biggest danger to the user: security vulnerabilities. Due to the nature of dependencies,
and the fact that they might be out of date, the security scan of dependencies is diﬀerent
than the security scan of the original source code. The overall process will be as follows:
1. Build dependency tree of given repository.
2. Check each dependency (and its version) against MITREs CVE database to check
for any vulnerabilities.
3. If a vulnerability exists, check if a corresponding exploit exists in exploit-db.
One might wonder why step 2 and 3 are not also performed on the original repository
source code. The nature of the vulnerabilities found in the CVE database is such that
the info on the vulnerability is (usually) only released when the fault has been patched.
Whenever a user is browsing a repository on GitHub, they’re presented the newest version,
i.e. no current CVEs should exist on that version of the software. Dependencies, however,
can be outdated and contain CVEs despite these vulnerabilities being patched in later
versions. For this reason we only take the extra measures in step 2-3 with dependencies
and not the original source code.
exploit-db is considered the de facto database for practical information on exploits.
Entries in the database often contain executable code, ready to run and exploit a given
vulnerability. They’re also often associated with a corresponding CVE entry detailing
the vulnerability itself. Figure 21 depicts an example of the scan process.
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 21. Assessment of vulnerabilities in dependencies
A vulnerability, depending on severity, is bad news. An associated, functional exploit in
exploit-db is catastrophic news. The example in ﬁgure 21 refers to a real vulnerability,
and a real exploit, namely CVE 2019-19844 [84]. The vulnerability in question allows
takeovers of existing Django user accounts, and any attacker can almost immediately
exploit this vulnerability by following the step-by-step guide on exploit-db detailing
the attack [85].
An exploit such as the one just detailed should erode all trust in a given piece of OSS.
Regardless of all other factors, an unpatched, critical-level exploit represents one of the
biggest, if not the biggest, fault in a software system. A system-critical bug that crashes
a system is bad, but an exploit that allows malicious actors control over your system is
arguably worse. For this reason, any vulnerability found that also has a corresponding
exploit in exploit-db will receive a score of -10000.
This very low score in essence
circumvents all other scores calculated, as the ﬁnal score will then be some very low,
negative number. The score of -10000 is somewhat arbitrarily chosen but should indicate
a high level of distrust, as opposed to a lack of trust indicated by, for example, a score of
0 trust.
Other, less severe cases exist when scanning for vulnerabilities. Less critical vulnerabilities
still pose a threat, but a vulnerability severity of low naturally poses a much smaller threat
50
==PAGE:58==
to the overall OSS package, than a critical severity. Severity scores on CVEs from NVD
come in two formats - qualitative (low, medium, high and critical) and quantitative (on
a scale from 0-10, with 0 being no severity and 10 representing critical severity). For
calculating our dependency score, we rely on these numerical scores provided by NVD.
DSS = Pd
i=1 C(i)
(15)
D(i) = Picve
j=1
(
−10000 if cvej 2 e
−10cvejss, otherwise
(16)
Equations 15 and 16 formalises our calculation of trust. In equation 15, DSS = Depend-
ency Security Score and d is the total amount of dependencies present in the repository.
In equation 16, icve = all CVEs present for a given dependency, cvejss refers to the speciﬁc
severity score of cvej and e represents all exploits present in exploit-db.
Thus, we ﬁrst sum the scores for each vulnerability found with regards to a given depend-
ency, and then sum scores calculated for all dependencies. The resulting score DSS then
reﬂects the amount of (dis)trust in all of the dependencies the repository relies on. No
lower bound exists on the ﬁnal score, as this is determined by number of CVEs present,
which is unknown. The score will then exist in the range 0 to some negative number.
As our given implementation will focus on Python and dependencies largely written in
Python, we can leverage existing Python libraries to scan dependencies and check for
both vulnerabilities and exploits. To scan for vulnerabilities and get the id’s of any CVE,
we use safety by pyup.io [86], a Python package for scanning projects for vulnerable
dependencies. safety generates a report including an id for the vulnerability. We utilize
this id by searching for it in the expanded database of safety, a separate package called
safety-db. This ensures we get a CVE id, which is not always included in the base report
from safety. Leveraging the CVE id, we query NISTs own REST API to get the severity
score, also not included in the initial scan by safety. Lastly, we utilize the Python library
cve_searchsploit [87], which allows us to search for exploits in exploit-db by CVE
ids. Figure 22 illustrates this process.
Figure 22. Process for checking dependencies
51
==PAGE:59==
Using the information obtained in the described process, we can now calculate the de-
pendency security score via equations 15 and 16.
4.5.2.8
Health
One of the ways in which open source software diﬀers from closed source is the engagement
and activity of its contributors. In the vast majority of cases, contributors to OSS projects
work without pay and on their oﬀhours from their day jobs, meaning engagement will
naturally ﬂuctuate as the rest of their lives do. Open source organizations like Mozilla
are obviously excluded from this observation, as they often employ developers and pay
them, instead of relying on goodwill. Without funding from an organization or employer,
open source projects tend to face a dilemma: if no one uses it, why keep working on
it? The contributors might not deem it worth their precious oﬀ-work hours if no one is
actually using the software. Closed source projects avoids this problem by being funded
and developers having to work on a project regardless of actual usage.
For this reason, one can ﬁnd many abandoned projects on GitHub, where little to no
activity has occurred over the years. Many of the frameworks for assessing trust ex-
amined in section 3.2 have met this fate, where commit activity was frequent and new
versions were being released on a regular basis, only for the project to suddenly halt all
development without explanation. From a user perspective, this lack of development is
usually bad rather than good. Lack of development means bugs go unﬁxed, and that no
one is around to update out-of-date dependencies. As seen in the previous section on
dependency security, out-of-date 3rd party libraries can severely threaten the trustwor-
thiness of a project. A project might rely on a speciﬁc cryptographic mode or key length
that later becomes insecure, but as the project is abandoned the vulnerability is never
patched. This lack of engagement or even abandonment can be considered synonymous
with the health of the OSS project. In this context, bad or good health refers to the
activity (or lack of) on the repository, and the growth of the project.
Level of activity on a repository can be seen as a measure of health, but what about
growth? An argument has been made connecting the health of a project and its current
growth (measured in compound annual growth rate, or CAGR), as presented by Hatton
et al. [88, p. 14]. Although not the core hypothesis of the report, Hatten et al. reasons
that growth can stagnate due to a number of reasons, among these lack of investment
in the product or a disproportionate amount of bugs that needs ﬁxing, leading to lack
of development [88, p. 14]. Regardless of reasons behind a lack of growth, it is rarely a
good sign that a project is not growing. Obviously this depends on the project - a small
library like the JavaScript package left-pad that left-aligns text, does not need to show
signiﬁcant growth, as it already does as advertised. In other projects, such as the browser
Firefox, growth is a good sign. Regardless of project, growth most certainly rarely is, if
ever, a bad sign. For this reason we consider growth a sign of trustworthiness. We won’t
place the same level of importance on the growth of the repository as other components,
such as security. This disparity between components and their associated weights will be
examined further when we collect and aggregate all computed metrics.
To measure growth, we turn to the concept of compound annual growth rate. CAGR is the
annual growth rate in percentage terms of a given project, and was initially introduced in
52
==PAGE:60==
the ﬁeld of economics and investing but has in recent years made its way over to software.
According to Hatton et al., CAGR (over other measures of growth) has the beneﬁts of
being easy to calculate and its compound nature averages out refactoring of software,
where the total length of source code might be reduced and not increased [88, p. 1].
Calculating CAGR is fortunately rather easy in our context, as Git repositories contain
all changes since the inception of the repository. Equation 17 can be used to calculate
CAGR, where S0 stands for software size at the beginning of the period, S the size at
the period’s end, and r the number of years in between. [88, p. 1]
CAGR = ( S
S0
)1/r
(17)
[88, p. 1]
However, calculating compound growth since the beginning of the repository does not
seem suﬃcient to our cause. Consider the following: an OSS package was released 5
years ago, and was rapidly growing for the ﬁrst 3 years. Then, development slowed down
considerably, to the point where the code base was not actively growing. The CAGR of
the package would still be positive, and without context we would not be able to discern
that growth had halted. To illustrate the problem, consider ﬁgure 23. Any observer
would quickly deduce that growth has halted on the project in question. However, the
project still has a CAGR of 1.12, due to the massive growth in the early years.
Figure 23. Growth in a 10-year project
To combat this issue, we modify the usage of CAGR as presented by Hatton et al.,
instead opting to calculate CAGR based on the last three years of activity. The example
in ﬁgure 23 would then have a CAGR of 1.0, more accurately indicating a lack of growth.
OSS projects tend to have sporadic growths, and code additions might come in short
spurts instead of long-term steady growth.
3 years is then deemed a suitable time-
span - it’s long enough to capture any recent growth spurts, but short enough to be
somewhat contemporary. Going forward, this new indicator will be called 3YCAGR, to
avoid confusion with the traditional understanding of CAGR. Equation 18 shows the
updated formula for calculating 3YCAGR, which will be used in future calculations.
53
==PAGE:61==
3Y CAGR = ( Scurrent
Scurrent−3
)1/3
(18)
We also deﬁne another health-associated metric as being connected to trust, namely the
level of current activity or LCA. This metric gives an indication of how high or low the
current level of activity is in a given repository, by measuring days passed since the latest
commit. This measure is needed to gauge whether or not a project might be abandoned,
or in the process of being so. 3YCAGR only measures growth, and a project might still
be active despite lack of growth. On this subject, Hatton et al. says:
[...]a CAGR that gets lower over a long period could indicate a development
department is getting stuck.
It might be because a development process
is temporarily (or even permanently) compromised by the disproportionate
growth of defects, so that a large percentage of engineer resources is spent
ﬁre-ﬁghting (corrective maintenance) rather than in the creation of reliable
new functionality.
[88, p. 14]
To detect level of activity, we calculate the average number of days between commits and
the current date, over the last 5 commits. The number 5 is chosen somewhat arbitrarily, as
the distance between commits can vary greatly between repositories. On the repositories
for Linux and openssl, 5 commits usually happen over short spans of time, meaning a
day or less. On other repositories, like safety (used in section 2.3), 5 commits happen
over a period of half a year. Obviously, this is partly due to how the workﬂow is managed
on the project; some projects ﬁre oﬀcommits at fast rates, others bundle them or review
them more carefully. Regardless, the average of the last 5 commits seem to capture the
activity level rather well, or at least give an indication of activity.
LCA = 100 −
P5
i=1 today −icd
5
(19)
Equation 19 formalizes this, where i is the commit in question, and icd refers to the
commit date of commit i. Subtracting the result from 100 gives us the ﬁnal score, and
high-activity repositories like openssl will score 99-100, while low activity ones will score
closer to 0.
We now have both the growth and the level of activity of a repository. We now want
to aggregate these two into one ﬁnal health metric. Here we take a relatively simple
approach - we multiply 3YCAGR by LCA. As evidenced by the work of Hatton et al. in
examining CAGR of 358 million lines of code, CAGR usually falls in the 1.0-1.50 range
with very few outliers going above a CAGR of 3 [88, p. 11-12]. Equation 20 formalises
this, where we take the absolute value of LCA to make the equation work properly with
negative LCA values.
Health = LCA + (abs(LCA) ⇤3Y CAGR
(
−LCA if LCA ≥0
+LCA, otherwise
)
(20)
54
==PAGE:62==
Using equation 20, we can now estimate the health of a repository. Thus, a repository that
show both solid growth and high levels of activity will score high, while any repository
lacking in either will score somewhat lower. We’ve now deﬁned the health (within our
scope), and move on to examining licenses.
4.5.2.9
Licenses
Open source is, in part, deﬁned by what license scheme it employs. During the early
years of computing, licenses for software were unheard of, simply because software was not
covered by any copyright laws. Any software could be copied, modiﬁed, re-branded, resold
and so on, without legal repercussions. That all changed with the Copyright Act of 1976
[89, p. 123], which introduced sweeping changes across many sectors, including software.
Software programs and by extension, software code, was now by default copyrighted,
essentially ﬂipping the current situation on its head. One now had to explicitly ask for
permission to use, modify or sell a piece of software. However, machine code was not yet
covered by copyright. That changed in 1983, with a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit regarding the Apple Computer v. Franklin Computer Corporation
lawsuit. In short, engineers at Franklin Computer Corp. had copied programs from the
Apple II computer in an eﬀort to make Apple II programs run on their Franklin Ace
computer [90]. Apple sued, and the court decided in their favour: Machine code was
copyrightable, just as "regular" source code was.
Now all software was by deﬁnition copyrighted, and authors had to explicitly give per-
mission for any modiﬁcations, usage and so on. Thus, the concept of a software license
was born, and among the ﬁrst and most popular was the GNU Public License, released
in 1985 and created by free-software evangelist, Richard Stallman [89, p. 125].
Many diﬀerent licenses has been released since the GNU Public License was ﬁrst con-
ceived, and often these serve diﬀerent purposes. Maybe you want to allow others to use
and modify your software freely, but only if they also share the resulting modiﬁed software
freely. In that case, choose the GNU GPLv3 [91]. Maybe you don’t care about how your
free software is used, but just want credit. In that case, choose the MIT Public license,
which allows others to do whatever they want with your software, as long as they include
a notice of the license [91].
As described, software is by default copyrighted, and if no explicit license is present, the
software is not legally usable. Even if one ﬁnds publicly hosted source code on GitHub,
usage is still only permitted if a license is present. Thus, a lack of a license represents
a rather large risk for anyone who decides to use the software. Even more critical, a
dependency used by an OSS package might include non-licensed software, and expose
the user of the original package to litigation. Many examples exist of companies using
licensed software without complying to the terms stated in the license, and then ending
up in expensive legal disputes [92] [93]. The largest and most notable of these cases is
still underway, in the case of Oracle vs. Google. Oracle has sued Google over the use
of Java API interfaces, which Google has failed to pay a licensing fee for, arguing that
the software falls under fair use. The case was heard in August 2020 by the US Supreme
Court and as Oracle is asking for almost $9 billion dollars, the case is shaping up to be
the largest ever in the realm of software licensing [94].
55
==PAGE:63==
As we can see, OSS packages that lack a license, or contain more strict licenses, represent
an avenue of mistrust for any developer wishing to implement this package in their work.
This matter is further complicated when considering the vast web of dependencies a pack-
age might rely on. As seen earlier, the deep-learning Python library pytorch-geometric
contains 55 dependencies, all of which need to have the proper licenses if we wish to
modify pytorch-geometric and distribute it. To ensure licenses are present, we perform
two steps:
1. Scan for a LICENSE ﬁle. In Python, best practice regarding licensing dictates
a ﬁle named LICENSE is present in the root directory of the package. We scan for
this ﬁle, then scan the ﬁle itself to detect what license is present.
2. Scan dependencies for licenses. We use the Python package python-license-check
[95] to scan dependencies for associated licenses.
What the user needs the given OSS package for inevitably diﬀers from case to case. Some
might need the package for use in a commercial product, others might need it in another
OSS project. Both require diﬀerent types licenses, and as this is subject to individual
usage, we cannot eﬀectively score based on the license employed. For this reason, licenses
will not play a part in the ﬁnal score, and will not be assigned a score. Users are presented
with licenses found, instead of a score. The user requesting the trust score can then judge
for themselves if the licensing schemes employed by the software and its dependencies ﬁt
their individual needs.
56
==PAGE:64==
4.6
Aggregating Scores
In the previous sections, we have deﬁned the concept of trust in our context and created a
number of low-level metrics that make up this ﬁnal metric of trust. Trust, as we’ve deﬁned
it, is made up of internal trust (metrics that can be gathered from the source code, or the
meta data surrounding the source code) and external trust (the diﬀerent amounts of trust
put into the software by external forces outside the repository itself). Both internal and
external trust is then made up of diﬀerent sub-components, that in turn consist of other
components. A high level component, such as source code quality, consists of low-level
components that represent calculable metrics gathered from our analysis of the software.
A total of 13 diﬀerent low-level components have been created, each representing diﬀerent
avenues of trust within a software project, and each oﬀering diﬀerent levels of severeness.
This section will present the metrics created in this thesis and the ranges on which they
exist. Figure 24 contains all the components of trust we’ve deﬁned so far.
Figure 24. The complete tree of trust created throughout this thesis. Blue components
are broken down into yellow, low level metrics. Grey components do not contribute to
the ﬁnal numerical score.
Scaling and weighing the components in ﬁgure 24 will inevitably include some subjective
judgement. Weighing components should acknowledge the diﬀerent impacts the com-
ponents have on the ﬁnal trust score, but also on the more abstract concept of trust.
Whoever uses the framework developed in this thesis to score a OSS project will have
preferences of their own. One might not care about licensing, as the package in question
is just for a side-project never to be published. Another might care deeply about licens-
ing, as they hope to include the package in a commercial application, where the wrong
license could have expensive consequences. Most of the components have this ambiguity,
although there might be slightly less ambiguity about components such as source code
57
==PAGE:65==
quality and dependency security. Both of these contain scores on security, and while users
do not always seem terribly concerned with high levels of security, most would probably
shy away from a package with a documented, existing exploit present in the code.
When scaling the diﬀerent low-level metrics and, as a consequence, their parent compon-
ents, two diﬀerent factors are considered:
1. Positive/negative inﬂuence. Trust can be both positive and negative (distrust),
and a score of 0 should indicate a complete lack of either trust of distrust. As an
example, the metric security is measured by scanning for known security vulnerab-
ilities in the source code. A lack of these vulnerabilities does not indicate secure
software, but rather the possible absence of insecure code. As such, the metric
security cannot indicate positive trust, but only distrust. This perspective is used
when scaling the metrics, and deﬁning the range they exist on. Some, like quality of
community, are positive only, as the scores do not indicate a "bad" community but
rather the presence or non-presence of a "good" community. Others are negative
only, as they only convey distrust and cannot indicate positive trust. A lack of
documented exploits, for example, does not mean the project is non-susceptible to
being exploited.
2. Severity. Not all metrics and components are equal, and this discrepancy is com-
municated through the diﬀerent ranges the metrics are assigned to. Some, like the
dependency security component, can far outweigh other components, as exploits
present represents one of the most serious avenues for mistrust. Others, like main-
tainability are less impactful, as this metric does not indicate serious ﬂaws in the
software but rather a general state of maintainability as seen in the technical debt
found in the project.
Parent component
Range
Child component
Range
Intent
[-1000 - 0]
Detection of Malicious
Networking
[-1000 - 0]
External Trust
[0 - 800]
Connected Trust
[0-400]
Unconnected Trust
[0-400]
Source code
quality
[-500 - 400]
Reliability
[0 - 300]
Security
[-500 - 0]
Maintainability
[0 - 100]
Quality of
Community
[0 - 300]
Quality of Contributors
[0 - 200]
Responsiveness
[0 - 100]
Dependency
Security
[-10000 -0]
Number of CVEs
[-1000 - 0
Exploits
[-10000 - 0]
Health
[0 - 300]
Growth / CAGR
[0 - 3]
Level of Current Activity
[0 - 100]
Licensing
N/A
Unlicensed Components
N/A
Table 6: Numerical ranges for all low-level metrics deﬁned, and their parent components.
Note that the metric Licensing has no numerical score, and is only presented in text form
to the user.
58
==PAGE:66==
Table 6 contains ranges for all low-level metric values, deﬁned from the perspectives
outlined earlier. This puts the ﬁnal calculated trust score on the range [−11500 −1800].
As such, our metrics skew negative as the metrics used and data and metadata gathered
allows us to say more about distrust than positive trust.
59
==PAGE:67==
4.7
Implementation
To test our developed framework, a functional implementation is needed. This section
outlines the design and implementation in detail, and how later evaluation is constructed.
The implementation of TrustWeb focuses on Python repositories, and is written exclus-
ively in Python. Pythons ease-of-use and rapid prototyping makes it ideal for an exper-
imental implementation of our framework. The implementation relies on external data
fetched from a multitude of sources, which is then processed in various ways, and aggreg-
ated into a range of scores representing the trustworthiness of the repository in question.
After processing the data and calculating the relevant metric scores, the data, scores
and a range of other metadata is then written to a SQL database for later analysis and
evaluation.
Figure 25. Component diagram providing an overview of interactions in the system
The component diagram in ﬁgure 25 shows how diﬀerent parts of the implementation
interact. When designing and implementing TrustWeb, a signiﬁcant amount of eﬀort went
in to creating a system with a high degree of modularity. For this reason most components
60
==PAGE:68==
in TrustWeb, such as reliability or dependency security, are treated as separate, self
contained Python ﬁles. If one wishes to implement more metrics, the system is designed
to allow easy integration. Furthermore, interaction with the associated SQL database is
strictly limited to the functions contained in db_handlers.py, as to avoid simultaneous
database calls, potentially corrupting already present data.
The implementation revolves around to central classes, ScoreObj and RepoData, and are
outlined in the class diagram in ﬁgure 26. ScoreObj is contained in the ﬁle calculate_score.py,
and RepoData in the ﬁle gather_data.py. The class RepoData represents all the data
gathered from external endpoints, and consists of raw data processed for later scoring.
The ﬁner points of scoring is done in the class ScoreObj, which is also responsible for
communicating with the database. This division of labor is intentional, should either the
data collected or the scoring change.
Figure 26. Class diagram of the two primary classes the implementation relies on.
Retrieving the data for collection, transformation and scoring is done via a range of
sources. All of these sources can be seen in table 7.
The data is queried at diﬀerent points during an execution, and will take varying degrees
of time to query. For example, scanning all issue comments for a small, unknown Git-
Hub repository will take seconds, while fetching comments on large, popular repositories
can take several minutes. To get a sense of what parts interact during an execution of
the implementation, a full sequence diagram detailing each interaction in the system is
available in the appendix.
4.7.1
Notable parts of the implementation
A full, detailed walk-through of each method utilized in the implementation would prove
too long for this thesis. However, some parts warrants further explanation. These are
highlighted in this section. Note: the code is well documented and each class, method
and function is also described in the comments found in the attached source code.
61
==PAGE:69==
Data
Source
Endpoint
Comment
Repository
metadata
GitHub REST API
https://api.github.com/repos
/{owner}/{name}
Contains important metadata, such as the clone URL,
lists of contributors and so on
Repository
source data
Git clone
The source code of the repository, for static analysis
Repository
issues
GitHub REST API
https://api.github.com/repos
/{owner}/{name}/issues
Issues and their metadata
Repository
issue events
GitHub REST API
https://api.github.com/repos
/{owner}/{name}/issues/events
Event data for the collected issues.
This contains state changes to
GitHub issues, and metadata regarding these
Repository
comments
GitHub REST API
(Preview
endpoint used)
https://api.github.com/repos
/{owner}/{name}/comments
Comments on issues, pull requests and commits.
Note: to get reactions to comments,
a so-called "preview" endpoint was used.
These oﬀer experimental data not oﬀered elsewhere,
but are subject to change.
User data
GitHub GraphQL
API
(Preview
schema used)
https://api.github.com/graphql
Data and metadata on users followed by the
user performing the scan.
This includes starred repositories,
repositories contributed to and so on.
A preview version of the GraphQL endpoint is used
to get experimental data on the dependencies
of other users’ repositories.
CVE data
NISTs REST API
https://services.nvd.nist.gov
/rest/json/cve/1.0/{cve_id}
Provides a range of data on a given CVE id,
such as severity, description etc.
Malicious IP
addresses
IPSum GitHub
https://raw.githubusercontent.com
/stamparm/ipsum/master/ipsum.txt
Feed of malicious IPs updated every 24 hours,
with IPs gathered via the
malicious traﬃc detection system Maltrail.
Contains some 130.000 IP addresses.
Exploits
Exploit DB
https://exploit-db.com
Using the tool cve_searchsploit, we check
for new links between CVEs and exploits
everytime a repository is scanned
Table 7: Data sources used when scanning and classifying a repository. All of the above
sources are queried every time a repository is scanned.
4.7.1.1
Fetching data from followed users
When gathering much of the GitHub speciﬁc data, such as issues, comments and general
metadata on the repository, query times vary wildly due to the nature of a REST API.
For example, GitHub restricts API calls to 100 items per page (so, 300 issues = 3 pages
worth of data). Fortunately, the API supports pagination, but unfortunately, we need
to wait for each API call to resolve before making the next one. This means long query
times for some repositories. For example, the openssl GitHub repository has around
5000 closed or open issues. Other have less than 50. This large discrepancy makes for
huge diﬀerences in scan times, and with REST APIs one usually also run the risk of
overfetching data. When fetching issues, for example, we’re only really interested in a
few data points, such as date, state, author and a few other variables. However, REST
APIs serve the same amount of data regardless, meaning we usually get more than we
need. This, compounded by the need for pagination, makes for slow retrievals at times.
Enter GraphQL. This technology is new enough (ﬁrst release in 2015) to justify an ex-
planation here, as readers might not be aware of its beneﬁts.
Initially developed by
Facebook, GraphQL is
"open-source language for querying databases from client-side
applications"[96]. It acts as a layer between the client and the database, and relies on
a single endpoint, instead the usual mass of endpoints, as with REST APIs. More im-
portantly, however, it allows the user to specify exactly what data they want from the
API, neither over- or underfetching data. In the context of TrustWeb, we want to fetch
62
==PAGE:70==
data on users followed by a given user. Data needed includes simple requests such as
starred repositories, to the more complicated ones such as dependencies of their reposit-
ories. Recall from section 4.4 that we want to see the dependencies of the followed users
repositories to judge the amount of external trust placed in a given repository. Getting
this from a traditional REST API would require the following queries:
1. Request a list of the given user’s followed users.
2. For each user, request a list of their respective repositories.
3. For each repository, request a list of dependencies.
If a user follows more than a couple of users, this quickly grows out of control, as the
complexity is exponential. With 100 followed users, who each have 3 repositories, this is
a total of 300 REST API calls - too many. With GraphQL, we can fetch all of this data
in exactly one API call, and what could easily take minutes (in some cases, hours) can
be done in a matter of seconds. GraphQL does have its drawbacks however, but these
are speciﬁc to GitHub where much of the data needed for TrustWeb is still only available
through the traditional REST API. It should also be noted that to get dependency
information of user repositories, we are relying on an experimental preview version of the
GraphQL client which is subject to change without notice.
4.7.1.2
Discovering vulnerabilities, malicious activity and bad licenses in de-
pendencies.
We rely on the Python library safety for discovering vulnerabilities (in the form of
CVEs), which we then check in the exploit-db database. safety works by scanning
the installed dependencies in a given virtual environment, and this presents something
of a challenge when automating this process. The challenge is to clone any given Python
repository (containing only source code, and no actual dependency code), iterate over
the ﬁles to generate a list of requirements, and programmatically install all dependencies,
and the dependencies of dependencies. Solving this problem gives us access to not only
the source code of the given repository, but also the source code for all dependencies, in
a cascading fashion. The problem is solved in the following way:
1. Clone the repository.
2. Copy a script (install_script.py) containing pip install commands.
3. Create a new virtual environment in the cloned repository, where dependencies can
be installed into. This is done via the activate_from_venv function in utilities.py
4. Switch from the perspective of the current virtual environment (the one executing
all the code cloning, scanning and scoring repositories), to the perspective of the
freshly installed virtual environment.
5. Run the aforementioned install script and fetch all dependencies, and their respect-
ive dependencies.
The process is as fast as the number of dependencies - some repositories depend on
large amounts of libraries and installing these programmatically can take a while. Most,
63
==PAGE:71==
however, are installed in under 30 seconds. The result is signiﬁcant in terms of data
scanned by TrustWeb:
• We can ﬁnd CVEs in all dependencies, and their respective dependencies, thus
uncovering otherwise unknown security vulnerabilities.
• We can scan for malicious IPs in all the code, not just the cloned repository.
• We can scan for bad licenses in all the dependencies, not just the repository itself.
Some libraries make use of +20 dependencies in total, and manually skimming these
for license information can be a tedious task.
We only scan dependencies for security reasons. Other metrics, such as health and reli-
ability are limited to the cloned repository, and not dependencies.
4.7.1.3
Calculating the quality of the contributors
Recall section 4.5.2.6, where we utilize the DAM model for assessing the quality of com-
munity members in a software context. Normalizing the scores of the contributors relies
on the values ximin and ximax. These two values represent the lowest and highest of the
type of value (tech skill, community inﬂuence etc.) out of all contributors assessed. But
the DAM model was primarily conceived to rank members within a community, not rank
communities within the scope of all other communities. In the context of TrustWeb, we
want to speciﬁcally rank communities and their contributors, against other communities
- or at least provide a meaningful score.
To do this, we need ximin and ximax values across a large ranges of communities, not just
one. This would allow us to normalize community scores and give a score implicitly rank-
ing a community in the grand scope of all other communities scanned. In total, we need
four ximin values and four ximax values, across the four categories speciﬁed in the DAM
model. But we need the minimum and maximum values before scanning repositories,
otherwise scoring with inevitably be skewed and repositories scanned earlier rather than
later would score better, as lower maximum and higher minimum values exist earlier in
the process.
For this reason, a preliminary scan of +1500 Python repositories was performed, and
minimum and maximum values gathered from the these scanned communities. Obviously,
scores will still skew as more minimum and maximum values are uncovered during regular
scanning and scoring of repositories, but by gathering minimum and maximum values
beforehand we are able to rather eﬀectively score OSS communities and how they stack
up to other communities. Ideally, one would scan each and every one of the thousands
of GitHub communities, so each score would accurately portray the repository’s place
in the ecosystem, but such an operation lies outside the scope of this thesis (and could
potentially be a project in and of itself).
64
==PAGE:72==
5
Evaluation
Evaluating the implementation of TrustWeb allows us to better understand the advant-
ages and disadvantages of the system, where it performs as expected and where it falters.
A range of metadata on the scanned repositories is collected and stored during execution
of the implementation, in order to better understand how the framework performs, and to
also gather interesting insights into GitHub repositories and the communities surrounding
them. These insights are powered by a database and the associated handlers gathering
and storing data. Figure 27 illustrates the relationships between tables in scans.db. For
each scanned repository, associated values are inserted into each table, with the exception
of table cve_data. cve_data is not linked via a key to a speciﬁc repository, but contains
meta-information on the diﬀerent CVEs uncovered during scans.
Figure 27. Database diagram depicting the various tables found in scans.db.
Much of the stored data directly impacts an associated low-level metric score. For ex-
ample, stars and dependents in the table trust_metadata have a direct eﬀect on the
external trust metric. Some, however, are not used when scoring. These include lines
of code and lines of comments. These are included to later examine if any one metric
might correlate to a higher or lower trust score, or correlate to a low-level trust met-
65
==PAGE:73==
ric. Finally, the table scan_times contain the times it took to scan each repository, in
an attempt to see which repositories cause the implementation to slow down and where
possible improvements might lie.
Before evaluating TrustWeb, a list of 332 Python repositories was gathered. The primary
popularity-indicator on GitHub remains the amount of stars a repository has, similar
to likes on other platforms.
To ensure a broad cross-section of the available Python
repositories, these are selected in intervals based on stars. An eﬀort has been made to
evenly distribute the collected repositories on the range 1-100.000 stars. However, the
list thins out somewhat towards the upper echelons of repositories - only 87 Python
repositories have over 50.000 stars, while over 4 million repositories have between 2-10
stars. Figure 28 contains the ﬁnal distribution of scanned repositories.
Figure 28. Density of scanned repositories over total stargazers.
5.1
Results
A total of 332 Python repositories was scanned to evaluate TrustWeb and its implement-
ation. The histogram in ﬁgure 29 illustrates the distribution of trust scores among the
scanned repositories. The scores seem to follow a reasonable curve, where most will score
in the 0-500 range, and few scoring very high or low.
66
==PAGE:74==
Figure 29. Trust score distribution among 332 scanned Python repositories.
Table 8 contains the top 5 best scoring repositories across the 332 repositories scanned.
As expected, the top 5 all scored high across the board, and low in negative-only cat-
egories such as security, dependency security and intent. Interestingly, the top scorer
(jupyter-widgets/ipyleaflet) comes from the very popular Python community Jupy-
ter. This is the same community that is behind Jupyter Notebooks, one of the most
popular Python tools for learning and performing data visualization. While we can only
speculate as to why the repository scores as high as it does, Jupyter as a community
maintains a rather detailed guide to contributing to a project, containing everything
from setting up the proper development environment, to testing and documenting [97].
Other open source communities also often provide guides for contributors, and these
might indeed have a positive eﬀect in terms of higher trust.
Name
Total trust
score
Reliability
Security
Maintain-
ability
Community
Health
Dependency
security
External trust
Intent
Stars
jupyter-widgets/
ipyleaﬂet
878.86
239.7
-10
100
248.70
129.38
0
171.08
0
1071
d2l-ai/d2l-zh
860.56
173.7
0
100
119.46
137.4
0
300
0
19664
timofurrer/maya
822.98
217.5
0
100
258
21.93
0
225.55
0
3225
scrapinghub/
dateparser
794.8
241.8
-205
100
266
92
0
300
0
1657
jazzband/
django-widget-tweaks
746.54
155.1
-10
100
98.56
102.88
0
300
0
1495
Table 8: The 5 best scoring Python repositories, of the 332 repositories scanned
Table 9 contains the 5 lowest scoring repositories of the 332 scanned repositories. Rather
interestingly, 4 out of the 5 lowest scoring repositories are all related to penetration-
67
==PAGE:75==
testing or network scanning, and this is likely the reason why they contain malicious
IPs. This might also explain the low security scores, as they employ low-security Py-
thon functionality not out of ignorance but in relation to vulnerability-exploitation.
brython-dev/brython, the 5th lowest scoring repository, is an implementation of Py-
thon 3 running in the browser. This likely will impact security, as to bridge the gap
between browser and local Python 3 execution some tricks might be needed. The score
is also ﬁtting then, as using brython might not inherently be a bad idea, but implement-
ing Python execution in a browser inevitably comes with the danger of vulnerabilities
occurring, as two rather complex systems are being linked.
Name
Total
trust
score
Relia-
bility
Security
Maintain-
ability
Community
Health
Depen-
dency
security
External trust
Int-
ent
Stars
gwen001/pentest-tools
-1216.8
-109.5
-500
100
87.32
57
0
148.31
-1000
2076
Srinivas11789/PcapXray
-1073.43
-300
-70
100
21.02
0
0
175.55
-1000
1070
yogeshojha/rengine
-938.44
88.8
-500
100
132.32
92.99
0
147.44
-1000
2447
TheRook/subbrute
-868
-1.2
-130
100
8
0
0
155.2
-1000
2562
brython-dev/brython
-798.74
203.4
-500
0
199.78
111.1
0
186.97
-1000
4123
Table 9: The 5 worst scoring Python repositories, of the 332 repositories scanned
5.2
Correlations & patterns
We now shift our gaze to some of the correlation patterns present in the data. Before
diving in, it should be noted that many correlations exist in the data, however these tend
to be between the ﬁnal trust score and one of its lesser parts (so, the reliability score has
an obvious link to the ﬁnal score). Examining correlations between aggregated scores
and the metric that contribute to these score are somewhat meaningless, as the two are
obviously correlated - one is made up of the other.
68
==PAGE:76==
Figure 30. Left: correlation between security score and number of dependencies. Right:
correlation between number of contributors and community score. Both utilize the Pear-
son coeﬃcient.
Two interesting correlations are found in ﬁgure 30. On the left is the correlation (using
Pearson coeﬃcient) between security score and number of dependencies. Here we see a
negative correlation of -0.44, indicating a relationship between the two. However, depend-
encies are not installed when performing the security check where we utilize the library
bandit to calculate a security score. Dependencies are installed later, when checking
for present CVEs using safety in the dependency security part of the implementation.
Thus, no dependency code is present when calculating the initial security score, but there
still exist a correlation between the two. As to why, we can only speculate. One reason
for a lower security score might be that developers who are less stringent security-wise
might also be more willing to incorporate external libraries, and developers who actively
work to ensure security are more cautious with regards to external code. Again, this is
only speculation.
The scatter plot on the right side of ﬁgure 30 tells another story.
Here we see the
relationship between number of contributors and community score - or lack thereof. There
is some correlation (0.18) between the two, but it does not seem entirely signiﬁcant.
This is to the beneﬁt of TrustWeb and its implementation - if the number of contributors
strongly correlated with the ﬁnal community score, then that would infer that larger
repositories with more contributors are more likely to score high in terms of community
score, than smaller communities. An ideal community score does not scale with size,
but rather tries to gauge the quality of the individual contributors. It seems we have
69
==PAGE:77==
succeeded, at least partly, in this regard.
Figure 31. Correlations between lines of code and the diﬀerent trust metrics employed
in TrustWeb.
Investigating the relationship between lines of code the diﬀerent trust metrics shows
mostly weak correlation, with security, health and community scores showing a slightly
stronger correlation. Figure 31 contains scatter plots detailing the correlations (or lack
thereof). Perhaps most importantly is the lack of correlation between lines of code and
the ﬁnal trust score (the scatter plot in the bottom right corner). A strong correlation
here would have been bad news, as trust should not hinge on lines of code. We want our
trust score to be independent of program length, and judge small and large codebases
on equal terms. While a negative correlation does exist (ie. larger programs have a very
slight tendency to score lower), the link seems to be relatively weak.
70
==PAGE:78==
Figure 32. The 10 most violated bandit rules. Description of the rules can be found in
10
The security score is based on rule violations found by the library bandit. To better
understand what violations are most common, we refer to ﬁgure 32, which contains the
30 most prevalent rule violations. The top 5 corresponding rule descriptions are found in
table 10, and a complete list of rules and their descriptions can be found in the appendix.
71
==PAGE:79==
ID
Description
Severity
# of violations
B311
"random - Standard pseudo-random generators
are not suitable for security/cryptographic purposes"
Low
1680
B603
"subprocess_without_shell_equals_true - Python possesses many
mechanisms to invoke an external executable.
However, doing so may present a security issue
if appropriate care is not taken to
sanitize any user provided or variable input"
Low
1122
B106
"hardcoded_password_funcarg - The use of hard-coded passwords
increases the possibility of password
guessing tremendously."
Low
987
B110
"try_except_pass - explicit pass on raised exception.
This pattern is considered bad practice in general,
but also represents a
potential security issue.
Low
746
B307
"eval - Use of possibly insecure function -
consider using safer ast.literal_eval". Author note: Eval allows
execution of arbitrary Python code, and is therefore considered
insecure [98]
Medium
710
Table 10: The 5 most commonly violated bandit rules. Descriptions from bandit docu-
mentation [76].
Most of the very common bandit violations are relatively low-impact, and often indicates
a lack of proper security-oriented best practices, and not necessarily serious vulnerab-
ilities. However, many serious violations have also been found, and the 5 "worst" of
these are found in table 11 (worst implies an objective ranking of severity, and while
they are all classiﬁed as being of "high" severity in the bandit documentation, rank-
ing them beyond that does include some measure of subjectivity). Rather impressively,
brython-dev/brython, the 5th worst scoring repository mentioned in table 9 contains 3
out of the 5 violations mentioned in table 11 (B312, B321 and B103).
ID
Description
Severity
# of violations
# of unique repositories
containing one or more
violations
B312
telnetlib usage - telnet is unencrypted
and much safer alternatives such as
ssh should be used
High
10
3
B321
ftplib usage - ftp is unencrypted and as with
telnet, ssh/sftp/scp can be used as much
safer alternatives
High
26
3
B304
Insecure cipher usage - usage of old/broken
ciphers such as RC2 and Blowﬁsh
High
79
2
B103
Set bad ﬁle permissions - insecure usage of Pythons
built-in chmod function, where permissions on ﬁles
are set too permissive (in the worst case ﬁles are set
to executable, meaning malware can be injected into a
ﬁle and then executed locally)
High
38
11
B413
pycrypto usage - pycrypto has not been maintained since
2014, and was depreciated after an overﬂow vulnerability
was found. Any usage is considered unsafe. [99]
High
25
5
Table 11: Five high-severity violations that were found in various repositories. Descrip-
tion from bandit documentation [76]
72
==PAGE:80==
The metric dependency security handles CVEs found in dependencies, and a wide range
of CVEs was indeed discovered in the scanned repositories dependencies. Figure 33 ranks
these. All of the discovered CVEs have a severity rating above 5.3, and almost 50% have
a severity rating of 9.8. Descriptions of the top 5 CVEs can be found in table 12.
Figure 33. The most common CVEs found in repository dependencies.
ID
Vulnerable
dependency
Description
Severity
# of violations
CVE-2019-6446
NumPy <= 1.16.0
"It uses the pickle Python module unsafely, which allows remote attackers
to execute arbitrary code via a crafted serialized object" (Severity currently
disputed)[100]
9.8
7
CVE-2020-5310-
CVE-2020-5313
Pillow <6.2.2
All CVEs are regarding Pillow pre 6.2.2. where various methods contain integer
overﬂow vulnerabilities [101] [102] [103] [104]
8.8
5310: 6
5311: 6
5312: 6
2313: 6
CVE-2020-1747
PyYAML <5.3.1
"[...] it is susceptible to arbitrary code execution when it processes
untrusted YAML ﬁles through the full_load method or with the FullLoader
loader. [...] An attacker could use this ﬂaw to execute arbitrary code on
the system by abusing the python/object/new constructor."[105]
9.8
4
CVE-2018-18074
Requests <2.20.0
"The Requests package before 2.20.0 for Python sends an HTTP
Authorization header to an http URI upon receiving a same-hostname
https-to-http redirect, which makes it easier for remote attackers to
discover credentials by sniﬃng the network."[106]
9.8
4
CVE-2017-18342
PyYAML <5.1
"[...] the yaml.load() API could execute arbitrary code if used with untrusted data." [107]
9.8
3
Table 12: 9 of the most common CVEs found in the dependencies of scanned repositories.
Note: CVE-2020-5310 - CVE-2020-5313 encompass 4 four CVEs all related to Pillow pre-
6.2.2.
Having examined the results provided by scanning 332 Python repositories, we move on
to the discussion where the model itself and its implementation will be discussed in detail.
73
==PAGE:81==
6
Discussion
6.1
Metrics
TrustWeb, both as a conceptual model and as an actual implementation has succeeded
in calculating trust for a wide range of Python repositories. However, trust is subjective
and there is no set deﬁnition of trust within a software context, much less agreed upon
methods for calculating trust. TrustWeb is not a single score, but a wide range of low-
level metrics that ultimately make up the ﬁnal score, and thus these individual metrics
should be evaluated by themselves. Figure 34 contains the distributions of the diﬀerent
metrics that make up the ﬁnal trust score. Notably, most follow a somewhat reasonable
distribution, while maintainability, dependency security and intent are heavily skewed
towards certain scores. Maintainability might just indicate that the scanned repositories
all carry little technical debt, or that the implementation provided by SonarQube is too
lenient.
Dependency security being skewed is a good sign, as it implies few scanned
repositories carry any CVEs around in their dependencies. Intent is similar, in that only
a handful of repositories had any malicious IP addresses in their code.
Figure 34. Score distributions of the diﬀerent metrics used for computing the ﬁnal trust
score. Note: number of dependencies does not factor into the ﬁnal score and are only
included as an added insight.
Overall, the metrics have performed well and all contribute to the ﬁnal score in a mean-
ingful way. Some more than others, however. Maintainability was never intended to have
a big impact on the ﬁnal score, but the lack of granularity made the metric less impactful
74
==PAGE:82==
than intended. The median maintainability score across 332 repositories is 100, and as
thus the vast majority of repositories scored the maximum score.
The distribution of security scores seems skewed towards the lowest score of -500. This
is because security has a lower bound of -500, meaning any repositories with an original
security score of lower than -500 gets set to -500. Fine tuning this could be advantageous,
either by scaling the metric diﬀerently or by only focusing on high severity vulnerabilities
found by bandit. As seen earlier in table 10, the most commonly violated bandit rules
were the low severity ones, typically having less of an impact on overall security of the
software. While adjustments to the score might be beneﬁcial, the security module still
provided very valuable insight. Further, while the majority of violated rules were of low
severity, many of the overall top scoring repositories avoid violating these altogether,
signaling that it’s possible to develop Python software without relying on potentially
unsafe patterns, even the ones considered of low severity.
Although both the intent and dependency security metrics on the surface suﬀer from
the same lack of distribution as maintainability, the two former metrics actually per-
formed as expected, and added value to the ﬁnal trust score. The intent metric was
never expected to vary wildly from project to project; the vast majority of open source
developers are believed to have good intentions. The intent metric only diﬀered from
the norm a handful of times, and these might have been false-positives, however almost
unavoidable false-positives. The majority of repositories where malicious IPs were dis-
covered, which make up the intent metric, were dealing with network traﬃc scanning or
penetration testing, where these malicious IPs might be included as some part of tool to
prevent malicious traﬃc in the ﬁrst place. Avoiding these while still scanning for mali-
cious IPs is close-to impossible: we cannot determine the intention of the use of these
malicious IPs in an automated fashion. However, the presence of these malicious IPs in
any non-pen-testing/network scanning related repository would indeed indicate ill-intent
on the part of the developer. On the subject of intent and scanning for malicious IPs,
the implementation was successful, albeit a little naive. The implementation scans for
complete strings of IP addresses in the source code. This means that any IP string that
is assembled during runtime (the address could be split into smaller parts speciﬁcally to
avoid detection, and only concatenated on program execution) would go unnoticed by the
implementation. However, within the scope of this thesis, the intent module performs
well and could potentially warn a user in advance of malicious IPs present in the code.
Relating to metadata surrounding a given repository, the metrics quality of community,
external trust and health all performed well, and functions very well as compliments to
each other. As evident from ﬁgure 30 in the previous section, quality of community was
only weakly linked to the amount of contributors, and provided an eﬀective way to gauge
the quality of contributors to a project, regardless of how many contributes to a project.
This is in line with the original intention - one should be able to measure the quality of a
community regardless of size, as the size of a community should not indicate its quality.
The distribution of quality of community scores in ﬁgure 34 underscores this, as the
distribution follows a somewhat linear, downward facing pattern. The best communities
(the ones scoring 300) should indeed be rarer than the ones who score between 0-50.
While quality of community functions as a score regarding the community, external trust
75
==PAGE:83==
takes a diﬀerent approach and is more strongly linked to the amount of stargazers the
repository has. External trust then fulﬁlls its role by being only concerned with what
trust is put into the repository by outsiders.
One caveat about external trust is the
concept of connected trust, or how many of ones followed users interact with a repository.
Obviously, if one follows no-one on GitHub, there will be no connected trust calculated,
and the score is then completely reliant on unconnected trust, which is calculated from
stargazers, watchers, contributors and so on.
As such, external trust remains the only metric where the perspective of who requested
the scan matters. All other metrics perform the same regardless of who requested the
scan, and this distinction is important as trust propagated from people you know is a
very important aspect of the theoretical concept of trust. Evaluating this, however, has
been diﬃcult as the scans have only been made on behalf of the authors GitHub user.
In a broader evaluation of TrustWeb, it would be beneﬁcial to have many users scan the
same repositories and gauge how big a role connected trust plays on the aggregated score
of external trust.
The health metric also performs as expected, and oﬀers great insight into just how active
a community is. The distribution of health scores found in ﬁgure 34 ﬁt well with the
expected result, where repositories in better health were less prevalent than ones in less
good health. The majority of the best scoring repositories found in table 8 all had high
health scores, indicating both a consistent growth of the repository codebase and a high
level of recent activity.
Dependency security performed as expected, and gave very valuable insights into the vul-
nerabilities found in dependencies. Installing the dependencies of the repository (and thus
any dependencies of the dependencies) proved a very useful way to gauge exactly how
vulnerable the software might be. The TrustWeb implementation found plenty of CVEs
in the dependencies of repositories, and many of these was of very high severity. These
are insights a potential user have no way of gauging by just examining the repository’s
webpage, and these vulnerabilities would require a signiﬁcant amount of work to un-
cover manually. Fortunately, and as expected, most repositories kept their dependencies
updated and relatively free of vulnerabilities.
As we saw in the previous section detailing the results, the scores gathered from our
examination of +300 Python repositories diﬀer by over 2000 points. The lowest score was
-1216.8, and the highest 878.86. The score is, however, only our interpretation of the data
gathered throughout the scanning process. What does a user see, when presented with a
score of 800 points? Does that indicate a high or low level of trust? The diﬀerent ranges
could be sorted into intervals, so 200-400 would indicate that the software is "somewhat
trustworthy", 800-1000 that it’s "very trustworthy" and so on. Everything below 0 would
then indicate some level of distrust. The end-user and their user-experience is not part of
the scope of this thesis, as the subject requires a completely diﬀerent tool-set with regards
to research and empirical data, which is why the subject of result interpretation has not
been analysed more thoroughly. The subject most certainly warrants investigation if one
was to implement TrustWeb in any sort of user-oriented fashion.
76
==PAGE:84==
6.2
Performance of Implementation
Calculating a trust score takes time, and the time it takes varies according to the reposit-
ory is question. Ultimately, the goal for TrustWeb is to ﬁnd some real-world use, and for
that to happen, scan times should be reasonable. While no requirement has been set for
what is reasonable and what is not, one can agree that seconds or minutes are preferred
over hours.
Figure 35. Scan times of the TrustWeb implementation are closely correlated to the
total amount of issues present in the given GitHub repository.
By far the biggest bottleneck with regards to scan times is the amount of issues found in
a given repository. The amount of issues vary, and the GitHub REST API allows fetching
of up to 100 issues at a time. On top of this, we also need comments and issue-events,
which are fetched in separate requests. As seen in ﬁgure 35, a strong correlation between
scan times and amount of issues has been found. Less strong but still notable is the
correlation between lines of code and scan times. The scan times varies from a minimum
of 39 seconds, to a maximum of almost 28 minutes. Asking a user to wait 39 seconds for
a scan seems reasonable, 28 minutes less so. As number of issues are so closely linked to
scan times, one solution is to put a hard limit on the amount of issues, comments and
events scanned. This would impact the accuracy of the community scores calculated, but
might be worth the sacriﬁce in order to increase user-friendliness.
77
==PAGE:85==
6.3
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
In section 4.2 we deﬁned a list of requirements to the framework and subsequent im-
plementation. We now examine these and assess whether or not requirements and end-
product match up.
1. Estimate the level of external trust put into the software by outside
actors. We have fulﬁlled this requirement by estimating external trust, and its sub-
components, connected and unconnected trust. As seen in ﬁgure 34, the distribution
of external trust scores is most dense in the 100-150 point area, with the density
dropping as the score increases. No scanned repository reached the top score of
400, likely due to a low amount of connected trust, as the GitHub user whose
perspective the scans were performed from (the authors) does not have a large
network on GitHub.
2. Estimate the level of internal trust found in the source code. This require-
ment has been fulﬁlled as we estimate reliability, security and maintainability from
the source code of the repository itself. These three factors were found by developers
to be some of the most contributing factors to trustworthiness in open source soft-
ware [43, p. 71]. Furthermore, we assess the security of dependencies used by the
repository, and thus we not only gauge the trustworthiness of the original source
code but also the dependencies used.
3. Further estimate the level of internal trust found in the metadata sur-
rounding the software. This requirement has been fulﬁlled by fetching GitHub
issues, comments, events and other metadata, in order to gauge the trustworthiness
of the community surrounding the repository. We have successfully implemented
an adjusted version of the DAM model proposed by Bai et al. [37] and adapted this
to rank the quality of contributors to a project, in relation to other repositories. We
have estimated the growth of the codebase, the responsiveness of the contributors
and the level of activity in the community in order to create the most encompassing
assessment of the community.
4. Estimate the intent of the developer. This has been partially fulﬁlled. By
scanning for malicious IP addresses present in the code (and dependencies), we
can uncover most simple attempts from the software to contact outside malicious
actors. However, intent would ideally also cover malware present in the code, or
more benign data gathering, or indeed anything that the developer intents with the
software that is not communicated clearly to the user. Scanning for malware or
other malicious code is an entire thesis in and of itself, and therefore we limit our
coverage to detecting potentially malicious traﬃc.
5. Combine all of the above mentioned metrics into one ﬁnal, meaningful
trust score. This requirement has been fulﬁlled, as we are able to successfully
score repositories in meaningful, broad way. The scaling of the diﬀerent low-level
metric-scores and their impact on the ﬁnal score is unfortunately too subjective
for us to do more than estimate their weight. Throughout this thesis, we have
presented reasoning and when possible, evidence, of why metrics are scaled as they
are. The reality remains however, that trust is subjective and any collection of
78
==PAGE:86==
metric scales and weights is likely to leave at least some users dissatisﬁed. All in
all, TrustWeb does provide a representative estimation of the trust one should place
in a repository, even if the granularity of the diﬀerent parts are up for debate.
79
==PAGE:87==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have developed a framework for assessing the trustworthiness of open
source software, with a focus on Python repositories found on GitHub. We have deﬁned
a range of low-level trust metrics found in and around the software in question, that all
make up diﬀerent aspects of trust in software. The framework, christened TrustWeb, has
been implemented in Python, and is able to gauge the trustworthiness of other Python
software by leveraging practical implementation of the metrics deﬁned in the conceptual
framework. The implementation, and thus the framework, was then tested and evalu-
ated on 332 Python repositories found on GitHub, and data was gathered both on the
trustworthiness assessed, and on the performance of the implementation itself.
In the introduction, we posed the following question: Can one measure the trustwor-
thiness of a given piece of open source software, without the need to manually examine
it? Through rigorous analysis, and by utilizing research and frameworks developed by
a host of brilliant scientists, we are able to answer with a cautious Yes. The reason for
this caution lies in the very nature of trust, and its inherent subjectivity. No universally
agreed-upon formal deﬁnition of trust within a software context exists. However, within
the deﬁnition of trust that we ourselves have deﬁned, the yes become less cautious and
more conﬁdent. We have successfully assessed the internal and external trust of hundreds
of software repositories, and in the process uncovered a range of security ﬂaws present,
that surely would erode trust under most if not all deﬁnitions. The framework, and its
implementation, is focused on software developed in Python, but uses language-agnostic
approaches to the concepts developed. Therefore, any adaptation of the framework and
implementation in other languages should not provide much of a challenge. Regardless of
language, the framework developed and the concepts used are applicable to all software,
and can eﬀectively assist any developer in assessing the trustworthiness of open source
software.
80
==PAGE:88==
8
Future Work
Plenty of opportunities exist for expanding on the work presented in this thesis. The
implementation could be expanded to other languages, ideally JavaScript as the majority
of open source software is written in and for JS. TrustWeb encompasses many diﬀerent
metrics, but there are bound to exist other, interesting features of source code repositories
and the communities surrounding them. Other opportunities include setting up a system
for supporting automatic assessment of software when a user visits a repository - possibly
a browser plugin that fetches TrustWeb data and presents it to the user. Expanding the
framework to BitBucket, GitLab and other hosting sites is also an option.
81
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Synopsys. 2020 Open Source Security & Risk Analysis. 2020.
[2]
Business Insider India. GitHub, the world’s largest open-source software site, just
had mounds of data stored in the permafrost chamber of an old coal mine deep in
an Arctic mountain for 1,000 years. 2020. url: https://www.businessinsider.
in/tech/news/github-the-worlds-largest-open-source-software-site-
just - had - mounds - of - data - stored - in - the - permafrost - chamber - of -
an - old - coal - mine - deep - in - an - arctic - mountain - for - 1000 - years /
articleshow/77040432.cms (visited on 22/01/2021).
[3]
The Open Source Initiative. The Open Source Deﬁnition. 2007. url: https://
opensource.org/osd (visited on 22/01/2021).
[4]
Stephen Walli, Dave Gynn and Bruno von Rotz. ‘The Growth of Open Source
Software In Organizations’. In: (2005).
[5]
Black Duck Software. 2017 Open Source Security & Risk Analysis. 2017.
[6]
OS Market Share and Usage Trends - archived. 2015. url: https://web.archive.
org/web/20150806093859/http://www.w3cook.com/os/summary/ (visited on
22/01/2021).
[7]
snyk.io. Growth of npm packages. 2019. (Visited on 22/01/2021).
[8]
PyPi homepage. 2020. url: pypi.org (visited on 22/01/2021).
[9]
Marat Valiev, Bogdan Vasilescu and James Herbsleb. Ecosystem-Level Determ-
inants of Sustained Activity in Open-Source Projects: A Case Study of the PyPI
Ecosystem. 2018.
[10]
Linux Foundation. Open Source Software Supply Chain Security. 2020. url: https:
//www.linuxfoundation.org/publications/2020/02/open-source-software-
supply-chain-security/.
[11]
Sean Gallagher. ‘Rage-quit: Coder unpublished 17 lines of JavaScript and broke the
Internet’. In: (2016). url: https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/
2016/03/rage-quit-coder-unpublished-17-lines-of-javascript-and-
broke-the-internet/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[12]
kik homepage. 2020. url: www.kik.com/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[13]
About npm. 2020. url: www.npmjs.com/about (visited on 22/01/2021).
[14]
React on OpenHub. 2020. url: www.openhub.net/p/facebook-react (visited on
22/01/2021).
[15]
Dan Goodin. ‘How a college student tricked 17k coders into running his sketchy
script’. In: (2016). url: https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/
2016 / 06 / college - student - schools - govs - and - mils - on - perils - of -
arbitrary-code-execution/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[16]
PyPI security notice. 2017. url: https : / / www . nbu . gov . sk / skcsirt - sa -
20170909-pypi/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
82
==PAGE:90==
[17]
Dan Goodin. ‘Devs unknowingly use malicious modules snuck into oﬃcial Py-
thon repository’. In: (2017). url: https://arstechnica.com/information-
technology / 2017 / 09 / devs - unknowingly - use - malicious - modules - put -
into-official-python-repository/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[18]
Python.org forum post on typosquatting. 2020. url: https://discuss.python.
org/t/improving-risks-and-consequences-against-typosquatting-on-
pypi/5090 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[19]
Michael B. Nielsen. Master thesis: Quality and IT Security assessment of Open
Source Software projects. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[20]
Christian Damsgaard Jensen and Michael Bøndergaard Nielsen. CodeTrust: Trust-
ing Software Systems. 2018.
[21]
Christian Damsgaard Jensen and Michael Bøndergaard Nielsen. CodeTrust: Trust-
ing Software Systems. 2018.
[22]
About CVE. 2020. url: https://cve.mitre.org/about/index.html (visited on
22/01/2021).
[23]
React homepage. 2020. url: https://reactjs.org/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[24]
React OpenHub. 2020. url: https://www.openhub.net/p/facebook- react
(visited on 22/01/2021).
[25]
React github. 2020. url: https://github.com/facebook/react/network/
dependents?package_id=UGFja2FnZS0xMzM2NDkxNg%5C%3D%5C%3D (visited on
22/01/2021).
[26]
Retroﬁt OpenHub. 2020. url: https://www.openhub.net/p/square-retrofit
(visited on 22/01/2021).
[27]
Retroﬁt github. 2020. url: https://github.com/square/retrofit (visited on
22/01/2021).
[28]
pip OpenHub. 2020. url: https://www.openhub.net/p/pip (visited on 22/01/2021).
[29]
pip github. 2020. url: https://github.com/pypa/pip (visited on 22/01/2021).
[30]
Yan Li, Zhiqiang Wu and Yixiang Chen. Software Trustworthiness Static Meas-
urement Model and the Tool. 2017.
[31]
CWE online. 2020. url: https://cwe.mitre.org/index.html (visited on
22/01/2021).
[32]
Thomas J. McCabe. A Complexity Measure. 1976.
[33]
Les Hatton. Defects, Scientiﬁc Computation and the Scientiﬁc Method. 2011.
[34]
alitheia github. 2020. url: https://github.com/istlab/Alitheia-Core (visited
on 22/01/2021).
[35]
Diomidis Spinellis, Georgios Gousios, Vassilios Karakoidas and Panagiotis Louri-
das. Evaluating the Quality of Open Source Software. 2009.
83
==PAGE:91==
[36]
Bruno Almeida, Sophia Ananiadou, Alessandra Bagnato, Alberto Berreteaga Barbero,
Juri Di Rocco, Davide Di Ruscio, Dimitrios S. Kolovos, Ioannis Korkontzelos, Scott
Hansen, Pedro Maló, Nicholas Matragkas, Richard F. Paige and Jurgen Vinju.
OSSMETER: Automated Measurement and Analysis of Open Source Software.
2015.
[37]
Yu Bai, Gang Yin and Huaimin Wang. Multi-Dimensions of Developer Trustwor-
thiness Assessment in OSS Community. 2014.
[38]
Don Coleman, Dan Ash, Bruce Lowther and Paul Oman. Using Metrics to Eval-
uate Software System Maintainability. 1994.
[39]
Eberhard Wolﬀand Sven Johann. Technical Debt. 2015.
[40]
Valentina Lenarduzzi, Nyyti Saarimäki and Davide Taibi. The Technical Debt
Dataset. 2019.
[41]
John Estdale and Elli Georgiadou. Applying the ISO/IEC 25010 Quality Models
to Software Product. 2018.
[42]
Paweł Rebeś. Software Quality Standards—How and Why We Applied ISO 25010.
2019. url: https://www.monterail.com/blog/software-qa-standards-iso-
25010.
[43]
Luigi Lavazza, Sandro Morasca and Davide Taibi. ‘A Survey on Open Source
Software Trustworthiness’. In: 2011.
[44]
Merriam Webster entry on trust. 2020. url: https://www.merriam-webster.
com/dictionary/trust (visited on 22/01/2021).
[45]
Colorama on PyPi. 2020. url: https://pypi.org/project/colorama/ (visited
on 22/01/2021).
[46]
Catalin Cimpanu. ‘Twelve malicious Python libraries found and removed from
PyPI’. In: (2018). url: https://www.zdnet.com/article/twelve-malicious-
python-libraries-found-and-removed-from-pypi/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[47]
Richard Levitte GitHub proﬁle. 2020. url: https://github.com/levitte (visited
on ).
[48]
The State of the Octoverse. 2020. url: https://octoverse.github.com/ (visited
on 22/01/2021).
[49]
Linux on github. 2020. url: https://github.com/torvalds/linux (visited on
22/01/2021).
[50]
Python on github. 2020. url: https://github.com/python (visited on 22/01/2021).
[51]
Apache on github. 2020. url: https://github.com/apache (visited on 22/01/2021).
[52]
MITRE CVE frontpage. url: https://cve.mitre.org/cve/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[53]
WannaCry operator empties Bitcoin wallets connected to ransomware. url: https:
//arstechnica.com/gadgets/2017/08/wannacry-operator-empties-bitcoin-
wallets-connected-to-ransomware/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
84
==PAGE:92==
[54]
Tuesday’s massive ransomware outbreak was, in fact, something much worse. url:
https : / / arstechnica . com / information - technology / 2017 / 06 / petya -
outbreak-was-a-chaos-sowing-wiper-not-profit-seeking-ransomware/
(visited on 22/01/2021).
[55]
NVDs severity calculator. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln-metrics/cvss/
v3-calculator?vector=AV:L/AC:L/PR:L/UI:N/S:U/C:H/I:H/A:H&version=3.
1 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[56]
Wanita Sherchan, Surya Nepal and Cecile Paris. A Survey of Trust in Social Net-
works. 2013.
[57]
Chris Wysopal, Chris Eng and Tyler Shields. Static Detection of Application Back-
doors. 2010.
[58]
IPSum on GitHub. 2020. url: https://github.com/stamparm/ipsum (visited
on 22/01/2021).
[59]
MalwareWorld on GitHub. 2020. url: https : / / github . com / carlospolop /
MalwareWorld (visited on 22/01/2021).
[60]
M.V.Vijaya Saradhi and B.R.Sastry. A Quality Indicator for Software Interoper-
ability. 2010.
[61]
Brian Chess and Jacob West. Secure Programming With Static Analysis. 2007.
[62]
Mark Schroeder. ‘A Practical Guide to Object-Oriented Metrics’. In: (1999).
[63]
Peter Kafka. The Automotive Standard ISO 26262, the innovative driver for en-
hanced safety assessment & technology for motor cars. 2012.
[64]
Martin Shepperd. A critique of cyclomatic complexity as a software metric. 1988.
[65]
Tim Hopkins and Les Hatton. Exploring defect correlations in a major Fortran
numerical library. 2008.
[66]
Python Wiki on strong and dynamic typing. 2020. url: https://wiki.python.
org/moin/Why%20is%20Python%20a%20dynamic%20language%20and%20also%
20a%20strongly%20typed%20language (visited on 22/01/2021).
[67]
Hristina Gulabovska and Zolt An Porkol Ab. Survey on Static Analysis Tools of
Python Programs. 2019.
[68]
PyLint FAQ. 2020. url: https://docs.pylint.org/en/1.6.0/faq.html
(visited on 22/01/2021).
[69]
Scientiﬁc American. ‘Why is Turing’s halting problem unsolvable?’ In: (2006). url:
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-is-turings-halting-
pr/.
[70]
Brian Chess and Gary McGraw. ‘Static Analysis for Security’. In: (2004).
[71]
CWE top 25 list. 2020. url: https://cwe.mitre.org/top25/archive/2020/
2020_cwe_top25.html (visited on 22/01/2021).
[72]
Can integers overﬂow in python? 2020. url: https : / / mortada . net / can -
integer-operations-overflow-in-python.html (visited on 22/01/2021).
85
==PAGE:93==
[73]
Katerina Goseva-Popstojanova and Andrei Perhinschi. On the capability of static
code analysis to detect security vulnerabilities. 2015.
[74]
Factorization of a 512-bits RSA key using the Number Field Sieve - Archive from
2004. 1999. url: https://web.archive.org/web/20041231230220/http:
//listserv.nodak.edu/scripts/wa.exe?A2=ind9908&L=nmbrthry&P=1905
(visited on 22/01/2021).
[75]
Hans Dobbertin. The Status of MD5 After a Recent Attack. 1996.
[76]
Bandit Test Plugins. 2020. url: https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
plugins/index.html (visited on 22/01/2021).
[77]
Arthur-Jozsef Molnar and Simona Motogna. Longitudinal Evaluation of Open-
Source Software Maintainability. 2020.
[78]
Ilja Heitlager, Tobias Kuipers and Joost Visser. A Practical Model for Measuring
Maintainability. 2007.
[79]
Les Hatton. The role of empiricism in improving the reliability of future software.
2008.
[80]
Ward Cunningham. The WyCash Portfolio Management System. 1993.
[81]
Michele Tufano, Fabio Palomba, Gabriele Bavota, Rocco Oliveto, Massimiliano Di
Penta, Andrea De Lucia and Denys Poshyvanyk. When and Why Your Code Starts
to Smell Bad. 2015.
[82]
Jean-Louis Letouzey. The SQALE Method for Managing Technical Debt. 2016.
[83]
SonarQube documentation. url: https://docs.sonarqube.org/latest/user-
guide/metric-definitions/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[84]
Django vulnerability on NVD. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-
2019-19844 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[85]
django exploit. url: https://www.exploit-db.com/exploits/47879 (visited on
22/01/2021).
[86]
PyUpIO. Safety. GitHub. June 2020. url: https://github.com/pyupio/safety.
[87]
Andrea Fioraldi. CVE SearchSploit. GitHub. June 2017. url: https://github.
com/andreafioraldi/cve_searchsploit.
[88]
Les Hatton, Diomidis Spinellis and Michiel van Genuchten. The long-term growth
rate of evolving software: Empirical results and implications. 2016.
[89]
Sam Williams. Free As In Free. 2010.
[90]
Impact of Apple V Franklin. url: http://internetlegal.com/impact- of-
apple-vs-franklin-decision/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[91]
GNU Public License v3. url: https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-
3.0/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[92]
Court rules on BusyBox GPL. url: https://arstechnica.com/information-
technology/2010/08/court-rules-gpl-part-of-a-well-pleaded-case/
(visited on 22/01/2021).
86
==PAGE:94==
[93]
FSF Settles Suit Against Cisco. url: https://www.fsf.org/news/2009-05-
cisco-settlement.html (visited on 22/01/2021).
[94]
Google’s Supreme Court faceoﬀwith Oracle was a disaster for Google. url: https:
/ / arstechnica . com / tech - policy / 2020 / 10 / googles - supreme - court -
faceoff-with-oracle-was-a-disaster-for-google/ (visited on 22/01/2021).
[95]
Python license check on GitHub. url: https://github.com/dhatim/python-
license-check (visited on 22/01/2021).
[96]
What is GraphQL: History, Components, and Ecosystem. url: https://levelup.
gitconnected.com/what-is-graphql-87fc7687b042 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[97]
Jupyter contribution guide. url: https://jupyter-notebook.readthedocs.io/
en/latest/contributing.html#setting-up-a-development-environment
(visited on 22/01/2021).
[98]
Minimizing the Security Issues of eval. url: https://realpython.com/python-
eval- function/#minimizing- the- security- issues- of- eval (visited on
22/01/2021).
[99]
Pycrypto GitHub issue detailing vulnerability. url: https://github.com/pycrypto/
pycrypto/issues/176 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[100]
CVE detailing Numpy vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/
CVE-2019-6446 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[101]
CVE detailing Pillow vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/
CVE-2020-5310 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[102]
CVE detailing Pillow vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/
CVE-2020-5311 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[103]
CVE detailing Pillow vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/
CVE-2020-5312 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[104]
CVE detailing Pillow vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/
CVE-2020-5313 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[105]
CVE detailing PYYAML vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/
detail?vulnId=CVE-2020-1747 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[106]
CVE detailing requests vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/
CVE-2018-18074 (visited on 22/01/2021).
[107]
CVE detailing PYYAML vulnerability. url: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/
detail/CVE-2017-18342 (visited on 22/01/2021).
87
==PAGE:95==
9
Appendix
9.1
Appendix A
PyLint utilizes a large list of rules for ﬁnding errors, bad practices and so on. The full list is
available here: https://pylint.readthedocs.io/en/latest/technical_reference/features.html
SonarQube also utilizes a list of rules for ﬁnding code smells used for assessing technical
debt. A full list of rules can be found here: https://rules.sonarsource.com/python/
type/Code%20Smell
9.2
Appendix B - bandit plugins
Bandit utilities a range of rules to assess the security of a project. These rules and links to
their descriptions are found in table 13. Note: rule B101, "assert_used" was deactivated
as it would ﬂag a disproportionate amount of times.
88
==PAGE:96==
ID
Name
Link with description
B102
exec_used
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b102_exec_used.html}
B103
set_bad_ﬁle_permissions
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b103_set_bad_ﬁle_permissions.html}
B104
hardcoded_bind_all_interfaces
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b104_hardcoded_bind_all_interfaces.html}
B105
hardcoded_password_string
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b105_hardcoded_password_string.html}
B106
hardcoded_password_funcarg
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b106_hardcoded_password_funcarg.html}
B107
hardcoded_password_default
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b107_hardcoded_password_funcdef.html}
B108
hardcoded_tmp_directory
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b108_hardcoded_tmp_directory.html}
B109
Test for a password based conﬁg option not marked secret
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b109_password_conﬁg_option_not_marked_secret.html}
B110
try_except_pass
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b110_try_except_pass.html}
B111
Test for the use of rootwrap running as root
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b111_execute_with_run_as_root_equals_true.html}
B112
try_except_continue
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b112_try_except_continue.html}
B201
ﬂask_debug_true
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b201_ﬂask_debug_true.html}
B301
pickle
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b301-pickle}
B302
marshal
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b302-marshal}
B303
md5
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b303-md5}
B304
ciphers
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b304-b305-ciphers-and-modes}
B305
modes
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b304-b305-ciphers-and-modes}
B306
mktemp_q
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b306-mktemp-q}
B307
eval
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b307-eval}
B308
mark_safe
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b308-mark-safe}
B309
httpsconnection
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b309-httpsconnection}
B310
urllib_urlopen
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b310-urllib-urlopen}
B311
random
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b311-random}
B312
telnetlib
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b312-telnetlib}
B313 - B320
XML
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b313-b320-xml}
B321
ftplib
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b321-ftplib}
B322
input
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b322-input}
B323
unveriﬁed_context
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b323-unveriﬁed-context}
B325
tempnam
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_calls.html#b325-tempnam}
B401
import_telnetlib
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b401-import-telnetlib}
B402
import_ftplib
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b402-import-ftplib}
B403
import_pickle
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b403-import-pickle}
B404
import_subprocess
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b404-import-subprocess}
B405
import_xml_etree
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b405-import-xml-etree}
B406
import_xml_sax
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b406-import-xml-sax}
B407
import_xml_expat
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b407-import-xml-expat}
B408
import_xml_minidom
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b408-import-xml-minidom}
B409
import_xml_pulldom
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b409-import-xml-pulldom}
B410
import_lxml
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b410-import-lxml}
B411
import_xmlrpclib
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b411-import-xmlrpclib}
B412
import_httpoxy
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b412-import-httpoxy}
B413
import_pycrypto
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b413-import-pycrypto}
B414
import_pycryptodome
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blacklists/blacklist_imports.html#b414-import-pycryptodome}
B501
request_with_no_cert_validation
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b501_request_with_no_cert_validation.html}
B502
ssl_with_bad_version
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b502_ssl_with_bad_version.html}
B503
ssl_with_bad_defaults
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b503_ssl_with_bad_defaults.html}
B504
ssl_with_no_version
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b504_ssl_with_no_version.html}
B505
weak_cryptographic_key
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b505_weak_cryptographic_key.html}
B506
yaml_load
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b506_yaml_load.html}
B507
ssh_no_host_key_veriﬁcation
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b507_ssh_no_host_key_veriﬁcation.html}
B601
paramiko_calls
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b601_paramiko_calls.html}
B602
subprocess_popen_with_shell_equals_true
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b602_subprocess_popen_with_shell_equals_true.html}
B603
subprocess_without_shell_equals_true
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b603_subprocess_without_shell_equals_true.html}
B604
any_other_function_with_shell_equals_true
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b604_any_other_function_with_shell_equals_true.html}
B605
start_process_with_a_shell
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b605_start_process_with_a_shell.html}
B606
start_process_with_no_shell
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b606_start_process_with_no_shell.html}
B607
start_process_with_partial_path
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b607_start_process_with_partial_path.html}
B608
hardcoded_sql_expressions
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b608_hardcoded_sql_expressions.html}
B609
linux_commands_wildcard_injection
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b609_linux_commands_wildcard_injection.html}
B610
django_extra_used
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b610_django_extra_used.html}
B611
django_rawsql_used
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b611_django_rawsql_used.html}
B701
jinja2_autoescape_false
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b701_jinja2_autoescape_false.html}
B702
use_of_mako_templates
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b702_use_of_mako_templates.html}
B703
django_mark_safe
url{https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins/b703_django_mark_safe.html}
Table 13: bandit rules used for scanning repositories
9.3
Appendix C
A range of tools are leveraged for asserting diﬀerent aspects of the software in question.
Table 14 contains a list of these tools and links to their respective source code. Note:
other dependencies not directly engaged in the scoring of repositories are not listed here,
but can be found in the ﬁle "requirements.txt" found in the attached source code.
89
==PAGE:97==
Name
Purpose
Link
bandit
Checks source code for known security
vulnerabilities
https://github.com/PyCQA/bandit
PyLint
Checks source code for known code smells,
bad practices and general ﬂaws in programming
https://github.com/PyCQA/pylint
safety
Checks dependencies for known vulnerabilities,
often with associated CVE ids
https://github.com/pyupio/safety
SonarQube
Scans source code and assesses the amount of
technical debt present
https://docs.sonarqube.org
python-license-check
Checks source code for licenses of modules
https://github.com/dhatim/python-license-check
CVE SearchSploit
Searches the exploit-db database for an exploit
associated with a given CVE id
https://github.com/andreaﬁoraldi/cve_searchsploit
IPSum
A curated (updated every 24h) list of malicious IP
addresses. Used for detecting malicious networking
https://github.com/stamparm/ipsum
Table 14: Tools used to assert low level metrics in TrustWeb
9.4
Appendix E - Source code, database and diagrams
Included as a separate appendix is the source code for the Python implementation of
TrustWeb. Instructions on running the code is available in the README ﬁle. The code
is also well documented with comments for most classes, methods and functions.
Also included is the raw data gathered during the scan of 332 Python repositories on
GitHub. The data is available in the included SQLite3 database ﬁle scans.db, and the
associated csv ﬁles are also available in the datasets folder.
Finally, a full sequence diagram (sequence_diagram.png) is also included in the separate
appendix.
90
