==PAGE:1==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in
cochlear synaptopathy
Mercedes Christensen Duvig1 2 · Teresa Maria Clausen Gallo1 3 · Bastian
Epp1 · Gerard Encina-Llamas1 · Pernille Holtegaard1
1Hearing Systems Group, Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
2Student ID: s193412
3Student ID: s193411
Abstract Animal studies show that noise-exposure
can damage the synapses between inner hair cells and
auditory nerve (AN) ﬁbers (cochlear synaptopathy, CS)
without permanently elevating hearing thresholds. This
damage has been suggested to target low spontaneous
rate (SR) ﬁbers predominantly. The majority of re-
search in CS hypothesize deﬁcits at supra-threshold lev-
els in accordance with this assumption. However, re-
cent work based on models of the auditory periphery
suggests that the loss also includes high-SR ﬁbers and
that these have an oﬀ-frequency contribution to cod-
ing of moderate-to-high level sounds. The present study
aims at investigating the integrity of low- and high-
SR ﬁbers in CS.Two outcome measures were assumed
to reﬂect AN-ﬁber integrity, gap detection thresholds
(GDTs) and loudness functions. Low presentation lev-
els were assumed to reﬂect the integrity of on-frequency
high-SR ﬁbers, while moderate-to-high levels were as-
sumed to reﬂect the integrity of low-SR ﬁbers and oﬀ-
frequency high-SR ﬁbers. Tinnitus, a potential percep-
tual consequence of CS, was assumed to increase the
likelihood of a larger degree of CS. It was hypothesized
that tinnitus ears would exhibit higher GDTs and shal-
lower loudness functions across presentation levels com-
pared to non-tinnitus ears. The middle ear muscle re-
ﬂex (MEMR) was used as a proxy measure for CS, and
a relationship between MEMR and outcome measures
was hypothesized. Individuals with high-frequency sen-
sorineural hearing loss (SNHL) with and without noise-
induced tinnitus were recruited. GDTs and loudness
functions were measured across a range of presentation
levels at low frequencies where hearing sensitivity was
Hand in date: 24.01.21
normal. There were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
groups in GDTs at any level. The slope of the upper
part of the loudness function at 0.25 kHz was signiﬁ-
cantly shallower in the tinnitus group, but no diﬀerence
was found at 0.5 or 1 kHz. There were no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in MEMR between groups. No correlations
were found between the MEMR and GDTs or loud-
ness functions. Overall, the results did not support the
hypotheses. The interpretation of the results was con-
founded by methodological challenges primarily related
to varying hearing sensitivity. The present results can-
not conﬁrm or dismiss a role of high-SR ﬁbers in CS.
1 Introduction
Noise exposure can have damaging eﬀects on the au-
ditory system causing outer hair cell (OHC) loss and
thereby reducing hearing sensitivity (Bohne and Hard-
ing, 2000). Damage to auditory nerve (AN) ﬁbers has
not been considered a direct consequence of noise ex-
posure since degeneration of AN-ﬁbers was believed
to occur secondary to primary hair cell loss (Bohne
and Harding, 2000). However, recent research in ani-
mals has revealed that noise exposure can cause deaf-
ferentation of AN-ﬁbers synapsing with inner hair cells
(IHCs) without producing hair cell loss and without
permanently elevating hearing thresholds (Kujawa and
Liberman, 2009). This synaptic damage impairs neu-
ral transmission between IHCs and AN-ﬁbers and has
been termed cochlear synaptopathy (CS; Kujawa and
Liberman, 2009). In humans, age-related CS was found
using post-mortem analysis of temporal bones (Viana
et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2019). Assuming the human au-
ditory system responds to noise exposure similarly to
==PAGE:2==
2
Duvig et al.
animal models, CS could be present in audiometrically
normal hearing individuals. This could in part explain
why some listeners experience diﬃculties understanding
speech in challenging acoustic settings despite normal
audiometric thresholds (Hind et al., 2011; Kumar et al.,
2007). This is consistent with animal models in which
IHC loss of up to ∼80% does not elevate thresholds in
quiet (Salvi et al., 2017).
The lack of aﬀected hearing sensitivity in CS is of-
ten explained in relation to the respective damage to
diﬀerent AN-ﬁber types. The majority of research in
CS hypothesize that medium and low spontaneous rate
(SR) ﬁbers are selectively damaged based on the results
by Furman et al. (2013). Hence, only deﬁcits at stimu-
lus intensities within the dynamic range of this group
of AN-ﬁbers were hypothesized in these studies. It has,
however, been suggested that the interpretation of these
results has been over-simpliﬁed by considering a selec-
tive loss to be an exclusive loss (e.g. Encina-Llamas et
al., 2019). A re-analysis of the data from Furman et
al. (2013) concluded that there was a loss of all AN-
ﬁber types, although the loss of low- and medium-SR
ﬁbers was threefold the loss of high-SR ﬁbers (Marmel
et al., 2015). Using a model of the AN Encina-Llamas
et al. (2019) investigated the eﬀect of hair cell dys-
function and CS on the envelope following response
(EFR) magnitude-level function. In order to simulate
trends observed in EFR data from human subjects ex-
hibiting reduced EFR magnitudes, consistent with CS
in mice (Parthasarathy and Kujawa, 2018; Shaheen et
al., 2015), the model had to include a loss of all AN-
ﬁber types across a wide range of characteristic frequen-
cies. In addition, the results suggest that at moderate-
to-high intensities high-SR ﬁbers, with characteristic
frequencies higher than the stimulus frequency, heav-
ily contribute to coding of the amplitude ﬂuctuations.
Hence, this oﬀ-frequency contribution of high-SR ﬁbers
was identiﬁed as the reason for the failure of the model
to explain the observed EFR magnitude-level functions
with a loss of exclusively low- and medium-SR ﬁbers.
In a study by Verhulst et al. (2018), a numerical model
of the auditory periphery was used to investigate the
impact of AN-ﬁber loss and OHC-loss on EFR and
amplitude modulation (AM) detection thresholds at
supra-threshold levels. Simulating normal hearing and
hearing impairment resulted in similar AM detection
thresholds, suggesting that OHC-loss did not inﬂuence
AM detection thresholds. Simulating a complete loss of
low- and medium-SR ﬁbers resulted in an AM detec-
tion threshold shift of two dB. Adding a loss of 50% or
75% high-SR ﬁbers resulted in a threshold shift of eight
and 15 dB, respectively. Additionally, the simulations
demonstrated that the EFR magnitude correlated with
individual diﬀerences in AM detection thresholds. The
results suggest that high-SR ﬁbers play an important
role in AM detection at supra-threshold levels, likely
due to an oﬀ-frequency contribution at moderate-to-
high intensities, as suggested by the results of Encina-
Llamas et al. (2019).
Models of CS serve as the basis of predicting dif-
ferential measures and of interpreting results related to
these by considering the inﬂuence of speciﬁc compo-
nents of the auditory system. Naturally, with the work-
ing assumption based on the results by Furman et al.
(2013) the components aﬀected in these models are the
low- and medium-SR ﬁbers. Additionally, the role of
oﬀ-frequency encoding is often omitted, and deﬁcits are
hypothesized locally in a frequency region. Reconsider-
ing this predominant loss of low- and medium-SR ﬁbers
in CS might aid in interpreting the lack of evidence of
CS found in many studies on humans focusing on supra-
threshold levels. Therefore, investigating the potential
involvement of high-SR ﬁber loss in CS is crucial in
order to base future research on correct assumptions.
While for the detection of sounds, only few intact
nerve ﬁbers are required, the processing of complex
sounds is dependent on the auditory system combin-
ing information from diﬀerent AN-ﬁbers. The repre-
sentation of temporal information is closely linked to
the synchronous ﬁring of numerous AN-ﬁbers. Hence,
a reduction in AN-ﬁbers might lead to temporal cod-
ing deﬁcits. Zeng et al. (1999) found such deﬁcits in
subjects with auditory neuropathy with gap detection
thresholds (GDTs) 2-25 times greater than the con-
trol group. In chinchillas with selective loss of ∼70%
IHCs, Lobarinas et al. (2020) found signiﬁcantly higher
GDTs but almost no change in hearing thresholds in
quiet. Signiﬁcantly higher GDTs in older individuals as
compared to a younger group could not be explained
by hearing thresholds in a study by Snell and Frisina
(2000). In guinea pigs, the GDTs in the low-frequency
region increased and became signiﬁcantly higher af-
ter inducing high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss
(SNHL) using noise-trauma (Yin et al., 2008). Similarly,
individuals with high-frequency SNHL exhibited higher
thresholds for detection of gaps in noise presented in the
low-frequency region compared to age-matched audio-
metrically normal hearing controls (Feng et al., 2010).
These results suggest that GDT potentially can be used
to indicate impaired temporal processing due to neural
damage in cochlear regions without increased thresh-
old sensitivity. Besides temporal processing deﬁcits, a
reduction in AN-ﬁber population might also aﬀect loud-
ness perception. A common assumption is that the
summed activity of AN-ﬁbers across the area of ex-
citation contributes to loudness perception, for which
==PAGE:3==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
3
reason CS causing a reduction in AN-ﬁber population
might correspondingly reduce loudness perception.
Since it is not possible to histologically conﬁrm CS in
humans in-vivo, physiological measures associated with
histologically conﬁrmed noise-induced CS in animals
have been used as proxy measures of CS in humans.
One such proxy is the measure of the middle ear muscle
reﬂex (MEMR). It was found that animals with histo-
logically conﬁrmed CS have weaker MEMR compared
to animals without CS (Valero et al., 2016; Valero et al.,
2018). These results are in accordance with the specu-
lation that low-SR ﬁbers might be important drivers of
the MEMR (Kobler et al., 1992; Valero et al., 2017).
As Mepani et al. (2020) suggested, the variation in
MEMR observed between audiometrically normal hear-
ing individuals (McGregor et al., 2018) may be due to
underlying CS. In humans, reduced MEMR strength
has been associated with perceptual deﬁcits assumed
to be a consequence of CS. Mepani et al. (2020) found
poorer listening performance in individuals with high
MEMR thresholds. In audiometrically normal adults
with and without self-reported hearing diﬃculties, She-
horn et al. (2020) found a relationship between reduced
MEMR magnitude and higher lifetime noise exposure.
Additionally, MEMR magnitude was associated with
poorer hearing performance in reverberation and noise
as a function of increasing presentation level (Shehorn
et al., 2020). Noise-induced tinnitus in listeners with
audiometrically normal or near-normal hearing thresh-
olds has also been associated with reduced strength of
the MEMR (Wojtczak et al., 2017). It has been hy-
pothesized that tinnitus can arise from deprivation of
input from AN-ﬁbers (Schaette and Kempter, 2006).
This hypothesis is supported by studies in which tinni-
tus has been associated with reduced amplitude of wave
I and unchanged or increased amplitude of wave V in
auditory brainstem responses (Bramhall et al., 2018;
Bramhall et al., 2019b; Gu et al., 2012; Schaette and
McAlpine, 2011; Valderrama et al., 2018), consistent
with ﬁndings in animals with CS (Kujawa and Liber-
man, 2009; Kujawa and Liberman, 2015; Sergeyenko et
al., 2013; Shaheen et al., 2015). Contrary to these re-
sults, Guest et al. (2019) found no relationship between
tinnitus and MEMR responses using a clinical measure
of the MEMR in normal hearing young adults.
The aim of this study was to investigate the integrity
of low- and high-SR ﬁbers in individuals suspected of
having CS. A reduction in AN-ﬁber population should
be reﬂected in psychoacoustic measurements that re-
quire the auditory system to combine information from
several AN-ﬁbers, such as detection of gaps in noise and
loudness scaling. Assuming that high-SR ﬁbers, in addi-
tion to encoding low intensity sound at their character-
istic frequency, provide an oﬀ-frequency contribution at
moderate-to-high intensities, the integrity of this AN-
ﬁber population will likely inﬂuence the internal rep-
resentation of sound across the entire dynamic range
of hearing. By nature of their high thresholds, low-SR
ﬁbers should be reﬂected solely at high intensities. Thus
investigating GDTs and loudness functions across in-
tensities might aid our understanding of the respective
loss of low- and high-SR ﬁbers. In order to increase
the likelihood of CS in the population, we recruited
participants with high-frequency SNHL, based on the
assumption that deaﬀerentation of AN-ﬁbers synaps-
ing with IHCs precede OHC-dysfunction. Thus it is as-
sumed that CS will be present in the low frequency re-
gion where OHCs are intact. Additionally, individuals
with presumed noise-induced tinnitus were recruited to
increase the likelihood of a more extensive degree of CS
within this population. We hypothesize that individ-
uals with tinnitus exhibit higher GDTs and shallower
loudness functions across presentation levels compared
to individuals without tinnitus. We further hypothesize
an association between MEMR responses and GDTs
and loudness functions across presentation levels.
2 Methods
2.1 Participants and inclusion criteria
Twenty-four hearing impaired individuals with and
without tinnitus, likely due to noise exposure, were re-
cruited for the study. Three individuals were excluded
on the basis of air-conduction (AC) thresholds falling
outside the inclusion criteria. One individual was ex-
cluded due to the presence of chronic disease associated
with cognitive impairment. Inclusion criteria was nor-
mal hearing (AC thresholds in quiet ≤20 dB HL) at fre-
quencies 0.125 to 1.5 kHz, one or more elevated thresh-
olds at frequencies from 2 to 8 kHz and normal middle
ear status. Individuals with tinnitus with other more
probable etiologies than noise exposure (e.g. acoustic
neuroma or stress-related tinnitus) were excluded. A to-
tal of 20 participants (9 female, 11 male) with a median
age of 63 years (range: 54 to 68 years) were included
in the study. All exhibited normal otoscopic ﬁndings,
normal middle-ear function and reported no history of
middle ear surgery, neurological disorders or ototoxic
exposure. Tympanometry revealed high compliance of
2.92 ml in one ear (P1 left ear). The ear was included
since MEMR measurements, using the custom method
described in section 2.6, were similar between right and
left ear (see appendix A). Data was obtained for both
ears in 17 participants, while only one ear met the in-
clusion criteria for three participants (a total of 37 ears,
18 right ears and 19 left ears). All participants provided
==PAGE:4==
4
Duvig et al.
informed consent and all experiments were approved
by the Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Re-
gion of Denmark (reference H-16036391). All partici-
pants were oﬀered hourly ﬁnancial compensation in ac-
cordance with existing regulations.
2.2 Audiological assessment
Audiological assessment was performed on all partici-
pants in order to conﬁrm that inclusion criteria were
met. Otoscopic examination was performed in order to
assess the status of the outer ear and tympanic mem-
brane, and to check for any abnormalities that might in-
ﬂuence the measurements. AC thresholds were obtained
in a soundproof booth using Interacoustics AC40 au-
diometer and ER-3A insert earphones. Thresholds were
measured in accordance with the recommended proce-
dure of the British Society of Audiology (BSA, 2018) at
standard audiometric frequencies (0.25 to 8 kHz) and at
0.125, 1.5, 3 and 6 kHz. Warble tones were used to avoid
confusing a presented tone with the presence of tinnitus.
Tympanometry was performed using the Interacoustics
Titan and the standard clinical 226 Hz probe tone. Dis-
tortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs) were
measured in order to objectively assess outer hair cell
function at frequencies of interest (i.e. frequencies ≤1.5
kHz). The procedure was performed using the Intera-
coustics Titan at frequencies 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9 and 10 kHz.
2.3 Tinnitus assessment
Individual participants’ tinnitus was qualitatively as-
sessed in order to increase the likelihood of noise expo-
sure as cause of tinnitus. Factors such as self-reported
characteristics of tinnitus, years of perceiving tinnitus,
self-reported believed cause and self-reported medical
history was used to asses the likely etiology of tinnitus.
Self-reported characteristics of tinnitus included per-
ceived placement and sound characteristics (intensity,
pitch and kind of sound).
2.4 Temporary threshold shifts
Subjective reports of temporary threshold shifts have
been found more predictive of tinnitus and other hear-
ing complaints later in life than questions relating to
noise exposure history (Brungart et al., 2019). Partic-
ipants were asked whether they had experienced tem-
porary threshold shifts in their lifetime, explained as
attenuated hearing or a sensation of ”muﬄed” sound,
after exposure to loud noise, e.g. a loud concert. The
participants answered on a predeﬁned scale, similar to
the one used in Brungart et al. (2019), with the follow-
ing options: 1) Never, 2) Once in my life, 3) A few times
in my life, 4) Several times a year, 5) Several times a
month, 6) Several times a week and 7) Every day.
2.5 Fixed-level Frequency Thresholds
High-frequency hearing was assessed using a modi-
ﬁed version of the procedure for ﬁxed-level frequency
thresholds (FLFT) described by Rieke et al. (2017).
In this procedure, the stimulus is ﬁxed in level while
frequency is varied adaptively towards higher frequen-
cies. The measurement was conducted in a soundproof
booth and stimuli were created digitally (MATLAB,
2017), converted into an analogue signal (RME Fireface
UCX) and presented through headphones (HDA 200;
Sennheiser Audio, Germany). FLFTs were measured
monoaurally on both ears using warble tones starting
at 8 kHz with the lower limit set to 2 kHz and the upper
limit to 20 kHz. A yes/no task using a single-interval
adjustment-matrix (Kaernbach, 1990) was applied. In
each trial the stimulus was either present or absent.
The frequency increased after a positive response and
decreased after a negative response. If no tone was pre-
sented but the participant provided a positive response
the frequency decreased, thus controlling the partici-
pants internal criterion. Each run consisted of a train-
ing phase and a measurement phase. In the training
phase, the initial step-size of 1/2 octave was changed
to 1/5 after one reversal and 1/10 octave after second
reversal. The measurement phase started after fourth
reversal in the training phase and ended after three re-
versals or if lower or upper limit was reached ﬁve times.
The threshold was calculated based on the three rever-
sals in the measurement phase. FLFTs were measured
twice at 40, 65 and 80 dB SPL in randomized order.
The ﬁnal threshold at each level was the mean of the
two measurements.
2.6 Middle Ear Muscle Reﬂex
Ipsilateral MEMRs were measured using two methods.
First, a method used in the clinic with a tonal probe
and -elicitor (MEMRPT) and second, a custom method
recently used to assess CS in humans by Mepani et al.
(2020), initially described by Keefe et al. (2010), using
broadband probe and -elicitor (MEMRBB).
The MEMRBB was performed using the Interacous-
tics Titan and a custom MATLAB script (MATLAB,
2018). Since the MEMR is strongest at an air pres-
sure equal to the pressure in the middle ear (Gelfand,
2009) the device performed a wideband tympanome-
try before the reﬂex measurement to establish tym-
panometric peak pressure. Next, an ipsilateral click-
noise-click complex using a wideband click from 0.25
to 8 kHz and a 500 ms white noise elicitor was pre-
sented four times at each of the seven elicitor levels
==PAGE:5==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
5
in 5 dB steps from 75 to 105 dB SPL. The spectral
diﬀerence in ear canal SPL (∆Immittance) was aver-
aged for the four presentations. The reﬂex magnitude
at each elicitor level was calculated as the absolute val-
ues of average ∆Immittance across frequencies 0.25 to
8 kHz (see example in ﬁg. 1). Two metrics were com-
puted from the measurement: MEMRBB strength and
MEMRBB growth. MEMRBB strength was deﬁned as the
reﬂex magnitude measured at the highest elicitor level
(105 dB SPL). MEMRBB growth was calculated as the
slope of a regression line based on reﬂex magnitude as
a function of elicitor levels 90, 95, 100 and 105 dB SPL.
The measurement was performed twice on each ear with
removal and reinsertion of the probe. The ﬁnal metrics
were calculated from the average of the two measure-
ments unless an artifact was discovered, in which case
this measurement was discarded. It was decided not
to use MEMR threshold, the lowest elicitor level pro-
ducing a measurable reﬂex, since there is no normative
data available for this custom method to decide on a
criterion.
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Frequency (kHz)
Δ Immittance (dB)
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
1
2
4
8
0.5
Elicitor level (dB SPL)
Fig. 1. Example of an MEMRBB
response (P7 left ear).
The graph shows the spectral diﬀerence in ear canal SPL
(∆Immittance) after a broadband noise elicitor. MEMR magni-
tude is calculated as the absolute values of ∆Immittance across
the frequency range of the probe (0.25 to 8 kHz).
The clinical MEMR measure implemented in the Titan
Suite was used to measure reﬂex magnitude at ﬁxed
elicitor levels of 80, 85 and 90 dB HL using a 226 Hz
probe tone at 85 dB SPL (69 dB HL) and a 500 Hz
pure-tone elicitor. The MEMRPT strength was deﬁned
as the magnitude of the reﬂex at the elicitor level of 90
dB HL. The measurement was performed once on each
ear.
2.7 Gap Detection Thresholds
An adaptive three-interval, three-alternative forced-
choice procedure was used to measure gap detection
thresholds (GDTs) as a function of presentation level.
The measurement was conducted monoaurally in a
soundproof booth and stimuli were created digitally
(MATLAB, 2017), converted into an analogue signal
(RME Fireface UCX) and presented through head-
phones (HDA 200; Sennheiser Audio, Germany). The
measurement was performed on the ear with weakest
MEMRBB. Participants were presented with three inter-
vals of 500 ms noise in which one interval contained a
silent gap. Intervals were separated by two silent pauses
of 500 ms. The noise used was threshold equalizing noise
(TEN) from 0.1 to 1.5 kHz (Moore et al., 2000). TEN
is spectrally shaped to produce equal masked thresh-
olds for pure-tones at frequencies from 0.25 to 10 kHz
in normal hearing individuals. The idea behind using
TEN, was to present the same density of noise above
threshold in the stimulated frequency region. The task
of the participant was to identify the interval in which
the silent gap was present. A transformed one-up two-
down method was applied. The gap-length was adjusted
according to the last two responses and the 70.7 point
on the psychometric function was measured. The gap
length started at 20 ms with lower and upper limit set
to 1 and 100 ms, respectively. The initial step-size of 2.5
ms was changed to 1.6 ms after the ﬁrst reversal and to
1.26 ms after second reversal. The measurement started
when the smallest step-size was reached and ended af-
ter six reversals or if lower or upper limit was reached.
The threshold was calculated based on the six reversals
at the smallest step-size. Gap detection thresholds were
measured twice at presentation levels 20, 40, 60 and 70
dB/ERB in randomized order. The ﬁnal threshold at
each level was the mean of the two measurements.
2.8 Loudness Functions
An adaptive procedure for categorical loudness scaling
(ACALOS; Brand and Hohmann, 2002) was used to es-
timate loudness functions. The measurement was con-
ducted monoaurally in a soundproof booth and stim-
uli were created digitally (MATLAB, 2017), converted
into an analogue signal (RME Fireface UCX) and pre-
sented through headphones (HDA 200; Sennheiser Au-
dio, Germany). Participants were presented with inter-
leaved 1/3 octave band noises centered at 0.25, 0.5,
1, 2, 4 and 6 kHz at levels ranging from -10 to 105
dB HL. Participants were instructed to rate the per-
ceived loudness of each stimulus presentation using a
response scale. The scale consisted of 11 response alter-
natives with labels ”not heard” and ”extremely loud”
representing the limiting categories corresponding to 0
==PAGE:6==
6
Duvig et al.
and 50 categorical units (CU). In between, response al-
ternatives were labelled ”very soft”, ”soft”, ”medium”,
”loud” and ”very loud” corresponding to 5, 15, 25, 35
and 45 CU, respectively. Unlabelled intermediate re-
sponse alternatives were provided and corresponded to
10, 20, 30 and 40 CU. The procedure consisted of an ini-
tial phase, in which the dynamic range was roughly esti-
mated, and a second phase in which more data was col-
lected within this range (Brand and Hohmann, 2002).
In the ﬁrst phase, two interleaved stimuli sequences
were performed in an ascending and descending man-
ner. In the ascending sequence, level was increased until
the ”too loud” response was given or until the maxi-
mum stimulus level was reached. In the descending se-
quence, level was decreased until inaudible to ﬁnd the
hearing threshold. The test was performed for right and
left ear separately and provided raw data to model loud-
ness functions at each center frequency.
The loudness model used in ACALOS is described in
detail by Brand and Hohmann (2002) and Oetting et al.
(2014). The function has two linear parts with indepen-
dent slope values. The linear parts intersect at the level
corresponding to 25 CU (”medium”) and is smoothed in
the transition region between the levels corresponding
to 15 CU (”soft”) and 35 CU (”loud”). The raw data
is ﬁtted to the model by use of a modiﬁed least-square
method. The ACALOS provides the following outcome
parameters for each of the six stimulus frequencies: the
hearing threshold (HTL), the most comfortable level
(MCL), the uncomfortable level (UCL), the dynamic
range (DYN), the level where the two linear parts of
the loudness function intersect (Lcut), the slope of the
lower linear part of the loudness function (Mlow) and
the slope of the upper linear part of the loudness func-
tion (Mhigh).
ACALOS was used to investigate the slope of the
loudness function at low and high intensities in the low
frequency area without OHC-loss. Therefore, the out-
come parameters used in the analysis were Mlow and
Mhigh at frequencies 0.25, 0.5 and 1 kHz. Individual
data for all outcome parameters for these frequencies
can be found in appendix B.
2.9 Statistical analysis
Two main statistical analyses were performed using R
Commander (Fox, 2005), a graphical user interface for
R (R Core Team, 2017). All tests used were built-in
options in R Commander. For measures performed on
both left and right ear in each participant, the ears were
analyzed individually. GDTs were obtained in one ear
for each participant and analyses were completed with
data for the corresponding ear only.
The ﬁrst analysis aimed to investigate diﬀerences be-
tween tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears. Group compar-
isons were made using independent samples t-tests in
cases of normal distribution and equal variances be-
tween groups. The normality of distributions was tested
using the Lilliefors normality test and group variances
were controlled using two-sample F-test. For data with-
out normal distribution, or in cases of unequal variances
between groups, the non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-
sum test was used. Group comparisons were performed
using one-tailed tests in accordance with the hypothe-
ses.
The aim of the second analysis was to investigate
the relationship between the outcome variables GDT,
Mhigh and Mlow and measures considered as potential
predictors of CS: MEMRBB strength, MEMRBB growth,
MEMRPT strength and TTS. Pearson’s correlation co-
eﬃcient was used to check pairwise correlations, ex-
cept when including TTS in the analyses, in which case
Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬃcient was used. Cor-
relation analysis were conducted two-tailed.
Correction for multiple comparisons were made us-
ing Bonferroni-Holm’s method (Holm, 1979) in order
to reduce risk of type I errors. Corrected p-values are
represented by ep.
3 Results
3.1 Audiological assessment
Population characteristics can be found in table 1 and
audiograms are shown in ﬁg. 2. With the exception of
one participant (P3 left ear) with an AC threshold of
25 dB HL at 1.5 kHz in one ear, all participants had
AC thresholds ≤20 dB HL at frequencies ≤1.5 kHz.
Median low-frequency hearing (average AC thresholds
from 0.125 to 1.5 kHz) was 10 dB HL (range: -1 to 17).
All participants had minimal-to-moderate SNHL, either
with a noise-dip or sloping towards high frequencies.
Median high-frequency hearing (average AC threshold
from 2 to 8 kHz) was 36 dB HL (range: 13 to 56). Con-
sistent with this variation in high-frequency hearing,
FLFTs varied greatly at all levels, with a median of 3.4
kHz at 40 dB SPL (range: 2.1 to 10.3 kHz), 6.8 kHz at
65 dB SPL (range: 3.3 to 12.7 kHz) and 10.3 kHz at
80 dB SPL (range: 4.1 to 13.1 kHz). Individual partic-
ipant characteristics including age, gender, presence of
tinnitus, low-frequency hearing, high-frequency hearing
and FLFTs can be found in appendix C. DPOAEs at
0.5 kHz were not present in 34 of 37 ears. Correspond-
ing AC thresholds for these ears were all ≤20 dB HL.
DPOAEs at 1 and 1.5 kHz were present in all but one
ear (P3 left ear). Corresponding AC threshold for this
ear was 15 dB HL at 1 kHz and 25 dB HL at 1.5 kHz.
==PAGE:7==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
7
.125
.250
.500
1
1.5
2
3
4
6
8
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency (kHz)
AC threshold (dB HL)
Non-tinnitus (n=16)
Tinnitus (n=21)
Fig. 2. AC thresholds in individual ears (grey lines) and means
for tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears.
3.2 Tinnitus assessment
Eleven participants reported tinnitus. Self-reported
cause and other potential causes, and characteristics
of tinnitus can be found in appendix D. Ten partic-
ipants reported cause of tinnitus as either a speciﬁc
noise exposure event or long-term noise exposure while
one participant did not report a speciﬁc cause of tin-
nitus. Since there was no other known potential cause
of tinnitus, it was decided to include this participant.
Five participants reported high blood pressure, which
is a known etiology of tinnitus often perceived as pul-
sative. Of these, four experienced tinnitus as a constant
sound. The remaining participant with high blood pres-
sure (P9) reported perceiving tinnitus as both constant
and pulsating. However, this participant had experi-
enced tinnitus for 10 years and was conﬁdent the cause
was noise exposure related to use of ﬁre arms, which is
supported by tinnitus being present only in the exposed
ear.
3.3 Tinnitus and non-tinnitus comparisons
The 37 ears in the study were divided into a group of
tinnitus ears (n = 21) and a group of non-tinnitus ears
(n = 16). Group characteristics are displayed in table
1. There were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between groups
in age (W = 184.5, p = .62) or low-frequency hear-
ing (t(26) = -0.61, p = .55). Although there were more
males in the tinnitus group (71%) compared to the non-
tinnitus group (50%), the diﬀerence was not signiﬁcant
(W = 116, p = .052). High-frequency hearing was sig-
niﬁcantly higher in the tinnitus group compared to the
non-tinnitus group (t(32) = -2.29, p = 0.04) with medi-
ans of 38 and 34 dB HL, respectively. FLFT was slightly
better in the non-tinnitus group at all levels, but the
diﬀerence did not reach statistical signiﬁcance (40 dB
SPL: W = 187.5, p = .39, ep = .39; 65 dB SPL: W =
Table 1. Population characteristics
All
(n = 37)
Tinnitus
(n = 21)
Non-tinnitus
(n = 16)
Male
25 (68%)
17 (71%)
8 (50%)
Age
63 (45 to 68)
63 (54 to 68)
63 (55 to 68)
LF hearing
10 (-1 to 17)
10 (5 to 17)
10 (-1 to 16)
HF hearing
36 (13 to 56)
38 ( (21 to 56)
34 (13 to 44)
FLFT 40 dB
3.4 (2.1 to 10.3)
3.1 (2.1 to 10.3)
3.6 (2.2 to 9.6)
FLFT 65 dB
6.8 (3.3 to 12.7)
6.6 (3.3 to 12.7)
8.0 (4.4 to 11.1)
FLFT 80 dB
10.3 (4.1 to 13.1)
10.2 (4.1 to 13.1)
11.2 (6.1 to 12.7)
TTS
3 (1 to 4)
4 (1 to 4)
3 (1 to 4)
Number of male ears are presented with (%). The remaining characteristics
are medians with (range). Age is presented in years, LF hearing (average AC
thresholds <2 kHz) in dB HL, HF hearing (average AC thresholds ≥2 kHz)
in dB HL and FLFT in kHz.
Never
Once in my life
A few times in my life
Several times a year
Several times a month
Several times a week
Every day
0
2
4
6
8
No. of participants
Tinnitus (n=11)
Non-tinnitus (n=9)
Fig. 3. Self-reported TTS in tinnitus and non-tinnitus partici-
pants. Response options are shown on the x-axis, with ”never”
being option number 1 and ”Every day” being option number 7.
215.5, p = .15, ep = 0.3; 80 dB SPL: W = 228, p = .07,
ep = 0.21). Self-reported TTS is shown in ﬁgure 3 for
participants with and without tinnitus. Only three of
the seven response options were used and there was no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between groups with medians of 3
in the tinnitus group and 4 in the non-tinnitus group
(W = 36.5, p = .31).
3.3.1 Middle Ear Muscle Reﬂex
Median MEMRBB magnitude as a function of intensity
is presented in ﬁg. 4 for the tinnitus and non-tinnitus
group. Individual MEMRBB responses can be found in
appendix A. Overall, reﬂex magnitudes were modest at
all elicitor levels with 105 dB SPL eliciting the high-
est response. MEMRBB strength (magnitude at 105 dB
SPL) appeared slightly higher in non-tinnitus ears com-
pared to tinnitus ears, but the diﬀerence was not signif-
icant (W = 202, p = .15). Reﬂex magnitudes grew with
elicitor level, although this increase was small and not
visible at levels below 90 dB SPL. Therefore, MEMRBB
==PAGE:8==
8
Duvig et al.
growth was calculated with the four highest elicitor
levels from 90-105 dB SPL. MEMRBB growth corre-
lated strongly with MEMRBB strength (r(25) = 0.99,
p<.0001) since the magnitude at 105 dB SPL had the
largest change in immittance, and therefore strongly
inﬂuenced growth. There was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in MEMRBB growth between the groups (W = 202, p
= .15). There was no measurable change in MEMRPT
for seven ears at 80 and 85 dB HL and six ears at 90
dB HL. Statistical tests were performed with MEMRPT
strength for the remaining 31 ears at 90 dB HL (17 tin-
nitus ears and 14 non-tinnitus ears). MEMRPT strength
in the groups are presented in boxplots with individual
ears represented as black dots in ﬁg. 5. There was no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in MEMRPT strength between tin-
nitus and non-tinnitus groups (W = 167.5, p = .51).
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Elicitor level (dB SPL)
MEMRBB magnitude
Tinnitus (n=20)
Non-tinnitus (n=16)
Fig. 4. Median MEMRBB magnitude as a function of elicitor
level in tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears. Errorbars represent the
interquartile range.
3.3.2 Gap Detection Thresholds
Median GDTs are plotted in ﬁg. 6 as a function of the
presentation level of the stimuli. The lowest level of
20 dB/ERB yielded the highest GDTs in both groups,
meaning that participants needed longer gaps in order
to detect them. However, there was a large variation
between ears in GDTs at this level with GDTs rang-
ing from 6 to 33 msec. The GDT of 33 msec (P7 left
ear) was far from other ears’ GDTs at this presentation
level, and from the GDTs measured at 40, 60 and 70
dB/ERB within the same ear. The average AC thresh-
old across 0.125-1.5 kHz, the frequency range of the
GDT stimuli, in this ear was 17 dB HL, which could
explain the high threshold. In accordance with this ex-
planation, there was a signiﬁcant relationship between
low-frequency hearing and GDT at 20 dB/ERB (r(18)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
MEMRPT strength (ml)
Tinnitus (n=17)
Non-tinnitus (n=14)
Fig. 5. Median MEMRPT strength in tinnitus and non-tinnitus
ears. The box plot displays the 25th percentile, median and the
75th percentile. Upper and lower whiskers represent the highest
and lowest values. Individual ears are represented as black dots.
= .54, p = .015). Increasing the presentation level of the
stimuli to 40 dB/ERB decreased the GDTs in all ears,
although the decrease was larger for ears with higher
AC thresholds in the low frequencies. Further increas-
ing the presentation level to 60 and 70 dB/ERB did not
have the same threshold-lowering eﬀect on group level.
Part of the population exhibited higher thresholds at
these presentation levels, compared to 40 dB/ERB (see
individual GDTs in appendix E).
1
10
Presentation level (dB/ERB)
Gap detection threshold (msec)
Tinnitus (n=11)
Non-tinnitus (n=9)
20
40
60
70
Fig. 6. Median GDTs in tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears at the
four presentation levels. Errorbars represent interquartile range.
Median GDTs in the tinnitus and non-tinnitus groups
are presented in table 2 along with results of Wilcoxon
rank-sum tests. Contrary to our hypothesis, the median
GDTs in the tinnitus group were lower than the median
GDTs in the non-tinnitus group at all presentation lev-
==PAGE:9==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
9
els. One-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum tests according to
the hypothesis were performed and did not reveal signif-
icantly higher thresholds in the tinnitus group. As seen
in table 2, additional one-sided tests were performed
with the alternative hypothesis that the tinnitus group
yielded lower GDTs than the non-tinnitus group. These
tests showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between groups.
Table 2. GDTs in tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears
Level
(dB/ERB)
Tinnitus
(n=11)
Non-tinnitus
(n=9)
Wilcoxon (H1)
Wilcoxon (H2)
W
p
ep
W
p
ep
20
11.3
13.4
54.5
.662
1
54.5
.366
.366
40
6.2
7.0
63
.857
1
63
.161
.322
60
6.5
8.1
69.5
.941
1
69.5
.069
.207
70
5.9
8.1
76
.980
.980
76
.024
.096
Median GDTs in msec in tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears for presentation levels
20, 40, 60 and 70 dB/ERB. The W -, p- and corrected p-values are presented
for the Wilcoxon rank-sum test with two alternative hypotheses: H1: higher
GDTs in the tinnitus group and H2: lower GDTs in the tinnitus group.
3.3.3 Loudness Functions
When ﬁtting the loudness functions, the model (Oetting
et al., 2014) was not able to estimate Mhigh in several
cases and instead ﬁxed Mhigh to a value of 1.53 CU/dB.
This happened due to a lack of datapoints above 35
CU (”loud”), meaning that participants in these cases
rarely or never responded using the upper end of the re-
sponse scale. This was the case for six ears at 0.25 kHz,
eight ears at 0.5 kHz and four ears at 1 kHz. Anal-
ysis were performed without these datapoints. Mlow
and Mhigh at 0.5 kHz for one ear (P2 left ear) was ex-
cluded from the analysis since visual assessment of the
loudness function (see appendix F) concluded that this
measurement was most likely not reliable.
Boxplots of Mlow and Mhigh in the two groups are
shown in ﬁg. 7 along with individual datapoints indi-
cated by black dots. The medians and the results of the
one-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum tests are presented in ta-
ble 3. In accordance with the hypothesis, the median
Mhigh at 0.25 kHz was signiﬁcantly lower, meaning a
shallower slope, in the tinnitus group (0.84 CU/dB)
than in the non-tinnitus group (1.83 CU/dB) (W =
190, p = .002, ep = .012). There were no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between groups in Mhigh at remaining fre-
quencies or Mlow at any frequencies. There was a sig-
niﬁcant correlation between Mlow at 0.25 kHz and AC
thresholds at 0.25 kHz (ρ = .34, p = .039) and between
Mlow at 1 kHz and AC thresholds at 1 kHz (ρ = .45,
p = .005) but not between Mlow at 0.5 kHz and AC
thresholds at 0.5 kHz (ρ = .19, p = .247). To investigate
whether the diﬀerence in Mhigh at 0.25 kHz could be re-
lated to the signiﬁcantly better high-frequency hearing
in the non-tinnitus group, the relation between high-
frequency hearing and Mhigh at 0.25 kHz was assessed.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Frequency (kHz)
Mhigh (CU/dB)
0.25
0.5
1
0.25
0.5
1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Mlow (CU/dB)
Tinnitus
Non-tinnitus
*
Fig. 7. Mlow and Mhigh at frequencies 0.25, 0.5 and 1 kHz in
tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears. The box plot displays 25th per-
centile, median and 75th percentile. Upper and lower whiskers
represent the highest and lowest values. Individual ears are repre-
sented as black dots. The asterix indicates signiﬁcant diﬀerence
with p < .05.
Table 3. Mlow and Mhigh in tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears
Tinnitus
Non-tinnitus
Wilcoxon
Parameter
n
Median
(CU/dB)
n
Median
(CU/dB)
W
p
ep
Mlow 0.25 kHz
21
0.32
16
0.27
99
.984
.984
Mlow 0.5 kHz
20
0.31
16
0.28
114
.953
1
Mlow 1 kHz
21
0.29
16
0.29
168
.506
1
Mhigh 0.25 kHz
17
0.84
14
1.83
190
.002
.012
Mhigh 0.5 kHz
16
1.00
12
1.35
132
.138
.7
Mhigh 1 kHz
19
1.28
14
1.24
127
.592
1
Median Mlow and Mhigh in tinnitus and non-tinnitus ears are presented with
the W -, p- and corrected p-value of the Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
The analysis did not reveal such a relation (r(29) =
-0.19, p = 0.31).
3.4 Relationship between predictors and out-
come measures
Relationships between MEMRBB strength and Mlow
and Mhigh at 0.25 kHz and GDT at all presentation
levels are visualized using scatterplots in ﬁg. 8. Scatter-
plots for MEMRBB growth are not presented, since the
==PAGE:10==
10
Duvig et al.
Tinnitus
Non-tinnitus
5
15
25
35
GDT 20 dB/ERB (msec)
2
4
6
8
10
12
GDT 40 dB/ERB (msec)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
4
6
8
10
12
GDT 60 dB/ERB (msec)
MEMRBBstrength (ΔImmittance)
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Mlow 0.25 kHz (CU/dB)
0
1
2
3
4
Mlow 0.25 kHz (CU/dB)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
5
10
15
20
GDT 70 dB/ERB (msec)
Fig. 8. Relationship between MEMRBB strength and outcome
measures Mlow (0.25 kHz), Mhigh (0.25 kHz) and GDT at all
levels. There were no signiﬁcant correlations with any outcome
measure (see appendix G).
correlation between MEMRBB strength and MEMRBB
growth was very strong (r(25) = 0.99, p<.0001) and
plots were very similar. Tests revealed no signiﬁ-
cant correlations between any predictors (MEMRBB
strength, MEMRBB growth, MEMRPT strength and
TTS) and the outcome measures Mlow, Mhigh and
GDT (see results of correlation analyses in appendix
G).
4 Discussion
This study aimed at investigating the integrity of low-
and high-SR ﬁbers in a population suspected of hav-
ing CS. We hypothesized that individuals with tinni-
tus would exhibit higher GDTs and shallower loudness
functions across presentation level compared to indi-
viduals without tinnitus. We further hypothesized an
association between predictors of CS and outcome mea-
sures. Contrary to our hypothesis, no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences were observed in GDTs or Mlow between groups.
Mhigh was signiﬁcantly shallower in the tinnitus group
compared to the non-tinnitus group at 0.25 kHz, but
no diﬀerences were observed at any other frequency. No
correlations were observed between potential predictors
of CS and either gap detection thresholds or loudness
functions.
4.1 Considering CS in the population
Some studies have found a relation between tinnitus
and physiological proxy measures of CS using auditory
evoked potentials (Bramhall et al., 2018; Bramhall et
al., 2019b; Gu et al., 2012; Kara et al., 2020; Schaette
and McAlpine, 2011; Valderrama et al., 2018) and mea-
sures of the MEMR (Wojtczak et al., 2017) while other
studies found no relation (Dewey et al., 2020; Guest et
al., 2019; Guest et al., 2017; Shim et al., 2017). This
inconsistency could be due to the presence of tinnitus
with other etiologies than noise exposure in the exper-
imental population, since there are multiple possible
etiologies of tinnitus, as pointed out by Bramhall et al.
(2019a). In the present study, all but one of 11 partici-
pants with tinnitus reported noise exposure as cause of
tinnitus, decreasing the likelihood of other etiologies of
tinnitus in the present population. However, some par-
ticipants also reported suﬀering from high blood pres-
sure and while it is suspected that noise exposure is the
most likely cause of their tinnitus it is not possible to
rule out high blood pressure as the cause. The main
methodological diﬀerence in the present study is inclu-
sion of SNHL in the population as compared to audio-
metrically normal hearing individuals in previous stud-
ies investigating tinnitus and CS. In a broad perspec-
tive, an audiometrically normal population will presum-
ably have a small likelihood of CS on group level, which
is then increased in part of the population by the pres-
ence of tinnitus. When using a similar approach to a
study design with a population with SNHL, the starting
point is a larger likelihood of CS in the entire popula-
tion. Therefore, tinnitus is no longer used as a predictor
of the presence of CS but as a predictor of the degree of
CS. This could very well be an over-interpretation of the
relationship between tinnitus and CS. Thus, the lack of
diﬀerences between groups might be due to similar de-
gree of CS across the population studied, irrespective
of the presence of tinnitus. This possible explanation is
supported by the ﬁnding of similar self-reported TTS
between groups. The results by Brungart et al. (2019)
suggest that self-reported TTS might be a predictor of
the consequences of noise exposure. With this assump-
tion, the similar ﬁndings between the groups could in-
dicate a similar degree of noise-induced CS. However,
it is worth noting that participants only used three of
seven response options when answering the question re-
garding TTS. Many participants struggled to settle on
==PAGE:11==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
11
a response and e.g. indicated that an answer between
third option (”a few times in my life”) and fourth op-
tion (”several times a year”) would have suited better,
resulting in some participants randomly selecting one
of the two options. This suggests that response options
provided were not nuanced enough. The response op-
tions used in the present study were found to predict
tinnitus and other hearing complaints in a population
of U.S. service members (Brungart et al., 2019). On ac-
count of their occupation, the population in this study
presumably had a higher noise exposure risk than the
participants in the present study. It is possible that any
diﬀerences in experienced TTS are hidden due to a lack
of ecological validity of the response options.
While the hypotheses are not supported by the
present results, the lack of diﬀerences on the outcome
measures across presentation levels between groups
challenges the interpretation of the integrity of low- and
high-SR ﬁbers.
4.2 Middle Ear Muscle Reﬂex
The MEMR was used as a proxy measure of CS, for
which reason a diﬀerence between tinnitus and non-
tinnitus ears was predicted. Our results did not indi-
cate such a diﬀerence in accordance with the results of
Guest et al. (2019), who used a clinical measure with
tonal probe and elicitor stimuli similar to the MEMRPT.
However, Wojtczak et al. (2017) found reduced MEMR
strength in their tinnitus group using a click probe and
broadband elicitor which closely resembles the stimuli
used for the MEMRBB. The main methodological dif-
ference from this study is that the population in the
present study had high-frequency SNHL. As mentioned,
assuming a larger degree of CS based on the presence
of tinnitus might be incorrect. This might have caused
the degree of CS to be similar on group level, which
could explain the lack of diﬀerence in MEMR strength
between the groups. Nonetheless, using MEMR as a
proxy of CS without considering tinnitus should allow
us to observe a relationship with the outcome measures
assumed to be aﬀected by CS. We did not ﬁnd such
a relationship between MEMR and GDTs or loudness
functions. Responses on the MEMRBB measure were
generally small, and there was no growth between elic-
itor levels below 90 dB SPL. This lack of variation in
the data makes it diﬃcult to observe any relationship
between MEMR responses and the outcome variables,
should there be any. Valero et al. (2016) and Valero
et al. (2018) found reduced MEMR threshold, mean-
ing the lowest elicitor level producing an immittance
change of a certain criterion, in mice with noise-induced
CS. Mepani et al. (2020) found that word recognition
was more strongly correlated with MEMR threshold
rather than MEMR strength. Since there is no norma-
tive data to base a reﬂex criterion on, the present study
used MEMR strength and growth. Using a tonal probe
and elicitor stimuli, Causon et al. (2020) found no corre-
lation between MEMR threshold and MEMR growth,
suggesting that the threshold may provide additional
information. To explore the potential of the MEMR
threshold as a measure, we visually assessed MEMRBB
responses to identify the elicitor level producing a neg-
ative change in ear canal SPL of 0.03 ∆Immittance, a
common criterion used for clinical (tonal) MEMR mea-
sures (Causon et al., 2020; Guest et al., 2019). With this
criterion, the reﬂex was elicited in only 16 of 37 ears.
This underlines that the elicitor levels of MEMRBB were
not high enough to observe any diﬀerences in strength
or growth. This likely inﬂuenced the relationship be-
tween the MEMRBB and outcome measures, thus im-
peding any interpretation regarding the integrity of low-
and high-SR ﬁbers.
The low responses on the MEMR measures might
be related to the presence of SNHL in the popula-
tion. Other studies measured the MEMR by excit-
ing cochlear regions without OHC-loss (Mepani et al.,
2020; Shehorn et al., 2020; Valero et al., 2016; Valero
et al., 2018; Wojtczak et al., 2017). Here, we used a
broadband elicitor across frequencies with and with-
out SNHL. Since SNHL can involve a complex loss
of IHCs, OHCs and AN-ﬁbers, the inﬂuence of hair
cell loss cannot be untangled from the presence of CS.
A trend of elevated MEMR thresholds in individuals
with SNHL using both tonal and broadband elicitor has
been observed, although the shift in MEMR threshold
is not always consistent with the audiometric thresh-
old shift (Hyde et al., 1980; Jerger et al., 1974). Al-
though the variability in MEMR within SNHL popula-
tions could be due to diﬀering degrees of CS, the inﬂu-
ence of hair cell loss is unknown, and varying degrees
of high-frequency SNHL could be a confounding vari-
able. To avoid this, a noise elicitor low-passed at 2 kHz
could be used instead. Decreasing the bandwidth and
thereby increasing the spectral density in the cochlear
region without OHC-loss could aid in eliciting larger
MEMR responses. Diﬀerences in the degree of CS in
a population with high-frequency SNHL might become
more evident with this alternation to the method. It
is important to keep in mind that an increase in spec-
tral density will result in a wider spread of excitation
which will excite high-SR ﬁbers in more basal regions
of cochlea, in which there is SNHL. However, it has
been suggested that the MEMR is driven by low-SR
ﬁbers (Kobler et al., 1992; Valero et al., 2017) with
high thresholds, hence the oﬀ-frequency contribution
from high-SR ﬁbers should not aﬀect the MEMR.
==PAGE:12==
12
Duvig et al.
4.3 Gap Detection Thresholds
There was a large variation in GDTs between ears, es-
pecially at a presentation level of 20 dB/ERB, as illus-
trated in the individual GDT plots (see appendix E). A
moderate correlation between GDTs at 20 dB/ERB and
low-frequency hearing was observed. Although partici-
pants with audiometrically normal low-frequency hear-
ing were recruited, hearing thresholds were allowed to
vary below 20 dB HL. In fact, average AC thresholds
at the frequencies of the TEN (0.1-1.5 kHz) varied be-
tween -1 to 17 dB HL, meaning that some ears had
better audibility of the stimuli than others. Studies in
normal and impaired hearing populations have found
that the GDT does not decrease linearly with sensation
level (Nelson and Thomas, 1997; Zeng et al., 2005). In-
creasing presentation level of the stimuli from a level
near the hearing threshold has a larger eﬀect on GDTs
than increasing the level of fully audible stimuli. To
demonstrate this, four examples of GDTs along with
low-frequency hearing are plotted in ﬁg. 9. As seen on
the ﬁgure, the slope of GDTs across presentation lev-
els appears ﬂat for the ears with better low-frequency
hearing (P8 and P12), as compared to the two ears
with slightly worse low-frequency hearing (P7 and P20).
This suggests that GDTs at a presentation level of
20 dB/ERB in part reﬂect the AC thresholds at low
frequencies. Therefore, the variation in low-frequency
hearing thresholds may obscure the interpretation of
diﬀerences across level. In the present study design the
low presentation levels are of importance to the in-
terpretation of the results in terms of low- and high-
SR ﬁber contribution, since solely high-SR ﬁbers with
characteristic frequencies close to the stimuli frequency
should be represented at this level. To control for hear-
ing sensitivity as a confounding variable it would be
useful to present stimuli above individual audiomet-
ric thresholds. Further, it might be useful to measure
GDTs at additional low levels to provide a more nu-
anced picture of performance in the dynamic range of
high-SR ﬁbers.
4.4 Loudness Functions
The maximum presentation level of 105 dB HL in the
ACALOS procedure was chosen for ethical reasons and
to avoid exposing participants to sounds that could po-
tentially aggravate the perception of tinnitus. In sev-
eral cases, there was a lack of responses in the upper
loudness domain suggesting that this maximum level
was not loud enough for some ears. As a consequence,
the loudness model was not provided with enough dat-
apoints above 35 CU (”loud”), preventing an estima-
tion of Mhigh. The fact that some participants did not
make use of response options in between ”loud” and
1
10
Threshold (msec)
20
40
60 70
35
P8 left ear
P12 left ear
1
10
P7 left ear
Threshold (msec)
20
40
60 70
35
Presentation level (dB/ERB)
P20 left ear
1
10
20
40
60 70
35
1
10
 
Presentation level (dB/ERB)
20
40
60 70
35
Fig. 9. GDTs for four ears and individual AC thresholds at the
frequencies of the GDT-stimuli (TEN). For each ear, the audio-
gram is plotted between frequencies 0.125 and 1.5 kHz. Dotted
vertical lines indicate 0.25, 0.5 and 1 kHz. The upper and lower
limit of the y-axis is -10 and 30 dB HL, respectively. Dotted
horizontal line indicates 10 dB HL. The average low-frequency
AC thresholds are 17, 5, 2 and 13 dB HL for P7, P8, P12 and
P20, respectively. P7 and P8 belong to the tinnitus group, while
P12 and P20 belong to the non-tinnitus group.
”extremely loud” could indicate an altered loudness
perception, possibly a more shallow loudness function.
Naturally, it could be interesting to increase this maxi-
mum in order to obtain enough data to estimate Mhigh
for all ears.
Mlow was correlated with AC thresholds at the re-
spective frequency at 0.25 and 1 kHz, but not at 0.5
kHz. A relation between the slope of the low-level part
of the loudness function and audiometric thresholds
has been found in other studies (Al-Salim et al., 2010;
Rasetshwane et al., 2015), with the slope becoming
steeper as audiometric thresholds increased. While the
inﬂuence of OHC-loss from the low-frequency cochlear
region was limited in the present study by recruiting
a population with normal AC thresholds <2 kHz, the
variation within the range of ”normal” could inﬂuence
Mlow. As previously mentioned, the low presentation
levels are crucial to interpreting integrity of low- and
high-SR ﬁbers. As loudness functions are per deﬁnition
measured in the dynamic range of the individual lis-
tener, controlling for diﬀerences in AC thresholds as a
confounding variable is not possible by individualizing
presentation levels as suggested in the case of GDTs. An
approach to this challenge could be carefully matching
==PAGE:13==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
13
individuals with and without tinnitus on audiometric
low-frequency thresholds.
The assumption behind investigating AN-ﬁber in-
tegrity by measuring loudness functions is that loudness
is closely related to the total AN-ﬁber activity across
the excitation area. Although this may be true in broad
terms, this relationship is complex and unlikely one-
to-one (Heinz et al., 2005; Pickles, 1983; Relkin and
Doucet, 1997), suggesting involvement from other com-
ponents of the auditory system. Auditory steady state
response (ASSR) growth functions evoked by stimuli
modulated at a rate known to reﬂect the auditory cor-
tex have been found to resemble loudness growth func-
tions (Van Eeckhoutte et al., 2016), indicating that
loudness is mediated at cortical level. It might be the
case that a reduction of AN-ﬁbers is not reﬂected in the
loudness functions, due to inﬂuence of central process-
ing. In fact, the central auditory system might act in
a compensatory manner in response to reduced periph-
eral input. Qiu et al. (2000) investigated this by mea-
suring auditory evoked potential input/output func-
tions in chinchillas at diﬀerent sites along the audi-
tory pathway before and after selectively damaging 20-
30% IHCs through carboplatin treatment. The authors
found that action compound potentials, reﬂecting activ-
ity at cochlear level, were reduced post-treatment. In-
terestingly, responses at the level of the midbrain (infe-
rior colliculus potentials) were only slightly below those
observed before treatment and responses reﬂecting ac-
tivity in the auditory cortex were higher than those
observed before treatment. Thus, the results suggest a
compensatory gain mechanism at central sites along the
auditory pathway in response to auditory deprivation.
Further, some studies found evidence suggesting this
compensatory gain mechanism in humans suspected of
having CS (Bramhall et al., 2017; Bramhall et al., 2020)
and in audiometrically normal humans with tinnitus
(Bramhall et al., 2018; Schaette and McAlpine, 2011;
Valderrama et al., 2018). If the central auditory system
acts in a compensatory manner to reduced peripheral
input it might similarly aﬀect the perception of loudness
either in a manner that the perception remains the same
or possibly in a manner that enhances the perceived
loudness of the signal. Thus, it is possible that the lack
of shallower loudness functions might be due to com-
pensatory gain mechanisms at higher stages of the au-
ditory system. However, signiﬁcantly shallower Mhigh
was observed in the tinnitus group compared to the
non-tinnitus group at 0.25 kHz. Given the somewhat
unclear relationship between loudness and processing
at diﬀerent stages of the auditory system, this measure
may not be appropriate to address the current interest,
namely investigating the integrity of diﬀerent AN-ﬁber
types by investigating auditory processing across pre-
sentation level.
5 Conclusion
This study aimed to investigate the integrity of low-
and high-SR ﬁbers in a population suspected of having
CS. Understanding which ﬁbers are aﬀected in synap-
topathic ears is of importance in the ongoing investiga-
tion of its perceptual consequences and the search for
diagnostic measures. Overall, the results of the present
study do not support the hypotheses. However, due to
the methodological issues discussed, the underlying as-
sumption that high-SR ﬁbers are aﬀected along with
low-SR ﬁbers cannot be dismissed either. Investigat-
ing auditory processing at low levels, where solely on-
frequency high-SR ﬁbers convey the signal to the cen-
tral auditory system, is challenged by the the smaller
dynamic range of these ﬁbers and the confounding inﬂu-
ence of hearing sensitivity, which must be carefully con-
sidered when designing experiments. Future research
in CS should consider the possible inﬂuence of oﬀ-
frequency contribution of high-SR ﬁbers in the study
design, and eﬀorts should be put into investigating the
possibility of CS involving a loss of these ﬁbers.
Acknowledgements
The script used for the MEMRBB measure was pro-
vided by Jonatan M¨archer-Rørsted. The scripts for the
FLFT and ACALOS measures were provided by Raul
Sanchez-Lopez and the script for the GDT measure was
developed by Raul Sanchez-Lopez and Gerard Encina-
Llamas. We would like to thank you all for your support
and for making your MATLAB scripts available to us.
References
Al-Salim, S. C., Kopun, J. G., Neely, S. T., Jesteadt,
W., Stiegemann, B., & Gorga, M. P. (2010).
Reliability of categorical loudness scaling and
its relation to threshold. Ear and Hearing,
31(4), 567–578.
Bohne, B. A., & Harding, G. W. (2000). Degenera-
tion in the cochlea after noise damage: Primary
versus secondary events. American Journal of
Otology, 21(4), 505–509.
Bramhall, N. F., Beach, E. F., Epp, B., Le Prell, C. G.,
Lopez-Poveda, E. A., Plack, C. J., Schaette, R.,
Verhulst, S., & Canlon, B. (2019a). The search
for noise-induced cochlear synaptopathy in hu-
mans: Mission impossible? Hearing Research,
377, 88–103.
==PAGE:14==
14
Duvig et al.
Bramhall, N. F., Konrad-Martin, D., & McMillan, G. P.
(2018). Tinnitus and Auditory Perception Af-
ter a History of Noise Exposure: Relationship
to Auditory Brainstem Response Measures.
Ear and Hearing, 39(5), 881–894.
Bramhall, N. F., Konrad-Martin, D., McMillan, G. P.,
& Griest, S. E. (2017). Auditory Brainstem Re-
sponse Altered in Humans with Noise Exposure
Despite Normal Outer Hair Cell Function. Ear
and Hearing, 38(1), e1–e12.
Bramhall, N. F., McMillan, G. P., Gallun, F. J., &
Konrad-Martin, D. (2019b). Auditory brain-
stem response demonstrates that reduced pe-
ripheral auditory input is associated with self-
report of tinnitus. The Journal of the Acousti-
cal Society of America, 146(5), 3849–3862.
Bramhall, N. F., Niemczak, C. E., Kampel, S. D.,
Billings, C. J., & McMillan, G. P. (2020).
Evoked Potentials Reveal Noise Exposure–
Related Central Auditory Changes Despite
Normal Audiograms. American Journal of Au-
diology, 29(2), 152–164.
Brand, T., & Hohmann, V. (2002). An adaptive pro-
cedure for categorical loudness scaling. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
112(4), 1597–1604.
Brungart, D. S., Barrett, M. E., Schurman, J., Sheﬃeld,
B., Ramos, L., Martorana, R., & Galloza, H.
(2019). Relationship Between Subjective Re-
ports of Temporary Threshold Shift and the
Prevalence of Hearing Problems in Military
Personnel. Trends in Hearing, 23, 1–19.
BSA. (2018). Recommended Procedure: Pure-tone air-
conduction and bone-conduction threshold au-
diometry with and without masking. British
Society of Audiology, 39(August), 1–39.
Causon, A., Munro, K. J., Plack, C. J., & Prendergast,
G. (2020). The Role of the Clinically Obtained
Acoustic Reﬂex as a Research Tool for Sub-
clinical Hearing Pathologies. Trends in Hear-
ing, 24, 233121652097286.
Dewey, R. S., Francis, S. T., Guest, H., Prendergast,
G., Millman, R. E., Plack, C. J., & Hall, D. A.
(2020). The association between subcortical
and cortical fMRI and lifetime noise exposure
in listeners with normal hearing thresholds.
NeuroImage, 204, 116239.
Encina-Llamas, G., Harte, J. M., Dau, T., Shinn-
Cunningham, B., & Epp, B. (2019). Investi-
gating the Eﬀect of Cochlear Synaptopathy on
Envelope Following Responses Using a Model
of the Auditory Nerve. JARO - Journal of
the Association for Research in Otolaryngology,
20(4), 363–382.
Feng, Y., Yin, S., Kiefte, M., & Wang, J. (2010). Tem-
poral resolution in regions of normal hearing
and speech perception in noise for adults with
sloping high-frequency hearing loss. Ear and
Hearing, 31(1), 115–125.
Fox, J. (2005). The R Commander: A basic-statistics
graphical user interface to R. American Statis-
tical Association.
Furman, A. C., Kujawa, S. G., & Charles Liberman, M.
(2013). Noise-induced cochlear neuropathy is
selective for ﬁbers with low spontaneous rates.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 110(3), 577–586.
Gelfand, S. (2009). The Acoustic Reﬂex (J. Katz, L.
Medwestky, R. Burkhard, & L. Hood, Eds.;
6th). In J. Katz, L. Medwestky, R. Burkhard,
& L. Hood (Eds.), Handbook of clinical au-
diology (6th). Baltimore, Lippincott Williams;
Wilkins.
Gu, J. W., Herrmann, B. S., Levine, R. A., & Melcher,
J. R. (2012). Brainstem auditory evoked poten-
tials suggest a role for the ventral cochlear nu-
cleus in tinnitus. JARO - Journal of the Asso-
ciation for Research in Otolaryngology, 13(6),
819–833.
Guest, H., Munro, K. J., & Plack, C. J. (2019). Acoustic
Middle-Ear-Muscle-Reﬂex Thresholds in Hu-
mans with Normal Audiograms: No Relations
to Tinnitus, Speech Perception in Noise, or
Noise Exposure. Neuroscience, 407, 75–82.
Guest, H., Munro, K. J., Prendergast, G., Howe, S.,
& Plack, C. J. (2017). Tinnitus with a nor-
mal audiogram: Relation to noise exposure but
no evidence for cochlear synaptopathy. Hearing
Research, 344, 265–274.
Heinz, M. G., Issa, J. B., & Young, E. D. (2005).
Auditory-nerve rate responses are inconsistent
with common hypotheses for the neural corre-
lates of loudness recruitment. JARO - Journal
of the Association for Research in Otolaryngol-
ogy, 6(2), 91–105.
Hind, S. E., Haines-Bazrafshan, R., Benton, C. L.,
Brassington, W., Towle, B., & Moore, D. R.
(2011). Prevalence of clinical referrals having
hearing thresholds within normal limits. In-
ternational Journal of Audiology, 50(10), 708–
716.
Holm, S. (1979). A Simple Sequentially Rejective Mul-
tiple Test Procedure. Scandinavian journal of
statistics, (2), 65–70.
Hyde, M. L., Alberti, P. W., Morgan, P. P., Symons, F.,
& Cummings, F. (1980). Puretone Threshold
==PAGE:15==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
15
Estimation from Acoustic Reﬂex Thresholds-A
Myth? Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 89, 345–357.
Jerger, J., Burney, P., Mauldin, L., & Crump, B. (1974).
Predicting Hearing Loss from the Acoustic Re-
ﬂex. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders,
39(1), 11–22.
Kaernbach, C. (1990). A single-interval adjustment-
matrix (SIAM) procedure for unbiased adap-
tive testing. The Journal of the Acoustical So-
ciety of America, 88(6), 2645–2655.
Kara, E., Aydın, K., Akbulut, A. A., Karakol, S. N.,
Durmaz, S., Yener, H. M., G¨ozen, E. D., &
Kara, H. (2020). Assessment of Hidden Hear-
ing Loss in Normal Hearing Individuals with
and Without Tinnitus. Journal of Interna-
tional Advanced Otology, 16(1), 87–92.
Keefe, D. H., Fitzpatrick, D., Liu, Y. W., Sanford,
C. A., & Gorga, M. P. (2010). Wideband
acoustic-reﬂex test in a test battery to pre-
dict middle-ear dysfunction. Hearing Research,
263(1-2), 52–65.
Kobler, J. B., Guinan, J. J., Vacher, S. R., & Norris,
B. E. (1992). Acoustic reﬂex frequency selectiv-
ity in single stapedius motoneurons of the cat.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 68(3), 807–817.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2009). Adding
insult to injury: Cochlear nerve degeneration
after ”temporary” noise-induced hearing loss.
Journal of Neuroscience, 29(45), 14077–14085.
Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2015). Synaptopa-
thy in the noise-exposed and aging cochlea:
Primary neural degeneration in acquired sen-
sorineural hearing loss. Hearing Research, 330,
191–199.
Kumar, G., Amen, F., & Roy, D. (2007). Normal hear-
ing tests: Is a further appointment really nec-
essary? Royal Society of Medicine Press Ltd.
Lobarinas, E., Salvi, R., & Ding, D. (2020). Gap
Detection Deﬁcits in Chinchillas with Selec-
tive Carboplatin-Induced Inner Hair Cell Loss.
JARO - Journal of the Association for Re-
search in Otolaryngology, 21(6), 475–483.
Marmel, F., Rodr´ıguez-Mendoza, M. A., & Lopez-
Poveda, E. A. (2015). Stochastic undersam-
pling
steepens
auditory
threshold/duration
functions: implications for understanding au-
ditory deaﬀerentation and aging. Frontiers in
Aging Neuroscience, 7(APR).
MATLAB. (2017). Version 9.3.0.713579 (R2017b).
Natick, Massachusetts, The Mathworks Inc.
MATLAB. (2018). Version 9.5.0.944444 (R2018b).
Natick, Massachusetts, The Mathworks Inc.
McGregor, K. D., Flamme, G. A., Tasko, S. M., Deit-
ers, K. K., Ahroon, W. A., Themann, C. L.,
& Murphy, W. J. (2018). Acoustic reﬂexes are
common but not pervasive: evidence using a
diagnostic middle ear analyser. International
Journal of Audiology, 57, S42–S50.
Mepani, A. M., Kirk, S. A., Hancock, K. E., Bennett,
K., De Gruttola, V., Liberman, M. C., & Mai-
son, S. F. (2020). Middle Ear Muscle Reﬂex
and Word Recognition in ”normal-Hearing”
Adults: Evidence for Cochlear Synaptopathy?
Ear and Hearing, 25–38.
Moore, B. C., Huss, M., Vickers, D. A., Glasberg, B. R.,
& Alcantara, J. I. (2000). A test for the di-
agnosis of dead regions in the cochlea. British
Journal of Audiology, 34(4), 205–224.
Nelson, P. B., & Thomas, S. D. (1997). Gap detec-
tion as a function of stimulus loudness for lis-
teners with and without hearing loss. Jour-
nal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
40(6), 1387–1394.
Oetting, D., Brand, T., & Ewert, S. D. (2014). Op-
timized loudness-function estimation for cat-
egorical loudness scaling data. Hearing Re-
search, 316, 16–27.
Parthasarathy, A., & Kujawa, S. G. (2018). Synaptopa-
thy in the aging cochlea: Characterizing early-
neural deﬁcits in auditory temporal envelope
processing. Journal of Neuroscience, 38(32),
7108–7119.
Pickles, J. O. (1983). Auditory-nerve correlates of loud-
ness summation with stimulus bandwidth, in
normal and pathological cochleae. Hearing Re-
search, 12(2), 239–250.
Qiu, C. X., Salvi, R., Ding, D., & Burkard, R.
(2000). Inner hair cell loss leads to enhanced
response amplitudes in auditory cortex of
unanesthetized chinchillas: Evidence for in-
creased system gain. Hearing Research, 139(1-
2), 153–171.
R Core Team. (2017). R: A language and environment
for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria, R
Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Rasetshwane, D. M., Trevino, A. C., Gombert, J. N.,
Liebig-Trehearn, L., Kopun, J. G., Jesteadt,
W., Neely, S. T., & Gorga, M. P. (2015). Cat-
egorical loudness scaling and equal-loudness
contours in listeners with normal hearing and
hearing loss. The Journal of the Acoustical So-
ciety of America, 137(4), 1899–1913.
Relkin, E. M., & Doucet, J. R. (1997). Is loudness sim-
ply proportional to the auditory nerve spike
==PAGE:16==
16
Duvig et al.
count? The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 101(5), 2735–2740.
Rieke, C. C., Clavier, O. H., Allen, L. V., Anderson,
A. P., Brooks, C. A., Fellows, A. M., Brungart,
D. S., & Buckey, J. C. (2017). Fixed-level fre-
quency threshold testing for ototoxicity moni-
toring. Ear and Hearing, 38(6), e369–e375.
Salvi, R., Sun, W., Ding, D., Chen, G. D., Lobarinas,
E., Wang, J., Radziwon, K., & Auerbach, B. D.
(2017). Inner hair cell loss disrupts hearing and
cochlear function leading to sensory depriva-
tion and enhanced central auditory gain. Fron-
tiers in Neuroscience, 10(JAN).
Schaette,
R.,
&
Kempter,
R.
(2006).
Develop-
ment of tinnitus-related neuronal hyperactiv-
ity through homeostatic plasticity after hearing
loss: A computational model. European Jour-
nal of Neuroscience, 23(11), 3124–3138.
Schaette, R., & McAlpine, D. (2011). Tinnitus with a
normal audiogram: physiological evidence for
hidden hearing loss and computational model.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 31(38), 13452–
13457.
Sergeyenko, Y., Lall, K., Charles Liberman, M., &
Kujawa, S. G. (2013). Age-related cochlear
synaptopathy: An early-onset contributor to
auditory functional decline. Journal of Neuro-
science, 33(34), 13686–13694.
Shaheen, L. A., Valero, M. D., & Liberman, M. C.
(2015). Towards a Diagnosis of Cochlear Neu-
ropathy with Envelope Following Responses.
JARO - Journal of the Association for Re-
search in Otolaryngology, 16(6), 727–745.
Shehorn, J., Strelcyk, O., & Zahorik, P. (2020). Associa-
tions between speech recognition at high levels,
the middle ear muscle reﬂex and noise exposure
in individuals with normal audiograms. Hear-
ing Research, 392.
Shim, H. J., An, Y.-H., Kim, D. H., Yoon, J. E., &
Yoon, J. H. (2017). Comparisons of auditory
brainstem response and sound level tolerance in
tinnitus ears and non-tinnitus ears in unilateral
tinnitus patients with normal audiograms. PloS
One, 12(12), e0189157.
Snell, K. B., & Frisina, R. D. (2000). Relationships
among age-related diﬀerences in gap detection
and word recognition. Citation: The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 1615.
Valderrama, J. T., Beach, E. F., Yeend, I., Sharma,
M., Van Dun, B., & Dillon, H. (2018). Eﬀects
of lifetime noise exposure on the middle-age
human auditory brainstem response, tinnitus
and speech-in-noise intelligibility. Hearing Re-
search, 365, 36–48.
Valero, M. D., Burton, J. A., Hauser, S. N., Hackett,
T. A., Ramachandran, R., & Liberman, M. C.
(2017). Noise-induced cochlear synaptopathy
in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Hearing
Research, 353, 213–223.
Valero, M. D., Hancock, K. E., & Liberman, M. C.
(2016). The middle ear muscle reﬂex in the
diagnosis of cochlear neuropathy. Hearing Re-
search, 332, 29–38.
Valero, M. D., Hancock, K. E., Maison, S. F., &
Liberman, M. C. (2018). Eﬀects of cochlear
synaptopathy on middle-ear muscle reﬂexes in
unanesthetized mice. Hearing Research, 363,
109–118.
Van Eeckhoutte, M., Wouters, J., & Francart, T.
(2016). Auditory steady-state responses as neu-
ral correlates of loudness growth. Hearing Re-
search, 342, 58–68.
Verhulst, S., Ernst, F., Garrett, M., & Vasilkov, V.
(2018). Suprathreshold psychoacoustics and
envelope-following response relations: Normal-
hearing, synaptopathy and cochlear gain loss,
In Acta acustica united with acustica, S. Hirzel
Verlag GmbH.
Viana, L. M., O’Malley, J. T., Burgess, B. J., Jones,
D. D., Oliveira, C. A., Santos, F., Merchant,
S. N., Liberman, L. D., & Liberman, M. C.
(2015). Cochlear neuropathy in human presby-
cusis: Confocal analysis of hidden hearing loss
in post-mortem tissue. Hearing Research, 327,
78–88.
Wojtczak, M., Beim, J. A., & Oxenham, A. J.
(2017). Weak Middle-Ear-Muscle Reﬂex in Hu-
mans with Noise-Induced Tinnitus and Normal
Hearing May Reﬂect Cochlear Synaptopathy.
eNeuro, 4(6).
Wu, P. Z., Liberman, L. D., Bennett, K., de Gruttola,
V., O’Malley, J. T., & Liberman, M. C. (2019).
Primary Neural Degeneration in the Human
Cochlea: Evidence for Hidden Hearing Loss in
the Aging Ear. Neuroscience, 407, 8–20.
Yin, S. K., Feng, Y. M., Chen, Z. N., & Wang,
J. (2008). The eﬀect of noise-induced slop-
ing high-frequency hearing loss on the gap-
response in the inferior colliculus and auditory
cortex of guinea pigs. Hearing Research, 239(1-
2), 126–140.
Zeng, F. G., Kong, Y. Y., Michalewski, H. J., &
Starr, A. (2005). Perceptual consequences of
disrupted auditory nerve activity. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 93(6), 3050–3063.
==PAGE:17==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
17
Zeng, F. G., Oba, S., Garde, S., Sininger, Y., & Starr,
A. (1999). Temporal and speech processing
deﬁcits in auditory neuropathy. NeuroReport,
10(16), 3429–3435.
==PAGE:18==
18
Duvig et al.
Appendix A: Individual MEMR responses
P1
Left ear
Right ear
P2
P3
P4
==PAGE:19==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
19
P5
Left ear
Right ear
P6
P7
P8
==PAGE:20==
20
Duvig et al.
P9
Left ear
Right ear
P10
P11
P12
==PAGE:21==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
21
P13
Left ear
Right ear
P14
P15
P16
==PAGE:22==
22
Duvig et al.
P17
Left ear
Right ear
P18
P19
P20
==PAGE:23==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
23
Appendix B: Individual results on all outcome parameters of the ACALOS for low
frequencies
LCUT
(dB HL)
Mlow
(CU/dB HL)
Mhigh
(CU/dB)
HTL
(dB HL)
MCL
(dB HL)
UCL
(dB HL)
Dyn
(dB)
P
Ear
0.25
0.5
1
0.25
0.5
1
0.25
0.5
1
0.25
0.5
1
0.25
0.5
1
0.25
0.5
1
0.25
0.5
1
1
R
77
76
93
0.30
0.32
0.28
0.84
0.70
1.96
-5
-3
5
70
70
85
105
110
105
110
113
100
2
R
74
74
71
0.32
0.37
0.36
0.68
0.67
0.88
-3
8
3
70
70
65
110
110
98
113
103
95
3
R
82
97
93
0.35
0.27
0.28
0.59
13
5
5
78
88
85
120
113
108
108
108
103
4
R
91
89
84
0.29
0.31
0.29
1.79
1.35
1.18
5
10
0
83
83
78
105
108
105
100
98
105
5
R
78
90
96
0.31
0.27
0.25
0.51
0.72
1.69
-3
-3
-3
73
83
85
120
120
110
123
123
113
6
R
94
100
105
0.30
0.28
0.24
2.52
10
13
3
85
93
95
103
115
120
93
103
118
7
R
81
91
91
0.39
0.36
0.32
0.79
1.33
1.36
18
23
13
75
85
83
110
108
108
93
85
95
9
R
72
78
85
0.38
0.32
0.30
0.81
0.98
1.55
8
0
3
68
73
78
103
103
100
95
103
98
9
R
90
85
80
0.29
0.32
0.37
1.51
0.76
5
8
15
83
78
75
105
100
113
100
93
98
10
R
69
75
84
0.36
0.33
0.29
0.72
0.89
1.19
3
3
0
65
70
78
103
103
105
100
100
105
11
R
95
90
88
0.27
0.31
0.28
0.80
1.16
5
10
0
88
83
80
110
120
108
105
110
108
12
R
83
69
87
0.26
0.34
0.28
1.47
0.69
5.00
-8
-5
0
75
65
78
98
105
90
105
110
90
13
R
85
74
75
0.33
0.37
0.36
1.31
0.79
0.76
10
8
8
78
70
70
103
105
108
93
98
100
14
R
83
82
78
0.32
0.38
0.32
0.89
0.81
0.64
5
18
0
78
78
73
110
113
115
105
95
115
15
R
90
95
86
0.31
0.29
0.33
1.04
1.06
10
10
10
83
88
80
113
110
108
103
100
98
16
R
100
99
96
0.24
0.24
0.25
2.69
-3
-5
-5
90
88
85
115
113
105
118
118
110
17
R
91
95
99
0.26
0.24
0.26
1.58
1.64
-3
-8
5
83
85
90
105
110
113
108
118
108
19
R
98
99
93
0.26
0.26
0.28
2.87
2.16
5
5
5
88
90
85
105
115
103
100
110
98
1
L
94
87
94
0.25
0.28
0.28
2.26
1.17
5.00
-8
0
5
83
80
85
103
108
98
110
108
93
2
L
83
50
66
0.32
0.42
1.21
0.84
8
8
75
63
103
95
95
88
3
L
79
94
78
0.37
0.28
0.34
0.83
5.00
0.79
13
5
8
73
85
73
108
98
108
95
93
100
4
L
94
97
97
0.28
0.25
0.25
3.19
2.34
5
0
0
85
88
88
110
103
108
105
103
108
5
L
97
98
96
0.25
0.25
0.27
0
-3
5
88
88
88
113
113
110
113
115
105
6
L
98
101
94
0.28
0.27
0.29
0.98
10
10
10
90
93
88
113
115
118
103
105
108
7
L
82
85
82
0.35
0.39
0.38
1.08
1.02
0.84
13
23
18
75
80
78
105
108
110
93
85
93
8
L
81
80
91
0.31
0.31
0.26
0.84
0.97
5.00
0
0
-3
75
73
80
110
105
95
110
105
98
9
L
61
91
77
0.49
0.29
0.38
0.62
1.20
1.28
13
13
60
83
70
100
110
95
88
110
83
10
L
80
93
95
0.33
0.28
0.27
0.88
2.39
2.99
5
5
5
75
83
85
108
103
103
103
98
98
11
L
88
92
91
0.32
0.30
0.27
1.05
1.04
2.04
10
10
0
80
85
83
110
115
103
100
105
103
12
L
88
91
93
0.25
0.25
0.25
2.36
2.34
5.00
-8
-8
-8
78
80
83
98
100
98
105
108
105
13
L
89
73
77
0.28
0.34
0.32
1.87
0.64
0.77
0
3
0
80
68
73
100
110
108
100
108
108
14
L
72
90
68
0.45
0.29
0.44
0.36
0.36
18
5
13
73
83
68
120
105
120
103
100
108
16
L
98
91
86
0.25
0.27
0.27
5.00
1.39
1.05
-3
0
-5
88
83
78
103
108
108
105
108
113
17
L
94
98
89
0.26
0.23
0.27
3.70
5.00
1.64
0
-8
0
85
88
80
100
103
103
100
110
103
18
L
92
88
88
0.25
0.28
0.30
2.84
1.31
1.41
-8
0
5
83
80
80
100
108
105
108
108
100
19
L
93
87
95
0.28
0.28
0.29
2.24
1.13
2.36
5
0
10
83
80
88
103
108
105
98
108
95
20
L
90
85
73
0.33
0.35
0.40
1.78
0.90
0.70
15
15
13
83
80
70
103
113
108
88
98
95
In addition to removed datapoints for Mhigh due to a ﬁxed value used by the model (described in results section), HTL has been removed
for P9 left ear due to a ﬁtting error of the model. P: participant, LCUT: presentation level at 25 CU, Mlow: slope of the lower section of the
loudness function, Mhigh: slope of the upper section of the loudness function, HTL: hearing threshold level, MCL: most comfortable level,
UCL: uncomfortable level, Dyn: dynamic range.
==PAGE:24==
24
Duvig et al.
Appendix C: Participant characteristics
AC thresholds
(dB HL)
FLFT
(kHz)
Participant
Age
(years)
Gender
TTS
Ear
Tinnitus
<2 kHz
≥2 kHz
40 dB
65 dB
80 dB
Right
Yes
8
45
3.0
4.5
6.2
P1
63
Female
3
Left
Yes
9
50
3.1
4.1
5.5
Right
Yes
7
22
6.2
9.6
10.6
P2
64
Male
4
Left
Yes
10
39
3.1
6.7
10.3
Right
No
14
44
2.3
10.1
11.8
P3
63
Female
1
Left
No
16
42
3.0
5.0
11.2
Right
Yes
16
42
2.9
6.2
6.6
P4
58
Male
1
Left
Yes
13
38
2.4
6.8
8.4
Right
Yes
6
34
3.8
7.9
10.3
P5
57
Male
1
Left
Yes
8
41
3.2
8.3
10.3
Right
Yes
12
29
4.0
5.7
8.3
P6
66
Male
3
Left
Yes
7
33
3.6
4.7
9.0
Right
Yes
15
33
4.1
6.6
10.4
P7
65
Female
4
Left
Yes
17
36
3.8
5.6
9.6
Right
Yes
10
56
5.5
3.5
4.1
P8
54
Male
4
Left
Yes
5
56
0.0
3.2
7.9
Right
No
10
34
2.9
11.1
11.8
P9
68
Male
4
Left
Yes
5
46
2.0
11.8
12.7
Right
Yes
10
38
2.5
11.2
12.1
P10
54
Male
4
Left
Yes
12
38
2.7
9.3
11.8
Right
Yes
8
36
3.1
6.6
10.3
P11
55
Male
4
Left
Yes
11
21
10.3
12.7
13.1
Right
No
10
26
9.6
11.1
11.8
P12
63
Female
3
Left
No
2
24
8.3
9.7
11.8
Right
No
7
29
4.5
5.0
7.6
P13
62
Female
1
Left
No
7
36
3.6
4.9
9.2
Right
Yes
7
42
3.1
3.8
10.2
P14
66
Male
1
Left
Yes
10
42
3.1
4.6
6.8
P15
59
Female
4
Right
No
11
13
6.8
7.6
11.2
Right
No
4
35
3.9
6.9
11.2
P16
55
Male
3
Left
No
-1
31
4.1
8.3
11.1
Right
No
16
37.5
3.6
5.5
6.1
P17
58
Male
3
Left
No
11
38
3.2
4.4
8.7
P18
66
Male
4
Left
No
7
33
3.7
10.6
11.8
Right
No
10
42
2.2
10.3
12.7
P19
64
Male
1
Left
No
6
33
2.9
10.6
12.7
P20
66
Female
3
Left
No
13
24
4.6
7.2
9.6
AC thresholds: air-conduction thresholds, FLFT: ﬁxed level frequency threshold, TTS: temporary threshold shift.
==PAGE:25==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
25
Appendix D: Tinnitus assessment
P
Duration
(years)
Placement
Characteristics
Self-perceived cause
Other possible causes
1
1
Inside the head
Constant
High-pitched
Unknown
2
>15
Both ears
Constant
High-pitced
Noise exposure
Participant believes tinnitus is
caused by noise exposure related
to work in an airport
High blood pressure
4
25-30
Both ears
Constant
Around 3.5 kHz
Noise exposure
Participant suspects tinnitus is
caused by occupational noise exposure
High blood pressure
5
10
Inside the head
Constant
High-pitched tone
Noise exposure
Participant explains that tinnitus was
not present before exposed to
occupational noise (factory)
6
40
Both ears
Varying intensity
Chime
Noise exposure
Participant believes tinnitus is caused
by speciﬁc noise exposure event
related to ﬁrework
High blood pressure
7
6
Both ears
Varying intensity
Whistling
Noise exposure
Participant worked as a school teacher
and described the class room as a very
noisy environment
8
Inside the head
Susende
High-pitched
Noise exposure
Participant has been exposed to
occupational noise
9
10
Left ear
Varying, pulsating
Buzzing
Noise exposure
Participant believes tinnitus is related
to shooting with ﬁre arms
High blood pressure
10
10-15
Both ears
Constant
High-piched tone
Loud
Noise exposure
Participant previously worked as
a smith and currently work as a
carpenter/bricklayer
High blood pressure
11
Inside the head
Constant
High-pitched tone
Noise exposure
Participant has been exposed to
occupational noise
14
0.5
Both ears
Varying
High-pitched tone
Noise exposure
Participant believes tinnitus is caused
by speciﬁc noise exposure event
related to ﬁrework
==PAGE:26==
26
Duvig et al.
Appendix E: Individual gap detection thresholds
1
10
P2 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P3 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P4 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P5 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P6 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P7 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
33
1
10
P8 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P9 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P10 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P11 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P12 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P13 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P14 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P15 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P16 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P17 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P18 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P19 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P20 left ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
1
10
P1 right ear
Spectrum level (dB)
Threshold (msec)
20
40
6070
25
==PAGE:27==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
27
Appendix F: Individual loudness functions
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
P1
Left ear
Right ear
P2
P3
P4
==PAGE:28==
28
Duvig et al.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
P5
Left ear
Right ear
P6
P7
P8
==PAGE:29==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
29
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
P9
Left ear
Right ear
P10
P11
P12
==PAGE:30==
30
Duvig et al.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
P13
Left ear
Right ear
P14
P15
P16
==PAGE:31==
Investigating the role of high spontaneous rate ﬁbers in cochlear synaptopathy
31
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Level (dB HL)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Loudness (CU)
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
P17
Left ear
Right ear
P18
P19
P20
==PAGE:32==
32
Duvig et al.
Appendix G: Correlations between predictors and outcome measures
MEMRBB strength
MEMRBB growth
MEMRPT strength
TTS
Mlow 0.25 kHz
n = 37
r = 0.0220
pairwise p = 0.8970
adjusted p = 1
n = 37
r = 0.0139
pairwise p = 0.9351
adjusted p = 1
n = 31
r = 0.1206
pairwise p = 0.5180
adjusted p = 1
n = 37
ρ = 0.1995
pairwise p = 0.2366
adjusted p = 1
Mlow 0.5 kHz
n = 36
r = 0.1357
pairwise p = 0.4299
adjusted p = 1
n = 36
r = 0.1562
pairwise p = 0.3630
adjusted p = 1
n = 31
r = -0.1704
pairwise p = 0.3594
adjusted p = 0.7687
n = 36
ρ = 0.3102
pairwise p = 0.0656
adjusted p = 1
Mlow 1 kHz
n = 37
r = 0.0656
pairwise p = 0.6997
adjusted p = 1
n = 37
r = 0.1185
pairwise p = 0.4849
adjusted p = 1
n = 31
r = -0.1291
pairwise p = 0.4889
adjusted p = 1
n = 37
ρ = 0.1694
pairwise p = 0.3163
adjusted p = 1
Mhigh 0.25 kHz
n = 31
r = 0.1430
pairwise p = 0.4430
adjusted p = 1
n = 31
r = 0.1727
pairwise p = 0.3530
adjusted p = 1
n = 26
r = 0.0707
pairwise p = 0.7316
adjusted p = 1
n = 31
ρ = -0.1599
pairwise p = 0.3902
adjusted p = 1
Mhigh 0.5 kHz
n = 29
r = 0.0898
pairwise p = 0.6431
adjusted p = 1
n = 29
r = 0.0604
pairwise p = 0.7556
adjusted p = 1
n = 26
r = 0.3809
pairwise p = 0.0549
adjusted p = 1
n = 29
ρ = -0.0573
pairwise p = 0.7676
adjusted p = 0.7804
Mhigh 1 kHz
n = 33
r = -0.1368
pairwise p = 0.4477
adjusted p = 1
n = 33
r = -0.1682
pairwise p = 0.3496
adjusted p = 1
n = 28
r = 0.1175
pairwise p = 0.5514
adjusted p = 1
n = 33
ρ = 0.1003
pairwise p = 0.5786
adjusted p = 1
GDT 20 dB/ERB
n = 20
r = 0.39
pairwise p = 0.09
adjusted p = 0.91
n = 20
r = 0.35
pairwise p = 0.13
adjusted p = 1
n = 16
r = -0.01
pairwise p = 0.99
adjusted p = 1
n = 20
ρ = 0.14
pairwise p = 0.55
adjusted p = 1
GDT 40 dB/ERB
n = 20
r = -0.20
pairwise p = 0.41
adjusted p = 1
n = 20
r = -0.24
pairwise p = 0.31
adjusted p = 1
n = 16
r = -0.02
pairwise p = 0.95
adjusted p = 1
n = 20
ρ = 0.01
pairwise p = 0.97
adjusted p = 1
GDT 60 dB/ERB
n = 20
r = -0.25
pairwise p = 0.30
adjusted p = 1
n = 20
r = -0.30
pairwise p = 0.20
adjusted p = 1
n = 16
r = -0.01
pairwise p = 0.97
adjusted p = 1
n = 20
ρ = -0.11
pairwise p = 0.66
adjusted p = 1
GDT70
n = 20
r = 0.21
pairwise p = 0.37
adjusted p = 1
n = 20
r = 0.15
pairwise p = 0.53
adjusted p = 1
n = 16
r = -0.06
pairwise p = 0.82
adjusted p = 1
n = 20
ρ = -0.08
pairwise p = 0.74
adjusted p = 1
