==PAGE:1==
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly
Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue Turnover
in Spondyloarthritis
Master’s Thesis
Smaragda Elina Intzilaki, s153142
MSc in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
January 24, 2021
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Inves-
tigate Tissue Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
Master Thesis
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine (DTU Bioengineering)
Technical University of Denmark
By
Smaragda Elina Intzilaki
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
ECTS:
30
Hand in date:
January 24th, 2021
Supervisors:
Rune Busk Damgaard, DTU
Signe Holm Nielsen, Nordic Bioscience
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was performed by Smaragda Elina Intzilaki and is submitted
to the Technical University of Denmark, Bioengineering, as part of the requirement
to obtain a Master of Science in Engineering (M.Sc. Pharmaceutical Design Engi-
neering). The work presented in this report was carried out at the ImmunoScience
group at the Department of Biomarkers and Research of Nordic Bioscience, Her-
lev, in collaboration with the Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Lyngby. The thesis was conducted under supervision
by Associate Professor Rune Busk Damgaard and Scientist Signe Holm Nielsen,
PhD.
This thesis represents 30 ECTS and has been prepared over a period of five
months between September 2020 and January 2021.
ii
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Background: Spondyloarthritis (SpA) is one of the most prevalent chronic in-
flammatory arthropathies and encompass several interrelated subsets including
axSpA and PsA. Inflammation at the involved joints is associated with ECM re-
modeling of the connective tissues. SpA is a progressive disease and fast diag-
nosis is highly desired since early treatment can reduce progression of irreversible
structural damages. Currently, a lack in easy quantifiable methods to investigate
structural changes in SpA is an existing problem, therefore, this thesis aimed at
developing a sensitive biomarker to investigate tissue turnover in SpA.
Methods: This was performed by developing and validating a competitive ELISA
for detection of Arresten, a type IV collagen α1-chain fragment. The validated as-
say was assessed in two SpA cohorts representing patients with Psoriatic Arthritis
(PsA), axial Spondyloarthritis (ax-SpA) and non-radiographic ax-SpA (nr-axSpA).
Moreover, in vitro cleavage was performed on type IV collagen to elucidate pro-
teases responsible for cleavage and release of Arresten. Finally, Arresten’s an-
giogenic properties were investigated by a HUVEC migration assay.
Results: A specific, robust and accurate assay was successfully developed for
quantifying Arresten in serum samples. The assay succeeded in identifying nr-
axSpA from the healthy controls, but failed to separate PsA from axSpA and
to identify SpA from healthy controls. Identification of proteases responsible for
cleavage and release of Arresten was not successful, hence experimental opti-
mization is required. HUVEC cell migration was significantly higher when treated
with Arresten compared to an anti-angiogentic control.
Conclusion: The novel Arresten assay performed technically well. Arresten did
not show biological relevance in SpA, but did demonstrate biomarker potential in
identifying nr-SpA. Moreover, Arresten appeared to posses pro-angiogenic prop-
erties. Further investigations are required to assess the biomarker potential of
Arresten.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank Signe Holm Nielsen and Solveig Skovlund
Groen for giving me the opportunity to conduct my master’s thesis at Nordic Bio-
science. I would like to thank them for always being available, for their great
scientific guidance during experimental work and their helpful revision during the
writing process.
I would like to thank Rune Busk Damgaard for his helpful and constructive in-
puts, and for great supervision.
Finally, a special thanks to all my colleagues at Nordic Bioscience for always being
helpful and for creating a great and fun working environment.
iv
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
2
2.1
Spondyloarthritis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The Synovial Joint and Extracellular Matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Biomarkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Hypothesis and Aims
15
4
Methods and Materials
17
4.1
Target Sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Development of Monoclonal Antibody
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Arresten ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
In Vitro Cleavage of Type IV Collagen to Generate the Arresten
Fragment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Study Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.7
Huvec Invasion Assay - Investigating Vascular endothelial cell growth
factor Induced Angiogenesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Results
27
5.1
Development of the Competitive Arresten ELISA Assay
. . . . . .
27
5.2
Cleavage of Type IV Collagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
SDS-PAGE and Silver Staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Measurements by Arresten Assay in SpA Cohorts
. . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
HUVEC Invasion Assay - Investigating VEGF Induced Angiogenesis 40
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Development of Arresten Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
The potential of Arresten as a biomarker in SpA . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Cleavage of Type IV Collagen to Release Arresten . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Angiogenic properties of Arresten . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Conclusion
51
8
Future Work
52
Bibliography
53
A Appendix
59
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Spondyloarthritis (SpA) is an umbrella term covering a group of related autoinflam-
matory disorders with an estimated global prevalence of 2–3% of the adult popula-
tion [1]. A hallmark of SpA is the destruction of tissue components in the synovial
joint, which results in pain, reduced mobility and thus, an impaired quality of life.
Recent clinical trials have demonstrated efficacy of several different agents with
different mechanisms of action for prevention of joint damage and ankylosis of the
spine, however, the challenges lies with identification of the patients[2]. Early and
accurate diagnosis could aid in this aspect, as to find patients and offer them ap-
propriate and personalized treatment to prevent disease progression. Currently,
SpA is diagnosed based on medical history and a medical exam. In addition to
this, assessment HLA-B27 genotype in blood and X-rays may be applied by the
individual physician. Serological biomarker with the ability to; 1) identify and diag-
nose SpA, 2) monitor disease activity and progression, and 3) aid in selection of
an appropriate treatment is currently an unmet medical need.
This project aims at developing a biomarker targeting joint tissue remodeling to
identify patients affected by SpA. The following theoretical background will include
information of SpA disease, the affected joint tissues and the use of biomarkers.
This will serve to establish the scientific background and rationale for development
of an immuno-assay investigating the tissue turnover of SpA. Following this, the
development of a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for
the type IV collagen derived fragment, Arresten, will be presented. Ultimately, the
finalized ELISA will be utilized in two different SpA cohorts to determine the bio-
logical relevance of Arresten and establish its application in disease investigation.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Theoretical Background
The following section will provide the reader with general understanding of SpA
on the basis of two common SpA subsets; Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and axial SpA
(axSpA), with a presentation of disease symptoms, in addition to current diagnosis
and treatment options. Subsequently, the reader will be introduced to the synovial
joint focusing on its tissue composition during health and SpA disease. Finally, an
introduction into biomarkers will be given, including current options and how they
can aid in SpA disease course.
2.1
Spondyloarthritis
SpA is a group of inflammatory joint diseases which covers a heterogeneous
group of progressive inflammatory arthritides [3]. SpA disorders include the pe-
ripheral subsets psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and reactive arthritis (ReA), in addition
to axial SpA (axSpA) subsets which are non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis
(nr-axSpA) and ankylosing spondylitis (AS) (Figure 2.1). Common clinical fea-
tures that characterizes SpA are inflammation in the spine, sacroiliac joints as
well as extremities, enthesitis, dactylitis and uveitis. Cutaneous manifestations
and colitis due to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have been considered as
subtype-defining manifestations [4]. Clinical features are typically chronic and ini-
tial symptoms commonly present themselves as chronic back pain and stiffness.
This occurs due to progressive alterations in the tissues of the joints. The body’s
own immune system attacks and destroys the connective tissue in the affected
area through inflammatory processes, this can cause concurrent new bone for-
mation [5]. All symptoms might not be present with every patient, while some
patients might experience an overlap of features that fulfills criteria for more than
one of the specific SpA disorders.
2
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Spondyloarthitis categorized into its subsets.
In the following, this thesis will present PsA and axSpA, focusing on their preva-
lence, diagnosis and treatment options. AxSpA and PsA represent the immune-
mediated inflammatory processes of the spinal joint and peripheral joints, respec-
tively.
2.1.1
Psoriatic Arthritis
PsA is described as a chronic, systemic immune-mediated inflammatory muscu-
loskeletal disease, and affects men and women equally [6]. This subset of SpA is
characterized by the involvement in the peripheral synovial joints, and involvement
of skin tissue which is a critical element [3]. Up to 20% of patients with the skin
disease psoriasis are eventually diagnosed with PsA where the nails are typically
affected [7]. For this reason dermatologists are encouraged to pay attention to
psoriatic patients since this is an opportunity for early diagnosis. Clinical features
include systemic inflammation [8] affecting 2% of the population. Patients are di-
agnosed between 30-50 years of age [6] with an average of 10 years later than
the manifestation of skin disease [8]. Similar to other rheumatic diseases, PsA
is associated with increased medical costs like hospitalization and comorbidities,
and concomitant loss of work productivity for yearlong periods [9].
Clinical features of PsA range from mild, nondestructive joint disease to severe,
rapidly erosive disease. The number of affected joints differs as well, however,
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
3
==PAGE:12==
there is a steady progression of joint involvement in patients with PsA over time
[8, 10], which outlines the need for effective monitoring and disease treatment.
Overall, patients with polyarticular involvement (i.e. five or more swollen and in-
flamed joints) as well as patients with actively inflammation have a higher risk of
progression to radiographic joint damage [11]. This means a state where damage
is visible on plain radiographs. It has been estimated that about 40 % of patients
diagnosed with PsA would eventually progress to develop erosive joint damage
[8].
2.1.2
Axial Spondyloarthritis
AxSpA represents the two subcategories non-radiographic axSpA (nr-axSpA) and
the radiographic form, AS [12]. AxSpA involves the axial joints and entheses, in
addition to manifestations such as uveitis, psoriasis, and inflammatory bowel dis-
ease that can occur [13]. Symptoms can be progressive, where the first manifes-
tations occur as back pain to eventual vertebral fractures due to ankylosing of the
spine. As other SpA conditions, symptoms are related to inflammation in the joints,
followed by structural damage as a result of tissue loss and bone erosions. AS
patients are characterized by enthesitis, sacroiliitis and spinal inflammation. The
clinical features might lead to ossification of the spinal ligaments, joints and discs
which is observed as hyperkyphosis - an excessive curvature of the thoracic spine
[14]. Of importance is that not all nr-axSpA patients progress to the radiographic
form.
The prevalence of axSpA within the group of SpA varies between 15-50% [14].
Similar to PsA, the functional limitations that follows this disease are substantial
which eventually leads to great economical burden on patients and on societies.
80-90% of the susceptibility of AS is due to genetic factors [15]. It is especially
seen with the presence of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecule
B27 (HLA-B27).
When comparing PsA patients to patients suffering from axSpA, there are cases
where PsA patients with axial involvement experience similar clinical manifesta-
tions as seen in axSpA patients. However, PsA patients are often less symp-
tomatic, have asymmetric joint involvement, and tend to have less severe disease
[6]. Importantly, there is a difference in the involvement of pathological processes
in skin tissue which is a critical element in PsA, and not in axSpA [7]. Another
difference is that patients with axSpA more often experience mobility limitations.
PsA with axial involvement is frequently due to spondylitis or sacroiliitis, usually
asymmetric and asymptomatic, while patients with AS usually progress to ankylo-
sis of the spine - the total loss of joint space [6].
2.1.3
The Current Diagnosic Pipeline
Diagnosis of SpA is based on medical history and a medical exam. Patients often
experience back pain and stiffness and it can be challenging for a physician to
connect generic back pain with SpA. Overall, the pipeline for diagnosis includes
three main features which are back pain, HLA-B27 genotype, and imaging [4].
A clinical examination can determine if there is axial involvement, since reduced
spinal mobility is often an early sign with axSpA[16]. Additionally, the patient will
4
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:13==
be examined for decreased chest expansion and limitations in cervical rotation
[4]. If there is no axial involvement, peripheral SpA can be assessed through
peripheral joint inflammation and particularly PsA by skin involvementby skin in-
volvement. In the lack of swelling as seen in enthesitis, arthritis, dactylitis, acute
anterior uveitis or inflammatory bowel disease [17], assessment relies solely on
imaging and laboratory parameters. The main laboratory parameters utilized for
diagnostic purposes are determination of HLA-B27 genotype and the inflamma-
tory parameter C-reactive protein (CRP). A limitation to the usage of laboratory
parameters is that they have limited correlation, eg. CRP levels have only 40-
60% correlation with axSpA [18]. Finally, imaging is a crucial diagnostic tool for
SpA, since x-ray and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) can visualize structural
changes in sacroiliac joints. However, MRI may not be feasible for re-occurring
assessment to diagnose, assess disease progression and monitor treatment ef-
fect due to its high costs.
During disease progression with axial involvement disease activity can be investi-
gated by the two tools Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Score (ASDAS) and
Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activities Index (BASDAI). Both tools involve
evaluation of back pain, pain and swelling of peripheral joints and at entheses in
addition to duration and severity of morning stiffness. BASDAI is evaluated en-
tirely patient-oriented, while ASDAS include assessment of inflammatory markers
such as CRP [18]. Investigations of the two tools in both axSpA and PsA with ax-
ial involvement have demonstrated good ability to discriminate between patients
with high and low disease status [18, 19]. In addition, the tool Bath Ankylosing
Spondylitis Functional Index (BASFI) is applied in patients with more advanced
disease in order to define and monitor their functional ability, i.e. functional limita-
tions [20].
2.1.4
Treatment Options for SpA Patients
Treatment of SpA aims at increasing the quality of life of the patients by reduc-
ing disease activity early during disease course. Earlier intervention may prevent
irreversible structural damage and loss of function. Hence, minimizing potential
complications caused by the disease itself or the treatment [5]. Currently, treat-
ment options can be categorized into different types according to disease severity
and patient response. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are used
with patients that can be classified as mild disease [6]. If only few joints are af-
fected rheumatologists might administer local intra-articular injections of corticos-
teroids. Both NSAIDs and corticosteriods offer symptom relief but do not inhibit
the development and progression of joint damage [6]. Patients with a more ag-
gressive disease, moderate to severe, can be treated with disease-modifying an-
tirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) [6]. Conventional DMARDS include methotrexate,
which is often used as a primary drug due to its treatment efficacy in both skin and
joint involvement [6]. For patients with most extensive disease, treatment with bi-
ologic DMARDs are often considered. Commonly in combination with methotrex-
ate. These biologic DMARDs include TNF-, IL-17-, IL-12/23- and IL-23- inhibitors
(or blockers) [21]. Inhibitors of TNF-dependet pro-inflammatory cytokine cascade
have demonstrated efficacy in treatment of various domains of the disease includ-
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
5
==PAGE:14==
ing reduction in radiographic progression, but is not effective in reducing new bone
formation during axSpA [5]. Biologic DMARDs are however expensive and show
limited clinical efficacy i.e. TNF inhibitors are not effective in 30-40% of patients
and is associated with serious side-effects [22].
Collectively for SpA subsets studies of disease progression and the fact that the
amount of joint involvement expands during disease course suggest that there
might exist a window of opportunity in relation to treatment. Early disease diag-
nosis can give rise to early intervention treatment in order to improve physical
outcome for the patients. This will have positive effect on quality of life.
2.2
The Synovial Joint and Extracellular Matrix
2.2.1
The Synovial Joint in Health and Disease
The synovial joint is the most common type of joint and consists of the junction of
two or more bones, whose ends are covered by the connective tissue hyaline car-
tilage. The union of the ends is localized in a fibrous joint capsule that surrounds
a synovial cavity [23]. The structure of the capsule is reinforced by intrinsic liga-
ments, which is thickenings of collagens fibers. The capsule consists of two layers
of connective tissue which can be compartmentalized into an inner and outer part.
The outer layer, a fibrous membrane, consist of collagenous fibers that covers
the entire joint area and is attached at the posterium of the bone, the part not
covered by cartilage. The inner layer of the capsule is the synovial membrane.
This membrane together with its fluid, are unique to synovial joints. The mem-
brane consists of synoviocytes that are up to four cell layers deep, surrounding
the entire joint except for the surface of articular cartilage. Additionally, fibrob-
lasts, mast cells, macrophages and structural macromolecules are components
of the membrane. Synoviocytes secrete collagen and proteoglycan which both
are pivotal components of the membrane. Synoviocytes can be separated into
two cell types: macrophage-like and fibroblast-like, but are likely to belong to a
common cell population [23]. The synovial cells and macrophages of synovial
membranes are key producers of inflammatory cytokines, and small amounts of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, like IL-1, IL-6, IL-17, IL-23 and TNF-α, are present
at all times in the synovial membrane. The main macromolecules include IV col-
lagen, laminin, fibronectin and chondroitin-6-sulfate-rich proteoglycan, typically
characteristics of the basement membrane [24].
In arthropathies, it is the fibroblast-like synoviocytes that proliferate aggressively,
destroying cartilage and the underlying bone concurrent with increased extracel-
lular matrix protein synthesis [25]. During inflammation an influx of inflammatory
cells occurs in the synovial membrane causing an increase of pro-inflammatory
mediator expression [26]. This leads to the a local increase of protease secre-
tion including families of metallo- and cysteine-proteases (MMPs and Cathepsins)
among others, that act in synergy to destroy the connective tissue components
of the affected joint [27] (Figure 2.2). Up-regulation of the proteolytic enzymes is
seen early in the course of inflammation. Specifically, MMP-2 and -9 have been
associated with local inflammation in the basement membrane and consequently
degradation of type IV collagen [26]. Within the cysteine-protease family, both
6
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:15==
Cathepsin L [27] and Cathepsin S [28] have been found implicated in the degra-
dation of type IV collagen in the basement membrane. Consequently to this pro-
teolytic burden, there occurs a destruction of the cartilage and synovial lining of
the joint capsule. The cartilage lining of the joint is critical for mobility, and when it
is lost, the space in the joint is reduced which leads to improper function. Further-
more, as a result of loss of cartilage, the rubbing of bones can lead to new bone
formation [29]. Thus, when talking about changes through radiological point of
view, there are destructive, productive, both combined, and those that are neither
[29].
Figure 2.2: Comparison of healthy joint (left) with Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA) (right). Depicting degra-
dation of multiple connective tissues in PsA.
2.2.2
The Extracellular Matrix
All tissues consist of structural proteins such as macromolecules including colla-
gens, elastin and laminins. The exact composition and presence of these molecules,
depend on the location and function of the tissue. Type I collagen is the main struc-
tural component of bone tissue [30], while type II collagen is abundant in articular
cartilage [31]. During growth, tissue is formed and elaborated, in contrary to adult-
hood where tissue is maintained and at homeostasis. During homeostasis, there
is a tight equilibrium of degradation and formation of macromolecules which en-
sures tissue remodeling essential for tissue health.
Extracellular matrix (ECM) is a well-organized network that ensures structural sup-
port through its role as a physical scaffold encapsulating cells. It is a primary com-
ponent of connective tissue of which ECM provides regulation of a wide number
of cellular processes including growth, migration, differentiation and homeostasis
[32]. ECMs are classified into two types the interstitial matrix and the basement
membrane (Figure 2.3). They differ in both composition and in location. The inter-
stitial matrix encloses cells and is filling in the space between them in the intersti-
tial of tissues. The basement membrane underlies the epithelium and is located
just above the interstitial matrix and the connective tissue. Here, the basement
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
7
==PAGE:16==
membrane ensures that the cells are positioned correctly and are functionable
by anchoring them in a sheet-like layer [32, 33]. The basement membrane is
mainly composed of type IV collagen [32]. The synovial membrane shares com-
mon ECM components with the basement membrane such as type IV collagen
as a main component [25], however, the specific α-chain compositions of type IV
collagen does differ between the two locations [34].
Figure 2.3: Structure of the extracellular matrix.
2.2.3
Type IV Collagen - a Component of the Synovial
Membrane
Collagens are major components of the human body, expressed throughout all
organs and tissues. Twenty-eight different collagens have been identified, eight
of which, types I, II, III, IV, V, VI IX and XI are the most abundant in connective tis-
sue [33]. Type IV collagen is a nonfibrillar network-forming collagen differing from
other connective tissue collagens by its non-collagenous domains (NC domains).
It is only present in the basement membranes where it makes up 50 %, and is thus
a crucial structural component [24]. In vertebrates the type IV collagen consists
of six α chains, α1 to α6 (Figure 2.6), encoded by the genes COL4A1 to COL4A6.
Each chain contains of an amino-terminal collagenous domain, the so-called 7S
domain, and a carboxyl-terminal NC1 domain. The two terminal domains are sep-
arated by a central collagenous triple helical domain of approximately 1300-1400
residues [33]. The conformation of type IV collagen is the triple helical domain as
it is with the fibrillar collagens, however, it differs in the aminoa cid sequence. Fib-
rillar collagens are characterized with triple helical domains consisting of repeated
Gly-Xaa-Yaa motifs, where Xaa and Yaa represent any other amino acid than cys-
teine and tryptophan. In contrary, type IV collagen contains 21-26 interruptions
of this repeated pattern [33], which provide flexibility to the collagen. Both the 7S
domain and the NC1 domain are rich in cystein and lysine. Meanwhile the NC1 is
free of hydroproline ensuring a globular/spherical structure [24], the 7S domain is
heavily glycosylated making it resistant to proteolytic activity [33].
The three α chains are secreted as self-assembled heterotrimers from cells. They
are associated through their NC1 domains in the following 3 variations; α1α1α2,
8
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:17==
α3α4α5 and α5α5α6 [33], and are supercoiled in a zipper-like fashion. Upon se-
cretion to the ECM, the heterotrimers form complex lattice-shaped networks. The
NC1 domain ensures dimer formation through binding of two heterotrimer, while
the 7S domain is responsible for the binding of four heterotrimers (Figure 2.4).
Figure 2.4: Assembly and structure of type IV collagen. Figure from [35].
2.2.4
ECM Remodeling
The ECM is a dynamic structure that is subject to continuous remodeling to uphold
the homeostasis of all healthy tissues. ECM remodeling is a key component in
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
9
==PAGE:18==
both the physiological remodeling, but also in the pathological processes, includ-
ing tissue repair and fibrosis. [33]. During fibrosis an increased fibroblast activity
causes excessive formation of connective tissue including formation of ECM com-
ponents. Eventually, the amount of anabolic processes becomes so great, that
local proteases are unable to balance the homeostatic tissue turnover and conse-
quently the turnover is altered. As a result of altered tissue remodeling in the joint,
the expression and secretion of ECM-degrading proteases results in degradation
of structural components.
Different proteases are mediators of remodeling depending on tissue, location and
pathology. They can be classified mechanistically into four types of proteases in
humans; aspartic, cysteine (i.e. Cathepsins), serine and metallo (i.e. MMPs) [36].
Determination of the proteases present during remodeling of ECM during SpA is
crucial in order to advance within the field of biomarker development, since these
can be highly specific for the structural damages taking place. The presence of
Cathepsin L has been determined in the inflamed synovial joint in early arthritis
[37], and Cathepsin S has been associated with the maintenance of inflammatory
arthritis [38]. Furthermore, tissue injuries caused during inflammation have been
found to induce the local increase of MMP-2 and MMP-9 secretion [26], while loss
of type IV collagen in the basement membrane has been associated with eleva-
tions in MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression [39].
2.3
Biomarkers
During tissue remodeling ECM components are degraded as a result of increased
proteolytic activity. The metabolites are released into circulation and offer the
possibility to be exploited as biomarkers. A biomarker has the broad definition:
“a defined characteristic that is measured as an indicator of normal biological
processes, pathogenic processes or responses to an exposure or intervention.”
[40], and can be utilized in a wide array of purposes. The resource ”Biomark-
ers, Endpoints, and other Tools” (BEST) [40] have classified biomarkers into sub-
categories according to their application which include diagnostic, monitoring, pre-
dictive, prognostic and susceptibility biomarkers. Diagnostic biomarkers can be
used in detection of disease or condition, or even to redefine classification of dis-
ease. Assessment of disease can be determined with monitoring biomarkers on
the basis of serial measurements. This is applicable during treatment to investi-
gate the effect of a therapeutic agent. A predictive biomarker can serve in pre-
dicting if a person has a higher likelihood of experiencing a certain effect from
therapeutic exposure e.g. through presence or change in biomarker, while the
prognostic biomarker serve in identification of the likelihood of a disease recur-
rence or progression. Prognostic biomarkers differ from predictive in that they are
associated with differential disease outcome, while a predictive biomarker can be
used to determine if a person will respond to a therapy or not. Lastly, a suscep-
tibility biomarker can aid in risk determination of a healthy person to develop a
disease or condition. They differ from prognostic in that they indicate transition
from health to disease, in contrary to prognosis upon diagnosis.
A single biomarker can be utilized in more than one of the above categories. Cur-
10
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:19==
rently, validated biomarkers for SpA include CRP and HLA-B27 genotyping which
has been described previously (Section 2.1.3). Moreover, various proteins have
been investigated for biomarker potential in SpA including calprotectin which have
showed association with disease activity in axSpA [41] and collagen metabolites
C1M, C3M, and C4M2, whose levels were higher in SpA [42]. Performance of
these biomarkers have been inadequate to validate clinical usage and thus, re-
liable biomarkers remain to be identified. Multiple biomarkers are under devel-
opment [42], and these could be combined into a panel of biomarkers reflecting
the different components of SpA pathology. Simultaneous assessment of multiple
biomarkers reflecting different aspects of pathological processes might increase
sensitivity and facilitate better discrimination amongst related diseases. Next to
this, serial measurements of MRI scans are not easily feasible, although MRI is
sensitive to detect changes in inflammation during treatment. Thus, there is an
unmet need for biomarkers reflecting disease activity and for identifying patients
at risk of developing structural damage and co-morbidities.
Biomarkers can take many forms as they range from simple metabolites such as
a collagen fragments, to complex molecules such as RNA and DNA or even cel-
lular systems with high complexity, like a CD4+ T cell profiling [2]. Therefore, the
discovery pipeline can look very different. A wide array of high-throughput ’omics’
are being used to discover biomarker candidates including genomics, transcrip-
tomics and metabolomics. Additionally, literature research might be used to dis-
cover molecules putative for disease and to gain prior knowledge on expression
differences of the candidates. Once a candidate is found, an analysis method has
to be developed for measurement. Currently, the antibody-based immunoassays
are among the widely used methods for protein biomarker assays, due to their
well established methods, simplicity and high specificity.
2.3.1
Protein Fingerprint™Technology
Subsequent to translation, proteins are exposed to post translational modifica-
tions. These modifications are not coded by DNA, rather they occur as a conse-
quence of the pathological processes, one of which is protease activity. The prod-
uct of proteolytic cleavage is neo-epitopes, also referred to as fingerprints, which
in can reflect different pathological processes [43]. The Protein Fingerprint™Tech-
nology is utilized as a tool to exploit the generation of ECM fragments specific for a
disease (Figure 2.5). A particular pathology will give rise to altered ECM turnover,
such as the destruction of articular cartilage during SpA. This turnover will give
rise to neo-epitopes [44] that might be particular to the tissue. A neo-epitope can
be targeted as a circulating biomarker when it is released into the bloodstream
(Figure 3.1).
By taking advantage of the high specificity of a monoclonal antibody on its target,
the development of an antibody-based immuno-assay can aid in further investiga-
tion of the biomarker. Monoclonal antibodies are highly specific for the analytes
they are raised against, and once specificity is ensured, an immuno-assay is a
good method for assessment of biomarkers.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: Principles of Protein Fingerprint™Technology. Healthy tissue components undergo
remodeling ensuring homeostasis. During pathology, proteolytic degradation processes generate
unique protein fingerprints that can be targeted by antibodies.
2.3.2
Type IV Collagen Biomarkers for SpA
Current advances within early diagnosis depends of access to MRI which can
show MRI inflammation. Therefore, one or multiple biomarkers able to fulfill the
need of early diagnosis, monitoring of disease activity, and progression to aid in
selection of appropriate treatment are needed. Biochemical marker levels can
easily be assessed on a routine basis, and provide information on disease pro-
gression to help clinicians in their decision regarding the best possible treatment.
The Protein Fingerprint technology approach may aid in development of novel
biomarkers of increased specificity towards tissue damage in SpA.
Search for neo-epitopes relevant for chronic inflammatory synovial joint arthropathies
has been supported based on the knowledge that inflammatory microenvironment
of these arthropathies is varied [45]. This rationale for biomarker search has fur-
ther been supported by the finding that α-chains of type IV collagen are highly
tissue-specific, as previously stated. This has lead to the identification of C4M2, a
fragment specific for α1-chain, that have shown disease association with axSpA
[35]. C4M2 has also been associated with disease activity and radiographic pro-
gression in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), another inflammatory joint disease [46].
Arresten is another α-chain-derived fragment from the C-terminal which is well
characterized, and yet remains to be fully understood [47] (Figure 2.6). It is de-
scribed as an anti-angiogenic factor, from the noncollagenous (NC1) domain, pre-
sumed to be cleaved by Cathepsin S [47], and is an interesting target candidate
for a biomarker capable of quantifying synovial joint destruction during SpA.
12
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.6: The primary structures of the six α-chains of Type IV Collagen. Depicting their func-
tional domains; N-terminal 7S domain and C-terminal globullar non-collageneous (NC1) domain,
seperated by a central collagenous domain. From [35].
2.3.3
Immuno-assays as Biomarker Tools
Antibody-based immuno-assays remain a common method for validation and mon-
itoring of protein biomarker assays following discovery of a putative biomarker.
Immuno-assays offer methods with high sensitivity and robustness, in addition to
being rapid and simple [48]. It utilizes the highly specific binding reaction between
an antigen and an antibody, and is capable of quantifying analytes of unknown
amounts. Overall, there are various types of ELISA setups, each developed with
the aim at optimizing assays dependent on the nature and abundance of target
analytes, sample complexity and the requirements of the assay. The four most
common setups are direct, indirect, sandwich and competitive ELISA. The com-
petitive ELISA, also known as inhibition ELISA, is build around the principle of
competition between a sample analyte and an immobilized synthetic peptide for
the binding of a labelled antibody.
Competitive ELISA is carried out by coating the wells of the plate with an anti-
gen, hereinafter referred to as a ’coater’. The coater is a biotinylated 10 amino
acid synthetic peptide specific for the HRP-conjugated antibody. The biotinylation
of the coater allows for a strong non-covalent interaction with streptavidin, which
is precoated in the wells, due to their high binding affinities. Upon coating of the
plate, sample material and antibody are sequentially added, and competion oc-
curs between analyte and coater for binding of the antibody. Unbound material
is washed off. In case of high analyte concentration in the sample material, a re-
duced signal is measured. Thus, there is a inverse relationship between signal
and analyte concentration 2.7.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.7: Principles of Competitive ELISA. A streptavidin-coated plate, is coated with a bi-
otinylated antigen. Sample and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) is added. Sample analyte and coating will compete for the binding of HRP conjugated
mAbs. Only mAbs bound to coating will be measured, resulting in an inverse relationship between
analyte concentration and signal.
14
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:23==
3
Hypothesis and Aims
This project is based on the hypothesis that neo-epitope fragments of type IV
collagen are released into circulation upon inflammation and degradation of the
synovial joint in SpA patients (Figure 3.1). As part of the increased joint tissue re-
modeling, Arresten, a type IV collagen α1-chain fragment, may be able to reflect
disease activity. Finally, it is expected that Arresten can be quantified by employ-
ment of a monoclonal antibody specific for its release. This will be investigated
through the following aims:
1. Development and validation of a competitive ELISA targeting the type IV
collagen α1 chain peptide fragment Arresten
2. Assessment of the Arresten assay in serum samples from SpA patients to
evaluate its use as a biomarker in patients with SpA
3. Identification of proteases responsible for cleavage and release of Arresten
from type IV collagen
4. Investigating the angiogenic properties of Arresten by a HUVEC migration
assay
Figure 3.1: Graphical illustration of hypothesis: Tissue Remodeling during SpA will result in re-
lease of neo-epitopes, including Arresten, into the bloodstream where they can be detected as
serological biomarkers.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:25==
4
Methods and Materials
4.1
Target Sequence
Identification of the C-terminal Arresten target sequence 1145’GFLVTRHSQT’1154
from type IV collagen α1 chain, for development of a biomarker was performed
prior to initiation of this project. The cleavage site and epitope was identified in
literature [49]. The chosen human sequence was aligned to mouse, rat, monkey,
pig and bovine prior to design of the targeted sequence to establish homology
using Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) and the protein sequence was
obtained though the Uniprot database [50].
4.2
Development of Monoclonal Antibody
Development of monoclonal antibody was conducted by Nordic Bioscience prior
to the initiation of this project. In short, the target sequence in a peptide-protein
conjugation was used to raise mAb in Balb/C mice. Mice were immunized by sub-
cutaneous injections of 200 µL emulsified immunogen composed of the peptide-
protein conjugation and an adjuvant system. Immunization was initiated on fe-
male mice at age 6-7 weeks, and injections were performed every second week
for eleven weeks. The best host candidate was selected based on peptide inhi-
bition data. This mouse was given a final boost in form of an intraperitoneal in-
jection consisting of 50 µL/100 µL immunnogen in saline. Spleenocytes from the
mouse was fused with immortal myeloma cell line Sp2/0 to produce the hybridoma
cells. These were subsequently grown in hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine
(HAT) medium in order to distinguish and select for fused cells. This is possible
through positive selection by taking advantage of DNA synthesis occurring during
cell division. Aminopterin is used as a blocker of the folate metabolism crucial for
DNA de novo synthesis. However, only desired fused cells have enzymes that
are able to evade this inhibition through the utilization of the HAT-provided hypox-
anthine and thymidine. Non-fused immortal myeloma cells will not divide due to
lack of evasion enzymes, this is not the case for non-fused spleen cells, eventu-
ally they will simply extinguish due to limited number of replication cycles (Figure
4.1).
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Production of monoclonal antibodies. After immunization of mice the spleen is har-
vested. Splenocytes extracted form the spleen are fused with myeloma cells, and resulting hy-
bridoma cells selected and expanded. Finally, monoclonal antibody are purified.
4.2.1
Antibody Purification and Horseradish Peroxidase
labeling
Antibody purification and subsequent horseradish peroxidase (HRP) labeling was
carried out at Nordic Bioscience prior to initiation of this project. The specific mon-
oclonal antibody was raised against NBH-263 (Nordic Bioscience Herlev program
nr. 263) with the sequence 1145’GFLVTRHSQT’1154. The antibody was purified
from the hybridoma supernatant through a 1 mL HiTrap Protein G columns (Cy-
tiva, cat. no. GE17-0404-01) affinity chromatography according to manufacturer.
Protein G is a E.coli-specific Fc receptor which contains two IgG binding regions.
Protein G is able to bind monoclonal mouse IgG through a non-immune mecha-
nism.
Labeling was performed with Peroxidase Labeling Kit (Roche, cat. no. 11829696001)
according to protocol from manufacturer. Dilutions of 10 μg/ml HRP-labelled anti-
body in AbGuard HRP Stabilizer Plus (Bio-Rad, cat. no. BUF052B) were stored
at -20°C.
4.3
Arresten ELISA
A 96-well streptavidin-coated ELISA plate (Greiner Bio-One, cat. no. 655995)
was coated with a biotinylated antigen specific for the antibody by transfering 100
µL NBH-263 in each well, followed by 30 min incubation during shaking in a 20 °C
incubator. Afterwards the plate was washed 5 times with washing buffer 25 mM
Tris; 50 mM NaCl; 0.1% (v/v) Tween20; pH 7.2 which is utilized for every washing
18
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:27==
step in the following. Subsequently, 20 µL samples were added in double deter-
mination, followed by the addition of 100 µL HRP-labelled antibody. The plate
was incubated for 3 H on a shaker at 300 rpm, in a 4 °C incubator. Subsequently,
the plate was washed 5 times followed by the transfer of 100 µL BM Chemilumi-
nescence ELISA Substrate (Roche, cat. no. 11852950001) to each well followed
by 1 min shaking at 240 rpm and 2 min rest before measurement of relative lumi-
nescence units (RLU) at a emission wavelength of 1000 ms on Fluoroskan™FL
Microplate Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher, cat. no. 5200220).
An 11-point standard curve was made from 2-fold dilutions of peptide NBH-263
starting at 8 ng/ml. The standard curve was fitted with a 4-parametrical model.
This protocol was developed through the following steps.
4.3.1
Synthetic Peptides
All synthetic peptides were purchased from Genscript and are displayed in Table
4.1. A 10 amino acid standard peptide (referred to as standard peptide) and coater
were utilized throughout all assay experiments. Elongated, truncated, 30 amino
acid standard peptide and biotin-conjugated nonsense coater were all utilized for
antibody specificity (Section 4.3.3), and the 30 amino acid standard peptide was
likewise utilized in spiking recovery (Section 4.3.5).
Type
Sequence
Manufacturer
10 aa Std. Peptide
GFLVTRHSQT
Genscript
Coater
GFLVTRHSQT-Biotin
Genscript
Truncated Peptide
FLVTRHSQT
Genscript
Elongated Peptide
HGFLVTRHSQT
Genscript
30 aa Std. Peptide
GFLVTRHSQTIDDPQCPSGTKILYHGYSLL
Genscript
Nonsense coater
MSAFAGLGPRK-Biotin
Genscript
Table 4.1: List of synthetic peptides used in development of Arresten assay.
aa, amino acids; std. peptide, standard peptide.
4.3.2
Optimization - Checkerboard
In order to find an optimal setting for assay condition, two buffers were used to
test at different incubation duration and temperature. Each plate was constructed
with scaled concentrations of antibody and coater (Figure 4.2). This was per-
formed with two different buffers both based on bovine serum albumin (BSA) and
phosphate buffered saline (PBS): 25mM PBS, 8 g/L NaCl and 50mM PBS, 8 g/L
NaCl (A).
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: Checkerboard dilutions performed to identify best coater/antibody ratios.
The concentration of antibody and coater that results in an RLU above background
signals, at a ratio of 1:10, are selected for next steps in assay development.
4.3.3
Antibody Specificity
Specificity of the mAb is ensured by testing that the antibody exclusively bind to
the selection peptide NBH-263. This is tested by investigation of cross-reactivity
with an elongated and truncated version of the peptide. The elongated version
consists of the selection peptide with the addition of an amino acid at the N OR
C terminal end of the sequence, while the truncated version consists of a short-
ened amino acid sequence at C OR N terminus (Tabel 4.1). Standard curves with
2-fold serial dilutions of each peptide in duplicates were made. In addition, the
specificity of the mAb was tested towards a nonsense biotinylated coater peptide
and a selection peptide with a 30 amino acid length, conserving the 10 amino acid
binding epitope (Tabel 4.1).
4.3.4
Assay Linearity
By investigating assay linearity it is possible to understand the ability of the as-
say to measure diluted values of the analyte, proportional to its undiluted value.
Assessment is performed by comparing the expected concentration with the con-
centration back calculated on the linear regression line. Furthermore, it is possible
to determine sample type (plasma and serum) and if the sample should be diluted
before measurement by the assay. Linearity test was performed on duplicates
of two-folds dilutions starting from undiluted up until a 1:8 dilution on three differ-
ent serum and three different plasma samples. Percentage recovery of the 100%
sample was calculated. A recovery of 100±20% was accepted.
20
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:29==
4.3.5
Spiking Recovery
The accuracy of the assay is defined as the ability to measure analyte as com-
pared to a reference value. The spiking was performed with serum, the 10 aa
standard peptide and 30 aa standard peptide, respectively. The two peptides
were spiked into 3 different serum samples as a 2-fold serial dilution (8 ng/mL - 0
ng/mL). Serum was spiked into three different serum samples as well, as a fore-
known 2-fold dilution (undiluted - 0 ng/mL). A recovery of 100±20% was accepted.
4.3.6
Biological Interference
Serum samples contain mixtures of various proteins that could potentially cross
react with the assay antibody. These cross reactions can potentially lead to mis-
leading results. This was assessed by spiking a panel of high and low concentra-
tions of well-known interfering substances into one serum sample, and comparing
these samples with the same non-spiked samples. A recovery of 100±20% was
accepted.
Biological
Component
Spiking concentations
Hemoglobin (mg/mL)
2.5
5
Lipid (mg/mL)
1.5
5
Biotin (ng/mL)
5
10
20
40
60
80
100
Table 4.2: Spiking Concentrations of Biological Components.
4.3.7
Analyte Stability
The stability of serum samples in temperature changes was evaluated by contin-
uously freezing and thawing samples up to 4 cycles. This was done for three
different serum samples, thawed 1, 2, 3 and 4 times respectively. Freezed and
thawed samples were compared to same samples that had not undergone a cy-
cle, and samples were assessed based on their recovery. A recovery of 100±20%
was accepted (Figure 4.3).
Figure 4.3: Principles of Freeze and Thaw Cycles.
Furthermore, analyte stability was tested for storage at different time points and
temperatures. Three different serum samples were stored at 4 °C and 20 °C for
2 H, 24 H and 48 H. Measurements were compared to the same samples thawed
once. A recovery of 100±20% was accepted.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
21
==PAGE:30==
4.3.8
Antibody Stress Test
Antibodies are a crucial part of an assay, and their conservation is of most im-
portance. Therefore, it is relevant to investigate if the HRP-labelled antibody is
sensitive to long storage at different time points and temperatures. Aliquots of
HRP-labelled antibody (in Abguard) were stored at 4 °C, 20 °C and 37 °C for 24
H, 72 H and 7 days. Once all Antibody aliquots were treated, a plate was run a
plate for each condition measuring standard curve, controls, lot-to-lot (LTL) panel
and quality controls (QCs).
4.3.9
Assay Robustness and Assay Controls
A robust assay is able to withstand different parameters such as changes in han-
dling, incubation times and temperature. A robust assay also measures with a
high precision. The robustness of the assay was evaluated by running 10 inde-
pendent plates throughout the duration of 3 days, with 30 min in between the
runs. The variation and precision of samples is the CV% found from plate to plate
and within each plate as the inter- and intra-variation respectively. Furthermore,
a comparison of IC20, IC50, IC80, slope and the ratio, B/B0, between maximum
RLU value and background value was performed.
In order to evaluate variations in the assay proper controls have to be included.
Controls include kit controls which are the 10 amino acid standard peptide in buffer
and quality controls (QC’s) of the intended matrix. Furthermore, lot to lot (LTL) con-
trols were developed which is needed when comparing newly developed labscale
batches. The aim when defining control concentrations is to cover the entire linear
range of the standard curve, in addition to utilizing the intended matrix. Two con-
trols were developed with the 10 amino acid standard peptide, one at 0.3 ng/mL
(CO1) and 1 ng/mL (CO2). Three QC’s were included to test the robustness when
measuring samples in matrix that the assay is intented to be used for. Lastly, five
LTL samples were included, two of which where the 10 amino acid standard pep-
tide in buffer at 0.5 and 1 ng/mL, in addition to three healthy human serum samples
with concentrations at 0.43, 0.28 and 0.34 ng/mL.
4.3.10
Technical Validation
To perform a full technical validation and characterization of the assay, a labscale
kit with 100 kits were produced.
The full validation included tests described in Table 4.3, together with inter-intra
variation based on 10 day to day runs using five LTL samples, CO1 and CO2.
Furthermore the technical validation depends on the investigations and criteria
listed in Table 4.4. Lower limit of detection (LLOD) was calculated by mean + 3x
standard deviation determined from 21 samples (i.e. buffer). Lower limit of mea-
surement range (LLMR) was determined as IC20 and upper limit of measurement
range (ULMR) was determined as IC80.
22
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:31==
Aliquot
Amount
Concentration
HRP-labelled
Antibody
100
3500 ng/ml
Coater
100
250 ng/ml
Standard Peptide
100
8 ng/ml
Kit Control 1
100
0.3 ng/mL
Kit Control 2
100
1 ng/mL
LTL 1: Serum
80
0.43 ng/mL
LTL 2: Serum
80
0.28 ng/mL
LTL 3: Serum
80
0.43 ng/mL
LTL 4: Peptide in Buffer
80
0.5 ng/mL
LTL 5: Peptide in Buffer
80
1 ng/mL
Table 4.3: Labscale Production Kit.
HRP; horseradish peroxidase, LTL; lot to lot.
Test
Acceptance Criteria
Sanity Test
No Cross Reactivity
Dilution Recovery
Recovery of 100±20%
Spiking Recovery
Recovery of 100±20%
Freeze/Thaw
Recovery of 100±20%
Analyte Stability
Recovery of 100±20%
Antibody Stability
Recovery of 100±20%
Biological Interference
Recovery of 100±20%
Table 4.4: Requirements for Technical Validation.
4.4
In Vitro Cleavage of Type IV Collagen to
Generate the Arresten Fragment
A protease cleavage experiment was performed on native human type IV collagen
extracted from human placenta (Abcam, cat. no. Ab7536), with MMP-2 (Giotto
Biotech, cat. no. G04MP02C), MMP-9 (Giotto Biotech, cat. no. G04MP09C),
Cathepsin S (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 219343-25UG) and Cathepsin L (Sigma-
Aldrich, cat. no. C6854-25UG). Two dilutions were made of type IV collagen, one
in MMP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM CaCl2, 10 uM ZnCl, 0.05%
Brij-35, pH 7.5) and another in Cathepsin buffer (50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, pH 7.5
). Type IV collagen diluted in MMP buffer, was mixed with either MMP-2 or MMP-
9, and type IV collagen Cathepsin buffer was used in mixture with Cathepsin L
and S. Protein was cleaved at a Protein:Protease ratio of 10:1. For each protease
and collagen mixture three controls were included as listed in Tabel 4.5. Mixtures
were made with a Enzyme:protein ratio of 1:10.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
23
==PAGE:32==
Vial 1
Vial 2
Vial 3
Vial 4
Buffer
Collagen
+
Buffer
Protease
+
Buffer
Collagen
+
Protease
+
Buffer
Table 4.5: Sample Mixtures for Cleavage. Proteases were either MMP-2, MMP-9, Catepsin L or
Cathepsin S. For cleavage with MMP the MMP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM
CaCl2, 10 uM ZnCl, 0.05% Brij-35, pH 7.5) was utilized and for cleavage with Cathepsins the
Cathepsin buffer (50mM Tris 150mM NaCl, pH 7.5) was utilized.
Solutions were gently mixed and stored at 37 °C incubator. At 24 H, 48 H, 7 days
and 14 days, 100 µL from each tube was transferred to new tube, where reaction
was stopped with 2 µL 50 µM Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Samples
were measured in the Arresten assay.
4.4.1
SDS-PAGE and Silver Staining
Silverstaining was performed on the 7 day reactions using 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-
Tris Mini Gels (Invitrogen) with MES SDS Running buffer (cat NP0002). The sam-
ples were prepared in by transferring 7.5 µL LDS sample buffer (4X) and 3 µL
Reducing Agent (10X). MES running buffer was prepared as a 1X solution from
the 20X stock, 200 mL of this were transferred to another container and added
0.5 ml NuPAGE Antioxidant (catNP0005). The mini cell apparatus was setup and
the gels placed the into the tank. The inner chamber was filled with 200 ml 1X run-
ning buffer containing antioxidant, and the outer chamber with 1X running buffer.
Subsequently, 20 µL protein ladder and 30 µL samples were loaded. The proteins
were run into the stacking gel slowly at 80V, after 30 min as the proteins were in
the resolving gel the voltage was raised to 120 V.
The gels were fixed in 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid for 1 H followed by wash-
ing with 30% ethanol for 20 min. twice and washing in Milli-Q for 20 min. The gels
were then sensitized in 0.02% sodium tiosulfate for 1 min followed by washing in
Milli-Q for 20 sec. three times. The gels were incubated in cold 0.1% silver nitrate
for 20 min in 4°C, washed three times in Milli-Q for 20 sec. and changed into a
new chamber. Finally, the gels were developed in 3% sodium carbonate, 0.05%
formalin. Once, desired staining was reached the gels were washed in Milli-Q for
20 sec and staining termination was performed in 5% acetic acid for 20 sec. The
gels were washed for 10 min in Milli-Q three times.
4.5
Study Samples
To investigate biological relevance, two different study cohorts were used. Cohort
1 consisted of 79 healthy patients, 75 PsA patients and 58 axSpA patients. Co-
hort 2 consisted of samples from 97 healthy patients, 53 nr-axSpA patients and
40 axSpA patients. The cohorts are obtained from two different hospitals with
approval from their local ethical committees. Details of the cohorts cannot be
disclosed in this thesis.
24
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:33==
4.6
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism, version 8 (GraphPad
Software, San Diego CA, USA) and by MedCalc (MedCalc, Belgium).
Patients demographics, serological biomarkers and clinical characteristics are pre-
sented as mean with SD for continuous variables and number with percentage for
categorical variables. Normality tests were assessed by a D’Agostino-Pearson
Omnibus normality test. To test for differences between variables where only val-
ues for two patient groups were represented, a t-test were used on normal dis-
tributed data, while a Mann-Whitney unpaired t-test were used for non-parametric
test between two groups. To test for differences between all the individual groups
of patients, an ANOVA was used on normally distributed data and a Kruskal-Wallis
test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons was used on non-normally distributed con-
tinuous variables. Differences in categorical variables were determined by a Chi-
Squired test. All p-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant. As-
terisks indications are as followed: * = P < 0.05, ** = P < 0.01, *** = P < 0.001,
and ****= P < 0.0001.
4.7
Huvec Invasion Assay - Investigating Vascular
endothelial cell growth factor Induced
Angiogenesis
The MILLIPORE Cell invasion Assay (cat. no. ECM 555) was performed by Kim
V. Andreassen (Nordic Bioscience) according to manufacturers protocol. It was
conducted in a 96-well invasion plate based on the Boyden chamber principle.
One well consists of an upper and lower chamber seperated by a semi-permeable
membrane composed of 8 μm pore size polycarbonate membrane coated with a
thin layer of ECMatrix™. 100 μL of prewarmed serum-free media was transfered
into the upper chamber, and left for 1-2 H at room temperature to rehydrate the
ECM layer. Upon rehydration media was carefully removed, followed by the ad-
dition of 150 μL of serum-free media with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) into
the lower chamber. Subsequently, Huvec cells (LONZA, cat. no. C2519AS) sus-
pended in 100 μL serum-free media were transferred into the upper chamber. The
plate was covered and incubated for 12-24 H in 37°C in a CO2 incubator. Invad-
ing cells will migrate through the membrane and attach themselves to the bottom
of the membrane, while the ECM layer will block non-invasive cells from passing.
Following incubation, cells and media were discarded from the upper chamber
by flipping out the remaining cell suspension. Invading cells were detached by
suspending the upper champer in 150 μL of prewarmed Cell Detachmet Solution
(Part No. 90130) for 30 min at 37 °C. Upon detachment cells were lysed and dyed
using dye solution (CyQuant GR Dye®)/lysis buffer (4x Cell Lysis Buffer) at a 1:75
ratio, by transferring 50 μL of this solution into the wells followed by an incubation
for 15 min at room temperature. Finally, 150 μL of the mixture was transferred to a
new 96-well plate and fluorescence measurement was performed using 480/520
nm filter set.
Cells were treated as followed: All wells contained Vascular endothelial cell growth
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
25
==PAGE:34==
factor (VEGF) at a concentration of 10 ng/mL, except for one migration control only
containing cells. Another migration control only contained cells in VEGF. One well
was a designated positive control for anti-angiogenesis, and was supplied with 20
μM of E1 (27 first amino acids of Endostatin [51]). Another Endostatin fragment
and Arresten where both investigated separately at concentrations of 2 μM and
20 μM, respectively.
26
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:35==
5
Results
5.1
Development of the Competitive Arresten
ELISA Assay
The following section will present results from the development of the competitive
assay for assessment of the Arresten. The developmental steps are designed to
obtain an assay with high level of specificity, sensitivity and robustness.
The target sequence for Arresten was identified by [49]. The sequence
1145’↓GFLVTRHSQT’1154
where ↓indicates the cleavage site, was aligned between mouse, rat, pig, mon-
key, bovine and human using BLAST and showed 100% homology between the
selected species (Figure 5.1)
Figure 5.1: Arresten target sequence in Type IV Collagen. Depicting sequence homology in hu-
man, mouse, bovine, rat, monkey and pig.
The purpose of checkerboard is to determine the coater antibody ratio that gives
the RLUs above background noise. RLUs are arbitrary values, meaning there is
no theoretical minimum or maximum. Ratios of antibody and coater gave differ-
ent RLU values when tested at different conditions such as buffer, incubation time
and incubation temperature. Checkerboard investigation showed a wide array of
possible antibody/coater combinations at a 1:10 ratio above background noise.
Overall, increased antibody and coater concentrations resulted in higher RLU sig-
nal, as expected. Upon comparison of the two buffers, 50 mM PBS-BTB, 8 g/L
NaCl showed overall decreased RLU signals compared to 25 mM PBS-BTB, 8 g/L
NaCl, which corresponds well with theory, since a higher molar ratio, will interfere
with detection. IC50 and slope values were obtained upon conduction of a 16-
point 2-fold serial dilution of the standard peptide. Linearity was determined with
all variation of the conditions. However, buffer 50 mM PBS-BTB, 8 g/L NaCl at
3 H °C incubation was selected since it showed low IC50 (high assay sensitivity)
and a slope closest to one. Furthermore, when testing analyte detection in healthy
serum samples, this buffer was able to measure diluted values of the analyte pro-
portional to its undiluted value. Ultimately, after numerous trials investigating the
different assay parameters, they were determined (Table 5.1).
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
27
==PAGE:36==
Assay Parameter
Value
Assay buffer
Buffer 50 mM PBS-BTB, 8 g/L NaCl
Incubation time
3 H
Incubation temperature
4°C
Coater conc.
2.5 ng/mL
mAb conc.
35 ng/mL
Standard peptide conc.
8 ng/mL
Table 5.1: Assay Parameters.
PBS; Phosphate Buffered Saline, BTB; Bovine Serum Albumin, NaCl; Sodium chloride, conc;
concentration, mAb; monoclonal antibody.
5.1.1
Antibody Specificity
Antibody specificity was high for both the 10 and 30 amino acid standard peptides,
containing same binding epitope, compared to elongated peptide, truncated pep-
tide, and a non-sense coating peptide. No cross reactivity was observed within
the measurement range of the assay (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.2: Antibody Specificity.
AA; amino acid.
5.1.2
Sample Type
Two different types of human samples, plasma and serum, were measured by the
assay. The difference between the two types is that plasma contains an antico-
agulant solvent, EDTA, lithium heparin or sodium citrate. It was apparent, based
on 10 EDTA plasma samples, 10 lithium heparin plasma samples and 10 sodium
28
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:37==
citrate plasma samples, that neither samples were measurable by the assay since
they were below measurement limit.
5.1.3
Determination of Assay Linearity and Accuracy
Assay linearity was assessed with four serum samples from healthy human donors.
A 2-fold dilution was performed, however only a 1+1 dilution was measurable in
limited samples due to low concentration of analyte. The mean value of the dilu-
tion recovery for all four samples was within 80-120% of the expected value (Table
5.2). Furthermore,it was evident that no sample dilution should be performed prior
to testing. Measurement was only possible with serum, excluding plasma samples
since all values were below the LLMR of the assay.
Sample
Dilution factor
Assay values
(ng/mL)
Adjusted values
(ng/mL)
Recovery
(%)
1
1
0.33
0.33
2
0.14
0.28
85
2
1
0.16
1.16
2
0.09
0.17
109
3
1
0.28
0.28
2
0.15
0.31
109
4
1
0.25
0.25
2
0.12
0.23
95
Table 5.2: Dilution recovery for four different serum samples.
Serum in Serum
Ratio
Expected conc.
(ng/mL)
Measured conc.
(ng/mL)
Recovery
(%)
1
1:2
0.39
0.34
86
1:4
0.39
0.28
71
1:8
0.30
0.23
76
2
1:2
0.39
0.39
100
1:4
0.39
0.29
76
1:8
0.30
0.24
80
3
1:2
0.41
0.40
98
1:4
0.41
0.31
76
1:8
0.33
0.25
75
Mean Recovery (%)
82
Table 5.3: Spiking recovery for three different serum samples. Acceptance is based on mean
recovery.
Assay accuracy was confirmed upon three spiking investigations. Firstly, the spik-
ing of standard peptide in serum was performed with both the 10 amino acid stan-
dard peptide and an extended 30 amino acid peptide (Table 5.4). While the 10
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
29
==PAGE:38==
amino acid peptide was undetectable in the sample, the extended 30 amino acid
was detectable with a recovery within the acceptance criteria of 80-120%. The
third investigation was serum spiked in serum (Table 5.3). The mean recovery was
within the accepted range of 80-120% and the test was accepted, even though
some of the individual recovery calculation were just below 80%.
Sample
10 AA in buffer
(ng/mL)
Expected conc.
(ng/mL)
Measured conc.
(ng/mL)
Recovery
(%)
1
3.517
3.68
0.14
4
1.952
2.12
0.16
8
1.069
1.24
0.15
12
0.494
0.66
0.17
26
2
3.517
3.70
0.17
5
1.952
2.13
0.17
8
1.069
1.25
0.16
13
0.494
0.67
0.16
24
3
3.517
3.76
0.25
7
1.952
2.19
0.24
11
1.069
1.31
0.21
16
0.494
0.74
0.22
30
Mean Recovery
(%)
94
Sample
30 AA in buffer
(ng/mL)
Expected conc.
(ng/mL)
Measured conc.
(ng/mL)
Recovery
(%)
1
3.320
3.48
3.46
99
1.873
2.04
1.93
95
0.953
1.12
0.99
89
0.475
0.64
0.60
94
2
3.320
3.47
3.76
108
1.873
2.02
2.00
99
0.953
1.10
1.03
93
0.475
0.63
0.59
94
3
3.320
3.56
3.59
101
1.873
2.11
1.90
90
0.953
1.19
0.97
81
0.475
0.71
0.58
81
Mean Recovery
(%)
94
Table 5.4: Spiking Recovery with 10 and 30 amino acid peptides.
AA; amino acid, conc.; concentration.
5.1.4
Biological Interference
Interference from biological components, such as hemoglobin, lipids and biotin, on
the assay was tested by spiking these components into serum samples. Spiking
30
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:39==
was performed with both high and low concentrations and interference of lipids and
biotin was excluded based on the analyte recovery within the accepted range of
80-120% (Table 5.5). Hemoglobin had a recovery below the acceptance criteria
determined at 71%. Thus, the assays capability of measuring analyte was not
compromised by lipids and biotin, while hemoglobin did show to interference.
Component
Biological sample
(ng/mL)
Mean Conc.
(ng/mL)
Recovery
(%)
Hemoglobin
Control
0.373
100
Low (2.5 mg/mL)
0.267
71
High (5 mg/mL)
0.268
71
Lipid
Control
0.324
100
Low (1.5 mg/mL)
0.313
96
High (5 mg/mL)
0.320
98
Biotin
Control
0.389
100
100 ng/mL
0.351
90
80 ng/mL
0.343
88
60 ng/mL
0.333
85
40 ng/mL
0.328
84
20 ng/mL
0.334
85
10 ng/mL
0.333
85
5 ng/mL
0.344
88
Table 5.5: Interference measurements of hemoglobin, lipid and biotin in one serum sample.
Conc; concentration.
5.1.5
Analyte and Antibody Stability
Analyte stability was assessed based on storage temperatures and freeze/thaw
cycles. Average recovery was calculated based on four freeze/thaw cycles for
each serum sample. Average recoveries were 105%, 97% and 107%, all within
the accepted range of 80-120% (Table 5.6).
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
31
==PAGE:40==
Freeze/thaw cycles
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Serum samples
1
2
3
1
2
3
Results ng/mL
0.18
0.16
0.17
0.21
0.16
0.16
Variation (%)
from first cycle
100
100
100
120
101
94
Mean (%) of variation
100
105
Freeze/thaw cycles
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Serum samples
1
2
3
1
2
3
Results ng/mL
0.18
0.11
0.21
0.21
0.15
0.18
Variation (%)
from first cycle
100
73
118
120
97
105
Mean (%) of Variation
97
107
Table 5.6:
Freeze/Thaw Cycles based on three different serum samples undergone four
freeze/thaw cycles.
Serum samples stored at 4°C, 20°C and 37°C, for 24 H and 72 H likewise demon-
strated high stability at different temperatures with a recovery within the accepted
criteria of 80-120% (Table 5.7).
Serum
4°C
0 H
(ng/ml)
2 H
(ng/ml)
Recovery
(%)
24 H
(ng/ml)
Recovery
(%)
48 H
(ng/ml)
Recovery
(%)
1
0.24
0.22
90
0.25
103
0.21
84
2
0.29
0.30
103
0.30
104
0.34
117
3
0.35
0.34
97
0.34
98
0.36
102
Serum
20°C
0 H
(ng/ml)
2 H
(ng/ml)
Recovery
(%)
24 H
(ng/ml)
Recovery
(%)
48 H
(ng/ml)
Recovery
(%)
1
0.24
0.24
99
0.27
110
0.26
105
2
0.29
0.25
88
0.28
97
0.31
107
3
0.35
0.33
94
0.33
94
0.36
102
Table 5.7: Serum samples stored at different temperatures.
The antibody stress test was based on storage of antibody vials at 4°C, 20°C and
37°C for 24 H, 72 H and 7 days (Table 5.8). These were tested on assay controls,
and LTL controls. The antibodies stored at 4°C for 24 H showed best recovery
with 100% and 92%, followed by storage at 37°C for 72 H with recoveries at 88 %
and 94 %. Overall, almost all storage condition showed relatively good recovery,
few demonstrated recovery just below the lower criteria of 80% (acceptance range
of 80-120%). Measurement of antibody stored at 4°C for 7 days was not possible
by the assay, hence no recovery was calculated.
32
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:41==
Recovery (%)
24 H
72 H
7 days
37°C
Controls
77
88
77
LTL
77
94
87
20°C
Controls
76
83
79
LTL
82
85
77
4°C
Controls
100
77
-
LTL
92
81
-
Table 5.8: Antibody stress test. (-) indicates in lack of measurement.
LTL; lot to lot.
5.1.6
Assay Robustness and Stability
The inter- and intra-variation was calculated from 10 independent runs. The inter-
variation, i.e. comparison of concentration measurements from plate to plate, was
determined to 2.5%, which is below the acceptance value of 15%. The intra-
variation, i.e. comparison of concentration measurements from duplicates, was
determined at 3.44%, likewise within the acceptance criteria of 10%. This intra-
variation is assessed on the mean of CV% for all samples. Thus, inter-intra in-
vestigations, together with assessment of slope, IC25, IC50, IC75(Table 5.10 and
5.9) and B/B0 (Figure 5.3 and Table 5.9) confirm the robustness and reproducibil-
ity of the assay. The LLOD for Arresten was determined as 0.075 ng/mL. LLMR
was determined as 0.150 ng/mL, thus samples lower than this will be assigned
the value of LLMR.
Parameter
IC25
IC50
IC75
Slope
B/B0
Mean
0.15
0.40
1.05
1.15
1.00
SD
0.01
0.02
0.06
0.06
0.07
CV%
8.35
5.18
6.108
5.408
6.70
Table 5.9: Standard Curve Robustness. Based on 10 independent runs during the course of three
days.
SD, standard deviation, CV; coefficient of variation, B/B0; native reactivity.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.3: Assay Stability: Stability of the assay based on the ratio of maximum RLU (B) and
background RLU (B0) for each of 10 independent standard curve runs.
std; standard curve.
Assay Parameter
Value
ELISA format
Competitive ELISA with chemiluminescence
IC50
0.40 ng/mL
B/B0
1.00
Slope of std. curve
1.15
Measurement range
(IC20-IC80)
0.15 - 1.05 ng/mL
Human serum
Undiluted
Inter-assay variation
2.50%
Intra-assay variation
3.44%
Test
Results (acceptance criteria 100±20%)
Dilution recovery
Accepted
Spiking recovery
Accepted for 30 aa and serum
Freeze/thaw
Accepted: Up to 4 cycles
Analyte stability
Accepted: Up to 48 H at 4-20 °C
Antibody stability
Accepted: Up to 24 H at 4°C,
Up to 72 H at 20-37°C
Biological interference
Accepted: No interference
Table 5.10: Technical validation data of Arresten assay.
B/B0; native reactivity, std; standard, aa; amino acid.
34
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:43==
5.2
Cleavage of Type IV Collagen
The product of in vitro cleavage of type IV collagen was tested in the Arresten
ELISA assay to investigate the specificity and elucidate which protease generates
the Arresten fragment. The type IV collagen cleavages were not detectable in the
Arresten assay, since all values were below measurement level.
5.3
SDS-PAGE and Silver Staining
The efficiency of the type IV collagen cleavage experiment was determined by
SDS-PAGE and silver staining. Increased bands were visualized from protease
products compared to bands generated with plain type IV collagen. However, no
apparent difference between fragment pattern was confirmed between the differ-
ent protease products. For all four proteases a fragment is observed at the weight
of Arresten 26 kDa, these are nevertheless observed as weak bands for MMP-2
and MMP-9. A more clear band is observed with Cathepsin S, while the clearest
is with Cathepsin L. The molecular weight of MMP-2 and MMP-9 was provided by
the manufacturer (Giotto Biotech) as 17.9 kDa, 37.7 kDa, respectively. Molecular
weights of Cathepsin L and Cathepsin S were not provided, these were calculated
at ~41 kDa and ~37 kDa, respectively.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Cleavage with MMPs. Buffer; MMP-buffer.
(b) Cleavage with Cathepsins. Buffer;Cathepsin buffer
Figure 5.4: Cleavage products investigated with SDS-PAGE and Silver Staining.
36
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:45==
5.4
Measurements by Arresten Assay in SpA
Cohorts
Two different SpA cohorts were measured by the technical validated Arresten as-
say. Cohort 1 encompasses 75 PsA patients, 58 axSpA patients and 79 healthy
individuals. The basic clinical characteristics of the 237 patients analyzed in cohort
1 are presented in Table 5.12. No significant difference was apparent between ei-
ther groups (PsA vs. axSpA; p>0.9999, PsA vs. healthy; p=0.2644; axSpA vs.
healthy; p=0.5950) (Figure 5.5).
Parameter
Healthy (n=79)
PsA (n=75)
AxSpA (n=83)
p-value
Age, mean (SD)
NA (20-60 years)
34.70 (11.58)
32.50 (12.41)
0.185
Gender, male (%)
41 (51.90%)
36 (48.00%)
60 (72.29%)
0.003
BMI, mean (SD)
NA
24.98 (9.34)
23.47 (7.68)
0.206
CRP mg/L, mean (SD)
NA
13.00 (16.70)
15.13 (20.92)
0.415
BASDAI, mean (SD)
NA
3.64 (24.85)
3.12 (21.70)
0.114
ASDAS, mean (SD)
NA
1.74 (12.21)
1.8 (12.14)
0.688
BASFI, mean (SD)
NA
26.66 (25.32)
23.31 (20.85)
0.298
HLA-B27 Positive, n (%)
NA
20 (26.67%)
75 (90.36)
<0.001
Treatment
Conv. DMARDs, n (%)
NA
46 (60.53%)
8 (9.64%)
<0.001
Treatment
Bio. DMARDs, n (%)
NA
29 (38.15%)
41 (49.40%)
0.599
Arresten ng/mL, mean (SD)
0.155 (0.016)
0.161(0.028)
0.158 (0.023)
0.221
Table 5.11: Patient Characteristics of Cohort 1.
Data are presented as mean (standard deviation, SD) for continuous variables, and n (%) for
categorical values.
BMI; body mass index, CRP; C-reactive protein, BASDAI; bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease
Activity Index, ASDAS; Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Score, BASFI; Bath Ankylosing
Spondylitis Functional Index, Conv.; conventional, Bio; biological, DMARD; Disease Modifying
Anti-Rheumatic Drugs. Differences between groups were assessed with a Kruskal Wallis test for
continuous variables, and a Chi-Squired test for categorical variables.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.5: Investigating Levels of Arresten in SpA Cohort 1. Comparison of PsA, axSpA and
Healthy Individuals. Normality tests were assessed by a D’Agostino-Pearson Omnibus normality
test. A Kruskal Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons was used to test for differences. All
p-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Cohort 2 encompasses 53 patients diagnosed with nr-axSpA, 40 axSpA patients
and 97 healthy individuals. The basic clinical characteristics of 191 patients an-
alyzed in cohort 2 are presented in Table 5.11. A significantly higher level of Ar-
resten was found for nr-axSpA patients, compared to healthy controls (p=0.0008),
while no difference was found between nr-axSpA and axSpa, or axSpa and heal-
hhy controls (p= 0.4224 and p=0.2916, respectively) (Figure 5.6).
5.12 and 5.11,
38
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:47==
Parameter
Healthy (n=97)
Nr-axSpA (n=53)
AxSpA (n=41)
p-value
Age, mean (SD)
38.11 (0.15)
36.54 (11.73)
34.58 (9.57)
0.157
Gender, male (%)
46 (47.42%)
29 (54.72%)
11 (26.83)
0.010
BMI, mean (SD)
25.39 (3.59)
24.95 (4.83)
24.95 (4.49)
0.764
CRP mg/L, mean (SD)
2.12 (2.73)
12.38 (20.85)
7.84 (9.16)
<0.001
BASDAI, mean (SD)
NA
1.71 (7.51)
2.34 (1.74)
0.160
ASDAS, mean (SD)
NA
2.21 (1.35)
2.13 (1.01)
0.536
BASFI, mean (SD)
NA
1.70 (1.66)
1.66 (1.86)
0.905
HLA-B27 Positive, n (%)
NA
43 (81.13%)
38 (92.68%)
0.093
Treatment
Conv. DMARDs, n (%)
NA
13 (24.53%)
6 (14.63%)
0.239
Treatment
Bio. DMARDs, n (%)
NA
2 (3.77%)
1 (2.44%)
NA
Arresten ng/mL, mean (SD)
0.156 (0.017)
0.170 (0.034)
0.160 (0.025)
0.007
Table 5.12: Patient Characteristics of Cohort 2.
Data are presented as mean (standard deviation, SD) for continuous variables, and n (%) for
categorical values.
BMI; body mass index, CRP; C-reactive protein, BASDAI; bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease
Activity Index, ASDAS; Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Score, BASFI; Bath Ankylosing
Spondylitis Functional Index, Conv.; conventional, Bio; biological, DMARD; Disease Modifying
Anti-Rheumatic Drugs. Differences between groups were assessed with a Kruskal Wallis test for
continuous variables, and a Chi-Squired test for categorical variables.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.6: Investigating Levels of Arresten in SpA Cohort 2. Comparison of nr-axSpA, axSpA and
Healthy Individuals. Normality tests were assessed by a D’Agostino-Pearson Omnibus normality
test. A Kruskal Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons was used to test for differences. All
p-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant. *** indication is p= 0.0008.
5.5
HUVEC Invasion Assay - Investigating VEGF
Induced Angiogenesis
Angiogenic properties of the Arresten peptide were analysed based on the basis
of cell migration, since this is a pivotal process during angiogenesis. E1 is a syn-
thetic peptide corresponding to the first 27 amino acids from N-terminal domain of
Endostatin [51]. E1 was here utilized as a positive control for anti-angiogenesis,
since this has been well-established in literature. Arresten is the 30 amino acid
peptide (Table 4.1). VEGF is a well-established key driver for angiogenesis and
Huvec cells are known to respond to it, hence its selection as assay driver. The
first control vehicle/10 VEGF is utilized to determine the maximal driver for the sys-
tem, while the second control, vehicle/vehicle, is utilized to determine the amount
of spontaneous migration. Subtracting these values gives a gradient window. Re-
sults are presented as mean of three runs (Figure 5.7). E1 was significantly lower
than vehicle/vehicle (p=0.0054) and significantly lower than vehicle/VEGF control
(p=0.0003). Arresten was significantly higher compared to vehicle/vehicle and
E1 (p= 0.0005 and p<0.0001, respectively). No significance were found between
vehicle/vehicle and E1, or Arresten and vehicle/VEGF (p>0.9999 for both).
40
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:49==
indicating successful inhibition. this was not the case for Arresten which was signif-
icantly increased compared to vehicle/VEGF control (p= an increase of migration
compared to E1.
Figure 5.7: HUVEC Invasion Assay. Investigating the angiogenic properties of Arresten in a HU-
VEC Invasion Assay. Mean of three runs. E1 is positive control for anti-angiogenesis. Arresten
is the 30 amino acid peptide. Normality tests were assessed by a D’Agostino-Pearson Omnibus
normality test. A Kruskal Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons was used to test for differ-
ences. All p-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant.Asterisks indications are
as followed: ** = P < 0.01, *** = P < 0.001, and ****= P < 0.0001.
HUVEC; Human umbilical vein endothelial cells, VEGF; Vascular Growth Factor.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:51==
6
Discussion
SpA is the result of chronic inflammation of the affected joints causing alterations
in turnover of the multiple tissues present in the joint. There is an unmet medical
need of easy accessible and quantifiable methods to detect these tissue changes,
and this thesis therefore focused on development of such methods.
6.1
Development of Arresten Assay
The developed assay is a competitive Arresten ELISA based on the Protein Fin-
gerprint™technology. The assay targets a neo-epitope sequence generated from
cleavage of type IV collagen, consisting of a 10 amino acids binding-epitope pre-
dicted from literature. A monoclonal antibody with high specificity towards the
neo-epitpoe was generated. The finalized assay was tested and validated ac-
cording to internal standards at Nordic Bioscience, which takes assay specificity,
sensitivity, robustness, reproducibility and accuracy into account. All parameters
that are essential for a clinical useful assay [52].
6.1.1
Assay Parameters
The standard curve is crucial for the accuracy of sample quantification. It illus-
trates the relationship between the signal that is measured and the concentration
of the standard peptide, which is representative of the analyte measures. The se-
lection of standard curve is therefore central in the application of the quantitative
assay. An optimal standard curve will increase precision, and will likely ensure
a broad measurement range. Assay parameters were chosen based on checker-
boards investigating different coater and antibody ratios at different incubation
duration and temperature.
Based on the desired signal to background noise ratio of 1:10, different concen-
trations and conditions were tested by conducting 16 point standard curves. All
serial dilutions followed a Sigmoid curve when fitted with a 4-parametrical model,
where concentrations are inversely proportional to the signal measurements. An
optimal curve was generated with a low IC50 value while the maximal signal, B0,
was maintained at its highest. Based on these criteria, the 50 mM PBS-BTB, 8 g/L
NaCl buffer with 3 H incubation at 4 °C showed the most optimal standard curve,
and was therefore chosen for this assay.
It is arguable that a low coater concentration is preferred in order to maintain most
optimal conditions for competition, since it is likely that the antibody has a higher
affinity for the synthetic coater compared to the the native Arresten fragment. If
the coater concentration is high it could result in that a majority of the antibodies
will bind the coater compromising competition. Nevertheless, the ELISA system
should be resistant to that.
An optimal and sensitive assay can be characterized with an IC50 value equal to
the samples of interest. This allows for competition since there would exist a 1:1
ratio and thus the system would be in balance. This allows for all the antibodies
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
43
==PAGE:52==
to be bound by either all the coating or all the serum analyte. Healthy human
samples utilized in the developmental steps were detected at the range of 0.16-
0.33 ng/mL which is low compared to the IC50 of this assay (Table 5.2). This
may be due to the samples are from healthy individuals, and ideally inclusion of
samples with higher Arresten values should have been applied. Nevertheless,
a biomarker should be able to provide yes/no information in regards to disease,
where undetectable levels of the biomarker indicate no disease. This might be
the case with the healthy samples.
Throughout the assay optimization process, the 16 standard points were reduced
to 11 points. By limiting the amount of standard points as much as possible, the
number of dilutions is likewise limited which decreases the level of systematic
dilution errors due to pipetting. It is recommended that a minimum of six calibrator
data points within the linear range including anchor points and a zero in order
to improve quality of the curve fit [52]. The finalized assay has a relatively high
sensitivity in the ng/mL range with an IC50 of 0.40 ng/mL. The measurement range
of the assay is 0.15 - 1.50 ng/mL where healthy serum samples are measured just
above LLMR. This could be a limitation in respect to performing measurements
on healthy donors, where a lower concentration of Arresten is expected.
6.1.2
Precision, Accuracy, Robustness and Reproducibility
Testing assay robustness, reproducibility and precision are further features neces-
sary in order to improve accuracy of sample quantification. These were assessed
through dilution recovery, spiking recovery and 10 independent runs.
Dilution recovery of this assay was within the acceptance criteria for human serum,
and confirmed a good assay linearity. Linearity is important for precision and
enables testing of different sample types with different analyte levels. However,
due to low concentrations of Arresten in the samples, dilutions were below LLMR
within first 1:2 dilution. Plasma samples containing either of the anticoagulant
agents EDTA, citrate or heparin, did not meet the acceptance criteria, and thus a
limitation in the assay is that such samples are not applicable. Spiking recovery
further elucidated how the assay remains unaffected by small variations such as
altered serum concentrations. The mean recovery of serum spiked into serum
was accepted at 82% , however, some of the individual recoveries at 1:4 and
1:8 ratios were determined just below 80% which is the lower limit of acceptance.
Spiking of standard peptide in serum was challenging using the 10 amino acid
standard peptide. Since this is a small peptide, a possibility is that is gets masked
by larger proteins within the sample, which decreases the probability of the anti-
body getting in contact with the peptide. When testing the spiking recovery of the
30 amino acid peptide in serum it resulted in a recovery within the acceptance
criteria. This indicates that short peptides may be difficult to detect within a pool
of various proteins. Based on the interference test, no interference was detected
by biotin and lipids. However, hemoglobin showed an interference with samples,
since recovery was determined at 71% which is below the acceptance criteria.
Hemoglobin interference is an issue if hemoglobin is insufficiently separated from
serum or if samples undergo hemolysis (lysis of red blood cells). This can occur in
association with improper sampling techniques, centrifugation and sample trans-
44
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:53==
port [53]. Hemolyzed samples are identifiable during sample handling by their red
color, and this is important to notice, since testing of these may cause unreliable
results and should be interpreted with caution and considered disregarded.
Recording and investigating measurements carried out over several days allow
for the assessment of assay reproducibility. The Arresten assay was assessed
to have high reproducibility by its low variation evidenced by an intra-variation of
3.4% and an inter-variation of 2.5%, both within the acceptance criteria. This was
further supported by low variations of IC25, IC50, IC75, slope and B/B0 ratio, all
values with relative variabilities below 10%.
Finally, assay robustness was also investigated through sample stability and anti-
body stress test. Measurements were performed on samples undergone multiple
freeze/thaw cycles in addition to samples and antibodies undergone extended
storage at different temperatures. Sample handling prior to sample analysis is
a crucial factor since it has the potential to alter measurement results. This is
important to investigate since samples are often collected at remote clinics as to
where analysis will be performed. Knowledge as to which conditions compromise
serum stability is a necessity in regards to how a sample should be stored during
transportation or until a possible need for rerun. Measurements conducted on this
assay showed that the assay is robust when analysing sample gone through four
freeze/thaw cycles and when analyzing samples stored up to 24 H at 4 and 20
°C, respectively. One source to poor assay performance could be that the anti-
bodies have been handled inappropriately. Most commonly, this is associated to
storage at wrong temperatures, repeated freeze/thaw cycles or light disturbance
of the HRP conjugation. Improper storage can denature the antibody which re-
sults in the formation of aggregates and thus reduce the binding capacity. Stress
test performed on the assay antibody with storage at temperatures 4 - 37 °C for
different time points causes large variations. At 20-37 °C it is observed that the
antibody has reduced recovery below the acceptance criteria, while storage at
same temperature for 72 H shows acceptable recovery. Antibodies stored as 4
°C for 24 H showed an acceptable recovery, while the recovery at 72 H was not
accepted. Seven days recovery was not accepted any of the tested temperatures.
This confirms the pivotal role of antibody storage and handling, also in this assay.
Antibodies should be stored at -20 °C since it showed acceptable performance
throughout the technical validation.
6.1.3
Assay Specificity
Assay specificity was established by testing the binding of the antibody with the
standard peptides compared to an elongated, truncated and nonsense peptide.
This test elucidated specificity towards both the 10 and the 30 amino acid stan-
dard peptide, since the antibody was unable to bind the other peptides. Little
reactivity was observed with the elongated peptide at high concentrations. This
reactivity at 7 ng/mL is far above the measuring range of the assay, why it is not
compromising assay performance or specificity. It can be argued that there exist
some pitfalls when testing antibody specificity by this method. By deletion or in-
sertion of only one amino acid at the beginning of the standard peptide epitope
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
45
==PAGE:54==
there occurs an alteration of the epitope length which changes its physical frame.
An interesting test could in turn be a mutation of an amino acid within the binding
epitope, by that the physical frame is maintained and could potentially represent
closely related peptides.
Even though synthetic peptides provide advantages due to known amino acid
sequence, they do not represent native 3-D structures or post-translational modi-
fications of native proteins [54]. Since the antibodies are raised against this syn-
thetic peptide, there might exist an affinity difference between the native peptide
and coater, the latter being stronger.
In summary, the antibody showed high specificity towards the two standard pep-
tides and is thus specific for the target of interest.
6.2
The potential of Arresten as a biomarker in
SpA
The finalized and validated assay was used to investigate the presence of Arresten
in two cohorts of SpA patients. Cohort 1 consisted of healthy controls, PsA and
axSpA patients.
PsA and axSpA patients are responsive to different treatments, including some
with no treatment efficacy. Hence, there is a need to separate the SpA subtypes
in order to offer early and efficient diseased-targeted therapy. The aim was to
test whether Arresten was able to separate the individual groups, which was not
shown by the current measurements. Additionally, Arresten was not able to sepa-
rate either of the disease groups from healthy controls. The mean ages are 34.7
years and 32.5 years for PsA and SpA respectively, which are representative of
the age at which SpA is typically diagnosed. Healthy controls were included as a
reference level and provided from the same university hospital as the SpA patients
and thus collected by the same protocol. The samples should be considered as
a reference level, due to the large age span (20-60 years) which does not cor-
respond to the SpA groups. Furthermore, it is evident that gender distribution
varies within the two subsets of disease. Within PsA there is almost an evenly dis-
tribution of women and men (48% men) and in SpA men are over-represented at
72.3%. This shows a significant different gender distribution between the groups,
nevertheless, it is representative of the gender distribution within the different dis-
ease indications. CRP levels are similar across the patient groups, which is also
the case for ASDAS and BASDAI. An ASDAS of 1.7-1.8 corresponds to a low
disease activity, which is also confirmed by BASDAI <4. This may be explained
by the fact that half of the patients are actively treated, and therefore have lower
disease activity scores.
HLA-B27 is highly prevalent in axSpA which correlates with the fact that HLA-B27
positivity is higher with axSpA patients compared to other PsA. Active treatment
may have may have an effect on the levels of disease activity and therefore also
an effect on type IV collagen turnover. Consequently, the amount of Arresten
released into the circulation would also be reduced [46]. The assay might not
46
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:55==
be sensitive enough to measure such low concentrations, which is considered a
limitation.
Cohort 2 consisted of healthy individuals, nr-axSpA and axSpA. The aim was
to test whether Arresten could identify SpA from healthy controls and whether
Arresten could seperate patients with axSpA evident on x-rays compared to nr
patients. Arresten was not able to differentiate axSpA patients from nr-axSpA,
Arresten was however able to distinguish the nr-axSpA group from healthy con-
trols.
While, this indicates that there is a lack of potential to utilize Arresten
as a biomarker in differentiation between non-radiographic patients and patients
axSpA, it is interesting that patients with no visual signs of axSpA based on X-rays
are significantly increased, compared to healthy controls. Patients diagnosed with
nr-axSpA, might represent an earlier disease state, and it could be speculated if
Arresten could have an involvement here. The mean age distribution in cohort 2
is at 36.5 years for nr-axSpA and 34.6 years for axSpA, this is also representative
of the age at which SpA is diagnosed within the population. There is a great differ-
ence in CRP levels between the groups. Interestingly, CRP levels are increased
in nr-axSpA compared to healthy controls, which is the same tendency seen in Ar-
resten levels. AxSpA patients had a mean value of 7.8 ng/L while CRP levels were
at 12.4 ng/L for nr-axSpA, both higher than the healthy individuals with 2.1 ng/L.
Here, it is important to take the high variation into consideration, since the CRP of
nr-axSpA has a SD of 21. ASDAS at >2.1 for both groups indicate high ankylosing
spondylitis disease activity, and this corresponds to CRP levels. BASDAI indicate
higher disease active for axSpA indicating higher disease associated challenges.
A majority of cohort patients received active treatment, which will likewise affect
the various above mentioned diagnostic scores. Furthermore, as mentioned with
the previous cohort, treatment might have an affect on Arresten levels in serum as
it is thought to represent the altered type IV collagen turnover taking place during
disease.
Similarly for cohort 1 and 2, it is observed that a vast majority of the measurements
were determined at LLMR of the assay. This could be a result of low disease activ-
ity or due to lack of assay sensitivity. In the case of the latter, assay optimization
may be required. This could be achieved by applying a new antibody to the assay,
since it is plausible that there is one with higher affinity synthetic peptide. Addition-
ally, one could have utilized samples from SpA patients when investigating and
defining the parameters of the assay. This could be quite challenging since there
usually is a limited sample amount, and great amounts of samples are required
during the developmental steps.
As previously stated, type IV collagen is the major component of the basement
membrane being one of the extracellular matrices. It is present throughout the
body where it functions as a scaffold for epithelial and endothelial cells and a bar-
rier between tissues [26]. Arresten quantified in a serum sample cannot be consid-
ered joint specific, since other tissues may contribute to the release of Arrresten in
the circulation. Base on literature, arresten could also be released upon tumor cell
metastasis. Remodeling of the basement membrane is required for tumor cells to
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
47
==PAGE:56==
reach vessels for migration [55]. This could potentially also result in altered type
IV collagen turnover, resulting in release of Arresten into circulation. Currently, it
is unknown if there exists a distinguishable trait to Arresten released from different
locations. When investigating neo-epitopes as potential biomarkers, it is this ex-
act trait of location-specified particularity that is desirable. This could be achieved
by investigation of the proteolytic activity occurring in disease, in this instance it
could be interesting to elucidate if Cathepsin S is highly present in the synovial joint
during SpA [28], compared to its levels in other body locations. In another study
with axSpA it was confirmed that collagen metabolites are released into circulation
from the diseased-affected tissue [42]. Interestingly, it was found that C4M2 was
higher in axSpA than in controls and that serum levels of C4M2 was increased
in AS compared to nr-axSpA. C4M2 is a MMP-12 degraded metabolite [26], and
even though C4M2 originates from the same collagen chain as Arresten, it was
not possible to observe same indications in SpA disease. This reinforces the high
specificity of each neo-epitope and how fragments of the same protein provide
different information of the ongoing homeostasis [43]. Local specific pathologi-
cal processes result in highly specific modifications formed by protease cleavage,
and the identification of this specific modification in the disease-affected tissue
may serve as a particular biomarker. Even though a specific tissue component
exists, in this case type IV collagen, it is not a matter of course that fragments
of this will be associated with disease. Rather it is the combination of specific
pathological events, post-translational modifications and tissue location. In fact,
it is unknown if Arresten undergoes post-translational modifications that compro-
mise the specific epitope targeted by this assay. It remains to be elucidated if
this specific 10 amino acid epitope, targeted by the assay monoclonal antibody,
is ’ released into the blood stream. One might speculate that Arresten’s signaling
responsibility, means it is quickly utilized in pathways associated with disease.
Biomarkers for disease assessment are highly demanded, especially in a disease
such as SpA. Earlier diagnosis is relevant to detect early changes, but the utility
of a biomarker tool to monitor whether the patient responds to a given treatment
could aid the need for personalized medicine. This will not only facilitate immedi-
ate patient treatment, but also be a useful tool to monitor treatment effect or the
need to change of dose or treatment type. Measurement of serological biomark-
ers is highly desired compared to imaging which is expensive, time-consuming
and not feasible for repetitive measurements. Arresten in humans is homologous
to other species such mouse, rat, pig, monkey and bovine, this means it has the
potential to be utilized in translation research and medicine, including pre-clinical
or clinical settings investigating safety and efficiency, or during drug development.
A biomarker, such as Arresten, could potentially be combined with multiple other
biomarkers to construct a panel with enhanced ability to assess structural changes
taking place in tissues.
48
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:57==
6.3
Cleavage of Type IV Collagen to Release
Arresten
Neither MMP-2, MMP-9, Cathepsin S or Cathepsin L generated cleavages of type
IV collagen were quantifiable in the Arresten assay, which may be explained by
an unsuccessful cleavage procedure. Silver staining demonstrated multiple frag-
ments of type IV collagen, which can be explained by the nature of the utilized pro-
tein that is extracted from human placenta. Furthermore, silver staining showed
that multiple fragments were generated from all four proteases. It appears that a
fragment at the weight of Arresten (26 kDa) is generated, which is clearest with
MMP-2 and Cathepsin L. One reason for unsuccessful cleavage of type IV colla-
gen, may be due to the complex structure of the basement membrane, making
it difficult for one protease to cleave at a specific site. Some proteins form multi-
valent complexes. This means that within a protein complex, a specific protease
might be designated generation of the first clip in the protein. This results in an
uncoiling/denaturing of the triple helical structure and allow subsequent cleavage
by additional enzymes. This issue could be addressed by pre-treating type IV col-
lagen with another protease such as pepsin [26] which could give greater access
for MMPs and Cathepsins to cleave at their specific sites.
6.4
Angiogenic properties of Arresten
Arresten has been described as a collagen-derived peptide with anti-angiogenic
properties [56], similar to its other fellow NC-domain-derived fragments, includ-
ing Endostatin from type XVIII collagen. Data from the HUVEC migration assay
did not indicate anti-angionetic properties. On the contrary, cells treated with Ar-
resten showed significantly higher migration than the anti-angiogenic control and
spontaneous migration. It could be speculated if Arresten elicits pro-angiogenetic
properties, since the 30 amino acid Arresten fragment increased cell migration in
this assay (Figure 5.7). Several proteolytic cleavage sites has been identified at
the NC-domain of type XVIII collagen resulting in the release of multiple Endo-
statin fragments. Endostatin is identified as a 27 amino acid fragment with anti-
angiogenic properties [51]. In addition to this, another fragment has been iden-
tified that showed pro-angiogenic activity by increasing migration of endothelial
cells [57]. These observations indicate that from the entire amino acid sequence
of Endostatin, multiple fragments can be released depending on the activity of
different proteases, possibly directed by different pathologies. Findings from the
HUVEC migration assay revealed that the entire human Endostatin did not af-
fect cell migration, which reinforces the hypothesis that Endostatin contains both
pro- and anti-angiogenetic domains. Arresten did not affect cell migration either
which may indicate that Arresten could contain different peptides as well. If this
is the case, Arresten would likely be highly regulated through excessive process-
ing, since these are necessary for directing its angiogenic properties. This further
highlights the specificity of each fragment generated from a larger amino acid se-
quence. When performing a Uniprot search Arresten is identified at one cleavage
site, however, due to its size of 26 kDa, it might be further processed within the
domain. It could be interesting to investigate if other fragments from the domain
exist, as it the case for Endostatin. It is possible that the specific 10 or 30 amino
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
49
==PAGE:58==
acid sequence of Arresten might not be of importance in SpA.
50
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:59==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, a competitive ELISA targeting the type IV collagen α1-chain peptide
fragment Arresten, was successfully developed. The technical validation criteria
established by Nordic Bioscience included proof of robustness, stability, speci-
ficity and accuracy which was all demonstrated by the assay. The Arresten assay
was assessed in serum samples from SpA patients where biological relevance of
the assay was not apparent. In the SpA cohorts no significant differences were
detected between PsA, axSpA and healthy patients. The level of Arresten was
significantly higher in nr-axSpA compared to healthy controls (p=0.0008). Thus,
Arresten did demonstrate some biomarker potential in this SpA subset. This has
to be further evaluated in larger SpA cohorts. The assay indicated lack of sensi-
tivity or low Arresten levels in samples, since a large proportion of the measured
samples were determined at LLMR. The identification of proteases responsible
for cleavage and release of Arresten from type IV collagen was not achieved. Sil-
ver staining demonstrated that cleavage procedure was unsuccessful, which may
be due to the complex structure of type IV collagen. Finally, evaluation of an-
giogenic properties of Arresten was discussed based on the findings of a HUVEC
migration assay, where indications of pro-angiogenetic properties were observed.
In conclusion, biological relevance in SpA was not demonstrated by the Arresten
assay. Further investigation is required to assess biomarker potential of Arresten
in SpA, and biomarker potential must be evaluated in other diseases than SpA
where pathological processes involve remodeling of the basement membrane.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
51
==PAGE:60==
8
Future Work
To assess biological relevance of Arresten in SpA and to determine its use as a
diagnostic, monitoring or treatment naïve biomarker a larger well-characterized
clinical cohort is required. Biomarker potential could be further elaborated by in-
cluding measurements of other biomarkers associated with SpA, such as C4M2,
to investigate correlation between biomarkers. Lastly, biomarker relevance could
be further assessed in other diseases where remodeling of the basement mem-
brane is involved.
More knowledge with regard to the role of Arresten in the synovial joint is required.
This could be facilitated by performing mass spectrometry on serum samples that
could determine the presence of Arresten in healthy and/or SpA samples. Addi-
tionally, this could be elaborated through immunohistochemistry of synovial mem-
branes with the monoclonal antibody (NBH-263) utilized in the assay, to illustrate
where in the synovial joint Arresten is present. A cleavage experiment on synovial
tissue would likewise reveal tissue-specificity in addition to aid in identifying post-
transaltional modifications Arresten is being exposed to. This would further aid in
clarifying the angiogenic properties of the peptide. Unfortunetly, we were unable
to obtain synovial tissue due to current limited surgery performance, but this could
very much enlighten the current knowledge gap regarding the Arresten epitope in
the synovial joint.
52
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Vera Golder and Lionel Schachna. “Ankylosing spondylitis: An update”. In:
Australian Family Physician 42.11 (2013), pp. 780–784.
[2]
Vinod Chandran. Pathway to biomarker discovery in psoriatic arthritis. May
2020. DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2020.1752667.
[3]
Joerg Ermann. “Spondyloarthritis”. In: Neurorheumatology. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2019, pp. 87–91. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-16928-2{\_
}9.
[4]
Jürgen Braun and Joachim Sieper. Early diagnosis of spondyloarthritis. Oct.
2006. DOI: 10.1038/ncprheum0296.
[5]
Hulda S. Hreggvidsdottir, Troy Noordenbos, and Dominique L. Baeten. “In-
flammatory pathways in spondyloarthritis”. In: Molecular Immunology 57.1
(Jan. 2014), pp. 28–37. ISSN: 01615890. DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.07.
016.
[6]
Alice Gottlieb et al. “Guidelines of care for the management of psoriasis and
psoriatic arthritis. Section 2. Psoriatic arthritis: Overview and guidelines of
care for treatment with an emphasis on the biologics”. In: Journal of the
American Academy of Dermatology 58.5 (May 2008), pp. 851–864. ISSN:
01909622. DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2008.02.040.
[7]
Esperanza Avalos-Daz, Judith Domnguez-Cherit, and Rafael Herrera-Esparza.
“Cutaneous manifestations of spondyloarthritis”. In: International Journal of
Clinical Rheumatology 7.1 (Feb. 2012), pp. 55–61. ISSN: 17584272. DOI:
10.2217/ijr.11.64.
[8]
Wolf Henning Boehncke and Alan Menter. Burden of disease: Psoriasis and
psoriatic arthritis. Oct. 2013. DOI: 10.1007/s40257-013-0032-x.
[9]
Seina Lee, Alan Mendelsohn, and Evelyn Sarnes. “The burden of psoriatic
arthritis: A literature review from a global health systems perspective”. In: P
and T 35.12 (Dec. 2010), pp. 680–689. ISSN: 10521372.
[10]
N. J. McHugh, C. Balachrishnan, and S. M. Jones. “Progression of periph-
eral joint disease in psoriatic arthritis: A 5-yr prospective study”. In: Rheuma-
tology 42.6 (2003), pp. 778–783. ISSN: 14620324. DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/
keg217.
[11]
D. D. Gladman et al. “Psoriatic arthritis (PSA) - an analysis of 220 patients”.
In: Quarterly Journal of Medicine 62.238 (1987), pp. 127–141. ISSN: 0033-
5622. DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.qjmed.a068085.
[12]
X. Baraliakos and J. Braun. “Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis and
ankylosing spondylitis: What are the similarities and differences?” In: RMD
Open 1.Suppl 1 (Aug. 2015), e000053. ISSN: 20565933. DOI: 10 . 1136 /
rmdopen-2015-000053.
[13]
Susanne Juhl Pedersen and Walter P. Maksymowych. The Pathogenesis
of Ankylosing Spondylitis: an Update. Oct. 2019. DOI: 10.1007/s11926-019-
0856-3.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
53
==PAGE:62==
[14]
Debby Vosse, Willem F Lems, and Piet P Geusens. “Spinal fractures in
ankylosing spondylitis: prevalence, prevention and management”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Clinical Rheumatology 8.5 (Oct. 2013), pp. 597–608.
ISSN: 1758-4272. DOI: 10.2217/ijr.13.37.
[15]
Maxime Dougados and Dominique Baeten. “Spondyloarthritis”. In: The Lancet
377.9783 (2011), pp. 2127–2137. ISSN: 1474547X. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(11)60071-8.
[16]
J. Brandt et al. “Studying patients with inflammatory back pain and arthri-
tis of the lower limbs clinically and by magnetic resonance imaging: many,
but not all patients with sacroiliitis have spondyloarthropathy”. In: Rheuma-
tology 38.9 (Sept. 1999), pp. 831–836. ISSN: 1462-0332. DOI: 10.1093/
rheumatology/38.9.831.
[17]
M. Rudwaleit et al. “How to diagnose axial spondyloarthritis early”. In: An-
nals of the Rheumatic Diseases 63.5 (May 2004), pp. 535–543. ISSN: 00034967.
DOI: 10.1136/ard.2003.011247.
[18]
Yuen Ling Elaine Au et al. “Disease activity assessment in ankylosing spondyli-
tis in a Chinese cohort: BASDAI or ASDAS?” In: Clinical Rheumatology 33.8
(July 2014), pp. 1127–1134. ISSN: 14349949. DOI: 10.1007/s10067- 014-
2729-5.
[19]
Lihi Eder et al. “Is ASDAS better than BASDAI as a measure of disease
activity in axial psoriatic arthritis?” In: Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases
69.12 (Dec. 2010), pp. 2160–2164. ISSN: 00034967. DOI: 10 . 1136 / ard .
2010.129726.
[20]
S. Garrett et al. “A new approach to defining disease status in ankylosing
spondylitis: The bath ankylosing spondylitis disease activity index”. In: Jour-
nal of Rheumatology 21.12 (1994), pp. 2286–2291. ISSN: 0315162X.
[21]
Dafna D. Gladman. “Psoriatic arthritis”. In: Moderate-to-Severe Psoriasis,
Third Edition. CRC Press, Jan. 2008, pp. 239–258. ISBN: 9781420088687.
DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.19144.1.
[22]
Silvia Menegatti et al. “Immune response profiling of patients with spondy-
loarthritis reveals signalling networks mediating TNF-blocker function in vivo”.
In: Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases 0 (Dec. 2020), pp. 1–12. ISSN: 14682060.
DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-218304.
[23]
Jasvir S. Khurana. “Bone pathology”. In: Bone Pathology. Humana Press,
2009. Chap. 2, pp. 1–416. ISBN: 9781588297662. DOI: 10.1007/978- 1-
59745-347-9.
[24]
Valerie S. LeBleu, Brian MacDonald, and Raghu Kalluri. “Structure and func-
tion of basement membranes”. In: Experimental Biology and Medicine 232.9
(Oct. 2007), pp. 1121–1129. ISSN: 15353702. DOI: 10.3181/0703-MR-72.
[25]
M. Schneider et al. “Basement membrane proteins in synovial membrane:
Distribution in rheumatoid arthritis and synthesis by fibroblast-like cells”. In:
Clinical Rheumatology 13.1 (Mar. 1994), pp. 90–97. ISSN: 07703198. DOI:
10.1007/BF02229873.
[26]
Jannie Marie Sand et al. “MMP Mediated Degradation of Type IV Collagen
Alpha 1 and Alpha 3 Chains Reflects Basement Membrane Remodeling
in Experimental and Clinical Fibrosis – Validation of Two Novel Biomarker
54
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:63==
Assays”. In: PLoS ONE 8.12 (Dec. 2013). Ed. by Effie C Tsilibary, e84934.
ISSN: 1932-6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084934.
[27]
Gaye Cunnane et al. “Synovial tissue protease gene expression and joint
erosions in early rheumatoid arthritis”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism 44.8 (Aug.
2001), pp. 1744–1753. ISSN: 0004-3591. DOI: 10.1002/1529-0131.
[28]
Akira Sugiyama et al. “Cathepsin S degrades arresten and canstatin in in-
farcted area after myocardial infarction in rats”. In: Journal of Veterinary
Medical Science 81.4 (2019), pp. 522–531. ISSN: 13477439. DOI: 10.1292/
jvms.18-0674.
[29]
William R. Reinus et al. “Arthropathies”. In: Bone Pathology. Humana Press,
2009, pp. 187–207. ISBN: 9781588297662. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-59745-347-
9{\_}12.
[30]
Erik F. Eriksen et al. “Serum markers of type I collagen formation and degra-
dation in metabolic bone disease: Correlation with bone histomorphometry”.
In: Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 8.2 (Dec. 1993), pp. 127–132.
ISSN: 15234681. DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.5650080202.
[31]
Valeria M. Dejica et al. “Increased type II collagen cleavage by cathepsin
K and collagenase activities with aging and osteoarthritis in human articu-
lar cartilage”. In: Arthritis Research and Therapy 14.3 (May 2012), pp. 1–9.
ISSN: 14786354. DOI: 10.1186/ar3839.
[32]
Achilleas D. Theocharis et al. “Extracellular matrix structure”. In: Advanced
Drug Delivery Reviews 97 (Feb. 2016), pp. 4–27. ISSN: 18728294. DOI:
10.1016/j.addr.2015.11.001.
[33]
Morten A. Karsdal et al. Biochemistry of Collagens, Laminins and Elastin:
Structure, Function and Biomarkers. Elsevier Inc., Aug. 2016, pp. 1–238.
ISBN: 9780128098998.
[34]
P. Poduval et al. “Type IV collagen α-chain composition in synovial lining
from trauma patients and patients with rheumatoid arthritis”. In: Arthritis and
Rheumatism 56.12 (Dec. 2007), pp. 3959–3967. ISSN: 00043591. DOI: 10.
1002/art.23072.
[35]
J. M.B. Sand et al. “Type IV collagen”. In: Biochemistry of Collagens, Laminins
and Elastin: Structure, Function and Biomarkers. Elsevier, Jan. 2019, pp. 37–
49. ISBN: 9780128170687. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-817068-7.00004-5.
[36]
Christopher Southan. A genomic perspective on human proteases. June
2001. DOI: 10.1016/S0014-5793(01)02490-5.
[37]
G. Cunnane et al. “Collagenase, cathepsin B and cathepsin L gene expres-
sion in the synovial membrane of patients with early inflammatory arthri-
tis”. In: Rheumatology 38.1 (Jan. 1999), pp. 34–42. ISSN: 14620324. DOI:
10.1093/rheumatology/38.1.34.
[38]
Gavin C Jones, Graham P Riley, and David J Buttle. “The role of proteases
in pathologies of the synovial joint”. In: International Journal of Biochemistry
and Cell Biology 40.6-7 (2008), pp. 1199–1218. ISSN: 13572725. DOI: 10.
1016/j.biocel.2008.01.024.
[39]
Zhao-Shi Zeng, Alfred M. Cohen, and José G. Guillem. “Loss of basement
membrane type IV collagen is associated with increased expression of met-
alloproteinases 2 and 9 (MMP-2 and MMP-9) during human colorectal tu-
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
55
==PAGE:64==
morigenesis”. In: Carcinogenesis 20.5 (May 1999), pp. 749–755. ISSN: 1460-
2180. DOI: 10.1093/carcin/20.5.749.
[40]
Robert M. Califf. “Biomarker definitions and their applications”. In: Experi-
mental Biology and Medicine 243.3 (Feb. 2018), pp. 213–221. ISSN: 15353699.
DOI: 10.1177/1535370217750088.
[41]
Matthias Jarlborg et al. “Serum calprotectin: A promising biomarker in rheuma-
toid arthritis and axial spondyloarthritis”. In: Arthritis Research and Therapy
22.1 (May 2020). ISSN: 14786362. DOI: 10.1186/s13075-020-02190-3.
[42]
Markéta Hušáková et al. “Metabolites of type I, II, III, and IV collagen may
serve as markers of disease activity in axial spondyloarthritis”. In: Scientific
Reports 9.1 (Dec. 2019). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-47502-
z.
[43]
Morten Asser Karsdal et al. “Novel combinations of Post-Translational Mod-
ification (PTM) neo-epitopes provide tissue-specific biochemical markers-
are they the cause or the consequence of the disease?” In: Clinical Bio-
chemistry 43.10-11 (July 2010), pp. 793–804. ISSN: 00099120. DOI: 10.
1016/j.clinbiochem.2010.03.015.
[44]
M. A. Karsdal, E. Delvin, and C. Christiansen. “Protein fingerprints - Rely-
ing on and understanding the information of serological protein measure-
ments”. In: Clinical Biochemistry 44.16 (Nov. 2011), pp. 1278–1279. ISSN:
00099120. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2011.08.1135.
[45]
Emma Altobelli et al. “Synovial Fluid and Serum Concentrations of Inflam-
matory Markers in Rheumatoid Arthritis, Psoriatic Arthritis and Osteoarthitis:
A Systematic Review”. In: Current Rheumatology Reviews 13.3 (May 2017).
ISSN: 15733971. DOI: 10.2174/1573397113666170427125918.
[46]
Natsja Stæhr Gudmann et al. “Type IV collagen metabolism is associated
with disease activity, radiographic progression and response to tocilizumab
in rheumatoid arthritis”. In: Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology 36.5
(Sept. 2018), pp. 829–835. ISSN: 1593098X.
[47]
A. L. Reese-Petersen, F. Genovese, and M. A. Karsdal. “The signals of the
extracellular matrix”. In: Biochemistry of Collagens, Laminins and Elastin:
Structure, Function and Biomarkers. Elsevier, Jan. 2019, pp. 321–339. ISBN:
9780128170687. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-817068-7.00033-1.
[48]
Marja E. Koivunen and Richard L. Krogsrud. “Principles of immunochem-
ical techniques used in clinical laboratories”. In: Laboratory Medicine 37.8
(2006), pp. 490–497. ISSN: 00075027. DOI: 10.1309/MV9RM1FDLWAUWQ3F.
[49]
Mari Aikio et al. “Arresten, a Collagen-Derived Angiogenesis Inhibitor, Sup-
presses Invasion of Squamous Cell Carcinoma”. In: PLoS ONE 7.12 (Dec.
2012). ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051044.
[50]
The Uniprot Consortium. URL: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P02462.
[51]
Robert M.Tjin Tham Sjin et al. “A 27-amino-acid synthetic peptide corre-
sponding to the NH 2-terminal zinc-binding domain of endostatin is responsi-
ble for its antitumor activity”. In: Cancer Research 65.9 (May 2005), pp. 3656–
3663. ISSN: 00085472. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-1833.
[52]
Paul Leonard. “Immunoassay Validation”. In: Immunoassays: Development,
Applications and Future Trends. Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd., Jan.
2017, pp. 89–113. ISBN: 9781351797351. DOI: 10.1201/9781315206547.
56
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:65==
[53]
Laura Heireman et al. Causes, consequences and management of sample
hemolysis in the clinical laboratory. Dec. 2017. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.
2017.09.013.
[54]
Jennifer Bordeaux et al. “Antibody validation”. In: BioTechniques 48.3 (2010),
pp. 197–209. ISSN: 07366205. DOI: 10.2144/000113382.
[55]
Jean A Engbring and Hynda K Kleinman. “The basement membrane matrix
in malignancy”. In: The Journal of Pathology 200.4 (July 2003), pp. 465–
470. ISSN: 00223417. DOI: 10.1002/path.1396.
[56]
Pablo C. Colorado et al. “Anti-angiogenic cues from vascular basement
membrane collagen”. In: Cancer Research 60.9 (May 2000), pp. 2520–2526.
ISSN: 00085472.
[57]
Lucia Morbidelli et al. “Angiosuppressive and Angiostimulatory Effects Ex-
erted by Synthetic Partial Sequences of Endostatin”. In: Clinical Cancer Re-
search 9.14 (Nov. 2003), pp. 5358–5369. ISSN: 10780432.
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix
Buffers utilized in experimental work
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:69==
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
61
==PAGE:70==
How to run Arresten Assay
62
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:71==
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
63
==PAGE:72==
Collagen α-1(IV) chain sequence
64
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
==PAGE:73==
Development and Validation of a Novel Highly Sensitive Biomarker to Investigate Tissue
Turnover in Spondyloarthritis
65
==PAGE:74==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a
printed text will look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no
information. Really? Is there no information? Is there a difference between
this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A
blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the
letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should contain
all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language.
There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelundsvej 1
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
