==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Thesis project, M.sc.
Supervisors: Ph.d. student Viviënne Mol,
Assoc. Prof. Gerd Seibold,
Prof. Alex Toftgaard Nielsen
Metabolic engineering of
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius
for the production of
volatile chemical compounds
Philip George Hau Sørensen
s153380
DTU, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
Bacterial Cell Factory group
January 24, 2021
==PAGE:2==
2
abstract
Biological production of the volatile compound butanone has long been of great interest
as a target for cell factory engineering, since this compound has many useful appli-
cations an industrial solvent. However, despite several attempts to produce butanone
biologically, no economically viable productions of butanone have been established to
date, which is in part a result of the fact that no natural pathway has been found
that efﬁciently produces butanone.
This thesis forms the basis for the creation of a
future butanone-producing strain of the thermophile Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius,
since thermophilic production of butanone has many potential beneﬁts, including lower
downstream processing costs, that could make the biological production of butanone
proﬁtable on an industrial scale. This thesis therefore investigates two fundamental
prerequisites for establishing butanone production in P. thermoglucosidasius: The ability
of P. thermoglucosidasius to produce high yields of the butanone-precursor molecule 2,3-
butanediol, and the existence of an efﬁcient enzyme for the conversion of 2,3-butanediol
to butanone. Strain engineering was performed in P. thermoglucosidasius to introduce a
pathway for 2,3-butanediol.
From fermentation experiments and subsequent HPLC,
no production of 2,3-butanediol was observed, but results indicate that this lack of
2,3-butanediol production was due to overly aerated cultures during the fermentation
experiments. Concurrently, a screening system was developed to test for the in vitro
conversion of 2,3-butanediol to butanone, in order to identify potential candidate en-
zymes for a future heterologous expression in P. thermoglucosidasius. The screening sys-
tem, based on an assay with the carbonyl-reacting 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH)
agent, was optimised to ultimately enable the detection of butanone in the range of 10-
500 mg/L. When using this screening system, none of the tested dehydratase enzymes
in this study was found to produce butanone. Although it’s difﬁcult on the basis of
the performed experiments to determine why no butanone production was found, bad
expression of the heterologous dehydratases by E. coli may be a cause of the lacking
butanone-converting activity. Overall, more work is therefore needed to be able to cre-
ate a butanone-producing strain of P. thermoglucosidasius, but an initial step has been
made.
==PAGE:3==
3
resumé
Biologisk fremstilling af det ﬂygtige kemikalie butanon har længe været et eftertragtet
mål inden for Cell Factory Engineering, siden dette kemikalie har mange brugbare an-
vendelser som industrielt opløsningsmiddel.
På trods af gentagne forsøg på at pro-
ducere butanon biologisk er det dog endnu ikke lykkedes at oprette en økonomisk
bæredygtig produktion as butanon, hvilket delvist skyldes at der ikke er blevet fundet
nogen naturlig metabolisk pathway der effektivt producerer butanone. Arbejdet i dette
speciale vil forme en basis for skabelsen af fremtidige butanon-producerende stammer
af den termoﬁle bakterie Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius, siden termoﬁl produktion af
butanon har mange potentielle fordele, heriblandt lavere omkostninger for oprensning
af produceret butanon, hvilket samlet set kan gøre en industriel, biologisk produktion
af butanon proﬁtabelt.
Dette speciale undersøger derfor to fundamentale forudsæt-
ninger for at butanon produktion kan blive etableret i P. thermoglucosidasius: Evnen til
at producere et stort udbytte af prækursor molekylet 2,3-butandiol i P. thermoglucosida-
sius, samt eksistensen af et enzym der effektivt kan convertere 2,3-butandiol til butanon.
En pathway for 2,3-butandiol blev derfor introduceret i P. thermoglucosidasius, og de re-
sulterende stammer blev testet i fermenteringseksperimenter med efterfølgende HPLC
detektion. Fra disse eksperimenter blev der ikke detekteret 2,3-butanediol, men resul-
tater indikerer at denne mangel på 2,3-butandiol skyldes for iltrige vækstbetingelser for
bakteriekulturerne under fermenteringsforsøget. Sideløbende blev et nyt screeningssys-
tem udviklet for at teste omdannelse af 2,3-butandiol til butanon in vitro, med henblik
på at kunne identiﬁcere enzymkandidater til heterologt udtryk i fremtidige stammer
af P. thermoglucosidasius. Dette screeningsystem, baseret på et assay med det carbonyl-
reagerende stof 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazin (DNPH), blev optimeret til at kunne måle
butanon med et måleområde på 10-500 mg/L butanon. Ved brug af dette screeningssys-
tem blev der ikke påvist nogen butanon produktion fra nogen af de testede dehydratase
enzymer. Selvom det er svært på baggrund af forsøgsdata fra dette projekt at fastslå
præcis hvorfor butanon produktion udeblev, kan en af årsagerne til den manglende
butanon-skabende aktivitet være at de heterologe dehydratase enzymer blev udtrykt
dårligt af værtsorganismen E. coli. Samlet set er der derfor behov for mere arbejde for
at kunne skabe en butanon-producerende stamme af P. thermoglucosidasius, men dette
speciale har taget de første spæde skridt mod det mål.
==PAGE:4==
4
foreword
This project was conducted as a 30 ETCS Master’s thesis project in the Bacterial Cell
Factory group at the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability. It marks
the completion of a 2 year M.sc. programme in biotechnology at the Technical University
of Denmark. The experimental work carried out in this project was completed in the fall
of 2020, with the thesis being completed during January 2021. Experimental work was
primarily carried out at the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, with
a few protocols being carried out at the Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
at the Technical University of Denmark.
acknowledgements
This project would not have been completed, had it not been for the appreciable help
and guidance by my supervisor Viviënne Mol, as well as the organisational work and
great feedback from my other supervisors Alex Toftgaard Nielsen and Gerd Siebold.
Viviënne in particular has been the source of many fruitful discussions to beneﬁt the
project, and she has been able to help with day to day troubleshooting of experiments
as well. A thanks should also go out to Fabian Stefan Franz Hartmann from the De-
partment of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, who helped me with mechanical lysis of
E. coli cells, as well as Ekaterina Kozaeva from the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for
Biosustainability, who has helped with guidance on the use of the DNPH assay.
Lastly, I want to thank all the nice collegues in the Bacterial Cell Factory group, for
their kindness and support during the past 6 months. It has been a pleasure to work in
such a well-balanced group.
==PAGE:5==
contents
5
contents
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.1
2-Butanone production from fermentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Thermoﬁllic production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius as cell factory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.1
Metabolic pathway for 2,3 butanediol synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Status on current efforts to produce butanone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Central technologies and techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
USER cloning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
HPLC-RI-DAD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine assays for determination of carbonyl
concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Aim and hypotheses of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1
Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Experimental design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
Introducing a metabolic pathway for production of 2,3-butanediol in Par-
ageobacillus thermoglucosidasius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Design of alsSD plasmids for 2,3-butanediol production
. . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Fermentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Butanone production from 2,3-butanediol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Selection of dehydratases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Design of dehydratase expressing plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.3
Lysis protocols and DNPH assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1
Producing 2,3 butanediol in P. thermoglucosidasius
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.1
Down-regulating expression of AlsSD genes during cloning in E.
coli seems essential for lowering the metabolic burden
. . . . . . .
44
6.1.2
Transformation and genome integration of AlsSD constructs . . . .
45
==PAGE:6==
contents
6
6.1.3
P. thermoglucosidasius fermentations to produce 2,3-butanediol . . .
46
6.1.4
Characterization of fermentation products in P. thermoglucosidasius
strains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1.5
Quantitative determination of produced chemicals and yield cal-
culations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
In vitro screening for butanone production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.1
Initial test of assay conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.2
Optimisation of DNPH concentration and volume . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2.3
Test of 2,3-butanediol effect on butanone detection
. . . . . . . . .
61
6.2.4
Final optimisations of DNPH assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2.5
Measuring the butanone production from dehydratases
. . . . . .
65
7
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.1
Characterising the P. thermoglucosidasius strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.2
Dehydratase screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.3
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
8
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
==PAGE:7==
introduction
7
1
introduction
The world is in need of new technologies in order to create sustainable production of
chemicals that are not derived from petrochemicals. This need of phasing out the use of
petrochemicals is a consequence of emerging environmental concerns over the use and
acquisition of oil, and the fact that the world’s reserves of oil is ultimately ﬁnite [1] [2].
In fact, while other oil consuming sectors such as the transportation sector is projected
to decrease their relative oil consumption in the coming decades, it is predicted that
petrochemicals will become the world’s largest driver of oil consumption, accounting
for almost 50% of the world’s oil demand by 2050 [2].
Biological production of chemical compounds from cell factories has the potential to
provide an alternative strategy for producing petroleum-derived chemicals, where the
carbon used for this chemical synthesis is derived from biomass. Since biomass can be
synthesized from photosynthesis using predominantly light and CO2, chemical produc-
tion from biomass will contribute towards creating a carbon neutral future by offsetting
CO2 emissions. Another advantage of synthesising chemical compounds biologically
is a potential energy reduction from the production itself. Since conversion of biomass
into chemical compounds has been optimised from nature to happen within temper-
atures that are tolerable to life, biological synthesis of compounds can often happen
at temperatures far below the temperatures needed to produce the same compounds
through conventional chemical synthesis [3].
One way to biologically synthesize various chemical compounds is through cell fac-
tory engineering, which is a ﬁeld within genetic engineering where genes of a produc-
tion organism are altered to either affect the function of existing proteins, or to introduce
genes encoding heterologous proteins (i.e. proteins that is not encoded naturally by the
organism itself) [4]. Ever since the birth of genetic engineering in 1973 when the ﬁrst
recombinant DNA was transformed into E. coli by Stanley N. Cohen and Herbert W.
Boyer [5], the ﬁeld has evolved rapidly. During the past two decades, synthetic biology
has emerged as a new ﬁeld, by combining methodology from genetic engineering with
insights from systems biology [6]. With synthetic biology came a new way of describing
DNA: As functional interchangeable parts, preferably with characterisation data from
previous experiments, that can be combined in numerous ways [6]. Combined with
technical advances in computing, which has led to a surge in Omics data [7], along with
the ever decreasing price of DNA sequencing and synthesis [8], we now have some un-
precedented opportunities for metabolic engineering, where creating and testing new
production strains has never been easier.
However, some challenges still remain for the use of cell factories for large-scale pro-
duction of chemicals. A major concern is the economic feasibility of introducing a novel
==PAGE:8==
introduction
8
biological synthesis for a given compound [9]. First of all, the current oil price is too low
to compete with the raw material and energetic costs for some bio-productions of chem-
icals [2]. Other bio-productions appear to be more competitive: Straathof and Bampouli
(2017) have made an analysis for a range of current petrochemicals, comparing the raw
materials cost associated with producing these compounds either biologically or from
petrochemicals [10]. In their analysis, at least 41 out of a total of 59 compounds had
a potentially lower raw material cost when produced biologically, compared to current
petrochemical production. However, their estimates are based on theoretical yields from
glucose, assuming that 100% of glucose metabolised by the production organism will be
converted to product. In practice, implemented pathways typically need to be optimised
through several rounds of iterations in order to attain yields that are high enough to be
economically viable [11]. On top of raw material cost, there is also some considerable
capital costs associated with building new fermentation plants for biological produc-
tion, which are needed since a lot of the current production facilities for petrochemicals
cannot readily be changed to accommodate bio-based chemical production [12]. The
improvements of the achieved yields therefore needs to be big enough to also offset
these capital costs.
1.1
2-Butanone production from fermentation
One chemical that is of interest to produce biologically is 2-butanone.
Also known
as methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), this volatile chemical has many different applications
in industry as a solvent [13], and furthermore, the high energy density of 31.5 MJ/kg
makes 2-butanone a potential biofuel [14]. In the study from Straathof and Bampouli
(2017), they predict a future production cost of 0.96 EUR/kg product, as seen in table 1.
This cost estimate is 0.56 EUR lower per kg product than the current cost for butanone,
which corresponds to a 58 % decrease in cost.
However, despite several attempts to produce 2-butanone biologically, there are still
no economically viable productions of 2-butanone by cell factories as of right now [11].
This lack of butanone producing strains is in part due to the fact that no natural pathway
has been found that efﬁciently produces 2-butanone [14]. Thus far, biological produc-
tion of 2-butanone has only been achieved by designing de novo pathways, using non-
speciﬁc enzymes, producing butanone in a side reaction.[14]. When looking at table
1, where achieved yields from bio-productions of current petrochemicals are compared,
2-butanone stands out as having one of the lowest achieved yields. Clearly, further opti-
misation is needed in order to reach yields for butanone production that is economically
viable.
==PAGE:9==
introduction
9
Table 1: Comparison of theoretical yields and potential future production costs for selected
petrochemicals. Also included in the table is the current yields that have been obtained
biologically for the different chemicals, and the difference between the current yields
and the theoretical yields. Yields are reported as kg product / kg glucose.
Chemical
Max theoretical
Potential cost
Reported
Difference from
compound
yield from glucose
EUR/kg product
yield
theoretical yield
Acetic acid
1
0.42
0.8
0.2
Acetone
0.483
0.87
0.11
0.373
Acrylic acid
0.800
0.53
<0.01
0.79
Adipic acid
0.749
0.56
0.05
0.699
1,4 butanediol
0.545
0.77
0.4
0.145
1-butanol
0.411
1.02
0.36
0.051
2-butanol
0.411
1.02
0.02
0.391
Butanone
0.436
0.96
0.01
0.426
Ethanol
0.511
0.82
0.50
0.011
Ethyl acetate
0.587
0.72
0.20
0.387
Ethylene
0.311
1.35
<0.01
0.301
Ethylene glycol
0.827
0.51
0.27
0.557
Isobutanol
0.411
1.02
0.35
0.061
Isobutyraldehyde
0.436
0.96
0.18
0.256
Isopropanol
0.444
0.95
0.24
0.204
Phenol
0.448
0.94
0.06
0.388
Propylene glycol
0.633
0.66
0.48
0.153
Styrene
0.347
1.21
0.06
0.287
1.2
Thermoﬁllic production
One way in which the production of butanone can be optimised to become economically
viable is through changing the bioprocesses for the butanone production. For this pur-
pose, it is interesting to consider the use of thermophilic production organisms, which
call for the fermentations of butanone to be run at elevated temperatures. Elevated
temperatures during fermentations generally has some attractive beneﬁts:
• Most cellulases, which are used to degrade lignocellulosic biomass in a process
called sacchariﬁcation, have optimum temperatures around 60 °C [15]. In a pro-
duction plant, the biomass will therefore be heated to 60 °C to allow enzymes to
efﬁciently break down the lignocellulosic polymers (such as cellulose or hemicel-
lulose) to monosaccharides that can be utilised by the production organism. If this
==PAGE:10==
introduction
10
step were to happen for a fermentation involving mesophiles, this digest would
need to be cooled down prior to use in cultivation, whereas for thermophiles, it’s
possible to either directly inoculate the digest, or to run the sacchariﬁcation and
fermentation simultaneously [16].
• The high temperature minimizes the risk of contamination, which reduces the
need for sterilisation [17]. Less strict anti-contamination measures have several
cost beneﬁts, one of which is lower capital costs of scaling up production. This is
due to the fact that current steam sterilization techniques demand that the reactors
are built of stainless steel, whereas cheaper reactor options will be available if less
sterilisation is needed*. Another beneﬁt is less downtime for the reactor, as the
steam sterilisation is a laborious process [17].
• Less need for fermenter cooling. As the metabolism from the production organ-
ism produces heat during growth, cultures often need to be actively cooled down
when grown in bioreactors [18, 17]. For thermophilic organisms however, the need
for cooling is reduced, due to the natural temperature difference between the ther-
mophilic culture and the surrounding environment [17].
Beyond these beneﬁts, production of volatile chemicals, such as butanone †, from ther-
mophiles has even more advantages. These include lower costs associated with down-
stream processing, as the volatile chemical will evaporate at the thermophilic production
temperatures, making it theoretically possible to continuously purify the volatile com-
pound from the off-gas of the fermentation [20]. This simultaneous fermentation and
product recovery can result in decreased product inhibition from having the product
accumulating in the growth media, and a decreased cost of product puriﬁcation, since
the product will be distilled continuously, thereby saving time by not having to include
a dedicated distillation step following fermentation [15].
Since 2-butanone is a volatile compound with unresolved potential to be produced
biologically, it is interesting to investigate whether thermophilic microbial production
of 2-butanone can be established.
The purpose of this thesis project is therefore to
create the foundation for a future sustainable production of 2-butanone using geneti-
cally engineered Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius. For this purpose, this study sets out
to investigate if it is possible to produce the butanone precursor 2,3-butanediol in P.
thermoglucosidasius. At the same time, this study optimises a screening strategy for eval-
uating whether a selection of dehydratase enzymes shows activity towards converting
2,3 butanediol to butanone in vitro. If it is possible to both create a strain of P. thermoglu-
cosidasius capable of producing large amounts of 2,3 butanediol, and ﬁnd an enzyme
*According to internal communications
†Boiling point for butanone is 79.6, according to [19]
==PAGE:11==
introduction
11
screening system that makes it possible to identify dehydratases with a high activity for
butanediol conversion, the foundational basis will have been completed for creating a
future thermophilic production strain for 2-butanone.
==PAGE:12==
theory
12
2
theory
2.1
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius as cell factory
For this project, the facultative anaerobe P. thermoglucosidasius was chosen as the target
organism, due to multiple beneﬁts this organism provides when working with ther-
mophilic fermentations. The fact that P. thermoglucosidasius is not an obligate aerobe,
unlike some other parageobacilli, is an advantage, since it allows P. thermoglucosidasius
to produce a range of compounds through different functional fermentation pathways
[21] under micro-aerobic conditions. Parageobacillus spp. are also known to be able to
utilize a broad range of different polysaccharides for growth, including hemicellulose
[21, 22], as well as aromatic compounds [23]. Consequently, Parageobacillus spp. has a
lot of potential for bioproductions using lignocellulosic biomass as substrate.
Additionally, several tools have been developed for genetically engineering P. ther-
moglucosidasius, making it a desirable host organism for synthetic biology applications.
Among these tools are different types of standardised genetic parts. For example, a
library of constitutive promoters have been developed for P. thermoglucosidasius, which
enables the ﬁne-tuning of gene expression on a transcriptional level [24]. Genome scale
metabolic models have also been developed for P. thermoglucosidasius [25], which enables
models to be made that can be used to, for example, predict yields of different platform
chemicals for growth on different carbon substrates [25]. Among these tools are also a
range of shuttle vectors, i.e. plasmids that can replicate autonomously in minimum two
different organisms, that allows for routine cloning to be carried out in E. coli, before
the assembled, ﬁnalised plasmid is puriﬁed and transformed into P. thermoglucosidasius
[26].
2.1.1
Metabolic pathway for 2,3 butanediol synthesis
It is worth noting that P. thermoglucosidasius already harbours a pathway for producing
(R,R)-2,3-butanediol (R-BDO), and that it natively produces butanediol, albeit at very
low levels [27]. The native pathway for R-BDO production in P. Thermoglucosidasius
can be seen in ﬁgure 1. In this pathway, pyruvate is ﬁrst converted into 2-acetolactate
by a reaction catalysed by the acetolactate synthase (AlsS) enzyme. 2-acetolactate is
then spontaneously oxidised to form diacetyl, which is then reduced by the (2R, 3R)-
butanediol dehydrogenase (BdhA) enzyme to form R-Acetoin.
R-acetoin is reduced
once more by BdhA, which results in R-BDO being produced. As mentioned, the native
production of R-BDO is low, which can mainly be attributed to the fact that the native
AlsS enzyme from P. thermoglucosidasius has a very low activity towards 2-acetolactate
formation [28].
==PAGE:13==
theory
13
Figure 1: Biosynthetic pathway for 2,3-butanediol in P. thermoglucosidasius. Native enzymes are
shown in in black, while red enzymes represent heterologous enzymes. The dotted
line from 2,3-butanediol (yellow box) to 2-butanone (green box) represents a potential
new step in the pathway to produce 2-butanone biologically. It is worth noting the
stochiometry of the different fermentation products from pyruvate: Whereas pyruvate
is converted into both lactate and ethanol at a 1:1 ratio, it requires 2 pyruvate molecules
to yield one molecule of 2-acetolactate
High speciﬁc productivities are needed in industrial biotechnology processes, and
therefore efforts have been made to optimise the 2,3-butanediol pathway in P. thermoglu-
cosidasius. In one study, Lin et al. (2014) tested different heterologous AlsS genes in
P. thermoglucosidasius, and found that the AlsS enzyme from Bacillus subtilis had the
highest activity towards converting pyruvate to 2-acetolactate [28]. Zhou et al. (2020)
[27] expanded on this work by demonstrating signiﬁcant increase in production of R-
BDO from glucose by using the AlsS enzyme from Lin et al., and introducing a second
heterologous enzyme to P. thermoglucosidasius. This enzyme, acetolactate decarboxylase
(alsD), had been found to allow some natural producers of 2,3-butanediol to convert 2-
acetolactate directly to (R)-Acetoin. Zhou et al. introduced genes encoding different het-
erologous alsD enzymes, from which the AlsD enzyme from Streptococcus thermophilus
proved the most efﬁcient.
Addtionally, as a way to direct metabolic ﬂux towards the biosynthetic pathway for
butanediol, Zhou et al. aimed to delete lactate and ethanol production by knock-out
of the genes encoding Lactate dehydrogenase (Ldh) and Alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh)
respectively.
==PAGE:14==
theory
14
For this project, genomic engineering will therefore be used to introduce both the alsS
gene from B. subtilis, along with variations of alsD gene. Additionally, the ldh gene will
be knocked out, as described in more detail in section 4. This project won’t attempt
to knock out both the ldh and adh gene, as was done by Zhou et al. (2020). This is
primarily due to the fact that ethanol production from glucose in P. thermoglucosidasius
is redox-balanced, whereas the production of 2,3-butanediol is not [27]: Fermentations
of P. thermoglucosidasius with 2,3-butanediol being the only fermentative pathway would
therefore lead to a redox imbalance, since NADH would accumulate from not being
converted to NAD+ by either Ldh or Adh. This redox imbalance would likely lead to
a diminishing growth of the P. thermoglucosidasius, as was observed in the Zhou et al.
study [27].
2.2
Status on current eﬀorts to produce butanone
As mentioned, attempts have previously been made to produce butanone biologically,
but overall very low yields and titers are obtained. To allow the biological production
process to be economically feasible, optimized strains are needed, initially made from
insertion of heterologous pathways followed by iterative strain optimization.
One of the most well-characterised methods for microbial production of butanone has
been to convert 2,3 butanediol to butanone through the use of dehydratase enzymes, a
process which has been included in the pathway overview in ﬁgure 1. This method of
producing butanone has been demonstrated in a wide range of organisms, including
prokaryotic model organisms such as E. coli [13], and eukaryotes such as Saccharomyces
cerevisiae [29]. The best result from a single organism has been achieved using the diol
dehydratase from Klebsiella pneumoniae, achieving a product titer of 450 mg/L when
grown on glucose [14]. A comparison of butanone produced from microbially expressed
dehydratases can be seen in table 2.
The primary dehydratase enzymes that have proven successful in producing bu-
tanone are vitamin B12-dependent diol dehydratases (EC 4.2.1.28) [30], which is why
Table 2: Comparison of different host organisms for the production of butanone and their max-
imum achieved butanone titers
Achieved product concentrations
Source
E. coli
151 mg/L (from glucose)
[13]
S. cerevisiae
2 mg/L (from 2,3-butanediol)
[29]
K. pneumoniae
450 mg/L (from glucose)
[14]
==PAGE:15==
theory
15
enzymes of this type will be screened for butanone production in this project. A differ-
ent type of diol dehydratases exists that are vitamin B12-independent, but dependent
on S-Adenosyl methionine (SAM) as a cofactor. Unlike the vitamin B12-dependant diol
dehydratases, these vitamin B12-independent dehydratases are known to be very sen-
sitive to oxygen, due to oxygenolytic cleavage of the enzyme [31]. They will therefore
not be investigated in this project, as a requirement to work strictly anaerobically is not
desirable at either laboratory or production scale.
Mechanistically, diol dehydratases catalyze their substrates as described by Abeles et
al (1976) [33], and illustrated in ﬁgure 2 Vitamin B12 (cobalamine) binding to the active
site will lead to a cobalt-carbon bond forming between cobalt and a adenosyl group,
and the subsequent addition of substrate to the active site will lead to a homolytic cleav-
age of the cobalt-carbon bond, which will form an adenosyl radical, as seen in ﬁgure
2-1. Once the adenosyl radical is formed, it will abstract a hydrogen atom from the
substrate, thereby forming a substrate-derived radical, along with a 5P-deoxyadenosine
(ﬁgure 2-2). The substrate derived radical will rearrange by transferring a hydroxyl
group from carbon C2 to C1 (ﬁgure 2-3). Once rearranged, the product radical will
abstract a hydrogen atom back from 5P-deoxyadenosine, thereby reforming the adeno-
Figure 2: Mechanism of dehydratase reactions. Adapted from [32]. [Co]: Cobalamin, E: enzyme,
RCH2: Adenosyl, Ade: adenine
==PAGE:16==
theory
16
syl radical (ﬁgure 2-4). The result of this rearrangement is the transfer of a hydroxyl
group to C1, which will now have two hydroxyl groups; this forms the basis for a subse-
quent dehydration, where the excess hydroxyl group is removed from C1, and the ﬁnal
product is released (ﬁgure 2-5). With the release of the product, the cobalamin-enzyme
complex is reestablished.
However, for this reaction to function correctly, it’s crucial that no undesirable side
reactions or escapes of intermediates from the active site occurs, since the regeneration
of cobalamin from the active site is dependent on being able to form a cobalt-carbon
with the adenosyl radical at the end of the reaction [33]. If cobalamin is not regenerated,
the enzyme is deactivated, due to the tight bond of cobalamin to the active site, which
can not be replaced by free, intact vitamin B12 by itself. Since side reactions for product
radicals does happen in diol dehydratases, this will often lead to suicide inhibition of the
dehydratases by substrates such as glycerol [32]. However, the defunct cobalamin can
be replaced by intact cobalamin through the activity of a dehydratase reactivase enzyme
[34, 35], which thereby restores the activity of the dehydratase. Thus, the dehydratase
reactivase enzyme plays a signiﬁcant role in sustaining dehydratase activity.
2.3
Central technologies and techniques
2.3.1
USER cloning
USER (Uracil-Speciﬁc Excision Reagent) cloning is a cloning technique based on PCR
ampliﬁcation of genes of interest, using primers with uracil-containing overhangs at
the 5’ end [36]. It allows for scarless, directional assembly of several DNA parts in
a single reaction [37]. These properties are due to the ﬂexibility in the design rules
that govern these primer overhangs, where any sequence of nucleotides can be used
to create 8 −12 bp complementary single strand DNA in the overhangs, as long as the
nucleotide furthest towards the 3’ end in the overhang is Uracil. When using USER
cloning, as illustrated in ﬁgure 3, the uracil primers are ﬁrst used to amplify the target
gene by PCR. The linear PCR product will now have incorporated a uracil nucleotide
on either side of the target gene fragment. A digest of the PCR product with both uracil
DNA glycosylase and DNA glycosylase-lyase Endo VIII, which are both formulated and
sold commercially as the USER™enzyme mix (New England Biolabs, MA, USA), will
result in the uracil base being excised from either side of the target gene fragment. The
nucleotides upstream of the removed uracil will then spontaneously dissociate, leaving
a single stranded 3’ end overhang on each side of the target gene fragment, which
will be able to hybridise to any complementary overhangs. If several USER reactions
are done in parallel, it is therefore possible to fuse several DNA fragments, depending
==PAGE:17==
theory
17
on how the primers are designed. The hybridised DNA fragments can be transformed
directly into E. coli, where phosphodiester bonds between the DNA fragments will form
in vivo.
Figure 3: USER cloning can be used to assemble two different DNA fragments, which in this
ﬁgure is a target gene and a backbone plasmid. USER cloning is done through PCR
using Uracil primers, followed by a digest with USER enzymes. The result is DNA
fragments with 8 −10 bp overhangs, that can then hybridise to each other
==PAGE:18==
theory
18
user-compatible cloning cassettes
Some plasmid collections have been devel-
oped that contains cloning cassettes that are compatible with USER cloning [36]. These
USER cloning cassettes are often based on a pair of restriction enzymes that, when com-
bined, are able to cut the cloning cassette in a way that leaves single strand overhangs
with a length of 8-10 bp [36]. These single strand overhangs will thus have a length
that correspond to those that are created by USER cloning. There are two important
design rules for these kind of USER cassettes: The cut site for the ﬁrst restriction en-
zyme needs to include a thymine in the last upstream nucleotide before the cut. This is
because Uracil used for USER cloning will always have adenine as the complimentary
nucleotide at this speciﬁc position. The other restriction enzyme needs to function as
a nicking enzyme, only cutting one of the two strands, which will result in the 8-10 bp
overhangs as seen in ﬁgure 4. In this project, the overhangs are created with the restric-
tion enzyme pair AsiSI and Nt.BbvCI, through the ProUSER plasmid collection created
by Calero et al. (2016) [38]. The ProUSER plasmids were designed to be broad-host
range vectors, and they are all compatible with the SEVA plasmid standard [39].
2.3.2
HPLC-RI-DAD
High-Performance-Liquid-Chromatography (HPLC) is a method for separating differ-
ent analytes on the basis of their chemical properties [40]. It is useful for measuring
the production of organic acids and similar metabolites, as the HPLC data will not only
provide information on whether or not a compound is present in a sample, but also
quantify how much of the compound is present [41]. Besides a column to separate the
different analytes, it is crucial to have one or more detectors for the HPLC, in order to
measure when the different analytes have passed through the column.
In this study, two different detectors are used for the HPLC analysis: A Diode Array
Detector (DAD), and a Refractive Index detector (RI detector). DAD works by having a
diode illuminate the HPLC-separated sample with light at a speciﬁc wavelength, usually
in the visible range (380-700 nm) and ultraviolet (UV) range (100-400 nm) [42]. Based on
the absorption of light of different wavelengths from the sample, it is possible to distin-
guish different chemical compounds from each other. The DAD is limited by only being
able to detect analytes that absorb lights at the mentioned ranges, and furthermore, it
requires that the mobile phase of the HPLC is not able to absorb light [42]. Organic
acids such as lactate, formate and acetate are known to be detectable by DAD, since
their carboxylic acid groups absorb light in the UV range, near 205-210 nm [43]. DADs
can also both be used to create chromatograms at speciﬁc wavelengths of light, or it can
be used to create UV-vis spectra for a given timepoint – This can be useful for identi-
ﬁcation of the compounds that has a similar retention time, but different absorbance
characteristics [42].
==PAGE:19==
theory
19
Figure 4: Figure illustrating the creation of 9 bp overhangs on a plasmid vector using two dif-
ferent restriction enzymes (PacI and Nt.BbvCI). Red basepairs in the ﬁgure marks the
recognition site for PacI, and cyan marks the recognition site for Nt.BbvCI. By chang-
ing basepairs in the regions marked with purple, grey, green or yellow, it is possible
to ensure speciﬁcity for the overhangs, enabling directional DNA assembly. Figure
originates from Frandsen et al (2008) [36]
RI detectors are as a broad method to detect the presence of a compound. It measures
the refraction of light in a sample and compares it to the refraction in a control sample
containing pure solvent [42]. Based on the calculated refractive index, the concentration
of analyte in a sample can be calculated if a standard curve of this analyte has been
made. The RI detector is therefore useful, since it allows for detection of compounds
with no light-absorbing properties, that would otherwise be missed by the DAD. Both
the mentioned detectors are non-destructive, meaning that the sample can be used by
additional downstream detectors following the measurements.
==PAGE:20==
theory
20
2.3.3
2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine assays for determination of carbonyl concentration
The use of 2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) for determining the presence of car-
bonyl groups in a sample was ﬁrst pioneered by Brady et al. in 1926 [44]. DNPH is
a hydrazine with a substituted phenyl group that has some additional nitrous groups
attached to the aromatic ring. The compound has a red to yellowish color when dis-
solved [45]. When exposed to carbonyl groups such as ketones or aldehydes, the NH_2
group of the hydrazine will react with the carbonyl group in an addition-elimination
reaction, as shown in ﬁgure 5, resulting in the substitution of the oxygen in the car-
bonyl group with the nitrogen from the hydrazine. This chemical reaction induces a
colour change for DNPH, with the colour of the resulting hydrazine being dependent
on which side groups the reacting carbonyl had. Aromatic carbonyls or α-β-unsaturated
carbonyls will generally give a reddish precipitate, whereas saturated carbonyls, such
as butanone, will give a yellow precipitate [45]. DNPH assays have been used in recent
years to quantify the carbonyl content of proteins [46]. In this project, a DNPH assay
will be adapted to detect in vitro butanone production, which has never been used for
in vitro production assays previously, to the knowledge of this author.
Figure 5: Reaction mechanism for DNPH reacting with a carbonyl group. Figure originally from
[47]
==PAGE:21==
aim and hypotheses of the study
21
3
aim and hypotheses of the study
This thesis aims to establish the groundwork for future butanone production using the
thermophilic microorganism P. thermoglucosidasius. The purpose of the experiments in
this project is therefore to investigate two fundamental prerequisites for establishing the
butanone production. These prerequisites are:
1. The biosynthetic pathway for production of 2,3 butanediol, the precursor molecule
for 2-butanone, has to be introduced into P. thermoglucosidasius. Furthermore, the
yield of 2,3 butanediol needs to be high enough to allow subsequent conversion to
butanone.
2. One or more candidate enzymes for the conversion of 2,3 butanediol has to be
identiﬁed. Consequently, a screening system to test such enzyme candidates needs
to be established.
The project was split into two parts that each try to investigate one of the aforemen-
tioned prerequisites, as illustrated in ﬁgure 6. Overall, the two sub-parts of this project
can be described by three phases: A cloning phase, a strain construction phase, and a
characterisation phase.
Figure 6: Diagram of the project plan and the project phases: The cloning phase (green), strain
construction phase (yellow) and characterisation phase (red).
==PAGE:22==
aim and hypotheses of the study
22
3.1
Hypotheses
This project is investigative in nature and is not hugely driven by the need to prove or
disprove a stringent set of hypotheses. Nonetheless, there are still some fundamental
hypothesis that can be set up for both sub-projects.
For the sub-project focused on
producing 2,3-butanediol in P. thermoglucosidasius, these hypotheses were as follows:
1. It is possible to transform and integrate the alsSD constructs into the P. thermoglu-
cosidasius genome
2. The engineered P. thermoglucosidasius strains containing one of the alsSD constructs
will produce more 2,3-butanediol than strains without this alsSD construct
3. The integration of fragments into the ldh locus will lead to a knock-out of the lac-
tate production, leading to a measurable difference in lactate production between
the wildtype and the constructed strains.
Similarly, for the experiments connected to dehydratase activity, the hypotheses were
as follows:
1. It will be possible to design a DNPH assay that will allow us to distinguish be-
tween different levels of butanone produced enzymatically.
2. A subset of dehydratases will produce amounts of butanone that is detectable by
the assay.
3. Dehydratases that have their α and β subunits fused will have a higher activity at
55 compared to their non-fused counterparts, as previously shown by Maddock et
al. (2017) [30].
==PAGE:23==
experimental design
23
4
experimental design
4.1
Introducing a metabolic pathway for production of 2,3-butanediol in Parageobacil-
lus thermoglucosidasius
For host organisms to produce heterologous chemicals of interest, genetic engineering
of production pathways are needed. In the following section, design considerations
are discussed for different plasmids, for which the purpose is to ensure 2,3-butanediol
production in P. thermoglucosidasius.
4.1.1
Design of alsSD plasmids for 2,3-butanediol production
A total of 18 different plasmids were constructed for this part of the project.
Each
plasmid consist of 6 or 7 DNA fragments, with each fragment having a speciﬁc function
as shown in ﬁgure 7, as well as in table 3. These parts were assembled through USER
and USER ligation (see section 5 for more details)
For each plasmid, one promoter of the three listed in table 3 is used. Pldh is a na-
tive Ldh promoter from P. thermoglucosidasius, that has previously been used to express
genes for 2,3-butanediol in P. thermoglucosidasius. Furthermore, the orthologous ldh pro-
moter in Geobacillus stearothermophilus is known to be functional both microaerobically
and anaerobically [48]. As the Pldh promoter is a native promoter, it may be subject to
regulation from the host organism. To avoid issues with regulation, the semi-synthetic
P3 promoter, created by Pogrebnyakov et al. (2017) [24], was used as well. This pro-
moter has a strength equal to that of the mid-strong, native groESL promoter from
Geobacillus sp., which the P3 promoter is based on [24]. Both Pldh and P3 are constitu-
tive promoters, whereas the Ptet promoter is inducible. The inducibility is useful, since
the continuous expression of the alsSD genes by a constitutive promoter might provide
a big metabolic burden on the cloning strains. The inducibility of the Ptet promoter
arrives from the fact that the promoter is repressed by the constitutively expressed TetR
repressor, unless the inducer molecule anhydrotetracycline (aTc) is present [49]. Its func-
tion has been validated internally in the lab, and results from these experiments indicate
that the TetR-Ptet promoter is very silent, inducible and have a high dynamic range in
P. thermoglucosidasius.
Each plasmid also consists of the coding sequence (CDS) for AlsS from B. subtilis,
which was chosen based on a study by Lin et al. (2014) [28], as discussed in section 2.1.
Additionally, each plasmid contains one of three variations of an AlsD CDS:
One variation is the AlsD CDS from S. thermophilus that resulted in the highest yield
among the alsD genes tested in the study by Zhou et al (2020) [27]. Another variation is
the AlsD CDS from B. subtilis, but with a T55A mutation introduced. A study by Marlow
==PAGE:24==
experimental design
24
Figure 7: Overview of the components used to build the AlsSD plasmids.
et al (2013) found that introducing this mutation into the B. subtilis alsD gene led to a 2.5
fold increase in Kcat, with no change in Km [50], leading to an overall higher catalytic
efﬁciency. It’s in vivo potential for 2,3-butanediol production has not been veriﬁed and
so is an interesting additional variant to test. The last variant of AlsD to test is the native
B. subtilis alsD, since comparison between the activity between this to that of the T55A
mutant will make it possible to verify the results from Marlow et al (2013)
For all plasmids, genomic integration was pursued, rather than having the AlsSD
constructs be expressed by plasmids. The primary reason for this was due to plasmid
stability: It is important to ensure that the plasmid is not lost during cultivation of
cells, and ensuring this by means of selective pressure from antibiotics is not desirable
for applications in the biotech industry. Antibiotics are not only expensive to use in the
amounts that would be needed for industrial bioprocesses [51], but the use of antibiotics
themselves would potentially contribute negatively to the current antibiotic resistance
crisis [52]. Furthermore, working with plasmid based systems will always cause some
copy number variations in a cultivation. For industrial processes, it is desired to keep
==PAGE:25==
experimental design
25
Table 3: Overview of the different fragments used to construct AlsSD plasmids
Fragment
Fragment type
Template
RepB-ColE1-dLDH
Backbone
pVM41 (ColE1-ldhKO-TetR-Ptet-sfGFP**-HISTCL-mRuby)
P15a-Km-RepB-KM
Backbone
pVM49
P3
Promoter
pIP3 plasmid from [24]
Pldh
Promoter
G. thermo gDNA
TetR-Ptet
Promoter
pVM45
alsS(Bs)
CDS
B. subtilis gDNA
alsD(Bs)
CDS
B. subtilis gDNA
alsD-mut-(Bs)up
CDS
B. subtilis gDNA
alsD-mut-(Bs)down
CDS
B. subtilis gDNA
alsD(st)
CDS
alsD-gBlock*
LDH left ﬂank
Homology region
pVM41 (ColE1-ldhKO-TetR-Ptet-sfGFP**-HISTCL-mRuby)
LDH right ﬂank
Homology region
pVM41 (ColE1-ldhKO-TetR-Ptet-sfGFP**-HISTCL-mRuby)
such parameters as homogeneous as possible, and genome integration offers a way to
keep the copy numbers of a gene relatively homogenous [53].
The two LDH ﬂank parts from table 3 are necessary for genome integration into P.
thermoglucosidasius. They serve as homology regions that will facilitate integration of
the genes of interest into the ldh locus of P.thermoglucosidasius through spontaneous
homologous recombination, thereby knocking the ldh gene out as discussed in section
2.1. This genome integration, illustrated in ﬁgure 8, happens by a two-step homologous
recombination event, where the entire plasmid, including antibiotic resistance marker,
is integrated by the ﬁrst homologous recombination. By PCR screening of antibiotic-
resistant colonies, successful integrations can be identiﬁed. Since no efﬁcient counter
selection systems have been developed for P. thermoglucosidasius yet, manual screening
of double-integrands was necessary. This screening was done by inoculating successful
colonies from the ﬁrst integration into a liquid culture, which was then passaged into
fresh media 1-2 times a day until the second recombination event occurred. For the
second recombination event, recombination can happen via either the same homologous
ﬂanking region as for the ﬁrst event, or via the secondary ﬂanking region. The second
recombination event can therefore lead to two results [54]:
1. Homologous recombination happens at the secondary ﬂanking region (Green ﬂank
in ﬁgure 8). The target gene is replaced, and the plasmid backbone, including the
antibiotic gene, is removed from the genome. This will leave only the gene of
interest integrated, effectively replacing the original target gene.
==PAGE:26==
experimental design
26
2. Homologous recombination occurs at the same ﬂanking region as the ﬁrst recom-
bination event (Cyan ﬂank in ﬁgure 8), leading to a reversal of the previous recom-
bination event, thereby reverting the transformant to a wildtype.
Figure 8: Genome integration via. a two-step homologous recombination. GOI: Gene of interest.
==PAGE:27==
experimental design
27
It is this risk of homologous recombination leading to the transformant reverting to
wildtype that necessitates a manual screening step following the second recombination
event. For this screening, it’s important to ﬁrst determine whether the plasmid backbone
has been lost by the host organism. As seen in ﬁgure 9, this is done by replica plating,
where cultures are ﬁrst diluted and spread onto antibiotic-free agar plates, forming
colonies. These colonies are then transferred to agar plates containing the antibiotic that
the transformed plasmid confers resistance towards. The plasmid is lost if the colonies
are sensitive towards the antibiotic, i.e. the colony from the antibiotic-free plate does
not have a matching colony on the antibiotic containing plate. Once antibiotic sensitive
colonies are identiﬁed, colony PCR (cPCR) will be used to verify the integration: By
analysing the size of the targeted gene, it can be determined whether the antibiotic
sensitivity is due to correct integration of the desired construct, or if it’s caused by a
reversion to wildtype.
Two different plasmid backbones were used, which are both designed as shuttle vec-
tors for Parageobacillus spp., since this allows for the plasmids to be cloned in E. coli
and then transformed directly into Parageobacillus spp. The ﬁrst plasmid, RepB-ColE1-
dLDH, is a high-copy number plasmid with a single kanamycin resistance cassette. This
kanamycin cassette was engineered to be more thermostable at 60 °C, but the modiﬁca-
tions consequently made resistance cassette less functional at 37 °C. As a result, selec-
tion for E. coli clones with the ColE1 plasmid is done at a low antibiotic concentration
of 6.25 µg/mL. The second plasmid backbone, P15a-Km-RepB-KM, uses the low copy
P15a origin of replication. A low copy number plasmid was chosen to counteract the
metabolic pressure put on the cloning strain as a result of having the AlsSD constructs
being expressed by the constitutive promoters Pldh and P3. There are two kanamycin
cassettes in P15a-Km-RepB-KM: One that confers resistance as mesophilic temperatures,
and one that confers resistance at thermophillic temperatures. This means that cloning
experiments in E. coli can be done with a kanamycin concentration of 50 µg/mL, which
is the standard concentration for E. coli cloning. However, the use of two resistance
cassettes in P15a-Km-RepB-KM makes this backbone almost 1 kb longer than the RepB-
ColE1-dLDH backbone, and since the transformation efﬁciency decreases with the size
of the transformed plasmid for P. thermoglucosidasius [27], the larger P15a-Km-RepB-KM
might prove difﬁcult to transform. It’s important to note that since the constructs that
are assembled into these plasmid backbones will eventually be integrated into the P.
thermoglucosidasius genome, the choice of plasmid should not matter once the gene of
interest has been integrated.
A summary of the different AlsSD plasmids designed and constructed in this project
can be seen in table 4
==PAGE:28==
experimental design
28
Figure 9: Illustration of the process behind identifying colonies with genome integrated DNA
constructs. 1) Replica plating is carried out to identify antibiotic-sensitive colonies
(dotted circle). 2) Colony PCR of antibiotic sensitive colonies can determine whether
the gene of interest has been integrated into the genome, by analysing the length of
the PCR product via gel electrophoresis.
4.1.2
Fermentation
Following strain construction, it is important to determine the effect of the different
genetic constructs on the pathways of the host cell. This effect is measured through a
fermentation experiment, where each strain is grown in biological quadruplicates. As
this is an initial screen, work is done in small scale, working with 250 mL shake ﬂasks.
==PAGE:29==
experimental design
29
Table 4: Table listing the different AlsSD plasmids constructed in this project, and the name
used for them in this project
Plasmid name
Description
pAls1
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)
pAls2
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)
pAls3
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
pAls4
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
pAls5
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
pAls6
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
pAls7
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)
pAls8
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
pAls9
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
pAls10
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)
pAls11
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)
pAls12
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
pAls13
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
pAls14
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
pAls15
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
pAls16
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)
pAls17
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
pAls18
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
Thermophile minimal media (TMM) with an added 20 g/L glucose and 0.05% yeast
extract was used as the growth media for the fermentation experiments. Ideally, only
glucose should have been added to the media in order for glucose to be the only possible
carbon source for the cell cultures, which is important for subsequent accurate yield
calculations done in this project. However, P. thermoglucosidasius has been demonstrated
in the past to grow poorly in the absence of yeast extract [55].
As a result, only a
low concentration of yeast extract is added, which is assumed not to have a signiﬁcant
effect on glucose yield calculations. The cultures were grown under micro-anaerobic
conditions by increasing the volume of culture in each shake ﬂask from 50 to 75 mL,
and by lowering the rotation speed of the incubator from the regular rotation speed of
250 rpm, which are used for standard E. coli cultivations, to 100 rpm. micro-anaerobic
conditions are crucial for the formation of fermentative products such as 2,3-butanediol,
as too aerobic conditions will lead to the available pyruvate being metabolised through
the TCA cycle [21]
==PAGE:30==
experimental design
30
It was decided to sample each fermentation cultures twice for HPLC, to determine
metabolite consumption and production proﬁle: Once after approximately 8 hours post-
induction, when cultures reach the stationary phase, and again after approximately 20
hours post induction. This was done to investigate any potential effects of prolonged
stationary growth on the metabolic proﬁle of the Parageobacilli.
It is expected that
any butanediol production will be visible in the samples from 8 hours post induction.
Measurements were also done for OD over time, in order to follow the growth of each
culture. For this, samples were taken every 2 hours for the ﬁrst 14 hours following
inoculation. Cultures were induced by aTc to produce butanediol after entering the
beginning of exponential phase, two hours after inoculation.
Using the experimental design described above, various strains were created and
evaluated by HPLC for their production of 2,3-butanediol.
4.2
Butanone production from 2,3-butanediol
A new screening setup was developed to test for in vitro production of butanone through
a DNPH assay. The dehydration of 2,3-butanediol to butanone in this project will be
carried out by diol dehydratases (DHs).
The DHs investigated in this study are all
expressed from one operon containing ﬁve coding sequences, as illustrated in ﬁgure
10. Three of these coding sequences encode subunits of the actual dehydratase enzyme:
Dhab1 ‡ encodes the α subunit, whereas dhab2 and dhab3 encode the β and γ subunits,
respectively. In K. pneumoniae, the three different subunits combine to form a trimer,
which then dimerizes with another trimer to form the active enzyme as a (α2β2γ2) het-
erohexamer [30]. The remaining two coding sequences of the operon encodes the small
and large subunit of the dehydratase reactivase enzyme [34], which has an important
function for dehydratase activity as described in section 2.2. To ensure the proper func-
tionality of the DH, the whole operon was used for the heterologous expression of
dehydratases in E. coli BL21.
4.2.1
Selection of dehydratases
Orthologs of the dehydratase operon from different organisms were selected on the ba-
sis of a study done by Martins-Pinheiro et al. (2016) [56]. In their study, the Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) was used to identify sequences with a high degree of
similarity when compared to a seed sequence, with the seed sequence being the well-
characterised vitamin B12 dependent diol dehydratase from Klebsiella pneumoniae. From
‡Different nomenclature exists for these coding sequences. “dhab1” may also be referred to simply
“dhaB”, with “dhab2” and “dhab3” being reffered to as “dhaC” and “dhaE” respectively, as seen in this
article by Daniel et al. (1999). [32]
==PAGE:31==
experimental design
31
Figure 10: Structure of the dehydratase operons used in this project: Three coding sequences
(dhab1, 2 and 3) encode the dehydratase enzyme, while dhaF and dgaG encode
subunits of the important dehydratase reactivase
a total of 2000 complete genomes analysed by Martins-Pinheiro et al., they identiﬁed
48 regulons containing the complete set of genes needed for the reduction of glycerol
to 1,3-propanediol – which is a pathway involving only two operons: The dehydratase
operon as depicted in ﬁgure 10, that converts glycerol to 3-hydroxypropoinaldehyde
(3-HPA). And a separately transcribed dhaT gene, that encodes a dehydrogenase that
converts 3-HPA to 1,3 propanediol. All 48 regulons identiﬁed in the study thus con-
tained a complete, diol dehydratase-encoding operon. The dhab1-dhab3 genes from the
complete operons were found to show a high degree of sequence similarity §, and fur-
thermore, multiple of the complete operons had a conserved order and orientation of
the individual genes of the operon. This similarity was consistent, not only across dif-
ferent prokaryotic phyla, but even across domains of life, as a copy of the complete DH
§All dhab13 genes had above 60 % similarity with seed sequence
==PAGE:32==
experimental design
32
Figure 11: Visualisation of a multiple sequence alignment of the α-subunit of the different de-
hydratases. The black box indicates the position of the conserved T200 amino acid,
that is mutated to serine for one of the dehydratase variants. Alignment was made
using the MUSCLE algorithm [58], and visualised using the open source software
MSAviewer [59]
operon was found in the archaea Halalkalicoccus jeotgali B3. The sequence similarity and
common genomic conﬁguration of the dehydratase operon indicate propagation of the
operon through horizontal gene transfer events. This is an advantage for this study, as
the similarity between different dehydratase operons supports an assumption that the
enzymes encoded by these genes will have similar properties. For example, the K. pneu-
monia dehydratase is oxygen insensitive [57], and from the high sequence similarity it is
acceptable to assume the mechanism of all selected dehydratases to be similar. As such,
the other dehydratase operons should also be insensitive to oxygen. To illustrate the
high degree of sequence similarity, a multiple sequence alignment of the dehydratase
α-subunit is shown in ﬁgure 11.
From the 48 candidate dehydratase operons, 10 operons were selected for use in this
study, based on these criteria:
• The DH from K. pneumonia was selected and used as a positive control in this
project, since this dehydratase is one of the most characterized enzymes for the
convertion of 2,3 butanediol to butanone, as mentioned previously in section 2.2.
• The DH operons from P. thermoglucosidasius, Acetobacterium woodii, Lactobacillus
brevis and Lactobacillus reuteri was selected based on availability, since genomic
DNA samples for these organisms were already present in the lab in the beginning
of the project.
• The Halalkalicoccus jeotgali B3 DH was chosen, since this archaeon is very distantly
related to the remaining organisms from which DHs were isolated for this project.
Including this DH is therefore interesting from an evolutionary perspective.
==PAGE:33==
experimental design
33
• The remaining DHs were selected from the organisms Clostridium perfringens, Propi-
onibacterium freundenreichii and Citrobacter freundii on the basis of these DHs having
varying degrees of sequence similarity to the positive control DH from K. pneumo-
nia: 91.0%, 83.6% and 97.3% respectively. ¶
For cloning purposes, the native DH operon was used in its entirety, in order to
simplify the cloning reactions as much as possible. Besides investigating the butanone
production from native versions of each dehydratase, modiﬁed versions of each dehy-
dratase was also made, as seen in ﬁgure 12.
Thus, for all the 10 dehydratases used in this study, a variant was made for which
the α and β subunits of the dehydratase was translationally fused by a peptide linker.
This modiﬁcation has been proven by Maddock et al.(2007) [30] to increase the optimum
temperature of the K. pneumoniae diol dehydratase, from 37 °C for the unlinked enzyme,
to 57 °C for the fused dehydratase. The peptide linker used for this fusion had the
sequence G(PT)4T(PT)7G, which results in a relatively rigid conformation due to the
proline content [30], while still retaining a length similar to that of the widely used
(G4S)4 linker. In this project, the (G4S)4 linker was used, since this is a ﬂexible peptide
linker that is known to allow for separate functional domains to move independently
from each other [60]. Since the (G4S)4 linker doesn’t affect the activity of functional
domains, it’s less enzyme speciﬁc compared to more rigid linkers. Generally speaking,
proline-rich rigid linkers are mostly useful when the spatial separation of the different
protein domains is critical to the bioactivity of the enzyme [60]. But since there’s no strict
requirement for the DH subunits to be separated by a speciﬁed distance, the ﬂexible
(G4S)4 linker is a better choice to use for the broad set of dehydratses tested in this
project. Furthermore, the (G4S)4 linker has already been used in studies that predates
the Maddock et al. (2017) study, where the α and β sub-units of the K. pneumoniae diol
dehydratase was fused [61].
The Maddock et al.(2017) paper also found that when a T200S mutation was intro-
duced to the K. pneumoniae diol dehydratase, the catalytic efﬁciency as measured by
Kcat/Km was increased 3.6 fold for the conversion of meso-2,3-butanediol [30]. This
result was found to be primarily due to a decrease in the Km constant for the T200S
enzyme when compared to the wildtype enzyme. Due to time constraints, it was not
possible to test this mutation for all 20 DH-variants, so the mutation was therefore tested
only for the positive control of the K. pneumoniae dehydratase constructs, since it was
this variation that has been published before. Interestingly, when looking at ﬁgure 11,
it’s clear that the threonine at position 200 in the enzyme is conserved for all the tested
¶Sequence similarity calculated from pariwise alingments of α subunits, usnig the EMBOSS Needle
web tool [58]
==PAGE:34==
experimental design
34
Figure 12: Overview of the three different versions of dehydratase constructs tested in this
project. A: Native DH operons extracted from gDNA samples by PCR. B: Modiﬁ-
cation to the native DH operon, where the genes encoding the α and β subunit of the
DH enzyme is fused. C: Modiﬁcation speciﬁcally for the K. pneumoniae DH, where a
T200S mutation is introduced in the gene encoding the α subunit of the DH enzyme
dehydratases, so it possible that this mutation will lead to a gain-of-function in some of
the dehydratase variants as well.
A summary of the speciﬁc dehydratase variations tested in this project can be seen in
table 5. This table also includes the name that each dehydratase construct will refer to
during this study.
4.2.2
Design of dehydratase expressing plasmids
For the 22 different DH variant tested in this project, each variant was assembled into a
plasmid by USER cloning. Unlike for the alsSD plasmids, the construction of DH plas-
mids was done by assembling the PCR-ampliﬁed DH fragments from genomic DNA
directly into a pre-digested ProUSER vector (pVM50). The pVM50 plasmid contains a
==PAGE:35==
experimental design
35
Table 5: Table listing the different dehydratase variants, and the name used for them in this
project
Construct name
Originates from organism
Modiﬁcation
DH1
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius
None
DH2
Acetobacterium woodii
None
DH3
Lactobacillus brevis
None
DH4
Lactobacillus reuteri
None
DH5
Thermoanaerobacterium saccharolyticum
None
DH6
Klebsiella pneumonia
None
DH7
Klebsiella pneumonia
T200S mutation in dhab1
DH8
Clostridium perfringens
None
DH9
Propionibacterium freundenreichii
None
DH10
Citrobacter freundii
None
DH11
Halalkalicoccus jeotgali B3
None
DH12
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius
α-β subunit fusion
DH13
Acetobacterium woodii
α-β fusion
DH14
Lactobacillus brevis
α-β fusion
DH15
Lactobacillus reuteri
α-β fusion
DH16
Thermoanaerobacterium saccharolyticum
α-β fusion
DH17
Klebsiella pneumonia
α-β fusion
DH18
Klebsiella pneumonia
α-β fusion + T200S mutation in dhab1
DH19
Clostridium perfringens
α-β fusion
DH20
Propionibacterium freundenreichii
α-β fusion
DH21
Citrobacter freundii
α-β fusion
DH22
Halalkalicoccus jeotgali B3
α-β fusion
USER-cloning cassette that can be prepared for USER cloning by digest with the restric-
tion enzymes AsiSI and Nt.BbvCI. Furthermore, the pVM50 plasmid contains a gen-
tamycin resistance cassette, along with a pBBR1 origin of replication, which is meant
for broad-host range plasmids [62]. Once assembled into plasmids, expression of the
different DH genes was controlled by the same TetR-Ptet promoter as was used for a
portion of the alsSD plasmids, thereby ensuring that expression of the DH genes would
be under strict repression until induced with aTc.
The actual expression of the dehydratases from the designed expression plasmids
was carried out using E. coli BL21 (DE3) as a host organism. This organism was chosen
since its well-characterised for experiments involving overexpression of heterologous
enzymes, and since several previous studies to express diol-dehydratases heterologically
have used E. coli BL21 [30, 60]. E. coli BL21 is well-suited for heterologous enzyme
==PAGE:36==
experimental design
36
expression, since it contains a copy of a viral T7 RNA polymerase, which enables a high
expression of heterologous enzymes [63].
4.2.3
Lysis protocols and DNPH assay
An overarching objective of the screening system developed in this study is to allow
for future high-throughput applications. The selected lysis methods reﬂect this, and
consequently, lysis techniques such as soniﬁcation were left out, due to the limited
capacity for these lysis methods [64], making it undesirable for scaling up the number
of samples being lysed using these methods. Low throughput is also one of the main
reasons behind the decision to not purify the DHs from the cell lysates, despite enzyme
puriﬁcation being done in previous studies on the production of butanone by DHs
[14, 30]. However, the aim of these studies was to measure the activity of either a single
or a few DH enzymes, and therefore, low-throughput was not a limiting factor for these
studies.
Of the reviewed lysis methods, chemical lysis by lysis buffer was deemed the best op-
tion for high-throughput experiments, since it requires no use of instruments that would
otherwise limit the capacity of samples being lysed, and can be performed in multi-well
formats. The lysis buffer (see recipe in section 5) was adapted from a standard E. coli
lysis protocol, but excluding any denaturing agents, since the tested dehydratases are
multi-subunit enzymes. The chelating compound EDTA was left out as well, as it se-
questers divalent metal ions such as Ca22+ [65]. Diol dehydratases are known to be
metalloenzymes that have a requirement for Ca2+ ions in order to function [66]. How-
ever, there is a risk that the chemical lysis buffer used will denature the DH enzymes
regardless, and so to mitigate this risk, an additional, mechanical lysis method was
tested in this project as control. For the mechanical lysis, cells were homogenized using
glass beads, as this method has proven to be efﬁcient and cost effective when compared
to other lysis methods for E. coli [67]. Furthermore, with beads milling lysis, it’s possi-
ble to process multiple samples simultaneously, unlike methods such as high-pressure
homogenisation.
The resulting protein concentration from both lysis methods is determined by a Brad-
ford assay bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard [68]. The Bradford assay will not
only provide a basis for the comparison the two of lysis methods, but it also allows for
the DNPH assay samples to be normalised (roughly) in regards to the amount protein
added.
The DNPH assay was chosen as the butanone-determining assay for this project, be-
cause of the potential for applying this assay to high-throughput experiments. As a
colorimetric assay, it should be well suited for testing several parallel reactions simul-
taneously. In this project, testing will be done in clear-bottomed 96-well plates, where
==PAGE:37==
materials and methods
37
absorbance measurements from a plate reader should be able to determine the amount
of DNPH agent that has reacted with the butanone from each sample.
5
materials and methods
Strains and media
Escherichia coli strain DH5-αλpir was chosen as the host organism for construction and
propagation of plasmids. Clones containing constructed plasmids were selected for by
using Lysogeny Broth (LB) agar plates containing antibiotics with the concentration indi-
cated in table 6. Correct clones were cultured in liquid 2YT media containing antibiotics
for propagation of the cloned plasmids.
For dehydratase-expression experiments, E. coli strain BL21 (DE3) was used. E. coli
BL21 was grown on either LB-agar plates or in liquid LB, and for transformants, selec-
tion for transformed plasmids was done at a concentration of 10 µg/mL gentamycin.
For experiments in Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius, strain DSM2542 was used. BBL™
Trypticase™soy agar (TSA) media blend (Becton Dickinson, NJ, USA) was used to make
agar plates for Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius experiments. Plates contained either
kanamycin (12.5 µg/mL) or no antibiotics. Liquid SPY media (16 g/L Soy peptone, 10
g/L yeast extract, 5 g/L NaCl, adjusted to pH 7.0 and ﬁlter sterilised) or SPYG media
(SPY + 1% glycerol) was used for liquid cultures of P. thermoglucosidasius. For fermenta-
tion experiments, TMM media || was used with an additional 20 g/L glucose and 0.05%
yeast extract added.
||As described by Fong et al. (2006) [69]
Table 6: Overview of the different antibiotics used in this project
Antibiotic
Concentration
Application
Gentamycin
10 µg/mL
Selection of DH plasmids in E.coli DH5-α and BL21
Kanamycin
12.5 µg/mL
Selection of AlsSD plasmids in P. thermoglucosidasius
Kanamycin
6.25 µg/mL
Selection of AlsSD plasmids with ColE1 backbones in E.coli DH5-α
Kanamycin
50µg/mL
Selection of AlsSD plasmids with P15a backbones in E.coli DH5-α
==PAGE:38==
materials and methods
38
DNA puriﬁcation
Plasmid puriﬁcations were all done with the NucleoSpin® Plasmid EasyPure, Mini kit
(Macherey-Nagel GmbH and Co. KG, Germany) by adding twice the volume of each
buffer per sample as stated in manufacturer’s standard protocol. For puriﬁcation of
DNA from agarose gels, a NucleoSpin® Gel and PCR Clean-up, Mini kit (Macherey-
Nagel GmbH and Co. KG, Germany) was used following the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions.
PCR
PCR served two different functions for the experimental work in this project, as PCR was
used either for cloning or for verifying cloning results. For each cloning PCR, phusionU
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., MA, USA) was used as a polymerase. Additionally, each
cloning PCR reaction contained 0.5 mM of each primer (See primer list in appendix), 0.2
mM dNTP and 1X Phusion™HF Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., MA, USA). To
verify colonies formed after cloning, colony PCT is sued. For colony PCR, the OneTaq®
Quick-Load® 2X Master Mix with Standard Buffer (New England Biolabs, MA, USA)
was used, along with 0.1 mM of each primer.
PCR products were visualised by gel electrophoresis using 1% agarose gels containing
1X SYBR™-safe gel stain. Electrophoresis was run for 30-55 minutes at 100V using a Sub-
Cell GT Cell electrophoresis machine (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., USA). A Gel Doc™
gel documentation system (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., USA) was used to analyse and
photograph the gels, whereas a Safe Imager Blue Light transilluminator (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc Inc., MA, USA) was used to visualise gelbands for gel excision. GeneRuler™
1kb DNA ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., MA, USA) was used as a reference for
the length of DNA fragments in the electrophoresis gels.
USER cloning and E. coli DH5-alpha transformation
To set up the USER cloning, insert fragments were mixed with backbone fragments in
a 2:1 ratio (v/v), and USER enzyme mix (New England Biolabs, MA, USA) was added
along with CutSmart® buffer (New England Biolabs, MA, USA) to a total volume of
12 µL, according to the concentrations recommended by the manufacturer. Each USER
reaction was incubated at 25 min at 35°C, followed by 25 min at 25°C. Following incuba-
tion, each sample was diluted in MilliQ water to a total volume of 20 µL before a 5 µL
aliquot was used for subsequent transformation: Cryostocks of chemically competent
E.coli DH5-α were thawed on ice for 10 minutes, and 50 µL of the stock was aliquoted
==PAGE:39==
materials and methods
39
into prechilled eppendorf tubes before adding 5 µL of the USER reaction product. The
competent cells were subsequently incubated on ice for 30 minutes, heat shocked at
42°C for 45 seconds, before being incubated on ice for an additional 5 minutes. 1 mL
SOC media was then added to each tube with competent cells, before incubating them
at 37°C, 250 rpm for more than 1 hour. Following incubation, cells were centrifuged at
4000 x g for 2 minutes, before being spread onto LB plates with appropriate antibiotics
and incubated at 37°C overnight.
Construction of alsSD plasmids
The plasmids encoding the different alsSD constructs were all assembled by USER
cloning, using the protocol described above, and combining the parts as described in
section 4. Genomic DNA (gDNA) from Bacillus subtilis was provided by the lab. gDNA
from P. thermoglucosidasius to use in PCR was isolated by boiling a loopful of cells in
10 µL 0.5 M NaOH for 15 minutes. The backbone fragments for the alsSD plasmids
were ampliﬁed from their respective sources by PCR (see table 3). Once plasmids were
constructed by USER and subsequently transformed, clones with correct length bands
following a colony veriﬁcation PCR (cPCR) were evaluated by Sanger sequencing. Plas-
mids with correct sequencing results were saved as glycerol stocks by transforming the
plasmids into E. Coli DH5-alpha, making an overnight culture of the transformants, and
mixing overnight cell culture with 50 % glycerol in a 1:1 (v/v) ratio. Glycerol stocks
were then stored at −80 °C
P. thermoglucosidasius transformation
Transformation of alsSD plasmids into P. thermoglucosidasius was done by electropora-
tion. The competent cells for electroporation were created as follows: A TSA plate was
streaked with the P. Thermoglucosidasius wildtype, and incubated at 60 °C overnight.
The following day, several loopfuls of P. thermoglucosidasius was used to inoculate 50 mL
preheated SPY medium in a 250 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask with bafﬂes. The ﬂask was incu-
bated at 60 °C, 200 rpm. After OD600 reached 1.5 a volume of each culture was used
to inoculate 30 mL of fresh, preheated SPY media, to create new shake ﬂask cultures
with a starting OD600 of 0.5. The new ﬂasks were incubated at 60 °C and 200 rpm,
until OD600 reached 1.6-2.0. When target OD was reached, erlenmeyer ﬂasks was put
on ice for 10 minutes. Two 25 mL aliquots was transferred into pre-chilled 50 mL falcon
tubes, and centrifuged at 4000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatant was discarded
and pellet was resuspended in 15 mL ice-cold electroporation buffer (0.5 M mannitol,
0.5 M sorbitol, 10% glycerol, ﬁlter sterilised), and centrifuged again at 4000 x g for 10
==PAGE:40==
materials and methods
40
minutes at 4 °C. Washing step was repeated 3 more times with 10 ml, 10 ml and 5 ml of
electroporation buffer, respectively. After centrifugation and decanting the falcon tubes
following the last washing step, cells were resuspended in 2 mL electroporation buffer
and 60µL aliquots were made and either kept on ice, or frozen solid by snap freezing
in dry-ice, and stored at −80 °C. For the transformation, 1 mm electroporation cuvettes
(Bio-Rad catalog no. 165-2089) was pre-chilled on ice, and 1 mL of SPYG medium was
preheated in 50 ml Falcon tubes at 52 °C. To each tube of electrocompetent cells, 2.5µL
DNA was added, and cells were transferred to the electroporation cuvettes on ice. A
Bio-Rad GenePulser Xcell machine was used to apply a single electric pulse to the cells,
with the following parameters: Exponential pulse, 2500 V, 10 µF capacitance, 600 ω re-
sistance. The time constant was measured to be around 3 ms for each sample. Following
electroporation, cells were immediately transferred into the preheated SPYG medium ,
and recovered at 52°C and 200 rpm for about 3 hours. Cells were then spun down at
3000 x g and plated onto preheated TSA plates containing 12.5µg/mL kanamycin. TSA
plates were incubated overnight at 52°C.
P. thermoglucosidasius genome integration and replica plating
Genome integration was done by inoculating 2 mL preheated SPY + Kan media in 10
mL culture tubes with AlsSD plasmid transformants. P. Thermoglucosidasius cultures
were incubated at 60°C, 100 rpm. Once cultures had grown for 8-18 hours, 2µL of the
cultures were used to inoculate fresh, preheated 2 mL SPY + Kan media in 10 mL cul-
ture tubes. This passage of cells continued for approx. 3 days, before the liquid cultures
were diluted and plated onto TSA+Kan plates, and incubated at 60°C overnight. The
resulting colonies screened for partial genome integration with cPCR, using the gDNA
PCR extraction method previously mentioned. Successful colonies were used to inoc-
ulate a new culture of preheated SPY in 10 mL culture tubes.
Cultures were again
incubated at 60°C, 100 rpm, and passaged 1-2 times a day to fresh SPY media by trans-
ferring 20 2µL of the old culture to the new culture. Cells were passaged for 3-4 days,
before diluting and plating the cells onto TSA plates, which was then incubated at 60°C
overnight. Colonies from the plates were used for replica plating, where sterilised cloth
was used to make an imprint of TSA plate colonies, before transferring said colonies to
a TSA+Kan plate. Following incubation at 60°C, kanamycin sensitive colonies from the
TSA plates were identiﬁed, and the correct genome integration of the respective AlsSD
constructs was veriﬁed by cPCR.
==PAGE:41==
materials and methods
41
P. thermoglucosidasius fermentations
Colonies with veriﬁed genome integration of the alsSD constructs were used to inoc-
ulate 5 mL SPY media. These starter cultures were incubated at 60 °C, 100 rpm for
approximately 8 hours. Once grown, 10µL of each starter culture was used to inoculate
a pre-culture of 75 ml minimal media (TMM + 20 g/l glucose + 0.05% yeast extract) in a
250 mL bafﬂed erlenmeyer ﬂask. The pre-culture was grown overnight at 60°C, 100 rpm.
The following day, the OD600 was determined for the pre-cultures, and the pre-cultures
were used to inoculate pre-heated TMM (+ 20 g/l glucose + 0.05% yeast extract) in 250
mL bafﬂed erlenmeyer ﬂasks, so that the starting OD in the new ﬂasks was 0.05. Fer-
mentation cultures were incubated at 60°C, 100 rpm, with OD being measured every 2
hours. After measuring an OD of above 0.1, each culture was induced with aTc at a ﬁnal
induction concentration of 0.5µg/ml. 1 mL samples for HPLC analysis were taken once
OD measurements indicated entry into stationary phase (approx 8 hours post induction)
and after 20 hours post induction. For each HPLC sample, the sample was spun down
at 6500 x g for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was transferred to a clean eppendorf
tube and stored at −20°C.
HPLC analysis of metabolites
Analysis of metabolites were carried out using a HPLC with an Aminex® HPX-87H
Ion Exclusion Column (Bio-Rad Laboratories, USA) in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC
machine (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., MA, USA), operated at 60°C. 100% 5 mM sul-
furic acid was used as the mobile phase at a ﬂowrate of 600 µL/min, with an injection
volume of 30 µL. A standard curve with different concentrations of commonly produce
metabolites was created for the HPLC, by mixing 10 g/L of the following compounds
to create a stock solution containing: ethanol, acetate, lactate, formate, pyruvate, (R,R)-
2,3-butanediol and (meso)-2,3-butanediol. An additional 20 g/L glucose was added to
the stock solution. The stock solution was diluted 1:1 (v/v) six times, and the dilution
series was run as the ﬁrst 7 samples on the HPLC machine by loading the samples
in progressive order, from low to high concentration. An 8th sample containing pure
MilliQ water was added following the high concentration standard sample, to wash out
any remaining residues in the column. The biological samples were then run on the
HPLC machinery.
Transforming plasmids into E. coli BL21
Transformation was done by electroporation with freshly made competent cells. Com-
petent cells were made by growing a colony of the E. coli BL21 wildtype in 5 mL LB
==PAGE:42==
materials and methods
42
overnight at 37 °C and 250 rpm, before cooling the cultures on ice for approximately
10 minutes. After cooling down, the cells were centrifuged at 4000 x g for 10 min at
4 °C, before the supernatant was discarded. Pellet was then resuspended in approx. 5
mL icecold 10% glycerol solution by pipetting up and down, before an additional 45
mL icecold 10% glycerol was added. Resuspended cells were centrifuged at 4000 x g for
7 min at 4°C, supernatant was discarded, and pellet was resuspended in 1 mL icecold
10% glycerol. Cells were then transferred to a precooled eppendorf tube, centrifuged
for 2 min at 4000 x g at 4 °C, before the supernatant was discarded again. Pellet was re-
suspended in 100 −200µL 10% glycerol, and 50µL of the resuspension was aliquoted to
pre-chilled eppendorf tubes and kept on ice. Transformation was then done by adding
2.5µL plasmid to the competent cells, before transferring the competent cells mix into
a pre-chilled 0.1 cm gap electroporation cuvette. Electroporation was then carried out
by applying a pulse of 1.8 kV for 5 ms using a MicroPulser™electroporation machine
(Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., USA) on setting “EC1”. 1 mL LB was immediately added to
cells, before they were recovered at 37°C for 1 hour. After the recovery step, 50-100 µL of
each transformation was plated into appropriate selection plates and grown overnight
at 37°C.
Expressing dehydratases in E. coli BL21
For expression of dehydratases, shake ﬂask cultures of BL21 were made by ﬁrst inoc-
ulating a starter culture of 5 mL LB-gm media with a colony from the transformation
plates. The next day, the OD value of each starter culture was measured, and the starter
cultures was used to inoculate cultures of 50 mL LB-gm in 250 mL bafﬂed Erlenmeyer
ﬂasks. These shakeﬂask cultures were incubated at 37 °C and 250 rpm, until OD=0.1
was reached. Cultures were then induced by adding aTc to a ﬁnal concentration of
0.1µg/ml. Shakeﬂasks were then either incubated at 37 °C, 250 rpm for 8 hours, or 16
°C, 250 rpm for 16 hours. Cultures aliquoted into 50 mL falcon tubes, centrifuged for 10
minutes at 4000 x g, decanted and stored at −20°C.
Lysis of E. coli BL21
One chemical and one mechanical lysis method was used to lyse E. coli BL21.
For
the chemical lysis, frozen pellets were resuspended in Cell Lysis Buffer (CellLytic B
2X Cell lysis reagent (Sigma-Aldrich Inc, USA), 2.5 µmol MgCl2, Pinch of lysozyme,
Pinch of protease inhibitor tablet, 2µL benzoase), and incubated on ice for 1 hour. To
separate the soluble fraction, samples were then centrifuged for 20 minutes at 11.000 x
g. Supernatant was aliquoted into clean eppendorf tubes, and either kept at −20°C or
==PAGE:43==
materials and methods
43
4°C. For mechanical lysis, pellets were resuspended 1 mL potassium phosphate solution
(50 mM potassium phosphate, 200 mM KCL) to a ﬁnal OD of 100. Resuspended cells
were then transferred to a 2 mL screwcap tube, and 200 µL 0.1 mm glass beads was
added to each tube. Cells were subsequently homogenised using a FastPrep FP120-
120V instrument (Savant Instruments Pvt ltd, India) at speed 6 for 30 seconds, followed
by a 2-minute incubation on ice. The homogenisation step was repeated 3 times, for
a total of 4 homogenisations, each with a 2-minute incubation of the samples on ice.
Following homogenisation, samples were transferred to a 4°C centrifuge and spun at
full speed for 30 minutes.
Dehydratase activity screening
For each assay reaction, the following reagents were added: DNPH, 2,3-butanediol (ei-
ther meso or R,R) and cell lysate, each in varying concentrations. Additionally, 1.8 mM
vitamin B12 (Cobalamine) was added to each reaction. A standard curve was made
with different concentrations of butanone dissolved in MilliQ water, to which DNPH
was added in similar concentrations as the sample reactions. The resulting change in
colour from the DNPH reaction was quantiﬁed by measuring absorbance using a Syn-
ergy Mx plate reader (BioTek Instruments, Inc., USA). Measurements were taken as
endpoint measurements at various wavelengths. Read speed was set to “Normal”, and
8 measurements were taken per data point. The 96 well plate was shaken for 5 seconds
by the plate reader immediately before measurements.
Analytical software and sequencing
Benchling (Benchling, Inc) was used to visualise primers and plasmids used in this
project. Benchling was also used for sequence alignment and visualisation of Sanger
sequencing results. Sanger sequencing was done by Euroﬁns Genomics Inc., using their
Mix2Seq overnight kits. Chromeleon 7.3 CDS (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., MA, USA)
was used to both run HPLC experiments, and for subsequent data analysis from HPLC.
For visualisation of assay data, Rstudio was used [70]. Illustrations in the theoretical
sections were made with BioRender.com.
==PAGE:44==
results
44
6
results
6.1
Producing 2,3 butanediol in P. thermoglucosidasius
6.1.1
Down-regulating expression of AlsSD genes during cloning in E. coli seems es-
sential for lowering the metabolic burden
For the AlsSD plasmids described in section 4.1.1, not all of them were created simul-
taneously.
Originally, only plasmid pAls1 – pAls6, i.e.
plasmids using constitutive
promoters to express the AlsSD genes, were constructed. For these initial attempts to
assemble AlsSD plasmids by USER cloning, only approximately 5 colonies appeared
for each agar plate following transformation. For each transformant, a screening by
colony PCR was done to identify plasmids with insert fragments of the correct length;
plasmids were harvested from transformants with successful cPCR screenings. When
puriﬁed plasmids were analyzed by Sanger sequencing, single base pair substitutions or
deletions would appear for all plasmids, as exempliﬁed in the sequencing results from
ﬁgure 13.
Common for the mutations was the fact that they all led to either missense muta-
tions, where one amino acid was exchanged for an amino acid with radically different
properties, or frame-shift mutations, both of which may have rendered the ﬁnal en-
zyme inactive. The problem with undesirable mutations was persistent, as detrimental
Figure 13: Sequencing result from pAls1, where a frame-shift mutation can be observed for the
second codon in the alsS CDS.
==PAGE:45==
results
45
mutations were found in many different positions in the AlsSD genes, upon repeated
attempts. The fact that the base pair substitutions are not located in the same position in
the DNA sequence, indicates that this mutation occurred from a selective pressure in the
cells, rather than from an error in the template, propagated by PCR, as a base pair sub-
stitution introduced from the cloning itself would be present in multiple colonies from
the same plasmid. The fact that these mutations are found, along with the fact that
transformation efﬁciency was low, indicates that the E. coli strains are stressed when
growing with the AlsSD plasmids. Based on these ﬁndings, it was hypothesised that
the constitutive expression of AlsSD enzymes in E. coli was detrimental to the cell, since
the AlsSD enzymes could potentially produce a lot of unwanted, toxic side products
for the cells. Consequently, plans were made to replace the two constitutive promoters
(Pldh and P3, respectively) with the inducible promoter TetR-Ptet, to construct plasmids
where the expression of AlsSD enzymes is repressed while cloning. Additionally, a low
copy-number plasmid backbone with a P15a origin of replication was introduced, with
the low copy numbers meant to limit the level of gene expression from the constitutive
promoters. Ultimately, only for the plasmids containing the TetR-Ptet promoter was it
possible to get a complete sequence read without encountering mutations, which indi-
cates that the downregulating of AlsSD genes during cloning in E. coli is important for
cell ﬁtness, since cells otherwise seems to have a high metabolic burden. Once validated
with sequencing, the plasmids could then be used for integration into P. thermoglucosi-
dasius.
6.1.2
Transformation and genome integration of AlsSD constructs
AlsSD plasmids were transformed into P. thermoglucosidasius by electroporation. How-
ever, for the ﬁrst two attempts at transformation, no transformants appeared. Initial
transformation used the P15a backbone plasmids for transformation, but since it was
anticipated that this plasmid might cause trouble due to its relatively large size, the
backbone was swapped for the smaller ColE1 backbone, as explained in section 4. Fur-
thermore, electrocompetent cells of P. thermoglucosidasius were made fresh, as this has
been demonstrated internally in the lab to double the transformation efﬁciency. With
the ColE1 backbone and fresh P. thermoglucosidasius cells, it was possible to transform
both pAls7, pAls8 and pAls9. Genome integration for the AlsSD plasmids was success-
ful for all three plasmids, as was conﬁrmed by cPCR and can be seen in the gel pictures
in appendix (ﬁgure 36).
==PAGE:46==
results
46
6.1.3
P. thermoglucosidasius fermentations to produce 2,3-butanediol
With a complete set of AlsSD plasmids having been constructed (pAls7, pAls8, and
pAls9), and integrated into P. thermoglucosidasius, it was possible to conduct fermenta-
tion experiments to quantify the 2,3-butanediol production from each AlsSD variant.
Besides strains containing plasmids pAls7-9, two additional controls strains were added
to the fermentation experiment: A ldh knockout strain (ldh), that functions as a negative
control for the 2,3 butanediol production of pAls7-9 strains, and a wildtype (wt) strain,
which allows us to analyse how the knock-out of ldh affects the overall production of
fermentation in P. thermoglucosidasius. The fermentation of each strain was done in bio-
logical quadruplicates, to ensure redundancy in case one or more cultures crashes due
to technical issues. Fermentation was done by growing cultures in TMM media supple-
mented with 20 g/L glucose and 0.05 % yeast extract. Cell growth was monitored via.
OD measurements that were taken every 2 hours up to 14 hours, which gave the growth
curves seen in ﬁgure 14.
From the growth curves, it’s interesting to see how two sets of the cultures (als9 and
wt) initially drop in OD values, to a level below the start value. This phenomenon might
be caused by sporulation of the pre-cultures in the TMM minimal media for these two
strains, although it’s unclear why it happened speciﬁcally for these two strains. Since
the same type of media was used for the overnight pre-cultures as was used in the
fermentations, this observed difference should not be caused by shifting from one media
to another. Besides the delay in growth for some strains, it’s also noteworthy that the
als8 strain, containing the T55A mutation in the alsD gene, reaches a maximum OD
which is approximately half that of the other strains.
6.1.4
Characterization of fermentation products in P. thermoglucosidasius strains
In order to measure the production of 2,3-butanediol from the constructed AlsSD strains,
HPLC was run on the fermentation samples taken at 8- and 20-hours post-induction, re-
spectively. Additionally, HPLC was used to create a standard curve, consisting of 8
separate samples each containing a set concentration of a mix if different compounds
as discussed in section 4. Lastly, chemical standard samples containing only one speci-
ﬁed compound was run in the HPLC, to provide a frame of reference when assigning
different peaks from the chromatograms with a certain compound. For the chemical
standards, two samples of the two most biologically relevant isomers of 2,3-butanediol
was made: One for (R,R)-2,3-butanediol (R,R-BDO), and one for (meso)-2,3-butanediol
(meso-BDO)
To give an idea of which detector is optimal for measuring the different compounds,
the chromatograms from the standard curve, as seen in ﬁgure 15, were assessed.
==PAGE:47==
results
47
Figure 14: Growth curves of the P. thermoglucosidasius as measured by OD over time. All strains
were grown in TMM media with 20 g/L glucose and 0.05 % yeast extract. The error
bars represent standard deviation from biological quadruplicates. The dotted blue
line indicate time of induction. The red arrow indicate the ﬁrst HPLC sampling time
for strains ldh, als7 and als8, whereas the blue arrow indicate the time for the ﬁrst
HPLC sampling from strains als9 and wt. The black arrow indicate the second HPLC
sampling time for all strains
From these chromatograms, it can be seen that all compounds except pyruvate is
able to be detected by the DAD or RI detectors. Although clear peaks appear for both
detectors for the organic acids lactate, formate and acetate, the peaks appear stronger
when measured by the DAD at 205 nm. Consequently, measurements of these three
acids will be done at 205 nm.
Generally speaking, the chromatograms from the ﬁve different P. thermoglucosidasius
strains looked similar when compared to each other, as seen in ﬁgure 16. For the RI
chromatogram, a representative chromatograms from each strain is compared in ﬁgure
16. From this ﬁgure, it appears that only two major compounds are identiﬁed by the
HPLC analysis: Glucose, at a retention time of 9.77 min, and what appears to be meso-
2,3-butanediol at a retention time of 18.58 min. Besides the major peaks, smaller peaks
can be found for ethanol by the RI detector. As can be seen, the peak for the assumed
==PAGE:48==
results
48
Figure 15: Chromatogram for the standard curve of chemical compounds, measured both by
the RI detector, and by DAD at 205 nm. These particular samples from the standard
curve contained compounds at a concentration of 10 g/L (20 g/L for glucose)
Figure 16: Comparison of peaks between RI chromatograms from different AlsSD strains
meso-2,3-butanediol is present in all samples, which indicates that this compound might
not be meso-2,3-butanediol after all.
For the DAD, peaks appeared in the chromatogram when the wavelength was set to
205 nm, as shown in ﬁgure 17. Small peaks can be observed for all strains in the region
of 13-16 minutes, which is the region were we would expect to ﬁnd the retention times
for the organic acids acetate, lactate, and formate. Furthermore, for the strain containing
the pAls8 plasmid, a compound (compound Y) is produced, which has a retention time
==PAGE:49==
results
49
Figure 17: Comparison of peaks between chromatograms at 205 nm from different AlsSD strains
close to that of (R,R)-BDO. The fact that this peak is not present in either of the controls
is noteworthy.
For both compound X and compound Y, a closer examination of the peaks was done.
As seen in ﬁgure 18, compound X actually has a slightly higher retention time than
(meso)-BDO, as indicated by the position of the tip of the peaks in the chromatogram.
Compound Y also has a retention time that is slightly higher than that of (R,R)-BDO,
which is an indication that neither of these compounds are actually butanediol. Further
analysis on these two peaks has therefore been done, which is reported later in this
section.
6.1.5
Quantitative determination of produced chemicals and yield calculations
A quantiﬁcation of produced metabolites in the different fermentation samples was
done. The concentrations of produced metabolites were calculated based on the area
under each identiﬁed peak for each compound. From linear regression of the standard
curves, it was possible to ﬁnd a suitable linear model that could be used for conversion
of peak area to concentration in g/L. As such, the determination of the quantities of
different compounds produced can be seen below.
glucose consumption
The glucose consumption was calculated by ﬁrst calculat-
ing the concentration of residual glucose in each sample in g/L. This concentration was
detracted from the start concentration of 20 g/L glucose in each culture. The result-
ing glucose consumption in g/L is shown on the left side of ﬁgure 19. The glucose
consumption was converted into the corresponding concentration in mM, before being
normalised to cell growth by dividing the glucose consumption by the OD600 value
when samples were taken. This normalisation is important, since the cultured from
which the HPLC samples were taken had very different OD values at the time the sam-
ples were taken. The result of these calculations is represented the right side of ﬁgure
19.
==PAGE:50==
results
50
Figure 18: Top: RI chromatogram showing the peaks of the two 2,3-butanediol isomers com-
pared to compound X (peak 2 in top chromatogram). Bottom: DAD chromatogram
at 205 nm, showing the peaks of (R,R)-2,3-butanediol and compound Y (peak 2 in
chromatogram)
Looking at the absolute glucose consumption in the left side of ﬁgure 19, the ﬁrst thing
that stands out is the generally low level of consumption. From 20 g/L glucose added
to each fermentation batch, only a maximum consumption of about 4 g/L is observed,
which is only about 20 % of the supplied glucose. The issue of low glucose utilisation is
a known problem when working with P. thermoglucosidasius **, and a known solution to
attaining higher growth is to grow the cultures with yeast extract in the ranges 0.2-1 %.
This would, however, skew the yield calculations of any fermentation product produced
in this fermentation experiment, so this solution is not desirable here. From the right
side of ﬁgure 19, more glucose per cell mass appears to be consumed after 20 hours,
when compared to samples taken after 8 hours. This is expected, since the prolonged
stationary phase would see bacteria consume glucose to maintain the cell density seen
in ﬁgure 14. Glucose consumption seems similar across the different strains, with the
consumption for the Als8 strain being a bit higher after 8 hours, which is likely due to
the lower call mass observed for the cultures of this strain.
**According to personal communications
==PAGE:51==
results
51
Figure 19: Bar charts visualising the glucose consumption after 8- and 20-hours post-induction,
respectively. The left side shows the absolute glucose consumption in g/L, and the
right side shows the molar glucose consumption when normalised for OD. Error
bars are representing standard deviations calculated from a biological quadruplicate
of samples
organic acids
The concentrations of organic acids and ethanol were calculated
based on HPLC data, and the yield of each fermentation product was calculated by
dividing the concentration of each product with the speciﬁc glucose consumption of
each strain. For calculations resulting in negative values for molar yield, the yield is
assumed to be 0 mM/mM glucose. The result of the yield calculations are illustrated as
a bar chart in ﬁgure 20.
Looking at the calculated yields from ﬁgure 20, it is interesting that no lactate is
produced in any strains - Not even for the wildtype P. thermoglucosidasius strain. The
purpose of genome integrating into the ldh locus in P. thermoglucosidasius was to delete
the lactate forming pathway, since literature reports lactate as being one of the main
fermentation products of this organism, so not even being able to ﬁnd lactate produced
in small amounts is surprising. The same result can be seen for ethanol, where no
production is detected from the fermentation cultures.
Formate does not appear to be produced either, except for a small amount in the ldh
knock-out strain after 8 hours. The sample to sample variation is quite big for formate
production after 20 hours, so while the mean molar yield seems to be above 0 for several
cultures, it’s not possible to conclude that formate is actually being produced, based on
this data.
==PAGE:52==
results
52
Figure 20: Bar chart visualising the molar yield of four different fermentation products, calcu-
lated from the glucose consumption. Negative yield values are represented as a yield
of 0 mM/mM glucose. Error bars are representing standard deviations calculated
from a biological quadruplicate of samples, and are only shown for compounds hav-
ing one or more positive yields
From the yields, it’s also clear that although acetate is being produced in all strains,
production of acetate is higher in the two control strains (wt and ldh knock-out). The ldh
knock-out strain even achieves a yield of 0.55 mM/mM glucose for the samples taken
20 hours post-induction. This indicates that the als7-9 strains primarily utilises glucose
for other reactions that acetate production, as a similar glucose consumption results in
acetate yields that are between 2,5 and 5 times lower for strains als7-9 when compared
to the control strains.
compound x and y
The two unknown compounds, compound X and compound
Y, are assumed to be (meso)-BDO and (R,R)-BDO, respectively, since their peaks are
close to each other, as shown earlier in ﬁgure 18. By using the standard curve from
the butanediols to calculate the concentration of compound X and Y, it was possible
to derive what the molar yields of compound X and Y would be, if they are indeed
butanediols.
For compound X, the molar yield is shown in ﬁgure 21. From this ﬁgure, it is clear
that all of the strains produce an impossible amount of (meso)-BDO. They all exceed a
==PAGE:53==
results
53
Figure 21: Bar chart visualising the molar yield of product X, under the assumption that this
compound is (meso)-2,3-butanediol ((meso)-BDO). Error bars are representing stan-
dard deviations calculated from a biological quadruplicate of samples
maximum yield threshold of 1.5 mM product/mM consumed glucose, meaning that if
this compound was indeed (meso)-BDO, the production of (meso)-BDO would exceed
the total glucose consumption.††. Since this is impossible, it is concluded that compound
X is not (meso)-BDO.
Compound Y was analysed in a similar way to compound X, and the molar yield
is shown in ﬁgure 22. The data shown in this ﬁgure conﬁrms what was observed in
the raw pictures of the HPLC chromatogram: That compound Y is produced in high
amounts speciﬁcally in strain als8. However, just as with compound X, the fact that the
yield from glucose consumption ratio is so high shows that compound Y is most likely
not (R,R)-BDO, as the als8 strain would otherwise produce about 60 times as much
butanediol as it consumes glucose.
test of alternative components in hplc
As large peaks of compound X and
Y were observed, identifying what they are could give important insights into cellular
metabolism.
In an attempt to identify the mysterious compound X and compound
††Since the conversion of glucose is a C6 molecule, and (meso)-BDO a C4 molecule, the theoretical
maximum for glucose to butanediol conversion is 1,5 mM/mM glucose
==PAGE:54==
results
54
Figure 22: Bar chart visualising the molar yield of product Y, under the assumption that this
compound is (R,R)-2,3-butandiol ((R,R)-BDO). Samples were taken at 8- and 20-hours
post-induction. Error bars represent standard deviations from a biological quadrupli-
cate of samples
Y, additional pure standards of chemical compounds were measured by HPLC, using
the same protocol. These compounds were selected either because they are precursors
for or metabolised from 2,3-butanediol (Acetoin, Butanone), because they are produced
as primary metabolites by P. thermoglucosidasius (Succinate, Citrate), or because they
chemically similar to 2,3 butanediol (1,3-propanediol, 1,4-butanediol).
The retention time for compound X in the ﬁrst HPLC run was found to be just above
that of (Meso)-2,3-butanediol, so the retention time of any of the 8 tested samples should
be between the two controls of (Meso)-2,3-butanediol and (R,R)-BDO, in order for it to be
considered compound X. For any of the tested compounds to be identiﬁed as compound
Y, they must show a strong peak at approx. 19,3 min on the chromatogram when the
dad is set at 205 nm, while at the same time only show a very weak or nonexistent peak
in the RI chromatogram. The compounds tested in this second round of HPLC, along
with their measured retention times for both RI and DAD can be seen in table 7. From
this table, it is evident that no peak has a retention time that would suggest that any of
these compounds were either compound X or compound Y. The identity of these two
mysterious peak therefore remains unknown.
==PAGE:55==
results
55
Table 7: Summary of tested compounds and their respective retention times for the second
round of HPLC. Also included are the retention times for the two unknown peaks:
Compound X and Y
Retention time (RI)
Retention time (205 nm)
Compound X
18.615
NA
Compound Y
NA
19.39
(Meso)-2,3-butanediol
18.497
18.293
(R,R)-2,3-butanediol
19.307
19.09
Succinate
11.418
11.243
Citrate
7.9
7.713
Acetoin
17.555
17.34
1-butanol
Not detected
20.287
Butanone
27.005
26.797
1,3-propanediol
17.72
Not detected
1,4-butanediol
21.422
Not detected
aTc in MilliQ
22.08
Not detected
6.2
In vitro screening for butanone production
In this project, designs were made to create 22 plasmids, each expressing a speciﬁc
dehydratase variant, described in section 4. Of these 22 dehydratase variants, 16 were
cloned successfully. In order to test for butanone production from these dehydratase
variants, a new test system had to be developed, based on a DNPH assay. The ﬁrst part
of the result section is therefore dedicated to the optimisation of assay conditions for
the DNPH assay used to measure butanone production in this project.
6.2.1
Initial test of assay conditions
We needed to adapt a previously tested assay to meet the needs of our experiment. To
do that, the test system was ﬁrst optimised, before the testing of the complete collection
of dehydratase variations was commenced. Therefore, a subset of the constructed DH
plasmids, containing positive control plasmids DH6, DH7, and DH17, were used for
initial screening of the assay conditions, along with a negative control plasmid, pVM50,
containing an empty plasmid with no dehydratase genes. These plasmids all contain
the dehydratase gene from K. pneomoniae, which has been well-characterised in litera-
ture as being able to convert 2,3-butanediol to butanone [30]. After transformation of
the three plasmids into E. coli BL21, and subsequent cultivations at either 16 °C or 37
°C to express the dehydratases, cells were lysed by either mechanical or buffer-based
==PAGE:56==
results
56
lysis as discussed in section 4. Following lysis, the protein concentration of each lysate
was determined by Bradford assay with a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard, giv-
ing the results shown in ﬁgure 23. This determination of protein yield from each ly-
sis/cultivation combination should give us an idea of whether one lysis method is more
optimal than the other when it comes to achieving high total protein yields.
Figure 23: Results of Bradford assay. Protein yields were normalised for OD/volume buffer.
Standard deviations were made on the basis of technical triplicates
From the protein concentrations in ﬁgure 23, a clear difference can be seen between
the chemical and mechanical lysis methods. Cells lysed with lysis buffer (“lysis” in ﬁg-
ure 23) had approximately 4-8 times bigger yields of protein, compared to mechanically
lysed cells (“beads” in ﬁgure 23), after protein yield was normalised for the concentra-
tion (OD) of cells used to prepare lysates for each lysis method. Furthermore, for most
strains, culturing the protein-expressing E.coli cells overnight resulted in a higher pro-
tein yield, indicating that 16 °C is a better temperature for expressing the dehydratase
enzymes, although it’s hard to know without determining the speciﬁc concentration of
dehydratases in the lysis samples. Based on the Bradford assay results, and the fact that
16 °C is a temperature used for the expression of dehydratases in E. coli BL21 in previ-
ous studies [71], the results in this section will primarily display results from testing the
16 °C-culture lysates.
==PAGE:57==
results
57
initial test of dnph assay
Using the prepared cell lysates, we tested for possi-
ble butanone production by a DNPH assay. Based on previous lab experience, it was
assumed that 20 µL of cell lysate from the mechanical lysis samples, would be a good
starting point to test if butanone production could be observed. In order to make a
rough adjustment for the difference in protein yield between mechanical and chemical
lysis, only 10 µL of cell lysate was used for each chemical lysis sample.
Each test of butanone production was split into two parts: A butanone producing
phase, and a DNPH assay phase. For the butanone production phase, each lysate sam-
ple was added to a reaction mixture containing vitamin B12 (for a ﬁnal concentration
of 1.8 mM), and either (meso)- or (R,R)-2,3-butanediol (for a ﬁnal concentration of 30
mM) in a 96-well plate. At the same time, in order to determine the concentration of
butanone produced, a standard curve of butanone was made by diluting butanone in
MilliQ water for different ﬁnal concentrations of butanone. Following incubation in
sealed 96-well plates for approximately 1 hour at 37 °C, the DNPH assay phase was
initiated by adding 100 µL DNPH to each well, to a ﬁnal concentration of 5 mM. The
resulting colour change for the DNPH assay was measured at 480 nm, and from the
absorbance results, a concentration of produced butanone could be calculated. This con-
centration was normalised for the amount of total protein from each lysate, resulting in
the data summerised in ﬁgure 24.
Although one would initially think that the cell lysates were able to produce butanone
based on ﬁgure 24, the fact that it’s not possible to see any difference between the
different DH samples, and the negative controls, i.e. the pVM50 samples, indicates
that the DNPH assay is not measuring produced butanone exclusively. Rather, it seems
that some other carbonyl compounds are picked up by the assay as well, obscuring
the results for butanone production. It’s therefore not even possible to conclude that
butanone is produced for the cell lysates, based on this data. Similar, non-conclusive
results were found from lysates isolated from cells cultivated at 37 °C (not shown).
Besides potential non-speciﬁc reactions of DNPH towards other carbonyl compounds
than butanone, additional information can be gathered from analysing the butanone
standard curve for the assay. For the standard curve, the detection range, i.e. the range
of datapoints from different concentrations that follow a linear pattern, was determined
to be between 10 and 250 mg/L, as seen in ﬁgure 25. Furthermore, the slope of the
standard curve was found to be relatively ﬂat. The standard curve can be described as
a linear function with the formula
Absorbance = β ∗x + α
(1)
where x is the concentration of butanone in mg/L. For the standard curve in ﬁgure
25, the slope parameter β is 0.0008, which is low considering the intercept value α is
==PAGE:58==
results
58
Figure 24: Bar chart representing the produced butanone, normalised for total protein content
in each lysate as determined by the Bradford assay. The pVM50 samples are negative
controls here, as the pVM50 plasmid is an empty backbone plasmid. Chemically
lysed cells are denoted “lysis”, while mechanical lysed cells are denoted “beads”.
All samples are from 16 °C cultures. Error bars represent the standard deviation of
technical duplicates
3.13. A high slope for these standard curves is preferable, as it provides more resolving
power. This is because a higher slope will enable the distinction between two close
concentrations, by employing a larger range of absorbance values to be used for the
distinction.
To improve the detection range and resolving power of the DNPH assay, tests were
therefore made, to optimise different reaction conditions. This included optimising the
concentration and volume of DNPH used in the assay, optimising the concentration of
added 2,3-butanediol, and optimising the protocol from the plate reader.
6.2.2
Optimisation of DNPH concentration and volume
For the initial DNPH assay, the 100 µL DNPH used for the assay was aliquoted from
a working solution of DNPH, made by diluting a stock solution of DNPH reagent in
pure ethanol.
It was hypothesised that the poor quality of the ﬁrst assay was due
to unwanted interactions between the DNPH agent and the large amount of ethanol
==PAGE:59==
results
59
Figure 25: Standard curve of butanone, measured at 480 nm. Standard curves were made as lin-
ear regressions of the datapoints, with the resulting model ﬁt of the linear regression
(R2) and parameters for the curve shown in the plot
added per well. To test this theory, dilutions of the DNPH stock was made so that the
ﬁnal concentration would be 5 mM DNPH per reaction, while the volume of DNPH
solution would vary from 5 to 100 µL. When the assay was performed on the butanone
standards, and subsequently measured at 480 nm, a clear improvement of the standard
curve slope, and the detection range could be observed for DNPH volumes under 100
µL, as seen in ﬁgure 26.
From ﬁgure 26 it also appears like the best working volume of DNPH solution for the
assay is somewhere near 25 µL, as the standard curve at this concentration has a good
ﬁt to the data, and a higher slope relative to the other standard curves. In ﬁgure 26,
the measurements for the samples with 10 µL DNPH saturated after 200 mg/L, which
might indicate that the used wavelength 480 nm is too close to the max absorbance
wavelength of DNPH. As a result, measurements were done for the same reactions at
520 nm, which gave the results seen in ﬁgure 27.
The standard curves in ﬁgure 27 still has a nice ﬁt to the model, a nice slope, and a
wide detection range of 10-500 mg/L butanone when the volumes of DNPH is either
25 $muLor10$muL. However, it seems like 5µL is too low a volume to give a proper
==PAGE:60==
results
60
Figure 26: Standard curve of butanone, reacting with different volumes of DNPH solution and
subsequently measured at 480 nm. Standard curves were made as linear regressions
of the datapoints, with the resulting model ﬁr of the linear regression (R2) and pa-
rameters for the curve shown in the colour-coded boxes
signal. As we wanted to avoid oversaturation for future experiments, it was decided to
measure at 520 nm for the remaining experiments.
Besides optimising the volume of DNPH used for the assay, we also wanted to test
the effect of different ﬁnal DNPH concentrations on the assay performance. To do this,
we used the pure, undiluted stock solution of DNPH (200 mM), and measured standard
curves of butanone with the ﬁnal concentrations of DNPH being 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10
mM, respectively. This gave the results shown in ﬁgure 28.
From ﬁgure 28, DNPH at a concentration of 2,5 mM seems to result in both the best
ﬁt of the standard curve, and the steepest slope of the standard curve. The detection
range all looked similar for the different DNPH concentrations. The fact that such a
low volume of DNPH (2,5 µL) results in a standard curve with such a nice ﬁt and
slope seems to contradict the results from measuring DNPH-solution volumes, as that
experiment indicated that DNPH volumes of 5 µL and lower would result in a bad
signal. Nevertheless, 2,5 mM DNPH stock was chosen as the new ﬁnal concentration
for DNPH assays.
==PAGE:61==
results
61
Figure 27: Standard curve of butanone, reacting with different volumes of DNPH solution and
subsequently measured at 520 nm. Standard curves were made as linear regressions
of the datapoints, with the resulting model ﬁr of the linear regression (R2) and pa-
rameters for the curve shown in the colour-coded boxes
Using this optimised DNPH concentration, a test was made to emulate the conditions
when the DNPH assay is used to measure butanone production from dehydratases. This
was done by incubating a triplicate of standard curve samples at 37 °C for an hour, test
the effect that evaporation of butanone may have on the standard curve. The result of
this test is shown in ﬁgure 29.
Figure 29 shows an improved standard curve from ﬁgure 25, as the slope of the
standard curve has increased from β = 0.0008 to β = 0.0027, while the detection range
has stayed the same, with a measurement threshold of 10 mg/L butanone. However,
there is still a big variance for each sample point, as seen by the large standard variation
(error bars) in the plot, and furthermore, the previous standard curves without the 1-
hour incubation step displayed a wider detection range. Consequently, further testing
of the assay conditions was done.
6.2.3
Test of 2,3-butanediol eﬀect on butanone detection
Considering the effect seen for ethanol on DNPH assay performance, and the fact that
2,3-butanediol is an alcohol, there is a risk that too high concentrations of 2,3-butanediol
==PAGE:62==
results
62
Figure 28: Standard curves of butanone, reacting with different DNPH concentrations and sub-
sequently measured at 520 nm
might be detrimental for the assay. It needs to be ensured that it’s possible to resolve the
produced butanone, even if some unreacted butanediol is present after incubation with
dehydratases. A test was therefore made, where butanone was dissolved in either 15,
30 or 50 mM 2,3-butanediol rather than MilliQ water to make the standard curves. For
the test of dehydratases, we want to be able to test abilities to convert both (R,R)-BDO
and (meso)-BDO. As a result, the effect of both (meso)- and (R,R)-2,3-butanediol was
analysed.
For meso-2,3-butanediol, the results of the experiment with butanone can be seen in
the top part of ﬁgure 30. From these results, it appears that 30 mM is by far the best
concentration to use for the DNPH assay, as the two other concentration of butanediol
will result in a very bad ﬁt of for the standard curve (R2 < 0.6), no matter what con-
centration range of butanone is chosen. Interestingly, the result is very different for
(R,R)-BDO, where the steepest slope can be found for the standard curve from 50 mM
R,R-BDO, as seen in bottom part of ﬁgure 30, but with higher detection ranges for 15
and 30 mM R,R-BDO, respectively.
In order to best compare utilisation of R,R-BDO to that of meso-BDO, it was decided
to keep the concentration the same for the two types of butanediol. The conclusion
from the experiments with 2,3-butanediol concentrations was therefore to keep a ﬁnal
==PAGE:63==
results
63
Figure 29: Standard curve for butanone that has been incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour prior to
having DNPH added.
Standard deviations from a technical triplicate of samples
were used to make the error bars
concentration of 30 mM 2,3-butanediol for future DNPH assays, since this concentration
worked best for meso-BDO.
6.2.4
Final optimisations of DNPH assay
Since the butanediol concentration was not changed, some other factor had to be con-
sidered, since there was still a need to address the mediocre ﬁt and large variations
observed for the Standard curve #2 (ﬁgure 29). The idea to use a concentration of 2,5
mM DNPH was revisited, since the initial test of DNPH concentration did not include
an incubation step at 37 °C to mimic the actual assay conditions when measuring de-
hydratase activity. Standard curves were therefore prepared using both 2,5 and 5 mM
DNPH, giving the resulting standard curves seen in ﬁgure 31. For this test, where stan-
dard curve samples were done in biological triplicates and incubated at 37 °C for an
hour, a clear improvement of the standard curve, both in terms of ﬁt and slope, could
be seen when using 5 mM rather than 2.5 mM DNPH. However, even for the standard
curve from 2.5 mM DNPH, a clear improvement could be seen from ﬁgure 31, as sample
variation was lowered as seen by the error bars, and the ﬁt improved. This is despite
==PAGE:64==
results
64
Figure 30: Test of the effect of (meso)-2,3-butanediol ((meso)-BDO) and (R,R)-2,3-butanediol
(R,R-BDO) on DNPH assays when measuring butanediol
not changing any parameters from the ones used to make ﬁgure 31, so the improvement
might be down to more consistent pipetting.
==PAGE:65==
results
65
Figure 31: Standard curve for butanone that has been incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour prior to hav-
ing either 2.5 or 5 mM DNPH added. Standard deviations from a technical triplicate
of samples were used to make the error bar
From these results, further improvements were made to the assay to optimise the
standard curve. By adding of some extra datapoints to the standard curve, and using
the new optimal concentration of 5 mM DNPH, a standard curve for butanone could be
obtained that is shown in in ﬁgure 32. This standard curve has a relatively steep slope of
β = 0.0025, while maintaining good linearity throughout the measurement range. This
is even after the butanone standard samples were incubated at 37 °C for an hour.
The ﬁt and resolving power of this standard curve is good enough for us to be conﬁ-
dent that we will be able to measure butanone if produced biologically in the previously
establish measuring range of 10-500 mg/L. The conditions and concentrations used for
the DNPH assay on the basis of the optimisation experiments are summarised in table
8.
6.2.5
Measuring the butanone production from dehydratases
With the assay being able to detect butanone at reasonable levels, a test of butanone
production from the different positive control strains (DH6, DH7, and DH17) was made.
Using an increased amount of lysate compared to the initial test (15 µL lysate from lysis
==PAGE:66==
results
66
Figure 32: Standard curve for butanone that has been incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour prior to hav-
ing 5 mM DNPH added. Standard deviations from a technical triplicate of samples
were used to make the error bars
Parameter
Value
Total volume per well
200 µL
DNPH volume
5 µL
DNPH concentration
5 mM
Butanediol concentration
30 mM
Wavelength for plate reader
520 nm
Detection range for butanone
10-500 mg/L
Table 8: List of optimum values for different DNPH assay parameters. Also listed is the resulting
detection range for butanone in water
buffer samples, 30 µL lysate from mechanically lysed cells), but the same concentrations
of 30 mM butanediol and 1.8 mM vitamin B12, cell lysates were incubated in a sealed
96 well plate for an hour at 37 °C. Cell lysates were either the same lysates used for the
initial DNPH test, that had been kept in the fridge for 14 days, or frozen lysis samples
that has been thawed just prior to the experiment. When using the optimised DNPH
conditions (5 mM DNPH, 5 µL DNPH), and measuring the resulting reactions at 520
==PAGE:67==
results
67
nm, the concentration of produced butanone could be calculated for all lysates, based
on a butanone standard curve (not shown). Calculated butanone concentrations were
normalised for the protein concentration of each lysate, resulting in the data visualised
in ﬁgure 33. In the bar chart, samples with negative values for butanone concentration
are plotted as having a concentration of 0 mg/L, while the standard deviation for the
concentration is still plotted.
Figure 33: Bar chart representing the calculated butanone production from lysates. Cell lystaes
were either kept in the fridge for 14 days, or kept frozen in 14 days at -20 °C (marked
“fr”). Standard deviation from a technical triplicate of samples were used to make
the error bars
From ﬁgure 33, it appears that no butanone is produced in any cells, since most
samples result in a negative butanone concentration in the plot, and the few samples for
which there seems to be some production has some very large error bars. It is therefore
not possible to draw any conclusions to whether it’s best to store the cell lysates at 4°C
or -20°C
Despite not seeing any signiﬁcant butanone production from the positive control, it
was decided that it was worth testing the rest of the dehydratase collection. For this
test, it was decided to express dehydratases in E. coli BL21 cells grown at 16 °C, as
this temperature has been used previously for expressing dehydratases, as mentioned
earlier. Furthermore, it was decided to use mechanical lysis to make all cell lysates, as
==PAGE:68==
results
68
the mechanical lysis was assumed to be the mildest of the two lysis options, due to the
risk of buffer-mediated lysis inactivating the dehydratase enzymes.
Once cell lysates were obtained, the DNPH assay was set up in the same way as for
ﬁgure 33, with one exception: Cell lysates were incubated with butanediol and vitamin
B12 at either 37 °C or 55 °C for two hours. This was done to test for thermostability of
the included dehydratases, and potentially see a difference between native dehydratases,
and dehydratases that have had their α and β subunits fused. From the measured ab-
sorbance readings from the DNPH assay, the corresponding butanone concentration
was calculated for each sample, and normalised for protein content. The resulting bu-
tanone concentrations per µg total protein can be seen in ﬁgure 34. Once again, most
of the calculated concentrations for the different samples were negative, in which case
their value was set to zero in the plot.
Figure 34: Bar chart representing the calculated butanone production from lysates, normalised
by total protein content in the added lysates. Cell lystaes were incubated at either
37 °C or 55 °C for 2 hours. Standard deviation from a technical triplicate of samples
were used to make the error bars.
From ﬁgure 34, it appears that the sample from the DH2 strain has a positive value
for butanone production when incubated with (R,R)-BDO at 37°C. However, the error
bars are relatively large for DH2, and the interval for the error bars include “0 mg/L”
butanone, meaning that there’s no statistical basis to claim that DH2 produces butanone.
No butanone production is therefore detected from the cell lysates in this assay
==PAGE:69==
results
69
In conclusion, although it was possible to optimise the assay to a point where we
are conﬁdent that butanone can be measured, no in vitro production of butanone was
observed from any of the tested cell lysates under any of the tested conditions.
==PAGE:70==
discussion
70
7
discussion
For this section, the experiments and their results will be discussed further. More specif-
ically, this section will focus on why some results deviated from out expectations, and
furthermore, how experiments can be improved in the near future. Lastly, some of the
greater, future perspectives from this research is discussed.
7.1
Characterising the P. thermoglucosidasius strains
In this project, integration of the alsSD genes into the genome of P. thermoglucosidasius
was conﬁrmed by cPCR. Under normal circumstances, the correct integration of the
alsSD genes would have been conﬁrmed by sequencing as well, but this was not possible
for this project, due to time constraints. Despite the missing sequencing results, we
are conﬁdent that the genome integrated alsSD genes are intact, based on the cPCR
results, and we assume no mutations were introduced during the transformation and
homologous recombination events for the alsSD genes
For the fermentation experiments in P. thermoglucosidasius, it was expected that we
would be able to observe production of (R,R)-2,3-butanediol. This is because the de-
sign of one of the P. thermoglucosidasius strains tested in this project, als9, had the exact
same alsSD genes incorporated into the genome as was used by Zhou et al (2020) [27]
to achieve what they claim to be a 72% theoretical yield for (R,R)-2,3-butanediol from
glucose. There are some caveats to this reported yield though: In order to optimise the
growth of P. thermoglucosidasius, Zhou et al. used a yeast extact concentration of 0.7%,
which is high enough that might skew the yield calculations from glucose. One reason
why production of 2,3-butanediol was not observed in this project could be due to overly
aerobic growth conditions for the strains. When preparing the P. thermoglucosidasius fer-
mentations, a lot of emphasis was put on making sure that the P. thermoglucosidasius
cultures would be growing micro-aerobically. Complete anaerobic growth would be
detrimental to 2,3-butanediol production, since the 2,3-butanediol pathway, is not redox
balanced when metabolising glucose. Other fermentation pathways that are redox bal-
anced, such as the pathway to produce ethanol, would therefore be favoured, in order
to maintain redox homeostasis in the cells.
However, using microaerobic conditions as opposed to aerobic conditions is also im-
portant when considering the metabolic ﬂux for P. thermoglucosidasius, since studies by
Tang et al. (2009) [72] have shown that for the under aerobic conditions, the ﬂux from
glucose mainly ﬂow through the TCA cycle.
Consequently, there is next to no car-
bon ﬂux being channeled into fermentation products such as lactate or ethanol under
aerobic conditions, which makes sense from a physiological point of view: Cellular res-
==PAGE:71==
discussion
71
piration is by far the most efﬁcient way cells can make ATP from glucose, so carbon
ﬂux would be wasted by going towards the formation of these fermentation products.
In this study, as mentioned in section 4, in order to accommodate microaerobic growth,
shake ﬂasks were incubated with a rotation speed of 100 rpm, and the volume of media
was increased per culture. Originally, the fermentation was supposed to be carried out
in 250 mL Erlenmeyer without bafﬂes, but only ﬂasks with bafﬂes were available for
use, thereby potentially aerating the cultures more than intended. The question is how
to determine whether the shake ﬂask cultures were indeed too aerobic for fermentation
to take place. By looking at the HPLC results, it is possible to get some clues.
It is well established in literature that P. thermoglucosidasius will produce fermentative
products under microaerobic conditions: Observations from both Cripps et al. (2009)
[73] and Tang et al. (2009) [72] agree that lactate, ethanol and formate are produced
under microanaerobic conditions, with the lactate being the largest fermentation prod-
uct when measured in yield from consumed glucose ‡‡. According to the same study,
when P. thermoglucosidasius is grown under microanaerobic conditions, the ﬂux through
the TCA cycle is reduced approximately 2.5 fold. The fact that neither of the three
mentioned fermentation products are measured at all in the HPLC samples from the P.
thermoglucosidasius fermentations in this project is therefore a clear indication that cul-
tures have grown under too aerobic conditions. However, despite fermentations seem-
ingly having run under aerobic conditions, the fermentation product acetate was still
measured in all HPLC samples from all ﬁve P. thermoglucosidasius strains. Here it is im-
portant to emphasise that while acetate is considered a fermentation product, it can still
be produced under both anaerobic and aerobic conditions. In cells where the carbon
source is in excess, as the case was for our P. thermoglucosidasius strains, the enzyme
acetyl-CoA synthetase [EC:6.2.1.1] can convert acetyl-CoA to acetate and coenzyme A,
with the simultaneous formation of 1 molecule of ATP. The reaction complete reactions
is:
AMP + Pyrophosphate + AcetylCoA ⇄Acetate + CoA + ATP
(2)
This alternative way of producing acetate exists so the cell can quickly metabolise
acetyl-CoA to maintain high ATP levels in the event that the normal respiration path-
way is temporarily impaired, for example if one of the enzymes of the TCA cycle gets
inhibited [72]. From the fermentation performed in this project, higher acetate yields
were observed for the two control strains, when compared to the producer strains (als7-
als9). This difference in acetate yields indicate that the carbon ﬂux for the producer
strains are channeled more towards the production of some other, as of now, unidenti-
ﬁed compounds than acetate. Also, since acetate is the only main fermentation pathway
‡‡Tang et al. (2009) measured a yield of 0.67 mol/mol glucose for lactate under microaerobic conditions
==PAGE:72==
discussion
72
that leads to the formation of ATP, the fact that less acetate is formed for the AlsSD
strains indicates that something is changing in the energy requirements of these strains.
We don’t know would cause this change though, but it could be related to the unidenti-
ﬁed product X and product Y peaks from the HPLC.
If alsSD strains are indeed producing some alternative product to acetate, we would
expect to be able to identify the production said products in the producer strains, but
despite these expectations, only one compound (product Y) could be found to be pro-
duced signiﬁcantly more in one of the producer strains (als8), compared to the controls.
Although the identity of product Y was never found, further steps can be taken to iden-
tify this compound. By using detection from DAD after HPLC, it should be possible to
measure not only absorbance at speciﬁc wavelengths for a given timepoint, but instead
measure a complete 0-700 nm UV-vis spectrum for each timepoint. This UV-vis spec-
trum can help distinguish between chemical compound with a retention time close to
each other, by measuring the absorbance capabilities across the whole 0-700 nm spec-
trum of light. An additional analytical method for identiﬁcation of compound Y, that
is compatible with HPLC, is identiﬁcation by mass spectrometry (MS). In MS, the mass
of all compounds present in a sample is measured as they are eluded from the HPLC
column, and from information regarding the retention time combined with the mass of
the analytes, one can deduct what kind of product is produced.
There were some more irregularities with the HPLC results.
For example, it was
not possible to identify pyruvate in any sample, even for the standard curve samples.
Pyruvate is a precursor for both acetate, lactate, formate and ethanol, and therefore,
one would not expect to measure a lot of pyruvate in a wildtype strain of P. thermoglu-
cosidasius. If, on the other hand, the ldh gene is deleted, thereby removing the lactate
producing pathway for P. thermoglucosidasius, one would expect to see pyruvate accu-
mulation during micro anaerobic growth, since the activity of the remaining pyruvate-
catabolising enzymes would not be sufﬁcient to handle the excess carbon ﬂux created
by removing the lactate pathway [73]. However, as mentioned, no pyruvate could be
detected whatsoever in the HPLC samples, so it was not possible to measure any differ-
ence in pyruvate accumulation between our wildtype P. thermoglucosidasius strain, and
the strains containing ldh knock-outs. Since the retention time of pyruvate is close to
that of glucose, the peak for pyruvate might have been eclipsed by the much larger glu-
cose peak when using the RI detector. However, since pyruvate contains a carboxylic
acid group just like lactate, formate and acetate, it would be expected that a clear peak
would be visible for measurements at 205 nm. Further experiments are warranted to
ﬁnd out why pyruvate was not being able to be measured for the chemical standard
samples. A start could be to make a fresh stock of pyruvate standard, and measure the
new sample using HPLC.
==PAGE:73==
discussion
73
7.2
Dehydratase screening
Prior to the experiments for measuring butanone production from different dehydratases,
it was expected that activity to produce butanone would be observed at least from the
positive control lysates, containing the well-characterised diol dehydratase from K. pneu-
moniae. Unfortunately, as mentioned in section 6.2, it was not possible to measure any
difference in butanone production from any of the screened dehydratases from this
project. In fact, no production of butanone could be observed whatsoever. Based on
current data, it’s hard to determine whether this lack of butanone production is due
to problems in expressing the dehydratases, lysing the dehydratase-producing cells, or
in the actual assay itself. Furthermore, although the conversion of 2,3-butanediol to
butanone has been demonstrated for at least one of the tested dehydratses used in this
project, the catalytic efﬁciency (k_cat/K_M) of this enzyme towards 2,3-butanediol has,
unsurprisingly, been demonstrated to be much lower than that of the native substrate.
Maddock et al. thus measured a 300 fold decrease in catalytic efﬁciency when testing
the K. pneumoniae dehydratase on 2,3-butanediol rather than 1,2-propanediol. As such,
for future experiments, it would be worth looking into replacing the butanediol sub-
strate used for the butanone screening with a native substrate for the dehydratases, in
order to test for any catalytic activity from the expressed dehydratases. For this pur-
pose, 1,2-propanediol could be used, since this is natively converted by dehydratases to
propionaldehyde, which should be measurable by the DNPH assay, since DNPH reacts
broadly with carbonyl groups. If the DNPH assay is repeated with 1,2-propanediol, and
a clear difference can be seen for the carbonyl content between the dehydratase express-
ing strains and the negative control, it would mean that the dehydratases are at least
getting expressed and are functional after lysis of cells. In that case, the test conditions
for the dehydratases in the assay will need to be reassessed. Furthermore, it is desir-
able to get a positive control for butanone production that does not rely on the DNPH
assay. For this purpose, gas chromatography could be used to quantify the amount
of produced butanone from a small subset of lysates, such as lysates from the positive
controls from K. pneumoniae. The conversion of 2,3-butanediol to butanone could hap-
pen in vitro in vials rather than in 96-well plates for ease of measurements by the gas
chromatography equipment. This would enable us to quantify any potential butanone
production from this small set of lysates, to check if something has gone wrong during
either lysis or dehydratase expression. To further test for lysis protocol efﬁciency, it is
possible to measure the speciﬁc enzyme concentration of the dehydratases following
lysis. Antibody-based quantiﬁcation methods, such as western blot, should be able to
determine the concentration of dehydratase present following different lysis methods.
The idea would once again be to only test this for a small subset of dehydratases, and
==PAGE:74==
discussion
74
then extrapolate from these results, since using antibodies are expensive, and only target
speciﬁc proteins, meaning that a new antibody would likely be needed for each native
dehydratase. A simpler method for measuring the speciﬁc protein concentration of de-
hydratases would normally be to purify the dehydratses through adding, for example,
a His-tag to the protein of interest. However, this solution would require a recloning
of all the plasmids made in this project. By measuring the speciﬁc concentrations of
dehydratases from a sample, it would also be possible to test the assumption that the
dehydratase is actually present in reasonable concentrations in the lysates.
For this
test, it would also be worth testing for dehydratase presence in samples such as super-
natant samples, to check for secretion, or cell debris samples, to check that expressed
dehydratases are not discarded along with leftover cell-debris following lysis.
7.3
Future perspectives
Besides the short-term improvements to the experiments detailed above, there are some
long term improvements to this project that would be interesting to implement. For
example, the dehydratases used in this project have all been expressed from native oper-
ons, with only smaller modiﬁcations being made to a subset of the operons, such as
the splicing of the α and β subunits of the dehydratase enzyme via a protein linker,
or the introduction of a T200S mutation for the K. pneumoniae dehydratase. Long term,
if the DNPH assay system is optimised to a point where butanone production from
dehydratase samples can be assessed, it would be nice to expand on the collection of
dehydratases used in this project. One interesting way to expand the dehydratase collec-
tion is through the implementation of synthetic operons. By for example using codon
optimised versions of the dha genes, it should be possible to improve the expression of
dehydratases by the host organism. In this study, E. coli was used to express the na-
tive dehydratase operons, but since some of the species for which the operons originate
from is relatively distantly related to E. coli, the codon usage may be quite different
from the optimal codon usage from E. coli. Another interesting prospect, that is linked
to dehydratase expression, is to express the dehydratase plasmids built in this study in
alternative host organism. The pVM50 plasmid from which the DH plasmids are built is
designed as a broad-host range plasmid, and would therefore work in organisms such
as Bacillus subtilis that are taxonomically more closely related to P. thermoglucosidasius.
The use of P. thermoglucosidasius to produce butanone under thermophilic conditions
remains an attractive idea. If more foundational work is done for both the metabolic en-
gineering of P. thermoglucosidasius, and the dehydratase screening system is developed
further, it would open up opportunities to create the ﬁrst thermophilic production strain
for butanone. Once a butanone-producing strain of P. thermoglucosidasius is established,
==PAGE:75==
conclusion
75
scale-up experiments can determine if the advantages of using thermophilic conditions
to produce butanone are great enough to ultimately make the biological production of
butanone economically viable.
8
conclusion
In this project, the aim was to enable the creation of a butanone-producing strain of
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius. To this end, three different strains of P. thermoglucosi-
dasius were created, that all contained genes encoding variations of heterologous AlsSD
enzymes, in order to produce the butanone-precursor molecule 2,3-butanediol in these
strains. The three P. thermoglucosidasius strains were used for fermentation experiments
under microanaerobic growth in minimal TMM media, but subsequent HPLC analy-
sis of metabolites produced by these strains showed no signs of butanediol production.
This lack of butanediol production might be caused by overly aerated cultures during
fermentation, as other fermentation products, such as ethanol, were not detected in the
HPLC samples either, despite the fact that these fermentation products are usually pro-
duced in high amounts during microanaerobic growth. Parallel to the effort to create
a butanediol-producing P. thermoglucosidasius strain was an effort to screen multiple en-
zymes for their activity towards converting 2,3-butanediol into butanone. In order to
perform screening experiments, a collection of 16 different variants of dehydratase genes
were therefore successfully cloned into plasmids. From the plasmid collection, each de-
hydratase variant was expressed in E. coli BL21, and lysates of the E. coli cultures were
used for an in vitro screening for butanone-converting activity by an adapted DNPH
assay. Initial tests to produce butanone did not give clear results, so a range of optimiza-
tion experiments were done, resulting in optimal reaction parameters being deﬁned
for the DNPH assay (5 mM DNPH, 5 µL DNPH, 520 nm absorbance measurements).
The optimised DNPH assay was able to detect butanone in the concentration range
10-500 mg/L. Despite using the optimised DNPH assay, it was ultimately impossible
to measure any production of butanone from any dehydratase variant. Future experi-
ments will show whether this is due to the assay working sub-optimally, or whether the
source of these problems is the expression and preparation of dehydratases. Although
more work is needed before a butanone-producing strain of P. thermoglucosidasius can be
created, this thesis project constitutes a meaningful step in the right direction towards
achieving that goal.
==PAGE:76==
references
76
references
[1] J. Laherrère, “The future of oil,” International Journal of Vehicle Design, vol. 35, no. 1-
2, pp. 9–26, 2004.
[2] IEA, “The Future of Petrochemicals – Analysis,” tech. rep., 2018.
[3] E. M. Abdelraheem, H. Busch, U. Hanefeld, and F. Tonin, “Biocatalysis explained:
From pharmaceutical to bulk chemical production,” Reaction Chemistry and Engi-
neering, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 1878–1894, 2019.
[4] A. M. Davy, H. F. Kildegaard, and M. R. Andersen, “Cell Factory Engineering,” Cell
Systems, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 262–275, 2017.
[5] E. Britannica, Genetic engineering. 2020.
[6] D. Liu, A. Hoynes-O’Connor, and F. Zhang, “Bridging the gap between systems
biology and synthetic biology,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 4, p. 211, 2013.
[7] C. Manzoni, D. A. Kia, J. Vandrovcova, J. Hardy, N. W. Wood, P. A. Lewis, and
R. Ferrari, “Genome, transcriptome and proteome: The rise of omics data and
their integration in biomedical sciences,” Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 286–302, 2018.
[8] K. Wetterstrand, “DNA Sequencing Costs: Data from the NHGRI Genome Sequenc-
ing Program (GSP),” 2020.
[9] M. Gustavsson and S. Y. Lee, “Prospects of microbial cell factories developed
through systems metabolic engineering,” Microbial Biotechnology, vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 610–617, 2016.
[10] A. J. J. Straathof and A. Bampouli, “Potential of commodity chemicals to become
bio-based according to maximum yields and petrochemical prices,” Biofuels, Bio-
products and Bioreﬁning, vol. 11, pp. 798–810, 2017.
[11] M. Tokic, N. Hadadi, M. Ataman, D. Neves, B. E. Ebert, L. M. Blank, L. Miskovic,
and V. Hatzimanikatis, “Discovery and Evaluation of Biosynthetic Pathways for the
Production of Five Methyl Ethyl Ketone Precursors,” ACS Synthetic Biology, vol. 7,
no. 8, pp. 1858–1873, 2018.
[12] T. Jin, J. Lian, and L. R. Jarboe, “Ethanol: A model biorenewable fuel,” Industrial
Biotechnology: Products and Processes, pp. 547–572, 2016.
==PAGE:77==
references
77
[13] H. Yoneda, D. J. Tantillo, and S. Atsumi, “Biological production of 2-butanone in
Escherichia coli,” ChemSusChem, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 92–95, 2014.
[14] Z. Chen, H. Sun, J. Huang, Y. Wu, and D. Liu, “Metabolic engineering of klebsiella
pneumoniae for the production of 2-butanone from glucose,” PLoS ONE, vol. 10,
no. 10, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[15] P. Turner, G. Mamo, and E. N. Karlsson, “Potential and utilization of thermophiles
and thermostable enzymes in bioreﬁning,” Microbial Cell Factories, vol. 6, pp. 1–23,
2007.
[16] L. R. Lynd, W. H. Van Zyl, J. E. McBride, and M. Laser, “Consolidated bioprocessing
of cellulosic biomass: An update,” Current Opinion in Biotechnology, vol. 16, no. 5,
pp. 577–583, 2005.
[17] B. M. Zeldes, M. W. Keller, A. J. Loder, C. T. Straub, M. W. Adams, and R. M. Kelly,
“Extremely thermophilic microorganisms as metabolic engineering platforms for
production of fuels and industrial chemicals,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 6,
no. NOV, pp. 1–17, 2015.
[18] U. Rasche, “Bioreactors and Fermentors-Powerful Tools for Resolving Cultivation
Bottlenecks,” no. 21, 2019.
[19] V. Haynes, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC press
LLC, 95th edition ed., 2014.
[20] J. P. Pereira, L. A. van der Wielen, and A. J. Straathof, “Perspectives for the micro-
bial production of methyl propionate integrated with product recovery,” Bioresource
Technology, vol. 256, no. December 2017, pp. 187–194, 2018.
[21] A. H. Hussein, B. K. Lisowska, and D. J. Leak, The Genus Geobacillus and Their
Biotechnological Potential, vol. 92. Elsevier, 2015.
[22] P. De Maayer, P. J. Brumm, D. A. Mead, and D. A. Cowan, “Comparative analysis
of the Geobacillus hemicellulose utilization locus reveals a highly variable target
for improved hemicellulolysis,” BMC Genomics, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2014.
[23] F. M. Duffner, U. Kirchner, M. P. Bauer, and R. Müller, “Phenol/cresol degradation
by the thermophilic Bacillus thermoglucosidasius A7: Cloning and sequence anal-
ysis of ﬁve genes involved in the pathway,” Gene, vol. 256, no. 1-2, pp. 215–221,
2000.
==PAGE:78==
references
78
[24] I. Pogrebnyakov, C. B. Jendresen, and A. T. Nielsen, “Genetic toolbox for controlled
expression of functional proteins in Geobacillus spp.,” PLoS ONE, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 1–15, 2017.
[25] A. Ahmad, H. B. Hartman, S. Krishnakumar, D. A. Fell, M. G. Poolman, and S. Sri-
vastava, “A Genome Scale Model of Geobacillus thermoglucosidasius (C56-YS93)
reveals its biotechnological potential on rice straw hydrolysate,” Journal of Biotech-
nology, vol. 251, no. December 2016, pp. 30–37, 2017.
[26] M. P. Taylor, C. D. Esteban, and D. J. Leak, “Development of a versatile shuttle
vector for gene expression in Geobacillus spp.,” Plasmid, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 45–52,
2008.
[27] J. Zhou, J. Lian, and C. V. Rao, “Metabolic engineering of Parageobacillus ther-
moglucosidasius for the efﬁcient production of (2R, 3R)-butanediol,” Applied Micro-
biology and Biotechnology, vol. 104, no. 10, pp. 4303–4311, 2020.
[28] P. P. Lin, K. S. Rabe, J. L. Takasumi, M. Kadisch, F. H. Arnold, and J. C. Liao,
“Isobutanol production at elevated temperatures in thermophilic Geobacillus ther-
moglucosidasius,” Metabolic Engineering, vol. 24, pp. 1–8, 2014.
[29] P. Ghiaci, J. Norbeck, and C. Larsson, “2-Butanol and butanone production in Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae through combination of a B12 dependent dehydratase and
a secondary alcohol dehydrogenase using a TEV-based expression system,” PLoS
ONE, vol. 9, no. 7, 2014.
[30] D. J. Maddock, M. L. Gerth, and W. M. Patrick, “An Engineered Glycerol Dehy-
dratase With Improved Activity for the Conversion of meso-2,3-butanediol to Bu-
tanone,” Biotechnology Journal, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 1–9, 2017.
[31] J. R. O’Brien, C. Raynaud, C. Croux, L. Girbal, P. Soucaille, and W. N. Lanzilotta,
“Insight into the Mechanism of the B12-Independent Glycerol Dehydratase from
Clostridium butyricum: Preliminary Biochemical and Structural Characterization,”
Biochemistry, vol. 43, no. 16, pp. 4635–4645, 2004.
[32] R. Daniel, T. A. Bobik, and G. Gottschalk, “Biochemistry of coenzyme B12-
dependent glycerol and diol dehydratases and organization of the encoding genes,”
FEMS Microbiology Reviews, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 553–566, 1998.
[33] R. H. Abeles and D. Dolphin, “The Vitamin B12 Coenzyme,” Accounts of Chemical
Research, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 114–120, 1976.
==PAGE:79==
references
79
[34] C. Seifert, S. Bowien, G. Gottschalk, and R. Daniel, “Identiﬁcation and expression
of the genes and puriﬁcation and characterization of the gene products involved
in reactivation of coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol dehydratase of Citrobacter fre-
undii,” European Journal of Biochemistry, vol. 268, no. 8, pp. 2369–2378, 2001.
[35] S. Honda, T. Toraya, and S. Fukui, “In situ reactivation of glycerol-inactivated coen-
zyme B12-dependent enzymes, glycerol dehydratase and diol dehydratase,” Journal
of Bacteriology, vol. 143, no. 3, pp. 1458–1465, 1980.
[36] R. J. N. Frandsen, J. A. Andersson, M. B. Kristensen, and H. Giese, “Efﬁcient four
fragment cloning for the construction of vectors for targeted gene replacement in
ﬁlamentous fungi,” BMC Molecular Biology, vol. 9, no. 70, pp. 1–11, 2008.
[37] H. H. Nour-eldin, B. G. Hansen, M. H. H. Nørholm, J. K. Jensen, and B. A. Halkier,
“Advancing uracil-excision based cloning towards an ideal technique for cloning
PCR fragments,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 34, no. 18, 2006.
[38] P. Calero, S. I. Jensen, and A. T. Nielsen, “Broad-Host-Range ProUSER Vectors En-
able Fast Characterization of Inducible Promoters and Optimization of p-Coumaric
Acid Production in Pseudomonas putida KT2440,” ACS Synthetic Biology, vol. 5,
no. 7, pp. 741–753, 2016.
[39] R. Silva-Rocha, E. Martínez-García, B. Calles, M. Chavarría, A. Arce-Rodríguez,
A. De Las Heras, A. D. Páez-Espino, G. Durante-Rodríguez, J. Kim, P. I. Nikel,
R. Platero, and V. De Lorenzo, “The Standard European Vector Architecture (SEVA):
A coherent platform for the analysis and deployment of complex prokaryotic phe-
notypes,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 41, no. D1, pp. 666–675, 2013.
[40] L. R. Snyder, J. J. Kirkland, and J. W. Dolan, Introduction to Modern Liquid Chromatog-
raphy, vol. 22. third ed., 2011.
[41] K. Töppner, D. Hansen, and E. Herbig, “HPLC Analysis: The Role of Ultrapure
Water,” G.I.T. Laboratory Journal, vol. 17, pp. 3–4, 2014.
[42] C. Phippen, “Liquid chromatography detectors.” 27412 Microbial chemistry 2018,
Technological University of Denmark.
[43] E. KOIVUSALMI, Characterisation and analysis of synthesis mixtures of hydroxy aldehy-
des, hydroxy carboxylic acids and polyols Article. Academic dissertation, University of
Helsingki, Porvoo, Finland, 2001.
[44] O. L. Brady and G. V. Elsmie, “The use of 2:4-dinitrophenylhydrazine as a reagent
for aldehydes and ketones,” The Analyst, vol. 51, no. 599, pp. 77–78, 1926.
==PAGE:80==
references
80
[45] J.
D.
Roberts
and
C.
Green,
“Absorption
Spectra
of
Some
2,4-
Dinitrophenylhydrazones,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
vol. 68,
no. 2, pp. 214–216, 1946.
[46] C. D. Georgiou, D. Zisimopoulos, V. Argyropoulou, E. Kalaitzopoulou, G. Salachas,
and T. Grune, “Protein and cell wall polysaccharide carbonyl determination by
a neutral pH 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine-based photometric assay,” Redox Biology,
vol. 17, no. April, pp. 128–142, 2018.
[47] Sachin S Kadam, Tambe ST, Grampurohit ND, and Gaikwad DD, “Review Article
on : Chemical Importance of Brady’S Reagent,” International Journal of Research in
Pharmacy and Chemistry, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 1086–1092, 2012.
[48] J. Bartosiak-Jentys, K. Eley, and D. J. Leak, “Application of pheB as a reporter gene
for Geobacillus spp., enabling qualitative colony screening and quantitative anal-
ysis of promoter strength,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 78, no. 16,
pp. 5945–5947, 2012.
[49] C. Berens and W. Hillen, “Gene regulation by tetracyclines: Constraints of resis-
tance regulation in bacteria shape TetR for application in eukaryotes,” European
Journal of Biochemistry, vol. 270, no. 15, pp. 3109–3121, 2003.
[50] V. A. Marlow, D. Rea, S. Najmudin, M. Wills, and V. Fülöp, “Structure and mecha-
nism of acetolactate decarboxylase,” ACS Chemical Biology, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 2339–
2344, 2013.
[51] G. Vandermeulen, C. Marie, D. Scherman, and V. Préat, “New generation of plas-
mid backbones devoid of antibiotic resistance marker for gene therapy trials,”
Molecular Therapy, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1942–1949, 2011.
[52] I. Peubez, N. Chaudet, C. Mignon, G. Hild, S. Husson, V. Courtois, K. De Luca,
D. Speck, and R. Sodoyer, “Antibiotic-free selection in E. coli: New considerations
for optimal design and improved production,” Microbial Cell Factories, vol. 9, pp. 1–
10, 2010.
[53] J. Alonso-Gutierrez, D. Koma, Q. Hu, Y. Yang, L. J. Chan, C. J. Petzold, P. D. Adams,
C. E. Vickers, L. K. Nielsen, J. D. Keasling, and T. S. Lee, “Toward industrial produc-
tion of isoprenoids in Escherichia coli: Lessons learned from CRISPR-Cas9 based
optimization of a chromosomally integrated mevalonate pathway,” Biotechnology
and Bioengineering, vol. 115, no. 4, pp. 1000–1013, 2018.
==PAGE:81==
references
81
[54] L. F. Bacon, C. H. Bennett, M. J. Danson, and D. J. Leak, “Development of an
efﬁcient technique for gene deletion and allelic exchange in Geobacillus spp .,”
Microbial Cell Factories, pp. 1–8, 2017.
[55] E. I. Riyanti and P. L. Rogers,
“KINETIC EVALUATION OF ETHANOL-
TOLERANT THERMOPHILE Geobacillus thermoglucosidasius M10EXG FOR
ETHANOL PRODUCTION,” Indonesian Journal of Agricultural Science, vol. 10, no. 1,
p. 24, 2016.
[56] M. Martins-Pinheiro, W. C. Lima, H. Asif, C. A. Oller, and C. F. Menck, “Evolution-
ary and functional relationships of the dha regulon by genomic context analysis,”
PLoS ONE, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1–13, 2016.
[57] H. Huang, C. S. Gong, and G. T. Tsao, “Production of 1,3-Propanediol by Klebsiella
pneumoniae,” Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology - Part A Enzyme Engineering
and Biotechnology, vol. 98-100, pp. 687–698, 2002.
[58] F. Madeira, Y. M. Park, J. Lee, N. Buso, T. Gur, N. Madhusoodanan, P. Basutkar,
A. R. N. Tivey, S. C. Potter, R. D. Finn, and R. Lopez, “The embl-ebi search and
sequence analysis tools apis in 2019,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 47, p. W636—W641,
July 2019.
[59] G. Yachdav, S. Wilzbach, B. Rauscher, R. Sheridan, I. Sillitoe, J. Procter, S. Lewis,
B. Rost, and T. Goldberg, “MSAViewer: interactive JavaScript visualization of mul-
tiple sequence alignments,” Bioinformatics, Jul 2016.
[60] X. Chen, J. Zaro, and W.-C. Shen, “Fusion Protein Linkers: Property, Design and
Functionality,” Adv Drug Deliv Rev., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 1357–1369, 2013.
[61] X. D. Wang, X. E. Zhang, Y. C. Guo, Z. P. Zhang, Z. A. Cao, and Y. F. Zhou, “Char-
acterization of glycerol dehydratase expressed by fusing its α- And β-subunits,”
Biotechnology Letters, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 711–717, 2009.
[62] T. S. Lee, R. A. Krupa, F. Zhang, M. Hajimorad, W. J. Holtz, N. Prasad, S. K. Lee,
and J. D. Keasling, “BglBrick vectors and datasheets: A synthetic biology platform
for gene expression,” Journal of Biological Engineering, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 12, 2011.
[63] H. Jeong, V. Barbe, C. H. Lee, D. Vallenet, D. S. Yu, S. H. Choi, A. Couloux, S. W.
Lee, S. H. Yoon, L. Cattolico, C. G. Hur, H. S. Park, B. Ségurens, S. C. Kim, T. K.
Oh, R. E. Lenski, F. W. Studier, P. Daegelen, and J. F. Kim, “Genome Sequences
of Escherichia coli B strains REL606 and BL21(DE3),” Journal of Molecular Biology,
vol. 394, no. 4, pp. 644–652, 2009.
==PAGE:82==
references
82
[64] M. S. Islam, A. Aryasomayajula, and P. R. Selvaganapathy, “A review on macroscale
and microscale cell lysis methods,” Micromachines, vol. 8, no. 3, 2017.
[65] I. life science, “EDTA and EGTA chelating agents - Product information.”
[66] T. Toraya, S. Honda, and K. Mori, “Coenzyme B12-dependent diol dehydratase
is a potassium ion-requiring calcium metalloenzyme: Evidence that the substrate-
coordinated metal ion is calcium,” Biochemistry, vol. 49, no. 33, pp. 7210–7217, 2010.
[67] C. W. Ho, W. S. Tan, W. B. Yap, T. C. Ling, and B. T. Tey, “Comparative evalua-
tion of different cell disruption methods for the release of recombinant hepatitis B
core antigen from Escherichia coli,” Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering, vol. 13,
no. 5, pp. 577–583, 2008.
[68] M. M. Bradford, “A Rapid and Sensitive Method for the Quantitation of Microgram
Quantities of Protein Utilizing the Principle of Protein-Dye Binding,” Analytical
Biochemistry, vol. 72, pp. 248–254, 1976.
[69] J. C. Fong, C. J. Svenson, K. Nakasugi, C. T. Leong, J. P. Bowman, B. Chen,
D. R. Glenn, B. A. Neilan, and P. L. Rogers, “Isolation and characterization of
two novel ethanol-tolerant facultative-anaerobic thermophilic bacteria strains from
waste compost,” Extremophiles, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 363–372, 2006.
[70] RStudio Team, RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. RStudio, PBC.,
Boston, MA, 2020.
[71] T. Toraya, A. Tanokuchi, A. Yamasaki, T. Nakamura, K. Ogura, and T. Tobimatsu,
“Diol Dehydratase-Reactivase Is Essential for Recycling of Coenzyme B12 in Diol
Dehydratase,” Biochemistry, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 69–78, 2016.
[72] Y. J. Tang, R. Sapra, D. Joyner, T. C. Hazen, S. Myers, D. Reichmuth, H. Blanch, and
J. D. Keasling, “Analysis of metabolic pathways and ﬂuxes in a newly discovered
thermophilic and ethanol-tolerant geobacillus strain,” Biotechnology and Bioengineer-
ing, vol. 102, no. 5, pp. 1377–1386, 2009.
[73] R. E. Cripps, K. Eley, D. J. Leak, B. Rudd, M. Taylor, M. Todd, S. Boakes, S. Martin,
and T. Atkinson, “Metabolic engineering of Geobacillus thermoglucosidasius for
high yield ethanol production,” Metabolic Engineering, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 398–408,
2009.
[74] R. Platt, C. Drescher, S. K. Park, and G. J. Phillips, “Genetic system for reversible
integration of DNA constructs and lacZ gene fusions into the Escherichia coli chro-
mosome,” Plasmid, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 12–23, 2000.
==PAGE:83==
references
83
[75] F. W. Studier and B. A. Moffatt, “Use of bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase to
direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes,” Journal of Molecular Biology,
vol. 189, no. 1, pp. 113–130, 1986.
[76] Y. Suzuki, T. Kishigami, K. Inoue, Y. Mizoguchi, N. Eto, M. Takagi, and S. Abe,
“Bacillus thermoglucosidasius sp. nov., a New Species of Obligately Thermophilic
Bacilli,” Systematic and Applied Microbiology, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 487–495, 1983.
==PAGE:84==
appendix
84
9
appendix
==PAGE:85==
appendix
85
Table 9: List of plasmids used in this project. In case plasmids were saved for subsequent project,
the plasmids were given the name denoted in the "Saved as" coloumn
Name
Relevant characteristics
Source
Saved as
pIP3
Source of P3 promoter
[24]
N/A
pVM41
Source of ColE1 backbone, used for δldh P. thermoglucosidasius strain;
In house
N/A
pVM45
Source of TetR-Ptet promoter
In house
N/A
pVM49
Source of pP15a backbone; P15a-KanR-RepB-kanR
In house
N/A
pVM50
Source of plasmid backbone for pDH plasmids
In house
N/A
pAls1
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)
This study
N/A
pAls2
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)
This study
N/A
pAls3
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
This study
N/A
pAls4
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
This study
N/A
pAls5
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
This study
N/A
pAls6
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
This study
N/A
pAls7
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)
This study
pVM58
pAls8
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
This study
pVM59
pAls9
ColE1-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
This study
pVM60
pAls10
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)
This study
N/A
pAls11
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)
This study
N/A
pAls12
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
This study
N/A
pAls13
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
This study
N/A
pAls14
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-P3-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
This study
N/A
pAls15
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-PLDH-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
This study
N/A
pAls16
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)
This study
N/A
pAls17
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
This study
N/A
pAls18
P15a-KanR-RepB-dLDH-TetR-Ptet-alsS(B)-alsD(St)
This study
N/A
pDH1
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Pt)
This study
N/A
pDH2
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Aw)
This study
pVM66
pDH3
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Lb)
This study
pVM67
pDH4
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Lr)
This study
pVM68
pDH5
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Ts)
This study
N/A
pDH6
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Kp)
This study
pVM70
pDH7
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Kp)T100S
This study
pVM71
pDH8
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Cp)
This study
pVM72
pDH9
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Pp)
This study
N/A
pDH10
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Cf)
This study
pVM74
pDH11
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Hj)
This study
pVM75
pDH12
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Pt)-αβfuse
This study
pVM76
pDH13
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Aw)-αβfuse
This study
pVM77
pDH14
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Lb)-αβfuse
This study
pVM78
pDH15
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Lr)-αβfuse
This study
pVM79
pDH16
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Ts)-αβfuse
This study
pVM80
pDH17
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Kp)-αβfuse
This study
pVM81
pDH18
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Kp)T100S-αβfuse
This study
pVM82
pDH19
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Cp)-αβfuse
This study
N/A
pDH20
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Pp)-αβfuse
This study
N/A
pDH21
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Cf)-αβfuse
This study
N/A
pDH22
BBR1-Gm-glms-cm-TetR-Ptet-DH(Hj)-αβfuse
This study
pVM86
==PAGE:86==
appendix
86
Table 10: List of strains used in this study
Strains
Genotype
Reference
Saved as
E. coli DH5-αλ pir
endA1 hsdR17 glnV44 (= supE44) thi-1 recA1 gyrA96 relA1 φ80dlac∆(lacZ)M15 ∆(lacZYA-argF)U169 zdg-232::Tn10 uidA::pir+
[74]
-
E. coli BL21 (DE3)
B F– ompT gal dcm lon hsdSB(rB–mB–) λ(DE3 [lacI lacUV5-T7p07 ind1 sam7 nin5]) [malB+]K-12(λS)
[75]
-
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius DSM2542
Wildtype isolate
[76]
-
als7
P. thermoglucosidasius DSM2542 δldhA::alsSD(Bs)
This study
sVM58
als8
P. thermoglucosidasius DSM2542 δldhA::alsSD(Bs)(T55A)
This study
sVM59
als9
P. thermoglucosidasius DSM2542 δldhA::alsS(B)-alsD(St)
This study
sVM60
==PAGE:87==
appendix
87
Table 11: Primer list, volume 1
Primer name
Sequence (5’ -> 3’)
P98-U-FW-ldhBB
AGCGCAUGCCATTATCATTTCCGTAATGCC
P157-U-Rev-TerA
ATCGCCUTTAATTAAAGGCATCAAATAAAACG
P158-U-FW-P3
AGGCGAUGGCAAAACAACCGGCTC
P159-U-Rev-P3
ACGACCUCCTTAACGATAGTTTTCGCC
P160-U-FW-alsS(Bs)
AGGTCGUTTCCCATGACAAAAGCAACAAAAGAAC
P161-U-Rev-alsS(Bs)
AGTGCUAGAGAGCTTTCGTTTTCATGAG
P162-U-FW-alsD(Bs)
AGCACUCTAGGAGGTCGATTACCATGAAACGAGAAAGCAACATTC
P163-U-Rev-alsD(Bs)
AtgcgcUTTATTCAGGGCTTCCTTCAG
P164-U-REV-T55A
AAATGCUCCGATACCGAAGTCTCCA
P165-U-FW-T55A
AGCATTUAACAAGCTTGACGGAGAGC
P166-U-Fw-Pldh
AGGCGAUTTTTCATTTATTAGACTGCTTGA
P167-U-REV-Pldh
ACGACCUCCTCCAAAAAATGAATTTGTGAAAC
P168-U-FW-alsDst
AGCACUCTAGGAGGTCGATTACCatgtctgaagccataaaatt
P169-U-Rev-alsDst
AtgcgcUttattcagccttagtaatatctttacg
P170-als(BS)
CGGACACATCAATCTTTGGA
P171-als(BS)-2
TGCGTAATGCAGTCGATGA
P172-als(BS)-3
ATGAACGCTGAAGGTCCTGT
P173-U-FW-DH(Pt)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGAGATCCAAGCGATTTCAAG
P174-U-REV-DH(Pt)
GGTGCGAUTTACGTAATTTCTTCAAGACGC
P175-U-FW-DH(Aw)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGACGATGAAGTCAAAAAGATTTG
P176-U-REV-DH(Aw)
GGTGCGAUTTATGACAGTTCTGTATTATCAAG
P177-U-FW-DH(Lb)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGAAACGTCAAAAACGATTTG
P178-U-REV-DH(Lb)
GGTGCGAUCTAATCTAATGTCTTAAAGGGCA
P179-U-FW-DH(Lr)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGAAACGTCAAAAACGATTTGA
P180-U-REV-DH(Lr)
GGTGCGAUTCACCTGTTTGCCATTTCC
P181-U-FW-DH(Ts)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGAAACATTCTAAGCGATTTGAGG
P182-U-REV-DH(Ts)
GGTGCGAUCTAATCTAAGTATTTAAGTGGCAAAC
P183-U-FW-Dha(Kp)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGAAAAGATCAAAACGATTTGCAG
P184-U-Rev-Dha(Kp)
ATAGATUTAATTCGCCTGACCGGC
P185-U-FW-Dhb(Kp)
AATCTAUAGGAGGTCGATTAGCATGTCGCTTTCACCG
P186-U-REV-Dhb(Kp)
GGTGCGAUTCAGTTTCTCTCACTTAACGG
P187-U-Rev-KpT200S
ACTGGCUCAACACGCCGGGACGG
P188-U-FW-KpT200S
AGCCAGUGCTCGGTGGAAGAGG
P189-U-FW-DH(Cp)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACGTGAAATCTAAAAGATTCCAAG
P190-U-REV-DH(Cp)
GGTGCGAUTTAAATATTTTTTAAAGGCATCCC
P191-U-FW-DH(Pf)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGCGTTCCAAGAGGTTTG
P192-U-REV-DH(Pf)
GGTGCGAUTCACTGGCTCCTTTCGGGT
P193-U-FW-DH(Cf)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGAGAAGATCAAAACGATTCG
P194-U-REV-DH(Cf)
GGTGCGAUTCACACGAGTTCTTTGAGCTG
P195-U-FW-DH(Hj)
GGCGAUAGGAGGAATATACATGGTTAACAACAAACCAGG
P196-U-REV-DH(Hj)
GGTGCGAUCTATTCGATCGGTTTGAGC
P197-U-REV-DH(Pt)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCATGAATATCTTCTGGCCTG
P198-U-FW-DH(Pt)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCATCATTAACGAACAGATCATTC
P199-U-REV-DH(Aw)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCTATGCTTGCTGGGTCAATAGCC
P200-U-FW-DH(Aw)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCGCTATAAACGAACAAATGTTA
P201-U-REV-DH(Lb)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCAAGCTGCATGTTTTGTGGATC
P202-U-FW-DH(Lb)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCGCTCAAGAAATTGATGAAAACT
P203-U-REV-DH(Lr)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCCAGTTCCAAATGTTCTGGAT
P204-U-FW-DH(Lr)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCGCTGATATTGATGAAAACTTATTAC
P205-U-REV-DH(Ts)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCCAAATTGTCAGGATTAATGGTG
P206-U-FW-DH(Ts)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCTACGTAGATGAAGAACTGTT
P207-U-REV-DH(Kp)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCTTCAATGGTGTCGGGCTGA
P208-U-FW-DH(Kp)yF
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCCAACAGACAACCCAAATTCA
P209-U-REV-DH(Kp)T200Sab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCTTCAATGGTGTCGGGCTG
P210-U-FW-DH(Kp)T200Syf
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCCAACAGACAACCCAAATTCAG
P211-U-REV-DH(Cp)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCCTCTATATCCTCTGGTCTCAT
P212-U-FW-DH(Cp)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCGAAGAAAGAACTTTTATACCAGAAAT
P213-U-REV-DH(Pf)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCGATGCTCTCGGGGCTGA
P214-U-FW-DH(Pf)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCAGCATTGATGTGAACACCCT
P215-U-REV-DH(Cf)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCTTCAATTGAGCCAGGCTGAA
P216-U-FW-DH(Cf)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCGAATGCACAACTGAACGTAA
P217-U-REV-DH(Hj)ab
ACCGCTUCCACCTCCCCCGCTCCCTCCGCCTCCGACATCCTTCGGGTCGAC
P218-U-FW-DH(Hj)yFG
AAGCGGUGGCGGTGGCAGCGGAGGCGGCGGTAGCAGCCAAGCGAAACAACG
==PAGE:88==
appendix
88
Table 12: Primer list, volume 2
Primer name
Sequence (5’ -> 3’)
P219-DH(Pt)
TCGATGGTGACGATACTCCA
P220-DH(Pt)
GCATACGTCTGCCATTATTACG
P221-DH(Pt)
TGCTGCGAAATATGCAAAAG
P222-DH(Pt)
TATAGGCAATGCCACGACAG
P223-DH(Pt)
CGGCCGTAGTCATCAAAACT
P224-DH(Aw)
TTGAAGAAGCGACCGAACTT
P225-DH(Aw)
CGTGATGTTGTCGCTGACTT
P226-DH(Aw)
ATCGGCATTGGCTTACAGTC
P227-DH(Aw)
CGGATGCCCGTTTATTAGAA
P228-DH(Aw)
CCATTGTCCAACGTGATGAT
P229-DH(Lb)
ATGCGGTTTACGTCTGGTTC
P230-DH(Lb)
TTTAAGGATGTTGCCCAAGC
P231-DH(Lb)
TGACGTTTCCTTCTGTGGTG
P232-DH(Lb)
GGATGCGGTTCAACGTAACT
P233-DH(Lb)
ATGCGGCTAAGCTGATCAAT
P234-DH(Lr)
TACCGCATATGCTGAAACCA
P235-DH(Lr)
TGTCGCTGAAGCAATTTTGA
P236-DH(Lr)
CCCACAAGCGCCAGTACTTA
P237-DH(Lr)
TGGCAACTGAAAAAGTAATTGG
P238-DH(Lr)
TCCGATTGTCGATGAAGTTG
P239-DH(Ts)
CGATACACCTTACTCCAAAGCA
P240-DH(Ts)
AAACAGCGCATATCTGGAGAC
P241-DH(Ts)
AAAGGCATGATGGTAAAGCCTA
P242-DH(Ts)
TGTGACAGGGGTTATTAATGGA
P243-DH(Ts)
CAGTTGAAGAAGTCGGCACA
P244-DH(Kp)
ATTTACCGACGGCGATGATA
P245-DH(Kp)
AGTGCGGTGGAAGAGATGAT
P246-DH(Kp)
AAGCCGCGCTATTTCATATC
P247-DH(Kp)
GAGACCATCACCGAGACCAT
P248-DH(Kp)
CTACATTAGCGGCGAAAAGC
P249-DH(Cp)
CAATGTGCAGTTGAGGAAGC
P250-DH(Cp)
AGCTGCAACTTACTGTCATGGA
P251-DH(Cp)
GCTCCGCTTTTAACTCCAGA
P252-DH(Cp)
GATGAAAATCATAGCAGGAATTGA
P253-DH(Cp)
CCTCAAGGGGATGTTAAGGA
P254-DH(Pf)
CCTACGCCGAAACCGTGT
P255-DH(Pf)
GCCGAGGACATGATGAACC
P256-DH(Pf)
TCATCCACCAGAAGGACCTG
P257-DH(Pf)
GAACTGGAGGGCCAGTACG
P258-DH(Pf)
CACGATTCCCTACGACCAG
P259-DH(Cf)
TTAACCAGCTACGCCGAAAC
P260-DH(Cf)
TGATGAAGCGCAATATCACC
P261-DH(Cf)
AAACACGTGGTGCAGGATG
P262-DH(Cf)
CGATGGAAACCATCACTGAA
P263-DH(Cf)
GCCGTGCATATTCAGGATCT
P264-DH(Hj)
CTCTCGCTGTTGATCGGAAC
P265-DH(Hj)
CACAAGAGCTGATGGAACGA
P266-DH(Hj)
GATACGCAAAAGGGGAGAGTC
P267-DH(Hj)
CGGACTGAAGGGGACTGTAA
P268-DH(Hj)
ACGAGATCATGGCACAGGTC
P270-Ptet-U-FW
AGGCGAUAGCGGATAACAATTTCACAC
P271-Ptet-U-Rev
ACGACCUCCTATCGCCTCAGCTTACTGCAG
P272-P15a-U-Fw
AATGGTAUGCGTTTTGACACAT
P273-P15-U-rev
atatatUccgcttcctcgctc
P274-LDH-U-Rev
ATACCATUTTGAGTTGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTGC
P275-LDH-U-FW
aatataUccGCGCCCAATACGCAGGG
==PAGE:89==
appendix
89
Table 13: Application of the different primers
Primer name
Application
Primer name
Application
P98-U-FW-ldhBB
Cloning of ColE1 backbone
P219-DH(Pt)
Sequencing primer
P157-U-Rev-TerA
Cloning of ColE1 backbone
P220-DH(Pt)
Sequencing primer
P158-U-FW-P3
Cloning of P3 promoter
P221-DH(Pt)
Sequencing primer
P159-U-Rev-P3
Cloning of P3 promoter
P222-DH(Pt)
Sequencing primer
P160-U-FW-alsS(Bs)
Cloning of AlsS gene from Bacillus subtilis
P223-DH(Pt)
Sequencing primer
P161-U-Rev-alsS(Bs)
Cloning of AlsS gene from Bacillus subtilis
P224-DH(Aw)
Sequencing primer
P162-U-FW-alsD(Bs)
Cloning of AlsD gene from Bacillus subtilis
P225-DH(Aw)
Sequencing primer
P163-U-Rev-alsD(Bs)
Cloning of AlsD gene from Bacillus subtilis
P226-DH(Aw)
Sequencing primer
P164-U-REV-T55A
Introducing T55A mutation in B. subtilis AlsD
P227-DH(Aw)
Sequencing primer
P165-U-FW-T55A
Introducing T55A mutation in B. subtilis AlsD
P228-DH(Aw)
Sequencing primer
P166-U-Fw-Pldh
Cloning of Pldh promoter
P229-DH(Lb)
Sequencing primer
P167-U-REV-Pldh
Cloning of Pldh promoter
P230-DH(Lb)
Sequencing primer
P168-U-FW-alsDst
Cloning of AlsS gene from Bacillus subtilis
P231-DH(Lb)
Sequencing primer
P169-U-Rev-alsDst
Cloning of AlsS gene from Bacillus subtilis
P232-DH(Lb)
Sequencing primer
P170-als(BS)
Sequencing primer
P233-DH(Lb)
Sequencing primer
P171-als(BS)-2
Sequencing primer
P234-DH(Lr)
Sequencing primer
P172-als(BS)-3
Sequencing primer
P235-DH(Lr)
Sequencing primer
P173-U-FW-DH(Pt)
Cloning of DH from Pt gDNA
P236-DH(Lr)
Sequencing primer
P174-U-REV-DH(Pt)
Cloning of DH from Pt gDNA
P237-DH(Lr)
Sequencing primer
P175-U-FW-DH(Aw)
Cloning of DH from Aw gDNA
P238-DH(Lr)
Sequencing primer
P176-U-REV-DH(Aw)
Cloning of DH from Aw gDNA
P239-DH(Ts)
Sequencing primer
P177-U-FW-DH(Lb)
Cloning of DH from Lb gDNA
P240-DH(Ts)
Sequencing primer
P178-U-REV-DH(Lb)
Cloning of DH from Lb gDNA
P241-DH(Ts)
Sequencing primer
P179-U-FW-DH(Lr)
Cloning of DH from Lr gDNA
P242-DH(Ts)
Sequencing primer
P180-U-REV-DH(Lr)
Cloning of DH from Lr gDNA
P243-DH(Ts)
Sequencing primer
P181-U-FW-DH(Ts)
Cloning of DH from Ts gDNA
P244-DH(Kp)
Sequencing primer
P182-U-REV-DH(Ts)
Cloning of DH from Ts gDNA
P245-DH(Kp)
Sequencing primer
P183-U-FW-Dha(Kp)
Cloning of DH-subunit α from Kp gDNA
P246-DH(Kp)
Sequencing primer
P184-U-Rev-Dha(Kp)
Cloning of DH-subunit α from Kp gDNA
P247-DH(Kp)
Sequencing primer
P185-U-FW-Dhb(Kp)
Cloning of DH-subunit β from Kp gDNA
P248-DH(Kp)
Sequencing primer
P186-U-REV-Dhb(Kp)
Cloning of DH-subunit β from Kp gDNA
P249-DH(Cp)
Sequencing primer
P187-U-Rev-KpT200S
Introducing T200S mutation in Kp DH
P250-DH(Cp)
Sequencing primer
P188-U-FW-KpT200S
Introducing T200S mutation in Kp DH
P251-DH(Cp)
Sequencing primer
P189-U-FW-DH(Cp)
Cloning of DH from Cp gDNA
P252-DH(Cp)
Sequencing primer
P190-U-REV-DH(Cp)
Cloning of DH from Cp gDNA
P253-DH(Cp)
Sequencing primer
P191-U-FW-DH(Pf)
Cloning of DH from Pf gDNA
P254-DH(Pf)
Sequencing primer
P192-U-REV-DH(Pf)
Cloning of DH from Pf gDNA
P255-DH(Pf)
Sequencing primer
P193-U-FW-DH(Cf)
Cloning of DH from Cf gDNA
P256-DH(Pf)
Sequencing primer
P194-U-REV-DH(Cf)
Cloning of DH from Cf gDNA
P257-DH(Pf)
Sequencing primer
P195-U-FW-DH(Hj)
Cloning of DH from Hj gDNA
P258-DH(Pf)
Sequencing primer
P196-U-REV-DH(Hj)
Cloning of DH from Hj gDNA
P259-DH(Cf)
Sequencing primer
P197-U-REV-DH(Pt)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Pt DH
P260-DH(Cf)
Sequencing primer
P198-U-FW-DH(Pt)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Pt DH
P261-DH(Cf)
Sequencing primer
P199-U-REV-DH(Aw)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Aw DH
P262-DH(Cf)
Sequencing primer
P200-U-FW-DH(Aw)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Aw DH
P263-DH(Cf)
Sequencing primer
P201-U-REV-DH(Lb)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Lb DH
P264-DH(Hj)
Sequencing primer
P202-U-FW-DH(Lb)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Lb DH
P265-DH(Hj)
Sequencing primer
P203-U-REV-DH(Lr)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Lr DH
P266-DH(Hj)
Sequencing primer
P204-U-FW-DH(Lr)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Lr DH
P267-DH(Hj)
Sequencing primer
P205-U-REV-DH(Ts)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Ts DH
P268-DH(Hj)
Sequencing primer
P206-U-FW-DH(Ts)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Ts DH
P270-Ptet-U-FW
Cloning of TetR-Ptet promoter
P207-U-REV-DH(Kp)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Kp DH
P271-Ptet-U-Rev
Cloning of TetR-Ptet promoter
P208-U-FW-DH(Kp)yF
Fusing αβ subunits in Kp DH
P272-P15a-U-Fw
Cloning of P15a backbone
P209-U-REV-DH(Kp)T200Sab
Fusing αβ subunits in Kp T200S DH
P273-P15-U-rev
Cloning of P15a backbone
P210-U-FW-DH(Kp)T200Syf
Fusing αβ subunits in Kp T200S DH
P274-LDH-U-Rev
Cloning of LDH homology region
P211-U-REV-DH(Cp)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Cp DH
P275-LDH-U-FW
Cloning of LDH homology region
P212-U-FW-DH(Cp)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Cp DH
P213-U-REV-DH(Pf)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Pf DH
P214-U-FW-DH(Pf)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Pf DH
P215-U-REV-DH(Cf)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Cf DH
P216-U-FW-DH(Cf)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Cf DH
P217-U-REV-DH(Hj)ab
Fusing αβ subunits in Hj DH
P218-U-FW-DH(Hj)yFG
Fusing αβ subunits in Hj DH
==PAGE:90==
appendix
90
Figure 35: Gelpicture of colony PCR to conﬁrm genome integration. As seen in ﬁgure 9, colony
PCR is done for antibiotic-sensitive colonies to determine if they have the gene of
interest integrated or not. In this case, the integrated DNA should result in band
with a length of approx. 5 kb, whereas the wildtype will show bands at approx. 3 kb,
as seen by the wildtype control samples that were run (marked purple). From the
gel, it looks like integration has succesfully happened for some colonies of the als7
(marked red) and als8 (marked blue) strains.
==PAGE:91==
appendix
91
Figure 36: Gelpicture of colony PCR to conﬁrm genome integration of the Als9 construct. Since
the cPCR didn’t work for the primer set used for ﬁgure 36, this PCR veriﬁcation
was instead done by using two independent primer sets: One resulting in a band of
approx. 2000 bp (gels in left side of ﬁgure), and one resulting in a band of approx.
1800 bp (right gels in the ﬁgure).
The PCR procedure was to ﬁrst do the cPCR
resulting in the bands on the gels to the right. By clean-streaking colonies resulting
in bands from the ﬁrst PCR, a second cPCR was done for the same clone with the
alternative primerpair. Since there are at least two cases where bands are present at
the right size for both gels, with no bands from the wildtype control, it is concluded
that the genome integration of als9 has been succesful.
