==PAGE:1==
Multi-objective optimization of 
organic Rankine cycle systems 
accounting for dynamic performance   
Søren Bojer Jørgensen   
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Project details
Title
Multi-objective optimization of organic Rankine cycle systems accounting for dynamic performance
Author
Søren Bojer Jørgensen (s183162)
Supervisors
Fredrik Haglind, Associate Professor, Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Mechanical Engineer-
ing, Technical University of Denmark
Roberto Pili, Postdoc, Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark
Period
24.08.2020 - 24.01.2021
30 ECTS
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The organic Rankine cycle system is a well-established technology for converting medium/low tempera-
ture waste heat into mechanical or electrical power. Ineﬃciencies in the internal combustion engines for
road transportation lead to large amounts of waste heat that are not exploited. Because of the engine
load changes during a driving cycle, the mass ﬂow rate and temperature of the heat source ﬂuctuate
rapidly over a broad range. This poses high requirements to the control and design of the organic Rank-
ine cycle unit, in order to prevent the risk of liquid droplets at the turbine inlet and acid gas corrosion in
the evaporator if the exhaust gas temperatures are too low. Furthermore, the additional weight caused
by the installation of the organic Rankine cycle system should be considered.
The present report presents a novel design method for organic Rankine cycle systems subject to highly
ﬂuctuating heat sources, ensuring safe and eﬃcient operation. An integral optimization code developed
in MATLAB/Simulink combining the design of the thermodynamic cycle, the system evaporator and
the control system with a dynamic simulation model is presented. The multi-objective optimization
maximizes the organic Rankine cycle net power output over a driving cycle of a heavy-duty truck, while
minimizing the mass of the evaporator. The results show that the design point of the exhaust gas heat
source should be chosen near the time weighted mean values of mass ﬂow rate and temperature. The
results also show that, in order to ensure safe operation, the degree of superheating of the working ﬂuid
as well as the exhaust gas temperature leaving the evaporator at design conditions should be higher than
what classical steady-state thermodynamic analyses suggest. This work provides a unique benchmark
for the optimization of organic Rankine cycle systems subject to high ﬂuctuating heat sources that will
be of beneﬁt for both academia and industry.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank project supervisors, Fredrik Haglind and Roberto Pili, for the support
throughout the project period. We have had many interesting discussions over the past ﬁve months.
The project has been very challenging but also very rewarding. I appreciate the opportunity to work on
a novel project and contribute with valuable information for future use both in academia and industry.
I hope to be able to use the experiences from this project in the future and contribute to a sustainable
future and develop value-adding technology for people.
I would also like to thank family and friends for continuous support over the past ﬁve months. It
has been a strange period, where the interactions with the world outside have been mainly through
telephone and video calls due to the COVID-19 restrictions. It is safe to say, that I have gotten to know
my 12 square meter room at the Kampsax dormitory very well and a special thanks goes out to my
fellow dormitory roommates at kitchen 40, who have helped keep the spirit high.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Nomenclature
1
2
Introduction
3
3
Waste heat recovery from diesel engine
6
3.1
Heat source characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.1
Minimum exhaust gas temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.2
Heat capacity correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.3
Available heat transfer rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
ORC system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Multi-objective optimization
11
5
Thermodynamic ORC design
13
5.1
Pump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.2
Evaporator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.3
Expander . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4
Condenser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.5
Decision variables and bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.6
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Fin and tube evaporator design
20
6.1
Decision variables and bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
Evaporator pressure losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.3
Evaporator mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.4
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
Dynamic simulation and controller design
24
7.1
Dynamic model of evaporator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.1.1
Heat transfer coeﬃcients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.2
Dynamic model of expander . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.2.1
Mass ﬂow rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.2.2
Isentropic eﬃciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.3
Control of pump and evaporator exhaust bypass valve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.4
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
8
Working ﬂuid selection
29
9
Results
31
9.1
Thermodynamic ORC design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
9.1.1
ORC system design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
9.2
Thermodynamic ORC design and ﬁn and tube evaporator design . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
9.2.1
ORC system design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
9.2.2
Evaporator sizing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
9.3
ORC design considering dynamic performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
9.3.1
ORC system design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
9.3.2
Design vs. oﬀ-design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.3.3
Dynamic response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10 Discussion
60
11 Conclusion
63
12 Bibliography
64
==PAGE:6==
A Appendix
70
A.1 Preheater, vaporizer and superheater heat transfer conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.1.1
Heat transfer rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.1.2
Overall heat transfer coeﬃcients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.1.3
Logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.1.4
Heat transfer areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 Oﬀ-design isentropic eﬃciency of expander . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:7==
1
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
F
NFPA 704 ﬂammability hazard
GSF
global safety factor
GWP
100-year global warming potential
H
NFPA 704 health hazard
I
NFPA 704 instability hazard
IC
internal combustion
LMTD logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerence
LP
low pressure
NA
not available
ODP
ozone depletion potential
ORC
organic Rankine cycle
RC
Rankine cycle
T- ˙Q
temperature-heat transfer rate
T-s
temperature-speciﬁc entropy
WHR
waste heat recovery
Variables
˙m
mass ﬂow rate (kg/s)
˙Q
heat transfer rate (W)
˙V
volumetric ﬂow rate (m3/s)
˙W
power (W)
A
area (m2)
cp
speciﬁc heat capacity (J/kg-K)
Cstodola Stodola’s constant
d
tube outer diameter (m)
fpitch
ﬁn pitch (1/m)
fspacing ﬁn spacing (-)
h
speciﬁc enthalpy (J/kg)
L
length fraction of phase region evaporator
(-)
l
tube length (m)
m
mass (kg)
p
pressure (Pa)
SH
degree of superheating (K)
T
temperature (K)
t
tube thickness (m)
V
volume (m3)
x
vapor quality (-)
Z
compressibility factor (-)
Subscripts
avai
available
avg
average
crit
critical
D
design
e
expander
eva
evaporator
ext
external
fl
ﬂuid
g
generator
height height
hs
heat source
in
inlet
k
condenser
L
saturated liquid
LV
vaporizer section of evaporator
max
maximum
min
minimum
net
net
OD
oﬀ-design
out
outlet
p
pump
1
==PAGE:8==
PH
preheater section of evaporator
pm
pump and pump motor
pp
pinch point
r
ratio
s
isentropic
sat
saturation
SH
superheater section of evaporator
st
stage
steel
steel
ts
timeseries
V
saturated vapor
wf
working ﬂuid
y
yield
Greek letters
α
heat transfer coeﬃcient (W/m2-K)
∆
diﬀerence
η
eﬃciency (%)
γ
heat capacity ratio
λ
thermal conductivity (W/m-K)
ψ
oﬀ-design heat transfer coeﬃcient exponent
ρ
desnity (kg/m3)
σ
material strength (MPa)
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
By 2050, the world energy demand is projected to increase by nearly 50% [1]. The focus on eﬃcient use of
energy is increasing as concerns over climate change are growing. There are countless initiatives related
to installation of renewable energy production in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, however there
are also signiﬁcant emission reductions and potentially cost savings from improving energy eﬃciency of
existing emitters. The transportation sector accounted for the highest share of ﬁnal energy consumption
in the 24 International Energy Agency participating countries in 2018 with a share of 35% [2]. Passenger
cars and freight road vehicles account for an estimated 21% and 9% of the ﬁnal energy related CO2
emissions.
The road transportation infrastructure is largely based on internal combustion (IC) engines. There
are approximately 380 million heavy-duty vehicles in the world and that number is growing [3]. There
are currently no real alternatives that can replace the entire range of IC engine applications and it would
take decades to replace the IC engines in addition to enormous investments [3].
Although internal combustion engines have continuously been improved since the 19th century, the
thermal eﬃciency is rarely higher than 40%, which in turn means that more than half of the fuel energy
is unused and goes to waste [4–6]. The conversion of waste heat into useful power can be beneﬁcial to
increase thermal eﬃciency of the IC engine and thereby reduce the greenhouse gas emissions and fuel
cost.
One way to recover some of this waste heat energy is by using waste heat recovery (WHR) organic
Rankine cycles (ORC). Organic Rankine cycles have been studied extensively in the past two decades [7]
and their advantages are well known. The ORC is similar to the traditional steam Rankine cycle (RC),
but it uses organic working ﬂuids instead of water. The availability of diﬀerent organic ﬂuids lead to
large application ranges with regards to heat source temperatures [8]. ORCs are applied in various
industries with the majority of applications in geothermal power plants, heat recovery, biomass power
plants accounting for 74.8%, 13.9% and 11.1% respectively of the total installed capacity of 2701 MW
in 2017 [9]. Within the heat recovery category, the main application is waste heat recovery from large
IC engines (> 1 MW) and accounts for 65% of total installed capacity. These applications generally
show small and slow variations in heat source characteristics compared to IC engines used for road
transportation.
The variability of the heat source is highly inﬂuential on the performance of the ORC. Heat sources
with high variability will impact the ORC so that it mostly operates far from the design point. Therefore,
the choice of design point is not straightforward [10] and it is based on a trade-oﬀbetween thermody-
namic performance and ORC unit constraints imposed by the customer such as weight, volume and cost.
The control system is also critical to ensure that the ORC system is operated within allowable limits.
The ORC system components and controllers must therefore be designed to allow safe and eﬃcient
operation of the ORC unit at oﬀ-design conditions.
In this study, the work is focused on the optimization of ORC systems considering the dynamic
performance. Waste heat recovery from a long-haul truck IC engine is used as the case study as it
represents a heat source with large and fast ﬂuctuations.
Several authors have investigated and analyzed the use ORC WHR units for heavy-duty truck IC
engines in the past. Amicabile et al. [5] investigated the potential of waste heat recovery from a heavy
duty diesel truck engine by use of an ORC for three diﬀerent working ﬂuids: pentane, ethanol and
R245fa. Both subcritical and supercritical cycles with and without recuperator were analyzed for a 50%
engine load, steady state exhaust gas ﬂow rate and temperature. It was concluded that for subcritical
cycles, the highest net power output is provided by ethanol as working ﬂuid with a recuperated ORC.
Such a modiﬁcation to the long-haul truck suggested a brake speciﬁc fuel consumption improvement of
3.3% and an ORC net power output of 8.19 kW. The non-recuperated subcritical ORC cycle suggested
an ORC net power output of 7.96 kW.
Zhao et tal [11] analyzed the coupling of an 85 kW diesel engine and ORC and used the particle
swarm optimization to maximize the ORC net power output at ﬁve diﬀerent operating conditions.
Using R245fa as the ORC working ﬂuid, the net power output and brake speciﬁc fuel consumption of
the system improved by 3.24% and 3.13% respectively at engine full load with the addition of a waste
heat recovery ORC. Results showed that brake speciﬁc fuel consumption was reduced by up to 5.71%
3
==PAGE:10==
at lower loads.
Katsanos et al. [12] compared the performance of Rankine cycles using steam or organic ﬂuid for
diesel truck engine waste heat recovery. Theoretical studies were performed at 25%, 50%, 75% and
100% engine load and suggested that the organic working ﬂuid (R245ca) provides higher net power
outputs than water with speciﬁc fuel consumption reductions in the ranges of 8.4-10.2% and 6.1-7.5%
respectively for decreasing engine load.
Domingues et al. [4] evaluated the waste heat recovery potential of a vehicle diesel engine using organic
and steam Rankine cycles by using thirteen diﬀerent operating conditions of the engine to estimate the
increment of thermal eﬃciency of the combined engine - ORC system.
It was shown that thermal
eﬃciency increases by 0.85%-1.2% with the installation of a WHR ORC system in the exhaust gas
stream.
Pili et al. [13] analyzed the performance of 17 diﬀerent working ﬂuids when modelling a direct-
evaporation ORC for waste heat recovery from a long-haul truck engine. Results performed for a ﬁxed
operating point of the engine showed that while acetone and ethanol provide the maximum ORC net
power output of more than 6 kW, they also require larger heat exchanger mass and volume. Isobutane
provided the highest power-to-weight and power-to-volume ratios.
Imran et al. [14] conducted a multi-objective optimization of ORCs for heavy-duty vehicle applications
considering performance, cost, mass and volume of the system. The authors designed the ORC for
a steady operating point of the engine combined with a quasi steady state approach for oﬀ-design
modelling.
The optimization was carried out for 7 diﬀerent working ﬂuids and results showed that
pentane was the optimum working ﬂuid and provided 10.9 kW and 8.3 kW net power output at design
and oﬀ-design on average. The total weight, volume and cost of the pentane organic Rankine cycle
system were 129 kg, 1.1 m3 and 8527 e respectively.
Shi et al. [15] included oﬀ-design performance in the design optimization of a WHR ORC for heavy
duty diesel truck engines by discretizing the engine exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature into 19
operating points. Using R245fa as the working ﬂuid, it was concluded that the optimal ORC design
point is medium engine load, i.e. medium exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature. This provided a
maximum net power output of 4.26 kW averaged over the driving cycle.
Xie et al [16] analyzed the operating process of a WHR ORC under a heavy duty diesel engine driving
cycle and considered four diﬀerent modes of operation, namely startup mode, turbine turning mode,
power mode and protection mode. It was observed in the simulation that for the duration of the the
driving cycle, the protection mode was activated 58% of the time, which led to the ORC unit being
unused. The thermal eﬃciency of the ORC decreased from 7.77% at design to 3.63% for the oﬀ-design
performance.
Motivation
A review of the ORC research trends performed by Park et al. [17] shows that while almost 37% of
the publications focus on the design, modeling and analysis of ORCs, only 3.1% of the publications
focus on the dynamics of the ORC. The most common approach for designing and evaluating the oﬀ-
design performance of ORCs in truck engine applications is to split the driving cycle into several steady
state engine operating points [18]. This common approach does not take the dynamic response and the
control of the system into consideration. The negligence of inertial eﬀects can lead to suboptimal or
even unfeasible solutions if the heat source has large and fast variability [10].
The importance of the dynamic response is also highlighted by Imran et al. [8] who investigated
the dynamics and control of ORCs. They conclude that the dynamic response of the ORC system is
dependent on the heat source, system size, operating conditions, equipment type and working ﬂuid, but
in particular the heat exchangers are the main components characterizing the dynamic response. The
recommendation for future research was to focus on the integrated design and optimization taking the
design of heat exchangers and the system dynamics and control into account.
According to the author’s knowledge, there exists no approach in literature for ORC system opti-
mization considering the dynamic behavior of the heat source and components. This study aims to
include the dynamic performance of the organic Rankine cycle system in a multi-objective optimization,
where the ORC net power output is maximized over the driving cycle and the mass of the ORC system
4
==PAGE:11==
is minimized. The results of this work can provide valuable information for researchers and industry,
when designing ORC waste heat recovery systems subjected to a dynamic heat source such as the waste
heat from an IC engine of a heavy-duty vehicle.
5
==PAGE:12==
3
Waste heat recovery from diesel engine
The case study of this work is an ORC waste heat recovery unit that recovers heat from a heavy
duty diesel engine of a long haul truck.
In a conventional long haul truck, there are several heat
sources available for heat recovery, where the main sources are exhaust gas and engine coolant [19,20].
Recovering heat from both the engine coolant and the exhaust gas complicates the control of the ORC
system [13] and may lead to the requirement of additional heat exchangers and valves [19] leading to
higher cost, volume and weight. The exhaust gases also show the highest exergetic content due the
higher temperature level compared to the engine coolant [13,16]. In order to reduce the complexity of
controls and due to the weight and space restrictions for WHR applications on a heavy-duty vehicle,
only heat recovery from the exhaust gasses is considered in this study.
3.1
Heat source characteristics
The exhaust gas temperature and mass ﬂow rate for a typical 45 minute driving cycle of a long-haul truck
is provided by a truck manufacturer. The time proﬁles of the exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature
are presented on Figure 1a. The exhaust temperature and mass ﬂow rate are shown as proﬁle duration
curves on Figure 1b.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time (min)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Exhaust gas mass flow (kg/s)
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
Exhaust gas temperature (°C)
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time (min)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Exhaust gas mass flow (kg/s)
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
Exhaust gas temperature (°C)
(b)
Figure 1: Exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate and temperature (a) for the driving cycle and (b) proﬁle duration curves
Figure 1a shows that the variation of exhaust mass ﬂow is signiﬁcantly higher than the variation of
the exhaust temperature with minimum and maximum values of mass ﬂow rates at 0.050 kg/s and 0.517
kg/s respectively. For exhaust temperature, the minimum and maximum values are 270°C and 334°C
respectively. The time weighted mean values of exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature are 0.223 kg/s
and 307°C respectively. Figure 1b indicates that the variations in exhaust mass ﬂow and temperature
are quite uniformly distributed over the driving cycle.
The variability and large ﬂuctuations of the heat source shown here indicates that the dynamic
response and control of the ORC system must be taken into account in order to ensure safe and eﬃcient
operation of the ORC waste heat recovery system over the driving cycle.
3.1.1
Minimum exhaust gas temperature
An important consideration for the design of waste heat recovery units for recovering waste heat from
internal combustion engines is the risk of corrosion in the exhaust heat exchanger. The exhaust gas
contains combustion products, which can cause corrosion on the heat exchanger surface if condensation
occurs. Several authors, who have previously studied the use of WHR ORC, have therefore limited the
exhaust gas temperature in order to avoid acid gas condensation in the heat exchanger. An overview of
the minimum allowable exhaust gas temperatures is shown in Table 1 along with the WHR application
in each study.
6
==PAGE:13==
Table 1: Minimum allowable exhaust gas temperature from literature
WHR application
Authors
Value
Diesel engine (truck)
Salek et al. [21]
60°C
Diesel engine (truck)
Lion et al. [22]
90°C
Diesel engine (truck)
Shu et al. [23]
90°C
Indirectly ﬁred gas turbine
Pieboron et al. [24]
110°C
Automotive diesel engine
Lin et al. [25]
120°C
Diesel engine (truck)
Karvountzis-Kontakiotis et al. [26]
130°C
Diesel engine (truck)
Pili et al. [13]
150°C
Billet reheat furnace
Pili et al. [10]
150°C
As Table 1 shows, there is no clear agreement in literature for the minimum exhaust gas temperature.
The acid dew point depends on the exhaust gas components and therefore ultimately the fuel charac-
teristics and engine load. Therefore it is not easy to deﬁne a general limit to apply for any diesel engine
for any time in a driving cycle. A more precise approach could be to calculate the acid dew point of the
exhaust gas during the driving cycle and compare with surface temperature of the heat exchanger. The
temperature at the surface of the heat exchanger wall is the coldest point for the exhaust gas and this
is where the acid condensation would occur ﬁrst.
These considerations are not in the scope of this study, as the information on the chemical composition
and the engine part-load behaviour is not available. Instead, a limit on the exhaust gas temperature
released to the ambient at any point in the driving cycle is set to 100°C based on Table 1 and recom-
mendations from the same truck manufacturer that provided the exhaust gas proﬁle during a typical
driving cycle.
3.1.2
Heat capacity correlation
Given the minimum allowable exhaust temperature at the outlet of the heat exchanger, it is possible
to compute the available heat for the ORC over the driving cycle. To achieve this, knowledge on the
speciﬁc heat capacity at constant pressure, cp,hs, of the exhaust gas is required. Literature reveals that
there are diﬀerent approaches although many authors do not specify how they calculate the speciﬁc heat
of the exhaust gas:
• Some authors assume that the exhaust gas has the same properties as air [13,22]
• Andreasen et al. [27] used a ﬁxed value of 1.06 kJ/kg-k as the heat capacity at constant pressure
for the exhaust gas of a diesel ﬁred marine engine.
• Domingues et al. [4] provided a correlation for calculating the speciﬁc heat as a function of tem-
perature based on a typical exhaust gas composition from a gasoline engine, see Equation (1).
• Yang et al. [28] provided a linear correlation for exhaust gas speciﬁc heat at constant pressure
from a vehicle diesel engine in Equation (2).
cp,hs(T) = 956 + 0.3386 · T −2.476 × 10−5 · T 2
(1)
cp,hs(T) = 990 + 0.25 · T
(2)
In Equation (1) and Equation (2), temperature, T, is in the unit of Kelvin.
The four diﬀerent
approaches are presented by Figure 2 for a temperature range between 100°C and 350°C. The speciﬁc
heat of air is computed via REFPROP [29] at a pressure of 1 bar. REFPROP is a ﬂuid property database
software developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology of the United States.
7
==PAGE:14==
100
150
200
250
300
350
Temperature (°C)
1000
1020
1040
1060
1080
1100
1120
1140
1160
Specific heat capacity (J/kg-K)
REFPROP Air
Andreasen et al. 2017
Domingues et al. 2012
Yang et al. 2014
Figure 2: Comparison of speciﬁc heat capacity correlations
Figure 2 shows that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the speciﬁc heat depending on the choice
of estimation with up to 8% discrepancy between the speciﬁc heat capacity of air and exhaust gas
correlations. The speciﬁc heat capacity depends on the exhaust gas composition, which depends on fuel
composition and air-fuel ratio of the engine and therefore on the engine load. Hence, it can be seen that
it is a complex task to achieve a detailed estimation of the heat capacity of the exhaust gas. For this
reason, this work assumes that the exhaust gas has the properties of air and REFPROP [29] is used to
retrieve ﬂuid information.
3.1.3
Available heat transfer rate
The available heat transfer rate,
˙Qhs,avai, that can be recovered by the ORC can be calculated as
shown in Equation (3) from the mass ﬂow rate of exhaust gas, ˙mhs, the speciﬁc heat capacity, cp,hs
and the temperature diﬀerence from inlet to outlet of the evaporator. Ths,eva,in is the exhaust gas inlet
temperature and Ths,eva,out,min is the minimum exhaust gas temperature of 100°C.
˙Qhs,avai = ˙mhs · cp,hs · (Ths,eva,in −100°C)
(3)
The available transfer heat rate for the duration of the driving cycle is shown on Figure 3a and as a
proﬁle duration curve on Figure 3b.
8
==PAGE:15==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time (min)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Available heat rate (kW)
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time (min)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Available heat rate (kW)
(b)
Figure 3: Available heat shown as (a) timeseries and (b) sorted in descending order for the driving cycle
Figure 3a shows that the variability of available heat is also high. When comparing to the exhaust gas
mass ﬂow and temperature provided in Figure 1a, it is observed that the available heat is mainly driven
by the heat source mass ﬂow rate. The proﬁle duration curve on Figure 3b shows that the available
heat ranges from 10 kW to 114 kW with a quite uniform distribution over the driving cycle. The time
weighted mean value of the available heat rate is 51.6 kW.
3.2
ORC system
The purpose of the ORC as a waste heat recovery unit is to recover heat, which would otherwise be
released to the atmosphere, and convert it into mechanical and/or electrical energy. The ORC systems
in this work are limited to subcritical cycles as these are well known in industry and generally have
lower costs than transcritical and supercritical cycles due to the lower evaporation pressures and higher
heat transfer coeﬃcients in the evaporator [30].
A simple schematic of the ORC system is shown on Figure 4.
Figure 4: ORC system schematic
The pump is responsible for forwarding the working ﬂuid from the low pressure side to the high
9
==PAGE:16==
pressure side. In the ORC system, it also has a crucial role in regulating the ﬂow of working ﬂuid to the
evaporator in order to prevent the risk of liquid reaching the expander. Liquid can damage the expander
and decrease the isentropic eﬃciency of the expander [31].
The evaporator is responsible for preheating, vaporizing and superheating the working ﬂuid in the
ORC system. The heat is supplied from the exhaust gas of the engine. Some ORC systems make use
of an indirect, intermediate loop of hot water or oil, which means that the heat source transfers heat
to the intermediate loop in one heat exchanger and subsequently from the water or oil to the ORC
working ﬂuid in another heat exchanger. The main advantage of the indirect approach is that is eases
the control of the thermodynamic conditions in the ORC for ﬂuctuating heat sources as heat source
temperature in the evaporator can be controlled more easily [32]. However, the indirect heat exchange
method also requires an additional heat exchanger, pump and pump control, which increases the total
cost and weight of the ORC system [33]. Due to the weight and space restrictions imposed on an ORC
for heavy duty truck applications, direct heat exchange is the approach of choice in this study.
The expander is also a key component of the ORC because it is responsible for converting the thermal
energy of the ﬂuid into mechanical energy. There are various types of expanders for ORC applications
and the expander of choice for this study is the axial turbine. The axial turbine has the advantage
of being compact and it is one of the most commonly used expanders for ORC applications [34, 35].
In this study, the mechanical energy from the expander is transformed into electrical energy through
a generator. The electrical power from the ORC can replace the conventional engine-generator on the
long-haul truck thereby reducing fuel consumption. The electrical power from the ORC system can also
supply electrical power to future hybrid truck engines [28].
The condenser is a heat exchanger that rejects the heat required to condense ORC working ﬂuid. The
heat from the condensation of working ﬂuid is transferred to the cold source, which can be ambient air
or the existing cooling system on the truck engine system. The actual condensation temperature will be
dependent on the ambient conditions, engine type and heat exchanger characteristics. The condenser
can be coupled to the existing engine radiator or a separate heat exchanger can be installed to reject heat
to the atmosphere. Depending on the condenser conﬁguration, fans may be added to ensure saturated
or sub-cooled liquid at the condenser exit.
As seen on Figure 4, the ORC system does not include a recuperator. A recuperator is a gas-liquid
heat exchanger that can allow for heat transfer from the superheated working ﬂuid vapor leaving the
expander to the subcooled working ﬂuid leaving the pump. This can result in higher system eﬃciencies,
however the integration of a recuperator also causes additional weight and space. That goes against the
need of minimum weight and volume on the truck and a recuperator is therefore not included in the
scope of this study as it may not be feasible [13].
The installation of a WHR ORC system leads to pressure drops in the exhaust gas system and
additional weight on the truck. Additional weight of the ORC system will increase the required power
of the truck engine and increase fuel consumption especially during acceleration and at low engine speeds
[36]. The ORC system mass changes depending on the design and there is a trade-oﬀbetween mass
and net power output of the ORC. When the heat transfer rate increases for the heat exchangers, the
heat transfer area also increases given similar temperature diﬀerences and heat transfer coeﬃcients. The
mass of the ORC is taken into account for the ORC system design and it is used as an objective function
in the multi-objective optimization presented in the following Section 4. The practical considerations
related to the exhaust gas system pressure drop and the additional weight of the ORC are presented in
Section 6.2 and Section 6.3 respectively.
10
==PAGE:17==
4
Multi-objective optimization
This section of the report aims to explain the integrated design approach used for the multi-objective
optimization in this work. The ﬁrst objective is to maximize net power output of the ORC over the
driving cycle. The other factor to consider is the additional mass imposed from the ORC system on the
truck by the installation of an ORC system. Therefore the second objective function is to minimize the
mass of the ORC system.
The multi-objective optimization of the ORC design is carried out using the genetic algorithm from
the MATLAB Global Optimization Toolbox [37]. The genetic algorithm allows for ﬁnding the Pareto-
optimal solutions for multiple objective functions by repeatedly changing the decision variables and
evaluating the objective functions. The Pareto-optimal solutions are also commonly described as the
Pareto front [14,38] and represent the optimal non-inferior solutions. In other words, the Pareto front
in this work presents the solutions, where the ORC net power output cannot be increased without also
increasing the mass of the ORC system.
The optimization algorithm is based on the ten decision variables presented in Table 2. The ﬁrst ﬁve
decision variables are related to the thermodynamic ORC design, while the last ﬁve decision variables
are related to the design of the ﬁn and tube evaporator.
Table 2: Decision variables for the multi-objective optimization
Quantity
Variable
Exhaust gas mass ﬂow
˙mhs
Exhaust gas temperature
Ths,eva,in
Evaporation pressure
pwf,eva
Degree of superheating
SHwf,eva
Pinch point temperature diﬀerence
∆Tpp,eva
Fin height
fheight
Tube outer diameter
d
Fin pitch
fpitch
Tube length
l
Fin spacing
fspacing
A description of the decision variables and their lower and upper bounds used in the optimization
algorithm are presented in Section 5 and Section 6.
A layout of the optimization approach is presented on Figure 5. The inputs required for the opti-
mization are the exhaust gas temperature and mass ﬂow rate over the driving cycle and a selection of
the organic working ﬂuid to be used in the ORC system. The available working ﬂuids in this study are
presented in Section 8.
The design approach starts with the thermodynamic ORC design. This means choosing the design
temperatures, pressures and mass ﬂow rates of the cycle as well as the heat source mass ﬂow rate
and temperature at design. The thermodynamic ORC design and the assumptions and constraints are
presented in Section 5.
The main challenges for operating the ORC system safely are related to ensuring superheat out of the
evaporator. It is assumed, that the cold source temperature and mass ﬂow rate does not ﬂuctuate as
much as the heat source for the truck diesel engine application. Therefore, this work focuses on a detailed
design of the evaporator. The mass ﬂow rates, temperatures and pressures from the thermodynamic
ORC design are used to design a ﬁn and tube evaporator. Designing the evaporator includes estimations
of heat transfer coeﬃcients as well as heat transfer areas and evaporator mass. The evaporator design
assumptions and related constraints are presented in Section 6.
With a thermodynamic design of the ORC and a ﬁn and tube evaporator design, the oﬀdesign
performance of the design is evaluated. The design ORC system including the ﬁn and tube evaporator
model is subjected to the variability of the exhaust heat source. In order to evaluate the oﬀ-design
performance, the control of the ORC system is dealt with along with the component behaviours at
11
==PAGE:18==
oﬀ-design. The methodology for designing the controls and the assumptions and constraints related to
the oﬀ-design performance are presented in Section 7.
A more detailed overview of the ORC parameters that are carried forward between each step of the
design algorithm are shown at the end of Section 5, Section 6 and Section 7, which corresponds to
the yellow blocks on Figure 5. Likewise, the assumptions and constraints related to each step of the
optimization are presented in the respective sections.
Figure 5: Layout of the multi-objective optimization
12
==PAGE:19==
5
Thermodynamic ORC design
In order to evaluate the oﬀ-design performance of an ORC system, the system must be designed. The
ﬁrst step of the optimization algorithm is therefore the thermodynamic ORC design. The purpose of
the thermodynamic design is to compute the design parameters of the ORC system such as mass ﬂow
rate of working ﬂuid, evaporator heat transfer rate and thermodynamic state points in the ORC system
on a basis of the ﬁve decision variables presented in Table 2.
A basis of the thermodynamic ORC design calculation code was provided by Roberto Pili. A part of
the calculations have been changed and this section presents the governing equations and assumptions
used for the thermodynamic ORC design. The following assumptions are generally applied:
• All processes occur at steady state with thermodynamic equilibrium in each system component [21]
• Heat losses in all components, pipes and valves are neglected [14,39]
• Pressure drops in all components, pipes and valves are neglected [40]
• REFPROP 10.0 [29] is used to obtain ﬂuid properties
• Exhaust gas has properties of air at 1 bar [13,22]
5.1
Pump
The required pump power to the working ﬂuid, ˙Wp,fl, is calculated based on a ﬁxed isentropic eﬃciency,
ηp,s, of 0.7 [5,13,22,24,41,42] as shown in Equation (4).
˙Wp,fl = ˙mwf (hp,out,s −hp,in)
ηp,s
(4)
˙mwf is the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid, hp,out,s is the speciﬁc enthalpy at the outlet out the pump
considering an isentropic process and hp,in is the speciﬁc enthalpy at the inlet to the pump. The working
ﬂuid at the pump inlet is assumed to be at saturated liquid state [28,43].
The electrical power supplied to the pump, ˙Wp, is slightly higher due to mechanical losses from the
pump and motor. The losses from the pump and motor, ηpm, are estimated from a combined eﬃciency
of 0.70 [13,24]. The electrical power supplied to the pump is estimated from Equation (5).
˙Wp =
˙Wp,fl
ηpm
(5)
The pump model assumptions related to the thermodynamic ORC design are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3: Pump model assumptions
Quantity
Variable
Value
Unit
Isentropic eﬃciency
ηp,s
70
%
Pump and motor combined eﬃciency
ηpm
70
%
5.2
Evaporator
The thermodynamic evaporator model is split into three sections: the preheater (PH), the vaporizer
(LV) and the superheater (SH). An example of a temperature-heat transfer rate (T- ˙Q) diagram for a
counter-ﬂow evaporator is illustrated on Figure 6.
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 6: Example of a T- ˙Q diagram for the evaporator
The working ﬂuid enters the preheater in subcooled liquid state and it is preheated until it becomes
saturated liquid (L). The vaporizer, as the name indicates, evaporates the working ﬂuid from saturated
liquid to saturated vapor (V). The superheater transfers additional heat to the working ﬂuid and it
becomes superheated vapor.
With the assumption of negligible heat losses in the heat exchangers, the energy balance of the
evaporator is presented in Equation (6). hwf,eva,in and hwf,eva,out are the speciﬁc enthalpies of the
working ﬂuid at the inlet and outlet of the evaporator respectively, while Ths,eva,in and Ths,eva,out are
the exhaust gas temperatures at inlet and outlet respectively.
˙mhs · cp,hs (Ths,eva,in −Ths,eva,out) = ˙mwf · (hwf,eva,out −hwf,eva,in)
(6)
For the thermodynamic design of the ORC, the mass ﬂow of working ﬂuid, ˙mwf, is obtained from
the assigned decision variables of degree of superheat, evaporator pressure, pinch point temperature
diﬀerence and heat source mass ﬂow rate and temperature. By assuming the pinch point temperature
diﬀerence, ∆Tpp,eva, in the evaporator at the saturated liquid point (L) [43], the temperature of the
exhaust gas at the working ﬂuid saturated liquid interface, Ths,eva,L, is calculated as in Equation (7).
Ths,eva,L = Twf,eva,L + ∆Tpp,eva
(7)
The combined heat transfer rate from the vaporizer and superheater part of the evaporator, ˙QLV +SH,
can be calculated from an energy balance on the exhaust gas side of the the vaporizer and superheater
as shown in Equation (8).
˙QLV +SH = ˙mhs · cp,hs · (Ths,eva,in −Ths,eva,L)
(8)
An energy balance on the working ﬂuid side of the vaporizer and superheater parts of the evaporator
allows for calculation of the working ﬂuid mass ﬂow as shown in Equation (9). hwf,eva,L is the speciﬁc
enthalpy of the working ﬂuid at saturated liquid state.
14
==PAGE:21==
˙mwf =
˙QLV +SH
hwf,eva,out −hwf,eva,L
(9)
The pinch point temperature is not necessarily always located at the transition between preheater
and vaporizer. Depending on the working ﬂuid characteristics at the sub-cooled or super-heated state,
the pinch point temperature diﬀerence can also at the working ﬂuid inlet or outlet of the evapora-
tor [43, 44]. Therefore, the pinch point temperature diﬀerence is checked against the lower bounds at
all phase interface points in the thermodynamic design of the evaporator. The pinch point tempera-
ture diﬀerence input to the calculation algorithm is therefore always the temperature diﬀerence at the
transition between preheater and vaporizer.
The exhaust gas temperature at the outlet of the evaporator, Ths,eva,out, can be computed from an
energy balance on the preheater as shown in Equation (10).
Ths,eva,out = Ths,eva,L −˙mwf · (hwf,eva,L −hwf,eva,in)
˙mhs · cp,hs
(10)
The speciﬁc enthalpy of the working ﬂuid at the inlet to the evaporator, hwf,eva,in, is equal to the
speciﬁc enthalpy at the outlet of the pump.
5.3
Expander
Similarly to the power of the pump, the power taken out of the working ﬂuid by the expander, ˙We,fl, is
determined from the isentropic eﬃciency, ηe,s as shown in Equation (11). he,in is the speciﬁc enthalpy
at the expander inlet and he,out,s is the speciﬁc enthalpy at the outlet of the expander for an isentropic
expansion.
˙We,fl = ˙mwf (he,in −he,out,s) · ηe,s
(11)
The isentropic eﬃciency of the expander is estimated based on the work of Astolﬁand Macchi [34],
who have developed correlations for one, two and three-stage axial turbine isentropic eﬃciencies. In
their work, isentropic eﬃciency is a function of the number of stages, Nst, the isentropic volumetric
ratio, Vr,s, and the turbine size parameter, SP.
ηe,s = f (Nst, Vr,s, SP)
The isentropic volumetric ratio and turbine size parameter are calculated as shown in Equation (12)
and Equation (13) respectively. ˙Ve,in is the volumetric ﬂow rate into the expander, ˙Ve,out,s the volumetric
ﬂow rate out of the expander for an isentropic expansion and ∆he,s is the isentropic enthalpy diﬀerence
across the expander.
Vr,s =
˙Ve,out,s
˙Ve,in
(12)
SP =
q
˙Ve,out,s
∆he,s0.25
(13)
By using these correlations instead of a ﬁxed value, the isentropic eﬃciency becomes dependent on
the working ﬂuid. That is a relevant detail as axial turbines with identical isentropic work will have
diﬀerent isentropic eﬃciencies depending on the working ﬂuid, e.g. R125 and hexane [34].
15
==PAGE:22==
The number of stages in the axial turbine also have an inﬂuence on the isentropic eﬃciency. The
criteria to select the number of turbine stages is based on the work of Martelli et al. [44]. The maximum
speciﬁc enthalpy drop in one stage, ∆he, must not exceed 130 kJ/kg and the actual volumetric ratio,
Vr, in one stage must not exceed 15. If either of these constraints are exceeded, another stage is added
to the turbine.
The electrical power supplied by the generator, ˙Wg, is slightly lower than the power taken out of the
ﬂuid, ˙We,fl, due to mechanical and electrical losses in the expander-generator system. The mechanical
and electrical losses in the expander and generator are calculated from ﬁxed values of 0.96 and 0.85
respectively for the expander eﬃciency, ηe, and generator eﬃciency, ηg [22, 45]. The electrical power
output is calculated as shown in Equation (14).
˙Wg = ˙We,fl · ηe · ηg
(14)
Another constraint on the expander is the working ﬂuid vapor quality at the outlet, xe,out. While the
inlet of the expander is sensitive to liquid droplets in the working ﬂuid, it is generally of less concern
at the outlet. Therefore a minimum limit on vapour quality at the outlet of the expander is set at
0.85 [10,35]. The vapor quality at the expander outlet is only a concern for wet ﬂuids.
A summary of the expander model assumptions is shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Expander model assumptions
Quantity
Variable
Value
Unit
Isentropic eﬃciency
ηe,s
f(SP, Vr,s, Nst)
%
Expander mechanical eﬃciency
ηe
96
%
Generator eﬃciency
ηg
85
%
Maximum enthalpy drop per stage
∆he,max
130
kJ/kg
Maximum volumetric ratio per stage
Vr,max
15
-
Minimum vapor quality at expander outlet
xe,out
0.85
-
5.4
Condenser
The condenser is assumed to operate with a ﬁxed condensing temperature as other authors have also
done [13,14,39,46] for IC engine waste heat recovery ORC systems. Imran et al. [14] suggested using ﬁxed
condensation temperatures of 40°C for a standalone radiator and 60°C when using the existing radiator.
Maci´an et al. [39] used a ﬁxed condensation temperature of 40°C, while Pili et al. [13] conducted a
parametric study of condensation temperatures 30°C, 40°C and 50°C. Mariana et al. [46] provided 45.9°C
as ﬁxed condensation temperature. Based on that, the condensation temperature in this study is ﬁxed
at 50°C. Worth keeping in mind is that the condensation temperature is an input to the optimization
algorithm and can easily be changed if desired in the future.
For some organic working ﬂuids, a condensation temperature of 50°C corresponds to a condensation
pressure that is below atmospheric pressure. The designer has, therefore, to select either designing the
low pressure side of the ORC system to operate with some degree of vacuum or increase the condensation
temperature so the condensation pressure reaches atmospheric pressure conditions. The downsides of
operating with pressures below 1 bar are additional costs, complexity and weight due to auxiliary
equipment such as vacuum pumps and there is a risk of air inﬁltration to the cycle [47,48].
These disadvantages may be acceptable if the incremental power output is considerably larger. If the
saturation pressure of the organic working ﬂuid at 50°C is below 1 bar, the optimization is performed
for two cases: one case, where there the condensation pressure is constrained to 1 bar and one with a
50°C condensation temperature. Following Drescher and Br¨uggemann [49] and Baldasso et al. [50], a
minimum condenser pressure of 5 kPa is set. As mentioned previously, the working ﬂuid leaving the
condenser to the pump is assumed to be at saturated liquid state. In practice, this can be ensured by
16
==PAGE:23==
installing a receiver tank between the condenser and pump [51], but a tank model has not been included
in the modelling scope because of its secondary importance.
A summary of the condenser model assumptions is shown in Table 5.
Table 5: Condenser model assumptions
Quantity
Variable
Value
Unit
Condensation temperature
Twf,k
50 or Tsat(1bar)
°C
Condensation pressure
pwf,k
0.05 or 1
bar
Quality at condenser outlet
xwf,k
0
-
5.5
Decision variables and bounds
The decision variables related to the thermodynamic design of the ORC are presented in this section.
A summary table including the upper and lower bounds is shown in Table 6.
Heat source mass ﬂow and temperature
When the heat source has high variability, it is not straightforward to choose the design values of heat
source mass ﬂow rate and temperature at the inlet to the evaporator. Imran et al. [14] used 40% engine
load and the associated exhaust gas mass ﬂow and temperature as the heat source design point based on
recommendations from a truck engine manufacturer, however there may be more suitable design points.
Therefore, the exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature used for the thermodynamic ORC design are
included as decision variables and range from the minimum to maximum of each quantity over the
driving cycle [10]. As the exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature are independent decision variables,
it means that the design values may come from a point that does occur over the driving cycle.
Evaporation pressure
The evaporation pressure, pwf,eva, is one of the decision variables and may not exceed 80% of the
critical pressure [10,13,50,52] due to the desired subcritical operation. The supercritical region imposes
signiﬁcant changes in the working ﬂuid properties, which may inﬂuence the operating parameters of
the ORC and additional requirements of the heat exchanger may be needed [53]. If 80% of the critical
pressure is above 30 bar, the maximum evaporation pressure is limited to 30 bar [13,48,50,54] due to
safety and weight considerations. The minimum evaporation pressure is 1 bar to avoid inﬁltration in
the evaporator [13,52].
Pinch point temperature diﬀerence
At thermodynamic design, the heat transfer and thermodynamic states of the ﬂuids in the evaporator
are highly based on the the pinch point temperature diﬀerence, ∆Tpp,eva. The pinch point temperature
diﬀerence in the evaporator is a trade-oﬀbetween magnitude of the heat transfer area and ORC net
power output [55,56]. As literature suggests it is diﬃcult to choose the optimal pinch point temperature
diﬀerence. Andreasen et al. [57], Pili et al. [13], Pieboron et al. [58] and Katsanos et al. [12] relied on
a minimum allowable pinch point temperature diﬀerence equal to 10 K. However, this work considers
the pinch point temperature diﬀerence to be a decision variable. The design approach of this study
therefore includes the eﬀects on heat exchanger design and net power produced. A minimum pinch
point temperature diﬀerence is set to 5 K [38]. An upper boundary for the pinch point temperature
diﬀerence is set to 70 K [44].
17
==PAGE:24==
Degree of superheating
The degree of superheating at the evaporator outlet, SHwf,eva, is also a decision variable. The lower
boundary of the degree of superheating is a measure of the safety margin towards preventing liquid at
the expander inlet. Previous studies on ORC systems for truck engine applications have used diﬀerent
lower limits [10, 22]. For this study, the degree of superheat at design must be above is 2 K. A very
large degree of superheating is typically not beneﬁcial for the net power output of the cycle for dry and
isentropic ﬂuids [8,31,56]. The upper boundary for superheat is set to 75 K [44].
Table 6: Decision variables and bounds for the thermodynamic ORC design
Quantity
Variable
Unit
Lower bound
Upper bound
Exhaust gas mass ﬂow
˙mhs
kg/s
min( ˙mhs,ts)
max( ˙mhs,ts)
Exhaust gas temperature
Ths,eva,in
K
min(Ths,eva,in,ts)
max(Ths,eva,in,ts)
Evaporation pressure
pwf,eva
bar
1
min(0.8pwf,crit, 30)
Degree of superheating
SHwf,eva
K
2
75
Pinch point temperature diﬀerence
∆Tpp,eva
K
5
70
5.6
Overview
For the thermodynamic design of the ORC, it is worth deﬁning the net power output for comparison
between the nominal power output of the design cycle and the averaged net power output over the
driving cycle. The net power output of from the ORC system is the diﬀerence between the electric power
supplied by the generator and the electric power supplied to the pump as shown in Equation (15).
˙Wnet = ˙Wg −˙Wp
(15)
The thermal eﬃciency of the ORC, ηth, is deﬁned as the ratio between net power output and the heat
transfer rate in the evaporator, see Equation (16). In other words, the ORC thermal eﬃciency expresses
the amount of heat obtained in the evaporator, which is converted to useful power.
ηth =
˙Wnet
˙mwf · (hwf,eva,out −hwf,eva,in)
(16)
Another useful indicator of ORC performance is the ORC system eﬃciency [10]. The system eﬃciency
expresses the eﬀectiveness of the heat recovery by referring the heat supplied to the ORC to the minimum
exhaust gas temperature of 100°C, Ths,eva,out,min, see Equation (17).
ηsys =
˙Wnet
˙mhs · cp,hs (Ths,eva,in −Ths,eva,out,min)
(17)
A block ﬂow diagram representing the inputs and outputs for the thermodynamic ORC design is
presented on Figure 7.
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 7: Thermodynamic ORC design inputs and outputs
The organic working ﬂuid and the ﬁve decision variables presented in Table 6 serve as input to
the design of the thermodynamic ORC system. The assumptions such as pump isentropic eﬃciency,
condensation temperature are also inputs. The constraints on e.g. minimum exhaust gas temperature
and vapor quality at the outlet of the expander are checked sequentially within the optimization code in
order to reduce calculation time. The outputs of the thermodynamic design include the temperatures of
the heat source and working ﬂuid in the evaporator, the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid and the overall
parameters such as ORC net power output, thermal and system eﬃciency. The temperatures, pressures
and mass ﬂow rates of the heat source and ORC working ﬂuid are fed to the design of the ﬁn and tube
evaporator.
The thermodynamic ORC design model has been veriﬁed against the commercial software Ebsilon [59]
for three diﬀerent organic working ﬂuids and showed discrepancies below 0.6% for all thermodynamic
state points in the ORC systems.
19
==PAGE:26==
6
Fin and tube evaporator design
As previously emphasized, the evaporator is a key component of the ORC system because it is where
the heat transfer from the exhaust gas to the working ﬂuid occurs. A design model of the evaporator
is essential to investigate the dynamic response of the ORC unit and thereby evaluate the oﬀ-design
performance of the ORC over the driving cycle. A MATLAB [37] code developed by Pili et al. [13] is
used to design a ﬁn and tube evaporator.
A schematic of the ﬁn and tube evaporator is shown on Figure 8 [13].
Figure 8: Schematic of ﬁn and tube evaporator [13]
The evaporator is a ﬁn and tube heat exchanger with circular ﬁns on the outside of the tubes. The
tubing layout is staggered with equilateral triangles between tube centers. The exhaust gas ﬂows on the
ﬁn side, while the working ﬂuid ﬂows inside the tubes. The evaporator is a once-through heat exchanger,
which means that the working ﬂuid and exhaust gas passes through the heat exchanger one time.
The ﬁn and tube heat exchanger is preferred due to the low pressure losses on the exhaust gas side
compared to other heat exchangers such as plate heat exchangers. The ﬁn and tube evaporator is also
commonly used in other studies for engine waste heat recovery applications on long-haul trucks [6,60–62].
Detailed information about the evaporator design methodology can be found in [13], however a few
changes have been made to the model, which are highlighted here.
To allow for a more robust design against potential acid corrosion, the material used for the evaporator
in this study is type 316 stainless steel with mechanical and thermodynamic properties as presented in
Table 7 [63]. The steel properties are assumed constant for the operating range in this study.
Table 7: 316 stainless steel properties [63]
Quantity
Variable
Value
Unit
Yield strength
σy,steel
205
MPa
Density
ρsteel
7990
kg/m3
Thermal conductivity
λsteel
16.3
W/m-K
Speciﬁc heat
cp,steel
500
J/kg-K
The logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences, LMTD, and heat transfer rates, ˙Q, for the preheater,
vaporizer and superheater are supplied from the thermodynamic ORC design.
The energy balance
presented in Equation (18) is set for each section.
˙Q = U · A · LMTD
(18)
The overall heat transfer coeﬃcient, U, is composed of the heat transfer coeﬃcients on ﬁn- and
tube sides as well as the fouling factors.
The required heat transfer area, A, and the overall heat
20
==PAGE:27==
transfer coeﬃcient of each section is determined by numerically solving the energy and mass balances
for constraints related to desired working ﬂuid velocities.
6.1
Decision variables and bounds
The design of the evaporator includes the ﬁve decision variables shown in Table 8. The ﬁn pitch is an
expression for the number of ﬁns per meter tube, while ﬁn spacing is an expression for the distance
between tubes relative to the ﬁn diameter. The ﬁn thickness, s, is ﬁxed at 0.5 mm.
Table 8: Fin and tube evaporator design decision variables
Quantity
Variable
Unit
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Fin height
fheight
mm
15
75
Tube outer diameter
d
mm
12
40
Fin pitch
fpitch
1/m
100
800
Tube length
l
m
0.2
1
Fin spacing
fspacing
-
1.05
1.25
The upper and lower bounds are based on the bounds provided by other authors [6,13,52].
6.2
Evaporator pressure losses
The installation of an evaporator causes a pressure drop in the exhaust gas, and, therefore, a rise in the
engine back pressure. The increment of back pressure penalizes the engine performance in terms of fuel
consumption and power [62].
In literature, there is no clear guideline on the eﬀect of back pressure on engine performance and
diﬀerent limits are applied. Katsanos et tal [12] analysed an ORC system performance on a diesel truck
engine and concluded that 22 mbar of pressure drop across the evaporator has a negligible eﬀect on
engine performance. Similarly, Jung [64] argues that the a back pressure increment below 20 mbar can
be neglected for a truck engine. The engine manufacturer, MAN, provides a technical paper [65], where
they suggest a back pressure increment of 30 mbar for a marine engine waste heat recovery system.
Karvountzis-Kontakiotis et al. [26] found, via experimental work on marine diesel engine applications,
that exhaust back pressure increment of 100 mbar can increase fuel consumption by 3.5% at low engine
loads, however losses are minimized at higher loads.
Based on these ﬁndings and previous talks with a truck engine manufacturer, in this work, the applied
limit for incremental back pressure for the driving cycle is 30 mbar (3 kPa) at any time. This limit is
implemented in the optimization algorithm by calculating the pressure drop on the exhaust gas side of
the evaporator for the highest mass ﬂow during the driving cycle. Pressure drop on the exhaust side is
a function of the evaporator ﬁn-side geometry and exhaust gas properties and mass ﬂow rate. The most
dominating term is the mass ﬂow as it is squared in terms of pressure drop. At oﬀ-design, the mass ﬂow
rate is used to correct the pressure drop with respect to design value as shown in Equation (19). The
same method was adopted by Imran et al. [14].
∆phs,eva,max = ∆phs,eva,D ·
 ˙mhs,max
˙mhs,D
2
(19)
The incremental back pressure will inﬂuence the characteristics of the exhaust gas.
Higher back
pressure will increase the exhaust temperature and decrease the mass ﬂow rate [33]. Di Battista et
al. [36] showed through experimental work, that the changes are negligible, thus the changes to the
exhaust gas temperature and ﬂow due to the installation of an evaporator are not taken into account in
this study.
On the tube side, the pressure drop at the design may not exceed 5% of the evaporation pressure to
keep the impact of pressure drop on the working ﬂuid limited.
21
==PAGE:28==
6.3
Evaporator mass
The additional mass of the ORC system penalizes the truck engine performance. As for the incremental
back pressure, the exact penalty on an engine varies depending on the engine size and conﬁguration and
it is therefore diﬃcult to determine the exact impact of incremental mass.
DiBattista et al. [36] conducted experiments and simulations with a light-duty vehicle diesel engine
on a 3350 kg truck and concluded that a 100 kg weight increase requires additional propulsive power of
1.3-2.4% depending on the engine load. The engine and total truck weight is signiﬁcantly smaller than
the case study presented here based on the magnitude of exhaust temperature and mass ﬂow rate. For a
similar sized engine, Imran et al. [14] used correlations for ORC component masses and set a maximum
weight limit on the ORC system at 150 kg, however using plate heat exchangers and larger allowable
pressure drop.
Literature suggests that the heat exchangers have the highest contribution to the total weight of
the ORC [13, 66]. This is also shown by Usman et al. [67], who did a comprehensive study on ORC
component mass for a simple ORC with shell and tube evaporators and air cooled condensers for vehicle
applications. Results showed that the evaporator and condenser contribute to approximately 38% and
54% of the mass of small scale ORC units respectively. The condenser of the study was using forced
air as the cold source. The size and mass of the condenser can likely be reduced by changing the cold
source media from air to liquid such as water or brine.
The truck manufacturer, who provided the exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate and temperature, suggested a
maximum mass of 250 kg for the whole ORC system. The mass of the shell and tube heat exchanger
in this study is readily computed, however the rest of the components are not modelled in detail. The
objective function of mass will therefore be based on evaporator mass, which includes the combined mass
of steel tubes and ﬁns. The mass of exhaust gas and working ﬂuid in the evaporator is neglected due
to the small contribution. The maximum limit on evaporator mass is set to 150 kg, which seems high
when comparing to the truck manufacturer recommendations and the evaporator contribution to the
ORC system mass. However, it must be emphasized that he multi-objective optimization approach with
the Pareto-optimal solutions allows the user to choose optimal ORC design based on their perception
of allowable evaporator mass. A minimum limit on the evaporator mass is determined at 25 kg.
6.4
Overview
A schematic of the inputs and outputs for the evaporator design is shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Overview of inputs and outputs from the evaporator design
22
==PAGE:29==
The inputs for the design of the heat exchanger are delivered from the thermodynamic design of
the ORC along with the decision variables presented in Table 8. The outputs include heat transfer
areas, volumes and masses of the preheater, vaporizer and superheater sections as well as heat transfer
coeﬃcients and pressure drops. The evaporator heat transfer area, volume, mass and heat transfer
coeﬃcients are carried forward and serve as inputs to the dynamic simulation of the ORC system at
oﬀ-design conditions.
The constraints related to the ﬁn and tube evaporator design in this study are summarized in Table 9.
Table 9: Fin and tube evaporator design constraints
Quantity
Variable
Value
Unit
Maximum pressure drop exhaust gas side
∆phs,eva,max
30
mbar
Maximum pressure drop working ﬂuid side
∆pwf,eva,D
0.05 · pwf,eva
mbar
Maximum mass of evaporator
meva,max
200
kg
Minimum mass of evaporator
meva,min
25
kg
23
==PAGE:30==
7
Dynamic simulation and controller design
In order to ensure safe and eﬃcient operation of the ORC system, dynamic simulations are integrated
in the multi-objective optimization. The dynamic simulations are carried out in Simulink, which is
a simulation environment for MATLAB [37]. This section outlines the approach and assumptions for
simulating the operation of the ORC system over the driving cycle. The following assumptions are
generally applied for dynamic simulation of the ORC system:
• Constant condensing temperature
• Constant isentropic eﬃciency of pump
• Constant mechanical and electrical eﬃciencies of pump, expander and generator
• Pressure losses in all components, pipes and valves are neglected
• Heat losses in all components, pipes and valves are neglected
7.1
Dynamic model of evaporator
The dynamic performance of the evaporator is simulated using a moving boundary model that was
supplied by Pili et al. [68]. The moving boundary model including the ﬁn and tube evaporator has been
veriﬁed against commercial simulation software in that study [68].
The model is developed in Simulink, which is useful to access the variables from the previous calcula-
tions carried out in MATLAB [37]. The moving boundary model works by dividing the evaporator into
three regions based on their state: liquid, two-phase and vapor. Note that this is also the approach used
for the thermodynamic evaporator design model presented in the T-Q diagram on Figure 6. During
operation, each of the regions are represented by lengths LP H, LLV and LSH respectively as shown on
Figure 10 [69].
Figure 10: Moving boundary model illustration [69]
In the dynamic simulation, the interfaces, and thus the lengths, between the regions are changing
depending on the heat transfer conditions. If the heat source delivers a low heat rate to the working
ﬂuid, there is less heat available for superheating the ﬂuid if the mass ﬂow of working ﬂuid is unchanged
and therefore the length of the superheated vapor phase, LSH, would decrease. The pump controller
will counteract this by controlling the mass ﬂow of working ﬂuid as explained later in Section 7.3.
24
==PAGE:31==
7.1.1
Heat transfer coeﬃcients
Prior to the dynamic simulation, the heat transfer coeﬃcients, αD, are estimated based on the evap-
orator geometry and ﬂuid characteristics at design. In oﬀ-design conditions, the mass ﬂow rates and
temperatures of the heat source and working ﬂuid change signiﬁcantly, which will inﬂuence the oﬀde-
sign heat transfer coeﬃcients, αOD. The estimation of heat transfer coeﬃcients requires the solution
of complex functions that depend on several parameters. That can slow down the calculation process
and may lead to numerical instabilities and simulation failures [70]. For this reason, a simpler approach
is used based on the assumption that the heat transfer coeﬃcients are mainly dominated by the ﬂuid
mass ﬂow [70,71]. The heat transfer coeﬃcients are corrected to oﬀdesign according to the mass ﬂow
of the ﬂuid with an exponential factor, ψ, as seen in Equation (20).
αOD = αD
 ˙mOD
˙mD
ψ
(20)
The exponential factors, ψ, for each working ﬂuid phase side are presented in Table 10, while the
same exponential factor is used for the exhaust gas as no phase change occurs.
Table 10: Exponents for oﬀ-design evaporator heat transfer coeﬃcients [68]
Side
Region
Variable
ψ
Tube-side
Liquid
αwf,P H
0.92
Two-phase
αwf,LV
0.67
Vapor
αwf,SH
0.86
Fin-side
All
αhs,P H, αhs,LV , αhs,SH
0.54
This approach is also adopted by other authors [10, 14]. The exponents presented in Table 10 have
been veriﬁed against against commercial simulation software in the study of Pili et al. [68].
7.2
Dynamic model of expander
The mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid through the expander and the isentropic eﬃciency of the expander
are corrected in the dynamic simulation.
7.2.1
Mass ﬂow rate
The mass ﬂow rate through the expander over the driving cycle is estimated according to Stodola’s
theory as presented in equation (21) corrected for real gases. This approach is typically used in oﬀ-
design expander models from other authors [13,40,72].
˙mwf,D = Cstodola
pe,in
p
γe,in · Ze,in · Te,in
(21)
The mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid is proportional to the inlet pressure of the expander, pe,in, and
inﬂuenced by the inlet properties, where γe,in is the heat capacity ratio, Ze,in is the compressibility
factor, and Te,in is the inlet temperature. Cstodola is the Stodola constant, which is calculated for the
design values of the ORC, equation (22).
Cstodola = ˙me,D
p
γin,D · Zin,D · Tin,D
pin,D
(22)
25
==PAGE:32==
The Stodola constant is the input to the dynamic expander model to compute the mass ﬂow through
the expander over the driving cycle.
7.2.2
Isentropic eﬃciency
The isentropic eﬃciency of the expander changes when the expander is operated at oﬀ-design conditions
[67, 73]. The oﬀ-design isentropic eﬃciency of the expander, ηe,s,OD, is estimated based on the work
of Vetter [74]. It is carried out by using the design isentropic eﬃciency of the expander, ηe,s,D and
design and oﬀ-design values of working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate through the expander, ˙me,D and ˙me,OD,
respectively. The correlation is shown in Equation (23).
ηe,s,OD
ηe,s,D
= 0.007 + 3.182
 ˙me,OD
˙me,D

−6.491
 ˙me,OD
˙me,D
2
+ 10.501
 ˙me,OD
˙me,D
3
−11.413
 ˙me,OD
˙me,D
4
+ 7.068
 ˙me,OD
˙me,D
5
−1.856
 ˙me,OD
˙me,D
6
(23)
7.3
Control of pump and evaporator exhaust bypass valve
As mentioned in Section 5.1, the pump is controlled to ensure superheat at the expander inlet during
the driving cycle. The degree of superheat can be managed by regulating the mass ﬂow of working
ﬂuid. It is assumed that the operating range of the pump is from 20% to 120% of the design mass ﬂow
rate [10]. The aim of the pump controller is to keep the degree of superheating constant with the set
point determined by the degree of superheat of the design cycle.
The evaporation pressure is also subject to changes over the driving cycle. It is not desired to operate
the working ﬂuid in the ORC system beyond the critical pressure due thermodynamic instabilities.
Furthermore, the evaporator tubes have also been designed for the evaporator design pressure and
therefore it must also be ensured that the pressure in the evaporator does not exceed the allowable
pressure set by the mechanical design of the evaporator tubes. The tube thickness, t, is calculated based
on the evaporation design pressure but there exist minimum constraints of tubing thickness depending
on the tube outer diameter as per Pili et al. [13] in addition to a large safety factor. The increased
stress from an increase in evaporator pressure is therefore not a threat to the tube integrity. For this
reason, the maximum allowable pressure in the evaporator is limited to 90% of the critical pressure of the
working ﬂuid. It is implemented with a valve that bypasses some of the exhaust gas to the atmosphere
as shown on Figure 11.
The pump and exhaust evaporator bypass valve are controlled via two separate proportional-integral
(PI) controllers. PI control is a robust control method commonly used in various industry applications
[71,75]. The pump control is based on both proportional and integral gains, while the exhaust bypass
valve relies on just the proportional gain [68]. The controllers are tuned in MATLAB via the built-in
pidtune function from the Control System Toolbox [37].
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 11: ORC system schematic with control of degree of superheating and evaporation pressure
An overview of the control design is shown in Table 11 with the manipulated and controlled variables
and the set points for the pump and exhaust bypass valve.
Table 11: Control components, manipulated variables, controlled variables and set points
Control component
Manipulated variable
Controlled variable
Set point
Pump
˙mwf,OD
SHwf,eva,OD
SHwf,eva,D
Exhaust evaporator bypass valve
˙mhs,OD
pwf,eva
max(0.9 · pwf,crit)
7.4
Overview
The approach for the control design and the dynamic simulation have been presented and an overview
of the inputs and outputs to and from the oﬀ-design performance simulation is shown on Figure 12.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 12: Flow diagram for inputs and outputs of the control design and dynamic simulation
The inputs for the simulation of the driving cycle are delivered from the thermodynamic ORC design
as well as the ﬁn and tube evaporator. Most notably, the design values of working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate,
exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate, isentropic eﬃciency of the expander are delivered from the thermodynamic
ORC design described in Section 5. The heat transfer areas, heat transfer coeﬃcients, volume and mass
of the evaporator are delivered from the ﬁn and tube evaporator design described in Section 6.
Prior to dynamic simulation, PI controllers for the pump and exhaust bypass valve are tuned. The
initial temperature and mass ﬂow rate of the exhaust gas are simulated until steady state is reached.
The steady state conditions of the initial exhaust temperature and mass ﬂow rate are used at the
initialization of the driving cycle simulation.
There are numerous outputs from the dynamic simulation of the driving cycle, whose values are
available at any time during the driving cycle. The constraints related to the oﬀ-design performance
are presented in Table 12.
Table 12: Constraints on ORC system during driving cycle
Quantity
Variable
Value
Unit
Minimum exhaust gas temperature
Ths,eva,out,min,OD
100
°C
Minimum vapor quality at expander outlet
xe,out,min,OD
0.85
-
Minimum degree of superheating
SHwf,eva,min,OD
2
K
If the oﬀ-design performance of a given ORC conﬁguration is not within the constraints presented
in Table 12, it is disregarded. Recall from Section 6 that constraints related to evaporator pressure
losses and mass are handled prior to the oﬀ-design simulation. The constraint on maximum evaporation
pressure is handled by the exhaust gas bypass valve control. Due to the constraints on operating range
of the working ﬂuid pump, it might not be possible to keep the degree of superheating above 2 K for
the whole driving cycle, hence it is also reviewed over the driving cycle simulation.
The design ORC system including the ﬁn and tube evaporator, presented in Section 5 and Section 6
respectively, has been veriﬁed against the Simulink model for steady state conditions with discrepancies
below 1.5% on the evaporator heat transfer rate and ORC net power output across a variety of Pareto-
optimal solutions.
28
==PAGE:35==
8
Working ﬂuid selection
The selection of working ﬂuid in the ORC is highly inﬂuential to the thermodynamic performance of
the system and has therefore been studied extensively in the past [5,13,76,77]. Literature shows that
optimal choice of working ﬂuid is mainly dependent on the heat source and heat sink characteristics but
also on the component performance, especially the expander, which is highly inﬂuenced by the choice
of working ﬂuid [34].
This study considers not only thermodynamic performance of the organic working ﬂuid but also the
impacts on the environment and safety. In terms of environmental impact, working ﬂuids must have a
low 100-year global warming potential (GWP) and ozone depletion potential below 0.1. The working
ﬂuid safety impact is estimated from the global safety factor (GSF), which is based on the NFPA 704 [78]
system indicators of ﬂammability (F), instability (I) and health (H) [5,14]. The global safety factor is
calculated as shown in equation (24), where F, I and H are integer scores between 0 and 4 with 4 being
the highest impact [78]. Global safety factors above 2.5 are excluded in this study.
GSF = 0.45 · F + 0.35 · I + 0.2 · H
(24)
The weights of each safety hazard are inspired by Amicabile et al. [5], where ﬂammability hazard is
considered of highest importance to reduce the risk of ignition in case a leak occurs.
There are hundreds of available organic ﬂuids [35] and the selection has been limited to six available
working ﬂuids as shown in Table 13 inspired by the optimal working ﬂuids found in literature for waste
heat recovery truck applications [5,13,14,21,39,79].
Table 13: Selected properties of available organic working ﬂuids for ORC design and the source of information
Working ﬂuid
F
I
H
GSF
GWP
ODP
Tcrit
pcrit
Reference
R245fa
1
0
2
0.85
1030
0
154 °C
36.5 bar
[14,29]
R1233zde
0
0
2
0.40
1
0.0003
166 °C
36.2 bar
[14,29]
Isobutane
4
0
0
1.80
20
0
135 °C
36.3 bar
[29,50,80]
Pentane
4
0
1
2.00
7
0
197 °C
33.7 bar
[14,29]
Ethanol
3
0
0
1.35
NA
0
242 °C
62.7 bar
[14,29]
Toluene
3
0
2
1.55
3.3
0
319 °C
41.3 bar
[24,29,81]
The saturation temperature at 1 bar saturation pressure and the saturation pressure at 50°C are
presented in Figure 13 to indicate, which of the working ﬂuids that would require sub-atmospheric
conditions in order to keep a condensation temperature of 50°C.
29
==PAGE:36==
14.7°C
17.9°C
35.7°C
-12.1°C
78.1°C
110.1°C
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutan
Ethanol
Toluene
0
2
4
6
8
Saturation pressure at 50°C (bar)
Figure 13: Saturation pressures at 50°C and saturation temperatures at 1 bar
Ethanol and toluene will require sub-atmospheric pressures of 29.4 kPa and 12.3 kPa respectively in
order to reach a condensation temperature of 50°C. On the contrary, the saturation temperatures for 1
bar condensation pressure are 78.1°C and 110.1°C for ethane and toluene respectively.
As mentioned in Section 5.4, the potential of using sub-atmospheric condensation will be evaluated
as it is expected to deliver higher net power outputs. These cases will be referred to as LP cases in the
subsequent results.
The temperature-speciﬁc entropy (T-s) diagrams of the available working ﬂuids are shown on Fig-
ure 14. Working ﬂuids are conventionally characterized according to their saturation vapor curve [35] in
the T-s diagram. Ethanol is considered a wet ﬂuid due to the negative slope on the saturated vapor curve,
while the other mediums are considered dry ﬂuids due to the positive slope. In literature [5], R245fa
and R1233zde is also referred to as isentropic ﬂuids due to the almost vertical slope of the saturation
vapor curve. Figure 14 and Table 13 both indicate that the organic ﬂuids R245fa and R1233zde have
similar thermodynamic properties, however the global warming potential is much lower for R1233zde.
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Temperature (°C)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutan
Ethanol
Toluene
Figure 14: T-s diagrams of available working ﬂuids
30
==PAGE:37==
9
Results
The main purpose of this study is the development of the multi-objective optimization of ORC systems
considering the dynamic performance. The aim is also to investigate, how the ORC system design and the
performance changes, when going from the conventional steady state design approach to the inclusion
of the oﬀ-design performance in the design phase. In order to do that, three separate optimization
problems are presented in this section:
• Section 9.1: Maximizing the ORC net power output considering only the thermodynamic ORC
design and a steady state heat source
• Section 9.2: Maximizing the ORC net power output and minimizing the ﬁn and tube evaporator
mass considering a steady state heat source
• Section 9.3: Maximizing the ORC net power output and minimizing the ﬁn and tube evaporator
mass considering the dynamic performance of the ORC system over the driving cycle
The results presented in Section 9.1 and Section 9.2 do not consider the dynamic simulation and the
oﬀ-design performance of the ORC system. The steady state optimizations are carried out for exhaust
gas mass ﬂow rate and temperature at the time weighted mean values over the driving cycle of 0.223
kg/s and 307°C respectively. The results presented in Section 9.3 include the oﬀ-design performance
evaluation, which are obtained through the dynamic simulation of the driving cycle.
9.1
Thermodynamic ORC design
This section presents the results from a single objective optimization of maximizing the ORC net power
output and subsequently analyzes ORC design parameters, when applying a steady state approach to
design the ORC system. All assumptions and constraints related to the thermodynamic ORC design
presented in Section 5 are maintained.
The maximum ORC net power output when considering the thermodynamic ORC design is presented
on Figure 15 for the eight available ORC conﬁgurations.
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
ORC net power output (kW)
Figure 15: Maximum ORC net power output when considering only the thermodynamic ORC design for the
available ORC conﬁgurations
When limiting the condensation pressure to 1 bar, ethanol and pentane provide the highest ORC net
power output of 4.03 kW and 3.91 kW respectively. The lowest net power output is 1.94 kW when using
isobutane as working ﬂuid.
31
==PAGE:38==
The maximum net power output is highest for ethanol and toluene at 5.47 kW and 6.39 kW when
allowing the low pressure side to be operated below atmospheric pressure.
The incremental power
output is highest for toluene which can provide approximately twice as much power when changing the
condensation temperature from 110°C (1 bar) to 50°C (0.12 bar). From the thermodynamic ORC steady
state design point of view, it is a considerable improvement in the ORC net power output, when the
condensation pressure is sub-atmospheric for ethanol and toluene.
9.1.1
ORC system design
As only the thermodynamic ORC design is considered and the inlet temperature and mass ﬂow rate
of the exhaust gas is ﬁxed at the steady state mean value, there remain just three decision variables:
evaporation pressure, degree of superheating and pinch point temperature diﬀerence at the preheater and
vaporizer interface in the evaporator. The three decision variables are shown in Figure 16 normalized to
the lower and upper bounds. The explicit values along with the corresponding evaporation temperatures
and the mass ﬂow rates of working ﬂuid are presented in Table 14 and Table 15.
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized decision variables
Figure 16: Thermodynamic ORC decision variables normalized
Table 14: ORC system parameters for R245fa, R1233zde, pentane and isobutane
Quantity
Variable
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Evaporation pressure (bar)
pwf,eva
17.9
17.0
18.4
22.0
Evaporation temperature (°C)
Twf,eva
116.3
123.8
158.5
105.6
Degree of superheating (K)
SHwf,eva
15.0
19.9
2.5
27.9
Pinch point temperature diﬀerence (K)
∆Tpp,eva
70.0
61.0
62.4
70.0
Working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate (kg/s)
˙mwf
0.20
0.20
0.09
0.11
Net power output at design (kW)
˙Wnet
2.88
3.25
4.03
1.94
32
==PAGE:39==
Table 15: ORC system parameters for ethanol, toluene, ethnaol LP and toluene LP
Quantity
Variable
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Evaporation pressure (bar)
pwf,eva
15.4
6.1
10.3
6.4
Evaporation temperature (°C)
Twf,eva
168.5
188.6
151.9
190.9
Degree of superheating (K)
SHwf,eva
3.9
2.0
75.0
2.0
Pinch point temperature diﬀerence (K)
∆Tpp,eva
5.0
5.0
5.0
10.0
Working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate (kg/s)
˙mwf
0.05
0.09
0.04
0.08
Net power output at design (kW)
˙Wnet
3.91
3.09
5.47
6.39
The evaporation pressures are well below the upper bound of 80% critical pressure for all available
working ﬂuids. When comparing the evaporation pressures between the working ﬂuids, ethanol and
toluene cycles show lower pressures compared to the other working ﬂuids, yet the evaporation tempera-
tures are higher. The coherence between saturation pressure and temperature is diﬀerent depending on
the organic ﬂuid. It is beneﬁcial to have high evaporation temperatures in order to increase the speciﬁc
enthalpy diﬀerence across the expander. The speciﬁc enthalpy diﬀerences from inlet to outlet of the
expander are also highest for ethanol and toluene ORC systems as shown later in Table 16.
The degree of superheat also varies for the diﬀerent working ﬂuids. Higher degrees of superheating
increases the speciﬁc enthalpy at the inlet of the expander, however it is also reduces the mass ﬂow rate
of working ﬂuid through the expander. As shown in Equation (11), decreasing the mass ﬂow rate of
working ﬂuid reduces the ORC net power output, while increasing the speciﬁc enthalpy at the expander
inlet, increases the ORC net power output. The two contrary eﬀects are thus a trade-oﬀfor the ORC
net power out and Figure 16 shows that lower degrees of superheat are generally preferred for the ORC
systems with dry ﬂuids, which is in accordance with previous authors [31,44,56,82].
The trade-oﬀbetween degree of superheating and mass ﬂow rate also aﬀects the isentropic eﬃciency of
the expander, which can explain the reason behind ethanol LP showing a very high degree of superheating
for the maximum ORC net power output. It was previously mentioned in Section 5.3 that the estimation
of expander isentropic eﬃciency depends on the inlet and outlet conditions of the expander as well as the
volumetric ﬂow rate through the turbine. The isentropic eﬃciencies of the expander for the maximized
net power outputs are shown on Figure 17 along with the number of stages in the turbine.
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LPToluene LP
50
60
70
80
Expander isentropic efficiency (%)
0
1
2
3
Number of stages [-]
e,s
Nst
Figure 17: Expander eﬃciency and number of stages when considering only thermodynamic ORC design
Firstly, the toluene ORC systems yield the highest expander isentropic eﬃciencies for both the con-
33
==PAGE:40==
strained and unconstrained condensation pressure case with eﬃciencies of 69.4% and 70.6% respectively.
Isobutane yields the lowest eﬃciency of 54.2%. This can be explained by the volumetric ratio and the
turbine size parameter and number of stages. According to Astolﬁet al. [34], the eﬃciency increases
for low isentropic volumetric ratios and high turbine size parameters. The volumetric ratio, turbine
size parameter, isentropic and actual speciﬁc enthalpy drop as well as the isentropic eﬃciency of the
expander and the number of stages are presented in Table 16.
Table 16: Expander volumetric ratio, turbine size parameter, speciﬁc enthalpy drop, number of stages and
isentropic eﬃciency
Working ﬂuid
Vr
SP
∆he,s (kJ/kg)
∆he (kJ/kg)
Nst
ηe,s (%)
R245fa
5.91
0.0081
33.1
20.4
1
61.76
R1233zde
6.44
0.0086
37.2
23.3
1
62.63
Pentane
14.68
0.0087
95.9
60.5
2
63.06
Isobutane
3.63
0.0057
53.6
29.0
1
54.15
Ethanol
14.24
0.0081
169.5
105.1
2
62.02
Toluene
6.33
0.0110
66.3
46.0
1
69.39
Ethanol LP
29.57
0.0128
262.0
170.7
2
65.17
Toluene LP
50.63
0.0239
140.6
99.2
2
70.59
Although isobutane shows lowest volumetric ratio, it also shows lowest turbine size parameter com-
pared to the other working ﬂuids. The turbine size parameter dominates the single-stage eﬃciency in
this range [34] and that explains the lower isentropic eﬃciency.
Two stages are required when using pentane, ethanol and toluene LP as ORC working ﬂuids. For
ethanol LP, the volumetric ratio and the speciﬁc enthalpy drop across the expander are above 15 and
130 kJ/kg respectively. The volumetric ratio for ethanol and pentane is slightly lower than 15, yet there
are still two stages shown in Figure 17. This is caused by the volumetric ratio being slightly above
15 for a single-stage turbine, which yields a lower isentropic eﬃciency. The outlet temperature of the
expander increases for a lower isentropic eﬃciency and thus the density decreases and the volumetric
ratio increases. However, when two stages are considered for the turbine because the volumetric ratio
exceeds 15, the isentropic eﬃciency increases which reduces the outlet temperature of the expander and
density increases enough to reduce the volumetric ratio below 15.
The high expander isentropic eﬃciency of the toluene LP ORC system is also due to the high turbine
size parameter. The volumetric ﬂow rate at the outlet of the expander in the toluene LP cycle is higher
due to the lower condensation pressure. The volumetric ratio increases, but as seen for isobutane, the
larger turbine size parameter dominates the isentropic eﬃciency.
Coming back to the high degree of superheating for ethanol LP. The ORC net power output does
not decrease signiﬁcantly by the reduction in working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate compared to the increase in
speciﬁc enthalpy at the expander inlet and the increase in expander isentropic eﬃciency. Therefore, a
large degree of superheat is beneﬁcial to the ethanol LP cycle.
With regards to pinch point temperature diﬀerences shown on Figure 16, there is a split between
the working ﬂuids, where ethanol and toluene appear to have lower optimal values. When looking at
the T-s diagram in Figure 14, it is evident that the critical temperature of ethanol and temperature
is closer to the heat source temperature of 307°C. In addition, the exhaust gas temperature limit of
100°C means that the heat source temperature curve cannot go below 100°C. Therefore, ethanol and
toluene can allow for much lower temperature diﬀerences between the heat source and working ﬂuid at
the saturated liquid interface, which increases the evaporation temperature. Thus the low pinch point
temperature diﬀerences yield higher net power outputs, which is also highlighted by Sun et al. [83]. The
heat source and ORC systems are shown on the T-s diagrams presented in Figure 18.
34
==PAGE:41==
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(a) R245fa
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(b) R1233zde
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(c) Pentane
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(d) Isobutane
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(e) Ethanol
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(f) Toluene
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(g) Ethanol LP
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(h) Toluene LP
Figure 18:
T-s diagrams for available working ﬂuids, when maximizing the net power output considering
thermodynamic ORC design only
35
==PAGE:42==
It is also observed from Figure 18 that the location of the pinch point temperature diﬀerence in the
evaporator varies for the diﬀerent working ﬂuids. For R245fa, R1233zde, pentane and isobutane, the
pinch point temperature diﬀerence is located at the working ﬂuid inlet of the evaporator, while it is
located at the saturated liquid state point for the other working ﬂuids. As previously emphasized, the
input to the optimization algorithm is the temperature diﬀerence at the saturated liquid state in the
evaporator and therefore the actual pinch point temperature diﬀerence in the evaporator is slightly lower
for R245fa, R1233zde, pentane and isobutane. Yu et al. [84] observed similar behaviour for ORC systems
with R245fa as working ﬂuid, where the evaporator pinch point temperature diﬀerence is located at the
working ﬂuid inlet due to the high temperature of the heat source at the inlet to the evaporator.
The T-s diagrams presented on Figure 18 also show the exhaust gas temperature at the evaporator
outlet. The ORC thermal eﬃciency and system eﬃciency for each of the thermodynamic ORC designs
are shown on Figure 19.
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
ORC thermal and system efficiency (%)
th
sys
Figure 19: ORC thermal and system eﬃciency considering only the thermodynamic ORC design
The system eﬃciencies reveal that ethanol and toluene, when limiting the condensation pressure to 1
bar, do not make use of all of the available heat in the exhaust gas. The other working ﬂuids make use
of all of the available heat rate as the system eﬃciencies are equal to the thermal eﬃciencies. The range
of ORC thermal eﬃciencies presented in Figure 19 are in accordance with those presented by Thurairaja
et al. [76] for ORC applications in a similar heat source temperature range.
Conclusively, when considering only the thermodynamic ORC design for the time weighted mean value
of exhaust gas temperature and mass ﬂow rate, the low condensation pressure ethanol and toluene ORC
systems show the highest net power outputs of 5.5 kW and 6.4 kW respectively. When the condensation
pressure is limited to 1 bar, the pentane and ethanol cycles provide the highest ORC net power outputs
of 4.0 kW and 3.9 kW respectively. The degree of superheating for the optimal cycle designs are low,
with the exception of ethanol LP, where the net ORC power output is not penalized for higher degrees
of superheating. The isentropic eﬃciency of the expander is highest for the toluene LP ORC, which is
mainly due to the larger turbine size parameters caused by high volumetric ﬂow rates at the expander
outlet.
36
==PAGE:43==
9.2
Thermodynamic ORC design and ﬁn and tube evaporator design
The multi-objective optimization is performed for the eight available ORC systems, when including the
design of the ﬁn and tube evaporator in the design. Again, the time weighted mean value exhaust gas
temperature and mass ﬂow rate is considered as the steady state evaporator inlet conditions of the heat
source. The constraints related to maximum pressure losses in the evaporator and evaporator mass of
the ﬁn and tube heat exchanger are maintained.
The Pareto-optimal solutions for maximizing the ORC net power output and minimizing the evapo-
rator mass are presented on Figure 20 for each of the eight available ORC conﬁgurations.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Evaporator mass (kg)
2
3
4
5
6
7
ORC net power output (kW)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 20: Pareto-optimal solutions for the ORC design considering time weighted mean value of exhaust mass
ﬂow rate and temperature
When including the design of a ﬁn and tube evaporator, toluene LP and ethanol LP ORC systems
show the best performance with respect to ORC net power output and evaporator mass. Th ORC net
power outputs are in agreement with the results presented for the thermodynamic ORC design only on
Figure 15. Aside from the low condensation pressure systems, ORC systems with pentane show best
performance followed by R1233zde, ethanol and R245fa.
Figure 20 also reveals that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the evaporator mass required to reach
the maximum ORC net power output. It requires ﬁn and tube evaporators with masses above 100 to
reach the maximum ORC net power for the ORC conﬁgurations with ethanol, toluene, ethanol LP and
toluene LP. On the contrary, the ORC systems with R245fa, R1233zde, pentane and isobutane reach
their maximum ORC net power output with evaporator masses below 50 kg.
Another way to show the trade-oﬀbetween ORC net power output and evaporator mass is by the
power to weigh ratio. It expresses the amount of ORC net output power that can be produced per unit
mass of the evaporator. The power to weight ratio for the eight ORC conﬁgurations is presented on
Figure 21.
37
==PAGE:44==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0
50
100
150
Power to weight ratio (W/kg)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 21: Power to weight ratio for the Pareto-optimal solutions
For all available ORC conﬁgurations, the highest power to weight ratios are found for the lower ORC
net power outputs and thus low evaporator masses, but that does not mean that they are considered the
optimal designs. The optimal design among the Pareto-optimal solutions is based upon the customer
constraints on evaporator mass. Speciﬁcally, the customer must decide if the incremental ORC net
power output is worth the additional mass.
Interestingly, the ranking between working ﬂuids with constrained condensation pressure changes,
when the evaporator design is included and the trade-oﬀbetween mass and power is considered. From the
thermodynamic ORC design results on Figure 15, pentane yields slightly lower ORC net power output
than ethanol. However, when looking at the power to weight ratios, pentane performs signiﬁcantly
better for the Pareto-optimal solutions. In other words, the maximum ORC net power output requires
a signiﬁcantly lower mass of the evaporator for pentane ORCs compared to ethanol ORCs. The reason
can be found by investigating the ORC design of the Pareto-optimal solutions in more detail.
9.2.1
ORC system design
For readability purposes, the ORC design parameters related to the Pareto-optimal solutions in this
section are shown on two-dimensional plots as opposed to three-dimensional plots with the ORC net
power output on the ﬁrst axis. The corresponding evaporator mass can be found in Figure 20.
The three decision variables related to the thermodynamic ORC design are evaporation pressure, de-
gree of superheating and pinch point temperature diﬀerence in the evaporator. These decision variables
are shown for the Pareto-optimal solutions on Figure 22, Figure 23 and Figure 24.
38
==PAGE:45==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
5
10
15
20
25
30
Evaporation pressure (bar)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 22: Evaporation pressures for the Pareto-optimal solutions
Figure 22 shows that the evaporation pressures and therefore evaporation temperatures changes
slightly across the Pareto-optimal solutions. R245fa and R1233zde ORC systems see a slight increase
in evaporation pressure for increasing ORC net power output, while pentane, ethanol LP and toluene
LP systems see slight decreases. The isobutane system shows more signiﬁcant increase in evaporation
pressure for increasing ORC net power output, while the evaporation pressures for ethanol and toluene
are roughly unchanged across the Pareto-optimal solutions. The range of evaporation pressures for the
Pareto-optimal solutions are generally in agreement with the evaporation pressures presented in Table 14
and Table 15, where only the thermodynamics related to the ORC were considered.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Degree of superheating (K)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 23: Degree of superheating for the Pareto-optimal solutions
Unlike the evaporation pressure, the degree of superheating varies signiﬁcantly for the Pareto-optimal
solutions as seen on Figure 23. For R245fa, R1233zde and isobutane, the degree of superheating decreases
sharply for increasing ORC net power outputs, while it decreases less for ethanol, toluene and toluene
LP. The degree of superheating for ethanol LP increases for increasing ORC net power outputs.
39
==PAGE:46==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Pinch point temperature difference (K)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 24: Evaporator pinch point temperature diﬀerences for the Pareto-optimal solutions
As shown in Section 9.1 for the thermodynamic ORC design only, Figure 24 also shows the split be-
tween the working ﬂuids when looking at the pinch point temperature diﬀerences for the Pareto-optimal
solutions. R245fa, R1233zde, pentane and isobutane ORC systems all favor high pinch point temper-
ature diﬀerences, which is driven by the large temperature diﬀerence between the critical temperature
and the exhaust gas temperature. The ethanol and toluene ORC systems favor decreasing pinch point
temperature diﬀerences, which is in line with the results presented in Section 9.1.
When considering all three thermodynamic decision variables together with the Pareto-optimal solu-
tions presented on Figure 20, it is seen that the heat transfer conditions between exhaust gas and ORC
working ﬂuid are diﬀerent for working ﬂuids delivering ORC net power outputs in the same range. In
particular, Pareto-optimal solutions for ORC systems with pentane and ethanol working ﬂuids exhibit
similar ranges of ORC net power output, yet pentane can provide lower evaporator masses.
The heat transfer rates from the exhaust gas to the ORC working ﬂuid in the evaporator are presented
for the Pareto-optimal solutions on Figure 25.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Evaporator heat transfer rate (kW)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 25: Evaporator heat transfer rate for the Pareto-optimal solutions
40
==PAGE:47==
The evaporator heat transfer rates increase for all working ﬂuids as the ORC net power output and
evaporator mass increases. The exhaust gas temperature and mass ﬂow rate at the inlet is ﬁxed, hence
the exhaust gas temperature leaving the evaporator also decreases as the heat transfer rate increases as
shown on Figure 26.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Exhaust gas temperature, evaporator outlet (°C)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 26: Exhaust gas temperature at the evaporator outlet the Pareto-optimal solutions
The low capacity and low mass ORC systems of the respective working ﬂuid therefore yield higher
exhaust gas temperatures at the outlet of the evaporator, which indicates that a signiﬁcant amount
of the heat in the exhaust gas is not recovered. The heat transfer rate of 47.5 kW is equivalent of
an exhaust gas temperature at the outlet of the evaporator of 100°C. As the heat transfer rate in the
evaporator decreases, so does the mass ﬂow rate of the ORC working ﬂuid, which is shown in Figure 27.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
Working fluid mass flow (kg/s)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 27: Mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid for the Pareto-optimal solutions
The increase in working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate is required to obtain the increased heat transfer rate
41
==PAGE:48==
from the exhaust gas. The magnitude of the working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate indirectly reveals the speciﬁc
enthalpy diﬀerence from the inlet to the outlet of the evaporator.
With reference to Equation (6),
the ORC conﬁgurations with lower speciﬁc enthalpy increase in the evaporator require larger working
ﬂuid mass ﬂow rates for the same heat transfer rate. The slope of the mass ﬂow rates on Figure 27
is also directly coupled to the variations in the evaporator inlet and outlet conditions of the working
ﬂuid. R245fa, R1233zde and isobutane show larger variations in working ﬂuid pressure and degrees of
superheating and therefore require larger changes in working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate.
The maximum heat transfer rates from exhaust gas to the ORC working ﬂuid presented in Figure 25
are similar for all ORC conﬁgurations except toluene and ethanol. The ORC net power output varies
greatly, which indicates that some of the ORC conﬁgurations convert far less of the thermal power into
electrical power. The expander isentropic eﬃciencies for the Pareto-optimal solutions are shown on
Figure 28.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
50
55
60
65
70
75
Expander isentropic efficiency (%)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 28: Expander isentropic eﬃciency for the Pareto-optimal solutions
The expander isentropic eﬃciencies shown on Figure 28 are similar to those presented in Section 9.1.
The expander isentropic eﬃciency decreases as the ORC net power output decreases. The reason comes
from the correlation presented in Equation (13), where the turbine size parameter is reduced when the
mass ﬂow rate decreases. As highlighted in Section 9.1, the decreasing mass ﬂow rate and thus the
reduced turbine size parameter are not beneﬁcial to the expander eﬃciency. The expander isentropic
eﬃciency is not directly proportional to the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid, because the expander inlet
conditions also change. This is especially seen for R245fa, R1233zde and isobutane, which also show the
largest changes in degree of superheating and evaporation pressure.
9.2.2
Evaporator sizing
Recall from Equation (18) that the logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerence along with the overall heat
transfer coeﬃcient determines the required heat transfer areas of the evaporator sections for a given
heat transfer rate. The sizing of the evaporator as a whole consists of individual sections, namely the
preheater, vaporizer and superheater. In order to explain the reason behind the diﬀerent evaporator
masses for working ﬂuids with similar ORC net power outputs, the heat transfer conditions are analyzed.
The overall heat transfer rates, overall heat transfer coeﬃcients, heat transfer areas and logarithmic mean
temperature diﬀerences for the preheater, vaporizer and superheater of the Pareto-optimal solutions are
presented in the Appendix A.1 of this report for reference.
42
==PAGE:49==
Heat transfer rate
The heat transfer rates for the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the Pareto-optimal solutions
are presented on Figure 51, Figure 52 and Figure 53 in Appendix A.1.1.
Common for all ORC conﬁgurations, except isobutane, is that the majority of the heat transfer occurs
in the preheater and vaporizer. The ORC system with pentane as working ﬂuid has signiﬁcantly higher
heat transfer rates in the preheater compared to the vaporizer, while that is opposite for the other
ORC systems. Expectantly, the heat transfer rate in the superheater strongly reﬂects the degree of
superheating presented on Figure 23.
Overall heat transfer coeﬃcient
The overall heat transfer coeﬃcient depends on the ﬂuid properties as well as the evaporator geometry.
The exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate and temperature is ﬁxed, therefore the heat transfer coeﬃcients on
the ﬁn side change depending mainly on the geometry of the evaporator. On the tube side, the heat
transfer coeﬃcients also vary depending on the tube geometry as well as the working ﬂuid properties
and velocity.
The overall heat transfer coeﬃcients for the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the Pareto-
optimal solutions are presented on Figure 54, Figure 55 and Figure 56 in Appendix A.1.2. The variation
in the overall heat transfer coeﬃcients in the preheater is small when comparing the diﬀerent ORC
conﬁgurations.
The same cannot be said for the vaporizer.
The overall heat transfer coeﬃcient is
highest for pentane and isobutane, while it is lowest for toluene and toluene LP. The same trend is seen
for the overall heat transfer coeﬃcients in the superheater.
Logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerence
The logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences for the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the
Pareto-optimal solutions are presented on Figure 57, Figure 58 and Figure 59 in Appendix A.1.3.
The logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences are highest in the superheater for all ORC systems,
where the variations are small across the ORC net power output range. For the preheater and vapor-
izer, the logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences show similar behaviour with the exception of R245fa,
R1233zde, pentane and isobutane. There is a strong coherence between the logarithmic mean tempera-
ture diﬀerences in the vaporizer and the pinch point temperature diﬀerences. R245fa, R1233zde, pentane
and isobutane all show high pinch point temperatures across the Pareto-optimal solutions, hence the
change in vaporizer LMTD is also high.
Heat transfer area
The heat transfer areas of the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the Pareto-optimal solutions are
presented on Figure 60, Figure 61 and Figure 62 in Appendix A.1.4.
With reference to Figure 20, pentane and ethanol have similar ORC net power output ranges yet
diﬀerent evaporator masses, and they are used as an example to explain the inﬂuence of heat transfer
rate, overall heat transfer coeﬃcient and logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerence on the heat transfer
area.
For the preheater, the overall heat transfer coeﬃcients are slightly higher for pentane, while the
logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences are signiﬁcantly higher compared to ethanol. The heat transfer
rate in the preheater is higher for pentane and therefore the required heat transfer area is similar to
that of ethanol until an ORC net power output of approximately 3 kW. Above ORC net power outputs
of 3 kW, the diﬀerence between LMTD of pentane and ethanol ORC cycles becomes larger hence the
diﬀerence in required heat transfer area for pentane and ethanol also increases.
Similar observations are made for the vaporizer. The overall heat transfer coeﬃcients and logarithmic
mean temperature diﬀerences are higher for pentane compared to ethanol ORC systems along the
Pareto-optimal solutions. Now, the heat transfer rate in the vaporizer is lower for pentane and therefore
the resulting heat transfer area of the vaporizer is signiﬁcantly smaller for pentane compared to ethanol.
Due to the low heat transfer rates and large temperature diﬀerences in the superheater, the required
43
==PAGE:50==
heat transfer area is insigniﬁcant in comparison to the preheater and vaporizer.
Similar conclusions can be made for the other ORC conﬁgurations in similar net power output ranges
such as R1233zde and ethanol. For isobutane and toluene, the logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences
in all three sections are far lower for toluene but the heat transfer rate is also signiﬁcantly lower. That
is also the case for R245fa and ethanol.
In conclusion, when the detailed model of a ﬁn and tube evaporator is included in the ORC system
design and the mass of the evaporator is considered, the ORC conﬁgurations with sub-atmospheric con-
densation pressures, ethanol LP and toluene LP, provide the highest power to weight ratio as well as the
highest achievable ORC net power output. If the complexity and additional mass of the sub-atmospheric
condensation pressure ORC conﬁgurations are considered too high, the pentane ORC conﬁguration
should be considered the optimal choice with regards to maximum ORC net power output and mini-
mum mass. Furthermore, it is shown that the choice of working ﬂuid must not be based solely on the
maximum ORC net power output, when the minimizing the evaporator mass is of importance. For two
ORC systems in the same range of ORC net power outputs with similar evaporator heat transfer rates,
such as pentane and ethanol, pentane ORC systems allow for signiﬁcantly lower evaporator masses due
to the larger pinch point temperature diﬀerences in the evaporator, which decrease the required heat
transfer area and mass of the evaporator.
44
==PAGE:51==
9.3
ORC design considering dynamic performance
The two previous sections presented the optimal designs when considering a steady state heat source.
For the ORC application of waste heat recovery on truck engines over a driving cycle, the exhaust gas
exhibits far from steady state behaviour, and the oﬀ-design performance is therefore considered in this
section. This section presents the Pareto-optimal solutions, where the ORC net power output over the
driving cycle is maximized and the mass of the evaporator is minimized. The pump control strategy
in the dynamic simulation is to keep the degree of superheating at the design value and the exhaust
bypass valve is used to keep evaporation pressures below 90% of the critical pressure. The ORC net
power output over the driving cycle is accumulated and becomes the total ORC net energy output. For
comparison reasons, it is converted to the average ORC net power output over the driving cycle.
The multi-objective optimization routine, which includes the dynamic simulation of the ORC sys-
tem, requires far more computational eﬀort compared to the steady state optimizations presented in
Section 9.1 and Section 9.2. Only the most promising ORC conﬁgurations from Section 9.2 are consid-
ered: pentane, ethanol LP and toluene LP. The Pareto-optimal solutions for the optimization routine
considering dynamic performance are presented on Figure 29.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Evaporator mass (kg)
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 29: Pareto-optimal solutions for the ORC designs considering dynamic performance
The toluene LP ORC system shows the best potential with regards to maximum oﬀ-design ORC
net power output and minimum evaporator mass followed by ethanol LP and pentane. The average
oﬀ-design ORC net power output ranges from 2.3 kW to 5.2 kW for respective evaporator masses of 26
kg and 148 kg for toluene LP. For ethanol, the average oﬀ-design ORC net power output ranges from
2.3 kW to 4.6 kW for respective evaporator masses of 35 kg and 141 kg, while the average oﬀ-design
ORC net power output ranges from 2.0 kW to 3.2 kW for respective evaporator masses of 40 kg and
143 kg for pentane.
That ranking between the three ORC conﬁgurations is in accordance with the results presented on
Figure 20, where the steady state heat source was considered. However the average ORC net power
outputs are lower and the evaporator masses are higher for all three working ﬂuids. This shows that there
is a degradation in the achievable ORC net power output over the driving cycle, when the ﬂuctuating
heat source and the dynamics of the system are considered compared to considering a steady state heat
source at the mean value of exhaust temperature and mass ﬂow rate.
The same observation is made when comparing the power to weight ratios from Section 9.2 to those
presented on Figure 30.
45
==PAGE:52==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
0
50
100
150
Power to weight ratio (W/kg)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 30: Power to weight ratio of the Pareto-optimal solutions when dynamic performance is considered
The power to weight ratios of the ORC systems presented on Figure 30 are reduced by more than
50% compared to the power to weight ratios presented on Figure 21 for all three ORC conﬁgurations.
A noticeable observation is made related to importance of including the dynamic performance of
the ORC in the design. Not a single one of the ORC system designs on the Pareto-optimal solutions
presented on Figure 20 in the previous Section 9.2 overcome the constraints related to the operation of
the ORC system over the driving cycle. The solutions are not able to maintain a degree of superheating
above 2 K and/or a minimum exhaust gas temperature above 100°C. That emphasizes the importance of
integrating the dynamic performance of the ORC system for applications with large and fast ﬂuctuations
in the heat source.
9.3.1
ORC system design
The design of the ORC systems on the Pareto-optimal solutions are analyzed to investigate the changes
in the design, when the dynamic performance of the ORC system is included in the design phase. The
subsequent plots in this section are therefore showing selected ORC system design parameters to focus
on the diﬀerence between designing the ORC systems from a steady state heat source and a dynamic
heat source.
As stated earlier, the design points of exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature at the inlet to the
evaporator are included as decision variables. The design points of exhaust mass ﬂow rate and tem-
perature for the Pareto-optimal solutions are presented on Figure 31 and Figure 32 respectively. The
time-weighted mean value is also shown for reference.
46
==PAGE:53==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Design exhaust mass flow rate (kg/s)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Time-weighted mean
Figure 31: Design exhaust mass ﬂow rate for the Pareto-optimal solutions
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
Design exhaust inlet temperature (°C)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Time-weighted mean
Figure 32: Design exhaust temperature at the evaporator inlet for the Pareto-optimal solutions
With regards to exhaust mass ﬂow rate, the Pareto-optimal solutions suggest that the design point
should be near the time-weighted mean value. The pentane ORC systems suggest higher than average
mean values, while ethanol LP and toluene LP ORC conﬁgurations suggest slightly lower design exhaust
mass ﬂow rates compared to the mean value over the driving cycle.
The design point exhaust gas
temperature should be chosen slightly lower than the time-weighted mean with the exception of ethanol
LP at larger capacities.
The design points of inlet exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature directly set the upper bound for
the amount of heat that can be transferred from the exhaust gas to the working ﬂuid at design. The
design heat transfer rate of the ORC conﬁgurations are shown on Figure 37.
47
==PAGE:54==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Design evaporator heat transfer rate (kW)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 33: Design evaporator heat transfer rate for the Pareto-optimal solutions
The heat transfer rates in the evaporator decrease for lower capacity ORC systems as shown also in
Section 9.2. The design heat transfer rates for pentane are higher than ethanol LP and toluene LP
due to the larger exhaust heat at the design point, because the mass ﬂow rate of exhaust gas is more
dominant with regards to the available heat transfer rate compared to the exhaust gas temperature.
That also explains the sudden drop in heat transfer rate for pentane with an average ORC net power
output of 2.75 kW, where the both the design exhaust temperature and mass ﬂow rate rapidly decrease
as shown on Figure 31 and Figure 32.
An interesting observation is found, when investigating the magnitude of the heat transfer rates. The
design heat transfer rates are generally lower for ethanol LP and toluene LP compared to those on
Figure 25, even though the design points of exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature are similar. That
indicates that the exhaust temperature at the outlet of the evaporator is higher. The evaporator outlet
exhaust temperature for the designs along the Pareto-optimal solutions are presented on Figure 34.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Design minimum exhaust gas temperature (°C)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 34: Design working ﬂuid temperature at the evaporator outlet for the Pareto-optimal solutions
48
==PAGE:55==
As expected, the design exhaust temperatures presented on Figure 34 are higher than the minimum
exhaust gas temperature of 100°C. That is understandable due to the limit on minimum exhaust tem-
perature in the dynamic simulation. The design value of minimum exhaust gas temperature must be
higher than the 100°C limit in order to cope with the ﬂuctuations in the heat source. Figure 34 shows
that the margin between the minimum allowable exhaust temperature of 100°C and the design value
increases as the ORC system decrease in capacity and size. At the maximum capacity of each of the
ORC conﬁgurations, a margin of 10-20°C is required to keep exhaust temperatures above 100°C at all
times during the driving cycle.
The design evaporation pressures, degrees of superheating and pinch point temperature diﬀerences
for the Pareto-optimal solutions are presented on Figure 35, Figure 36 and Figure 37 respectively.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
5
10
15
20
25
30
Design evaporation pressure (bar)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 35: Design evaporation temperature for the Pareto-optimal solutions
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Design degree of superheating (K)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 36: Design degree of superheating for the Pareto-optimal solutions
49
==PAGE:56==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Design pinch point temperature difference (K)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 37: Design pinch point temperature diﬀerence for the Pareto-optimal solutions
The design evaporation pressures and pinch point temperatures presented on Figure 35 and Figure 37
show minor changes when compared to Figure 22 and Figure 24. The design evaporation pressure is
slightly higher for pentane when the oﬀ-design performance is considered, while it is slightly lower for
ethanol LP and toluene LP. There is a sharp decrease in the pinch point temperature of the pentane,
which is due to the decreased design temperature of the exhaust gas at the inlet to the evaporator as
shown on Figure 32. The pinch point temperature diﬀerences are higher for ethanol LP and toluene LP
due to the decreased evaporation pressure and thus a decreased evaporation temperature.
The changes in the design degrees of superheating is more prevalent. The design degrees of superheat-
ing for the Pareto-optimal solutions presented on Figure 36 are signiﬁcantly higher than those presented
on Figure 23 for pentane and toluene LP. For toluene LP, the degree of superheating increases from
5-10 K, when considering the steady state heat source, to 40-55 K, when the oﬀ-design performance is
considered. A similar observation is seen for pentane, where the design degree of superheating increases
from 10-25 K to 40-55 K respectively.
To protect the expander, the degree of superheating must not decrease below 2 K at any time. The
degree of superheating at design also serves as the set point for the pump, which regulates the mass
ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid. The ﬂuctuations of the exhaust heat provide less heat for the working ﬂuid
at certain times. In order to prevent liquid droplets at the turbine inlet, the degree of superheating
is therefore increased to cope with the ﬂuctuations in the exhaust heat, which is also shown later in
Figure 42.
The increased superheat also means that the heat transfer rate in the superheater increases, which
leaves less heat transfer rate to occur in the preheater and vaporizer. As explained in Section 9.1, the
working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate is reduced for increasing degrees of superheating, which decreases the ORC
net power output because the mass ﬂow rate reduction is more signiﬁcant than the speciﬁc enthalpy
increase at the expander inlet. The Pareto-optimal ORC designs considering the dynamic performance
therefore show a lower ORC net power output, when comparing to the Pareto-optimal ORC designs
considering a steady state heat source presented on Figure 23.
9.3.2
Design vs. oﬀ-design
The average oﬀ-design values of some key parameters relative their design values are shown in this section
for the Pareto-optimal solutions of the three ORC systems. The average oﬀ-design ORC net power
outputs of the ORC conﬁgurations are compared to the design ORC net power output on Figure 38.
50
==PAGE:57==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
Design ORC net power output (kW)
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (avg. off-design) (kW)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 38: Pareto-optimal solutions for the ORC design considering dynamic performance
Interestingly, Figure 38 reveals that the ORC system shows slightly higher ORC net power outputs
at oﬀ-design conditions compared to design for most of the ethanol LP and toluene LP ORC systems.
For pentane, it is opposite. A similar trend is seen for the evaporator heat transfer rate as seen on
Figure 39.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Design evaporator heat transfer rate (kW)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Evaporator heat transfer rate (avg. off-design) (kW)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 39: Pareto-optimal solutions for the ORC design considering dynamic performance
In line with the ORC net power output, the average heat transfer rate to the ORC working ﬂuid over
the driving cycle is higher than the design for ethanol LP and toluene LP ORC systems, while is is
opposite for pentane. The average isentropic eﬃciency of the expander, presented on Figure 40, reveals
that pentane cycles convert far less of the available heat rate into useful power.
51
==PAGE:58==
50
55
60
65
70
75
Design expander isentropic efficiency (%)
50
55
60
65
70
75
Expander isentropic efficiency (avg. off-design) (%)
Pentane
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 40: Pareto-optimal solutions for the ORC design considering dynamic performance
As also shown in Section 9.1 and Section 9.2, the expander isentropic eﬃciencies are highest for
toluene LP followed by ethanol LP and lastly pentane. Figure 40 reveals that the isentropic eﬃciency
of the expander degrades in the oﬀ-design conditions for all ORC designs. That is an important obser-
vation, which, in addition to the larger degrees of superheating, also explains the reduction in ORC net
power output, when going from a steady-state design approach to the oﬀ-design performance evaluation
presented in this section. The dynamic responses of two ORC systems are analyzed in more detail in
the following Section 9.3.3 to investigate the behaviour of the ORC system parameters over the driving
cycle.
9.3.3
Dynamic response
The dynamic responses of two diﬀerent ORC systems from the Pareto-optimal solutions from Figure 29
are presented in this section. As the most promising results are shown for toluene LP conﬁgurations,
that is also the choice for the two designs presented in Table 17. The quantities provided for oﬀ-design
are the average values across the driving cycle. The two objective functions, ORC net power output and
evaporator mass, are marked with bold. For simplicity, the ORC system with low mass and low ORC
net power output is referred to as design A, while the ORC system with higher evaporator mass and
ORC net power output is referred to as design B in the following section. The T-s diagrams of the two
ORC system designs are shown on Figure 41a and Figure 41b for design A and design B respectively.
52
==PAGE:59==
Table 17: Design A and design B ORC parameters
Quantity
Variable
Unit
Design A
Design B
Exhaust gas mass ﬂow
˙mhs,D
kg/s
0.210
0.218
Exhaust gas temperature inlet
Ths,eva,in,D
°C
295.9
298.6
Evaporation pressure
pwf,eva,D
bar
4.84
4.38
Degree of superheating
SHwf,eva,D
K
48.4
50.7
Pinch point temperature diﬀerence
∆Tpp,eva,D
K
53.0
24.5
Fin height
fheight
mm
17.3
19.4
Tube outer diameter
d
mm
15.8
15.9
Fin pitch
fpitch
1/m
329
580
Tube length
l
m
0.54
0.53
Decision variables
Fin spacing
fspacing
mm
37.4
40.0
Evaporator pressure drop working ﬂuid side
∆pwf,eva,D
kPa
2.16
6.61
Evaporator pressure drop exhaust side
∆phs,eva,D
mbar
0.05
0.08
Heat transfer area, preheater
AP H
m2
4.9
16.0
Heat transfer area, vaporizer
ALV
m2
5.9
20.6
Heat transfer area, superheater
ASH
m2
3.5
10.5
Tube thickness
t
mm
12
12
Working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate
˙mwf,D
kg/s
0.036
0.056
Exhaust gas temperature outlet
Ths,eva,out,D
°C
187.4
136.7
Evaporator heat rate
˙Qeva,D
kW
23.5
36.3
Expander isentropic eﬃciency
ηe,s,D
%
67.1
72.3
ORC thermal eﬃciency
ηth,D
%
12.0
12.6
ORC system eﬃciency
ηsys,D
%
6.6
10.3
ORC net power output
˙Wnet,D
kW
2.80
4.57
Design
Evaporator mass
meva
kg
38.0
109.1
Evaporator heat rate
˙Qeva,OD
kW
24.8
37.6
Exhaust gas temperature outlet
Ths,eva,out,OD
°C
188.1
141.0
Expander isentropic eﬃciency
ηe,s,OD
%
65.5
70.9
ORC thermal eﬃciency
ηth,OD
%
11.7
12.4
ORC system eﬃciency
ηsys,OD
%
5.7
9.1
Oﬀ-design
Average net power output oﬀ-design
˙Wnet,OD
kW
2.92
4.69
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(a)
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Specific entropy (J/kg-K)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Temperature (°C)
Heat source
Working fluid
(b)
Figure 41: ORC design systems on the T-s diagram for (a) design A and (b) design B
53
==PAGE:60==
The behaviour of the ORC systems is investigated by analyzing key cycle parameters across the
driving cycle. The degree of superheating for design A and B are shown on Figure 42 for the duration
of the driving cycle.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Degree of superheating (K)
A: off-design
A: design
B: off-design
B: design
Figure 42: Degree of superheating over the driving cycle
The design degree of superheating, which is also the set point for the pump control, is nearly the same
for design A and design B, yet the development over the driving cycle of the two systems is diﬀerent.
Generally, design A shows more frequent and larger ﬂuctuations compared to design B. Both the ORC
systems are very close to the degree of superheating lower boundary of 2 K approximately 27 minutes
and 42 minutes into the driving cycle for design A and design B respectively. That is also where the
available heat transfer rate is lowest as shown on Figure 3a. In order to understand the ﬂuctuations,
also the mass ﬂow rates of working ﬂuid through the pump are shown on Figure 43.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Pump mass flow rate (kg/s)
A: off-design
A: design
B: off-design
B: design
Figure 43: Working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate through the pump over the driving cycle
Figure 43 shows that the mass ﬂow of working ﬂuid delivered by the pump meets the upper limit
of 120% of the design mass ﬂow rate for design A at multiple times throughout the driving cycle. For
design B, the mass ﬂow rate of the pump only meets the upper limit a few times over the driving cycle.
None of the ORC systems reach the 20% lower limit of the mass ﬂow rate operating range.
At times of maximum mass ﬂow rate, the controller intends to increase the mass ﬂow rate of working
ﬂuid to reduce the degree of superheating, but the pump cannot deliver a higher mass ﬂow rate. When
comparing Figure 42 and Figure 43, it is therefore seen that the largest degrees of superheating for
design A occurs, when the pump mass ﬂow rate is limited. And the lowest degrees of superheat are
seen, when the pump decreases the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid.
54
==PAGE:61==
The comparison between the degree of superheating of design A and design B also shows that there is
a diﬀerence in time between the ﬂuctuations of the degree of superheat. Design B shows a later response
to changes in the exhaust heat, which can be explained by the larger thermal inertia of the evaporator
wall of design B due to the higher evaporator mass as shown in Table 17. That also explains the smaller
ﬂuctuations of design B compared to design A.
It is also observed that the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid through the pump at the initialization is
almost at the maximum limit in order to keep the degree of superheating at the set point. This indicates
that the exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate and temperature at the initial conditions of the driving cycle are
higher than the design values used for design A and design B, which is conﬁrmed from Table 17.
Figure 42 also shows that there are signiﬁcant discrepancies between the set point and the degree
of superheating over the driving cycle for both design A and design B. That suggests that the pump
controller performance is weak, but it must be emphasized that the mass ﬂow rate through the pump
is not equal to the mass ﬂow rate through the expander at all times during the driving cycle. The mass
ﬂow rates through the expander for the two designs are shown on Figure 44.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Expander mass flow rate (kg/s)
A: off-design
A: design
B: off-design
B: design
Figure 44: Working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate through the expander over the driving cycle
It is clear, when comparing Figure 43 and Figure 44, that the working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rates through
pump and expander are diﬀerent across the driving cycle for both design A and design B. Recall from
Section 7, that the mass ﬂow rate through the expander at oﬀ-design conditions is determined by the
Stodola’s constant. The oﬀ-design mass ﬂow rate through the turbine is thus a dependent on the inlet
conditions, in particular the inlet pressure, which is equal to the evaporation pressure. The evaporation
pressures over the driving cycle for the two designs are presented on Figure 45.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
3
4
5
6
7
8
Evaporation pressure (bar)
A: off-design
A: design
B: off-design
B: design
Figure 45: Evaporation pressure over the driving cycle
55
==PAGE:62==
Expectantly, the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid through the expander presented on Figure 44 is
proportional to the evaporation pressure presented on Figure 45. An accumulation of working ﬂuid in
the evaporator occurs when the mass ﬂow rate through the expander is lower than the mass ﬂow rate
through the pump. Adversely, the total amount of working ﬂuid in the evaporator decreases, when the
mass ﬂow rate through the expander is higher than the mass ﬂow rate through the pump.
The diﬀerence between mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid through the pump and through the turbine
complicates the control of the degree of superheating and it is therefore diﬃcult for the pump PI
controller to minimize the error between set point and actual degree of superheating as shown on
Figure 42.
It is important to emphasize that, in the dynamic simulation, the heat transfer rate from the exhaust
gas to the evaporator wall and the heat transfer rate from the evaporator wall to the ORC working ﬂuid
are not the same. The thermal inertia of the heat exchanger wall means that the changes in exhaust
gas temperature and mass ﬂow rate are not directly transferred to the ORC working ﬂuid.
The heat transfer rate from exhaust gas to the heat exchanger wall and the heat transfer rate from
the heat exchanger wall to the ORC working ﬂuid are shown on Figure 46 for design A and Figure 47
for design B.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Heat transfer rate (kW)
Exhaust gas
ORC working fluid
Figure 46: Heat transfer rates from the exhaust gas and heat transfer rates to the ORC working ﬂuid over the
driving cycle for design A
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Heat transfer rate (kW)
Exhaust gas
ORC working fluid
Figure 47: Heat transfer rates from the exhaust gas and heat transfer rates to the ORC working ﬂuid over the
driving cycle for design B
Figure 46 and Figure 47 show that heat transfer rate from the exhaust gas to the heat exchanger wall
shows larger ﬂuctuations compared to the heat transfer rate from the heat exchanger wall to the ORC
56
==PAGE:63==
working ﬂuid. That can be explained by the larger heat transfer area of design B compared to design
A. The heat transfer rate is limited by the heat transfer area, which in turns means that the exhaust
temperature of the exhaust gas at the evaporator outlet is higher. The exhaust gas temperature at the
evaporator outlet is shown on Figure 48 for design A and design B.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
100
150
200
250
300
Exhaust gas temperature at outlet (°C)
A: off-design
A: design
B: off-design
B: design
Figure 48: Exhaust gas temperature at the evaporator outlet over the driving cycle
More importantly, the exhaust gas temperature ﬂuctuations below the design value are signiﬁcantly
larger for design A than design B. This is an important observation due to the constraint on minimum
exhaust gas temperature of minimum 100°C. The higher ﬂuctuations of exhaust gas temperature for
the low evaporator mass systems therefore means that the minimum exhaust gas temperature at design
must be higher, which is also shown on Figure 34. The minimum exhaust gas temperature at the design
also inﬂuences the sizing of the evaporator due to the temperature diﬀerence as shown in Section 9.2.
The ORC net power outputs over the driving cycle for the two designs are presented on Figure 49.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ORC net power output (kW)
A: off-design
A: design
B: off-design
B: design
Figure 49: ORC net power output over the driving cycle
The ORC net power outputs of design A and design B ﬂuctuates around the design ORC net power
outputs for the majority of the driving cycle. When comparing with the evaporation pressure on Fig-
ure 45 and the mass ﬂow rate through the expander on Figure 44, there is a clear coherence. Expectantly,
the ORC net power output is high, when the evaporation pressure and mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid
through the expander are high. For design A and design B, the maximum power output over the driv-
ing cycle is 38% and 35% higher than the respective design values. In other words, it means that the
expander of the ORC design cycle must be oversized by up to 40%. In comparison, the average ORC
57
==PAGE:64==
net power output over the driving cycle is 4.3% and 2.6% higher than the design value for design A and
design B respectively.
The isentropic eﬃciency of the expander over the driving cycle is shown in Figure 50.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [min]
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
Expander isentropic efficiency (%)
A: off-design
A: design
B: off-design
B: design
Figure 50: Isentropic eﬃciency of the expander over the driving cycle
The expander isentropic eﬃciency also ﬂuctuates around the design value, however there are times,
where the eﬃciency drops signiﬁcantly. For both design A and design B, the average isentropic eﬃciency
of the expander is below the design value as shown also in Table 17. For design A and design B, the
average isentropic expander eﬃciency is 1.6%-points and 1.4%-points lower than the design value over
the driving cycle.
The isentropic eﬃciency of the expander at oﬀ-design is estimated according to the mass ﬂow rate
relative to the design mass ﬂow rate through the expander as explained in Section 7.2.2. Therefore the
isentropic eﬃciency of the expander on Figure 50 reﬂects the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid shown on
Figure 44. When the mass ﬂow rate of working ﬂuid through the expander is more than 125% of the
design value, the isentropic eﬃciency decreases sharply. For design A, that occurs approximately 2, 4, 9,
13 and 36 minutes into the driving cycle. For design B, it occurs at approximately 2, 10 and 13 minutes
into the driving cycle as seen on Figure 44.
When comparing the ORC net power outputs presented on Figure 49 to the expander eﬃciencies
on Figure 50, it is observed that the ORC net power output for both design A and design B are not
signiﬁcantly penalized by the degraded isentropic eﬃciency of the expander at oﬀ-design conditions. The
ﬂuctuations in ORC net power output are rather caused by the changing mass ﬂow rate and the speciﬁc
enthalpy diﬀerence across the expander, which are determined by the changing degrees of superheating
and the evaporation pressure.
Conclusively, the design of the ORC system changes, when the ﬂuctuations of the heat source are
considered compared to the optimal design, when a steady state heat source is considered. In order
to avoid liquid droplets at the turbine inlet during the driving cycle, the degree of superheating at the
design increases, as it also used as the set point of the pump to regulate the working ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate.
The high degrees of superheating reduce the mass ﬂow rate working ﬂuid at design, which reduces the
ORC net power output. The minimum exhaust gas temperature at the design also changes to overcome
the ﬂuctuations of the exhaust heat. In order to keep the exhaust gas temperature above 100°C at any
time during the driving cycle, the design value should be at least 10°C higher. That means that less
heat recovered, and the ORC net power output decreases further.
The larger ﬂuctuations in the exhaust gas temperature at the outlet for the smaller evaporators also
explain, why the Pareto-optimal, steady state based ORC designs from Section 9.2 are not able to be
operated safely over the driving cycle. The combination of low design exhaust gas temperatures and low
evaporator masses mean that the exhaust gas temperatures over the driving cycle ﬂuctuate below the
100°C limit. Similarly, the large ﬂuctuations in degree of superheating over the driving cycle requires a
58
==PAGE:65==
higher degree of superheat at the set point, which was not considered for the conventional steady state
approach.
59
==PAGE:66==
10
Discussion
The results from optimization of ORC waste heat recovery units for heavy-duty truck applications have
been presented in Section 9, and this section serves to discuss the results, compare with other work in
literature and provide recommendations for future work.
It has been shown throughout the results in Section 9 that the exhaust gas temperature at the evapo-
rator outlet is highly inﬂuential on the ORC net power output. The minimum exhaust gas temperature
sets a limit for the achievable heat transfer rate from the exhaust gas to the working ﬂuid. Higher
exhaust temperatures at the outlet of the evaporator reduce the achievable ORC net power output.
However, a higher evaporator outlet temperature also reduces the required heat transfer area of the ﬁn
and tube evaporator, due to the lower heat transfer rate and higher temperature diﬀerence between
working ﬂuid and exhaust gas. By reducing the minimum exhaust gas temperature of 100°C, it can
therefore be expected to achieve larger ORC net power outputs, but the evaporator and mass of the
ORC system also increases. In practice, the minimum exhaust gas temperature can be reduced and
the risk of acid gas corrosion can be minimized by using an acid corrosion resistant material, such as
polymer [85], in the preheater section. The risk of acid gas corrosion can also be eliminated by changing
the fuel of the diesel engine, so the exhaust gas does not contain acid gasses, however that makes the
retroﬁtting of existing road transportation considerably more troublesome and costly.
The maximum allowable mass of the evaporator in this study was set to 150 kg, and the eﬀects on
the diesel engine system of the truck were neglected. The nature of the multi-objective optimization,
which ﬁnds the Pareto-optimal solutions as seen on Figure 29, allows the user to choose the ORC
design that satisﬁes the constraints on maximum mass. The Pareto-optimal solutions also show that
when the evaporator mass is above 100 kg, the incremental ORC net power output is small compared
to increase in evaporator mass, especially for ethanol LP and pentane. The applicability of the multi-
objective optimization approach presented in this study is therefore powerful as it does not only represent
one possible design to maximize the ORC net power output, but rather a variety of Pareto-optimal
solutions, that the user can choose from depending on the weight constraints. This also means that
the integrated multi-objective optimization can be used for other waste heat recovery applications with
highly ﬂuctuating heat sources, where the objectives are to maximize the ORC net power out and
minimize the mass of the evaporator.
The decision variables for the thermodynamic ORC design, presented in Section 5, were chosen based
on the recommendations in literature for waste heat recovery applications. The two steady state opti-
mizations, Section 9.1 and Section 9.2, showed that the upper and lower boundaries were met for some of
the ORC systems. In particular, the upper bound of 70 K for the pinch point temperature diﬀerence was
met for the R245fa, R1233zde, pentane and isobutane ORC systems, due to the temperature diﬀerence
between the exhaust gas and critical temperature of these working ﬂuids. The upper bound of pinch
point temperature diﬀerence could be increased above 70 K, however additional calculations have shown
that the ORC net power output of the ORC systems will not increase signiﬁcantly. More importantly,
the results related to the Pareto-optimal ORC systens, when the dynamic performance is considered in
Section 9.3, showed that the decision variables were within the bounds for all three ORC systems. The
decision variables related to the heat source at the evaporator inlet, Figure 32 and Figure 31, suggest
that the design point should be chosen near the time weighted mean value of exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate
and temperature. That is in agreement with the advice from a truck engine manufacturer presented
by Imran et al. [14]. Shi et al. [15] also concluded that the design point of the heat source should be
chosen at medium exhaust temperature and mass ﬂow rate in a study that used 19 diﬀerent steady state
engine operating points to evaluate oﬀ-design performance. This information may be useful in future
developments to narrow the bounds on exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature in order to reduce the
computational time of the multi-objective optimization, when considering dynamic performance.
The computational eﬀort required to conduct the multi-objective optimization of the ORC systems
including the dynamic simulation is substantially larger compared to the steady-state optimization. The
Pareto-optimal solutions presented for the optimization considering dynamic performance in Section 9.3
show a similar relative performance to the steady state optimization presented in Section 9.2 for the
three ORC systems with pentane, ethanol and toluene as working ﬂuids. When the multi-objective
optimization code will be used in the future for a diﬀerent heat source and the choice of working ﬂuid
60
==PAGE:67==
is not determined prior to the design, it may be useful to run the steady state optimization ﬁrst. That
can give an indication of the working ﬂuids that should not be included in the dynamic performance
and thereby reduce the total computational time for the multi-objective optimization for a selection of
working ﬂuids.
The assumption of mechanical and electrical eﬃciencies of the expander and generator of 96% and
85% respectively means that the combined losses of the expander-generator system amount to 18.4% of
the power taken out of the working ﬂuid. That is a signiﬁcant amount of losses, which can be minimized
by coupling the shaft of expander to the drive shaft of the truck engine as suggested by Pili et al. [13],
thereby eliminating the electrical losses. The steady state optimization results of Pili et al. for a similar
heat source design point therefore showed slightly higher ORC net power outputs compared to the
results presented in this report, Section 9.1, although the minimum exhaust gas temperature of that
study was 150°C.
The maximized ORC net power outputs presented in Section 9.1 are also in agreement with those
presented by Amicabile et al. [5] for non-recuperated, subcritical ORC systems using R245fa, pentane
and ethanol as working ﬂuids. A similar relative performance is observed between the working ﬂuids,
however the ORC net power outputs in that study are higher, due to the higher available heat in the
exhaust gas with inlet temperature of 470°C and minimum exhaust gas temperature at the evaporator
outlet of 50°C.
When the ﬁn and tube evaporator is included in the ORC design as presented in Section 9.2, the ORC
net power outputs for the diﬀerent working ﬂuids are in accordance with those presented by Imran et
al. [14]. There is however a diﬀerence in magnitude, where the net power outputs in presented in this
report are lower. This can be explained by the limitation on exhaust gas temperature, which was not
considered in the study of Imran et al. The heat exchanger masses presented here are also signiﬁcantly
higher as the more compact plate heat exchangers were used and the limit on evaporator pressure drop
was ten times higher at 30 kPa.
The results related to the dynamic performance in Section 9.3 suggested that it is possible to operate
the ORC systems safely and produce electrical power over the whole driving cycle.
Xie et al. [16]
simulated the operation of an ORC system over a heavy-duty truck driving cycle and concluded that
the average thermal eﬃciency over the driving cycle decreased from 7.77% at design to 3.63% in oﬀ-
design conditions due to the operating mode switching. In particular, the protection mode was activated
at times of low available heat to prevent liquid droplets of reaching the expander inlet. Although for a
diﬀerent exhaust gas proﬁle, the results of this study suggest, that it is actually possible to design an
ORC system, that can be operated without switching to a protection mode due to liquid droplets at the
expander inlet, and the thermal eﬃciency over the driving driving cycle is not degraded signiﬁcantly
as shown in Table 17. This study has not covered detailed components of the pump and expander and
the operating range of these components over the driving cycle may not be feasible. It is therefore
recommended to do experimental work to verify, if the operation of the ORC system, presented in the
dynamic simulations of this study, are achievable for real components.
The set point used for the PI control of the degree of superheating at the turbine inlet was chosen
at the design value of degree of superheating. When comparing the degree of superheating to the set
point as shown for the two designs on Figure 42, large errors were seen. The error between set point and
measured degree of superheating can be reduced with the implementation of diﬀerent control strategies
or more advanced controllers. The implementation of other control strategies may improve the ORC
net power output and thermal eﬃciency of the ORC waste heat recovery unit. The set point of the
superheat control over the driving cycle does not have to be related to the ORC design. The set point
could be chosen independently of the ORC system design, which allows other ORC systems with lower
degree of superheating at the design to be considered for the driving cycle. In terms of control strategy,
Imran et al. [71] provided two diﬀerent control strategies for an ORC system which recovers heat from
the exhaust gas of a diesel engine with high and fast ﬂuctuations. In that study, it was recommended to
use a throttle valve between the evaporator and expander to better control the degree of superheating at
the turbine inlet. It could also be valuable to look into nonlinear model predictive controllers, keeping in
mind that the control of the ORC system must not be too complicated as the control design is included
in every iteration of the optimization algorithm.
By including the dynamic performance of the ORC system in the design optimization, it was shown
61
==PAGE:68==
that although the isentropic eﬃciency of the expander degrades at part load, it is still possible to achieve
higher ORC net power outputs than the design. In turn that would require a higher capacity of the
expander-generator system, which is a matter of over-sizing the components. The over-sizing of the
expander-generator is not captured in objective function of minimizing the ORC system mass, as only
evaporator mass is included. Therefore, it is recommended to include the mass of the expander-generator
in the objective function to minimize the mass. Likewise, the power supplied to the pump is also higher
than the design value in periods over the driving cycle. It should therefore also be considered to include
the mass of the pump into the ORC system mass. Over-sizing the pump may improve the error related
to the degree of superheating by allowing higher mass ﬂow rates of working ﬂuid through the pump. The
over-sizing of pump and expander-generator system comes with additional costs, and thus minimizing
the cost of the ORC system could also be included as an objective function.
The analysis of the dynamic response of the system, Section 9.3.3, showed that the mass ﬂow rate
through the expander changes signiﬁcantly over the driving cycle. Therefore the mass ﬂow rate through
the condenser and the heat transfer rate required for working ﬂuid condensation also changes signiﬁ-
cantly. As the main focus of the this work is related to the ﬂuctuations of the heat source, the condenser
was modelled with a ﬁxed condensation temperature. A detailed model of the condenser may be in-
cluded in future developments of the integral optimization code to investigate the impact of the cold
source.
Due to the large degrees of superheating combined with the expander isentropic eﬃciencies below
80% and large heat transfer rates in the subcooled liquid region of the evaporator, the installation of
a recuperator may increase the net power output of the ORC system over the driving cycle. It may
require additional controls and add more weight and cost to the overall system, but the incremental
ORC net power output may overcome that.
The oﬀ-design isentropic eﬃciency of the expander presented on Figure 50 showed that the eﬃciency
increases by up to 1.9% compared to the design value, when the mass ﬂow rate through the expander
is between 100% and 121% of the design value.
The correlation used, Equation (23), corrects the
design expander isentropic eﬃciency to oﬀ-design expander isentropic eﬃciency based on the working
ﬂuid mass ﬂow rate only. From the estimation at the design, Section 5.3, it is stated that the speciﬁc
enthalpy drop from inlet to outlet of the expander also have an eﬀect on the isentropic eﬃciency. Pili et
al. [73] presented a correlation for oﬀ-design isentropic eﬃciency of the expander based on the speciﬁc
enthalpy drop and the volumetric ﬂow rate at the expander outlet. The correlation was tried within the
optimization code, but it was strongly slowing down the optimization due to the numerical solving of
the algebraic loop. The correlation is presented in Appendix A.2 and in the Simulink model for future
use.
62
==PAGE:69==
11
Conclusion
This work presented a novel design method for waste heat recovery organic Rankine cycle systems
subject to highly ﬂuctuating heat sources, where the exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine
on a heavy-duty diesel truck over a driving cycle is used as the heat source. An integral optimization
code developed in MATLAB/Simulink combining the design of the thermodynamic cycle, the system
evaporator and the control system with a dynamic simulation model was presented.
The practical considerations, which penalize the existing engine fuel consumption, were identiﬁed as
the incremental pressure loss from the installation of the evaporator and the additional mass imposed on
the truck by the ORC system. Therefore, the allowable pressure loss in the exhaust gas system across
the evaporator were limited to a maximum of 30 mbar, and a maximum mass of the evaporator of 150
kg was considered.
The multi-objective optimization maximized the organic Rankine cycle net power output over the
driving cycle and minimized the evaporator mass. The challenges related to operating the ORC system
over the driving cycle were determined to mainly be the degree of superheating at the expander inlet
and the minimum exhaust gas temperature at the evaporator outlet. In order to protect the expander,
a minimum degree of superheating throughout the driving cycle of 2 K was applied. A proportional
integral controller was tuned for each ORC design with the goal to keep the degree of superheating at
the expander inlet at the design value. Due to acid gas corrosion risk at low exhaust gas temperatures,
a minimum exhaust gas temperature of 100°C was also enforced.
Classical steady-state thermodynamic analyses of six diﬀerent working ﬂuids, R245fa, R1233zde,
pentane, isobutane, ethanol and toluene, showed that toluene, ethanol and pentane provide the highest
ORC net power outputs and lowest evaporator masses, when designing the ORC system from the time
weighted mean value of exhaust temperature and mass ﬂow rate. For the condensation temperature of
50°C, the condensation pressures of toluene and ethanol are below atmospheric pressure, which leads to
considerable improvements of ORC net power output compared to atmospheric condensation pressures.
The ORC systems with pentane, ethanol and toluene were optimized with the multi-objective opti-
mization approach considering the dynamic performance. The toluene ORC system showed the best
potential over the range of evaporator masses with average ORC net power outputs over the driving
cycle from 2.3 kW to 5.2 kW for respective evaporator masses of 26 kg and 148 kg. The results also
showed that, in order to ensure a 2 K degree of superheating over the driving cycle, the degree of su-
perheating of the ORC design increases to 40-50 K compared to 5-10 K from the classical steady state
analysis.
The results also showed that the design points of exhaust mass ﬂow rate and temperature at the
inlet should be chosen near the time weighted mean value over the driving cycle. The exhaust gas
temperature at the outlet of the evaporator of the design ORC must be be higher compared to the the
classical steady state analysis to cope with the ﬂuctuations of the available heat of the exhaust gas.
The dynamic simulations of the driving cycle further concluded that none of the ORC system designs,
for which the ORC net power output was maximized and the evaporator mass minimized from a steady
state heat source, were able to be operated within the constraints on degree of superheating and minimum
exhaust gas temperature. The inclusion of the dynamic performance in the design of the ORC system
is therefore crucial to the safe and eﬃcient operation of the ORC system with highly ﬂuctuating heat
sources.
63
==PAGE:70==
12
Bibliography
[1] U.S. Energy Information Agency, “International Energy Outlook 2020 (IEO2020),” https://www.
eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/pdf/ieo2020.pdf, 2020, [Online; accessed 28-Dec-2020].
[2] International Energy Agency, “Energy Eﬃciency Indicators Highlights, 2020 edition,” https://
webstore.iea.org/download/direct/4266?ﬁlename=energy eﬃciency indicators highlights 2020 pdf.
pdf, 2020, [Online; accessed 28-Dec-2020].
[3] R. D. Reitz, H. Ogawa, R. Payri, T. Fansler, S. Kokjohn, Y. Moriyoshi, A. K. Agarwal, D. Arcouma-
nis, D. Assanis, C. Bae, K. Boulouchos, M. Canakci, S. Curran, I. Denbratt, M. Gavaises, M. Guen-
thner, C. Hasse, Z. Huang, T. Ishiyama, B. Johansson, T. V. Johnson, G. Kalghatgi, M. Koike,
S. C. Kong, A. Leipertz, P. Miles, R. Novella, A. Onorati, M. Richter, S. Shuai, D. Siebers, W. Su,
M. Trujillo, N. Uchida, B. M. Vaglieco, R. M. Wagner, and H. Zhao, “IJER editorial: The future
of the internal combustion engine,” International Journal of Engine Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp.
3–10, 2020.
[4] A. Domingues, H. Santos, and M. Costa, “Analysis of vehicle exhaust waste heat recovery potential
using a Rankine cycle,” Energy, vol. 49, pp. 71–85, 2013.
[5] S. Amicabile, J. I. Lee, and D. Kum, “A comprehensive design methodology of organic Rankine
cycles for the waste heat recovery of automotive heavy-duty diesel engines,” Applied Thermal
Engineering, vol. 87, pp. 574–585, 2015.
[6] F. Yang, H. Zhang, C. Bei, S. Song, and E. Wang, “Parametric optimization and performance
analysis of ORC (organic Rankine cycle) for diesel engine waste heat recovery with a ﬁn-and-tube
evaporator,” Energy, vol. 91, pp. 128–141, 2015.
[7] J. Wronski, “Design and Modelling of Small Scale Low Temperature Power Cycles,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, DTU Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[8] M. Imran, R. Pili, M. Usman, and F. Haglind, “Dynamic modeling and control strategies of organic
Rankine cycle systems: Methods and challenges,” Applied Energy, vol. 276, p. 115537, 2020.
[9] T. Tarti`ere and M. Astolﬁ, “A World Overview of the Organic Rankine Cycle Market,” Energy
Procedia, vol. 129, pp. 2–9, 2017.
[10] R. Pili, A. Romagnoli, M. Jim´enez-Arreola, H. Spliethoﬀ, and C. Wieland, “Simulation of Organic
Rankine Cycle – Quasi-steady state vs dynamic approach for optimal economic performance,”
Energy, vol. 167, pp. 619–640, 2019.
[11] R. Zhao, H. Zhang, S. Song, F. Yang, X. Hou, and Y. Yang, “Global optimization of the diesel
engine–organic Rankine cycle (ORC) combined system based on particle swarm optimizer (PSO),”
Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 174, pp. 248–259, 2018.
[12] C. O. Katsanos, D. T. Hountalas, and E. G. Pariotis, “Thermodynamic analysis of a Rankine
cycle applied on a diesel truck engine using steam and organic medium,” Energy Conversion and
Management, vol. 60, pp. 68–76, 2012.
[13] R. Pili, J. D. Castro Pastrana, A. Romagnoli, H. Spliethoﬀ, and C. Wieland, “Working Fluid
Selection and Optimal Power-to-Weight Ratio for ORC in Long-Haul Trucks,” Energy Procedia,
vol. 129, pp. 754–761, 2017.
[14] M. Imran, F. Haglind, V. Lemort, and A. Meroni, “Optimization of organic rankine cycle power
systems for waste heat recovery on heavy-duty vehicles considering the performance, cost, mass
and volume of the system,” Energy, vol. 180, pp. 229–241, 2019.
[15] X. Shi, X. Wang, J. Cai, Y. Gao, H. Tian, and G. Shu, “A novel design method of organic Rankine
cycle system harvesting waste heat of heavy-duty trucks based on oﬀ-design performance,” Energy
Science and Engineering, 2020.
64
==PAGE:71==
[16] H. Xie and C. Yang, “Dynamic behavior of Rankine cycle system for waste heat recovery of heavy
duty diesel engines under driving cycle,” Applied Energy, vol. 112, pp. 130–141, 2013.
[17] B.-S. Park, M. Usman, M. Imran, and A. Pesyridis, “Review of Organic Rankine Cycle experimental
data trends,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 173, pp. 679–691, 2018.
[18] V. Grelet, T. Reiche, V. Lemort, M. Nadri, and P. Dufour, “Transient performance evaluation of
waste heat recovery rankine cycle based system for heavy duty trucks,” Applied Energy, vol. 165,
pp. 878–892, 2016.
[19] T. Chen, W. Zhuge, Y. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A novel cascade organic Rankine cycle (ORC)
system for waste heat recovery of truck diesel engines,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol.
138, pp. 210–223, 2017.
[20] P. Tona and J. Peralez, “Control of Organic Rankine Cycle systems on board heavy-duty vehicles:
A survey,” Ifac-papersonline, vol. 28, no. 15, pp. 419–426, 2015.
[21] F. Salek, A. N. Moghaddam, and M. M. Naserian, “Thermodynamic analysis of diesel engine
coupled with ORC and absorption refrigeration cycle,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol.
140, pp. 240–246, 2017.
[22] S. Lion, C. N. Michos, I. Vlaskos, and R. Taccani, “A thermodynamic feasibility study of an Organic
Rankine Cycle (ORC) for heavy-duty diesel engine waste heat recovery in oﬀ-highway applications,”
International Journal of Energy and Environmental Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 81–98, 2017.
[23] G. Shu, X. Li, H. Tian, X. Liang, H. Wei, and X. Wang, “Alkanes as working ﬂuids for high-
temperature exhaust heat recovery of diesel engine using organic Rankine cycle,” Applied Energy,
vol. 119, pp. 204–217, 2014.
[24] L. Pierobon, T.-V. Nguyen, A. Mazzucco, U. Larsen, and F. Haglind, “Part-Load Performance of
a Wet Indirectly Fired Gas Turbine Integrated with an Organic Rankine Cycle Turbogenerator,”
Energies, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 8294–8316, 2014.
[25] S. Lin, L. Zhao, S. Deng, J. Ni, Y. Zhang, and M. Ma, “Dynamic performance investigation for
two types of ORC system driven by waste heat of automotive internal combustion engine,” Energy,
vol. 169, pp. 958–971, 2019.
[26] A. Karvountzis-Kontakiotis, A. Pesiridis, H. Zhao, F. Alshammari, B. Franchetti, I. Pesmazoglou,
and L. Tocci, “Eﬀect of an ORC Waste Heat Recovery System on Diesel Engine Fuel Economy for
Oﬀ-Highway Vehicles,” Sae Technical Papers, vol. 2017-, no. March, 2017.
[27] J. G. Andreasen, A. Meroni, and F. Haglind, “A Comparison of Organic and Steam Rankine Cycle
Power Systems for Waste Heat Recovery on Large Ships,” Energies, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 547, 2017.
[28] K. Yang, H. Zhang, S. Song, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Chang, and C. Bei, “Per-
formance analysis of the vehicle diesel Engine-ORC combined system based on a screw expander,”
Energies, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 3400–3419, 2014.
[29] E. Lemmon, I. Bell, M. Huber, and M. McLinden, “NIST Standard Reference Database 23: Refer-
ence Fluid Thermodynamic and Transport Properties-REFPROP, Version 10.0. National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Standard Reference Data Program,” Standard Reference Data Pro-
gram, Gaithersburg, 2018.
[30] O. A. Oyewunmi, S. Ferr´e-Serres, S. Lecompte, M. Van Den Broek, M. De Paepe, and C. N.
Markides, “An Assessment of Subcritical and Trans-critical Organic Rankine Cycles for Waste-
heat Recovery,” Energy Procedia, vol. 105, pp. 1870–1876, 2017.
[31] Y. A. ”Ayoub Laouid, C. Kezrane, Y. Lasbet, and L. O. Nord, “”Wet working ﬂuids for regenerative
ORC with varying heat source temperature”,” ”International Conference on Applied Energy 2019”,
vol. ”Paper ID: 117”, ”2019”.
65
==PAGE:72==
[32] M. Jim´enez-Arreola, C. Wieland, and A. Romagnoli, “Dynamic response comparison of direct and
indirect evaporation options in ORC systems for waste heat recovery,” Energy Procedia, vol. 158,
pp. 1606–1612, 2019.
[33] F. Alshammari, A. Pesyridis, A. Karvountzis-Kontakiotis, B. Franchetti, and Y. Pesmazoglou,
“Experimental study of a small scale organic Rankine cycle waste heat recovery system for a heavy
duty diesel engine with focus on the radial inﬂow turbine expander performance,” Applied Energy,
vol. 215, pp. 543–555, 2018.
[34] M. Astolﬁand E. Machhi, “Eﬃciency Correlations for Axial Flow Turbines working with Non-
Conventional Fluids,” 3rd International Seminar on ORC Power Systems, vol. 83, no. 1, 2015.
[35] J. Bao and L. Zhao, “A review of working ﬂuid and expander selections for organic Rankine cycle,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 24, pp. 325–342, 2013.
[36] D. Di Battista, M. Mauriello, and R. Cipollone, “Waste heat recovery of an ORC-based power
unit in a turbocharged diesel engine propelling a light duty vehicle,” Applied Energy, vol. 152, pp.
109–120, 2015.
[37] MATLAB, “Matlab,” Mathworks, 2020a.
[38] L. Barbazza A, L. Pierobon B, and A. Mirandola A, “Optimal design of compact organic Rankine
cycle units for domestic solar applications,” Pre-print, 2016.
[39] V. Maci´an, J. R. Serrano, V. Dolz, and J. S´anchez, “Methodology to design a bottoming Rankine
cycle, as a waste energy recovering system in vehicles. Study in a HDD engine,” Applied Energy,
vol. 104, pp. 758–771, 2013.
[40] F. Calise, C. Capuozzo, A. Carotenuto, and L. Vanoli, “Thermoeconomic analysis and oﬀ-design
performance of an organic Rankine cycle powered by medium-temperature heat sources,” Solar
Energy, vol. 103, pp. 595–609, 2014.
[41] M. Soﬃato, C. A. Frangopoulos, G. Manente, S. Rech, and A. Lazzaretto, “Design optimization of
ORC systems for waste heat recovery on board a LNG carrier,” Energy Conversion and Manage-
ment, vol. 92, pp. 523–534, 2015.
[42] X. Wang, G. Shu, H. Tian, W. Feng, P. Liu, and X. Li, “Eﬀect factors of part-load performance
for various Organic Rankine cycles using in engine waste heat recovery,” Energy Conversion and
Management, vol. 174, pp. 504–515, 2018.
[43] J. G. Andreasen, U. Larsen, and F. Haglind, “Design of organic Rankine cycles using a non-
conventional optimization approach,” Proceedings of Ecos 2015, 2015.
[44] E. Martelli, F. Capra, and S. Consonni, “Numerical optimization of Combined Heat and Power
Organic Rankine Cycles - Part A: Design optimization,” Energy, vol. 90, pp. 310–328, 2015.
[45] A. Al Jubori, A. Daabo, R. K. Al-Dadah, S. Mahmoud, and A. B. Ennil, “Development of micro-
scale axial and radial turbines for low-temperature heat source driven organic Rankine cycle,”
Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 130, pp. 141–155, 2016.
[46] A. Mariani, B. Morrone, M. V. Prati, and A. Unich, “Waste heat recovery from a heavy-duty
natural gas engine by Organic Rankine Cycle,” E3s Web of Conferences, vol. 197, p. 06023, 2020.
[47] M. Bahrami, A. A. Hamidi, and S. Porkhial, “Investigation of the eﬀect of organic working ﬂuids
on thermodynamic performance of combined cycle stirling-ORC,” International Journal of Energy
and Environmental Engineering, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 12, 1–9, 2013.
[48] S. Quoilin, M. V. D. Broek, S. Declaye, P. Dewallef, and V. Lemort, “Techno-economic survey of
organic rankine cycle (ORC) systems,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 22, pp.
168–186, 2013.
66
==PAGE:73==
[49] U. Drescher and D. Br¨uggemann, “Fluid selection for the Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC) in biomass
power and heat plants,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 223–228, 2007.
[50] E. Baldasso, J. G. Andreasen, A. Meroni, and F. Haglind, “Performance analysis of diﬀerent or-
ganic Rankine cycle conﬁgurations on board liqueﬁed natural gas-fuelled vessels,” Proceedings of
Ecos 2017: 30th International Conference on Eﬃciency, Cost, Optimization, Simulation and En-
vironmental Impact of Energy Systems, 2017.
[51] S. Quoilin, R. Aumann, A. Grill, A. Schuster, V. Lemort, and H. Spliethoﬀ, “Dynamic modeling
and optimal control strategy of waste heat recovery Organic Rankine Cycles,” Applied Energy,
vol. 88, no. 6, pp. 2183–2190, 2011.
[52] E. Baldasso, M. E. Mondejar, J. G. Andreasen, K. A. T. Rønnenfelt, B. Ø. Nielsen, and F. Haglind,
“Design of organic Rankine cycle power systems for maritime applications accounting for engine
backpressure eﬀects,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 178, p. 115527, 2020.
[53] R. Tian, Q. An, H. Zhai, and L. Shi, “Performance analyses of transcritical organic Rankine cycles
with large variations of the thermophysical properties in the pseudocritical region,” Applied Thermal
Engineering, vol. 101, pp. 183–190, 2016.
[54] K. Hossin and K. Mahkamov, “Performance Evaluation for a 10 kW Solar Organic Rankine Cycle
Power System to Operate in the UK Climate Conditions,” The European Conference on Sustain-
ability, Energy and the Environment 2015, 07 2015.
[55] B. A. Hagen, M. Nikolaisen, and T. Andresen, “A novel methodology for Rankine cycle analysis
with generic heat exchanger models,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 165, p. 114566, 2020.
[56] A. Nemati, H. Nami, F. Ranjbar, and M. Yari, “A comparative thermodynamic analysis of ORC
and Kalina cycles for waste heat recovery: A case study for CGAM cogeneration system,” Case
Studies in Thermal Engineering, vol. 9, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[57] J. G. Andreasen, M. R. Kærn, and F. Haglind, “Assessment of methods for performance comparison
of pure and zeotropic working ﬂuids for organic Rankine cycle power systems,” Energies, vol. 12,
no. 9, p. 1783, 2019.
[58] L. Pierobon, T.-V. Nguyen, U. Larsen, F. Haglind, and B. Elmegaard, “Multi-objective optimization
of organic Rankine cycles for waste heat recovery: Application in an oﬀshore platform,” Energy,
vol. 58, pp. 538–549, 2013.
[59] Ebsilon, “EBSILON®Professional – STEAG’s innovative, world-leading planning tool,” https:
//www.ebsilon.com/en/, 2020.
[60] H. G. Zhang, E. H. Wang, and B. Y. Fan, “Heat transfer analysis of a ﬁnned-tube evaporator for
engine exhaust heat recovery,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 65, pp. 438–447, 2013.
[61] E. Wang, H. Zhang, and B. Fan, “Modeling a ﬁnned tube evaporator for engine exhaust heat
recovery,” Applied Mechanics and Materials, vol. 229-231, pp. 576–581, 2012.
[62] H. Liu, H. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Hou, F. Yu, and S. Song, “Multi-objective optimization of ﬁn-and-
tube evaporator for a diesel engine-organic Rankine cycle (ORC) combined system using particle
swarm optimization algorithm,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 151, pp. 147–157, 2017.
[63] FineTubes, “Stainless Steel Tubes: alloy 316 properties,” https://www.ﬁnetubes.co.uk/products/
materials/stainless-steel-tubes/alloy-316-uns-s31600-wnr-14401, 2020, [Online; accessed 24-Nov-
2020].
[64] M. Jung, “Auslegung eines Clausius-Rankine-Zyklus mit Kolbenexpansionsmaschine f¨ur die An-
wendung im schweren Nutzfahrzeug,” 2014.
67
==PAGE:74==
[65] MAN,
“Waste
Heat
Recovery
System
(WHRS)
for
Reduction
of
Fuel
Consumption,
Emissions
and
EEDI,”
https://mandieselturbo.com/docs/librariesprovider6/technical-papers/
waste-heat-recovery-system.pdf, 2014, [Online; accessed 24-Nov-2020].
[66] W. Lang, P. Colonna, and R. Almbauer, “Assessment of waste heat recovery from a heavy-duty
truck engine by means of an ORC turbogenerator,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and
Power, vol. 135, no. 4, p. 42313, 2013.
[67] M. Usman, M. Imran, Y. Yang, and B. S. Park, “Impact of organic Rankine cycle system installation
on light duty vehicle considering both positive and negative aspects,” Energy Conversion and
Management, vol. 112, pp. 382–394, 2016.
[68] R. Pili, C. Wieland, H. Spliethoﬀ, and F. Haglind, “Numerical analysis of feedforward concepts
for advanced control of organic Rankine cycle systems on heavy-duty vehicles,” To be submitted in
2021, 2021.
[69] J. Peralez, M. Nadri, P. Dufour, P. Tona, and A. Sciarretta, “Organic Rankine Cycle for Vehi-
cles: Control Design and Experimental Results,” Ieee Transactions on Control Systems Technology,
vol. 25, no. 3, p. 7496930, 2017.
[70] S. Quoilin, “Sustainable energy conversion through the use of organic Rankine cycles for waste heat
recovery and solar applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium, 2011.
[71] M. Imran and F. Haglind, “Dynamic modelling and development of a reliable control strategy of
organic Rankine cycle power systems for waste heat recovery on heavy-duty vehicles,” Proceedings
of Ecos 2019: 32nd International Conference on Eﬃciency, Cost, Optimization, Simulation and
Environmental Impact of Energy Systems, pp. 2409–2422, 2019.
[72] F. Capra and E. Martelli, “Numerical optimization of combined heat and power Organic Rankine
Cycles - Part B: Simultaneous design and part-load optimization,” Energy, vol. 90, pp. 329–343,
2015.
[73] R. Pili, N. Siamisiis, R. Agromayor, L. Nord, C. Wieland, and S. Hartmut, “Eﬃciency correlations
for oﬀ-design performance prediction of ORC axial-ﬂow turbines,” 5th International Seminar on
ORC Power Systems, 09 2019.
[74] C. Vetter, “Thermodynamische Auslegung und transiente Simulation eines ¨uberkritischen Organic
Rankine Cycles f¨ur einen leistungsoptimierten Betrieb (KIT Scientiﬁc Reports ; 7674),” Ph.D.
dissertation, KIT Scientiﬁc Publishing, 2014, 35.01.01; LK 01.
[75] W. Zhang, E. Wang, F. Meng, F. Zhang, and C. Zhao, “Closed-Loop PI Control of an Organic
Rankine Cycle for Engine Exhaust Heat Recovery,” Energies, vol. 13, no. 15, p. 3817, 2020.
[76] K. Thurairaja, A. Wijewardane, S. Jayasekara, and C. Ranasinghe, “Working ﬂuid selection and
performance evaluation of ORC,” Energy Procedia, vol. 156, pp. 244–248, 2019.
[77] D. Matuszewska, M. Kuta, and J. Gorski, “A thermodynamic assessment of working ﬂuids in ORC
systems,” Experimental Fluid Mechanics 2018 (efm18), vol. 213, p. 02057, 2019.
[78] National Fire Protection Association, “Frequently Asked Questions on NFPA 704,” https://www.
nfpa.org/Assets/ﬁles/AboutTheCodes/704/704 FAQs.pdf, 2020, [Online; accessed 29-Nov-2020].
[79] L. Guillaume, A. Legros, A. Desideri, and V. Lemort, “Performance of a radial-inﬂow turbine
integrated in an ORC system and designed for a WHR on truck application: An experimental
comparison between R245fa and R1233zd,” Applied Energy, vol. 186, pp. 408–422, 2017.
[80] CAMEO
Chemicals,
“Chemical
Datasheet:
Isobutane,”
https://cameochemicals.noaa.gov/
chemical/8744, 2020, [Online; accessed 03-Dec-2020].
68
==PAGE:75==
[81] ——, “Chemical Datasheet:
Toluene,” https://cameochemicals.noaa.gov/chemical/4654, 2020,
[Online; accessed 03-Dec-2020].
[82] T. C. Hung, T. Y. Shai, and S. K. Wang, “A review of organic rankine cycles (ORCs) for the
recovery of low-grade waste heat,” Energy, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 661–667, 1997.
[83] J. Sun, Q. Liu, and Y. Duan, “Eﬀects of evaporator pinch point temperature diﬀerence on thermo-
economic performance of geothermal organic Rankine cycle systems,” Geothermics, vol. 75, pp.
249–258, 2018.
[84] H. Yu and X. Feng, “Pinch position between heat carrier and working ﬂuid in organic rankine cycle
for waste heat recovery,” Chemical Engineering Transactions, vol. 39, no. Special Issue, pp. 61–66,
2014.
[85] HeatMatrix,
“Flue
gas
heat
recovery
-
energy
eﬃciency,”
https://heatmatrixgroup.com/
ﬂue-gas-heat-recovery-energy-eﬃciency/?gclid=CjwKCAiAr6-ABhAfEiwADO4sfXogNeY5CKK
xeG Jrdh61oNXPFK7qIy5F4KRLQC MYWFLEd-skIxxoC1hoQAvD BwE,
2020,
[Online;
ac-
cessed 28-Dec-2020].
69
==PAGE:76==
A
Appendix
A.1
Preheater, vaporizer and superheater heat transfer conditions
The results from the multi-objective optimization of maximizing the ORC net power output and mini-
mizing the evaporator mass for a steady state mean value of exhaust gas mass ﬂow rate and temperature
are presented here. The Pareto-optimal solutions are presented in Section 9.2.
A.1.1
Heat transfer rates
The heat transfer rates in the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the Pareto-optimal solutions are
shown on Figure 51, Figure 52 and Figure 53 respectively.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Preheater heat transfer rate (kW)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 51: Preheater heat transfer rates for the Pareto-optimal solutions
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Vaporizer heat transfer rate (kW)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 52: Vaporizer heat transfer rates for the Pareto-optimal solutions
70
==PAGE:77==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Superheater heat transfer rate (kW)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 53: Superheater heat transfer rates for the Pareto-optimal solutions
A.1.2
Overall heat transfer coeﬃcients
The overall heat transfer coeﬃcients for the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the Pareto-optimal
solutions are presented on Figure 54, Figure 55 and Figure 56 respectively.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Preheater overall heat transfer coefficient (W/K-m2)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 54: Preheater overall heat transfer coeﬃcients for the Pareto-optimal solutions
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vaporizer overall heat transfer coefficient (W/K-m2)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 55: Vaporizer overall heat transfer coeﬃcients for the Pareto-optimal solutions
71
==PAGE:78==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Superheater overall heat transfer coefficient (W/K-m2)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 56: Superheater overall heat transfer coeﬃcients for the Pareto-optimal solutions
A.1.3
Logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences
The logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences for the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the
Pareto-optimal solutions are presented on Figure 57, Figure 58 and Figure 59 respectively.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Preheater LMTD (K)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 57: Preheater logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences for the Pareto-optimal solutions
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Vaporizer LMTD (K)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 58: Vaporizer logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences for the Pareto-optimal solutions
72
==PAGE:79==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
Superheater LMTD (K)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 59: Superheater logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerences for the Pareto-optimal solutions
A.1.4
Heat transfer areas
The heat transfer areas of the preheater, vaporizer and superheater for the Pareto-optimal solutions are
presented on Figure 60, Figure 61 and Figure 62 respectively.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Preheater heat transfer area (m2)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 60: Preheater heat transfer areas for the Pareto-optimal solutions
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Vaporizer heat transfer area (m2)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 61: Vaporizer heat transfer areas for the Pareto-optimal solutions
73
==PAGE:80==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
ORC net power output (kW)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Superheater heat transfer area (m2)
R245fa
R1233zde
Pentane
Isobutane
Ethanol
Toluene
Ethanol LP
Toluene LP
Figure 62: Superheater heat transfer areas for the Pareto-optimal solutions
A.2
Oﬀ-design isentropic eﬃciency of expander
Another correlation for describing the expander isentropic eﬃciency at oﬀ-design is described by the
correlation from Pili et al. [73]. The expander isentropic eﬃciency at design, ηe,s,D, is corrected to the
oﬀ-design isentropic eﬃciency, ηe,s,OD with the use of the design and oﬀ-design values of volumetric ﬂow
rate at the expander outlet, ˙Ve,out, and the total speciﬁc enthalpy drop across the expander, ∆he. The
correlation is shown in Equation (25).
ηe,s,OD
ηe,s,D
= ae + be
∆he,OD
∆he,D

+ ce
∆he,OD
∆he,D
2
+ de
 ˙Ve,out,OD
˙Ve,out,D
!
(25)
+ee
 ˙Ve,out,OD
˙Ve,out,D
!2
+ fe
∆he,OD
∆he,D
  ˙Ve,out,OD
˙Ve,out,D
!
The coeﬃcients for the correlation, ae, be, ce, de, ee, fe, were ﬁtted using eight diﬀerent working ﬂuids
in diﬀerent ORC conﬁgurations [73] and are presented in Table 18.
Table 18: Coeﬃcients for oﬀ-design expander isentropic eﬃciency [73]
Coeﬃcients
Number of stages, -
1
2
3
ae
0.245
0.418
0.548
be
1.632
1.066
0.937
ce
-1.940
-0.568
-0.609
de
0.033
0.057
-0.056
ee
-1.085
0.000
-0.043
fe
2.112
0.035
0.228
The volumetric ﬂow rate and speciﬁc enthalpy change from inlet to outlet of the expander and are
dependent on the isentropic eﬃciency of the expander. Hence, there is an iterative process involved in
matching the isentropic eﬃciency to the volumetric ﬂow rate at the expander outlet and the speciﬁc
enthalpy change.
74
==PAGE:81==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone: +45 4525 4131
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk 
January 2021
