==PAGE:1==
Research Article
Helping the helpers: Screening of bacterial strains for
development of robust biostimulant consortia
Alexander Pil Henriksen1, Andreas Blach Søby2, Mette Haubjerg Nicolaisen3, Frederik Bak3
1 Technical University of Denmark, Department for Bioengineering, Lyngby, Denmark 2 University of Copenhagen,
Faculty of Science, Copenhagen Denmark 3 University of Copenhagen, Department for Plant and Environmental Sciences,
Frederiksberg, Denmark
Abstract
In eﬀorts to increase sustainable practices in agriculture,
synthetic bacterial communities (SynComs) have shown po-
tential as substitutes for conventional fertilizers and bio-
chemicals. Eﬃcient assembly of such SynComs has, how-
ever, been diﬃcult due to the complexity of inter-bacterial
interactions and the logistical issues related to screening
many strains in parallel. Here, we develop a platform for
screening soil bacteria for their compatibility in soil-derived
SynComs. We show that the use of a bacterial recruitment
system can lead to enrichment of compatible bacteria from
a soil environment and using this system we select 368 soil
isolates able to promote survival of our test strain - TB34.
The platform developed here will guide future eﬀorts to as-
semble compatible SynComs and provide ideas for how to
perform parallel screening of large numbers of soil isolates.
Combined with specialized methods for deeper functional
analysis, these advances may produce standardized meth-
ods for eﬀective biostimulant development.
1
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Background
5
2.1
The importance of maize . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The microbial communities of plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Factors determining the composition of the rhizosphere microbiome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Plant growth-promoting bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Current research practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
PGPBs in maize
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Experimental setup
14
3.1
Exp 1 - "Recruitment" of soil bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Exp 2 - Screening in liquid media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Exp 3 - Soil survival and plant growth promotion assays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Results
18
4.1
Exp 1 - Recruitment of soil bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Exp 2 - Screening in liquid media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Discussion
21
6
Conclusion
24
7
Improvements to the platform
25
8
Methods and Materials
28
8.1
Exp 1 - Recruitment of soil bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8.2
Exp 2 - Screening in liquid media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8.3
Data handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Appendices
35
2
==PAGE:3==
Appendix A Additional results
35
Appendix B Medias
40
Appendix C Statistical analysis - R script
42
3
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
Approx. 11,000 years ago the ﬁrst agricultural societies were
founded. These societies were small human settlements that
grew cereals on an annual basis. This was in contrast to
most other groups of humans who lived a nomadic lifestyle,
moving with the seasons, and adapting to ﬁt the present en-
vironment. The agricultural societies started setting aside
land for their crops and also began breeding them to develop
better, higher-yielding varieties.
These humans of 11,000
years ago would probably be surprised to know that their
sedentary lifestyle would sweep across the world, causing
the human population to explode from around 2.5 million
at that time to 8 billion and leading to dramatic and possi-
bly everlasting changes in natural environments around the
globe [1]. But actually, the humans of 11,000 years ago had
already witnessed a degree of human-caused changes in the
environment. For example, already as early as 50,000 years
ago human activity was starting to threaten the survival of
many mammal species. It is estimated that around 85% of
wild land mammals (measured in Gt of carbon) have disap-
peared in the last 50,000 years as a product of human activ-
ity [2, 3]. Consequently, many species have now gone extinct
and are thus permanently lost. Of course, we humans have
intensiﬁed our impact on nature over time and today we
are more people, using more land, doing more damage, and
endangering more wild species than ever before. Currently,
only an estimated 4% of mammals on Earth (measured in
Gt carbon) are wild while the remaining 96% are humans
(36%) and their livestock (60%) [3]. Planet Earth is now not
so much a diverse jungle of magniﬁcent species and land-
scapes but rather a factorized set of ﬁelds producing food
for human consumption.
This analogy may seem impru-
dent, but it is quite literally true. Currently, around 50%
of the Earth’s habitable land is being used for agriculture
[4]. This is an area equivalent to the size of North America,
South America, China and all of Southeast Asia combined.
Just in the last 100 years, an area almost the size of North
America has been converted for agricultural use. The re-
maining 50% of global habitable land contains all forests,
shrubs, cities, lakes, and rivers on earth [4]. In other words:
there are more farms than forests on planet earth.
Now claiming half the Earth’s habitable land for food pro-
duction and consisting of almost 8 billion individuals, hu-
mans are quite visibly changing the way Earth looks and
functions. In the coming 4 decades, the global human pop-
ulation is estimated to rise to 10 billion people, thus fur-
ther exacerbating the detrimental eﬀects of human activity
on the natural environment [1, 5]. On top of that, global
climate change is projected to have long-lasting, and poten-
tially irreversible eﬀects that may amplify the already-seen
eﬀects of human activity [5]. It is diﬃcult to predict exactly
how climate change will aﬀect individual parts of the natural
environment, but there is almost no doubt that it will have
detrimental eﬀects on animals, plants, and humans as well.
Research predicts that global climate change will negatively
aﬀect the yield of staple crops such as wheat, maize, and rice
which account for around 40% of the Earth’s farmland [4].
Estimates for cereal yield loss vary, however most predict a
yield loss of 0-2.5% per decade resulting in a decline of up
to 10% by 2060 [5].
Needless to say, the way we humans produce food is shap-
ing, and will continue to shape the world in a very dramatic
way. Rapid population growth, increased demand for high-
footprint foods such as meat and dairy, and the eﬀects of
global climate change are all factors that support an era of
even further changes in the natural environment on a global
scale [5]. In turn, these environmental changes will lead to
complications for wild species and humans alike. Thus, the
importance of developing a more sustainable, eﬃcient and
robust global food system is hard to overstate. Although
not the only sector of importance, agriculture and food pro-
duction are undeniably driving much of the environmental
change that is unfolding year after year [6]. Many diﬀerent
ideas and solutions will have to come together in order to
make possible the transition to a more sustainable food sys-
tem. Some of these solutions will indeed be structural and
can be achieved without the need for new technology. Re-
ducing the demand for animal products for example, could
free up to an estimated 76% of the world’s current farmland
[6]. However, it is unlikely that we will successfully transi-
tion without the help of novel and innovative technologies
that expand the possibilities of those organizations, compa-
nies and institutions that work with food production [5].
4
==PAGE:5==
The potential of microorganisms
One technology which has received increased interest in the
last few decades is the application of speciﬁc bacteria to
promote crop yields. One vision for these products (termed
biostimulants) is that they might supplement or even sub-
stitute chemical fertilizers such as ammonia and provide
longer-lasting beneﬁts with fewer side eﬀects than current
fertilizing practices [7]. Since the invention of the Haber-
Bosch process in 1909, the use of chemical fertilizers has
risen steadily reaching a global production of 245 million
tonnes in 2015, the majority of it (145 million tonnes) being
nitrogen fertilizers [8]. The use of chemical fertilizers has led
to increases in agricultural yields in most parts of the world
and today we are deeply dependent on those increases. In
fact, it is estimated that around half of the human popula-
tion (more than 3.5 billion people) are fed only because of
the yield increases made possible by synthetic nitrogen fer-
tilizers [9]. This is despite nitrogen fertilizers only having an
eﬃciency (i.e. the amount of nitrogen obtained in the crops
relative to what was applied to the soil) of around 30% or
lower [9]. The nitrogen that isn’t used by crops can leak into
the environment and have other unintended eﬀects such as
promoting algal blooms as well as leading to soil acidiﬁca-
tion [10]. To allow the yield gains that fertilizers provide but
avoid the negative eﬀects of fertilizer runoﬀ, biostimulants
might be a sustainable solution. Additionally, biostimulants
might also be useful in pathogen control, drought tolerance
and other aspects of plant health [7, 11]. If applied correctly,
biostimulants may help prevent some of the damaging eﬀects
that current agricultural practices are having on natural en-
vironments and ecosystems.
Report structure
This report explores the potential for increasing yield and
decreasing the environmental impact of maize cultivation
through treatment with plant growth-promoting bacteria.
First, Section 2 looks and the importance of maize on a
global scale and then describes known interactions between
plants and microorganisms. Furthermore, it looks at how
recent research has studied beneﬁcial interactions between
maize and associated microorganisms. Section 3 describes
the setup and reasoning behind a small study performed to
isolate bacteria for use in biostimulant products. Section 4
- Section 5 then present the results of this study and discuss
the takeaways and potential for future work. Finally, Sec-
tion 6 will conclude on the report’s ﬁndings and Section 7
will suggest improvements for the applied methods.
This project was carried out as joint eﬀort between BSc stu-
dent Andreas Blach Søby and myself. While the lab work
has been shared somewhat equally between the two of us,
the presented illustrations, analyses and conclusions have
been made by me, of course with much advice from Mette
Nicolaisen and Frederik Bak and with helpful input from
Andreas.
2
Background
2.1
The importance of maize
For humans, maize is without doubt one of the most im-
portant cereal crops on the planet. By area of cultivation,
maize is the second largest cereal worldwide covering 189
million hectares globally - an area corresponding almost to
the size of Mexico which, ironically, is where maize is be-
lieved to have originated [4]. In tonnes of crop produced,
maize is by far the world’s top cereal with an annual pro-
duction exceeding 1.1 billion tonnes, 46% more than wheat
which comes in second (Fig 1) [12]. Although only a fraction
of the maize produced is used for direct human consumption
(globally, maize is primarily used for animal feed), people in
many parts of the world including south- and Latin Amer-
ica, sub-Saharan Africa and Asia are dependent on maize as
a source of nutrition. In fact, more than 80% of the maize
consumed by humans is consumed in developing countries
[13]. In four of the world’s ten largest countries (by popula-
tion), maize is considered an important part of the diet and
people here are estimated to consume between 55 g and 267
g of maize every day [14]. Additionally, worldwide consump-
tion of maize is projected to increase by 23 million tonnes by
2029 [13]. In short, millions of people across the world are
dependent on maize as a source of human nutrition and as
a raw material for other uses. As this is unlikely to change
in the future, sustainable solutions for maize cultivation and
processing will continue to have great relevance.
5
==PAGE:6==
Fig 1: The weight of global annually produced maize. Here it is com-
pared to some other very heavy quantities/objects.
Data retrieved
from OurWorldInData and Encyclopaedia Britannica [1, 15, 16]
2.2
The microbial communities of plants
Like humans, plants are hosts to a wide range of microor-
ganisms including bacteria, fungi, protists and others. This
community of microorganisms is collectively referred to as
the Microbiome [17]. Many microorganisms of the micro-
biome have been shown to share complex interactions with
their plant hosts which, depending on numerous factors, can
manifest themselves in diﬀerent phenotypes [18–20]. Evi-
dence suggests that most, if not all, plants have close re-
lationships with microorganisms [21]. As Partida-Martinez
and Heil put it "A plant that is completely free of microor-
ganisms represents an exotic exception, rather than the -
biologically relevant - rule" [22]. Some suggest that these
relationships can have existed for millions of years and that
the plants and microorganisms can have co-evolved together,
further strengthening the interactions between them over
time [23]. Indeed, several sources advocate that the plant
and its microbiome, referred to in unison as the Holobiont,
should be seen as an individual unit that evolves and adapts
over time [24, 25]. With this view, the bacteria of the mi-
crobiome can ideally be studied not so much as individual
actors competing for survival, but rather as members of a
larger community working together to increase their com-
bined ﬁtness [26].
For most plants, their microbiomes have only been super-
ﬁcially characterized.
Superﬁcially, in the sense that we
currently do have a general idea of the diﬀerent phyla of
bacteria that inhabit the given plant, but we do not have
a good understanding of the speciﬁc interactions between
these bacteria and the plant, their surroundings, and each
other [17]. The microbiome associated with a given plant
also varies depending on which part of the plant is being
examined [27–29]. Generally, the plant microbiome can be
divided into separate microbiomes which are found on dif-
ferent plant compartments (Fig 2).
These compartments
each house distinct microbiomes which show varying lev-
els of microbial diversity [27–30]. Notably, many have ob-
served a decrease in diversity going from the bulk soil to
the rhizosphere and from the rhizosphere to the endosphere
suggesting that conditions here are more selective [27, 31,
32]. This eﬀect has also been observed in several diﬀerent
plants, supporting the ﬁnding that distinct compartments
are home to truly distinct microbiomes and that plant com-
partments are a major selective force in shaping microbiome
composition [27–29, 33]. Another interesting observation is
that these distinct microbiomes seem to hold a number of
"core" species (often referred to as the "core microbiome")
which are present among most individuals of a given plant
species [27, 33, 34]. Studies have even identiﬁed bacterial
genera that were present in the core microbiomes of several
diﬀerent plants, indicating that these may be bacteria es-
pecially well-suited to life on/in plant tissues. Examples of
genera identiﬁed in multiple core microbiomes (barley, rice,
sugarcane, soybean, citrus, grapevine and A. thaliana) are
Pseudomonas, Agrobacterium and Methylobacterium [17].
In contrast, others have highlighted that the described core
microbiomes of a given plant do not necessarily match those
of similar plants grown in other locations [27]. This suggests
that the core microbiomes might be speciﬁc to the location
/ environment in which a plant is growing or that the true
core microbiome may just be very small [34, 35].
In this report focus will be mainly on the maize rhizosphere.
However, knowledge and observations from other plants and
plant compartments may be used throughout the report to
highlight certain trends and/or mechanisms.
The maize rhizosphere microbiome
Few studies have tried to characterize the composition of the
maize rhizosphere. Fortunately, the few studies which have
been performed show somewhat similar results.
Through
16S rRNA sequencing, Peiﬀer et al. (2013) saw that similar
to many other plants, the most abundant bacterial phyla
6
==PAGE:7==
• Phyllosphere: The aerial sur-
face of the plant (leaves, stem).
• Endosphere: The internal tis-
sues of the plant. (One can also
diﬀerentiate between the root
endosphere and the leaf endo-
sphere)
• Rhizosphere: The narrow re-
gion of soil/substrate imme-
diately surrounding the plant
roots, which is aﬀected by root
secretions and associated bac-
teria.
• Bulk soil: The soil surround-
ing the rhizosphere. This soil is
not aﬀected by plant-microbe
interactions to the same degree
as the rhizosphere.
Fig 2: Overview of the typical compartments of a plant. Each compartment is home to a distinct microbiome specialized, to some degree, to
co-exist in that particular compartment. The microbial diversity varies between these compartments with the bulk soil generally having the
highest diversity and the endosphere having the lowest diversity.
in the maize rhizosphere were Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes
and Actinobacteria [35]. Similar results were achieved by
others, albeit with relative abundances of phyla diﬀering up
to ∼10% [28, 36–38]. In some studies, there has been also
been eﬀorts to identify a smaller bacterial community repre-
sentative of the full maize rhizosphere microbiome. Niu et al.
(2017) isolated bacteria through cultivation-based methods,
resulting in a seven-member community that reproducibly
assembled on maize roots [28]. In a methodically diﬀerent
eﬀort, Walters et al. (2018) identiﬁed seven "core" bacterial
OTUs using 16S rRNA sequencing [39]. The seven OTUs
were present in 100 % of their 4911 soil samples, sampled
across 5 diﬀerent locations, 27 diﬀerent maize genotypes,
and over a 5-year time span. There is little overlap between
the two seven-member communities described by Niu et al.
(2017) and Walters et al. (2018) and only a single strain
between both studies belonged to the same genus. Thus,
despite some characterization of the maize rhizosphere mi-
crobiome, we are still far from fully understanding which
species are important and why. As the studies mentioned
here were very diﬀerent in both methodology and location,
this suggests not only that diﬀerent methods of identifying
core species can lead to very diﬀerent results, but also that
other factors beyond plant species and compartment may
strongly inﬂuence the microbiome composition.
2.3
Factors determining the composition of
the rhizosphere microbiome
For maize, as well as most other plants, the best-studied mi-
crobiome compartment is that of the rhizosphere (by mea-
sure of publication count). However, fully understanding the
rhizosphere microbiome composition and the factors that af-
fect it is notoriously diﬃcult. Studies take place across the
globe at diﬀerent times, in diﬀerent environments and with
diﬀerent varieties of maize, meaning that generalizing is al-
most impossible. However, several factors such as location,
soil chemistry and plant genotype have shown to consistently
inﬂuence the development of the maize rhizosphere micro-
biome [35, 37–39]. Using 16s rRNA sequencing, Peiﬀer et al.
(2013) investigated the rhizosphere microbiome diversity of
27 maize inbreds across 5 diﬀerent locations with unique
soils and management conditions [35].
They found that
most of the variation between samples could be described
by the individual ﬁeld, but also that ﬁelds located in the
same state were more similar. This was in spite of the ﬁelds
in the same state having measurably diﬀerent soil chemistry
and also using diﬀerent management practices (i.e. organic
and conventional agriculture).
Pieﬀer et al.
(2013) also
saw that maize genotype inﬂuenced the composition of the
rhizosphere microbiome but didn’t do so consistently across
diﬀerent ﬁelds. Thus, the genotypic eﬀect may be speciﬁc to
7
==PAGE:8==
the local environment in which the plant is growing. Gomes
et al. (2018) achieved somewhat similar results showing that
microbial diversity was aﬀected by maize genotype, but that
P-availability in the soil had a much stronger eﬀect [40]. Sev-
eral other studies have seen similar results in other plants,
showing that while genotype does have an eﬀect, the fac-
tors describing most of the variance between samples are
usually abiotic and/or geographic ones such as climate, soil
composition or sampling time [27, 34, 39, 41]. Interestingly,
even less-obvious factors such as weather have been shown
to inﬂuence the rhizosphere composition. By analyzing their
abundances in bulk soil and rhizosphere samples, Walters et
al. (2018) showed that certain bacterial species respond to
precipitation and temperature with some families of bacte-
ria responding after just a single day of precipitation [39].
In one case they also observed a genus-speciﬁc "bloom" in
which bacteria belonging to the genus Pseudomonas grew
from less than 10 % to around 50 % of the total species
abundance in a single week. Meanwhile, samples from bulk
soil did not experience a "bloom", indicating that this eﬀect
was plant-driven. Together, these results show that indeed
the microbiomes of plants respond to a myriad of diﬀerent
factors and in many diﬀerent ways as well. Furthermore, it
highlights the importance of multiple time measurements in
ﬁeld studies.
Plant-microbe interactions
Although many abiotic factors have been shown to greatly
inﬂuence microbiome composition, they alone do not pro-
vide the full picture of this complex machinery. It is now
well-established that plants actively enrich certain bacte-
ria in their microbiome, for example through root exudates,
leading to lower microbial diversity here than in the sur-
rounding environment [18, 42–44]. Kudjordjie et al. (2019)
used benzoxazinoid-knockout variants of maize to show how
benzoxazinoids aﬀected rhizosphere community composi-
tion [45].
In their study, they observed signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences in rhizosphere microbiome composition between the
benzoxazinoid-knockouts and the wildtype variants.
Fur-
thermore, they were able to identify OTUs that were ei-
ther negatively or positively correlated with host genotype,
suggesting that benzoxazinoids may attract some soil bac-
teria while repelling others. Also Hu et al. (2016) observed
signiﬁcant eﬀects of benzoxazinoids on rhizosphere micro-
biome composition and were even able to show an eﬀect of
these compounds on the phenotype of the next generation
of plants [46].
Many other speciﬁc interactions between plants and their as-
sociated bacteria have been shown to have certain beneﬁcial
or harmful eﬀects.
One example of this is that of Bacil-
lus subtilis which was shown to colonize plant roots when
methyl salicylate, a plant-defense signal compound, was re-
leased [47]. Furthermore, methyl salicate stimulated Bacil-
lus to produce antibiotics eﬀective against plant pathogenic
Fusarium [47]. Studies as this show the presence of highly
speciﬁc interactions between plants and bacteria which may
not be found between the plant and other, closely related
bacterial species.
In fact, sometimes both beneﬁcial and
pathogenic bacteria can be found within the same genus
[48]. In an extreme example two strains of the fungus Col-
letotrichum magna, one pathogenic and one non-pathogenic,
were shown to diﬀer only in a single genetic locus [49]. Thus,
because of the speciﬁcity of the interactions between plants
and microorganisms, a given interaction cannot easily be
classiﬁed as either beneﬁcial or harmful based on taxonomic
markers alone [22, 30]. Often, individual taxa are not nec-
essarily either "good" or "bad" for the host plant. Their
phenotypes likely depend on inﬂuence from many factors
making it diﬃcult to predict function from taxonomy alone
[50]. Therefore, phenotypes cannot be predicted from in-
dividual members of the community, but should be seen as
emergent traits that are a product of many diﬀerent interac-
tions including those with soil, weather and other bacteria
[19, 20, 51, 52].
Inter-bacterial interactions in the plant microbiome
Although studying and understanding plant-microbiome in-
teractions is in itself a daunting task, the complexity does
not end here. Perhaps not surprisingly, the bacteria within
the plant microbiome do not only communicate and inter-
act with their plant host, but also with each other [19,
53]. Although little is currently known about speciﬁc intra-
microbiome interactions, a few interesting observations have
been made that may translate into general ideas about the
functioning of these bacterial communities.
For example,
metagenomic sequencing of 16S rRNA has allowed for de-
velopment of co-occurrence networks showing correlations
between bacterial species within the microbiome [54]. These
8
==PAGE:9==
networks do not show causality but do suggest some inter-
esting relationships between speciﬁc groups. Species within
the same phylum seem to correlate positively, while distant
species do not. This could indicate that competitive mech-
anisms are more prevalent between distantly related groups
than closely related ones or that similar species are more
prone to support each other’s survival [54].
Microbiomes
also seem to house "keystone" species which are species
with a high degree of inﬂuence on the microbiome compo-
sition [28, 41]. These species are believed to interact with
many diﬀerent species of the microbiome and thus, have
more leverage than most microbiome members. Keystone
species may be able to limit the growth of speciﬁc bacte-
ria or may be necessary for the colonization and survival of
others. Both ways, these are species which have profound
eﬀects on other bacteria, determining whether or not these
will also be present in the microbiome. Agler et al (2016)
showed that infection of Arabidopsis thaliana with Albuego
laibachii resulted in lower bacterial diversity within the A.
thaliana phyllosphere, but that certain species increased in
abundance in response to the A. laibachii infection [41].
Many diﬀerent interactions between bacterial species can
result in changes in the microbiome composition. Through
nutrient exchange some nutritionally dependent members
can survive in otherwise nutrient poor environments. This
has been shown in the rhizosphere of soybean where Bacil-
lus cereus UW85 stimulated growth of bacteria within the
Cytophaga-Flavobacterium group [55]. Through evolution
this may lead to gene-loss as species can support each other
within their ecological niche. Although not yet shown for
plant microbiome bacteria, this sort of co-evolution could
lead to tighter inter-species dependencies further promoting
the importance of microbiome communication and interac-
tions [19]. Bacteria within the microbiome may also aﬀect
each other in other ways, for example through the formation
of bioﬁlms or through mechanisms such as quorum sensing
[56]. Though neither have been studied extensively within
plant microbiomes, there is evidence suggesting that many
rhizosphere bacteria can induce activity in known-quorum
sensing strains [57]. This may prove to be yet another avenue
through which bacteria of the microbiome may communicate
with and inﬂuence each other.
2.4
Plant growth-promoting bacteria
Some plant-associated microorganisms have been shown to
provide signiﬁcant and measurable beneﬁts to their host
plant in a number of diﬀerent ways. These include promot-
ing nutrient uptake, increasing pathogen resistance or pro-
tecting against abiotic stresses such as drought, high salin-
ity and heavy metal toxicity [58–61]. These bacteria are of-
ten referred to as plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB).
Probably the best studied example of PGPBs is that of the
nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria associated with legumes [62]. These
bacteria, often referred to as rhizobia, usually inhabit the
roots or the soil immediately surrounding the roots. Here
they are able to bind free N2 and convert it into NH3 or other
compounds that the host plant can utilize. In exchange the
plant can supply the soil bacteria with diﬀerent carbon com-
pounds which are scarcely available to the soil bacteria, but
which the host plant can synthesize through photosynthesis.
As nitrogen content is often a limiting factor in many soils,
this exchange of compounds between the plant and the as-
sociated soil bacteria is of great beneﬁt for the plant [63].
Since the discovery of the ﬁrst nitrogen-ﬁxating bacteria in
the late 1800s and the following understanding of their re-
lationship with plants, many more bacteria and symbiotic
plant-bacteria interactions have been discovered [64]. Simi-
lar to the example with nitrogen-ﬁxation, some of these in-
teractions rely on the bacteria to deliver certain compounds
that would otherwise be only scarcely available to the plant.
Examples of this include solubilization of phosphorous and
increasing availability of iron through release of organic com-
pounds [40, 65]. However, plant-bacteria interactions also
include more complex and indirect mechanisms such as syn-
thesis and release of plant hormones and inhibition of soil-
dwelling plant pathogens such as fungi and other bacteria
[30, 51].
Despite our somewhat fragmented knowledge of plant-
microbe interactions and of PGPBs, products containing
PGPBs have been around even longer than the Haber-Bosch
process and thus also conventional nitrogen fertilizers [66].
Today, many agricultural and food companies market bios-
timulant products containing PGPB which are sold to cus-
tomers worldwide (Table 1). However, as the interactions
between the PGPB and their plant hosts are incredibly di-
9
==PAGE:10==
Table 1: Non-comprehensive list of some current biostimulant products for use with maize seeds or on maize ﬁelds. The products here are
from some of the largest companies on the market, however, there are many more products than the ones listed here, especially from smaller
companies/manufacturers (See https://www.omri.org).
Product name
Beneﬁt
Bacterial species used
Produced by
Pivot Bio Proven®
Nitrogen ﬁxation
Klebsiella variicola
Pivot Bio (Berkeley, USA)
Life Force Bio-P™
Phosphorous solubilization
Azotobacter chroococcum,
Bacillus subtilis
AGSOL (Sebringville,
Canada)
Acceleron QuickRoots®
PB Corn
Phosphorous solubilization
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens,
Trichoderma virens
Bayer Group (Leverkusen,
Germany)
Integral Pro
Fungal disease suppression
Bacillus amyloquefaciens
BASF (Ludwigshafen,
Germany)
Deliver®
Pest control
Bacillus thuringiensis
Certis USA (Columbia,
USA)
Poncho® Votivo® Seed
Control
Pest Control
Bacillus ﬁrmus
Bayer Group (Leverkusen,
Germany)
verse and complex, they can be diﬃcult to study. Therefore,
there continue to be many unanswered questions relating to
when, where and how these interactions take place and how
they can be used in order to promote better crop health and
increased food security.
2.5
Current research practices
Research on the potential of speciﬁc PGPBs happens on
several diﬀerent levels (Fig 3). On the lowest level are in
silico analyses where bacterial strains are sequenced, and
genes related to PGP-traits are identiﬁed.
These studies
can give an indication that a certain bacterial strain can,
under appropriate circumstances, provide beneﬁts such as
access to otherwise inaccessible nutrients.
Usually, these
types of studies are followed by higher level studies, showing
whether the in-silico predictions were correct. An example
of this could be an assay testing whether or not a bacterium
can produce a protein originally identiﬁed through genomic
work. On the top level of the spectrum are ﬁeld experiments,
where bacterial inoculants are applied to plants, sometimes
on many diﬀerent plots of land and using diﬀerent plant va-
rieties. Studies on this level are much more complex as there
are a far greater number of uncontrollable eﬀects from vari-
ables such as weather conditions and native soil microbes.
Currently, most research exploring the potential of speciﬁc
PGPBs happens on levels in between the bottom and the
top levels. These levels contain many diﬀerent experiments
of varying complexity. Examples of these (in order of in-
creasing complexity) could be:
• Measuring
expression
of
certain
PGP-associated
genes/proteins in well-deﬁned laboratory medias.
• Screening bacteria for PGP-traits such as nitrogen-
ﬁxation or phosphorous-solubilization in well-deﬁned
laboratory medias.
• Quantiﬁcation of germination characteristics (time,
rate of success, etc.) of PGPB-inoculated seeds un-
der controlled conditions (e.g., in a growth chamber
with deﬁned media, temperature, humidity, etc.).
• Quantiﬁcation of growth characteristics of PGPB-
inoculated plants grown in controlled soil systems
(e.g., grown indoors in growth chambers with deﬁned
soil composition, temperature, humidity, etc.).
Numerous studies have showed the potential of various mi-
croorganisms to promote plant growth through experiments
on the middle levels [60, 67, 68]. In one example, Szilagyi-
Zecchin et al. (2014) isolated six bacterial strains from the
roots of maize (Zea mays) [68]. The six strains were screened
for 1) presence of the nifH gene, a gene related to nitrogen
ﬁxation, 2) their ability to ﬁxate nitrogen, and 3) their abil-
ity to produce ammonia. Of the six strains examined, four
had the nifH gene, all were classiﬁed as nitrogen ﬁxers, and
only one could produce ammonia. Following the screenings,
the six strains were then added to maize seeds as a bacterial
inoculant. Here, two of the six strains were shown to increase
the germination percentage and root volume of the seedlings
[68]. This study is an example of working with some of the
10
==PAGE:11==
Fig 3: A conceptualization of diﬀerent experiments on diﬀerent experimental levels.
Broadly, research in PGPBs can be divided into two
groups: Plant-free and plant-based experiments. Plant-based experiments are higher of complexity and have much more uncertainty. These
experiments are usually also longer, more laborious and more expensive. PGP: Plant growth-promotion.
lower levels of experimentation but also of spanning several
levels to see if observations "transfer" from one level to an-
other [69, 70]. Unfortunately, a key obstacle for research in
PGPBs is the low degree transferability of results and in-
sights from one experimental level to another. Although ex-
periments on the lower levels have identiﬁed many novel and
interesting interactions between plants and bacteria, these
interactions or outcomes of are not always reproducible in
experiments on the higher levels [71–73]. This was also the
case in the study by Szilagyi-Zecchin et al. (2014) where
four of the screened bacteria were shown to have the nifH
gene, but all six were classiﬁed as nitrogen ﬁxers and only
two were shown to stimulate germination of maize seeds [68].
This issue of transferability between levels may be one of the
costliest issues in developing new PGPB products and tech-
nologies. This is because it requires researchers/developers
to do more experimentation, requiring more time and thus
slowing development.
2.6
PGPBs in maize
Several studies have shown the potential beneﬁts of speciﬁc
bacterial strains to improve maize growth and yield (Ta-
ble 2) and many diﬀerent products already exist for improv-
ing various aspects of maize health (Table 1). However, re-
search on the performance of these stains is a lengthy process
spanning many diﬀerent methods from simple plate assays
to large ﬁeld trails. In one study Pereira et al. (2020) used
PGPB cultures to test their eﬀect on maize phosphorous use
eﬃciency (PUE) [79]. Cultures of three PGPBs (B. subtilis,
A. brasilense, P. ﬂuorescens) were mixed with the maize
seeds shortly before being sown on ﬁelds treated with dif-
ferent amounts of phosphorous. After 130 days, plants were
harvested and several components such as plant height, stem
diameter, weight of 100 grains and many others were mea-
sured. Pereira et al. (2020) observed that while addition of
any of the three PGPBs lead to better physical characteris-
tics (i.e., plant height, yield, etc.), they did not do so consis-
tently over the diﬀerent phosphorous treatments. Also, they
saw that while inoculation with PGPBs did lead to higher P
content in some plant compartments (such as the grain), it
did not do so in all of them and again, did not do so consis-
tently over the various phosphorous treatments. Similarly,
Breedt et al. (2017) grew maize with addition of 5 diﬀerent
PGPBs across 3 diﬀerent soil types [61]. Here, they also ob-
served yield increases in PGPB-inoculated plants, but with
results varying across soil types. Maize grown in heavier,
more fertile soils did not show the same beneﬁcial eﬀects
11
==PAGE:12==
Table 2: An overview of some observed eﬀects from maize inoculation with speciﬁc beneﬁcial bacteria. Bacteria have been shown to have
measurable eﬀects on maize and other plants across a wide range of measures. Many of the beneﬁcial interactions involve increasing availability
of core nutrients to the plant.
Bacteria
Ability
Condition
Eﬀect
Source
Azotobacter sp.
Salt tolerance
Growth chamber
Increased root length and
dry weight
[60]
P. mirabilis
Chromium tolerance
Growth chamber
Increased plant height
and fresh weight
[74]
P. beijingensis
Nitrogen ﬁxation
Growth chamber
Increased root and and
shoot dry weight
[75]
A. irakense
Nitrogen ﬁxation
Greenhouse
Increased root
development and plant
dry weight
[76]
P. alcaligenes, B. polymyxa,
M. phlei
Nitrogen ﬁxation,
IAA production
Greenhouse
Increased root and shoot
dry weight
[77]
L. sphearicus, Paenibacillus
sp.
Nitrogen ﬁxation,
IAA production
Field
Increased yield
[61]
P. ﬂuorescens
Phosphorus
solubilization
Field
Increased plant height
and yield
[78]
B. subtilis, A. brasilense, P.
ﬂuorescens
Phosphorus
solubilization
Field
Increased biomass P
content
[79]
from the PGPBs as those grown in less fertile soils.
These examples show that while many studies have indeed
observed signiﬁcant yield increases related to incubation of
maize with PGPBs, these eﬀects are not universal and can
only be expected under certain conditions.
In the men-
tioned examples the performance of the applied PGPBs var-
ied across somewhat controllable variables such as fertilizer
treatment and soil composition. However, many uncontrol-
lable factors such as weather and competition from native
soil bacteria can exert strong and unpredictable eﬀects on
plant performance [35, 70]. Future work in PGPBs must
recognize these obstacles in order to develop truly eﬀective
treatments.
Designing microbial communities
Most research on PGPBs in maize and other plants have
focused on single bacterial strains, which have a quantiﬁ-
able eﬀect on some aspect of plant health or growth. Al-
though these single strains have been shown to have signif-
icant eﬀects on plant health, it is becoming clear that the
single strain-approach may not be very eﬀective as single-
PGPB treatments often do not perform consistently over
time [61, 78, 80]. Also, few studies verify that the added
bacteria are also present when plant growth/yield is actu-
ally measured (for example when harvesting and measur-
ing/weighing plants), meaning that it is often not known
whether the added bacteria persist in association with the
plant as it grows. One potential way around some of these
issues is to use groups of diﬀerent bacteria instead of single
strains [69]. Although not well studied in maize, research in
other plants has shown that a higher bacterial diversity in
PGPB treatments can translate into more prominent bene-
ﬁcial eﬀects on the host plants [81, 82]. This trend has been
shown most clearly in bacterial disease suppression. Here,
several studies have shown that compared to single strains,
diverse bacterial communities are more eﬀective in prevent-
ing infection and accumulation of invading, pathogenic bac-
teria [83, 84]. Other studies have also shown a link between
increased microbial diversity and increased growth promo-
tion in Pteris vittata and A. thaliana [85, 86]. Hence, ap-
plication of synthetic microbial communities (SynComs) has
been proposed as a potentially more eﬀective and more re-
silient alternative to single-PGBP products [69]. However,
simply increasing diversity does not guarantee improved per-
formance, and some have indicated that the increase may be
dependent on the strains having somewhat complementary
traits or inhabiting distinct ecological niches [81, 82].
12
==PAGE:13==
Study
of
both
individual
PGPBs
and
SynComs
re-
quires a clear and targeted approach to identify which
strains/combinations are the best candidates and why. Of-
ten, research starts with a handful of strains that have pre-
viously been shown to exhibit some PGP-related traits [61,
79]. Alternatively, bacteria are ﬁrst isolated from soil / plant
tissue and then screened for beneﬁcial traits [28, 87]. Both
these methods can be used as a starting point for develop-
ment of SynComs. Currently, very few have experimented
with assembling SynComs from "novel" soil bacteria and
most studies use already-characterized PGP strains. Look-
ing ahead, the most robust and highest-performing novel
biostimulants will likely be composed of diverse but spe-
ciﬁc bacterial SynComs. As we currently know very little
about how to identify the best candidates and subsequently
group them into working communities, this will likely be an
area with increasing interest. Knowledge may be found in
genomic data, such as through co-occurrence networks and
functional genotyping.
However, it is unlikely that these
methods alone will produce robust SynComs and thus, they
must be supported by experimental evidence.
Here, we hypothesize that already-tested PGPBs make good
starting points for assembly of eﬀective SynComs. We de-
velop a platform to recruit and isolate novel community
members to help support the plant-beneﬁcial eﬀects of a
already-known "lead" strain. If proven successful, this plat-
form can be used in ongoing eﬀorts to build robust SynComs
without the need for large strain libraries or prior character-
ization of candidate strains. It is our hope that this study
can serve as a proof of concept to pave the way for devel-
opment of more eﬀective and robust SynComs for use as
agricultural biostimulants.
13
==PAGE:14==
3
Experimental setup
Scope of this project
This thesis was written in collaboration with Chr. Hansen
in an eﬀort to identify beneﬁcial bacteria for use in agri-
culture.
Currently, Chr.
Hansen is developing microbial
inoculants for use on cereal crops such as maize. Like many
others, Chr. Hansen has experienced that their lead strains
do not survive very well under ﬁeld conditions.
Inspired
by the advances in development of SynComs, we proposed
to identify "helper strains" that could support the growth
and/or survival of a maize-beneﬁcial lead strain. As we did
not have access to the speciﬁc strains used by Chr. Hansen
we decided to use a GFP-tagged Bacillus subtilis instead. B.
subtilis is a easily-culturable and well-described soil bacteria
and the GFP-tag in our strain allowed us to diﬀerentiate it
from similar soil bacteria. The B. subtilis strain used (strain
TB34) was obtained from Ákos Kovács at DTU Bioengineer-
ing [88].
Our goal was to identify individual helper bacteria capable
of promoting TB34 survival and we did not aim to piece
together a full microbial consortium. Through this project
we developed a platform for isolation of such helper bacte-
ria and tested the platform’s potential with TB34. Thus,
the overarching aim and hypothesis of this project was the
following:
Aim
Develop a platform for isolation of soil bacteria capable of
supporting survival of speciﬁc lead bacterial strains.
Hypothesis
Through soil incubation of TB34 it would be possible to re-
cruit speciﬁc bacteria capable of supporting the survival of
TB34 in the maize rhizosphere.
The following paragraphs describe the design of and reason-
ing behind the experimental setup employed to reach the
aforementioned aim. The developed platform was divided
into 3 main experimental parts appropriately named Exp 1,
Exp 2, and Exp 3 (See Fig 4). In each step we deselected
bacterial soil isolates, bringing us closer to ﬁnding the best
isolates with the desired TB34-promoting traits.
3.1
Exp 1 - "Recruitment" of soil bacteria
In Exp 1 agar droplets containing diﬀerent nutrient compo-
sitions were placed on sterile ﬁlter papers, TB34 was added
to the media and the ﬁlters were placed in a loamy soil to
attract soil bacteria. After incubation in the soil, the ﬁlters
were removed, washed and the wash water was plated on
agar plates to cultivate the recruited soil bacteria. To iden-
tify factors that could improve the platform, ﬁlters varied in
a number of ways described below:
Media on ﬁlter papers
R2A, VL55
Concentration of added
TB34
None, 109 cells/ml, 108
cells/ml
Pre-incubation time
0 days, 3 days
Soil incubation time
4 days, 8 days, 12 days
TB34 concentration
Most importantly, the concentration of the TB34 strain was
varied. A core hypothesis was that adding TB34 to the ﬁl-
ter papers would result in recruitment of bacteria capable
of co-existing with TB34 and thus perhaps also promoting
its survival. Additionally, we chose to test two diﬀerent con-
centrations of TB34 as we thought the density of bacteria
might inﬂuence the ability of soil bacteria to colonize the
ﬁlters.
Media
We tested two diﬀerent medias (R2A and VL55 - Table S1
and Table S3, Appendix B). The purpose of this was to see
whether we could recruit more bacteria capable of growing
on/near plant roots by using a media which resembled the
plant rhizosphere (VL55) as compared to a simple minimal
media such as R2A. The VL55 media used was a variant of
VL55 in which glucose was substituted with citric acid and
maleic acid, two known plant exudates [89]. The R2A media
used on the ﬁlters was a a diluted version in which we used
only 1/10 of the formula was used. NB: Any text, ﬁgure, or
table indicating the media used on a given ﬁlter will simply
use "R2A" or "VL55".
14
==PAGE:15==
Pre-incubation time and soil incubation time
These two conditions were varied mainly, in order to iden-
tify other potential variations to the platform.
The pre-
incubation of the ﬁlters before placement in the soil could
allow TB34 to colonize the media, perhaps making it more
diﬃcult for soil bacteria also to colonize. The soil incuba-
tion time might show if TB34-promoting bacteria are more
likely to colonize the media early on or perhaps only after
some degree of acclimatization.
The ﬁlters were named according to the diﬀerent condi-
tions (Media, TB34 concentration, etc.) which made them
unique. For example, R3-8H was the ﬁlter with R2A me-
dia (R), spotted with a high concentration of TB34 (H),
pre-incubated for 3 days (3) and incubated in the soil and
harvested after 8 days (8). This is illustrated below.
3.2
Exp 2 - Screening in liquid media
Exp 2 can be divided into two smaller experiments: Exp 2.1
and Exp 2.2. In Exp 2.1, isolates from Exp 1 were trans-
ferred to liquid media. This was done for two reasons: 1)
To see whether or not the colonies expressed GFP and were
thus "carry over" TB34 colonies. (This could also be done
diﬀerently e.g., by microscopy.) 2) To see which isolates were
capable of growing in liquid media. Although not necessary
for survival in soil, the ability to grow in liquid media is of
high importance if the isolate is to be used on an industrial
scale.
By discarding strains which grew to an OD600 of less than
0.1 we avoid isolates which are slow-growing and/or are less
suited to growth in liquid media. By discarding the isolates
that expressed GFP, we avoid spending time on isolates that
are likely isolates of the TB34 strain that were originally put
on the ﬁlter papers.
The remaining isolates were studied further in Exp 2.2 Here,
the isolates were cultured together with TB34 to explore
the eﬀects of the isolates on TB34 survival. The cultures of
both TB34 and the soil isolates were added in equal amounts
and the survival of TB34 was determined from GFP expres-
sion. Although GFP expression is not the best measure for
cell survival and there are undoubtedly many situations in
which this measure can be misleading, it was chosen because
of its ease of detection and suitability for measurements in
microplates. Also, the liquid media is admittedly radically
diﬀerent from soil in its composition, but the reasoning was
that it was important to use quick and cheap assays in order
to reduce the number of isolates that should be tested more
thoroughly.
When does an isolate promote survival?
The goal of Exp 2.2 was to identify those isolates, that when
grown in co-culture with TB34, would increase TB34 sur-
vival.
However, survival does not necessarily have just a
single interpretation. A bacterium may grow and replicate
quickly, but not survive for very long. Alternatively, it only
survives if it grows and replicates quickly. This all depends
on the context in which the bacterium is living. Here, we
are trying to promote the survival of a bacterium that it-
self promotes plant growth. We assume that this bacterium
colonizes plant roots and that for it to provide its plant
growth-promoting eﬀect, it must survive on those roots for
a long time. Thus, in this report we will focus on the signal
of TB34 at the last time point, while paying less attention to
its development up to that point. In other words, a strong
signal from TB34 at the last time point should indicate a
high number of surviving cells, which is what we are look-
ing for. In this report this will be referred to as survival or
survival promotion.
3.3
Exp 3 - Soil survival and plant growth pro-
motion assays
Exp 3 consisted of two diﬀerent experiments. The ﬁrst was
a soil assay in which promising isolates, identiﬁed in Exp
2, would be cultured with TB34 in soil to test their eﬀect
on TB34 survival.
This would give a more realistic pic-
ture of the soil isolates’ survival-promoting capabilities in
a more natural environment. The second experiment was
a screening of two typical plant growth-promotion (PGP)
traits: phosphorus solubilization and siderophore produc-
tion.
These speciﬁc screens were chosen mainly because
they needed few advanced compounds or equipment and be-
15
==PAGE:16==
cause it would be relatively easy to test many isolates in a
short amount of time. The most important reason for in-
cluding both a soil survival assay and assays for detecting
PGP-traits was to identify diversity.
When choosing be-
tween many isolates it can be advantageous not to choose
the best isolates purely based on one measure / trait. As all
of these assays and screens are solely mimicking the real ap-
plication of the isolates, there is no guarantee that good per-
formance in a given assay will translate to good performance
in the ﬁeld. Selecting a group of functionally and genetically
diverse isolates may improve the chances of ﬁnding a well-
performing isolate. In this case a well-performing "helper"
bacterium may indirectly support a rhizosphere bacterium
by directly supporting its host plant.
NB: Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it was not possible to
carry out Exp 3. Therefore, methods and results related to
Exp 3 will not be covered in this report. However, a brief
discussion of possibilities and obstacles related to Exp 3 will
is included in Section 5.
16
==PAGE:17==
Exp 1
Prepare filters
Add media
v R2A
v VL55  
1
Add TB34
v High conc.  
v Low conc.
v None (control)
2
Pre-incubation
v 0 days
v 3 days
3
Soil incubation
v 4 days
v 8 days
v 12 days
4
3 days
0 days
Exp 2.1
Liquid media screening
Transfer 
colonies to 
microplate
1
Grow for 16 h.
Measure OD / 
GFP
2
Transfer culture to 
new microplate 
with TB34
1
Exp 2.2
Co-cultures with TB34
Measure GFP and 
OD at 0, 16, 24, 40 
and 48 hours.
2
Exp 3.1
Soil survival assay
Transfer best isolates 
to soil with TB34
1
v Indicates the different options in each step 
Each filter will have a combination (ie. R2A, - High conc - 0 days - 4 days)
TB34
Quantify DNA 
from TB34 by 
qPCR
2
Transfer isolates
to defined agar medias
1
Exp 3.2
Plant-growth promotion assays
Identify positive 
isolates from 
plaques
2
4 days
8 days
12 days
NB: Choose strains 
based on results 
from Part 2.2
Fig 4: An illustration of the experimental setup. The setup was divided into 3 separate parts which were performed in succession. Exp 1:
Recruitment of soil bacteria. Exp 2.1: Identiﬁcation of 1) possible TB34 colonies and 2) isolates capable of growth in liquid media. Exp 2.2:
Co-culture of soil isolates and TB34. Exp 3.1: Co-culture of remaining isolates and TB34 in soil. Exp 3.2: Solid media screening of PGP-related
traits. Parts of this ﬁgure were created with Biorender.com.
17
==PAGE:18==
4
Results
4.1
Exp 1 - Recruitment of soil bacteria
A total of 26 diﬀerent ﬁlters were made with 3 replicates of
each ﬁlter (Table 3). After incubation in soil the ﬁlters were
washed, and the wash cultures were plated onto agar plates
in 0x and 10x dilution resulting in a total of 156 plates.
24 of these were discarded due to an error in handling the
cultures (These were the plates from ﬁlters R0-8H, R0-8L,
V0-8H, and V0-8L), meaning that 132 plates were used in
further steps of the experimental work.
Isolation of ﬁlter-associated bacteria
After 7 days of growth 101 of the 132 plates (77%) had vis-
ible growth. All the plates from R2A ﬁlters showed growth
with many of the plates having quite dense cell growth, up-
wards of 200 individual colonies. The Plates from the VL55
ﬁlters were not as successful and only 35 of the 66 plates
showed any form of bacterial growth. Generally, ﬁlters with
a high concentration of TB34 produced plates with a larger
number of colonies, although not consistently (Fig 5). Simi-
larly, ﬁlters pre-incubated for 3 days also seemed to produce
more colonies, but again, not consistently.
NB: Colonies
were counted 7 days after plating. Since bacterial growth
usually takes upwards of 10 days to develop on VL55 plates
this may explain the low degree of growth on these.
Fig 5: The distribution of colonies on the 10x diluted agar plates. The
data are split based on the TB34 concentration, indicated in the grey
at the top. The eﬀect of soil incubation time is not shown.
Continuing to Exp 2
Agar plates from 22 of the 26 ﬁlters remained (plates from
4 ﬁlters had been discarded) and many of these had visible
growth. The agar plates from 17 of these 22 diﬀerent ﬁlters
were selected for screening in Exp 2. The agar plates from
these ﬁlters were selected mainly based on the number of
colonies present on the plates. Plates with approx. 25-200
colonies were preferred. Table 3 shows from which ﬁlters
agar plates were selected and from which not.
Table 3: An overview of all the diﬀerent ﬁlters used in this study. Low
and high strain concentrations were OD600 = 0.1 and 1.0 respectively.
Agar plates from underlined ﬁlters were not used for screening in Exp
2. Agar plates from ﬁlters in bold were discarded due to experimental
error.
Media
TB34
concen-
tration
Pre-
incubation
time
Soil
incubation
time
Name
R2A
None
0 days
4 days
R0-4C
High
0 days
4 days
R0-4H
8 days
R0-8H
12 days
R0-12H
3 days
4 days
R3-4H
8 days
R3-8H
12 days
R3-12H
Low
0 days
4 days
R0-4L
8 days
R0-8L
12 days
R0-12L
3 days
4 days
R3-4L
8 days
R3-8L
12 days
R3-12L
VL55
None
0 days
4
V0-4C
High
0 days
4
V0-4H
8
V0-8H
12
V0-12H
3 days
4
V3-4H
8
V3-8H
12
V3-12H
Low
0 days
4
V0-4L
8
V0-8L
12
V0-12L
3 days
4
V3-4L
8
V3-8L
12
V3-12L
18
==PAGE:19==
4.2
Exp 2 - Screening in liquid media
We screened 1293 individual colonies for their growth in liq-
uid R2A media as well as for GFP expression.
TB34 thrives on ﬁlters with short incubation in soil
Exp 2.1 was performed partly to identify any TB34 colonies
that may have been transferred from the plates. Colonies
with a GFP expression larger than a threshold of 1/10 the
expression of the lowest-expressing control were considered
to be TB34 colonies. A total of 179 colonies had a GFP ex-
pression larger than the threshold and were thus classiﬁed as
TB34 isolates. These came primarily from ﬁlters R3-4H (72
colonies) and R0-4H (58 colonies) and constituted 86% and
70% of the colonies from those ﬁlters, respectively (Fig 6).
No TB34 isolates were identiﬁed from any of the ﬁlters with
VL55 media. Of the remaining 1114 colonies 93% showed
growth in the liquid R2A media. The share of colonies that
could grow in liquid media did not diﬀer much between the
diﬀerent ﬁlter conditions (Fig S3, Appendix A).
Fig 6: Distribution of GFP-expressing soil isolates from diﬀerent ﬁlters.
Isolates with a high GFP expression were classiﬁed to be strain TB34
and were discarded. These isolates came mostly from a few ﬁlters and
mostly from ﬁlters that had been incubated in soil for 4 days.
Continuing to Exp 2.2
1039 of the original 1293 soil isolates were capable of growth
in liquid media and did not express GFP at signiﬁcant levels.
Cultures of these isolates were used in Exp 2.2.
Applying a diﬀerent measure for GFP expression
The objective in Exp 2.2 was to determine which of the
1039 soil isolates from Exp 2.1 could improve the survival of
TB34 in a liquid co-culture. From the GFP-expression data,
it was apparent that the mean GFP-expression of the con-
trol cultures was notably higher than that of the co-cultures
(Fig S8, Appendix A). This was true for all microplates and
across all time points including t=0, showing that the co-
cultures and the controls did not start from similar starting
points. This was a result of the way the co-cultures were set
up. Each co-culture contained half TB34 and half soil iso-
late, while the controls contained only TB34, meaning that
each control well contained twice as many GFP-expressing
TB34 cells. To account for the high GFP expression of the
control cultures, analysis of the data was performed using a
relative measure of GFP expression, which was deemed more
suitable for comparisons between controls and co-cultures.
Many isolates promote TB34 survival
When using the relative GFP measure, the data looked quite
diﬀerent (Fig S7, Appendix A). The co-cultures’ GFP ex-
pression relative to the controls was now much higher with
many co-cultures now performing better than the controls
(Fig 7). Co-cultures with an increased GFP expression were
identiﬁed using the threshold described in Eq. 1 and the
soil isolates in those co-cultures were classiﬁed as TB34-
promoting isolates or "helper isolates".
Tp = mean(GFPcontrols)+2·stand_dev(GFPcontrols) (1)
In this way 368 isolates (35% of the total) were classiﬁed as
helper isolates. In contrast, using the same threshold on the
original, absolute GFP-measure only resulted in the classi-
ﬁcation of 2 helper isolates. Helper isolates were identiﬁed
from all 17 ﬁlters, but with the highest performers originat-
ing from R2A ﬁlters (Fig S8, Appendix A).
Fig 7: The distribution of GFP expression from co-cultures relative
to the controls. Two diﬀerent measures are compared: 1) an absolute
GFP measure (purple) and 2) a relative GFP measure (yellow).
19
==PAGE:20==
Although helper isolates could now be found on all ﬁlters, a
majority of them (67%) originated from ﬁlters with a low
TB34 concentration (Fig S9, Appendix A).
Filters with
VL55 media were over-represented with slightly more than
half of the helper isolates coming from VL55 ﬁlters. This
was despite these isolates only making up 35% of the total
number of isolates used in the co-cultures.
Helper composition changes over time
Using the same criteria as was used at 48 hours (Eq. 1), we
counted the number of helper isolates at each time point.
The total number of helpers ranged between 480 and 368 at
t=16 and t=48, respectively (Fig 8). Furthermore, for 12
of the 17 ﬁlters, a diﬀerent number of helpers were identi-
ﬁed at every time point. The results from some ﬁlters were
very dependent on the time at which isolates were classi-
ﬁed as helpers. An example of this is Filter R0-4L which
produced 23 helper isolates at t=16 and 54 at t=48. Other
ﬁlters show similar patterns with an increase or decrease
in the number of classiﬁed helpers over time (Fig 8).
In
fact, only around 250 isolates were consistently classiﬁed as
helpers across all time points. Generally, fewer isolates were
classiﬁed as helpers at later time points.
Fig 8: The distribution of TB34-promoting helper isolates identiﬁed at
each of four time points. Three ﬁlters showing diﬀerent patterns over
time are highlighted. The number at the top of each column is the
total number of helper isolates classiﬁed at that time point. NB: Co-
cultures for 3 of the 17 ﬁlters were not measured at t=16 and another
3 at t=40, meaning that helpers could not be identiﬁed from these
ﬁlters. Thus, the numbers reported here, 480 and 380, are estimates
for t=16 and t=40, respectively.
Inﬂuence of ﬁlter conditions on the promotion of TB34
In our analysis, we compared the number of helper isolates
identiﬁed across the various ﬁlter conditions. Note, we here
used helper isolates identiﬁed by the relative GFP measure
described previously, as the original measure only resulted in
2 TB34-promoting isolates, a number far too small for sta-
tistical analysis. Using a Poisson regression model (null de-
viance: 215.72 on 32 degrees of freedom, residual deviance:
94.24 on 26 degrees of freedom), TB34 concentration to-
gether with soil incubation time was shown to have an ef-
fect on the number of helper isolates. More speciﬁcally, a low
TB34 concentration was shown to result in a higher num-
ber of helper isolates on ﬁlters, which had been incubated
in the soil for 4 or 8 days (p = 1.99e-6 and p = 5.44e-4,
respectively).
However, the model here does not provide
a very good ﬁt of the data, meaning that it can only ex-
plain part of the diﬀerences between the ﬁlters (goodness-
of-ﬁt chi-squared test, p = 1.14e-9). Despite this, the eﬀects
identiﬁed by the regression model can be identiﬁed visually
in the data Fig 9. The trend is especially visible for ﬁlters
with a low TB34 concentration and a soil incubation time of
4 days. These ﬁlters all produced a minimum of 10 helper
isolates, more than most other ﬁlters. The trend is less clear
for ﬁlters with a low TB34 concentration and a soil incuba-
tion time of 8 days.
Fig 9: The distribution of helper isolates across various ﬁlter condi-
tions. Each dot represents the result of a single ﬁlter. This ﬁgure was
made using only data from ﬁlters with R2A media.
20
==PAGE:21==
5
Discussion
Despite the growing interest in biostimulants as alternatives
for fertilizers and bio-control agents, the successes of these
alternatives are hampered by their high degree of ﬁeld-to-
ﬁeld and year-to-year variation [69, 70]. Designing probi-
otics around well-assembled SynComs may be one way, in
which ambitions of both sustainability, productivity and re-
producibility may be met in the future. However, the study
and development of these SynComs is still an area with many
unknowns and thus methods for quickly identifying compat-
ible bacterial communities will be of great interest [80].
In this study, we tested a platform for screening of soil-
derived SynCom candidates. In doing so, we selected 368
soil isolates that were capable of promoting the survival of
B. subtilis strain TB34. These were isolated from several,
characteristically diﬀerent agar-spotted ﬁlter papers. The
isolates were ﬁrst screened for their ability to grow in liq-
uid media and were afterward screened for their ability to
promote survival of TB34 in a liquid media co-culture. 368
isolates were identiﬁed to "help" TB34 survival and were
thus candidates for any further screening. Additionally, we
examined whether the addition of TB34 to the ﬁlters would
lead to higher numbers of helpers isolated from those ﬁlters.
We found evidence that adding TB34 in a low concentration
led to a higher occurrence of TB34-promoting helpers how-
ever, only when the ﬁlters were incubated in the soil for no
longer than 8 days.
Potential of TB34-promoting isolates
Since this experiment screened 1293 diﬀerent soil isolates in
co-culture, screening had to be easy and quick and only a
single replicate of each co-culture was made. In other words,
the TB34-promoting isolates were identiﬁed in a broad (i.e.,
including many isolates) but shallow (i.e., receiving little in-
formation on each isolate) screening. Unfortunately, a more
thorough examination of the 1293 isolates was not possible
within the time frame of this thesis. Already, screening this
many isolates is a challenge and similar screenings rarely use
more than 100 isolates [65, 90–92]. Furthermore, the spe-
ciﬁc isolates classiﬁed as helpers were identiﬁed at a set time
point. We have already shown that choosing a diﬀerent time
point would have led to the classiﬁcation of a diﬀerent set of
helper isolates, meaning that the 368 helpers identiﬁed here
are not the deﬁnitive helpers, but simply the ones identiﬁed
by the methods applied here. However, the variability in
whether isolates are classiﬁed as helpers or not is not nec-
essarily a ﬂaw of the experimental design or the handling of
the experiments, but more likely a product of the complex
interactions between bacteria and their environment. Simi-
lar patterns have been observed in soils, where multiple time
measurements have shown the variable composition of rhi-
zosphere microbiomes in which drastic changes can happen
on the scale of days [35]. It is absolutely fundamental to
realize that traits observed under a given set of conditions
may not be present under diﬀerent conditions. At the same
time, the degree of this variability may be reduced by strate-
gic screening and thus any good screening platform should
be designed with this is mind.
Commonly in similar studies, all available bacterial iso-
lates are screened for a number of desired traits such as
siderophore production, co-growth with target species, etc.
[60, 68]. Because of the high number of bacterial isolates
studied here, this was simply not possible within the avail-
able time span and we thus adopted more selective measures.
A core hypothesis underlying our work was that as we pro-
gressed with the experimentation and deselected more and
more soil isolates, the remaining isolates would have higher
potential for being used to promote survival of TB34 (This
concept is illustrated in Fig 10).
Fig 10: A conceptualization of isolate selection through experimenta-
tion. Initially one starts with a high number of candidate isolates, but
little knowledge of them and thus little potential of them being use-
ful. As more isolates are discarded through screening and selection the
number of candidate isolates declines. At the same time the potential
of each remaining isolate to be useful increases.
Optimally, every experiment and every selection of isolates
would exclude the ones with the least potential and include
21
==PAGE:22==
the ones with the most potential. In this way, we go from
many candidate isolates with lower potential to a few can-
didate isolates with a higher potential. With this in mind,
the 368 selected helper isolates need not be able to promote
TB34 survival predictably in order for the screening to be
successful. As others have pointed out, the relevant phe-
notype of a given strain may only become truly apparent,
when observed under ﬁeld conditions and in combination
with other strains [69, 80].
With all likelihood, many of
the 368 selected helpers would not be classiﬁed as helpers
if we repeated the experiment several times. However, the
experiments were designed to show which isolates had the
most potential for TB34-promotion, and given the observa-
tions described in this report, the 368 isolates were the most
promising of the examined isolates.
Evaluation of the developed platform
One of the novelties of our setup was the use of ﬁlter papers
with added media and bacteria. The general hypothesis was
that the addition of a speciﬁc bacterium (TB34 in our case)
before soil incubation, would cause certain bacteria from the
soil to be recruited to the ﬁlter. This is analogous to the spe-
ciﬁc recruitment of soil bacteria that takes place in the plant
rhizosphere [33]. If proven successful, we could use this ap-
proach to recruit soil bacteria with speciﬁc phenotypes and
thus optimize the process of isolating and identifying bac-
teria for use in agriculture. A similar example of this was
shown for isolation of fungi-associated soil bacteria however,
without determination of the supportive functions of the re-
cruited bacteria [93].
In the present study, we were able
to demonstrate a link between the addition of low concen-
trations of TB34 to the ﬁlters and an increased number of
isolates able to promote TB34 survival. To our knowledge,
this form of helper-recruitment has not been demonstrated
for soil bacteria before. However, although our results show
an eﬀect from added TB34, the applied regression models
were simple and did not describe the data fully. There may
be several reasons for this, including the small number of
replicates and the many variations applied to the ﬁlters. In
future work, better results might be obtained with fewer
variations to the ﬁlters and more replicates of each ﬁlter,
making both handling of samples and of the resulting data
simpler. However, even with these variations, we might not
have been able to fully explain the eﬀects of the various ﬁlter
conditions. Many diﬀerent variables can inﬂuence whether
or not a speciﬁc bacterium chooses to colonize a ﬁlter paper
placed in its vicinity. Some of these variables were included
in the experimental design (TB34 concentration for exam-
ple), but a signiﬁcant number of them were not. It is now
well established that unknown or poorly understood factors
such as "ﬁeld" or "sampling region", can have signiﬁcant ef-
fects on the recruitment of bacteria on plant tissues [27, 35,
39]. Although our study was smaller and simpler than ﬁeld
studies, it should be no surprise that we cannot fully de-
scribed the observed trends. This lack of descriptive power
is likely due to a lack of knowledge of the relevant sources
of inﬂuence. The included variables (Media, TB34 concen-
tration, etc.) were, after all, not included because we knew
that they would aﬀect colonization of the ﬁlters, but because
we wanted to test whether they did. However, through this
study we found evidence that two of our experimental vari-
ables (TB34 concentration and soil incubation time) aﬀected
the recruitment. As they only described part of the variation
between ﬁlters, this suggests that there are additional, po-
tentially unknown variables which may be used to improve
the eﬃciency and applicability of the developed platform.
This would allow for additional ways of improving and tai-
loring platform performance for speciﬁc needs.
Unfortunately, we were not able to proceed with Exp 3, from
which results could have helped us evaluate the eﬀective-
ness of our approach of consecutive screening and selection.
This would otherwise have allowed us to determine if the
co-culture in liquid media was a useful step towards ﬁnding
bacteria which have supportive functions in soil. Had a high
percentage of the 368 helper isolates shown the same TB34-
promoting capabilities in soil, we might conclude that the
liquid co-culture is a very meaningful and also time-saving
screening to perform. In other words: It would indicate a
high degree of functional transferability between Exp 2 and
Exp 3. For future iterations, it will be important to evaluate
the eﬀectiveness of the applied screenings and to determine
whether each individual step is useful in predicting the rel-
evant functions on "higher" experimental levels.
Looking forward, the platform will undoubtedly need addi-
tional steps/procedures to construct robust SynComs, start-
ing from only a single strain. As mentioned by others, iden-
tifying diversity will be an important step when selecting
22
==PAGE:23==
community members for SynCom assembly [82, 86]. Impor-
tantly, selection should preferentially give weight to func-
tional rather than taxonomic diversity, as taxonomic mark-
ers are often unable to capture emergent traits [17, 69, 80].
Additionally, focus on functional traits may improve pre-
diction of additive eﬀects and allow targeted assembly of
functional "blocks" [80]. Further screens may thus include
ones in which diﬀerent traits can be identiﬁed and used for
grouping of isolates into functional groups. In turn, these
could be accompanied by microﬂuidic technologies to allow
for parallel screening of many diﬀerent assemblies, identi-
fying high-performing combinations and improving future
predictions of consortium functions [94].
Unknown mechanism behind TB34 recruitment
Though a low concentration of added TB34 seemed to have
a recruiting eﬀect, we did not study the exact mechanism by
which the soil bacteria colonized the ﬁlter and thus we can-
not say whether TB34 was in fact recruiting other bacteria.
One explanation for the observed eﬀect is that TB34 is able
to prevent some non-beneﬁcial soil bacteria from colonizing
the ﬁlters. Kiesewalter et al. (2020) have previously shown
that B. subtilis is able to produce secondary metabolites
that inhibit certain genera of soil bacteria [95]. This eﬀect
could also be at play here, preventing speciﬁc, potentially
inhibitory bacteria from colonizing the ﬁlters. If this is the
case, TB34 is not so much recruiting beneﬁcial bacteria as
it is repelling inhibitory bacteria. However, without deeper
analysis, these two can be diﬃcult to tell apart. Another
possibility is that TB34, similar to many plants, actively re-
cruits other bacteria through secondary metabolites. Becher
et al. (2020) have observed such an eﬀect between Strepto-
myces and the springtail F. candida [96]. In their exper-
iments, the Streptomyces released the organic compound,
geosmin, which was eﬀective in attracting F. candida but
at the same time did not attract insects or arachnids. Ac-
cordingly, geosmin-deﬁcient Streptomyces mutants did not
attract F. candida. Although this experiment involved at-
traction between very diﬀerent species, this ability to attract
may very well be present between species of soil-inhabiting
bacteria as well and could explain the recruitment observed
in TB34.
However, these possible explanations do not explain why a
high concentration of TB34 did not lead to recruitment of
TB34-beneﬁcial bacteria. A possible explanation is that the
higher concentration of TB34 simply makes the ﬁlter more
crowded" and thus more diﬃcult for the soil bacteria to col-
onize the ﬁlter. As B. subtilis is known for forming bioﬁlms,
it is also possible that a higher concentration of TB34 sup-
ported the formation of a bioﬁlm-like structure on the ﬁlter
[97, 98]. Although, this is more likely if the ﬁlters were pre-
incubated.
Lastly, we also only observed the recruiting eﬀect on ﬁlter
which had been incubated in soil for 4 or 8 days and not
for 12 days. This could be because over time the ﬁlter is
colonized by more and more foreign bacteria, few of which
are "helpful" for TB34. Even if TB34 is repelling some of
these through secondary metabolites it might not be able
to do so eﬀectively for longer periods. Additionally, slower
growing/moving bacteria might not have been able to ef-
fectively colonize the ﬁlters within 8 days but might have
better chances over 12 days.
In summary, addition of TB34 in low concentration did lead
to a higher occurrence of "helpful" soil isolates. However,
as the mechanisms behind the colonization of the soil bacte-
ria were not studied, we cannot conclude on whether we are
witnessing a speciﬁc recruitment of bacteria from the soil or
whether other, diﬀerent eﬀects are at play.
The future perspective
Despite the challenges of the applied experimental setup,
we were able to show that use of TB34-inoculated ﬁlters,
facilitated recruitment of helpful bacteria from a soil envi-
ronment. Additionally, we selected 368 soil bacteria with
potential for TB34 promotion. However, several important
questions remain: What other factors inﬂuence the colo-
nization by "helpful" bacteria? Can this platform be used
with other bacteria with similar results? And maybe most
importantly, are the functional screenings performed here
predictive of function within plant-associated bacterial com-
munities? Thus, there is still work to be done before our
results can be understood fully and the platform can be ap-
plied more broadly. Despite this, the platform might open
the doors for more successful development of microbial Syn-
Coms and with some improvement, it may expand the tool-
box currently available to researchers leading to advances in
both microbial ecology and agriculture.
23
==PAGE:24==
6
Conclusion
Future high-performing SynComs will need to be assembled
with diversity and stability in mind and methods for design-
ing and testing these SynComs will thus be of great impor-
tance. In the present study, we show that a simple platform
can be used to screen soil bacteria for their compatibility in
soil-derived SynComs. Most importantly, we observed that
addition of TB34 to soil incubated ﬁlter papers resulted in
isolation of more TB34-promoting isolates. This ﬁnding sug-
gests that we may take advantage of natural microbial di-
versity in order to assemble SynComs around well-described
and high-performing strains. Although the developed plat-
form still has much room for improvement, several simple
interventions have already been identiﬁed, which may lead
to quicker handling and more meaningful results.
Com-
bined with specialized methods for deeper functional anal-
ysis, these advances might eventually lead to standardized
methods for quick and eﬀective assembly of SynComs. In
turn, robust and eﬀective SynComs may be used as more
natural alternatives to fertilizers and biocontrol agents and
support the move towards more sustainable and productive
agricultural practices.
24
==PAGE:25==
7
Improvements to the platform
Exp 1 - Know your medias and your markers
It was clear that there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the
number of colonies present on plates from R2A ﬁlters as
compared to plates from VL55 ﬁlters. VL55 media is, rela-
tive to 1/10 R2A, a more niche-speciﬁc and selective media.
Other studies using VL55 have grown soil bacteria for up
to 10 days before the emergence of visible growth [99, 100].
Most likely, much of the diﬀerence between the growth on
R2A and VL55 plates in our experiments can be explained
by the fact that all the colonies were counted after 7 days
of growth. This was done in order to standardize, but was
not optimal for our purposes, as it led to a lower number of
isolates from VL55 ﬁlters. In turn, this meant that we did
not have isolates from all 26 ﬁlters making the statistical
analysis more diﬃcult. To cope with these consequences, we
chose not to use the data from VL55 ﬁlters in our statistical
modeling.
However, it is likely, that our statistical mod-
els could have beneﬁted from the additional data if more
colonies had been observed and data from all the ﬁlters were
used.
Other changes could also have provided us with more data.
A few of the agar plates had quite high numbers of TB34
colonies growing on them (this was evident from Exp 2.1
which showed many isolates having high levels of GFP ex-
pression). Because of issues with some of the lab equipment,
it was not possible to measure the GFP expression of the
colonies while on the agar plates. Had this been possible,
many of the TB34 colonies could have been discarded and
only the "novel" soil bacteria transferred to the microplates
in Exp 2. Another possibility here, could be to use a diﬀer-
ent reporter than GFP. One possible substitute is mcherry,
which is well-established as a genetic marker and is also
visible by the naked eye when several mcherry-genes are
expressed [101].
Using a mcherry-tagged TB34 strain, it
would be possible to easily deselect TB34 from the agar
plates without the need for further equipment or methods.
Alternatively, systems based on the lacZ gene and X-gal
media could also be used [102]. Application of such markers
would also mean that identifying TB34 colonies in Exp 2.1
would not be necessary, as TB34 could be deselected before-
hand.
Exp 2.1 - Work smarter, not harder
The purpose of Exp 2.1 was two-fold: 1) See which of the
isolates were capable of growth in liquid R2A media. 2) See
which isolates were expressing GFP and thus likely TB34
isolates that had "carried over" from the ﬁlters. This step
was also useful, as it allowed us to grow the non-TB34 iso-
lates to a density, where they could be transferred directly
to the microplates in Exp 2.2.
However, as diﬀerent iso-
lates would grow to diﬀerent densities (diﬀerent OD600),
this meant that a diﬀerent amount of culture would have
to be transferred for each individual well. In practice, this
was the most time-consuming part of the experimental work,
and thus improvements in this part of the platform would
come with great beneﬁt. As an alternative, we might instead
have chosen to transfer the colonies directly from the agar
plates to the co-cultures in Exp 2.2. After all, our results
from Exp 2.1 showed that 89 % of the tested soil isolates
were capable of growth in liquid media, meaning that this
step did not deselect very many isolates. Emitting this step
in future iterations would mean signiﬁcant time-savings and
could thus allow for the inclusion of additional replicates
leading to potentially more reliable data.
Exp 2.2 - GFP, a simple measure for TB34 concentration
To make the setup more attractive to the others we chose to
screen our soil isolates using methods that were compara-
bly quick and cheap and which could be scaled up relatively
easily. An example of this is the co-culture screening in Part
2.2. Here, GFP was used as a marker for TB34 growth as it
would be easy and quick to measure. Indeed, it was quick
and easy as we could grow the co-cultures in 96-well mi-
croplates, and spectrophotometric measurement of the GFP
expression did not damage the cultures. This meant that
we could measure the cultures, re-incubate them, and then
measure them again at a later time, all quickly and without
the need for preparing the cultures between each measure-
ment. These advantages were precisely why we chose this
approach, and others have similarly used ﬂuorescent markers
to conduct large-scale screening of co-cultures [94] Further-
more, it would make it easier for others to adopt this setup
since it required no overly advanced equipment or compli-
cated procedures. However, while the setup did allow for
25
==PAGE:26==
relatively high throughput and did not cost much, it was
far from the most precise method to measure what we were
studying. To measure the growth/survival of TB34 in the
co-culture many other methods could be used. These could
be anything from simple plate-culturing methods to more
advanced methods such as ﬂow cytometry [103]. While these
methods would have allowed for much better estimates of the
true amount of TB34 cells in a given culture, they are also
signiﬁcantly more costly and time-consuming, making them
less appealing when dealing with many samples. Thus, while
microplate measurement of GFP expression was the quick-
est and cheapest method we could ﬁnd, it was not the most
precise. There are several reasons for this. Importantly, the
B. subtilis strain which we used, TB34, contained GFP as
a constitutively promoted chromosomal gene. This meant
that it would produce GFP as long as it was alive, causing
GFP, which is quite stable, to accumulate in the microplate
wells. This meant that each measurement did not measure
the GFP expression at that speciﬁc time, but instead the ac-
cumulated expression up until that point. In order for this
measure to be comparable between samples, each sample
would have to start under identical initial conditions such
that no cultures would show deviating GFP expression at
t=0 and hence deviations later as well.
An alternative to this would be to use a non-constitutively
expressed marker-gene. This could for example be one linked
to a receptor or enzyme, which the cell produces in relatively
ﬁxed amounts. In this case, stagnation in cell growth (which
we observed in our experiments - Fig S6, Appendix A) would
not lead to further marker-expression. Of course, this would
not necessarily lead to a completely precise quantiﬁcation of
cell number.
Marker-proteins from dead cells might per-
sist in the culture, leading to a "dead" signal that could
not be separated from the "live" signal. However, using a
non-constitutively expressed marker-gene would likely make
the quantiﬁcation of cell density more precise than observed
here and allow better comparison across diﬀerent cultures
and diﬀerent times.
Exp 2 - Growth or survival?
In Exp 2.2 we observed that most of the TB34 controls sus-
tained an OD600 of around 0.2 for the 48 hours of the exper-
iment. Thus, TB34 was likely not in an exponential growth
phase at any time, and if so, only shortly. This doesn’t have
to be a problem. We were trying to quantify the survival
of TB34 and thus soil isolates wouldn’t necessarily have to
support TB34 growth in order for them to be classiﬁed as
TB34-promoting. However, had both soil isolate and TB34
been added in smaller amounts, perhaps 106 cells or fewer
instead of the ∼107 cells that were used here, we might
have observed diﬀerent dynamics.
In this scenario, there
would be a larger potential for growth, and thus also the
potential for growth-promotion or growth inhibition of the
other bacteria in the co-culture. Some fast-growing isolates
may have outcompeted TB34, while they couldn’t do so in
the applied setup because of the lower potential for growth.
Similarly, if an isolate was quickly outcompeted by TB34,
it would have been more clearly noticeable in the result-
ing data.
The information provided by such experiments
with "growth included" could have suggested how and if
the two bacteria could grow together and thus perhaps also
colonize the plant rhizosphere together. Although the plant
rhizosphere is a drastically diﬀerent environment than that
of liquid lab medias, the underlying hypothesis of this and
other studies into PGPBs is that observations in the lab can
be somewhat reproduced in the ﬁeld.
Exp 2 - Alternative methods
Other, alternative methods could also have been used to
quantify TB34-survival in the co-cultures.
Here, we used
liquid co-cultures, but co-cultures on solid media would also
be possible. One example of this is described by Temkin et
al. (2019) [104]. Shortly, they incubate their target strain
(analogous to TB34) on a solid media in 12-well plates. After
7 days of incubation, they then add culture of a test strain
(analogous to a soil isolate) to the well. After an additional
7 days of growth, they then evaluate the co-cultures and
compare them to a control with no added test strain. This
co-culture on solid media could also have been used in our
setup with several advantages and disadvantages. Firstly, we
might have gotten a better picture of the compatibility of the
isolate and TB34 with the solid co-culture. Each co-culture
could be analyzed qualitatively, and we might observe dif-
ferences not only in the degree of promotion/inhibition but
also in how a given isolate promotes/inhibits TB34. This
method could potentially give more information about the
interactions taking place in a given co-culture. On the down-
side, the solid media co-culture approach would require more
26
==PAGE:27==
work. We would have to use more plates and spend a longer
time analyzing each co-culture. Furthermore, it may be dif-
ﬁcult to quantify the degree of promotion/inhibition, thus
also making data analysis and statistical modeling more dif-
ﬁcult. In our case, the liquid co-culture used was probably
well-suited. However, had we been studying a smaller num-
ber of soil isolates, the solid co-culture could have been an
interesting alternative.
Exp 3 - Quick and cheap selection is needed
In the planned setup, the ﬁnal step for the 368 helper iso-
lates was a soil co-culture assay in which TB34 and helper
isolates were co-cultured in soil. The idea was that DNA
extraction and qPCR would be used to quantify the de-
gree of TB34 survival and thus also the TB34-promoting
capabilities of the helper isolates. This method was origi-
nally chosen before the 368 helper isolates had been identi-
ﬁed. With 368 helper isolates however, this setup is some-
what unrealistic, especially within the context of a 5-month
Master’s thesis.
Using a FASTDNATM Spin Kit for Soil
(MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH, USA), a single extraction
for each co-culture alone would cost ∼e 3000 and take at
least 4 full days of lab work to perform (based on personal
experience and rates from https://www.mpbio.com/us/
116560000-fastdna-spin-kit-for-soil-samp-cf).
Al-
though institutions with deeper pockets may be capable of
performing such experiments, it is hardly eﬃcient and there
are likely other methods more suitable for this number of
samples.
To prevent excessive costs, we could make the
criteria for classifying an isolate as TB34-promoting more
conservative.
For example, requiring a relative GFP ex-
pression 50% higher than the mean of the controls leads to
the classiﬁcation of only 120 isolates instead of 368. Other
approaches to avoid handling all 368 isolates could be to
include another screening before the soil assay or to select
among the 368 isolates based on morphological and/or ge-
netic diversity to avoid testing multiple isolates that are al-
most identical. Alternatively, we could have conducted the
co-culture experiment (Exp 2.2) over a longer time period
than 48 hours. As was mentioned in Section 4, classiﬁcation
of helper isolates at a later time led to lower occurrences of
helper isolates, indicating that a longer co-culture may be
more selective and expose only the most "helpful" isolates.
27
==PAGE:28==
8
Methods and Materials
Bacterial strains
B. subtilis strain TB34 was obtained from Ákos Kovács at
DTU [88].
TB34 is a B. subtilis mutant, with the Phy-
GFP(Cm) cassette recombined into the amyE gene. TB34
was thus canamycin-resistant, expressed GFP and was deﬁ-
cient in α-amylase activity.
Growth conditions
Isolated bacterial strains as well as the original strain TB34
[88] were grown on either VL55 or 1/10 R2A agar plates
(Appendix B) at room temperature. Liquid cultures were
grown in R2A broth at 28°C.
8.1
Exp 1 - Recruitment of soil bacteria
Setup of ﬁlters
Sterile microﬁber ﬁlters (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA)
were spotted with 5 x 5 µl spots of agar medium (either 1/10
R2A or VL55). To each agar spot 5 µl of TB34 solution at
OD600=1.0 or OD600=0.1 was added and the ﬁlter papers
were placed in small mesh pouches. The ﬁlter-pouches were
pre-incubated for either 0 days (meaning no incubation) or
3 days at 20°C. Lastly, the ﬁlter-pouches were transferred
to new petri dishes and covered with soil. Filters were in-
cubated in the soil for 4, 8, or 12 days at 20°C before "har-
vest". Three replicates of each combination of media, TB34
concentration, pre-incubation time and soil incubation time
were made. Control ﬁlters were made with either 1/10 R2A
or VL55 media (3 of each), no TB34 was added, they were
pre-incubated for 3 days and incubated in soil for 4 days.
Controls for 1/10 R2A and VL55 media were named R0-4C
and V0-4C, respectively
The soil used for soil incubation was topsoil (0-25 cm) col-
lected from a maize ﬁeld located a few km west of Hornslet,
Denmark (56°18’39.9” N, 10°14’33.1” E). The soil was sandy
loam (pH: 5.5, N: 1.5 g kg-1, P: 44 g kg-1, K: 148 g kg-1, Mg:
49 g kg-1). Before use, water was added to soil to reach a
water content of 14 % w/w.
Harvest of ﬁlters
After incubation for 4, 8, or 12 days the ﬁlters were removed
from the soil, taken out of their mesh bags and placed in 5
mL of 0.9% NaCl. Filters were sonicated for 2x2min and a
few mL of the sonicated solution was diluted 10x. Both the
diluted and undiluted solutions were then plated into sep-
arate 1/10 R2A or VL55 agar plates (Depending on which
media had been used on the ﬁlter from which the solution
originated). Bacterial growth on the agar plates was deter-
mine after 7 days of growth at room temperature.
8.2
Exp 2 - Screening in liquid media
Equipment
All measurements of OD600 and GFP expression were made
using the FLUOstar OPTIMA (BMG Labtech GmbH, Or-
tenberg, Germany) with software version 5.11 R3.
Exp 2.1 - Liquid media screening
96-well microplates were prepared with each well containing
200 µL of R2A broth supplemented with 50 µg/ml nystatin
for fungal inhibition. Up to 28 colonies from each of the R2A
and VL55 agar plates were transferred to the microplates so
that colonies from all three replicates of a ﬁlter were located
in the same microplate. There was one replicate of each iso-
late. The microplates were set to incubate for 16 hours at
28°C. GFP expression and OD600 was measured before and
after incubation at 495nm and 600nm, respectively.
Exp 2.2 - Co-growth assays with TB34
From the microplates in Exp 2.1 isolate cultures with an
OD600 above 0.1 and a low GFP expression were transferred
to a new 96-well microplate along with TB34. To each well
100 µl of TB34 at OD600=0.1 (∼107 cells) was added along
with a similar number of cells from the soil isolate cultures
(That is, if the OD600 of an isolate culture in Exp 2.1 was
0.2, then only 50 µl of culture was transferred to the new
plate for Exp 2.2). R2A broth was added to each microplate
well so the total volume was 200 µl. The microplates were
incubated for 48 hours at 28°C. As a control, wells with 200
µl of TB34 (OD600=0.1) were used. OD600 and GFP ex-
pression were measured after 0, 16, 24, 40, and 48 hours. As
this was a quick screening of 1293 soil isolates, every isolate
had just one replicate.
28
==PAGE:29==
8.3
Data handling
Plate reader data
Data collection and blank correction for microplate exper-
iments (Exp 1 and Exp 2) were performed using the Mars
Software analysis tool, Version 3.31 (BMG Labtech GmbH,
Ortenberg, Germany).
Conversion of GFP to relative measure
As an alternative to looking at the absolute GFP expression
of each isolate-TB34 co-culture in Exp 2.2, we chose instead
to look at the relative expression over time. In other words:
Relative to t=0, how much did the GFP expression change
in each culture? The relative measure of GFP was calculated
by Eq. 2 for a given time point n.
GFPrel = GFPt=n/GFPt=0
(2)
Statistics and plots
All data was exported to csv ﬁle format and analyzed us-
ing R version 3.6.1 and RStudio version 1.3.1093 (RStu-
dio, PBC). Plots were made using the tidyverse (https:
//www.tidyverse.org) tools for R.
The statistical analysis was done using R’s built-in package
for statistical functions (stats package version 3.6.1). Sta-
tistical modelling was done using Poisson regression (avail-
able through the glm()-function in the stats package) and
evaluations of the model ﬁt were made using χ2 distributions
available through the pchisq function in R. An R-script
showing the steps of the statistical modelling is included in
Appendix C. Because isolates from only a few ﬁlters with
VL55 media were included in Exp 2.2, regression models
were made using only data from isolates originating from
R2A ﬁlters.
29
==PAGE:30==
References
1.
Roser, M., Ritchie, H. & Ortiz-Ospina, E. World
Population Growth. Our World in Data. https://
ourworldindata.org/world- population- growth
(2013).
2.
Barnosky,
A.
D.
Colloquium
paper:
Megafauna
biomass tradeoﬀas a driver of Quaternary and future
extinctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 11543–
11548 (2008).
3.
Bar-On, Y. M., Phillips, R. & Milo, R. The biomass
distribution on Earth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
115, 6506–6511 (2018).
4.
Ritchie, H. & Roser, M. Land Use. Our World in
Data. https : / / ourworldindata . org / land - use
(2013).
5.
IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Con-
tribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change tech. rep. (IPCC, Geneva, Switzer-
land, 2014), 151. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/
ar5/syr/.
6.
Poore, J & Nemecek, T. Reducing food’s environmen-
tal impacts through producers and consumers. Sci-
ence 360, 987–992 (2018).
7.
Backer, R. et al. Plant Growth-Promoting Rhizobac-
teria: Context, Mechanisms of Action, and Roadmap
to Commercialization of Biostimulants for Sustainable
Agriculture. Front. Plant Sci. 9, 1473 (2018).
8.
FAO. World fertilizer trends and outlook to 2020.
www.fao.org/publications (2017).
9.
Erisman, J. W., Sutton, M. A., Galloway, J., Klimont,
Z. & Winiwarter, W. How a century of ammonia syn-
thesis changed the world. Nat. Geosci. 1, 636–639
(2008).
10.
Galloway, J. N. et al. The Nitrogen Cascade. Bio-
Science 53, 341–356 (2003).
11.
Mendes, R., Garbeva, P. & Raaijmakers, J. M. The
rhizosphere microbiome: signiﬁcance of plant bene-
ﬁcial, plant pathogenic, and human pathogenic mi-
croorganisms. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 37, 634–663
(2013).
12.
Ritchie, H. Agricultural Production. Our World
in
Data.
https : / / ourworldindata . org /
agricultural-production (2020).
13.
FAO. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2020-2029,
330. http://www.fao.org/publications/oecd-
fao - agricultural - outlook / 2020 - 2029 / en/
(2020).
14.
FAO. Faostat Food Supply. http://www.fao.org/
faostat/en/#home (2012).
15.
Ritchie, H. & Roser, M. Crop Yields. Our World in
Data. https://ourworldindata.org/crop-yields
(2013).
16.
The editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. Pyramids
of Giza. Encyclopaedia Britannica. https : / / www .
britannica.com/topic/Pyramids-of-Giza (2020).
17.
Trivedi, P., Leach, J. E., Tringe, S. G., Sa, T. & Singh,
B. K. Plant–microbiome interactions: from commu-
nity assembly to plant health. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
18, 607–621 (2020).
18.
Zhalnina, K. et al. Dynamic root exudate chemistry
and microbial substrate preferences drive patterns in
rhizosphere microbial community assembly. Nat. Mi-
crobiol. 3, 470–480 (2018).
19.
Amine Hassani, M, Durán, P. & Hacquard, S. Micro-
bial interactions within the plant holobiont. Micro-
biome 6, 58 (2018).
20.
Hartman, K. et al. Cropping practices manipulate
abundance patterns of root and soil microbiome mem-
bers paving the way to smart farming. Microbiome 6,
14 (2018).
21.
Berendsen, R. L., Pieterse, C. M. & Bakker, P. A.
The rhizosphere microbiome and plant health. Trends
Plant Sci. 17, 478–486 (2012).
22.
Partida-Martínez, L. P. & Heil, M. The microbe-free
plant: fact or artifact? Front. Plant Sci. 2, 100 (2011).
23.
Redecker, D, Kodner, R & Graham, L. E. Glomalean
fungi from the Ordovician. Science 289, 1920–1921
(2000).
24.
Rosenberg, E. & Zilber-Rosenberg, I. Microbes Drive
Evolution of Animals and Plants: the Hologenome
Concept. mBio 7, 01395–15 (2016).
30
==PAGE:31==
25.
Vandenkoornhuyse, P., Quaiser, A., Duhamel, M., Le
Van, A. & Dufresne, A. The importance of the micro-
biome of the plant holobiont. New Phytologist 206,
1196–1206 (2015).
26.
Saikkonen, K., Nissinen, R. & Helander, M. Toward
Comprehensive Plant Microbiome Research. Front.
Ecol. Evol. 8, 61 (2020).
27.
Hamonts, K. et al. Field study reveals core plant mi-
crobiota and relative importance of their drivers. En-
viron. Microbiol. 20, 124–140 (2018).
28.
Niu, B., Paulson, J. N., Zheng, X. & Kolter, R. Simpli-
ﬁed and representative bacterial community of maize
roots. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, E2450–E2459
(2017).
29.
Fonseca-García, C. et al. The Cacti Microbiome:
Interplay
between
Habitat-Filtering
and
Host-
Speciﬁcity. Front.Microbiol. 7, 150 (2016).
30.
Bulgarelli, D., Schlaeppi, K., Spaepen, S., van The-
maat, E. V. L. & Schulze-Lefert, P. Structure and
Functions of the Bacterial Microbiota of Plants.
Annu. Rev.Plant Biol. 64, 807–838 (2013).
31.
Fitzpatrick, C. R. et al. Assembly and ecological func-
tion of the root microbiome across angiosperm plant
species. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E1157–E1165
(2018).
32.
Santos-Medellín, C., Edwards, J., Liechty, Z., Nguyen,
B. & Sundaresan, V. Drought Stress Results in
a Compartment-Speciﬁc Restructuring of the Rice
Root-Associated Microbiomes. mBio 8 (2017).
33.
Lundberg, D. S. et al. Deﬁning the core Arabidopsis
thaliana root microbiome. Nature 488, 86–90 (2012).
34.
Yeoh, Y. K. et al. Evolutionary conservation of a core
root microbiome across plant phyla along a tropical
soil chronosequence. Nat.Comm. 8, 215 (2017).
35.
Peiﬀer, J. A. et al. Diversity and heritability of the
maize rhizosphere microbiome under ﬁeld conditions.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 6548–6553 (2013).
36.
Chauhan, P. S., Chaudhry, V., Mishra, S. & Nautiyal,
C. S. Uncultured bacterial diversity in tropical maize
( Zea mays L.) rhizosphere. J.Basic Microbiol. 51, 15–
32 (2011).
37.
Xia, X. et al. Eﬀects of tillage managements and maize
straw returning on soil microbiome using 16S rDNA
sequencing. J. Integr.Plant Biol. 61, 765–777 (2019).
38.
Johnston-Monje, D., Lundberg, D. S., Lazarovits, G.,
Reis, V. M. & Raizada, M. N. Bacterial populations in
juvenile maize rhizospheres originate from both seed
and soil. Plant and Soil 405, 337–355 (2016).
39.
Walters, W. A. et al. Large-scale replicated ﬁeld study
of maize rhizosphere identiﬁes heritable microbes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 7368–7373 (2018).
40.
Gomes, E. A. et al. Root-Associated Microbiome of
Maize Genotypes with Contrasting Phosphorus Use
Eﬃciency. Phytobiomes Journal 2, 129–137 (2018).
41.
Agler, M. T. et al. Microbial Hub Taxa Link Host and
Abiotic Factors to Plant Microbiome Variation. PLoS
Biol. 14, e1002352 (2016).
42.
Huang, A. C. et al. A specialized metabolic network
selectively modulates Arabidopsis root microbiota.
Science 364 (2019).
43.
Sasse, J., Martinoia, E. & Northen, T. Feed Your
Friends: Do Plant Exudates Shape the Root Micro-
biome? Trends Plant Sci. 23, 25–41 (2018).
44.
Lareen, A., Burton, F. & Schäfer, P. Plant root-
microbe communication in shaping root microbiomes.
Plant Molec. Biol. 90, 575–587 (2016).
45.
Kudjordjie, E. N., Sapkota, R., Steﬀensen, S. K.,
Fomsgaard, I. S. & Nicolaisen, M. Maize synthesized
benzoxazinoids aﬀect the host associated microbiome.
Microbiome 7, 59 (2019).
46.
Hu, L. et al. Root exudate metabolites drive plant-
soil feedbacks on growth and defense by shaping the
rhizosphere microbiota. Nat. Comm 9, 2738 (2018).
47.
Kobayashi, K. Plant methyl salicylate induces defense
responses in the rhizobacterium Bacillus subtilis. En-
viron. Microbiol. 17, 1365–1376 (2015).
48.
Rodriguez, P. A. et al. Systems Biology of Plant-
Microbiome Interactions. Molecular Plant 12, 804–
821 (2019).
49.
Freeman, S. & Rodriguez, R. J. Genetic Conversion
of a Fungal Plant Pathogen to a Nonpathogenic, En-
dophytic Mutualist. Science 260, 75–78 (1993).
31
==PAGE:32==
50.
Santhanam, R. et al. Native root-associated bacte-
ria rescue a plant from a sudden-wilt disease that
emerged during continuous cropping. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 112, E5013–E5020 (2015).
51.
Mendes, R. et al. Deciphering the Rhizosphere Micro-
biome for Disease-Suppressive Bacteria. Science 332,
1097–1100 (2011).
52.
Donn, S., Kirkegaard, J. A., Perera, G., Richardson,
A. E. & Watt, M. Evolution of bacterial communities
in the wheat crop rhizosphere. Environmental Micro-
biology 17, 610–621 (2015).
53.
Leach, J. E., Triplett, L. R., Argueso, C. T. & Trivedi,
P. Communication in the Phytobiome. Cell 169, 587–
596 (2017).
54.
Barberan, A., Bates, S. T., Casamayor, E. O. &
Fierer, N. Using network analysis to explore co-
occurrence patterns in soil microbial communities.
ISME J. 6, 343–351 (2012).
55.
Peterson, S. B., Dunn, A. K., Klimowicz, A. K.
&
Handelsman,
J.
Peptidoglycan
from
Bacillus
cereus Mediates Commensalism with Rhizosphere
Bacteria from the Cytophaga-Flavobacterium Group.
Appl.Environ. Microbiol. 72, 5421–5427 (2006).
56.
Bogino, P., Oliva, M., Sorroche, F. & Giordano, W.
The Role of Bacterial Bioﬁlms and Surface Compo-
nents in Plant-Bacterial Associations. Int.J.Mol.Sci.
14, 15838–15859 (2013).
57.
Steidle, A et al. Visualization of N-acylhomoserine
lactone-mediated
cell-cell
communication
be-
tween bacteria colonizing the tomato rhizosphere.
Appl.Environ. Microbiol. 67, 5761–5770 (2001).
58.
Richardson, A. E. & Simpson, R. J. Soil microor-
ganisms mediating phosphorus availability update on
microbial phosphorus. Plant physiol. 156, 989–996
(2011).
59.
Naveed, M., Mitter, B., Reichenauer, T. G., Wiec-
zorek, K. & Sessitsch, A. Increased drought stress
resilience of maize through endophytic colonization
by Burkholderia phytoﬁrmans PsJN and Enterobac-
ter sp. FD17. Environ.Exp.Bot. 97, 30–39 (2014).
60.
Rojas-Tapias, D. et al. Eﬀect of inoculation with plant
growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) on amelioration
of saline stress in maize (Zea mays). Appl.Soil Ecol.
61, 264–272 (2012).
61.
Breedt, G., Labuschagne, N. & Coutinho, T. Seed
treatment
with
selected
plant
growth-promoting
rhizobacteria increases maize yield in the ﬁeld.
Ann.Appl.Biol 171, 229–236 (2017).
62.
Sprent, J. I. in Encyclopedia of Soils in the Environ-
ment (ed Hillel, D.) 46–56 (Elsevier, Oxford, 2005).
63.
Chapin, F. S., Matson, P. A. P. A., Vitousek, P. M.
& Chapin, M. C. Principles of terrestrial ecosystem
ecology 2nd ed., 529 (Springer Science and Business
Media, 2011).
64.
Gray,
E.
& Smith,
D.
Intracellular and extra-
cellular PGPR: commonalities and distinctions in
the plant–bacterium signaling processes. Soil Biol.
Biochem. 37, 395–412 (2005).
65.
Laslo, E. et al. Screening of plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria as potential microbial inoculants. Crop
Protection 40, 43–48 (2012).
66.
Sahoo, R. K., Bhardwaj, D. & Tuteja, N. in Plant Ac-
climation to Environmental Stress 403–432 (Springer
New York, New York, NY, 2013).
67.
Vieira Velloso, C. C. et al. Genome-guided insights
of tropical Bacillus strains eﬃcient in maize growth
promotion. FEMS Microbiol.Ecol. 96 (2020).
68.
Szilagyi-Zecchin, V. et al. Identiﬁcation and charac-
terization of endophytic bacteria from corn (Zea mays
L.) roots with biotechnological potential in agricul-
ture. AMB Express 4 (2014).
69.
Finkel, O. M., Castrillo, G., Herrera Paredes, S., Salas
Gonzalez, I. & Dangl, J. L. Understanding and ex-
ploiting plant beneﬁcial microbes. Curr.Opin. Plant
Biol. 38, 155–163 (2017).
70.
Vorholt, J. A., Vogel, C., Carlström, C. I. & Müller,
D. B. Establishing Causality: Opportunities of Syn-
thetic Communities for Plant Microbiome Research.
Cell Host & Microbe 22, 142–155 (2017).
32
==PAGE:33==
71.
Nkebiwe, P. M., Weinmann, M. & Müller, T. Improv-
ing fertilizer-depot exploitation and maize growth
by inoculation with plant growth-promoting bacte-
ria: from lab to ﬁeld. Chem.Biol.Technol.Agric. 3, 15
(2016).
72.
Raymond, N. S. et al. Phosphate-solubilising microor-
ganisms for improved crop productivity: a critical as-
sessment. New Phytologist 229, 1268–1277 (2021).
73.
Prudêncio de Araújo, V. L. V. et al. Bacteria from
tropical semiarid temporary ponds promote maize
growth under hydric stress. Microbiol. Res. 240,
126564 (2020).
74.
Islam, F. et al. Combined ability of chromium (Cr)
tolerant plant growth promoting bacteria (PGPB)
and salicylic acid (SA) in attenuation of chromium
stress in maize plants. Plant Physiol.Biochem. 108,
456–467 (2016).
75.
Li, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, H., Wang, M. & Chen, S. Di-
azotrophic Paenibacillus beijingensis BJ-18 Provides
Nitrogen for Plant and Promotes Plant Growth, Ni-
trogen Uptake and Metabolism. Front.Microbiol. 10,
1119 (2019).
76.
Dobbelaere, S. et al. Eﬀect of inoculation with wild
type Azospirillum brasilense and A. irakense strains
on development and nitrogen uptake of spring wheat
and grain maize. Biology and Fertility of Soils 36,
284–297 (2002).
77.
Egamberdiyeva, D. The eﬀect of plant growth promot-
ing bacteria on growth and nutrient uptake of maize in
two diﬀerent soils. Appl.Soil Ecol. 36, 184–189 (2007).
78.
Krey,
T.,
Vassilev,
N.,
Baum,
C.
&
Eichler-
Löbermann, B. Eﬀects of long-term phosphorus ap-
plication and plant-growth promoting rhizobacteria
on maize phosphorus nutrition under ﬁeld conditions.
Eur.J.Soil Biol. 55, 124–130 (2013).
79.
Pereira, N. C. M. et al. Corn Yield and Phosphorus
Use Eﬃciency Response to Phosphorus Rates Associ-
ated With Plant Growth Promoting Bacteria. Front.
Environ.Sci. 8, 40 (2020).
80.
Herrera Paredes, S. et al. Design of synthetic bacterial
communities for predictable plant phenotypes. PLoS
Biol. 16, e2003962 (2018).
81.
Bell, T., Newman, J. A., Silverman, B. W., Turner,
S. L. & Lilley, A. K. The contribution of species rich-
ness and composition to bacterial services. Nature
436, 1157–1160 (2005).
82.
Singh, M. et al. Complementarity among plant growth
promoting traits in rhizospheric bacterial communi-
ties promotes plant growth. Sci.Rep. 5, 15500 (2015).
83.
Wei,
Z.
et al.
Trophic
network
architecture
of
root-associated
bacterial
communities
determines
pathogen invasion and plant health. Nat. Comm. 6,
8413 (2015).
84.
Van Elsas, J. D. et al. Microbial diversity determines
the invasion of soil by a bacterial pathogen. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 1159–1164 (2012).
85.
Lampis, S., Santi, C., Ciurli, A., Andreolli, M. &
Vallini, G. Promotion of arsenic phytoextraction eﬃ-
ciency in the fern Pteris vittata by the inoculation of
As-resistant bacteria: a soil bioremediation perspec-
tive. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 80 (2015).
86.
Weidner,
S.
et
al.
Bacterial
diversity
ampliﬁes
nutrient-based plant–soil feedbacks. Func.Ecol. 29,
1341–1349 (2015).
87.
Chen, L. et al. Eﬀects of growth-promoting rhizobac-
teria on maize growth and rhizosphere microbial com-
munity under conservation tillage in Northeast China.
Microb.Biotechnol. 0, 1–16 (2020).
88.
Seccareccia, I., Kovács, A. T., Gallegos-Monterrosa,
R. & Nett, M. Unraveling the predator-prey relation-
ship of Cupriavidus necator and Bacillus subtilis. Mi-
crobiol.Res. 192, 231–238 (2016).
89.
Kumar, R. et al. Establishment of Azotobacter on
plant roots: Chemotactic response, development and
analysis of root exudates of cotton (Gossypium hir-
sutum L.) and wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) J.Basic
Microbiol. 47, 436–439 (2007).
90.
Liu, G. et al. Screening, identiﬁcation and application
of soil bacteria with nematicidal activity against root-
knot nematode (Meloidogyne incognita) on tomato.
Pest Manag.Sci. 76, 2217–2224 (2020).
33
==PAGE:34==
91.
Hennessy, R. C. et al. A Screening Method for
the Isolation of Bacteria Capable of Degrading
Toxic Steroidal Glycoalkaloids Present in Potato.
Front.Microbiol. 9, 2648 (2018).
92.
Haiyambo,
D.
H.,
Chimwamurombe,
P.
M.
&
Reinhold-Hurek, B. Isolation and Screening of Rhizo-
sphere Bacteria from Grasses in East Kavango Region
of Namibia for Plant Growth Promoting Characteris-
tics. Curr.Micriobiol. 71, 566–571 (2015).
93.
Ghodsalavi, B. et al. A novel baiting microcosm ap-
proach used to identify the bacterial community as-
sociated with Penicillium bilaii hyphae in soil. PLoS
ONE 12 (2017).
94.
Kehe, J. et al. Massively parallel screening of syn-
thetic microbial communities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 116, 12804–12809 (2019).
95.
Kiesewalter, H. T., Lozano-Andrade, C. N., Strube,
M. L. & Kovács, A. T. Secondary metabolites of
Bacillus subtilis impact the assembly of soil-derived
semisynthetic bacterial communities. Beilstein J. Org.
Chem. 16, 2983–2998 (2020).
96.
Becher,
P.
G.
et al.
Developmentally
regulated
volatiles geosmin and 2-methylisoborneol attract a
soil arthropod to Streptomyces bacteria promoting
spore dispersal. Nat.Microbiol. 5, 821–829 (2020).
97.
Bridier, A., Meylheuc, T. & Briandet, R. Realistic
representation of Bacillus subtilis bioﬁlms architec-
ture using combined microscopy (CLSM, ESEM and
FESEM). Micron 48, 65–69 (2013).
98.
Blake, C., Christensen, M. N. & Kovács, A. T. Molec-
ular Aspects of Plant Growth Promotion and Protec-
tion by Bacillus subtilis. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact.
34, 15–25 (2021).
99.
Oberpaul, M. et al. High-Throughput Cultivation for
the Selective Isolation of Acidobacteria From Termite
Nests. Front.Microbiol. 11, 2830 (2020).
100.
Sangwan, P., Kovac, S., Davis, K. E. R., Sait, M. &
Janssen, P. H. Detection and Cultivation of Soil Ver-
rucomicrobia. Appl.Environ. Microbiol. 71, 8402–8410
(2005).
101.
Shaner, N. C. et al. Improved monomeric red, orange
and yellow ﬂuorescent proteins derived from Disco-
soma sp. red ﬂuorescent protein. Nat.Biotechnol. 22,
1567–1572 (2004).
102.
Shapiro, J. A. The Use of Mudlac Transposons as
Tools for Vital Staining to Visualize Clonal and
Non-clonal Patterns of Organization in Bacterial
Growth on Agar Surfaces. Microbiology 130, 1169–
1181 (1984).
103.
Ram, Y. et al. Predicting microbial growth in a mixed
culture from growth curve data. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 116, 14698–14707 (2019).
104.
Temkin, M. I., Carlson, C. M., Stubbendieck, A. L.,
Currie, C. R. & Stubbendieck, R. M. High Through-
put Co-culture Assays for the Investigation of Micro-
bial Interactions. JoVE, e60275 (2019).
34
==PAGE:35==
Appendices
A
Additional results
Fig S1: Percentage of agar plates from each group of ﬁlters that showed bacterial growth. Solutions from each ﬁlter were plated onto either
1/10 R2A or VL55 agar plates. Bacterial growth was validated after 7 days of incubation at room temperature. The soil incubation time of
each ﬁlter is not shown.
Liquid cultures - choice of media
In order to choose which liquid media should be used for the cultures in Exp 2, a small comparison experiment was carried
out. In a microplate well, TB34 was grown in medias LB, R2A, VL55 and DFM, each in both undiluted and 10x dilution
leading to a total of eight diﬀerent medias. Three replicates for each well were made, including controls to which TB34
was not added (Fig S2). From the shown results, it was decided that R2A was the best media for our purposes. This was
because R2A allowed for relatively high growth, had a low signal in the GFP expression wavelength range and because
R2A media is cheap and easy to make requiring only R2A powder and water (Table S2).
35
==PAGE:36==
Fig S2: Growth curves of TB34 grown in diﬀerent 8 medias and across three distinct measures. A) OD600 - Absorbance at 600 nm, B) GFP
expression measured in arbitrary ﬂuorescence units (a.f.u.) C) OD600 / GFP measured in arbitrary combined units (a.c.u.)
Fig S3: Percentage of colonies from each R2A ﬁlter that grew above an OD600 of 0.1. OD600 was measured in liquid R2A medium after 16
hours of growth. Due to some sloppy data handling, the percentages for isolates from VL55 ﬁlters were not available.
36
==PAGE:37==
Fig S4: GFP expression of colonies (Isolate) compared to a TB34 control with OD600=0.1. GFP is shown here in arbitrary ﬂuorescence units
(a.f.u.). Outliers in the "Isolate" group have been colored red. Outliers were all suspected to be TB34 and not novel soil isolates.
Fig S5: The measured GFP expression of all the controls (TB34) from the co-culture screening - Exp 2.2. Each "column" shows the distribution
of the controls at ﬁve given time points (0, 16, 24, 40, and 48 hours) for the controls in a speciﬁc microplate. Data at t=16 for microcosms
R3-12L, R3-12H and V0-4L as well as t=40 for microcosms R3-4H, R3-8L and R3-8H does not exist. GFP is shown here in arbitrary ﬂuorescence
units (a.f.u.)
37
==PAGE:38==
Fig S6: Co-cultures over time. A) GFP expression of TB34 controls and soil isolates. GFP is shown here in arbitrary ﬂuorescence units (a.f.u.)
B) OD600 - optical density at 600nm for TB34 controls and soil isolates.
Fig S7: Change in GFP expression for co-cultures from 3 ﬁlters over 48 hours. Only three ﬁlters are shown here to give a simpler, clearer
overview, however, they are still representative of the remaining data. A) Using an absolute measure of GFP expression. The value on the
y-axis is that registered by the microplate reader. GFP is shown here in arbitrary ﬂuorescence units (a.f.u.). B) Using a relative measure of
GFP expression where each time point is compared with t=0. The value on the y-axis is the factor by which the GFP expression has increased
since t=0. That is, 2 corresponds to 200% or an increase of 100%.
38
==PAGE:39==
Fig S8: Distribution of helper isolates when using the relative GFP measure for classiﬁcation. Each dot represents a single soil isolate, and
their GFP expression is measured relative to the mean of the controls in the same microplate.
Fig S9: Percent of TB34-promoting isolates across diﬀerent ﬁlters. The shown percentage indicates the share of isolates from each ﬁlter which
were classiﬁed as TB34-promoting. TB34-promoting isolates were classiﬁed using the relative GFP-measure.
39
==PAGE:40==
B
Medias
R2A agar media (1/10)
Component
Supplier
Amount
R2A agar
Merck (Darmstadt, Germany)
1.82 g
Bacteriological Agar
VWR chemicals (Luewen, Belgium)
13.5 g
Demineralized Water
-
to 1000 mL
Table S1: Recipe for 1L 1/10 R2A agar medium.
R2A broth
Component
Supplier
Amount
R2A
Alpha Biosciences (Baltimore, USA)
3.2 g
Demineralized Water
-
to 1000 mL
Table S2: Recipe for 1L R2A broth
VL55 solid and liquid Media
Component
Supplier
Amount
Solid media
Liquid media
MES
Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, USA)
3.90 g
1.95 g
Bacteriological agar
VWR chemicals (Luewen, Belgium)
30 g
-
20 mM MgSO4 x 7 H2O
Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, USA)
20 ml
10 ml
30 mM CaCl2 x 2 H2O
PanRear Applichem (Darmtstadt, Germany)
20 ml
10 ml
0.2 M citric acid solution†
VWR chemicals (Luewen, Belgium)
5 ml
5 ml
0.2 M maleic acid solution†
Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, USA)
5 ml
10 5 ml
Selenite-tungsten solution
Made in lab
2.00 ml
1 ml
Trace element solution SL10
Made in lab
2.00 ml
1 ml
Demineralized water
-
to 980 ml
to 990 ml
20 mM (NH4)2HPO4
*
Merck (Darmtstadt, Germany)
20 ml
10 ml
Vitamin solution*
Made in lab
1.50 mL
3.0 ml
Table S3: Recipe for 1L VL55 agar medium and VL55 liquid medium with citric and maleic acid as carbon sources. †These liquid solutions were
made from solid acid stocks from the named suppliers. *To be added separately after autoclavation of mixture with remaining components.
40
==PAGE:41==
Additional solutions for VL55 media
Trace element solution SL10
Component
Amount
25% HCl
10 ml
FeCl2 x 4 H2O
1.5 g
CoCl2 x 6 H2O
190 mg
MnCl2 x 4 H2O
100 mg
ZnCl2
70 mg
H3BO3
6 mg
Na2MoO4 x 2 H2O
36 mg
NiCl2 x 6 H2O
24 mg
CuCl2 x 2 H2O
2 mg
Demineralized Water
to 1000 ml
Table S4: Recipe for the Trace element solution SL10 which was
used in the VL55 media.
Vitamin solution
Component
Amount
4-aminobenzoate
13 mg
d-(+)-biotin
3 mg
Nicotinic acid
33 mg
Hemicalcium D-(+)-pantothenate
17 mg
Pyridoxamine hydrochloride
50 mg
Thiamine hydrochloride
33 mg
Cyanocobalamin
17 mg
DL-6,8-thioctic acid
10 mg
Riboﬂavin
10 mg
Folic acid
4 mg
Table S5: Recipe for the Vitamin solution which was used in the
VL55 media.
Selenite-tungsten solution
Component
Amount
NaOH
0.5 g
Na2SeO3 x 5 H2O
3 mg
Na2WO4 x 2 H2O
4 mg
Demineralized Water
to 1000 ml
Table S6: Recipe for the selenite-tungsted solution which was used in the VL55 media.
LB broth (Lennox)
Component
Supplier
Amount
Peptone
BD (le Pont de Claix, France)
10 g
Yeast extract
Fisher Bioreagents (MD, USA)
5 g
NaCl
Merck (Darmstaadt, Germany)
5 g
Demineralized Water
-
to 1000 mL
Table S7: Recipe for 1L LB broth (Lennox)
41
==PAGE:42==
C
Statistical analysis - R script
The data from Exp 2.2 was stored in a R data frame (Fig S10) and was analyzed using R’s suite of tools for generalized
linear models Fig S11.
Fig S10: An overview of the data used for statistical modelling of the eﬀect of various ﬁlter conditions.
## Apply the model
model <- glm(promotor ∼TB34.concentration * Soil.incubation, data = ana_data, family = "poisson")
## Review the outcome
summary(model)
## Review the fit of the model
plot(model)
## Estimate model fit with chi-square distribution
pchisq(94.24, 26, lower.tail=FALSE)
Fig S11: The bit of R code which was used to model the data from Exp 2.2.
42
