==PAGE:1==
Analysis and Optimization of the 
Transient Operation of a Combined 
Ammonia Chiller and Heat Pump Unit  
Dánjal Tórgarð   
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis and Optimization of the Transient Operation of a Combined
Ammonia Chiller and Heat Pump Unit
Master Thesis
January, 2021
By
Author: Dánjal Tórgarð,
s183161
Supervisor: Brian Elmegaard,
be@mek.dtu.dk
Co-Supervisor: Valentin Salgado Fuentes,
vasafu@mek.dtu.dk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Niels Koppels Allé, Building
404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mekanik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The study presented in this thesis has been conducted at the Section of Thermal Energy
under the Department of Mechanical Engineering within the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU. The thesis work has been carried out in the period starting from August
3rd 2020 to January 24th, and represents a workload equivalent to 30 ECTS points.
The study covers the subject of transient behaviour of a chiller and heat pump during
dynamic operation. It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge within the ﬁeld of
thermodynamics and control theory.
I would like to extend my deepest gratitude and appreciation to everyone that has been
involved in making this project a reality. I would like to thank my supervisors for giving
me the opportunity to work with this topic, which has given me a deep understanding
of dynamic modelling and operation of refrigerating systems. To my supervisor, Brian
Elmegaard, thank you for the excellent guidance and supervision during this process, and
all the insightful remarks from our meetings. I would like to express a special thank you
to my co-supervisor Valentin Salgado Fuentes for helping me making this project a reality.
Your persistent eﬀort and ability to adapt to unforeseen circumstances has made it possible
for me to navigate this topic, and your remarkable patience to answer my endless row of
questions is admirable. To my colleagues in Rambøll, thank you for insightful discussion
throughout this period. A special show of gratitude to Anders Carøe for always being
available for debating the control approach. I would like to thank all my fellow students and
professors i have encountered in the Sustainable Energy Master’s program for a wonderful
experience that i will treasure for the rest of my life. To my family and friends, thank you
for being so supportive and urging me to keep working hard, it has made this process a
joyful experience.
Til Natashu, Miru og Auru. Orð kunnu ikki lýsa mítt takksemi fyri, at eg havi tykkum at
koma heim til hvønn dag. Takk fyri alt, við vón um eina spennandi tíð fyri framman.
Kongens Lyngby, January 24, 2021
Dánjal Tórgarð
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
ABSTRACT
The aim of this study is to analyse the transient behavior of a chiller and heat pump
unit during dynamic operation and to optimize the transient performance based on the
insights gained from the analysis. A low charge direct expansion vapour compression cycle
is proposed in a previous study. This system is designed to operate as a combined chiller
and heat pump unit, satisfying process cooling needs with a water supply temperature of 7
℃and simultaneously supplying district heat network with a supply temperature of 60 ℃.
A dynamic model of the proposed system is developed in the software Dymola using the
extended libraries TIL and TIL media. The dynamic model is developed to analyse the
transient response during a dynamic load change, going from a rated capacity of 180 kW to
90 kW and vice-versa. A control approach is developed using a non-predictive method with
a rule based control strategy. The high latent heat of vaporization of ammonia requires
a signiﬁcant amount of energy for ensuring full evaporation of the refrigerant. Thus, a
valve controller superheating setpoint of 10 K is initially used. Steady state analysis of
the system shows that a cooling COP of 2.03 and a heating COP of 2.19 can be achieved.
The analysis shows that dynamic operation of the system does not pose an immediate
risk of having liquid refrigerant exiting the evaporator as the superheating is maintained
during the transient period. The control approach has a time delay, which causes the
compressor controller and district heating pump controller to execute counteracting output
signals during the transient period. This causes subcooling of the refrigerant to occur in
the condenser. To optimize the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump a 5 K and
a 2 K superheating setpoint of the valve controller is implemented. There is no apparent
risk by reducing the superheating setpoint to 5 K, as the refrigerant remains completely
evaporated in the transient period. The suction pressure is increased and the compressor
power uptake is lowered leading to better performance. Using 2 K superheating setpoint a
sudden decline in the temperature of the ammonia exiting the evaporator, causes the valve
controller to saturate rendering the control system unstable. In this scenario an extended
period where refrigerant with quality less than one exiting the evaporator is observed.
It is examined what the impact of increasing the cooling load ramping time has on the
transient response of the system, and it is seen that less volatile behaviour is obtained
throughout the system and the chiller and heat pump unit operates in a more stable
manner. Increasing the ramping time did not mitigate having subcooling in the condenser
as believed, showing that it is more a consequence of the time delay seen in the control
strategy. It is proposed that the compressor performance is mapped from a larger set of
operational data, to improve estimation of the chiller and heat pump performance, and
that a liquid separator model is developed that allows for superheating control strategies.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
NOMENCLATURE
Parameter
α
Heat transfer coeﬃcient [W/m2K]
˙m
Mass ﬂow rate [kg/s]
˙Q
Heat transfer rate [kW]
˙V
Volume ﬂow rate [m3/s]
˙W
Power [kW]
A
Heat transfer area [m2]
e(t)
Controller error signal [-]
h
Speciﬁc enthalpy [kJ/kg]
k
Controller proportional constant [-]
M
Total mass in control volume [kg]
p
Pressure [bar]
R
Thermal resistance [m2K/W]
T
Temperature [℃]
t
Time [s]
Ti
Integrator time constant [-]
U
Overall heat transfer coeﬃcient [W/2K]
V
Volume [m3]
x(t)
Process output [-]
y(t)
Controller output signal [-]
Sub- and superscripts
1
Heat exchanger side 1
2
Heat exchanger side 2
c
Condenser
comp
Compressor
cool
Refrigerating eﬀect
dh
District Heating
e
Evaporator
i
Inlet
is
Isentropic
lmtd
Log mean temperature diﬀerence
loss
Heat loss to ambient
o
Outlet
pc
Process cooling
r
Refrigerant
rt
Response time
sc
Subcooling
sh
Superheating
sink
High temperature reservoir
source Low temperature reservoir
ss
Steady state
start
Start time
w
Water
Fluid constants
ρ
Density [kg/m3]
cp
Speciﬁc Heat Capacity [kJ/kgK]
Abbreviations
COP
Coeﬃcient of Performance
DH
District Heating
DX
Direct Expansion
HPR
High Pressure Receiver
NH3
Ammonia
PC
Process Cooling
SP
Setpoint
Other
∆
Diﬀerence
η
Eﬃciency
v
==PAGE:10==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface and Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
iii
Table of Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of the Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
System Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Load Conditions of Examined Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Objectives of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methods
7
2.1
Design of Chiller and Heat Pump Unit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Mathematical Model of the Refrigeration System . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Assumptions Regarding Design of the Chiller and Heat Pump . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Developing the Dynamic Model of the Chiller and Heat Pump . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
General Overview of the Dynamic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Model Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Initial Conditions and System Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.4
Assumptions Regarding Design of the Dynamic Model . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Control Approach for Chiller and Heat Pump System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.1
Evaluation Criteria of Control Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.2
Control Strategy for Chiller and Heat Pump Operation . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.3
Controller Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.4
Implementing the Controllers in the Dynamic Model . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.5
Verifying the Control Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.6
Assumptions Regarding Control Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Cooling load scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Results
29
3.1
Design of Chiller and Heat Pump Unit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Mathematical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Operational Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.3
Comparison of Mathematical and Operational Model . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Verifying Control of Chiller and Heat Pump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.1
Transient Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.2
Controller Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
vi
==PAGE:11==
Table of Contents
3.3
Transient Response to Dynamic Operation of Chiller and Heat Pump . . . . . . .
37
3.3.1
Ramping Down the Cooling Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.2
Ramping up the Cooling Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Optimizing Dynamic Operation of Chiller and Heat Pump
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4.1
Reducing the Superheating Setpoint of the Valve Controller . . . . . . . .
43
3.4.2
Increasing Cooling Load Ramp Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Discussion
51
5
Conclusion
59
5.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
References
63
A Catalogue Components
65
vii
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Background
The impact of global warming has forced governments and policy makers worldwide to ﬁnd common
ground and to unite to overturn an immanent threat to the global society. In 2015 at the COP
21 in Paris, the United Nations adopted the Paris climate change agreement, which aims to hold
temperatures from increasing more than 2 °C and to pursue a 1.5 °C temperature increase compared
to pre-industrial temperature levels[1]. Several issues need to be addressed to achieve this goal, and
transitioning towards a more renewable energy sector remains one of the critical factors. The policies
of governments around the world have emphasized that the energy sector must shift from relying
on carbon based fuels towards more renewable energy sources. As a consequence of innovation and
signiﬁcant investments in renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar photovoltaics, the share
of renewables in the worlds electricity mix reached 26 % in 2018[2] and are thereby the second
largest electricity producers, mainly consisting of hydro, wind and solar photovoltaics [3]. As the
energy sector transitions to rely more on electricity, and with an increasing share of the electricity
deriving from ﬂuctuating renewable energy sources, there is a need to ﬁnd suitable applications for
various critical tasks within the society. In 2018 the residential sector represented 26.1 % of the ﬁnal
energy consumption in the European Union, with the space and water heating demand constituting
78.4 % of the ﬁnal consumption by end-use purpose[4]. In light of the transition towards an energy
sector relying more on electricity generated from ﬂuctuating renewable energy source, it is expected
that heating and cooling will primarily be supplied by electrically driven applications, making the
overall thermal demand strongly connected to the electrical grid.
The term smart energy system is widely used in connection with this overall trend, and it typically
refers to using sector coupling to be able to utilize the synergies possible by the nature of the
diﬀerent types of energy sources and demand[5]. An integral part for establishing a smart energy
system are the district heating networks, since they enable electrically driven applications, such
as large-scale(+1 MW) heat pumps to generate heat when excess electricity is available, and to
supply it either directly to the customer or to store the heat in thermal energy storages. The
energy eﬃciency of the district heating network is heavily inﬂuenced by the supply and return
temperatures, as well as heat loss to the surrounding soil [6]. This is evident by examining the
development of the district heating networks throughout the years, as they have shifted from steam
based systems to hot water systems, and also by replacing concrete ducts with pre-insulated steel
pipes. With the progression of this development the supply temperatures of the energy producing
units are expected to decrease to a range of 50-60 °C[7].
In recent years several large scale ammonia heat pumps have been connected to the district heating
network in Denmark, marking the ﬁrst steps towards the future energy system. Large scale ammonia
heat pumps are well established and have been used for serving thermal processes for industrial
purposes for many years[8]. Industrial process cooling serves the function of keeping a certain
1
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
space, medium or process within a chosen temperature range. In the process of maintaining the
temperature of the refrigerated space, heat is generated by the compression of the refrigerant
in the chiller unit that must be rejected to the surroundings. The eﬃciency of the refrigeration
unit is correlated to the diﬀerence of the source and sink temperatures, meaning that an increase
in eﬃciency is expected with decreasing temperature lift[9]. Generally, it is therefore desired to
have a low temperature sink for such chiller applications. However, with the decreasing supply
temperatures of the 4th generation district heating networks projected in [7], the option of having
companies with industrial process cooling needs utilizing the excess heat generated by the chillers
to supply thermal energy to the district heating network, might prove to be an attractive option of
sacriﬁcing eﬀectiveness of cooling, in order to provide district heating in addition to the process
cooling. The large industrial sized ammonia systems are already delivering heat to the district
heating networks in Denmark, showing that this is a viable option. However, there could also be
a possibility of incorporating chiller units with lower capacities, since all companies do not have
process cooling needs of this magnitude.
There exists a great variety of small to medium sized chillers (15-200 kW) on the market, and
depending on the intended purpose and operating conditions of the unit, these can be charged with
diﬀerent types of refrigerant. The Montreal protocol for substances that deplete the ozone layer[10]
addresses the phase-out of chloroﬂuorocarbons(CFC) and hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons(HCFC) due to
their ozone depleting potential, and the 2016 Kigali amendment to the Montreal Protocol aims to
have an 80 % reduction of the use of Hydroﬂourocarbons(HFC) by 2047[11], creating the need for
a shift towards more natural refrigerants such as Ammonia and Carbon Dioxide.
Ammonia has a high heat of vaporization, meaning it is well suited for heat transfer[8]. Furthermore,
ammonia is easily manufactured and relatively inexpensive, and as a refrigerant possesses desirable
qualities, such as not having any ozone depleting potential and zero greenhouse warming potenial[8].
Although ammonia has several beneﬁcial qualities as a refrigerant, there are also challenges with
using ammonia. The refrigerant is not compatible with copper, which is the material most typically
used for the components and piping in vapor compression systems of medium sized capacity. Due
to its high latent heat of vapourization the system needs to operate with a signiﬁcant amount
superheating, to ensure that refrigerant exiting the evaporator is fully evaporated. Operating
with a high amount of superheating means that the suction pressure must be suﬃciently low, to
ensure that the heat transfer in the evaporator complies with the second law of thermodynamics.
The low suction pressure causes the compression of the refrigerant to the high pressure side to
result in high refrigerant discharge temperature of the compressor. The incompatibility with
copper and high temperatures in the compressor creates a demand for development of the system
components for chiller units charged with ammonia. Furthermore, ammonia is a toxic substance in
low concentrations in air, and is ﬂammable when mixed with air at a concentration of 16-25 % by
volume[8]. The refrigerant has a self-alarming trait in its pungent smell, thus alerting risks at even
lower concentrations than the hazardous level.
The toxicity is one of the main barriers for reintroducing ammonia systems with small to medium
sized capacity[12]. One method for limiting the safety hazards in case of leakages, is to reduce the
refrigerant charge of the system, as suggested by [13]. An additional advantage of a reduced charge
refrigeration system is the reduction of direct emissions of greenhouse gasses over the lifetime of
the refrigeration system[14]. Designing refrigeration systems with reduced refrigerant charge, also
presents challenges. In general, refrigeration systems suﬀer penalties whenever a loss of refrigerant
2
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
occurs, with the most obvious being the loss of refrigerant and the cost of repair. Initially the
operating eﬃciency declines with decreasing charge, and if the leakage is not detected, the operating
capacity is negatively aﬀected. When the operating capacity is reduced, the system is no longer
able to deliver the required cooling, and thus the customer can experience a loss of product due
to spoilage, ultimately leading to loss of sales[15]. Thus, the consequences of having leaks in a
reduced refrigerant charge system can be even more damaging, since the time span from incremental
decline in operating eﬃciency to loss of product is shortened, due to the low refrigerant inventory.
This increases the demands for quick detection and repair of leaks[15]. Operating for extended
periods of time with decreased eﬃciency contradicts the purpose of reducing direct greenhouse
gas emissions, since the increase in electrical consumption will lead to signiﬁcantly higher indirect
carbon emissions overall[14]. Therefore, the objective of reducing the refrigerant charge of any
system, should not be to have as low charge as possible, but rather to reduce the refrigerant charge,
while securing a stable and eﬃcient operation of the system.
Research shows that the refrigerant charge can be minimized by using compact plate heat exchangers
for the evaporator and condenser, and by ensuring proper implementation of a receiver, resulting
in a signiﬁcant reduction in total refrigerant charge, when compared to similar ammonia systems
that are commercially available[12]. The system proposed in [12] presents a direct expansion low
charge ammonia system operating either in chiller or heat pump mode. The chiller-heat pump unit
presented is designed to either supply process cooling for industrial purposes, or to produce heat for
a district heating network with supply temperatures of 80 °C[12]. It is highlighted in the study that
dynamic simulations of the system for various operating conditions is needed, in order to indicate
if the system is able to operate eﬃciently considering the reduced refrigerant charge design.
A dynamic model of a physical system or process interprets and predicts the continuous expected
output of the physical system when a disturbance is incurred, or operating conditions are altered.
Dynamic models can be used to analyze the system behavior, and to design and optimize the design
of components, to develop control strategies that ensure the desired dynamic system response, or
for fault detection[16]. Since the dynamic model is based on fundamental physics, it is possible to
apply a variety of operating conditions and conﬁgurations of the system, to examine the dynamic
system response when these conditions are applied. The results of a dynamic simulation of the
system proposed in [12] can provide information to whether altering the operating conditions pose
any risks for the operation of the system, and to indicate the impact on the energy eﬃciency when
operating with diﬀerent operating conditions.
1.2
Scope of the Study
Based on the information presented above, the aim of the study is to investigate the transient
performance of a low charge ammonia direct expansion chiller and heat pump unit when controlled
to satisfy process cooling demand and simultaneously supply heating to the 4th generation district
heating network. Furthermore, it is desired to examine methods of optimizing the dynamic operation
of the combined chiller and heat pump unit based on the knowledge gathered regarding the transient
behaviour of the system.
3
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
1.2.1
System Description
The chiller and heat pump unit under examination is a one stage direct expansion vapour compression
system with a high pressure receiver, with a nominal cooling capacity of 180 kW. The system is
composed of ﬁve main components, being the compressor, evaporator and condenser in the form of
plate heat exchangers, an expansion valve and a high pressure receiver. The secondary cycles as
seen in Figure 1.1 represent the process cooling and district heating network, where circulation
pumps are used to control the water ﬂow on the secondary cycles. The control system needed to
enable dynamic operation of the combined chiller and heat pump unit is to be developed, and the
respective components used are presented once the control strategy is deﬁned. The parameters
Figure 1.1. The chiller and heat pump unit is developed based on the system proposed in [12]
used to deﬁne the design conditions of the chiller and heat pump unit is summarized in Table 1.1.
The process cooling conditions are formed on the basis of the European standard EN 14511:2018
for rating test conditions of process chiller[17], and the heating operating conditions are derived
from the prospect of having low-temperature district heating networks as projected by [7].
Parameter
Value
Unit
Cooling capacity
180
kW
Evaporation temperature
0
°C
Inlet/outlet temperature of water in evaporator
12/7
°C
Condensing temperature
60
°C
Inlet/outlet temperature of water in condenser
40/60
°C
Table 1.1. The operating conditions established for the chiller and heat pump unit.
1.2.2
Load Conditions of Examined Scenarios
The transient operation of the chiller and heat pump unit is to be examined for the following
scenarios of varying load conditions. The chiller and heat pump is initially tested for steady state
operation under the given design conditions, to examine if the operation of the dynamic model is
coherent with the design of the system. The dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump unit is
tested by altering the cooling load from rated capacity to a certain part-load operational point, and
vice versa from part-load operation to rated capacity. The transient behaviour is analyzed based
on the response to the cooling load change. The range of the part load operation is dependant
on ensuring stable operation of the chiller and heat pump unit, and is determined in the control
4
==PAGE:17==
1. Introduction
system veriﬁcation process.
1.3
Objectives of the Study
In light of the approach and conditions presented, the objectives of the study are as follows:
1.3.1
Problem Statement
Analyze the transient behavior of a combined chiller and heat pump unit during load changes and
optimize the dynamic operation of the unit to increase energy eﬃciency without compromising
component safety.
1.3.2
Research Questions
Developing a dynamic model
• How can a dynamic model be developed based on the proposed chiller and heat pump unit?
• Does the dynamic model reﬂect a fair representation of the actual operation of the chiller
and heat pump unit?
Control strategy
• What control approach can be implemented for a direct expansion vapor compression system
with the given design conditions?
• Is it possible to develop a control strategy that ensures steady supply temperatures for both
cooling and heating simultaneously?
Transient behaviour
• Which impact does a varying load have on the risk of damage to components in the system?
• How does the rate at which the cooling load is altered aﬀect the operation of the system?
• Does the dynamic operation cause a change in the accumulation of refrigerant in the system
components?
Optimizing the chiller and heat pump performance
• Is it possible to improve the energy eﬃciency of the unit without risking damage to the
components?
• Can optimization of the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump unit be achieved by
altering the control strategy?
5
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
2
METHODS
This section presents the methods used to deﬁne the system and develop a dynamic model, in order
to examine the transient operation of the chiller and heat pump unit. The process of developing
a mathematical model of the system based on the chosen design conditions is stated. The main
physical and thermodynamic relations and equations used to represent the system are presented,
including an elaboration of the most critical assumption taken in constructing the model. Following
this, the process of developing the dynamic model in the Dymola software program[18] is stated.
The control strategy is then presented, covering the evaluation criteria of the dynamic operation of
the chiller and heat pump, the conﬁguration of the control system an the implementation of the
controllers in the dynamic model, and the process of verifying the control strategy. Finally, the
cooling load scenarios tested in this study are presented. A section of the assumptions taken for
each process is presented at the end of each section.
2.1
Design of Chiller and Heat Pump Unit
General Principles and Operation
The principles that constitute the operation of chillers and heat pumps apply to both devices, and
will henceforth be mentioned as the refrigerating system. The refrigerating system is a heat engine,
and the objective of the heat engine is to absorb thermal energy from a low temperature source
reservoir, and transfer the absorbed thermal energy to a high temperature sink reservoir, where the
thermal energy is rejected[9]. In accordance to the second law of thermodynamics, the transfer
of heat from a low temperature source to a high temperature sink is only possible by supplying
additional work or heat, and accounting for the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, the heat rejected to
the sink reservoir must equal the sum of the work input needed to transfer the thermal energy and
the absorbed heat from the source reservoir, assuming no loss of heat to the surroundings[9]. A
refrigeration cycle can be used to facilitate the transfer of heat as indicated by Figure 2.1.
By examining Figure 2.1, one can derive that the energy balance for refrigeration cycle system is as
seen in eq. 2.1.
˙Qsink = ˙Qsource + ˙W −˙Qloss
(2.1)
The performance of the refrigeration unit is typically deﬁned by the coeﬃcient of performance
(COP), which is a measure that shows how many units of work input is needed to deliver the desired
cooling. The theoretical maximum COP is derived from the Carnot principle, which states that
the most eﬃcient system consists of entirely reversible processes, and thus the eﬃciency is solely
determined by the temperature diﬀerence between the source and sink reservoir[9]. However, this
theoretical maximum is under the assumption that the source and sink are an inﬁnite reservoir, and
therefore the temperatures are constant. But since these systems have irreversible processes with
7
==PAGE:20==
2. Methods
Figure 2.1. General principle of the energy balance of a refrigerating system
gliding temperatures the Lorenz cycle can preferably be used to estimate the COP, by using the
values of the logarithmic averages of the temperature of the medium entering and exiting the cold
and warm side respectively[8]. The performance of the refrigeration system is highly eﬀected by the
temperature lift, since more work is needed for compression of the refrigerant as the temperature
diﬀerence is increased. The COP of a refrigeration cycle can be given as seen in eq. 2.2, with the
COP equalling the ratio of the refrigerating capacity compared to the work input.
COP = What you get
What you pay =
˙Qcool
˙W
(2.2)
For this study a one-stage vapour compression refrigeration cycle is used, and the general operation
of the cycle is brieﬂy elaborated in the following text, and illustrated in Figure 2.2. The working
medium, or refrigerant, enters the compressor as a low pressure superheated vapour, and is
compressed to the condenser pressure level and discharged at a relatively high temperature. The
refrigerant enters the condenser where the heat is rejected to the secondary medium. The refrigerant
is desuperheated from gaseous phase to two-phase vapor-liquid mixture where it starts to condensate
and ﬁnally exits as subcooled liquid. The liquid refrigerant is transferred to the high pressure
receiver before entering the expansion device. The refrigerant is throttled down to the evaporation
pressure, where it enters the evaporator at a low temperature and absorbs the heat from the source
medium. The cycle completes as the refrigerant exits the evaporator, and thus the continuous
operation of this cycle maintains the desired temperature in the refrigerated space. The evaporation
temperature of the working medium must be lower than the source medium, and the condensation
temperature of the working medium must be higher than the sink temperature to ensure that the
refrigeration cycle can operate correctly[8].
8
==PAGE:21==
2. Methods
Figure 2.2. The various components of the vapor compression cycle are shown, with the secondary
cycles being represented as the source and sink.
Design Procedure of the Refrigeration System
This section lists in short form the general method for designing a refrigeration system, and can be
used as a reference for the content in the remainder of the section 2.1.
1. Determine the cooling load for the intended purpose using load calculations.
2. Determine the design conditions for the system.
3. Choose refrigeration cycle conﬁguration.
4. Develop a mathematical model of the system.
5. Use the model to determine the state points when operating under design conditions.
6. Use the state points to analyse the feasibility of the design (log p-h diagram, etc.).
7. Use the results from the mathematical model to determine commercially available components.
8. Verify numerical model compared to the operational model.
The cooling load is determined since the system under examination is previously deﬁned, and thus
elaborating on the load calculations is outside the scope of the study. Furthermore, the cycle is
also deﬁned and is a direct expansion one-stage ammonia vapor compression cycle with a high
pressure receiver. A mathematical model is developed, and is presented since the initial values for
the dynamic simulation must be derived from this model. The heat exchangers used in the dynamic
simulation of the model are developed in the software program Dymola [18], and are based on the
geometry of commercially available components. The choice of catalogue compressor and expansion
device is to be determined from the operation of the mathematical model under design conditions.
9
==PAGE:22==
2. Methods
Design Conditions for the Chiller and Heat Pump Unit
Parameter
Deﬁnition
Value
Unit
˙Qe
Cooling load
180
kW
Te
Evaporation temperature
0
◦C
Tc
Condensing temperature
60
◦C
∆Tsh
Superheating
10
K
∆Tsc
Subcooling
0
K
ηis
Isentropic eﬃciency of compressors
0.6
-
Tpc,i
Water inlet evaporator
12
℃
Tpc,o
Water outlet evaporator
7
℃
Tdh,i
Water inlet condenser
40
℃
Tdh,o
Water outlet condenser
60
℃
p
Water pressure from pumps
5
bar
Table 2.1. Design parameters for the mathematical model
2.1.1
Mathematical Model of the Refrigeration System
The performance of the actual system under various design conditions can be derived from de-
veloping a mathematical model of the refrigeration system, and thus a numerical model enables
simple modiﬁcations and optimization of the system prior to constructing the real-life refrigeration
unit. The numerical model is based on the physical and thermodynamic relations between the
components and medium that constitute the system, and is presented in the following text.
Evaporator
The evaporator is the component that facilitates the refrigerant to absorb the heat from the source.
Heat is transferred from the source medium to the refrigerant via heat conduction through the plate
wall, causing the refrigerant to vaporize. The heat transfer must comply with the energy balance,
and thus the energy balance is set for both sides of the evaporator, e. The process cooling medium
is noted as pc, the refrigerant as r, and i and o indicate the direction of the medium ﬂowing to the
inlet and from the outlet respectively.
˙Qe = ˙mpccp,pc(Tpc,i −Tpc,o)
(2.3)
˙Qe = ˙mr(he,o −he,i)
(2.4)
Where ˙m is the mass ﬂow rate, cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity, h is the speciﬁc enthalpy, and T is
the temperature. The overall heat transfer of the heat exchanger is derived as seen in eq. 2.5.
˙Q = UA∆Tlmtd
(2.5)
where ˙Q is the heat ﬂow, A is the total heat transfer area for one side of the heat exchanger, U is
the overall heat transfer coeﬃcient correlating to that area, and ∆Tlmtd is the logarithmic mean
temperature diﬀerence. The log mean temperature diﬀerence is derived presented in eq. 2.6
10
==PAGE:23==
2. Methods
∆Tlmtd = ∆T1 −∆T2
ln( ∆T1
∆T2 )
(2.6)
Where ∆T1 is the temperature diﬀerence of the ﬂows on one side of the heat exchanger and ∆T2 is
the temperature diﬀerence on the other side of the heat exchanger. The heat transfer coeﬃcient is
determined by eq. 2.7.
1
UA =
1
αrAr
+ Rwall +
1
αwAw
(2.7)
where αr and Ar are the heat transfer coeﬃcient and area on the refrigerant side of the plate heat
exchanger. Similarly, αw and Aw are the heat transfer coeﬃcient and area on the water side of the
plate heat exchanger. Finally, Rwall is the thermal resistance of the plate wall. The term for the
inner and outer area can be mitigated since the heat exchanger is a plate heat exchanger and there
is no diﬀerence in the geometry for either side. Also the plate wall resistance is neglicable. Hence,
eq. 2.7 can be reduced to eq. 2.8.
1
U = 1
αr
+ 1
αw
(2.8)
The heat transfer coeﬃcient for both ﬂows in the heat exchanger is determined by the transfer
correlations single- and two-phase ﬂow that are implemented in the evaporator of the dynamic
model. The chosen heat transfer correlation are presented in Section 2.2.2.
Condenser
The condenser is the component that enables the heat absorbed by the refrigerant in the evaporator
to be rejected to the sink reservoir. The refrigerant enters the condenser as a superheated vapor
and is ﬁrst de-superheated until it reaches the dew-point, where it starts to condensate and ﬁnally
leaves the condenser as a liquid. The introduction of the receiver makes it possible to not have any
subcooling in the cycle. The energy balance is deﬁned for both sides of the condenser, c, with the
sink medium representing the district heating load being noted as dh.
˙Qc = ˙mdhcp,dh(Tdh,o −Tdh,i)
(2.9)
˙Qc = ˙mr(hc,i −hc,o)
(2.10)
The equations presenting the overall heat transfer and method of deﬁning the heat transfer coeﬃcient
in the heat exchanger, seen in eq. 2.5 and 2.8, also apply for the condenser in the dynamic model.
Compressor
The main objective of the compressor is to remove the vapor from the evaporator and force it to the
condenser[8], and also to maintain the pressure diﬀerence of the low and high pressure side together
with the expansion device[8]. The compressor power uptake is determined using the energy balance
of the compressor, as seen in eq. 2.11
11
==PAGE:24==
2. Methods
˙W = ˙mr(hcomp,o −hcomp,i)
(2.11)
The compression of the refrigerant from the suction line to the discharge line increases the pressure
and temperature of the medium, resulting in a higher enthalpy value. The enthalpy value at the end
of compression process can be derived by ﬁrst assuming an isentropic compression of the refrigerant,
and then using an isentropic eﬃciency, noted ηis, to ﬁnd the actual enthalpy value. The enthalpy
of the refrigerant as it is discharged from the compressor, is derived as seen in eq. 2.12, assuming
that no heat loss occurs in the compressor.
hcomp,o = hcomp,i + hcomp,o,is −hcomp,i
ηis
(2.12)
However, the outlet enthalpy value that is used in the mathematical model is deﬁned by assigning
a constant discharge temperature for the refrigerant exiting the compressor. This temperature
constraint is determined by the manufacturers of the compressors, and is speciﬁed in the compressor
datasheet seen in Appendix A. The compressor heat loss is determined by the energy balance of
the overall system as seen in eq. 2.1
Throttling Valve
The expansion valve is modelled as an isenthalpic process, thus throttling the pressure from the
high condensation pressure level to the lower evaporation pressure level with the enthalpy remaining
constant.
Performance of the Refrigeration System
Once the energy balances are deﬁned for each control volume of the system, the COP of the system
can be derived. Since the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant is constant throughout the cycle, the
COP is deﬁned by the enthalpy diﬀerences, where the refrigerating capacity is determined by the
enthalpy change of the refrigerant from inlet to outlet of the evaporator, and the work input of
the compressor is deﬁned by the enthalpy change of the refrigerant from inlet to outlet of the
compressor. The heating capacity is determined from the enthalpy diﬀerence of the refrigerant at
the inlet and outlet of the condenser.
Cooling COP =
he,o −he,i
hcomp,o −hcomp,i
(2.13)
Heating COP =
hc,i −hc,o
hcomp,o −hcomp,i
(2.14)
State Points and log P-h Diagram
Once the mathematical model is established, the performance of the system is derived by deter-
mining the enthalpy values for each state point in the cycle. To illustrate the state points, ﬁg.2.3
presents a log P-h diagram of a one stage vapor compression cycle of the same type as used in
this study. To determine the state points, the enthalpy and pressure values are found by the
12
==PAGE:25==
2. Methods
thermodynamic properties of the refrigerant at each state point, by using the information from the
design conditions and by solving the mathematical model.
Figure 2.3. The theoretical performance of the refrigeration cycle can be derived from the state
points.
Given that the evaporation and condensation temperatures are deﬁned as 0 °C and 60 °C respec-
tively, the saturation pressure of ammonia on the low- and high pressure side is 4.29 bar and 26.14
bar, which makes it possible to deﬁne the pressure level of all state points.
Solving the mathematical model provides information of the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant
and the secondary water cycles, which is used to determine which commercially available compo-
nents are to be used in the operational refrigeration cycle. Furthermore, the results of the state
point calculation is used to ﬁnd the initial start values for the initialization of the dynamic simulation.
Component Selection and Finalization of the Refrigeration Cycle
The catalogue components are chosen based on the results of the mathematical model when
operating in steady state under the design conditions. The actual components are incorporated in
the dynamic model in the software program Dymola, and compared to the mathematical cycle.
The implementation of the catalogue components in the dynamic model is possible to the extent of
which parameters the validated model components in the simulation software can have as an input.
Therefore, the dynamic model will only resemble the operation of catalogue components to the
closest extent possible. The limitations of this issue are elaborated and discussed further in the study.
13
==PAGE:26==
2. Methods
2.1.2
Assumptions Regarding Design of the Chiller and Heat Pump
No heat ingress in the suction line - it is assumed that the suction line in the refrigeration
system is perfectly insulated and thus no heat is absorbed by the refrigerant from the surroundings.
This assumptions is rather dependant on the design of the actual refrigeration unit, since some
systems can have a long suction line, making heat ingress a signiﬁcant factor. However, since the
objective of the proposed system is to design a compact system, it is assumed that the distance
between the evaporator and compressor is limited.
Compressor heat loss - The heat loss in the compressor is deﬁned by a constraint on the
discharge temperature of the refrigerant exiting the compressor. Since the temperature constraint is
a condition that will be used for developing the dynamic model, it is also used in the mathematical
model to have comparative results with the dynamic model.
Isenthalpic expansion - The expansion of the refrigerant in the throtling valve is assumed to be
isenthalpic, which is an approach that is customarily used when designing similar systems[8].
Isentropic eﬃciency - The isentropic eﬃciency of the compressor is chosen to being 0.6. This
parameter can certainly have a higher value, however since the objective of the study is to examine
the transient behaviour of the refrigerating unit, the magnitude of the isentropic eﬃciency is not
expected to have a signiﬁcant impact on the transient behaviour of the system.
2.2
Developing the Dynamic Model of the Chiller and
Heat Pump
To conduct a dynamic simulation, it is necessary to develop a mathematical model that represents
the physical system and to deﬁne the simulation criteria that applies to the intended scenario.
The physical system is represented by a set of equations that are based on fundamental physics
and is deﬁned as the mathematical model of the system. The level of accuracy to which the
mathematical model resembles the physical system is achieved, is dependent on the complexity of
the mathematical model. In general, it is desired to have an adequate resemblance of the physical
system without developing an overly complex model[19]. To analyse the transient behaviour of
the chiller and heat pump unit during dynamic operation, a dynamic model is developed in the
object-oriented programming language Modelica[20], using a software program named Dymola[18],
version 2019x, and two extended libraries, TIL[21] and TIL media[22]. TIL includes validated
component models used for simulation of refrigeration systems, and TIL media is an extended
library for ﬂuid property computations [23]. The Dymola program allows for a user interface where
a drag and drop function is used to connect the predeﬁned components, to create a intuitive visual
representation of the system. With the extension of the TIL and TIL media libraries, the Dymola
software program is proved to be well suited for thermodynamic simulations of similar systems,
and is therefore considered a suitable tool for this study[23].
All the components used in the dynamic model are modelled based on mass, energy, and momentum
balance equations. Each ﬁnite volume cell contains a medium retrieved from the TIL media
library and represents the ﬂuid properties of the control volume[23]. The cells are deﬁned by the
conservation laws of mass, energy and momentum as seen in the following equations[23].
14
==PAGE:27==
2. Methods
Mass balance
V dρ
dt = ˙mi + ˙mo
(2.15)
Momentum balance
po = pi −∆pf
(2.16)
Energy balance
dh
dt = 1
M ( ˙mi(hi −h) + ˙mo(ho −h) + ˙Q + V dp
dt )
(2.17)
To perform a dynamic simulation of the mathematical model, it is also necessary to deﬁne the
criteria for the simulation itself, since real time is not interpreted by the simulation program. A
computer is not able to numerically solve any real value function of a real value argument since this
would demand an inﬁnite amount of real time[24]. Therefore, the time dimension of the simulation
must be discretized, so that the amount of time steps is ﬁnite, and the program is able to assign a
value to each time step[24]. The requirements for the computational work increase with increasing
amount of time steps chosen for the simulation[24]. Furthermore, it is impportant to select a
numerical integration solver to solve the simulations, and the default solver DASSL is used in this
study. The simulation time step is set to solve every 0.5 seconds during the simulation run time.
2.2.1
General Overview of the Dynamic Model
The dynamic model developed in Dymola is seen in Figure 2.4. The control system is not included
in this layout and is presented later in this chapter. The general procedure of developing the model
is ﬁrst presented, followed by an in-depth description that clariﬁes the methods and limitations of
each step.
The TIL library has an extensive list of validated model components typically used in refrigeration
systems, and the ﬁrst step is to select the components needed to design the proposed system. When
the components are chosen they are connected as seen in Figure 2.4, with the connectors indicating
the ﬂuid ﬂowing through the system. The blue lines represent liquids, whereas the the green lines
represents Vapour-Liquid equilibrium (VLE) ﬂuids, which in this case is the ammonia refrigerant.
The type of ﬂuids present in the system is chosen in the system information manager seen in the
top right corner of Figure 2.4, and the properties for each selected ﬂuid is deﬁned by the TIL media
library. After completing the conﬁguration of the system using each respective component, it is
necessary to established the boundary conditions governing the system. The temperature and
pressure level at the boundaries of the system are derived from the design conditions of Table 2.1
and are deﬁned in the blue nodes. Once the boundary conditions are established, it is necessary
to deﬁne the initialization parameters for the dynamic simulation. Pressure state elements are
included to set the initial pressure level in the cycle, and the enthalpy values of the refrigerant from
each state point found from the mathematical model is introduced in the heat exchangers, together
with the temperature of the liquid at the inlet and outlet. Furthermore, the mass ﬂow rate of the
refrigerant and liquids, an initial ﬁlling level of the high pressure receiver and the initial opening
degree of the expansion valve must be deﬁned before simulation.
It is possible to simulate the model with the presented information, but the system will be overdeﬁned
since all the components have ﬁxed operating points, which inhibits the refrigeration unit of reaching
an equilibrium operating point. Therefore, the control system must be implemented to enable the de-
sired operation of the unit. The conﬁguration of the control system is presented later in this chapter.
15
==PAGE:28==
2. Methods
Figure 2.4. The dynamic model developed in Dymola, is shown before implementing the control
system.
2.2.2
Model Components
Compressor
The compressor component chosen for the dynamic model is a simple compressor model. The
simple compressor model allows for selecting a parameter variable that can be either ﬁxed or
regulated by user deﬁned input. It is possible to select between having a pressure diﬀerential,
regulating the mass ﬂow rate or the volume ﬂow rate. For this study it is chosen to regulate the
mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant. Furthermore, it is possible to specify a certain discharge condition,
where having a constant discharge temperature of 80 ℃is chosen. Since the simple compressor
model limits the discharge temperature to 80 ℃, the results available from the simulation will only
reﬂect the state of the refrigerant for this speciﬁc temperature and the operating condensation
pressure level. Therefore, it does not account for the actual work needed for compression of the
refrigerant. To account for the compressor power, a linear regression model is constructed based on
the rated performance of an open screw compressor from Bitzer of type OSHA7472-K[25]. The
power consumption of the compressor operating at 50 Hz and 60 Hz under the design conditions is
used to extrapolate the power uptake of the compressor during part-load operation in the dynamic
simulation.
Using the information presented in Table 2.2 the linear regression model seen in eq. 2.18 is used
to derive the power consumption during dynamic simulation, where ˙W is the compressor power
16
==PAGE:29==
2. Methods
Parameter
Unit
50 Hz
60 Hz
Cooling capacity
kW
180,7
218
Power uptake
kW
88.3
106,6
Table 2.2. The cooling capacity and power consumption is derived from the data sheet of the
open screw compressor OSHA7472-K from Bitzer.
uptake and ˙Qe is the cooling load.
˙W = 0.4906 ˙Qe −0.3544
(2.18)
Heat Exchangers
The heat exchangers implemented in the dynamic model are modelled as counterﬂow corrugated
plate heat exchangers. The heat exchanger is discretized in 10 ﬁnite control volumes for both
medium ﬂows as well as the plate wall. The heat exchangers are modelled based on transient
energy- and mass balances. The heat transfer model chosen for the condensation is based on a heat
transfer model using the heat transfer correlation of Longo[26] for both single- and two-phase ﬂow.
The heat transfer model chosen in the evaporator is based on the heat transfer correlation of Shah
and Chen[27] during two-phase ﬂow and Gnielinski, Dittus and Boelter[28] during single-phase ﬂow.
The correlation for the heat transfer coeﬃcient of the water in both the condenser and evaporator
is calculated using the correlation of Martin 1996 [29].
A zero pressure drop model is used for the ﬂows in both heat exchangers. Therefore, the momentum
balance in eq. 2.16 is set to zero. The heat conduction through the plate walls are based on the
geometry of the plate heat exchangers, and the geometry used in the dynamic model is presented
in Table 2.3. The material used for the plates is stainless steel.
Parameter
Unit
Evaporator
Condenser
Outer geometry
Number of plates
-
94
114
Plate length
m
0.538
0.456
Plate width
m
0.272
0.138
Pattern angle
°
35
35
Inner geometry
Wall thickness
mm
0.2
0.45
Pattern amplitude
mm
0.95
0.95
Pattern wave length
mm
7
7
Table 2.3. Geometry of the corrugated plate heat exchangers as implemented in the dynamic
model.
Expansion Valve
The expansion device chosen in the model is an oriﬁce valve model. The regulated parameter of the
oriﬁce valve can be set to either the eﬀective ﬂow area, which is the area of the smallest constriction
in the valve, or the Kv-value, which represents the volume ﬂow rate for a certain pressure loss. For
this study the Kv-value is used as the input signal to the valve, since this value can be found in the
data sheet of most expansion valves.
17
==PAGE:30==
2. Methods
High Pressure Receiver
The component chosen for the receiver tank is a separator model that separates the VLE ﬂuid at
the inlet into a liquid and a gaseous phase. The separator model bases on an ideally mixed volume
and the ﬁlling level is determined from the enthalpy of the volume, derived enthalpy and density of
the ﬂuid in vapour and liquid phase. The tank has a volume of 9 liters, and the initial ﬁlling level
is set to 30 % of the tank volume.
Water pumps
The water pumps used for both the process cooling circuit and the district heating network are
simple pump models. The pumps are regulated by changing the mass ﬂow rate and have a constant
pressure lift of 2 bar. When the simple pump model deﬁnes the mass ﬂow rate, the pressure
diﬀerence is established by other system components in the path, and for this conﬁguration the
pressure increase is deﬁned at the boundary conditions, due to having a zero pressure drop model
for the ﬂow through the heat exchangers.
Chiller and heat pump performance in the dynamic model
Due to the discharge temperature constraint in the simple compressor model components, the
derivation of the performance of the chiller and heat pump unit must be slightly adapted in
comparison to the methods used for the mahematical model. The compressor power is determined
from the linear regression model deﬁned above and the cooling and heating COP is deﬁned as
follows:
Cooling COP =
˙mr(he,o −he,i)
˙W
(2.19)
Heating COP =
˙mr(hcomp,disc −hc,o)
˙W
(2.20)
2.2.3
Initial Conditions and System Boundaries
To initialize the simulation, the system boundary conditions must be established, and the initial
values of the system operating under design conditions must be deﬁned. The boundary conditions
of the system are in large part stated in Table 2.1. The temperature values of the process cooling
network are set to 12 ℃and 7 ℃for return and supply line respectively, having a pressure level
of 3 bar on the return line and 5 bar on the supply line. The temperature values of the district
heating network is set to 40 ℃for the return line and 60 ℃for the supply line. The pressure level
is also 3 bar at the return line and 5 bar at the supply line.
Pressure state elements
The pressure state elements enable the selection of the initial pressure level of the heat exchangers
and the high pressure receiver, and is indicated by a pressure ID, which corresponds to the high or
low pressure level. Pressure state 1 is set to a pressure level of 26.14 bar and pressure state 2 is set
to a pressure level of 4.29 bar.
Initialization of components
The compressor has an initial refrigerant mass ﬂow rate of 0.18 kg/s, and the mass ﬂow rate of
18
==PAGE:31==
2. Methods
the water from the process cooling and district heating pumps is set to 8.58 kg/s and 2.32 kg/s
respectively.
The heat exchangers are initialized by setting the values for enthalpy of the refrigerant at inlet and
outlet, as well as the pressure state. For the condenser the enthalpy value for inlet and outlet is
1710 kJ/kg and 637.5 kJ/kg respectively, with pressure state ID of 1. The initial enthalpy value in
the evaporator is set to 1633 kJ/kg and 637.5 kJ/kg for inlet and outlet respectively, with pressure
state ID of 2. The temperature of the liquid at the inlet and outlet of the heat exchangers are the
same as those deﬁned in the system boundaries.
The opening degree of the valve is dependant on the Kv- value, which is set to 0.25. Finally, the
high pressure receiver is set to have an initial ﬁlling level of 30 % of the total volume, with a
pressure state ID of 1.
2.2.4
Assumptions Regarding Design of the Dynamic Model
• It is assumed that the power consumption of the compressor during part load operation can
be extrapolated by linear correlation of the change in frequency, with 50 Hz representing
rated capacity. Rated capacity represents a mass ﬂow rate of 0.18 kg/s and it is assumed
that the frequency change is directly proportional to the change in mass ﬂow rate. Thus
it is assumed that the compressor control can regulate the mass ﬂow rate as it is directly
proportional to the frequency.
• By using the zero pressure drop model in both heat exchangers it is assumed that the impact
of this is negligible during the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump unit.
• The amount of control volumes cells speciﬁed in the heat exchanger models is assumed to be
suﬃcient for the dynamic simulation. More cells increase the precision of the temperature
development, but demands more computational power. For the purpose of the study, it is
assumed that the amount of cells chosen provides suﬃcient precision and increasing the
amount cells does not deliver any substantially diﬀerent outcome.
2.3
Control Approach for Chiller and Heat Pump System
This section describes the approach and methods used to develop a control strategy for dynamic
operation of the chiller and heat pump unit. First, the evaluation criteria for assessing the control
strategy is determined. Thereafter follows the reasoning for the control strategy used, with the
design of the controllers and implementation of these in the dynamic model, before listing the
assumptions taken regarding the control approach.
2.3.1
Evaluation Criteria of Control Strategy
The control strategy for the dynamic operation of the chiller is evaluated based on the presented
criteria in the following section, both to ensure that the simulated model behaves in a manner that
upholds the laws of physics, and to determine if the chiller is suited for ﬂexible operation and is
able to satisfy the desired design conditions.
19
==PAGE:32==
2. Methods
Chiller response time
The response time is deﬁned as the period from when the ramping is incurred to when the system
converges to within a certain percentage of the altered set point[19]. The response time in this
study is determined from the change in cooling load, ˙Qe, from rated capacity of 180 kW to a certain
part load operation of the chiller and heat pump unit. The system is assumed to have reached
steady state once the evaporator cooling load reaches the altered set point and the oscillations do
not exceed a tolerance of 2% of the altered set point. Since the response time depends on several
factors, the aim is to have a reasonable response time as a reaction to the dynamic cooling load.
The success criteria for the response can therefore be discussed based on the utility of the chiller
and heat pump unit.
∆trt = tstart −tss
Ensuring complete evaporation of refrigerant in the evaporator
Sudden changes in the cooling load can cause the temperature of the refrigerant exiting the
evaporator to change quickly. Since the refrigerant temperature rises faster than the temperature
at the pipe wall, due to the thermal inertia of the piping material, formation of droplets can occur
in the suction line. The formation of droplets in the suction line can be harmful for the compressor,
and therefore it is essential to maintain a certain amount of superheating of the refrigerant in the
evaporator during load changes. Due to the high latent heat of vaporization of ammonia, it is
chosen that the chiller and heat pump unit should maintain superheating of greater than 1 K during
transient operation to ensure that the refrigerant exiting the evaporator is completely evaporated.
∆Tsh ≥1K
Receiver ﬁlling level
To ensure that the refrigerant entering the expansion device does not have any vapour bubbles,
the high pressure receiver shall maintain a ﬁlling level of at least 10 % of the vessel volume during
dynamic operation. Additionally, the ﬁlling level should not exceed 90 % of the vessel volume as
this could cause refrigerant to accumulate in the condenser, which decreases the available heat
transfer area of the condenser, and ultimately reduces the ability to reject the thermal energy to
the sink.
10 ≤HPR ﬁlling level ≤90
[% of vessel volume]
Performance of chiller and heat pump
The objective of the control for the chiller and heat pump operation is to maintain a constant supply
temperature of 7 ℃for the process cooling network and 60 ℃for the district heating network. The
variation in cooling load will cause short term deviations from the setpoint, but the chiller and heat
pump must be able to converge to the design criteria within a reasonable timeframe. Furthermore,
the chiller and heat pump must be able to meet the design conditions when operating in steady
state condition. The temperature measurements from both heat exchangers are also examined to
ensure that the dynamic operation complies with the laws of thermodynamics.
20
==PAGE:33==
2. Methods
2.3.2
Control Strategy for Chiller and Heat Pump Operation
The control structure developed for this study is seen in Figure 2.5. The ﬁrst priority of the
refrigeration unit is to satisfy the cooling demand, and secondly to maintain a constant temperature
on the sink side of the condenser outlet to the district heating network. Therefore, the components
that can be controlled are regulated based on these priorities. The approach implemented in this
study is a non-predictive method with rule based control, which are typically used for similar
systems[30]. This approach uses real time measurement values from sensors to regulate the controller
output for each time step. The process cooling water pump has a constant mass ﬂow rate of
8.58 kg/s, which is derived from the design of the mathematical model. This means that the
dynamic cooling load is experienced by the chiller and heat pump unit as a variation in the
return temperature of the process cooling network, with a constant mass ﬂow rate of water. The
compressor is controlled by measuring the process cooling supply temperature and regulating the
mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant, thereby indirectly maintaining a constant supply temperature
on the evaporator source side. To protect the refrigeration unit from having liquid exiting the
evaporator, the volume ﬂow rate through the expansion valve is controlled, to keep a certain amount
of superheating in the evaporator. The superheating is determined by measuring the evaporation
pressure, which correlates to a certain saturation temperature of the refrigerant, and ﬁnding the
temperature diﬀerence relative to the outlet temperature of the evaporator. The mass ﬂow rate of
the refrigerant is determined by the compressor controller, and therefore the temperature of the
outlet of the condenser on the sink side is regulated by the district heating water pump. The pump
alters the mass ﬂow rate of the water based on temperature measurements of the district heating
water supply, aiming at keeping the temperature at 60 ℃.
Figure 2.5. Controlled components and sensor conﬁguration used to execute the control strategy.
2.3.3
Controller Design
The controllers used in the system are based on the closed loop control principle, which is presented
in Figure 2.6. The process or plant receives an input, y(t), causing a system response, which
produces an output, x(t). This output signal is measured by a sensor, which then compares the
measured value with the desired setpoint. The resulting error, e(t) is then fed to the compensator
or controller, which uses the error signal to generate a new input signal to the plant, with the
21
==PAGE:34==
2. Methods
intention of reaching the desired operational point. The output signal is measured continuously,
and the operation of the system depends on several factors, such as the transient response of the
system, the size of the error, the design of the controller, and time interval of the measurement
points[19].
Figure 2.6. Schematic diagram of a generic closed loop control system.
There exists a great variety of controllers, but for this study all controllers are chosen as PI-
controllers. PI-controllers have a proportional term and an integral term as seen in eq. 2.21, and
the role of the proportional gain is to force the system to react faster by scaling the error with a
proportional constant, k.
y(t) = ke(t) + k
Ti
Z
e(t)dt
(2.21)
Increasing the proportional constant result in faster response, but also causes higher oscillations in
the system response, which ultimately can force undesired operation of the system. Additionally, the
proportional term induces a steady state error, and thus an integral term is used to eliminate this
error[19]. The time constant of the integral term, Ti, can be seen as a parameter that determines
the speed of the controller. Having a very small time constant can cause higher overshoot and will
make the system response take longer before the oscillations converge to the operational point. The
larger the time constant the slower the response of the controller, and thus there exists a range
for the time constant, in where the system operates as intended. The system response is therefore
heavily inﬂuenced by the tuning of these controller parameters, and must be properly designed for
the intended purpose.
The controllers are tuned manually, where the integral term is initially neglected and the proportional
gain is introduced at low values and is gradually increased until the proportional gain makes the
process response oscillate. At this point the integral term is introduced with a high value for the
time constant, which is gradually reduced until the controller output results in a desirable process
response. At this point the controller parameters can be tuned to improve the process response,
so they comply with the evaluation criteria of the control strategy. The controllers used in the
dynamic model are presented in Table 2.4.
22
==PAGE:35==
2. Methods
Parameter
Compressor control
Valve control
DH pump control
Type
PI
PI
PI
Measured variable
Tpc,o
TSH
Tdh,o
Regulated variable
˙mr
Kv
˙mc,w
Controller set point
7 ℃
10 K
60 ℃
k
6e-2
5e-3
0.8e-2
Ti
0.65
5
1.2
Initial output
0.18
0.25
2.36
Maximum output
0.30
1
3.5
Minimum output
0.08
0.02
0.5
Table 2.4. The controller parameters used in the dynamic model are tuned manually.
2.3.4
Implementing the Controllers in the Dynamic Model
The conﬁguration of the control strategy in the dynamic model is seen in Figure 2.7. The grey
boxes represent the setpoint of the controllers and the dark blue lines indicate the signalling to
and from the controller. Temperature sensors from the TIL component catalogue are used for
measurements for the compressor and district heating water pump control. A superheating sensor
is chosen from the catalogue where the calculation of the temperature diﬀerence between saturation
temperature and outlet temperature is processed in the component.
An addition to the conﬁguration of the process cooling network is implemented, to enable the
introduction of a dynamic cooling load. A pipe is implemented with an arbitrary length of 1 m, and
it is assumed that there is no pressure drop through the pipe. The pipe has an option of allowing
for heat conduction through the pipe wall, which enables the use of having a thermal resistor and a
heat boundary to simulate a user deﬁned cooling load. The boundary condition of the return line
in the process cooling network is changed to having a temperature of 7 ℃, since the cooling load
that is introduced via the heat resistor raises the temperature depending on the magnitude of the
user deﬁned cooling load.
23
==PAGE:36==
2. Methods
Figure 2.7. Schematic layout of developed model in Dymola with sensors and controllers.
2.3.5
Verifying the Control Strategy
The control strategy is veriﬁed by testing how the system responds to certain cooling load proﬁles.
Initially the system should be tested for steady state operation, to examine if the chiller and heat
pump operates as expected under steady state conditions. The transient response is subsequently
tested, and for this process it is chosen to test two scenarios. In the ﬁrst scenario the capacity of the
compressor is ramped down in steps of 10%, going from rated capacity to 50% capacity, as seen in
Figure 2.8. For the second scenario the cooling load is ramped down from rated capacity to a certain
part load capacity, and then ramped up again to rated capacity. This is repeated for ﬁve diﬀerent
levels of part load capacity, as seen in Figure 2.9. The transient response under dynamic operation
of the chiller and heat pump unit indicates the range in which the chosen control strategy is tech-
nically feasible, and if the chiller and heat pump unit is able to satisfy the established design criteria.
24
==PAGE:37==
2. Methods
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Time [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Cooling Load [kW]
Figure 2.8. First scenario for veriﬁcation of the control strategy
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000 5500
Time [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Cooling Load [kW]
Figure 2.9. Second scenario for veriﬁcation of the control strategy
2.3.6
Assumptions Regarding Control Approach
• The thermal inertia of the piping material is not accounted for in the dynamic simulation,
which can enable the model to converge rather quickly compared to an actual physical system.
The sensors are typically placed on the outside of the piping, giving a certain amount of lag
in the temperature measurements since the heat must ﬁrst be transferred via conduction
through the pipe walls and thus the temperature changes rather slowly. The scope of the
study is to test the ﬂexible operation of the chiller and heat pump and the thermal inertia is
25
==PAGE:38==
2. Methods
assumed to have negligible impact on the operation.
• Compressor and pumps are not frequency controlled, and thus the mass ﬂow rate is directly
regulated. This leads to a faster response, and is not typically a parameter that can be
regulated directly. However, the constraint on temperature of the refrigerant at the discharge
line limits the choice of compressors available in the software, and the chosen compressor can
not be frequency controlled. A mathematical model of a compressor should be developed
in Modelica to enable this feature to gain a more realistic control approach. Developing
numerical models of components is outside the scope of the study and is therefore not included.
2.4
Cooling load scenarios
The analysis of the transient behaviour of the chiller and heat pump unit is conducted using the
cooling load input signal shown in Figure 2.10. The cooling load follows a step function going from
rated capacity of 180 kW to 90 kW after 500 seconds. The cooling load is kept constant at 90 kW
until 1100 seconds, where it is increased to 180 kW or rated capacity.
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
Time [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Cooling Load Input [kW]
Cooling load step signal
Figure 2.10. Cooling load input implemented in the analysis of the transient behaviour
To examine the eﬀect of altering the ramping time of the cooling load on the transient response
of chiller and heat pump unit, the cooling load input shown in Figure 2.11 is implemented. The
cooling load ramping times tested are 20, 60, 100, and 200 seconds. The analysis is only conducted
for the decreasing cooling load.
26
==PAGE:39==
2. Methods
500
550
600
650
700
750
Time [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Cooling Load Input [kW]
Cooling load ramping time
Step
20 s
60 s
100 s
200 s
Figure 2.11. Cooling load input implemented for analysing the impact of increasing the cooling
load ramping time.
27
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
3
RESULTS
The results of the study is presented in the following section. The design of the mathematical
model is compared to the developed dynamic model under steady state conditions, highlighting the
key diﬀerences. Following this, the veriﬁcation process of the control approach is presented. The
transient response of the chiller and heat pump unit during load change is presented and analysed,
before applying methods for optimizing the dynamic operation of the unit.
3.1
Design of Chiller and Heat Pump Unit
3.1.1
Mathematical Model
The results of the mathematical model of the refrigeration cycle are derived using the design
conditions given in Table 2.1 and presented in this section. The result are presented in Table 3.1
and given for an ideal refrigeration cycle where isentropic compression is assumed, and a cycle where
isentropic eﬃciency of the compressor and the constraint of the compressor discharge temperature
is applied.
Parameter
Notation
Unit
Ideal Cycle
Real cycle
Enthalpy at state point 1
h1
kJ/kg
1633.7
1633.7
Enthalpy at state point 2
h2
kJ/kg
1922.5
2115.0
Enthalpy at state point 2 discharge
h2,disc
kJ/kg
(-)
1710.1
Enthalpy at state point 3
h3
kJ/kg
637.5
637.5
Enthalpy at state point 4
h4
kJ/kg
637.5
637.5
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
˙mr
kg/s
0.18
0.18
Evaporator water mass ﬂow rate
˙me,w
kg/s
8.59
8.59
Evaporator water volume ﬂow rate
˙Ve,w
m3/h
30.94
30.94
Condenser water mass ﬂow rate
˙mc,w
kg/s
2.31
2.31
Condenser water volume ﬂow rate
˙Vc,w
m3/h
8.48
8.48
Heating capacity
˙Qc
kW
232.18
193.80
Cooling performance
COPc
-
3.45
2.07
Heating performance
COPh
-
4.45
2.23
Table 3.1. The results of the mathematical model showing the ideal cycle and the actual cycle
where the isentropic eﬃciency and temperature constraint on the discharge line is
used.
The steady state operation of the refrigeration cycle under design conditions is shown in the log
P-h diagram in Figure 3.1, where the blue full line represents the ideal refrigeration cycle and the
red dotted line represents the refrigeration cycle with isentropic eﬃciency of 0.6. The compressor
discharge temperature constraint of 80 °C is not seen on the log P-h diagram, thus the red dotted
line does not show the actual heating capacity of the chiller and heat pump unit.
29
==PAGE:42==
3. Results
The ideal refrigeration cycle has signiﬁcantly higher COP values for both heating and cooling at
3.45 and 4.45 respectively, compared to the real refrigeration cycle with cooling and heating COP
of 2.07 and 2.23 respectively. The heating capacity of the real cycle is lower for the real cycle due
to the constraint on the discharge temperature, which results in a lower enthalpy value for the
refrigerant when entering the discharge line. Introducing the isentropic eﬃciency of the compressor
to the model increases the compressor work needed to operate the refrigeration cycle, and thus the
combination of decreased heating capacity coupled with the increased work needed reduces the
overall performance of the refrigeration unit.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
h [ kJ/kg ]
100
101
102
P [ bar ]
Figure 3.1. The ideal refrigeration cycle is calculated assuming isentropic compression, thus
showing the theoretical limits of the designed system. The real refrigeration accounts
for the isentropic eﬃciency of the compressor. The constraint on the discharge
temperature is not seen in this diagram, thus the heating capacity can not be seen in
depicted cycle.
3.1.2
Operational Model
In this section the results of implementing catalogue components in the dynamic model are
presented.
Based on the design conditions established, the compressor is selected using the Bitzer selection
tool software[25]. The compressor should be compatible with ammonia and have a cooling capacity
of at least 180 kW. A Bitzer open screw compressor with model number OSHA7472-K is chosen, see
Appendix A for further details. Due to the limitations of the simple compressor model in the TIL
model component library, and since the mass ﬂow rate is deﬁned by the controller output signal,
the only relevant input from the catalogue compressor is the temperature constraint of 80 ℃.
The heat exchangers chosen from the catalogue are both plate heat exchangers from SWEP, with
the evaporator being a model P250ASHx94/1P and the condenser being a model b25Thx114/1p,
see Appendix A. The geometry of the chosen heat exchangers are deﬁned in the heat exchanger
model component in the dynamic model. The valve and water pumps are implemented in the
30
==PAGE:43==
3. Results
dynamic model in a manner that does not require deﬁning a speciﬁc catalogue component. The
results of the operational model during steady state conditions is presented in the following section.
3.1.3
Comparison of Mathematical and Operational Model
The operational model developed in the dynamic simulation software Dymola based on validated
component models and actual catalogue component parameters, are compared to the theoretical
cycle under steady state operation. In the theoretical model the evaporation and condensing
temperature are deﬁned as an input to the model, together with the inlet and outlet temperature
on the water side of both heat exchangers. Furthermore, the isentropic eﬃciency is estimated,
and based on this information it is possible to derive the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant and the
water. Ultimately the compressor work and heating capacity can then be derived, leading to the
heating and cooling COP of the cycle. In contrast, the operational model is determined based on
the information gained from the mathematical model, and once the components are chosen, the
operational parameters will change due to the design and performance of the components. The
results of the mathematical- and operational model are presented in Table 3.2.
Parameter
Notation
Unit
Mathematical
Operational
Evaporation temperature
Te
°C
0
-3.56
Condensing temperature
Tc
°C
60
61.06
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
˙mr
kg/s
0.181
0.185
Evaporator water mass ﬂow rate
˙me,w
kg/s
8.59
8.58
Condensor water mass ﬂow rate
˙mc,w
kg/s
2.31
2.36
Compressor work
˙W
kW
86.63
89.57
Cooling capacity
˙Qe
kW
180
182.56
Heating capacity
˙Qc
kW
193.80
196.69
Compressor heat loss
˙Qcomp
kW
72.83
75.44
Cooling performance
COPc
-
2.07
2.03
Heating performance
COPh
-
2.23
2.19
Table 3.2. Cycle comparison of key parameters under steady state operating conditions.
It is seen that by implementing the SWEP heat exchangers the evaporation temperature in the
operational cycle is lower with a value of -3.56 ℃compared to the design condition of 0 ℃. The
dynamic model is designed to have 10 K superheating, and the geometry and heat transfer models
chosen for the heat exchanger force the evaporation temperature to decrease, in order to comply
with the second law of thermodynamics. To lower the suction pressure, the compressor must have a
higher power uptake leading to a lower COP for heating and cooling. The condensation temperature
is increased to 61.06 ℃, and is similarly due to the geometry and heat transfer models that deﬁne
the condenser in the dynamic model.
It is seen that the COP of the operational refrigeration cycle, is 2.03 for cooling and 2.19 for heating,
compared to the theoretical cycle with cooling COP of 2.07 and a heating COP of 2.23. This
marginal diﬀerence can have a signiﬁcant impact, dependant on the amount of full load hours that
the unit is operated. It must be stated that the current deﬁnition of calculating the COP for the
operational model uses the linear regression model established for the compressor that correlates
the power uptake to the cooling load. Therefore, the COP is not determined from a decreasing
31
==PAGE:44==
3. Results
suction pressure but rather determined from the cooling load input in the dynamic model. The
validity of using the linear regression model to extrapolate the compressor power uptake is discussed
in Chapter 4.
It is seen in Table 3.2 that the cooling load is slightly higher for the operational model. This is due
to the conﬁguration of the cooling load in the dynamic model, and is explained in Section 3.3. The
compressor power uptake is derived from the linear regression model and is slightly higher than for
the theoretical cycle, which is mainly caused by the previously mentioned higher cooling load input.
It must be stated that the compressor heat loss shown in Table 3.2 is determined by the solving
the energy balance of the overall system. Hence, the heat loss due to oil cooling is not modelled in
the dynamic model, but is estimated based on the knowledge of the cooling and heating capacity
and the compressor power uptake. The validity of this procedure is discussed in Chapter 4.
3.2
Verifying Control of Chiller and Heat Pump
3.2.1
Transient Response
The control strategy used for the operation of the chiller and heat pump is veriﬁed by checking
if the system behaves in the expected manner when various load conditions are imposed to the
system, and that it complies with the governing laws of physics. In the ﬁrst scenario as presented
in Figure 2.9 the cooling load is reduced by 10 % of rated capacity for every step starting at rated
capacity. The transient response to this step reduction is presented by the temperature proﬁle of
the ﬂuid streams at the inlet and outlet of the evaporator as seen in Figure 3.2, with the controller
error and output seen in Figure 3.3 presenting the respective control response to the altered load
condition.
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
680
700
Time [s]
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Temperature [°C]
Evaporator temperature
NH3 outlet
NH3 inlet
PC return
PC supply
Figure 3.2. The transient response in the evaporator of the chiller and heat pump when a step
reduction of the cooling load from rated capacity to 90% capacity is incurred.
As the cooling load is reduced the temperature of the water ﬂowing through the evaporator decreases,
causing the evaporating temperature of the refrigerant to drop. This deviation is ﬁrst measured
32
==PAGE:45==
3. Results
by the valve controller, which starts to restrict the valve opening in order to keep an evaporating
pressure that ensures the desired superheating. The compressor controller registers the error from
the temperature sensor as the process cooling supply temperature starts to decline and reduces
the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant to reach the process cooling supply temperature setpoint. As
the mass ﬂow rate is reduced, the evaporating pressure increases, and therefore the amount of
superheating starts to decline. The valve controller attempts to regulate the valve opening degree
to maintain the superheating as the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is reduced. The sudden decline in
refrigerant mass ﬂow rate also causes the district heating supply temperature to decrease below
the setpoint due to the energy balance, causing the district heating pump controller to reduce the
water mass ﬂow rate to reach the chosen setpoint.
Figure 3.3. The top ﬁgure shows the measured error registered by each respective sensor. The
bottom ﬁgure shows the controller output signal from each controller.
By examining Figure 3.3 it is seen that the valve controller and compressor controller respond
faster than the district heating pump controller. The measured error from each respective setpoint
shows that the process cooling supply temperature reaches steady state after 20 seconds with
the superheating reaching its setpoint after 40 seconds. Finally, the district heating temperature
stabilizes after approximately 90 seconds from the initial load disturbance. The settling time and
overshoot are highly dependant on the step size of the cooling load input. Therefore, the results
presented in this section are only used to highlight that the control strategy controls the system in
the intended manner.
The further the cooling load conditions are from the rated capacity of the system, the more volatile
the transient response becomes. This causes higher overshoot and longer settling times before
reaching steady state operation. Therefore, the chiller and heat pump control is tested by increasing
the step changes to determine the limits of the system. The results are presented in Figure 3.4,
where the evaporator load is seen together with the cooling load input. The transient response
from the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump is able to converge in the range from
33
==PAGE:46==
3. Results
100 % capacity to 50 % capacity. Beyond this range the controllers are not able to regulate the
components in a manner that causes the transient response to converge to the altered setpoint.
The bottom ﬁgure in Figure 3.4 indicates that the system is able to operate as low as 40 % capacity.
However, at this level the system is oscillatory and has a long settling time, putting the system at
higher risk of unstable operation if the cooling load is altered before the system reaches steady
state.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
50
100
150
200
Cooling load [kW]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time [s]
50
100
150
200
Cooling load [kW]
Cooling load input
Evaporator load
Figure 3.4. The cooling load input signals used to verify the control strategy of the chiller and
heat pump unit. The top ﬁgure shows that at 40 % capacity the system becomes
unstable.
3.2.2
Controller Tuning
The information gained from the transient behaviour is used to reﬁne the controller parameters,
to improve the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump. The controllers are tuned using
the knowledge that the largest step reduction in cooling capacity is from rated capacity to 50 %
capacity, which is the cooling load input used for the controller parameter tuning. The quality of
the refrigerant exiting the evaporator is examined to determine if there is a risk of having liquid
refrigerant exiting the evaporator due to incomplete evaporation. The temperature proﬁle of the
refrigerant in the evaporator shown in Figure 3.5 indicates that there is a short period where the
valve is unable to restrict the eﬀective ﬂow area suﬃciently to maintain enough pressure diﬀerence to
ensure superheating of the refrigerant. However, the results of the simulation show that refrigerant
is fully evaporated throughout the transient period.
34
==PAGE:47==
3. Results
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
680
700
Time [s]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Temperature [°C]
Evaporator temperature
NH3 outlet
NH3 inlet
PC return
PC supply
Figure 3.5. When the cooling load is reduced from 100% to 50% the evaporating pressure increases
as the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is reduced until the valve control is able to restrict
the ﬂow area enough to secure a certain superheating.
By examining the rest of the refrigerant cycle it is discovered that a signiﬁcant amount of subcooling
occurs in the condenser as seen in Figure 3.6, which is not expected for the chosen refrigerant cycle
conﬁguration. The reason is a combination of the compressor and valve control being aggressive
and responding quickly to the cooling load change, whereas the control of the district heating pump
is too slow to respond to the reduction of the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate. The controller output
seen in Figure 3.6 shows that the compressor and valve control start to regulate before the district
heating pump controller, which is expected as these components ﬁrst experience the load change.
The compressor and valve controllers regulate at a rapid degree compared to the district heating
pump controller, and it is seen that the compressor and valve control stabilize approximately 40
seconds before the district heating pump. Due to the rapid reduction in the refrigerant mass ﬂow
and the slow response of the district heating pump the energy balance of the condenser forces the
condensation temperature of the refrigerant to drop.
35
==PAGE:48==
3. Results
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
680
700
Time [s]
40
50
60
70
Temperature [°C]
Condenser temperature
DH water supply
NH3 condenser outlet
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
680
700
Time [s]
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
NH3 Mass flow rate [kg/s]
and Valve Coefficient [Kv]
1
1.5
2
2.5
DH Mass flow rate [kg/s]
Controller output
Valve control
Compressor control
DH pump control
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
680
700
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
Subcooling [K]
Condenser subcooling
Condenser subcooling
Figure 3.6. First ﬁgure shows the condenser subcooling. The second ﬁgure shows the controller
output and how the components are regulated during the transient period. The
third ﬁgure show the temperature of the water outlet and refrigerant outlet of the
condenser.
To improve the transient response of the chiller and heat pump the compressor controller
aggressiveness is reduced, meaning it is slower to respond to the cooling load change.
The
district heating pump controller gain is increased signiﬁcantly to be able to reach the desired mass
ﬂow rate level in a more reasonable time frame. The ﬁnal controller parameters used in the study
are given in Table 3.3.
Parameter
Compressor control
Valve control
DH pump control
k
6e-3
6.8e-3
14.5e-2
Ti
1.4
7
3.2
Initial output
0.18
0.25
2.36
Maximum output
0.30
1
3.5
Minimum output
0.08
0.02
0.5
Table 3.3. The controller parameters used for examining the dynamic operation of the chiller and
heat pump unit.
36
==PAGE:49==
3. Results
3.3
Transient Response to Dynamic Operation of Chiller
and Heat Pump
The transient behaviour of the chiller and heat pump under dynamic operation is presented in
this section. It is found from testing the dynamic model of the chiller and heat pump that the
system is able to maintain consistent operation in the range of 100% to 50% capacity, resulting in
the following section examining the transient behaviour at the largest possible cooling load step
reduction. The cooling load change and the chiller and heat pump response is shown in Figure 3.7.
The cooling load input is reduced from rated capacity to 50 % capacity after 500 seconds, where it
is kept constant until 1100 seconds, before the cooling load input is increased to rated capacity.
The timeframe mentioned in the text hereafter refers to the period after a step in the cooling load
occurs.
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
Time [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Load [kW]
Chiller load
Evaporator load
Condenser load
Power uptake
Cooling load input
Figure 3.7. The cooling load input is reduced to 90 kW after 500 seconds and kept steady until
1100 seconds, where the cooling load is increased to 180 kW. The heat load on the
evaporator and condenser is shown, as well as the estimated power uptake of the
compressor.
There is a slight diﬀerence between the load input signal and the load seen by the evaporator,
which is due to the conﬁguration of the dynamic model. The load is introduced prior to the process
cooling pump, and the 2 bar pressure increase raises the enthalpy of the process cooling return
before entering the evaporator, resulting in a steady state evaporator load of 182.57 kW. The
altered operating point for the evaporator load is reached after 47.5 seconds at 93.58 kW, with
the condenser load also reaching steady state after 47.5 seconds at 102 kW. The evaporator and
condenser load are slower when the load signal is increased from 50 % to 100 % reaching steady
state after 55 and 57.5 seconds respectively.
The discharge temperature of refrigerant from the compressor is constrained to 80 ℃, and thus the
heating capacity of the chiller and heat pump is limited to 196.76 kW at rated capacity and 102
kW at 50 % capacity. The power uptake of the compressor during steady state operation is 89.57
37
==PAGE:50==
3. Results
kW and when the cooling load is reduced to 50 % capacity the power uptake decreases to 45.91 kW
under steady state operation.
3.3.1
Ramping Down the Cooling Load
The transient response of the system to the cooling load reduction from rated capacity to 50 %
capacity is presented in the following section.
Reducing the cooling load causes the process cooling water stream to cool down. The tempera-
ture of the process cooling return decreases to 9.62 ℃5.6 seconds after the cooling load signal
is changed. Consequently the process cooling supply temperature starts to decrease reaching a
minimum temperature of 5.43 ℃after 5 seconds, as seen in Figure 3.8, where the temperature of
the refrigerant and process cooling water at the inlet and outlet of the evaporator is shown. The
supply temperature of the process cooling reaches within a tolerance of 2 % of the setpoint value
after 31 seconds.
The refrigerant evaporation temperature is determined by the saturation pressure level and it is
seen from Figure 3.9 that a slight decrease in the low pressure level is followed by a peak before it
reduces and stabilizes at 3.35 bar corresponding to an evaporation temperature of -6.4 ℃. The
high pressure side shows a steady decline from the steady state level of 26.84 bar to 25.14 bar after
12.5 seconds, before it increases and stabilizes at 26.04 bar after 33 seconds, corresponding to a
condensation temperature of 59.84 ℃.
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
-10
-5
0
5
10
Temperature [°C]
Evaporator temperature
NH3 outlet
NH3 inlet
PC return
PC supply
Figure 3.8. Temperature at inlet and outlet
of evaporator.
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Pressure [bar]
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Pressure [bar]
Pressure level
High pressure level
Low pressure level
Figure 3.9. High- and low pressure level
of the system
A critical parameter to examine during dynamic operation is that there is a suﬃcient amount of
superheating to ensure full evaporation of the refrigerant exiting the evaporator. For the chosen
conﬁguration, the superheating is maintained throughout the transient period reaching a minimum
of 5.76 K after 9.5 seconds. This is derived from the the temperature diﬀerence of the evaporating
temperature and the temperature of the refrigerant at the outlet of the evaporator, seen in Figure 3.8.
The dynamic behaviour of all ﬂows are best explained from examining the controller output used
38
==PAGE:51==
3. Results
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
NH3 Mass flow rate [kg/s]
and Valve Coefficient [Kv]
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
DH Mass flow rate [kg/s]
Controller output
Valve control
Compressor control
DH pump control
Figure 3.10. Controller output during decreas-
ing cooling load
495
500
505
510
515
520
525
530
Time [s]
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
NH3 Mass flow rate [kg/s]
and Valve Coefficient [Kv]
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
DH Mass flow rate [kg/s]
Controller output
Valve control
Compressor control
DH pump control
Figure 3.11. Controller output during decreas-
ing cooling load
to regulate the chiller and heat pump, as seen in Figure 3.10 and Figure 3.11. The decreasing
cooling load is ﬁrst registered by the expansion valve controller, which instantly registers the
decreasing superheating of the refrigerant, and starts to restrict the valve opening to reduce the
evaporating pressure to maintain the superheating. After one second the process cooling supply
temperature starts to decrease, which is registered by the compressor controller and the mass ﬂow
rate of the refrigerant is then ramped down in an attempt to compensate for the load change.
Finally, after three seconds the district heating pump controller registers that the district heating
supply temperature decreases causing the controller to ramp down the mass ﬂow rate of the district
heating water. It is seen that the refrigerant mass ﬂow is reduced in a steady decline, whereas the
opening degree of the valve has a more varying rate of change, which is due to a combination of the
superheating being indirectly aﬀected by the change in refrigerant mass ﬂow rate and the cooling
load reduction, as well as having a large integrator time constant of the valve controller.
The district heating water mass ﬂow rate is regulated with an observed lag deriving from the
chosen control conﬁguration, and the impact of the control delay is seen in Figure 3.12 and 3.13.
Due to the rapid decrease in cooling load, the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is reduced before the
district heating pump controller registers any deviation. Thus, the refrigerant is cooled by the
district heating water stream, which ultimately results in subcooling of the refrigerant occurring in
the condenser reaching a maximum value of 5.27 K after 7.5 seconds. After that, the refrigerant
mass ﬂow rate starts to levelize and the district heating pump control is able to counteract the
discrepancy and eliminate the refrigerant subcooling after 13.5 seconds.
As refrigerant accumulates in the condenser due to the subcooling, the receiver ﬁlling level decreases
from an initial level of 31.19 to 29.64 % before the rising and stabilizing at 32.28 % of the vessel
volume.
39
==PAGE:52==
3. Results
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Subcooling [K]
Condenser subcooling
Condenser subcooling
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
54
56
58
60
62
64
Temperature [°C]
Condenser temperature
DH water supply
NH3 condenser outlet
Figure 3.12. Condenser subcooling and tem-
perature during decreasing cool-
ing load
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
NH3 Mass [kg]
NH3 mass distribution
Evaporator
Condenser
Receiver
Total
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Filling level [%]
Receiver filling level
Receiver
Figure 3.13. Receiver ﬁlling level and distri-
bution of charge in components
during decreasing cooling load
3.3.2
Ramping up the Cooling Load
The transient response of the system to the cooling load reduction from 50 % capacity to rated
capacity is presented in the following section.
Increasing the cooling load causes the process cooling water stream to heat up, and the temperature
of the process cooling return increases from 9.62 ℃to 12.04 ℃5 seconds after the cooling load
signal is changed. Consequently the process cooling supply temperature starts to increase reaching
a maximum temperature of 8.58 ℃after 5 seconds, as seen in Figure 3.14. The supply temperature
of the process cooling reaches within a tolerance of 2 % of the setpoint value after 30.5 seconds.
It is seen from Figure 3.14 that the risk of not having full evaporation of the refrigerant is not a
concern for this load change, since the amount of superheating is constantly greater than the 10 K
setpoint value.
The refrigerant evaporation temperature is determined by the pressure level in the evaporator and
it is seen from Figure 3.15 that an initial slight increase the pressure level in the evaporator is
followed by a sharp decline reaching a minimum pressure level of -12.58 ℃after 10.5 seconds before
it starts to increase and stabilizes after 56.5 seconds at 3.75 bar corresponding to the evaporating
temperature of -3.54 ℃.
The high pressure side shows a steady increase from the steady state level of 26.04 bar to 27.74
bar after 10.5 seconds before it starts to decrease and stabilize at 26.84 bar after 49.5 seconds
corresponding to a condensation temperature of 59.84 ℃.
40
==PAGE:53==
3. Results
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140 1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
Time [s]
-10
-5
0
5
10
Temperature [°C]
Evaporator temperature
NH3 outlet
NH3 inlet
PC return
PC supply
Figure 3.14. First scenario for veriﬁcation
of the control strategy
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140 1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
Time [s]
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Pressure [bar]
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Pressure [bar]
Pressure level
High pressure level
Low pressure level
Figure 3.15. Second scenario for veriﬁcation
of the control strategy
Similarly to the cooling load reduction scenario, the transient behaviour can be explained from the
controller output during this load change, shown in Figure 3.16. The cooling load increases, causing
the process cooling water stream to heat up, and this is ﬁrst registered by the valve controller as the
temperature of the refrigerant exiting the evaporator starts to rise. The compressor control registers
the increasing temperature and starts to regulate the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate. Both manipulated
parameters increase at the same rate until 2.5 seconds where the valve opening starts to increase at
a slower rate, while the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate increases at the same rate. This causes a sharp
decline in the pressure level of the evaporator, thus reducing the evaporating temperature.
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140 1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
Time [s]
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
NH3 Mass flow rate [kg/s]
and Valve Coefficient [Kv]
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
DH Mass flow rate [kg/s]
Controller output
Valve control
Compressor control
DH pump control
Figure 3.16. Controller output during increas-
ing cooling load
1095
1100
1105
1110
1115
1120
1125
1130
Time [s]
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
NH3 Mass flow rate [kg/s]
and Valve Coefficient [Kv]
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
DH Mass flow rate [kg/s]
Controller output
Valve control
Compressor control
DH pump control
Figure 3.17. Controller output during increas-
ing cooling load
This is a diﬀerent behaviour compared to the cooling load reduction scenario, and it is mostly
due to the chosen control strategy. The valve controller registers an outlet temperature that is
increasing at a faster rate than the evaporating temperature. Therefore, the valve opens more slowly
to reduce the pressure in the evaporator. The steady increase in refrigerant mass ﬂow causes the
temperature to drop to -11.8 ℃after 7 seconds and after a small sudden increase, the evaporating
temperature reaches a minimum value of -12.58 ℃after 10.5 seconds, where it starts to increase
41
==PAGE:54==
3. Results
again. By examining Figure 3.16 it is seen that the system is sensitive to the valve control under
the established operating conditions, seeing that slight changes in the controller output can result
in volatile behaviour of the refrigerant under dynamic operation.
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140 1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
Time [s]
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
Temperature [°C]
Condenser temperature
DH water supply
NH3 condenser outlet
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140 1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Subcooling [K]
Condenser subcooling
Condenser subcooling
Figure 3.18. Condenser subcooling and tem-
perature during increasing cool-
ing load
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140 1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
NH3 Mass [kg]
NH3 mass distribution
Evaporator
Condenser
Receiver
Total
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140 1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
Time [s]
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Filling level [%]
Receiver filling level
Receiver
Figure 3.19. Receiver ﬁlling level and distri-
bution of charge in components
during increasing cooling load
By examining the condenser, it is evident that subcooling also occurs during the cooling load
increase, as seen in the top diagram of Figure 3.18. When the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is increased,
the district heating water stream absorbs more heat, and therefore no subcooling of the refrigerant
occurs in the ﬁrst seconds of the load change. After 15 seconds the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate starts
to increase at a slower rate and as the district heating water mass ﬂow rate increases at a faster rate,
the district heating water stream starts to cool the refrigerant causing the refrigerant to condensate
and accumulate in the condenser. The subcooling reaches a maximum value of 1.84 K after 21
seconds and as seen from Figure 3.16 the district heating mass ﬂow rate starts to change more
slowly, which stops the subcooling of the refrigerant. From the condenser temperature shown in
Figure 3.18 it is possible to see how the increasing district heating mass ﬂow rate aﬀects the refrig-
erant temperature, where it initially follows the pressure change from regulation of the compressor,
but after 16.5 seconds a sudden decline is seen as a consequence of the district heating pump control.
42
==PAGE:55==
3. Results
3.4
Optimizing Dynamic Operation of Chiller and Heat
Pump
The results presented in the following section are meant to provide suggestions for how to optimize
the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump. First it is tested if the valve controller
superheating setpoint can be reduced to improve the performance of the chiller and heat pump,
without compromising the safety of the components.
Additionally a slower ramping time is
introduced to test if the subcooling of the refrigerant in the condenser can be reduced. The
transient response of the chiller with the altered controller set points is tested by reducing the
cooling load from rated capacity to 50 % capacity for both scenarios.
3.4.1
Reducing the Superheating Setpoint of the Valve Controller
The results from examining the transient response of the proposed system indicate that a reduction
in the superheating setpoint value of the valve controller is possible, since the lowest superheating
measurement that is registered is 5.76 K. Two new setpoint values are chosen, being 2 K and 5 K,
to compare the dynamic response of the chiller and heat pump with the original control strategy.
The temperature of the refrigerant and water at the in- and outlet of the evaporator are shown in
Figure 3.20, where the alternative superheating set points are implemented in the control strategy.
By reducing the superheating setpoint to 5 K the evaporation temperature is increased to -0.59
℃at rated capacity corresponding to a evaporating pressure of 4.20 bar. The chiller and heat
pump is able to maintain superheating with a minimum of 0.93 K, which occurs after 10 seconds,
indicating that the refrigerant is fully evaporated when exiting the evaporator throughout the
transient period.
By altering the superheating setpoint to 2 K the evaporation temperature is increased to 0.52 ℃
corresponding to a evaporation pressure of 4.38 bar. However, from Figure 3.20 it is seen, that
shortly after the cooling load is reduced, the temperature of the refrigerant exiting the evaporator
is equal to the evaporating temperature. The evaporating temperature increases, as the compressor
controller attempts to compensate for the temperature drop of the process cooling supply, and
oscillates until the process cooling supply temperature settles within a certain range of the controller
setpoint. After 40 seconds the valve is again able to ensure superheating, and the system reaches
steady state operation. The transient period where no superheating is observed, indicate that there
is a risk of the refrigerant not being completely evaporated when exiting the evaporator.
43
==PAGE:56==
3. Results
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
[°C]
10 K superheating
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
-5
0
5
10
15
[°C]
5 K superheating
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
0
5
10
15
[°C]
2 K superheating
NH3 outlet
NH3 inlet
PC return
PC supply
Figure 3.20. The temperature proﬁle at inlet and outlet of the evaporator for refrigerant and
water side, shows the results of reducing the superheating setpoint.
The quality of the refrigerant exiting the evaporator is therefore examined for all three controller
superheating setpoints, and is shown in Figure 3.21. The cooling load reduction does not eﬀect
the quality of the refrigerant when the 10 K and 5 K superheating setpoint is used, as the
refrigerant remains fully evaporated during the transient period, due to a having a certain amount
of superheating throughout the transient period, as seen in Figure 3.20.
However, when the 2 K superheating setpoint is used there is an extended period where refrigerant
quality of less than one is observed. Initially, the same behaviour is seen as in the other scenarios,
where the valve restricts to reduce the evaporating pressure to maintain a certain amount of
superheating. Due to having a low amount of superheating the valve is not able to keep the
refrigerant from reaching the saturation pressure, and at this point the valve controller saturates
and gives a constant output signal for restricting the valve opening, as seen in Figure 3.23.
44
==PAGE:57==
3. Results
Figure 3.21. By reducing the superheating setpoint to 5 K, the refrigerant remains fully evaporated
throughout the transient period. The risk of having liquid refrigerant exiting the
evaporator increases signiﬁcantly by reducing the setpoint to 2 K.
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
NH3 Mass flow rate [kg/s]
and Valve Coefficient [Kv]
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
DH Mass flow rate [kg/s]
Controller output 5 K superheat
Valve control
Compressor control
DH pump control
Figure 3.22. Controller
output
using
a
5 K superheating setpoint.
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
NH3 Mass flow rate [kg/s]
and Valve Coefficient [Kv]
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
DH Mass flow rate [kg/s]
Controller output 2 K superheat
Valve control
Compressor control
DH pump control
Figure 3.23. Controller
output
using
a
2 K superheating setpoint.
The compressor controller reduces the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate to compensate for the temperature
drop in the process cooling supply, thus the evaporating pressure increases causing the refrigerant
to exit the evaporator with a quality of less than one. From 4.5 seconds to 32 seconds after the
cooling load is reduced, the refrigerant exiting the evaporator is not completely evaporated, showing
an absolute minimum value of 0.64 after 12 seconds and a local minimum of 0.83 after 25.5 seconds.
The oscillation is due to control signal from the valve controller having a constant decline while the
compressor controller attempts to regulate the process cooling supply temperature.
45
==PAGE:58==
3. Results
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Pressure [bar]
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
Pressure [bar]
Pressure level 5 K superheat
High pressure level
Low pressure level
Figure 3.24. High- and low pressure level
with 5 K superheating setpoint.
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
580
590
600
Time [s]
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Pressure [bar]
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
Pressure [bar]
Pressure level 2 K superheat
High pressure level
Low pressure level
Figure 3.25. High- and low pressure level
with 2 K superheating setpoint.
The dynamic simulation of the chiller and heat pump using the 10 K superheating valve controller
setpoint results in the refrigerant being subcooled in the condenser. Therefore, it is examined if
changing the superheating setpoint impacts the refrigerant subcooling that occurs, which is shown
in Figure 3.26.
490
500
510
520
530
540
550
560
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Subcooling [K]
Condenser subcooling
10 K SH
5 K SH
2 K SH
Figure 3.26. The condenser subcooling is slightly reduces by setting the superheating setpoint
to 5K. With a 2 K superheating setpoint the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant and
water stream varies signiﬁcantly through the transient period causing the subcooling
to occur in multiple periods.
Reducing the setpoint to 5 K superheating results in a slightly lower amount of subcooling reaching
a peak value of 5.05 K after 7.5 seconds, and declines to zero after 13.5 seconds. Reducing the
superheating setpoint to 2 K shows that the subcooling occurs from the initial load change until
46
==PAGE:59==
3. Results
10.5 seconds having a peak value of 4.51 K, and in a period from 21.5 seconds to 29.5 seconds with
a peak value of 2.39 K, and ﬁnally also from 39 seconds to 43.5 seconds with a peak value of 0.13
K. This behaviour is due to the oscillating mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant and the district heating
water stream as seen in Figure 3.23.
3.4.2
Increasing Cooling Load Ramp Time
From examining the results it can be concluded, that it is possible to reduce the valve controller
superheatinging setpoint to 5 K without compromising the safety of the components, under
the chosen control conﬁguration and operating conditions. Therefore, it is chosen to use this
conﬁguration to test the impact of increasing the cooling load ramp time.
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
640
660
680
700
720
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Subcooling [K]
Condenser subcooling
Step input
20 s
60 s
100 s
200 s
Figure 3.27. The condenser subcooling
The results presented in Section 3.3 indicate that increasing the cooling load ramp time can lower
the amount of refrigerant subcooling that occurs in the condenser during the transient period.
Figure 3.27 shows the refrigerant subcooling in the condenser with cooling load ramp time of 20,
60, 100 and 200 seconds, as well as the step load change from rated capacity to 50 % capacity. The
ﬁgure shows that the peak value of the subcooling is lower with increasing ramp time, but it does
not mitigate the issue, showing that there is a certain amount of subcooling for the entire duration
of the transient load change.
It is evident from examining the results, that the chosen control conﬁguration and the controller
tuning being too aggressive are responsible for this behaviour.
The impact of the control
conﬁguration can be observed by the fact that there is an initial peak at the start of the load
change due to the refrigerant mass ﬂow rate being reduced faster than the district heating water
mass ﬂow rate. Furthermore, the subcooling consistently ends 10 seconds after the cooling load
ramp has ended, and the lag causes the district heating pump controller to keep reducing the water
mass ﬂow rate while the refrigerant mass ﬂow stabilizes, which then reduces the subcooling.
47
==PAGE:60==
3. Results
The ﬂuctuation seen in the refrigerant subcooling, is due to the sensitivity to the opening degree of
the expansion valve, where slight deviations in the rate of change can have signiﬁcant impact on
the pressure level. Furthermore, the delay caused by the conﬁguration of the control system creates
a constant counteracting behaviour between the compressor and district heating pump controllers,
which also creates an oscillatory response for the duration of the cooling load reduction.
500
525
550
575
600
-5
0
5
10
15
[°C]
Step input
500 525 550 575 600 625 650
-5
0
5
10
15
[°C]
20 second ramp time
500
550
600
650
700
-5
0
5
10
15
[°C]
60 second ramp time
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
-5
0
5
10
15
[°C]
100 second ramp time
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
1000
Time [s]
-5
0
5
10
15
[°C]
200 second ramp time
NH3 outlet
NH3 inlet
PC return
PC supply
Figure 3.28. Temperature proﬁle of the water and ammonia streams at the inlet and outlet of
the evaporator with increasing cooling load ramp time.
The risk of having liquid refrigerant exiting the evaporator is one of the main concern, when
examining the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump. Therefore, the refrigerant quality
is examined to observe what the impact of increasing the cooling load ramping time is. Figure
3.28 shows the temperature development of the ﬂows entering and exiting the evaporator with
increasing ramp time being incurred. It is observed that the longer the ramp time is, the less the
process cooling supply temperature deviates from the temperature setpoint of 7 ℃. Furthermore,
the minimum amount of superheating increases with a longer ramp time, showing that having a
longer ramp time reduces the risk of having liquid refrigerant exiting the evaporator during dynamic
operation of the system.
48
==PAGE:61==
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
4
DISCUSSION
Design of the chiller and heat pump unit
The ideal theoretical cooling COP of this system under the design conditions is 3.45. This can be
considered attractive, since the water on the secondary side of the condenser can also be used for
district heating or other heating purposes, which further increases the energy eﬃciency of the overall
system. However, this is under ideal conditions, where the isentropic eﬃciency of the compressor
is not considered. The cooling COP decreases to 2.03 in the dynamic model. Furthermore, the
oil injection to the compressor must also be considered. The oil is injected to work as a sealing
material and lubricant of bearings and moving parts to prevent friction from mechanical contact,
and if a relatively signiﬁcant amount of oil is injected it will also cool the refrigerant, preventing
exceedingly high gas temperatures during compression[8]. The oil injection to the compressor
causes the temperature of the refrigerant to decrease, thus the enthalpy value of the refrigerant in
the discharge line is signiﬁcantly lower than the ideal theoretical model, meaning that the heat
rejected to the district heating water is signiﬁcantly reduced. This ultimately results in a lower
heating COP of 2.19 in the dynamic model compared to 4.45 for the ideal theoretical cycle.
Furthermore, the compression of the refrigerant causes some oil in vapour form to mix with ammonia
in vapour form. As this mixture is passed through the cycle, the thermodynamic properties of the
refrigerant is changed, and will ultimately reduce the refrigerant heat transmission capacity.
Typically an oil separator is used to ﬁlter the oil from the refrigerant before reaching the condenser,
but the velocity of the ammonia at the end of the compression causes the oil to disperse and
the oil aerosols that are formed are carried with the refrigerant throughout the system. Due to
the typical physical conﬁguration of direct expansion systems, the refrigerant accumulates in the
evaporator, which is the component that is usually located at the lowest point in the refrigeration
cycle. The evaporation process inside the plate heat exchanger will occur in an upward ﬂowing
direction. Thus, the velocity of the refrigerant ﬂow must be suﬃciently high to ensure that the
refrigerant is able to drag the oil through the evaporator and rising pipe, before being returned to the
compressor[8]. The velocity of the refrigerant depends on the physical design of the system, and if
the design is not properly developed, there is a high certainty of oil accumulating in the lower part of
the evaporator, which ultimately results in reduced refrigeration eﬀect and thus a lower cooling COP.
The objective with the chiller and heat pump presented in [12] is to design a compact system with
low refrigerant inventory. To achieve this, a direct expansion system is developed with brazed
plate heat exchangers and a high pressure receiver. An open screw compressor is chosen as these
allow a high pressure ratio in single stage compression[8]. The system is designed to operate with
10 K superheating under steady state conditions, which is due to ensuring stable operation and
limiting the risk of having liquid refrigerant in the suction line. To ensure that no liquid refrigerant
enters the suction line, a liquid separator or a suction accumulator is typically implemented. This
is not possible for the developed dynamic model, due to limitations of the software used, which is
51
==PAGE:64==
4. Discussion
elaborated further along in the discussion. In the proposed system a liquid separator is typically
implemented at the outlet of the evaporator, to ensure that if any liquid refrigerant exits the
evaporator, the liquid is separated from the gaseous refrigerant, which ensures that the vapour
entering the compressor is completely evaporated. The collected liquid is led back to the evaporator
inlet, where it is reentered and mixed with the refrigerant coming from the expansion device.
Alternatively, it can also be reheated by an electric heater and fed to the suction line. Having
a functional liquid separator in the dynamic model of the system might enable the possibility
of operating with a lower amount of superheating, and thereby increasing the suction pressure,
resulting in less power uptake from the compressor and a higher COP. Developing a separator
model is complex due to being a multiphase ﬂow process, which is challenging to describe using
numerical methods. Describing the multiphase ﬂow numerically requires a thorough understanding
of the physical content and the equations being solved, in addition to understanding the dynamics
of the microscopic processes that control the observed ﬂow behaviour[31]. Furthermore, developing
a numerical description of the separator remains an experimental process within the ﬁeld of
ﬂuid mechanics[31]. Thus, it requires a signiﬁcant amount of experimentation to validate the
mathematical model and to ﬁnd the separation eﬃciency.
The thermodynamic properties of ammonia poses certain challenges for design and operation of
a compact low charge direct expansion vapour compression system using plate heat exchangers.
The density ratio of ammonia is vast, and this causes several issues from both design and control
perspectives. From a design perspective the density ratio becomes an issue since the gaseous
ammonia requires signiﬁcantly larger volume than ammonia in liquid form. The sizing of the
components must be carefully chosen if the objective is to design a direct expansion system with low
refrigerant inventory. In the two-phase components, the evaporator and condenser, the signiﬁcant
density ratio demands higher requirements for the control after the heat exchangers, since the
velocity of the ammonia in gas form is much greater than the ammonia in liquid form. Slight
changes during a short period can have a signiﬁcant impact and higher velocity can cause instability
of the control. Thus, controllers with fast dynamics are needed to maintain reliable operation.
The software program used to develop the mathematical model of the chiller and heat pump is a
proven tool for designing and simulation of such systems, but there are limitations that impact
the manner in which the system is designed and behaves under dynamic simulation. The liquid
separator is not included in the mathematical model, since the separator component developed in
TIL forces the refrigerant to be fully evaporated precisely on the saturation point between being a
two-phase vapour liquid mixture and a superheated gas when exiting the evaporator. Operating
with any amount of superheating is not possible when the separator is used, preventing the chosen
control strategy can not be executed if the separator component is included in the dynamic model.
Therefore, the refrigerant exiting the evaporator in the model is lead directly to the compressor
suction inlet. The absence of a liquid separator causes the refrigerant charge in the dynamic model
to be lower than the refrigerant charge of the physical system. Having a functioning liquid separator
in the dynamic model also increases the possibility of developing a more optimal solution for the
control strategy of the chiller and heat pump unit.
The compressor used in the mathematical model is a simple component that is constrained to
having a refrigerant discharge temperature of 80 ℃, and is not able to provide the actual compressor
work, since the isentropic eﬃciency is not used, and the enthalpy value used to determine the actual
52
==PAGE:65==
4. Discussion
compressor work is not given as a result. It is possible to choose an advanced compressor model in
the TIL model component library that accounts for the isentropic and volumetric eﬃciency and
provides the actual work, but this component does not have the possibility of constraining the
discharge temperature of the refrigerant, which is needed to resemble what will happen in a physical
system. This advanced compressor model does not take the impact of oil cooling into account, and
thus the refrigerant temperature in the discharge line of the compressor is unreasonably high and
will not represent a realistic outcome of the transient behaviour during dynamic operation.
Utilizing the linear regression model to determine the compressor power uptake is not an optimal
method, since the regression model is constructed based on a very small set of data points. To
improve the validity of the compressor performance, a larger set of operational data from a real
compressor under diﬀerent operating conditions should be obtained. This would allow for better
estimation of the compressor power uptake and thereby a more reasonable projection of the perfor-
mance of the chiller and heat pump unit can be established.
Additionally, by using the simple compressor model the compressor capacity control is not controlled
by regulating the frequency of the variable speed drive. It is assumed that the compressor capacity
control can be directly regulated by scaling the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant.
Transient Response of the chiller and heat pump unit
The results gained from dynamic simulation of the chiller and heat pump indicate that it is possible
to reduce the superheating setpoint value of the expansion valve control, since full evaporation
of the refrigerant is ensured during both decreasing and increasing cooling load. The minimum
amount of superheating observed is during cooling load reduction with a value of 5.76 K. Having a
certain amount of superheating does not necessarily ensure that the risk of condensation in the
suction line is mitigated. Seasonal and even daily ﬂuctuation in the ambient temperature can
have an impact if the evaporator and suction line is not properly insulated. In the case where
the ambient temperature is lower than the temperature of the refrigerant exiting the evaporator,
the pipe wall can be colder than the refrigerant, causing droplets to form on the pipe wall due to
condensation. When the ambient temperature is greater than the temperature of the refrigerant,
the superheating is increased due to heat ingress from the ambient. This increases the compressor
power uptake needed for the compression, causing the energy performance of the chiller and heat
pump unit to decrease. Finally, the risk of having condensation in the suction line is also a function
of the length of the pipe, and whether safety components such as liquid separators or suction
accumulators are implemented. In this study it is assumed that the suction line is perfectly insulated
and that ambient conditions do not aﬀect the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump
unit. When operating with a dynamic cooling load the risk of condensation in the suction line is
mainly present when the cooling load increases. As the cooling load increases, the temperature
of the refrigerant exiting the evaporator rises. As the temperature of the pipe wall increases at
a slower rate, due to the thermal inertia of the material in the pipe wall, condensation of the
refrigerant can occur on the pipe wall. Since the physical properties of the suction line is not
included in the dynamic model, it can not be concluded from the analysis that condensation of the
refrigerant will not occur in the suction line. To examine this phenomena, a pipe model component
with typical design parameters for suction lines in similar systems should be introduced in the
dynamic model, with the heat port of the component being enabled to allow for user deﬁned
heat load. Thereafter, a ﬂuctuating temperature proﬁle should be implemented, which gives
information regarding the energy eﬃciency of the system operating in diﬀerent ambient temper-
53
==PAGE:66==
4. Discussion
atures, as well as providing improved estimates of whether condensation in the suction line can occur.
The results show that subcooling of the refrigerant in the condenser will occur with the chosen
control conﬁguration and operating conditions, causing liquid refrigerant to accumulate in the
condenser during a part of the transient period. This is due to the district heating pump controller
having a time delay from registering the error at a later point compared to the compressor controller,
and is not able to regulate the mass ﬂow rate of the water synchronously with the change in the
mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant. Due to this conﬁguration of the chosen control strategy, there
will be a constant risk of having liquid refrigerant accumulating in the condenser when the chiller
and heat pump unit experiences a change in the dynamic cooling load, since the controllers will
be responding to measurements that are delayed relative to each other. During steady state
operation this is not as issue for the chiller and heat pump unit. The results also indicate that
either increasing the cooling load ramp time or setting less aggressive controller parameters can
help reduce subcooling of the refrigerant in the condenser.
It is observed that the transient response is sensitive to the valve controller output, where short
periods when the valve opening degree does not change at the same general rate as the refrigerant
mass ﬂow can cause a signiﬁcant change in the suction pressure, and thereby the evaporation
temperature. This issue is in particular seen with increasing cooling load, where the initial tem-
perature increase of the refrigerant exiting the evaporator rises at a fast rate compared to the
evaporating temperature, leading the sensor to measure a higher superheating value. The valve
starts to regulate aggressively to counteract this development, which causes the temperature to
reduce drastically. Therefore, it is important that the valve control is designed in a less aggressive
manner, as this behavior is undesirable might cause operational issues over time.
Reducing the sizing of the high pressure receiver can lower the refrigerant inventory in the system,
leading to a more optimal solution. Furthermore, less volume allows for a more compact solution,
which is in line with the objective of the design of the chiller and heat pump unit. It is observed
from the analysis that the ﬁlling level of the high pressure receiver does not ﬂuctuate in a signiﬁcant
manner during the transient period. This indicates that the current sizing of the receiver can be
reduced without aﬀecting the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump signiﬁcantly. However,
it is not known how decreasing the receiver volume will impact subcooling of the refrigerant in the
condenser, and should therefore be examined further.
Optimizing the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump unit
The results show that it is possible to reduce the superheating setpoint of the expansion valve
controller to 5 K without risking having liquid refrigerant exiting the evaporator. Having a lower
superheating setpoint for the valve controller, increases the overall chiller energy eﬃciency due to
being able to operate with a higher evaporating pressure. However, due to the limitations of the
simple compressor model, it is not possible to observe how the increased suction pressure eﬀects
the compressor power uptake. Implementing the superheating setpoint of 5 K allows the chiller
and heat pump unit to operate with a suction pressure of 4.20 bar at nominal capacity, an increase
from 3.35 bar using the 10 K superheating setpoint.
54
==PAGE:67==
4. Discussion
It is also found that having too low superheating setpoint for the expansion valve controller can
result in liquid refrigerant exiting the evaporator. The expansion valve controller is not able to
compensate correctly when the refrigerant exiting the evaporator is not completely evaporated, and
the transient response is therefore determined by the eﬀorts of the compressor controller to regulate
the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant until the process cooling supply temperature converges to
the setpoint. The results also show that in order for the chiller and heat pump to function with a
low superheating setpoint, the cooling load experienced by the evaporator must not decrease to
suddenly, as this will surely cause the evaporation pressure to increase in such a manner, that the
valve is not able to maintain any amount of superheating.
When the cooling load ramping time is increased, it is observed that the amount of superheating
ﬂuctuates less during the transient period, indicating that when the dynamic cooling load changes
at a slower rate the chiller and heat pump unit has a more stable operation. With a longer ramping
time the temperature of the refrigerant does not show a sudden increase as the cooling load varies,
thereby reducing the risk of condensation in the suction line even further, since the diﬀerence be-
tween the refrigerant temperature and the temperature of the pipe wall will not deviate signiﬁcantly.
The results show that subcooling of the refrigerant in the condenser will occur when the superheating
setpoint of the expansion valve controller is reduced, and when the ramp time of the cooling load is
increased. Short cooling load ramping time results in a high peak value of subcooling for a short
duration, while having a large cooling load ramping time results in a lower peak value for the
subcooling for an extended period. The problem with having a dynamic cooling load is seen in
Figure 3.27, where the accumulation of liquid refrigerant in the condenser occurs throughout the
transient period, and is due to the choice of control conﬁguration as previously mentioned. The
controllers regulate the mass ﬂow rate based on measurements that are delayed relative to each
other, and therefore the controllers produce counteracting output signals, creating a diﬀerence
in the change of the mass ﬂow rate of the water and refrigerant, which force the condensation
temperature to drop in order to comply with the energy balance of the condenser.
This suggests that as long as the chiller and heat pump unit experience a dynamic cooling load
using the examined control conﬁguration, there will be a signiﬁcant risk of having liquid refrigerant
accumulating in the condenser, which ultimately reduces the performance of the unit due to lower
heat transfer area in the condenser being available for rejecting the heat.
Tuning of the controller parameters does not mitigate this issue, since it is a problem caused by the
inherent time delay for the chosen control conﬁguration. To improve this behaviour it should be
considered to alter the conﬁguration of the district heating pump controller to regulate the water
mass ﬂow rate based on the pressure level of the refrigerant in the condenser instead, aiming to
keep a constant condensation pressure. Regulating the mass ﬂow rate of the district heating water
based on the pressure level on the high pressure side of the refrigeration cycle, allows for the district
heating pump controller to change the pump speed instantaneously as the compressor starts to
change the operational load. This will eliminate the delay that is caused by control conﬁguration.
This would cause the supply temperature of the district heating water to vary as the cooling load
changes, thus deviating from the design conditions of constant temperature of 60 ℃. However, if
the process cooling is the main priority, having a slightly varying supply temperature on the district
heating water side is not considered a critical parameter, as this could be solved by using an electric
heater or other equivalent devices to boost the temperature to the necessary temperature level.
55
==PAGE:68==
4. Discussion
A critical issue to consider for the reliable operation of the chiller and heat pump is the water con-
tamination of the refrigerant in the system. Contamination of water in the refrigerant solution has
an impact on several parts of the chiller and heat pump, both considering operational performance
and risk of damage to components[32].
Contamination of water in ammonia systems causes the anhydrous ammonia solution to be diluted,
which changes the pressure-temperature relation of the refrigerant[32]. This means that ammonia
with a signiﬁcant amount of water diluted in the solution will have a higher saturation temperature
than a pure anhydrous ammonia solution under the same pressure level[32]. The chosen control
conﬁguration utilizes a superheating sensor to control the expansion valve, which measures the
pressure and temperature and calculates a superheating value based on the measurements. When
the saturation temperature increases due to having water contamination, the sensor registers
an increasing superheating value and starts to regulate the valve opening incorrectly, which can
ultimately lead to overfeeding the evaporator and cause liquid refrigerant to enter the suction
line[32]. As elaborated in [33] the superheating sensor is not able to diﬀerentiate between the
superheat and the temperature increase caused by the water contamination. Thus, having a low
superheating setpoint value for the expansion valve makes the system more exposed to improper
control of the valve. Therefore, to reduce the superheating setpoint as proposed, it is necessary to
ensure that there is a suction accumulator that traps the water, preventing it from entering the
compressor.
An alternative solution to this issue is presented in [33], where instead of controlling the expansion
valve based on superheating measurements, the valve opening is regulated based on the quality of
the refrigerant measured at the outlet of the evaporator. This control strategy used in a low charge
direct expansion system enables a lower temperature diﬀerence between the source medium and
refrigerant, which increases the energy eﬃciency of the system due to the compressor being able to
operate with higher suction pressure[33].
Therefore, this control strategy should also be tested for the proposed system to examine how the
chiller and heat pump responds under dynamic operation. In order to test this control strategy
using the dynamic model, the sensor measuring the superheating should be replaced by a quality
sensor, which is available in the TIL component model library. The controller parameters must
also be tuned to match with the change in sensor signals. It is not known if additional model
conﬁguration changes need to be performed, in order to enable the dynamic model to operate using
this control strategy.
Additionally, the dilution of the refrigerant solution means that the refrigerant cooling capacity is
reduced, causing the compressor to further reduce the evaporating pressure, in order to sustain the
process cooling supply temperature. This reduces the cooling COP of the system and increases the
power consumption of the compressor.
The increase of water content in the refrigerant solution typically develops incrementally over a long
period, and it can therefore be diﬃcult for maintenance staﬀto identify, that the water concentration
is the reason for improper operation of the unit[32]. Therefore, it is necessary to perform reg-
ular water contamination examinations to ensure reliable operation of the chiller and heat pump unit.
The insight gained from examining the dynamic operation of the chiller and heat pump unit show
that it is possible to improve the dynamic operation of the system by altering the control strategy,
and by increasing the ramping time of the cooling load. However, the physical test rig of the
56
==PAGE:69==
4. Discussion
proposed system is not developed, inhibiting validation of the results from simulation of the dynamic
model. The optimization eﬀorts that are discussed in this section are stated under the assumption
that the dynamic model is a fair representation of the actual system. This uncertainty can have
a signiﬁcant impact on the validity of the statements made regarding optimization of the chiller
and heat pump unit. Nevertheless, the results found from analysing the transient operation of the
system and the optimization methods proposed do suggest opportunities and limitations that can
be implemented in the physical system as a reference.
Utilization of the chiller and heat pump unit
The concept of having a single refrigerating unit that can provide cooling and heating simultaneously
is an interesting solution, which is in line with the global trend of sustainability and improved
utilization of resources. The concept presented with this particular chiller and heat pump unit
is to develop a system that has a low amount of refrigerant charge, using an inexpensive and
sustainable medium as refrigerant, that is energy eﬃcient with limited global warming potential.
However, the high temperature lift needed with a single stage compression of the refrigerant in
order to satisfy both cooling and heating purposes simultaneously, cause the refrigerating unit to
operate in an ineﬃcient manner, considering that the cooling COP under steady state conditions is
2.03, meaning that for each energy unit spent 2.03 units of cooling are gained with addition of the
energy available for heating purposes. The ineﬃcient manner in which the chiller and heat pump
is operating, counteracts the objective of utilizing energy resources optimally. The beneﬁt from
implementing this product should be thoughtfully considered in a case by case scenario, since most
projects would have superior alternative solutions capable of delivering the heating and cooling
demand, both separately or in a combined solution.
57
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
5
CONCLUSION
A dynamic model of the chiller and heat pump unit was successfully developed in the dynamic
simulation software Dymola, that is based on the object-oriented programming language Modelica.
The TIL model component library together with the TIL media library allowed for using validated
model components and thermodynamic properties of the mediums, to construct a dynamic model
of the refrigeration system. The model was constructed using the design parameters from catalogue
components to present a realistic response. Steady state operation of the chiller and heat pump
unit resulted in a cooling COP of 2.03 and a heating COP of 2.19. The high temperature lift
together with the constraint on the temperature of the refrigerant in the discharge line, results in a
signiﬁcant compressor power uptake and a heating capacity in the condenser that is constrained,
thereby giving a low overall energy eﬃciency. The dynamic model has limiting factors that impact
the examination of the transient behaviour of the unit, mainly due to simplicity of the compressor
model utilized in the model. A simple compressor model was utilized to enable dynamic operation
that fairly represented the transient development of the working mediums in the system. However,
this model component did not provide information to determine the actual compressor work, and
thus the compressor power uptake was extrapolated from a linear regression model, based on
the performance of the catalogue compressor under diﬀerent operating conditions. Other TIL
compressor model components did not have the option of constraining the discharge temperature,
and therefore the refrigerant temperature at the discharge line would be unreasonably high and
would not provide a fair presentation of the transient behaviour during dynamic operation. A
method for mapping the compressor performance should be developed using a larger data set from
operation of a real compressor during various operating conditions. This would result in a more
reasonable estimation of the performance of the chiller and heat pump unit.
Transient operation of the chiller and heat pump unit required developing a control approach that
could ensure satisfying the process cooling and the district heating demands simultaneously. A
non-predictive method with rule based control was chosen as control approach for the dynamic
operation of the system. The controllers were designed based on continuous closed loop control
principles. For a direct expansion system it is critical to ensure that the refrigerant exiting the
evaporator is fully evaporated, to prevent liquid refrigerant from entering the suction line. Thus,
the expansion valve was set to regulate the valve opening degree based on measurements from a
superheating sensor. The refrigerant mass ﬂow rate was regulated by the compressor controller
based on the temperature measurements of the process cooling supply line. Finally, the district
heating control loop on the secondary side of the condenser was regulated by a water pump
controller, to maintain a constant district heating supply temperature by regulating the mass ﬂow
rate of the water. The chosen strategy proved to be able to satisfy the design criteria established
for transient operation of the dynamic model.
For this analysis the transient operation of the chiller and heat pump unit was tested when operating
at rated capacity of 180 kW and reduced to 50 % part load operation, and was subsequently ramped
59
==PAGE:72==
5. Conclusion
up from 50% part load operation to rated capacity. The cooling load was altered using a step
function input. It was found that with the chosen control strategy, the chiller and heat pump
unit is not at risk of having liquid refrigerant exiting the evaporator during the transient period
for both decreasing and increasing cooling load. A minimum amount of superheating of 5.76 K
was observed, as the cooling load was reduced from rated capacity to part load operation. From
the transient behaviour of the ﬂows in the condenser, it was possible to observe that the control
strategy had an inherent time delay, due to the conﬁguration of the control system. This delay
caused the compressor and district heating pump controllers to regulate the mass ﬂow rate of the
refrigerant and water in a counteracting manner for the duration of the transient period. This lead
to subcooling of the refrigerant occuring in the condenser. Tuning of the controller parameters
was done to force a faster response from the district heating pump controller and to reduce the
aggressiveness of the compressor controller. Although this improved the transient response, it did
not mitigate the issue of having subcooling of the refrigerant in the condenser. It is suggested to
alter the control conﬁguration so that the district heating pump is regulated based on pressure
measurements from the high pressure side of the refrigeration cycle. This would force the district
heating pump controller to regulate the water mass ﬂow rate instantaneously as a pressure deviation
is registered.
The transient response during dynamic operation indicated that the expansion valve controller
superheating setpoint could be reduced to 5 K without risking having liquid refrigerant exiting the
evaporator. Reducing the superheating setpoint increases the suction pressure, which ultimately
improves the cooling and heating COP of the chiller and heat pump unit. Due to the limitation
of the compressor model, it was not possible to determine the extent of the improvement in
performance by altering the setpoint. It was observed that reducing the superheating setpoint
to 2 K resulted in an extended period with refrigerant exiting the evaporator with quality of less
than one, indicating a possible risk of having liquid refrigerant entering the suction line. Having a
superheating setpoint of 2 K caused the valve controller to saturate when the refrigerant quality
became less than one, rendering the control approach unstable until the compressor controller and
district heating pump controller were able to stabilize the mass ﬂow rate of the refrigerant and water
as the load started to converge to the operating point. It was not possible to implement a liquid
separator after the evaporator in the dynamic model, since the separator model component forces
the refrigerant to exit the evaporator as a fully evaporated vapour in the saturation point. This
prevented the control of the system from functioning correctly as no superheating was measured,
and could therefore not be used to separate the liquid refrigerant exiting the evaporator with the 2
K superheating setpoint.
The impact of altering the cooling load ramping time was examined, and it was found that when
the cooling load is reduced at a slower rate, the transient response of the chiller and heat pump unit
is less volatile than if a short cooling load ramping time is experienced. The amount of superheating
present during the slower ramping is more constant throughout the transient period, indicating
that there is less risk of the ammonia not being completely evaporated when exiting the evaporator.
It was also observed that the peak value of subcooling of the refrigerant is reduced with a longer
ramping time. However, it is also seen that subcooling will occur throughout the transient period,
which is due to the time delay deriving from the choice of control strategy.
60
==PAGE:73==
5. Conclusion
5.1
Future Work
For the dynamic model to be improved it is important to develop a method to account for the
actual compressor work, whilst still having the temperature constraint of the refrigerant exiting
the compressor. Developing a method for simulating the oil cooling system will present a better
representation of the expected transient operation of the chiller and heat pump unit. Mapping the
performance of the compressor based on a larger set of operational data points would be a practical
method of obtaining reasonable estimation of compressor performance.
A liquid separator model that does not force the refrigerant exiting the evaporator to be fully
evaporated before entering the liquid separator, will enable the possibility of utilizing a lower
expansion valve controller setpoint for the superheating. By operating with a lower amount of
superheating, the suction pressure can be further increased, which improves the energy eﬃciency of
the chiller and heat pump unit. The complexity of developing a liquid separator with multi-phase
ﬂow process could present an option for an independent study in itself.
A pipe model component should be implemented in the dynamic model that represents the physical
suction pipe, allowing thermal interaction with the ambient conditions that are determined by a
user deﬁned temperature input. This will provide a better estimate of the actual risk of having
condensation in the suction line, in addition to enabling an improved control strategy due to having
better knowledge of the transient response.
The control strategy should be altered in order to mitigate the inherent time delay found in the
current control conﬁguration. The district heating pump controller should be regulated based on
pressure measurements on the high pressure side of the refrigeration cycle. This conﬁguration
requires tuning of the controller parameters, to balance the output signal of the district heating
pump controller with the response of the compressor controller to the dynamic cooling load.
The analysis was performed with the initial condition of operating at rated capacity. It would
however be interesting to examine the start-up and shut-down time of the system, in order to
analyse how long it takes for the system to reach the rated capacity. In particular to analyse how
the transient behaviour of the working medium develops during the ramping period, and if any
risks of preventing stable operation are found.
61
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
REFERENCES
[1]
UNFCCC, “Adoption of the paris agreement cop21,” 25th session Paris, vol. 30, 2015.
[2]
International Energy Agency, “World energy balances 2020: Overview,” 2020.
[3]
——, “Global energy review 2019,” 2019.
[4]
EuroSTAT, Energy consumption in households, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Energy_consumption_
in_households#Context
[5]
H. Lund, P. A. Østergaard, D. Connolly, and B. V. Mathiesen, “Smart energy and smart
energy systems,” Energy, vol. 137, pp. 556–565, 2017.
[6]
S. Werner, “District heating and cooling,” 2013.
[7]
H. Lund, S. Werner, R. Wiltshire, S. Svendsen, J. E. Thorsen, F. Hvelplund, and B. V.
Mathiesen, “4th generation district heating (4gdh): Integrating smart thermal grids into
future sustainable energy systems,” Energy, vol. 68, pp. 1–11, 2014.
[8]
E. Granryd, Refrigerating Engineering.
Royal Institute of Technology-Department of Energy
Technology, 2011.
[9]
R. H. Turner and J. M. Cimbala, Fundamentals of thermal-ﬂuid sciences.
McGraw-Hill, 2008.
[10] United Nations Environment Programme Ozone Secretariat, Handbook for the Montreal
protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer.
UNEP/Earthprint, 2006.
[11] E. A. Heath, “Amendment to the montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone
layer (kigali amendment),” International Legal Materials, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 193–205, 2017.
[12] V. S. Fuentes, W. Brix Markussen, E. Damgaard Rothuizen, J. Kristofersson, C. Madsen, and
B. Elmegaard, “Medium capacity low charge ammonia chiller and heat pump,” 2020.
[13] R. Ciconkov and Z. H. Ayub, “New technologies in ammonia refrigerating and
air-conditioning systems,” Heat transfer engineering, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 324–329, 2009.
[14] J. Corberan and IIF-IIR, “Refrigerant charge reduction in refrigerating systems. 25th
informatory note on refrigeration technologies,” 2014.
[15] A. Pearson, “The advantages and disadvantages of charge reduction in industrial systems,”
11th Iir Gustav Lorentzen Conference on Natural Refrigerants (2014), pp. 963–969, 2014.
[16] W. Meesenburg, W. B. Markussen, T. Ommen, and B. Elmegaard, “Optimizing control of
two-stage ammonia heat pump for fast regulation of power uptake,” Applied Energy, vol. 271,
p. 115126, 2020.
63
==PAGE:76==
References
[17] European Committee for Standardization, “EN 14511 - Air conditioners, liquid chilling
packages and heat pumps for space heating and cooling and process chillers, with electrically
driven compressors,” 2018.
[18] Dassault Systémes, “Dymola Systems Engineering, version 2019x,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.3ds.com/products-services/catia/products/dymola/
[19] C. L. Phillips and J. M. Parr, Feedback control systems.
Prentice Hall, 2011.
[20] Modelica Association, “Modelica and Modelica Standard library,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://modelica.org/
[21] TLK Thermo GmbH IfT, “TIL 3.4, Model library for thermal components and systems,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.tlk-thermo.com/index.php/en/software/til-suite
[22] ——, “TILMedia, Model library providing thermophysical properties,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.tlk-thermo.com/index.php/en/software/til-suite
[23] C. Richter, “Proposal of new object-oriented equation-based model libraries for
thermodynamic systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, 2008.
[24] F. E. Cellier and E. Kofman, Continuous system simulation.
Springer Science & Business
Media, 2006.
[25] BITZER Kühlmaschinenbau GmbH, “BITZER Software,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bitzer.de/websoftware/
[26] G. A. Longo, “Refrigerant r134a condensation heat transfer and pressure drop inside a small
brazed plate heat exchanger,” International journal of refrigeration, vol. 31, no. 5, pp.
780–789, 2008.
[27] J. G. Collier and J. R. Thome, Convective boiling and condensation.
Clarendon Press, 1994.
[28] H. D. Baehr and K. Stephan, Wärme-und stoﬀübertragung.
Springer, 1994, vol. 7.
[29] H. Martin, “A theoretical approach to predict the performance of chevron-type plate heat
exchangers,” Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensiﬁcation, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
301–310, 1996.
[30] D. Fischer and H. Madani, “On heat pumps in smart grids: A review,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 70, pp. 342–357, 2017.
[31] K. Hiltunen, A. Jäsberg, S. Kallio, H. Karema, M. Kataja, A. Koponen, M. Manninen, and
V. Taivassalo, “Multiphase ﬂow dynamics,” Theory and Numerics. Tech. Rep, vol. 722, 2009.
[32] P. S. Nielsen, “Eﬀects of water contamination in ammonia refrigeration systems,” 2000.
[33] S. Jensen and M. Elstrøm, “Low charge ammonia dx system controlled by hbx vapor quality
sensors,” 2017.
64
==PAGE:77==
A CATALOGUE COMPONENTS
The data sheets of the components used to develop the dynamic model in Dymola is presented
from the next page in the following order of succession:
1. Compressor - Open Screw Compressor model OSHA7472-K from Bitzer
2. Evaporator - Brazed plate heat exchanger model P250ASHx94/1P from SWEP
3. Condenser - Brazed plate heat exchanger model B25THx114/1P from SWEP
65
==PAGE:78==
OSHA7472-K
BITZER Software v6.15.2 rev2501
01-11-2020 / All data subject to change.
1 / 4
Selection: Open Screw Compressors OS
Input Values
Compressor model
OSHA7472-K
Refrigerant
R717
Reference temperature
Dew point temp.
Evaporating SST
0 °C
Condensing SDT
60,0 °C
Liq. subc. (in condenser)
0 K
Suct. gas superheat
10,00 K
Operating mode
Standard
Speed
2900 /min
Useful superheat
100%
Additional cooling
Automatic
Max. discharge gas temp.
80,0 °C
Result
Compressor
OSHA7472-K
Capacity steps
100%
Cooling capacity
180,7 kW
Cooling capacity *
182,5 kW
Evaporator capacity
180,7 kW
Shaft power
88,3 kW
Condenser capacity
194,0 kW
COP/EER
2,05
COP/EER *
2,07
Mass flow LP
651 kg/h
Mass flow HP
651 kg/h
Operating mode
Standard
Liquid temp.
60,0 °C
Oil volume flow
2,90 m³/h
Cooling method
External
Oil cooler outlet
25,9 °C
Oil cooler load
74,9 kW
Recommended driving motor
110,0 kW
Discharge gas temp. w/o cooling
227 °C
Additional cooling/ Limitations (see Limits)!
Coupling housing for this motor size not available
Starting point for motor selection see T. Data/ Notes
*According to EN12900 (5K suction gas superheat, 0K liquid subcooling)
Application Limits Standard OSHA7472
Legend
==PAGE:79==
OSHA7472-K
BITZER Software v6.15.2 rev2501
01-11-2020 / All data subject to change.
2 / 4
Technical Data: OSHA7472-K
Dimensions and Connections
Technical Data
Technical Data
Displacement (2900 RPM 50 Hz)
250 m³/h
Displacement (3500 RPM 60 Hz)
302 m³/h
Allowed speed range
1450 .. 4000 min-1
Sens of rotation (compressor)
links / counter-clockwise
Weight
188 kg
Max. pressure (LP/HP)
19 / 28 bar
Connection suction line
76 mm - 3 1/8''
Connection suction line (NH3)
DN 80
Connection discharge line
54 mm - 2 1/8''
Connection discharge line (NH3)
DN 50
Adapter for ECO (NH3)
DN 20 (Option)
Oil type NH3
Reniso KC68 , SHC 226E
Extent of delivery (Standard)
Suction shut-off valve
Standard
Pressure relief valve
Standard
Check valve
Standard
Oil injection kit
Standard
Built in oil filter
Standard
discharge gas temperature monitoring
SE-B2
Discharge gas temperature sensor
Standard
Start unloading
Standard
Capacity control
100-75-50% (Standard)
Protective charge
Standard
Available Options
Oil flow control
Option
Discharge shut-off valve
Option
ECO connection with shut-off valve
Option
Coupling housing
Option
==PAGE:80==
www.swep.net
SWEP International AB
Box 105, Hjalmar Brantings väg 5
SE-261 22 Landskrona, Sweden
M4QUK6TTAPX6XB5GAYHB5RLCR7ICEF
www.swep.net
Page: 1/2
30/10/2020
Date: 
HEAT EXCHANGER:  P250ASHx94/1P 
SWEP SSP G8 2020.1027.2.0
30/10/2020
Date: 
EVAPORATOR - DESIGN
P250AS
SSP Alias:
DUTY REQUIREMENTS
Side 1
Side 2
Fluid
Ammonia (NH3) 
Water 
Flow type
Counter-Current
Circuit
Inner
Outer
Chanel
narrow
wide
Heat load
kW
180,0
Subcooled liq. temp.
°C
Inlet vapor quality
0,225
Outlet vapor quality
1,000
Inlet temperature
°C
0,49
12,00
Evaporation temperature (dew)
°C
0,00
Superheating
K
10,00
Outlet temperature
°C
10,00
7,00
Flow rate
kg/s
0,1793
8,584
• Inlet vapor
kg/s
0,04035
Fluid vaporized
kg/s
0,1390
Pressure drop (Design PD)
kPa
8,91 (50,00)
51,4 (50,00)
PLATE HEAT EXCHANGER
Side 1
Side 2
Total heat transfer area
11,9
m²
Heat flux
15,1
kW/m²
Mean temperature difference
9,43
K
O.H.T.C. (available/required)
2150/1600
W/m²,°C
Pressure drop - total*
8,91
51,4
kPa
- in ports (Inlet/Outlet)
-0,732/0,614
3,60
kPa
Pressure drop in fluid distribution
193 - 227
kPa
Operating pressure (outlet)
430
kPa
Number of channels per pass
46
47
Number of plates
94
Oversurfacing
34
%
Fouling factor
0,160
m²,°C/kW
Port diameter (up/down)
63,0/34,0
63,0/63,0
mm
Recommended inlet connection diameter
20,7 - 32,7
mm
Recommended outlet connection diameter
51,8 - 116
mm
Reynolds number
1389
Outlet port velocity
17,1
2,75
m/s
Channel velocity
3,55
0,559
m/s
Shear stress
74,5
Pa
Largest wall temperature difference
0,98
K
Min./Max. wall temperature
2,82/11,17
3,35/11,27
°C
*Excluding pressure drop in connections.
NOTES
Pressure drop in distribution device is 1,9 - 2,3 bar .
Very high heat flux not experimentally certified (15 kW/m²).
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Side 1
Side 2
Reference temperature
0,40
9,44
°C
Liquid • Dynamic viscosity
0,170
1,33
cP
• Density
638,1
999,7
kg/m³
• Heat capacity
4,600
4,194
kJ/kg,°C
==PAGE:81==
www.swep.net
SWEP International AB
Box 105, Hjalmar Brantings väg 5
SE-261 22 Landskrona, Sweden
M4QUK6TTAPX6XB5GAYHB5RLCR7ICEF
www.swep.net
Page: 2/2
30/10/2020
Date: 
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Side 1
Side 2
• Thermal conductivity
0,5578
0,5789
W/m,°C
Vapor • Dynamic viscosity
9,25e-3
cP
• Density
3,408
kg/m³
• Heat capacity
2,329
kJ/kg,°C
• Thermal conductivity
0,02282
W/m,°C
• Latent heat
1264
kJ/kg
Film coefficient
19300
10000
W/m²,°C
TOTALS
Side 1
Side 2
41,25 - 45,09
kg
Total weight (no connections)*
7,91
dm³
Hold-up volume (Inner  Circuit)
9,49
dm³
Hold-up volume (Outer Circuit)
63
mm
Port size F1/P1
63
mm
Port size F2/P2
42
mm
Port size F3/P3
63
mm
Port size F4/P4
289,92
kg
Carbon footprint
*Weight depends on the selected product.
DIMENSIONS
mm
A
620 ±2
mm
B
202 ±1
mm
C
538 ±1
mm
D
112 ±1
mm
E
27 (opt. 54) 
mm
F*
193,54 - 205,18 ±3%
mm
G
0 ±1
mm
H
530 ±1
mm
I
120 ±1
mm
K
45 
mm
N
45 
mm
R
45 
*This is a schematic sketch. For correct drawings please use the order 
drawing function or contact your SWEP representative.
*Dimensions depend on the selected product.
Disclaimer:
Data used in this calculation is subject to change without notice. SWEP strives to use ”best practice” for the calculations leading to the above results. Calculation is intended to show
thermal and hydraulic performance, no consideration has been taken to mechanical strength of the product. Product restrictions  - such as pressure, temperatures and corrosion 
resistance- can be found in SWEP product sheets and other technical documentation.  SWEP may have patents, trademarks, copyrights or other intellectual property rights covering
subject matter in this document. Except as expressly provided in any written license agreement from SWEP, the furnishing of this document does not give you any license to these
patents, trademarks, copyrights, or other intellectual property. To the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, the software, the calculations and the results are provided without
warranties of any kind, whether express or implied. No advice or information obtained through use of the software (including information provided in the results), will create any
warranty not expressly stated in the applicable license terms. Without limiting the foregoing, SWEP does not warrant that the content (including the calculations and the results) is
accurate, reliable or correct. SWEP does not warrant that any system comprising heat exchanger and other components, installed on the basis of calculations in this software, will
meet your requirements or function to your satisfaction or expectations.
==PAGE:82==
www.swep.net
SWEP International AB
Box 105, Hjalmar Brantings väg 5
SE-261 22 Landskrona, Sweden
M4QUK6TTAPX6XB5GAYHB5RLCR7ICEF
www.swep.net
Page: 1/2
30/10/2020
Date: 
HEAT EXCHANGER:  B25THx114/1P 
SWEP SSP G8 2020.1027.2.0
30/10/2020
Date: 
CONDENSER - DESIGN
B25T
SSP Alias:
DUTY REQUIREMENTS
Side 1
Side 2
Fluid
Ammonia (NH3) 
Water 
Flow type
Counter-Current
Circuit
Inner
Outer
Heat load
kW
200,0
Inlet temperature
°C
80,00
40,00
Condensation temperature (dew)
°C
60,00
Subcooling
K
0,00
Outlet temperature
°C
60,00
60,00
Flow rate
kg/s
0,1901
2,392
Fluid condensed
kg/s
0,1901
Pressure drop (Design PD)
kPa
2,31 (50,00)
32,1 (50,00)
PLATE HEAT EXCHANGER
Side 1
Side 2
Total heat transfer area
7,06
m²
Heat flux
28,3
kW/m²
Mean temperature difference
6,79
K
O.H.T.C. (available/required)
4100/4180
W/m²,°C
Pressure drop - total*
2,31
32,1
kPa
- in ports (Inlet/Outlet)
-2,45/0,207
14,0
kPa
Operating pressure (outlet)
2610
kPa
Number of channels per pass
56
57
Number of plates
114
Oversurfacing
0
%
Fouling factor
-0,005
m²,°C/kW
Port diameter (up/down)
24,0/24,0
24,0/24,0
mm
Recommended inlet connection diameter
22,6 - 50,5
mm
Recommended outlet connection diameter
14,9 - 29,8
mm
Reynolds number
1357
Inlet Port velocity
22,1
5,35
m/s
Channel velocity
0,790
0,188
m/s
Shear stress
37,8
Pa
Largest wall temperature difference
1,15
K
Min./Max. wall temperature
45,02/61,57
44,25/61,30
°C
*Excluding pressure drop in connections.
NOTES
Very high heat flux not experimentally certified (28,34 kW/m²).
Secondary side port pressure drop is high in relation to total pressure drop. This could cause secondary side 
maldistribution
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Side 1
Side 2
Reference temperature
60,03
50,00
°C
Liquid • Dynamic viscosity
0,0944
0,547
cP
• Density
544,1
988,1
kg/m³
• Heat capacity
5,221
4,181
kJ/kg,°C
• Thermal conductivity
0,3904
0,6436
W/m,°C
Vapor • Dynamic viscosity
0,0114
cP
• Density
19,01
kg/m³
• Heat capacity
3,149
kJ/kg,°C
• Thermal conductivity
0,02838
W/m,°C
==PAGE:83==
www.swep.net
SWEP International AB
Box 105, Hjalmar Brantings väg 5
SE-261 22 Landskrona, Sweden
M4QUK6TTAPX6XB5GAYHB5RLCR7ICEF
www.swep.net
Page: 2/2
30/10/2020
Date: 
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Side 1
Side 2
• Latent heat
989,9
kJ/kg
Film coefficient
10300
12600
W/m²,°C
TOTALS
Side 1
Side 2
21,28 - 24,14
kg
Total weight (no connections)*
6,22
dm³
Hold-up volume (Inner  Circuit)
0,35
kg
Estimated refrigerant charge
6,33
dm³
Hold-up volume (Outer Circuit)
24
mm
Port size F1/P1
24
mm
Port size F2/P2
24
mm
Port size F3/P3
24
mm
Port size F4/P4
157,15
kg
Carbon footprint
*Weight depends on the selected product.
DIMENSIONS
mm
A*
524 - 526 ±2
mm
B*
117 - 119 ±1
mm
C
479 ±1
mm
D
72 ±1
mm
E
20 (opt. 45) ±1
mm
F*
258,5 - 268,48 ±3%
mm
G*
4 - 7 ±1
mm
R*
22 - 23 
*This is a schematic sketch. For correct drawings please use the order 
drawing function or contact your SWEP representative.
*Dimensions depend on the selected product.
Disclaimer:
Data used in this calculation is subject to change without notice. SWEP strives to use ”best practice” for the calculations leading to the above results. Calculation is intended to show
thermal and hydraulic performance, no consideration has been taken to mechanical strength of the product. Product restrictions  - such as pressure, temperatures and corrosion 
resistance- can be found in SWEP product sheets and other technical documentation.  SWEP may have patents, trademarks, copyrights or other intellectual property rights covering
subject matter in this document. Except as expressly provided in any written license agreement from SWEP, the furnishing of this document does not give you any license to these
patents, trademarks, copyrights, or other intellectual property. To the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, the software, the calculations and the results are provided without
warranties of any kind, whether express or implied. No advice or information obtained through use of the software (including information provided in the results), will create any
warranty not expressly stated in the applicable license terms. Without limiting the foregoing, SWEP does not warrant that the content (including the calculations and the results) is
accurate, reliable or correct. SWEP does not warrant that any system comprising heat exchanger and other components, installed on the basis of calculations in this software, will
meet your requirements or function to your satisfaction or expectations.
==PAGE:84==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone: +45 4525 4131
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk 
January 2021
