==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis - Human-Centered AI
Deep Learning for Stance Detection
on Twitter
Authors:
Andrew Ardueser (s182332)
January 24, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Contents
1
Abstract
2
2
Introduction
3
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Data Processing
6
3.1
Data Acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Dataset Arbitration Explanation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Model Architecture
13
4.1
Fast-Text Classiﬁer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.1
Input Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.2
Embedding Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.3
Dropout Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.4
Pooling Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.5
Dense layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Relevant Hashtag Classiﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.1
LSTM layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
Attention Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
Representation and output layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Putting it all together
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Transfer Learning and Chain-Thaw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Model Results
25
5.1
Fast-text Classiﬁer Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Relevant Hashtag Classiﬁer Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Final Architecture Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Conclusion
32
7
Future Work
32
8
Appendix
34
1 of 37
==PAGE:3==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
1
Abstract
In order to identify climate change denial on Twitter, I created a deep learning model based
on iterations from Felbo [6] and Mønsted/Lehmann [13]. From a large remote database, a
dataset of tweets from related hashtags were labeled as “real”, “hoaxer”, or “neutral”. By
utilizing a fast-text classiﬁer combined with a relevant hashtag classiﬁer, the model was able
to predict climate change stances on a test data subset with an accuracy of 86.75%. The
fast-text architecture made predictions on the 3 stances and used mainly word embedding
and pooling methods. The relevant hashtag classiﬁer predicted one of 32 selected hashtags
and made use of transfer learning and “chain-thaw” methods to gain insights from previous
models.
Given the goal for the model to be able to identify hoaxer tweets which are a
small minority of the full range of Twitter content, an estimated accuracy assuming the
most popular stance each time would be nearly useless at 0%.
Thus, I considered that
an expected accuracy of 1/n for an n-class prediction would be a suﬃcient base level for
prediction accuracy. Each component separately saw prediction accuracies far greater than
the expected accuracy for their respective classiﬁcation problems.
2 of 37
==PAGE:4==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
2
Introduction
2.1
Background
Since its inception in the early 2000s, social media has grown from novelty to widely accepted
practice [4]. Figure 1 shows the growth of social media platforms from 2004 until 2019 as
tracked by ourworldindata.org. The wide array of social media sites allows for an equally
diverse range of users to voice their opinion to millions of people worldwide. From world
news to journal articles to grandma’s cinnamon roll recipe, these sites have facilitated the
quick and easy spread of information between users regardless of distance. The volume of
social media content created daily is staggering, with 500 million posts being created daily
on Twitter alone in 2019 [2].
Figure 1: Increasing use of social media usage over time. The user base
of each platform may overlap, but the graph shows social media is used
by a large portion of the human population and is still on the rise. [2]
In 2006, UK mathematician Clive Humby stated, “Data is the new oil. It’s valuable, but if
unreﬁned it cannot really be used.” [16] As with the massive boom in social media information
being created, the increasing availability of data has the potential to provide deep insights
into how people communicate online but only if processed and analyzed properly. In 2017,
Bjarke Felbo published a paper detailing a deep neural network architecture which had the
3 of 37
==PAGE:5==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
ability to take tweet text as input and accurately predict an emoji which would appropriately
end the message [6]. Though the use of the model was somewhat trivial on its face, it opened
the door for other researchers to approach continue processing large amounts of social media
datasets in order to solve a larger variety of problems, including those related to the ubiquitous
presence of news on the platforms.
Though the namesake would suggest users rely on social media sites to primarily interact
with friends and family, a majority of US citizens - 62% - also get news from social media
sites [7]. While the medium provides an accessible platform for diﬀusing information, a recent
virtual pandemic has been spreading in the form of scientiﬁc misinformation. Topics such as
vaccinations and climate change have been subject to waves of users spouting scientiﬁcally
unsupported claims [14]. From a debunked link between vaccines and autism to the assertion
that climate change does not exist, communities have been formed on prominent sites such
as Facebook, Twitter, and Youtube around these false claims. Due to the large amount
of content generated on these sites, the users forming these groups (hereby referred to as
“hoaxers”) have been able to proliferate their malignant information largely unnoticed and
unfettered until recently [1].
According to Scheufele and Krause in 2019, false information falls into the categories of
“misinformation” (implying a lack of correct knowledge about a subject) or “disinformation”
(implying the intentional spread of information which is known to be false) [18]. Real-world
consequences have been reportedly linked to the spread of false information by these “hoax-
ers”. In January 2019, a measles outbreak in the United States infected 72 people most of
which were children [25]. Accounted largely to be caused by the recent anti-vaccination or
“anti-vax” movement, Measles was previously eradicated but was able to return on a popu-
lation with lower immunity [3]. The consequences of unaddressed climate change described
by Winn, Kirchgeorg, Griﬃths, Linnenluecke, G¨unther show the importance of increasing
eﬀorts to become more sustainable as a global eﬀort [26]. However, the acquisition of po-
litical power by growing climate change denial eﬀorts would brake the movement towards a
healthier planet.
These social media sites have suﬀered severe public backlash as these hoaxer communities
became more prominent. In response, platforms like Twitter have acknowledged a lack of ef-
fective disinformation detection methods. In 2019, a state representative in the United States
wrote to Youtube and Facebook regarding the growing anti-vax groups on their platforms
[19]. This letter revealed a deep concern for the quality and intent of the content being used
to mislead the public, stating “the dissemination of unfounded and debunked theories about
the dangers of vaccinations pose a great risk to public health.” The methods with which
popular social media platforms identify potentially harmful or dangerous information have
largely been comprised of a manual reporting and evaluation system.
4 of 37
==PAGE:6==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
While social media sites with a smaller number of users may be able to eﬀectively rely on
manual methods, larger platforms have a need for ability to algorithmically assess new content
and identify speciﬁc stances early. Whether the platform chooses to block the content or signal
users to vetted resources, these algorithms would give them the ability to address problematic
subsets of the larger user base quickly and eﬀectively. As these communities spread disproven
scientiﬁc misinformation towards a naive population, the push for more eﬀective content
monitoring conveniently coincides with the growth of natural language processing with deep
learning models.
Providing the near-instant analysis of text and near-human accuracy, deep recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) have been the choice of many researchers in the ﬁeld. Following the lead
of Felbo in 2017, Mønsted and Lehmann [13] extended the idea of predicting emojis at the
end of tweets to predicting hashtags. They found that establishing a classiﬁer on a list of
hashtags and pairing it with a basic text classiﬁer provided good results in predicting if the
tweet author was promoting a pro-vaxx, anti-vaxx, or neutral stance. With an average F1-
score of 0.762 on a 3-class problem and 90.4±1.4% accuracy on a binary case, the application
of deep learning architectures to the content review problem is obvious.
While continuing into the realm of vaccine stance detection would have likely been a fruitful
option, I chose to extend the concept to other hoaxer communities. The current political
climate is addressing man-made climate change more directly than ever before. The signing
of the Paris Accord in 2016 within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) shows that the matter is getting considerable international attention
[17]. The signature of 197 countries signifying the commitment to address the global issue
of climate change signals the opportunity to develop more sophisticated measures for identi-
fying climate change denial on social media platforms. The consequences of climate change
are urgent and must be addressed globally to prevent even more severe eﬀects in the near
future[8]. For these reasons, climate change seemed to warrant being the focus of my thesis.
As the anti-vaxx and climate change denial communities are often juxtaposed in mainstream
media, I followed Mønsted/Lehmann the aggregation of my climate change data and creation
of a deep neural network. In this report, I will explain the methodology behind the dataset
creation and network architecture before presenting my model’s stance classiﬁcation results.
5 of 37
==PAGE:7==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
3
Data Processing
3.1
Data Acquisition
While deep learning models are eﬀective at ﬁnding patterns in speech used for stance de-
tection, these architectures require a large amount of data to create an accurate model. To
create a dataset which would satisfy the goal of identifying climate change denial sentiment
in tweets, an estimate dataset size of 2,000 was decided. As each tweet needed to be manually
labelled for the training process, the number of tweets to be fed into the model was somewhat
limited. Creating such a large dataset would have involved a large amount of time and eﬀort
with web scraping via API returns. However, a tweet dataset consisting more than 6.8 TB
of raw tweet text was made available on a remote server in the form of several compressed
ﬁles. These ﬁles were created over time through an oﬃcial Twitter API and encompassed
approximately 1% of all tweets made available from January 2010 to June 2019. Though
there is more than a suﬃcient number of tweets related to climate change, the desired tweets
were only a small piece spread throughout the complete dataset.
In order to access the remote server, I learned and used SCP (Secure Copy Protocol) and
SSH (Secure Shell) network protocol via the command line. Initial exploration of the server
structure showed large compressed ﬁles with an lz4 ﬁle type. Lz4 ﬁles were created with the
focus of fast lossless compression and decoding for large ﬁles [12]. With compression speeds of
approximately 500MB per second per GPU core and decoding speeds of “multiple GBs” per
second per GPU core, the use of lz4 ﬁles for storage usually implies the ﬁles contain a large
amount of data. In this case, each ﬁle contained millions of tweets from a single date collected
via the Twitter API . These compressed, tab-separated ﬁles contained information for each
tweet including: internal tweet ID, user ID, timestamp, source, geo-tag, location, tweet text,
and twitter handle. Early python scripts to explore the data involved simple function calls,
iterating over the entirety of a single ﬁle. These would analyze basic statistics about a single
ﬁle and normally take 20 minutes while having access to the 32-core GPUs on the server.
With tweet data dating back to 2014, a decision was made to process only data from 2017
forward. This was due to the likelihood that processing further dates was unnecessary, and
the availability of climate change tweets was more frequent in later years. Additionally in
order to minimize bias, a limit was made of 200 tweets to come from a single month. With
36 available months, I wanted to avoid the situation of including a disproportionate number
of tweets caused by a large event, social media movement, or natural disaster.
Naturally, the goal would be to process the entirety of the available lz4 ﬁles in a feasible
amount of time while creating a clean dataset. The second iteration involved optimization of
function calls, eliminating a lot of unnecessary processing time. However, this only dropped
the the run-time to 15 minutes and left much room for improvement. While continuing to
6 of 37
==PAGE:8==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
add functionality to gather data on the hashtags relevant to climate change, I altered the
function call to utilize a larger number of GPU cores. The parallelization eﬀectively increased
the processing speed by a factor or 32. With the increased text processing and performance
enhancements, the run-time to process a single day’s ﬁle was reduced to 2-3 minutes.
Multiple code iterations were attempted in order to retrieve the climate change subset of
tweets from the remote server to my local machine in order to more easily observe the data
available. The task of local storage for such a large amount of data was diﬃcult to approach.
As the storage space required to hold all climate change tweets locally was several times
more than what was available on a laptop. These attempts included the creation of an index
system to translate the tweet text into integers. The idea was to decrease the amount of
memory needed to store a tweet by changing each part of the tweet from a string to an
integer, taking less space. This process involved breaking down each tweet into a list of
tokens. A demonstration of sentence tokenization would be to transform “Slowly, quarantine
consumed the man.” into
[“slowly” “,” “quarantine” “consumed” “the” “man” “.”] .
Upon creating an integer-word dictionary, the average size of each integer used to replace a
token was actually larger than the average size of the word it was replacing. In hindsight,
replacing a token which has the possibility of any character at each character position with
an integer with only 10 options at each character position is extremely ineﬃcient. Even the
lower-casing of all capitalized letters was insuﬃcient to justify further attempts at the local
token dictionary.
Another attempt was made with creating hashes of each tweet in order to minimize local stor-
age space. After multiple iterations of tweet hashing, the token dictionary idea was abandoned
in favor of solely uploading python scripts to the server and retrieving only summary-level
information until the ﬁnal iterations.
In order to narrow the dataset to include only tweets related to climate change, a number
of hashtags were aggregated from both on and oﬀTwitter. Any word, phrase, or acronym
which seemed to be a feasible hashtag was included. While this early list would likely include
hashtags which either don’t exist on Twitter or don’t occur in the server. This list of hashtags
was used in a python script to acquire a list of all unknown hashtags which occurred in
the same tweet as my list. These hashtags and their respective frequencies throughout the
complete dataset are available in the Appendix.
Figures 2 and 3 show the range of frequencies shown among the new hashtag list within the
dataset.
From this list, I manually reviewed several tweets in order to ensure the existence of all three
stances. After conﬁrming high-quality text data for both stances supporting and denying
7 of 37
==PAGE:9==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 2: The most common hashtags from the aggregated list contains many
which occur tens of thousands of times. As several are so closely linked, only
a few are included in the ﬁnal dataset.
climate change claims, I was able to further assess the best method by which to separate
which tweets would fall into each stance category. However in the initial database subset
review, trends were found which denoted a tweet more as spam than original content. These
tweets included daily newsletters from organizations and identically templated tweets pro-
moting articles written on websites. Investigating these trends, the amount of spam content
warranted manual review of the content to be included in the ﬁnal dataset. While some
of the spam was included for the sake of model robustness, original content from users was
prioritized in order to make best use of the limited dataset size available.
These python scripts for manual review involved searching through the database for instances
of at least one hashtag from the available list. Each was displayed for review to me, and I
would either skip the text to exclude it from the dataset or determine which stance by which
to label it. Multiple partial iterations were performed until a dataset of 2,062 tweets was
created. The methodology by which the stances were determined is described in Dataset
next sub-section.
Further optimizations would be made in order to most eﬀectively utilize the GPUs available
and continue decreasing the necessary processing time for each function call.
The ﬁnal
iterations would be able to process the entirety of the 2017-2019 dataset in approximately 3
hours.
8 of 37
==PAGE:10==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 3: The hashtags with low frequency are typically more closely linked
with a certain stance. While the amount of data coming from these hashtags
is limited, they still provide great beneﬁt in the training process.
3.2
Dataset Arbitration Explanation
The original list of hashtags provided a smaller scope to view the relevant tweets, but after
a small amount of tweet reviews, the range was determined to still be too broad. Thus,
the usage of more speciﬁc hashtags was required. By indexing the climate change tweet
subset, hashtags could be identiﬁed which highly co-occurred with the originally targeted
hashtags. While the more general hashtags (e.g. #climatechange, #earth, #environment)
eliminated many tweets completely irrelevant to the subject matter, the co-occurring tweets
proved to be more highly correlated to the sentiment of the tweet author. For example,
#GretaIsAHero, referencing climate change advocate Greta Thunberg, is used less often by
anti-science tweeters.
To ensure the model can correctly identify both easily identiﬁable
stances and more ambiguous stances, a range of ambiguity was included.
The data subset which contained at least one of the selected hashtags totaled 232,214 tweets.
While this represents a large amount of data, the need to ﬁlter out low-quality tweets and
the requirement of manual stance labeling caused the available dataset to be narrowed con-
siderably. I manually selected and labeled each tweet until a ﬁnal dataset of 2,062 tweets
with equal distributions of “real”, hoaxer, and neutral/unrelated tweets was created. A small
amount of text processing was done for the sake of the model. This included replacing all
URL links with the token “URLTOKEN”. The model interprets any two URLs as entirely
separate words. To avoid ﬁlling the models limited vocabulary size with URLs, they were
all replaced with a token which signiﬁed the author added a link in their tweet to a separate
9 of 37
==PAGE:11==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
website. While this could also be done with mentions (the use of “@” before a username
to notify the tagged user of the tweet), I wanted to retain the information contained in
tweets which mentioned relevant or large users like @GretaThunberg or the now-removed
@realDonaldTrump.
As the objective of a neural network is to accurately predict the target value (in this case
added by by manual review of tweet stances), a set of biased target values may result in
a model biased towards my own subjective opinions. Though I created the dataset in the
most objective method I could determine, there are likely biases which I could not identify,
However, my process as explained below outlines the criteria for what constitutes a “real”
tweet versus a hoaxer tweet.
To explain the characteristics of what would determine a “real” tweet, a hoaxer tweet, or as
unrelated, I focused solely on the text itself while trying to exclude contextual information
from my decision. A “real” tweet contains language which either asserts, recognizes, or does
not refute that both climate change is a real phenomenon and is largely driven by human-
made factors. A hoaxer tweet contains language which asserts that either climate change
isn’t real or that human-made factors play no role in climate change. Any tweet which does
not meet either deﬁnition is categorized in the “neutral” category by default. The category is
consequently populated by tweets which are unrelated entirely, are only tangentially related
to climate change, or contain language making the stance undeterminable (e.g. sarcasm).
This arbitration was chosen with the purpose in mind to most eﬀectively identify both tweets
which would be most dangerous if proliferated. However, a weakness of the model is that
contextual information is ignored. Often hoaxers which disseminate disinformation about
climate change are likely to believe in other conspiracy theories [11]. While tweets containing
conspiracy theory rhetoric unrelated to climate change may have a higher correlation with
the tweet author being a hoaxer, my dataset creation policy ignores this for the sake of a
simpler model. Table 1 shows a list of tweets with their respective labels to further illustrate
my policy’s intent for shaping how the model learns to identify hoaxer sentiment.
10 of 37
==PAGE:12==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Tweet Test
Stance
Reasoning
Psst, Trump. Acting on climate change is a great deal for the U.S. URLTOKEN #environment #climatechange
Real
Appeal to address climate change
On the Gullah, sea level rise, cultural resilience, and food heritage. #climatechange
Real
Lists eﬀects of climate change
Now these are ppl taking #ClimateAction for #climatechange. URLTOKEN
Real
Acknowledges climate change
Half the Great Barrier Reef is Dead. #climatechange #ThursdayThoughts #OldThingsIWantBack URLTOKEN
Real
Lists eﬀects of climate change
#fakescience pushed by Obama admin #ClimateChange2017 #busted URLTOKEN
Hoax
Labels climate change as fake
#climatechange is a sham that is nothing more than a redistribution of wealth scheme!!
Hoax
Labels climate change as fake
@Firegal 01 hate to burst your bubble but man made climate change ain’t real and the environments doing just ﬁne.
Hoax
Disputes human contribution to climate change
The godless typically suﬀer from God complexes. Many manmade climate change acolytes are ’secularists.’ URLTOKEN
Hoax
Disputes human contribution to climate change
let’s take appropriate steps to save water before its too late! #waterconservation #savetheplanet #sustainability URLTOKEN
Neutral
Tangentially related to climate change
Victoria’s law and order election year budget .. URLTOKEN #climatechange
Neutral
Unable to determine stance from language
Stop killing mountains to make @MountainDew. #climatechange
Neutral
Unable to determine stance/Unrelated
Oh the possibilities, really excited for this account! #climate #climatechange
Neutral
Unable to determine stance/Unrelated
Table 1: These tweets from the dataset were manually labeled with stances according to a
speciﬁc methodology. For a tweet to be labeled “real”, it must contain language
acknowledging climate change is real while hoaxer tweets must contain language denying
climate change. Neutral tweets either don’t contain the necessary language or are worded in
a way in stance cannot be determined.
This initial “stance” dataset was used as the training data for both the fast-text classiﬁer
and the ﬁnal model. However, the relevant hashtag classiﬁer required no manually labeled
data. By creating a separate pipeline, I was able to strip hashtags from tweets and add
an observation to the dataset for each relevant hashtag contained in the text. Further, the
python script to crawl the remote tweet database could retrieve all tweets containing at least
one of the selected hashtags. This method increased the amount of data for the relevant
hashtag classiﬁer from 2,062 to 15,387. Table 2 is the frequency distribution of the chosen
hashtags in the relevant hashtag classiﬁer dataset. As shown, the more speciﬁc hashtags like
climatescam and climatechangeisreal have fewer occurrences. While this causes an imbalance
in the dataset, I still chose to include them due to their strong tendency to only occur in a
“real” or hoaxer tweet.
11 of 37
==PAGE:13==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Hashtag
Frequency
#climatechange
11366
#climate
7507
#health
7124
#technology
5200
#weather
3988
#climateaction
3452
#trump
2731
#tcot
2674
#science
2671
#environment
2224
#fakenews
1980
#globalwarming
1319
#sustainability
1256
#water
809
#earth
730
#tlot
398
#conservation
389
#biodiversity
354
#renewables
310
#pollution
259
#climatechangeisreal
248
#gogreen
192
#conservationfunds
177
#conspiracy
165
#zerowaste
128
#msm
76
#savetheplanet
61
#spreadawareness
43
#hoax
42
#climatehoax
40
#climatechangehoax
21
#climatescam
20
Table 2: These hashtags were used to narrow the dataset from 232,214 tweets to 2,062.
They were chosen to include both general hashtags with high frequencies and speciﬁc
hashtags with low frequencies. The list contains speciﬁc hashtags for both “real” and
hoaxer tweets.
12 of 37
==PAGE:14==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
4
Model Architecture
My model’s architecture follows that of Mønsted/Lehmann’s [13] with changes to hyperpa-
rameters. The structure can be broken down into 3 components: a fast-text classiﬁer, a
hashtag context classiﬁer, and a ﬁnal concatenation of the previous two. The intent of the
model architecture is to acquire an understanding of each tweet’s tokens through the fast-
text classiﬁer while interpreting the sequential connections between the tokens in the relevant
hashtag classiﬁer.
Figure 4: The complete model architecture is build from the fast-text classiﬁer on the left
side and the relevant hashtag classiﬁer on the right side. Each component outputs to a set
of nodes (three for fast-text and 32 for relevant hashtags) to predict on their own tasks.
They are concatenated for a ﬁnal result to predict one of three stances.
4.1
Fast-Text Classiﬁer
This network is constructed in a way to take tweet text as input, process all the tokens at
once, and yield an output to predict if the text is “real”, from a hoaxer, or neutral.
13 of 37
==PAGE:15==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 5: The fast-text architecture is designed to process the tokens within a tweet
without regards for their order. By processing the relationship between the tokens present,
the model is able to classify each tweet into one of the available stances.
The fast-text classiﬁer is a neural network comprised of 5 unique layers.
4.1.1
Input Layer
The ﬁrst is an input layer, which as the name implies, processes the input data in the form
of vectors.
In order for the network to take the tweet text data as input, it has to be
translated into vector form. Each tweet is transformed into a token list, separated into sub-
strings including words and punctuation. A python package called “Twokenize” was used,
as the tokenization process was coded to handle speciﬁcally tweet text [22]. From the token
lists, a token dictionary is formed to create a 1-to-1 indexing between token and numerical
representation.
Word vectors (containing only numerical representations) are created by
translating the token lists via the token dictionary. These word vectors are passed into the
input layer, which has a ﬁxed maximum vector length 50. The maximum length is set to a
number which would include all input texts.
14 of 37
==PAGE:16==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 6: The word vector translation converts a list of tokens into a set of integers which
can be interpreted by the model. All words from the dataset are given an entry in the
makeshift dictionary.
4.1.2
Embedding Layer
From the input layer, the vector is passed into an embedding layer. The embedding then
projects each word (represented as an integer) into a continuous vector space. By mapping a
categorical vector to one containing continuous numbers, the dimensionality is reduced and
word vector representations can be grouped together to ﬁnd underlying patterns. In the
context of identifying climate change denial, these produced word embeddings are created
in a way which allows later layers to interpret the patterns among the grouped word vectors
and eventually correlate groupings to be in one of the three categories. While the embedding
layer isn’t built to explicitly understand the syntax of the tweet’s language, the network’s
ability to assess the relationship between these continuous vector representations is extremely
useful.
Figure 7: The embedding layer takes the integer vector from the input layer and calculates
an n-dimensional vector representation for each before passing it onto the next layer.
15 of 37
==PAGE:17==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
4.1.3
Dropout Layer
One challenge neural networks face in training to ﬁnd underlying patterns is overﬁtting
[20].
An eﬀective method to combat this is the addition of a dropout layer.
In neural
network layouts, information is passed along between the cells of each layer.
A dropout
layer’s function is to remove a number of outputs from the previous layer along with their
connections. Given a dropout value between [0,1), this is the chance for each cell’s output
to be removed. This random removal of cells has shown to reduce the co-learning of cells,
causing patterns of the training set to be trained into the network too thoroughly and reduce
its eﬀective generalization. A dropout layer is added after both the embedding layer and
pooling layers of the network in order to decrease overﬁtting throughout the network.
Figure 8: The dropout layer removes output values from the network to avoid overﬁtting.
Each node has a pre-determined percent chance of having its value set to 0, eﬀectivly
removing its information from the network. [20]
4.1.4
Pooling Layer
Though most often used with convolutional neural networks, pooling layers are used eﬀec-
tively to down-sample previously established patterns. From the embedding layer, the net-
work has created a feature map. A major issue with the mapping is the lack of account for
position variability. The appearance of a phrase like “Climate change is fraudulent.” within
a tweet gives the obvious notion that the author is a hoaxer. However if the embedding
layer only processes tweets where the phrase occurs at the beginning of a tweet, it wouldn’t
be able to recognize the pattern when it occurs at the end of a tweet. Thus, the pooling
layer is implemented. By eﬀectively down-sampling the patterns found by the embedding,
the pattern identiﬁcation becomes position invariant.
16 of 37
==PAGE:18==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 9: The pooling layer transforms each token vector into a single number, returning
the network representation of the data back into a 1-dimensional vector.
4.1.5
Dense layer
The ﬁnal output of the fast-text classiﬁer comes from a dense layer (aka fully connected
layer). With a simple structure, the dense layer connects each cell from the previous layer
to each output cell via a weighted connection. As the network has processed the data and
found underlying patterns, those patterns are passed through the ﬁnal output layer which
perform weighted sums on the previous layer’s output using the weight matrix leading to
three output nodes, denoting the available stance predictions.
Figure 10: The dense layer takes the pooling layer output and calculates each input’s eﬀect
on each stance via the weight matrix. The prediction values are passed through a sigmoid
function in order to give an eﬀective probability distribution of the predicted classes.
17 of 37
==PAGE:19==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
The formulas involved in the dense output layer are as follows:
Output
y = f(
X
j
wjxj + b)
where y is the output vector, xj is the input to cell at position j, wj is the cell weight at
position j, and b is the value of the bias cell.
Softmax
σ ⃗
(x) =
ezi
PK
j=1 ezj
where ⃗
(x) is the input vector, zi is the input value of the output cell at position i, and K is
the number of input cells [5].
Through training, the patterns found within each tweet text are evaluated, and the output
values are put through a softmax function in order to yield eﬀectively a probability distribu-
tion of the stances predicted for the input tweet.
By calculating the error between the prediction and the true target values, the network is
able to pass the corrections in reverse order through the layers of the network architecture.
The process known as backpropagation allows the network to “learn” the patterns within the
data more eﬀectively and make corrections where needed to form a more robust model. The
formula for weight for node j in layer lk for incoming node i is [9]:
∆wk
ij = −αδE(X, θ)
δwk
ij
(1)
where wk
ij is the weight for node j in layer k for incoming node i, x is the input vector, α is
the learning rate, E(X, θ) is the error function (typically mean squared error).
4.2
Relevant Hashtag Classiﬁer
An important component of the Mønsted architecture was the inclusion of a complex classiﬁer
which when given tweet text would predict one of several hashtags related to the subject
matter. In the case of identifying anti-vaxx sentiment, their targets included: #vaccineswork,
#cdcwhistleblower, #autism, etc. [13]. As discussed in the Data Processing section, my
hashtags were chosen as either hashtags almost certainly identifying one stance or a related
hashtag in order to increase the generalization ability of the model. The structure of the
relevant hashtag classiﬁer is comprised of eight layers, most of which are also contained in
the fast-text classiﬁer.
18 of 37
==PAGE:20==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 11: The relevant hashtag classiﬁer contains many layers from the fast-text classiﬁer
with the addition of the LSTM and Attention layers which allows the model to interpret
the input tweet’s sequentially. The output layer creates a prediction vector on the 32
hashtags from which the dataset was created and is intended to provide the model with
useful contextual knowledge for the ﬁnal stance detection.
The ﬁrst three layers of the network are identical to the fast-text classiﬁer: an input layer
to accept the word vector of the transformed tweet text, an embedding layer to identify
underlying patterns in the data, and a dropout layer to remove a number of output from
being passed on and preventing overﬁtting.
The output from the dropout layer is then
passed into two new layers: the LSTM layer and the Attention layer.
19 of 37
==PAGE:21==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
4.2.1
LSTM layer
The next layer is a bi-directional long/short-term memory recurrent neural network (or
LSTM). While the embedding layer is able to draw insights from the relation of words in
a sentence, the ability to understand the connections of each word in the context of the
sentence sentiment is captured in the LSTM layer. In contrast to the embedding layer, the
LSTM processes one token at a time to allow for the sequential relation of the tokens [21].
Figure 12: The LSTM layer processes tokens sequentially and processes previous cell and
hidden states in order to predict the next token. By using probability distributions which
are speciﬁc to position and token value, the model “learns” the structure and syntax of the
dataset language.
An LSTM network consists of a hidden memory state (or hidden state) and 3 gates for
determining which information should be retained or forgotten. The hidden state contains
a probability distribution between an input token and each token in the network’s known
vocabulary. Given input token at timestep t and the previously processed tokens at timestep
t-1, t-2, etc., the LSTM will calculate a probability distribution to yield the most likely word
in the known token vocabulary. In simpler terms, as the LSTM trains, it learns that given
the list of tokens “The, grocery, store, is”, the network is more likely to predict tokens like
“closed” or “massive” instead of tokens like “:)” or “tyrannosaurus”. As the LSTM processes
tweets, it is able to learn a probabilistic model of how speech syntax can be modelled.
The three gates of the LSTM are the input gate, forget gate, and output gate. The input
gate updates the current cell’s status by passing the input through both a hyperbolic-tangent
(or “tanh”) and a sigmoid function and cross-multiplying them. All information from the
current input which is determined to be relevant is passed through the input gate. The forget
gate determines if information from previous hidden states is relevant by passing the input
and previous hidden state through a sigmoid function. If information does not pass through
20 of 37
==PAGE:22==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
the forget gate, it is lost to future timesteps. Before the last gate, the cell state is processed
by performing element-wise addition on the output from both the input and forget gates.
This new cell state is passed on to the next timestep [21].
Finally, the output gate ﬁnalizes the current hidden state. By passing the processed cell state
through a tanh function and cross-multiplying it by the input gate’s output, the hidden state
to be passed forward is calculated. The tanh and sigmoid are speciﬁcally used because they
are able to ﬁnd non-linear patterns in the data. Assuming a linear model in this instance
would be extremely restrictive and prevent the model from learning the underlying patterns
in the most eﬀective way [21].
While training, recurrent neural networks experienced the inability to adequately utilize
backpropagation over time due to the “vanishing gradient” problem. The factor by which
loss is propagated backwards through the network layers has an eﬀective factor which is
above or below 1. Naturally, this can lead to the explosion or vanishing of gradients over
time-steps. LSTMs were constructed to regularize that factor towards 1 and eﬀectively nullify
the vanishing or exploding gradient problems. With this eﬀective distribution mechanism for
backpropagation, the network is able to correlate the tokens in “climate change is real” to
each other in a way which indicates the author believes in climate change.
The LSTM network processes tokens in each tweet sequentially, calculating the probability
distributions for each word in order to predict which token would likely follow. After the ﬁnal
token is processed, an output token is predicted. In this case, the output token would be
one of the available hashtags. While the LSTM is able to pass information between hidden
states at diﬀerent timesteps, the ability is limited when processing long tweets. Thus, the
model makes use of an attention layer.
4.2.2
Attention Layer
While the LSTM is able to pass information along multiple hidden states, information is lost
when long input vectors are processed. Early information from a tweet may be lost before
the end, which can lead to problems when dealing with tweets like:
Climate change may be the greatest myth of today, but I think penguins are the
absolute cutest. Their little ﬂippers are just so cute. Please can we all make sure
these penguins have homes for their little babies?
A standard implementation of an LSTM would process the hoaxer sentiment at the beginning
but would likely be too focused on the penguin language at the end to remember the tweet
started with an easily identiﬁable stance. To solve the issue, an attention layer stems from
the same dropout layer as the LSTM layer. The attention layer combines all previous hidden
21 of 37
==PAGE:23==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
state vectors produced by the LSTM and produced both an attention weight vector and a
weighted hidden representation of the tweet.
The attention weight vector allows the network to assess all points in the processed token
sequence in order to maintain important information gained in the early parts of a tweet.
The representation is how the tweet has been interpreted within the system and is derived
from the attention vector, as shown below. By multiplying the hidden state and weighted
attention vector, the sentence has a ﬁnal representation.
Figure 13: The attention layer uses the LSTM outputs from current and previous timesteps
in order to maintain information contained in early parts of the input text.
The equations for the attention layer are:
M = tanh(

WhH
Wvva
N eN

)
α = softmax(sTM)
r = HαT
where Wh, Wv are the weight matrices, H is the concatenation of all hidden state vectors, va
is the aspect embedding, eN is a column vector of N 1s, α is the attention weights vector, sT
is the cell state at timestep t, and r is the weighted representation of the whole tweet text
[23].
4.2.3
Representation and output layers
After passing the LSTM layer through another dropout layer to avoid overﬁtting, both that
output and the attention layer’s output are concatenated into a representation layer. The
22 of 37
==PAGE:24==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
values of each system’s outputs then ﬂow into a ﬁnal dense output layer containing 32 cells
(one for each hashtag to be predicted from dataset creation).
4.3
Putting it all together
The ﬁnal section of the network combines all the information and patterns discovered through
both the fast-text classiﬁer and relevant hashtag classiﬁer into one layer. A ﬁnal dense layer
tops the network with 3 output cells, one for each stance. As before, the output layer passes
the input information through a softmax function in order to give an eﬀective probability
distribution of the available predictions.
4.4
Transfer Learning and Chain-Thaw
In addition to training the model architectures on the training dataset, a method called
transfer learning is used. Transfer learning allows a model to inherit another model’s learned
data pattern identiﬁcation for a prediction task. Traditionally, transfer learning is used when
a new task has relatively scarce data. Thus, an established model with a similar prediction
task can be sampled to jump-start the new model’s training [24]. The process is done by
removing the pre-trained weights from a network and loading them into a network with a
new objective. In this case, my available data is scarce due to the need of manual labeling,
and the prediction task was similar enough that transfer learning was an obvious choice to
implement.
The relevant hashtag classiﬁer weights from Mønsted/Lehmann’s model were transferred
into a model of the same architecture.
The ﬁnal dense ouptut layer was then removed
before one suiting my prediction task was added. Normally, the weights in a network are
randomly created, though there are established weight initialization methods to help quicken
convergence slightly [10]. Table 4 displays the beneﬁts of both transfer learning and the
chain-thaw method.
To supplement the beneﬁts of transfer learning, a method established in the original Felbo
paper called “chain-thaw” [6] is used to assist in the training of the new prediction task.
Chain-thaw is the method by which layers in a model are sequentially trained in reverse order
to help best the network as a whole to train on the new dataset and task. In each chain-
thaw step, all layers but one are 11frozen” and unable to be aﬀected by backpropagation.
This causes each layer to individually learn how best to ﬁnd important patterns for the
new task while also learning which old learned patterns lead to incorrect predictions and
correcting them.
Chain-thaw has been shown to be especially eﬀective with embedding
layers, which have the task of adding new tokens to its vocabulary [6]. Once each layer has
been trained, all layers are un-frozen for a ﬁnal training round. Felbo showed that chain-thaw
23 of 37
==PAGE:25==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
increased prediction task accuracy while also increasing token coverage of new tokens added
to the embedding vocabulary [6]. Notably, chain-thaw was not implemented in the fast-text
classiﬁer, as the output layer from the Mønsted/Lehmann model was also predicting “real”,
“neutral”, or “hoax” though on a diﬀerent dataset.
Figure 14: Transfer learning for this problem involved creating an skeleton copy of the
architecture and copying the weights from the pre-trained model. This led to more accurate
generalization to tweet language outside my dataset.
Figure 15: The chain-thaw method calls for each layer of the model besides the input layer
to be trained separately and in reverse order. One ﬁnal training of all layers together has
shown to yield better results than standard training [24] .
24 of 37
==PAGE:26==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
5
Model Results
5.1
Fast-text Classiﬁer Results
To give eﬀective context for the results of the full model, I will present the eﬀectiveness of
its parts ﬁrst. With the fast-text classiﬁer, the model attempts to ﬁnd underlying patterns
from the word vector embedding layer. Though the fast-text classiﬁer is able to correlate
patterns between the tokens present and predict a a stance, this component is not built to
learn the sequential relationship between tokens. Thus, we would expect the results to be
worse than the ﬁnal model. The fast-text classiﬁer has two parameters to optimize: dropout
rate and number of training epochs. Figure 16 shows the performance of each iteration of
the hyperparameters against the validation dataset. While each appeared to be converging
after 30 epochs, the dropout value of 0.1 had the highest prediction accuracy.
Figure 3 shows the accuracy of the fast-text classiﬁer on the train, validation, and test data-
sets.
Dataset
Accuracy
Train
90.58%
Validation
86.14%
Test
85.14%
Table 3: Prediction Accuracy of Fast-text Classiﬁer
For a 3-class classiﬁcation problem, the results on all datasets are far better than the 33.33%
expected accuracy from random guessing, 90.58% for the training set. In the training set, the
classiﬁcations with the largest number of errors are neutral tweets being labeled as “real”,
“real” tweets being labeled as hoax or neutral, and hoax tweets being labeled as “real”.
Considering the primary goal is to identify tweets disseminating disinformation about climate
change, a false positive rate of 1.69% shows the model was able to learn the underlying
patterns within the data to a signiﬁcant degree.
However, the validation and test sets give more useful insights into the model’s ability to gen-
eralize to unseen data instead of simply overﬁtting on the training dataset. In the validation
results, the model has a slightly lower accuracy (86.14%). The model’s main weakness here
is its ability to correctly identify “real” tweets. 11.45% of the dataset (92.61% of the total
misclassiﬁed tweets) were either incorrectly predicted “real” tweets or “real” tweets which
were incorrectly predicted. Considering these categories comprise 2/3 of the misclassiﬁcation
categories in the confusion matrix but contain 92.61% of the errors, there appears to be
incorrect patterns recognized in “real” tweets.
25 of 37
==PAGE:27==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 16: The fast-text hyperparameter tuning saw each dropout value plateau on their
respective prediction accuracy on the validation dataset after approximately 30 epochs.
Figure 17: Fast-text Train Results
Figure 18: Fast-text Val Results
Finally, the model’s test dataset accuracy is slightly lower (85.14%) but still shows that the
fast-text classiﬁer generalizes well to the black box of a test dataset. To explore how the
fast-text classiﬁer performs compared to the complete architecture, sample tweets will be
shown with predictions from both models.
5.2
Relevant Hashtag Classiﬁer Results
As the fast-text classiﬁer consists of a somewhat simple deep learning architecture, the rele-
vant hashtag classiﬁer as described in Mønsted/Lehmann is concatenated to supplement the
full model with the ability to process the sequential correlation between tokens. From the
combination of LSTM and attention layers, information regarding the structure and syntax of
26 of 37
==PAGE:28==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 19: Fast-text Test Results
the tweet is passed onto higher layers. Table 4 displays the accuracy of the relevant hashtag
classiﬁer both with and without the Chain-thaw training method. Figures 20, 21, 22 show
the confusion matrices of the hashtag predictions.
Dataset
Base Accuracy
Acc. with Transfer Learning
Acc. with Chain-thaw
Train
29.55
82.53%
84.79%
Validation
29.76%
55.58%
59.92%
Test
29.85%
56.72%
60.69%
Table 4: The relevant hashtag classiﬁer saw that the implementation of both transfer
learning and chain-thaw increased the prediction accuracy of the model on all datasets.
The results conﬁrm the methods’ eﬀects shown by Weiss/Khoshgoftaar/Wang [24]
27 of 37
==PAGE:29==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 20: Relevant hashtag train results
The random-selection accuracy for a 32-class classiﬁcation problem being 3.13%, producing a
84.79% accuracy result on the training dataset far exceeds expectations. While the training
results show a small part of the total picture, the training confusion model shows a trend I
was hoping to see when I selected the relevant hashtags. As mentioned before, popular, vague
hashtags like #climatechange , #climate, and #climateaction had a relatively high misclassi-
ﬁcation rate. In contrast, the less frequent, more speciﬁc hashtags had lower misclassiﬁcation
rates.
Further, a large portion of the misclassiﬁcations occur between #climatechange and #cli-
mateaction, #climatechange, and #globalwarming, and #environment and #globalwarming.
While the ﬁrst does have slight inclination towards being a “real” tweet, all three pairings
include highly related terms. Climate change during the early 2000s was popularly termed
28 of 37
==PAGE:30==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 21: Relevant hashtag val results
as global warming, so the misclassiﬁcation between them is understandable. Additionally,
the hashtags #tlot and #tcot (“top liberals on twitter” and “top conservatives on twitter”,
respectively) are misclassiﬁed as each other. Though they both largely denote political tweets
regarding the two main political parties of the United States, the fact that they are opposing
parties shows the model is unable to completely diﬀerentiate between them.
Assessing the model accuracy for the validation dataset (59.92%), a signiﬁcant decrease in
model accuracy is seen. However, the performance shows the model is able to ﬁnd enough
underlying patterns in the data to make signiﬁcant progress in accurately predicting teh
related hashtag. The prediction accuracy on the test results (60.69%) conﬁrms the model
is incorporating patterns instead of overﬁtting to the training dataset. Similarly to the test
and validation datasets, the majority of misclassiﬁcations occur with the popular, general
29 of 37
==PAGE:31==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Figure 22: Relevant hashtag test results
hashtags with the confusion matrix becoming more scarce towards the bottom-right corner.
To further display the performance of the relevant hashtag classiﬁer, Figure 5 shows a list of
example tweets not in any of the datasets.
30 of 37
==PAGE:32==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Tweet
Prediction
Climate change is real.
#climatechange
If you think climate change is real, you’re an idiot.
#fakenews
Have you seen the newest Global article about climate change? It’s a hoax!
#weather
We have to stop glaciers from melting to save the planet #climatechange
#globalwarming
If you think the media isn’t lying to you, you’re an idiot
#tcot
Microchips on sale until Thursday at Al’s Computer Hut!
#technology
Table 5: The results from the relevant hashtag classiﬁer show the model can make basic
associations between each tweet and a relevant hashtag. The third tweet has an unexpected
association to weather, but the rest have predicted hashtags which make sense on their face.
5.3
Final Architecture Model Results
With test accuracies of 85.14% for a 3-class classiﬁcation and 60.69% for a 32-class classi-
ﬁcation from the fast-text classiﬁer and relevant hashtag classiﬁer respectively, the passage
of important data patterns through the ﬁrst stages of the ﬁnal model has been displayed.
The concatenation of these component’s outputs for the ﬁnal model architecture yields the
results shown in Table 6. Because the fast-text model and ﬁnal model both predict stance
for a given tweet, the most obvious comparison is to compare their results and assess if the
relevant hashtag classiﬁer contributed meaningfully to the overall architecture. As shown
between Tables 3 and 6, the ﬁnal model has higher accuracy on all data-sets. While the
accuracy comparison shows the relevant hashtag classiﬁer has a positive contribution to the
fast-text classiﬁer, Table 7 contains example tweets and their respective predicted stances
from the fast-text classiﬁer and the ﬁnal model.
The fast-text classiﬁer and ﬁnal model predictions juxtaposed some weaknesses of the fast-
text model which are strengthened in the ﬁnal model. Predicting the ﬁrst two tweets as both
hoaxes implies there is a deﬁciency in diﬀerentiating “is” and “isn’t”. Whether the deﬁciency
is due to the non-sequential nature of the fast-text model’s analysis capabilities or another
unseen factor, the ﬁnal model is able to correctly predict the stance of arguably the two most
important important pieces of data for this problem.
Dataset
Accuracy
Train
96.92%
Validation
82.53%
Test
86.75%
Table 6: Prediction accuracy of the ﬁnal model architecture
31 of 37
==PAGE:33==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
Text
Fast-text Prediction
Final Prediction
Climate change is real.
Hoax
Real
Climate change isn’t real
Hoax
Hoax
* drinks tea * If I see you throw a McDonalds bag out of your moving car, I’m going to tailgate you.
Neutral
Neutral
Can we just agree to ﬁght climate change? #climatechange
Real
Real
If you think climate change is real, you’re an idiot.
Hoax
Hoax
Table 7: Fast-text and ﬁnal model predictions
6
Conclusion
To approach the problem of identifying climate change denial in tweet text, I created a stance
dataset of 2,062 tweets and a hashtag dataset of 21,856 tweets. The stance dataset was labeled
according to a speciﬁc methodology to avoid bias. A deep neural network architecture was
created to follow those of Felbo [6] and Mønsted/Lehmnan [13] made of a fast-text classiﬁer
and relevant hashtag classiﬁer. The fast-text classiﬁer’s results showed it was able to predict
stances with an accuracy well above the expected level for a 3-class problem with 85.14%.
Additionally, the relevant hashtag classiﬁer predicted hashtags to follow a tweet with results
exceeding the expected accuracy of a 32-class classiﬁcation problem with 60.69%. The two
network when concatenated into a ﬁnal architecture achieved a prediction accuracy on the
test dataset of 86.75%, showing that both the relevant hashtag classiﬁer provided important
information for the predictions and that the ﬁnal combined architecture is successful in
detecting stances of climate change sentiment in tweets.
7
Future Work
While good results were produced, there are several areas in which the model can be im-
proved. The main improvement areas I see are the dataset, architecture, and pre-trained
word embeddings. If I were to continue work on this model, these areas appear to be the
ones which can be most improved.
As the Dataset Arbitration Explanation section detailed, the methodology by which the
tweets are labeled with stances is somewhat thorough. However, increasing the amount of
data with which to train and assess the model would likely yield more robust predictions
on a wider array of language structures. Further, the inclusion of neutral tweets which were
unrelated to climate change may allow the model to generalize better to a dataset which is
not tailored for the identifying climate change denial.
The architecture in its current iteration is able to ﬁnd enough underlying patterns in the data
to make stance predictions with a relatively high accuracy. However, there is always room for
improvement and innovation. Implementing an LSTM or other layer to allow the ability to
32 of 37
==PAGE:34==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
process the tweet tokens in a sequential manner could result in better accuracy. Additionally,
experimenting with smaller pieces like activation functions, vocabulary size, optimizers, and
loss functions provide a lot of opportunity to ﬁnd more optimal model tuning.
Finally, the transfer of word embeddings from the Mønsted/Lehmann vaccine model to my
model via transfer learning provided a jump-start for training. As more research is done
in natural language processing using deep learning methods, pre-trained word embeddings
can be ﬁne-tuned for speciﬁc purposes. One instance is the BERTweet embedding, created
speciﬁcally for processing Twitter text[15]. Though I was unable to utilize these sophisticated
embeddings, the sheer volume of text on which these embeddings are trained could prove to
lead to more robust models.
33 of 37
==PAGE:35==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
8
Appendix
Action: 5777
Doomsday: 314
KeepItInTheGround: 87
Activism: 614
Drought: 785
Methane: 153
ActNow: 89
Earth: 23138
MSM: 1202
ActOnClimate: 181
EatTheRich: 42
Nature: 24002
ActOnClimateChange: 2
Eco: 33066
NoNewCoal: 19
Arctic: 561
EcoFriendly: 872
NoPlanetB: 8
BadScience: 42
Ecology: 383
NoPlastic: 92
BeTheChange: 635
Environment: 7943
Ocean: 4907
BHFYP: 17
Environmentalist: 29
PlasticFree: 521
Biodiversity: 1048
EPA: 517
PlasticPollution: 548
Bushﬁres: 10
ExtinctionRebellion: 53
Pollution: 1487
Carbon: 1248
FakeNews: 18579
QuestionMore: 3
CarbonTaxScam: 2
FakeScience: 35
Recycle: 1416
Climate: 7507
FossilFool: 13
RenewableEnergy: 1178
ClimateAction: 701
FossilFree: 81
Renewables: 1360
ClimateAlarmism: 1
FrackFree: 14
Reuse: 426
ClimateChange: 11366
FrackOﬀ: 29
SaveOurPlanet: 66
ClimateChangeHoax: 20
FridaysForFuture: 93
SaveTheEarth: 93
ClimateCrisis: 63
Future: 15727
SaveThePlanet: 267
ClimateCult: 3
GlobalWarming: 1141
SchoolStrike4Climate: 67
ClimateDenier: 24
GlobalWarmingHoax: 8
Science: 21735
ClimateEmergency: 29
GlobalWarmingNonsense: 1
Sustainability: 3869
ClimateFraud: 10
GlobalWarmingScam: 1
Sustainable: 2644
ClimateHysteria: 4
Go100Percent: 5
ShellNo: 2
ClimateJustice: 82
GoGreen: 606
SustainableLiving: 72
ClimateLaw: 3
Green: 16909
TiredEarth: 2
ClimateScam: 21
GreenDeal: 12
Trees: 2076
ClimateStrike: 128
GreenPeace: 150
Vegan: 17052
Conservation: 1608
GretaThunberg: 9
Wildlife: 4330
Conspiracy: 1610
Health: 7124
YouthStrike4Climate: 5
DivestNow: 4
Heatwave: 1266
ZeroWaste: 789
Table 8: Targeted hashtags with corresponding frequency in dataset
34 of 37
==PAGE:36==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
References
[1]
Hunt Allcott, Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu. “Trends in the diﬀusion of misin-
formation on social media”. In: Research Politics 6 (Apr. 2019), p. 205316801984855.
doi: 10.1177/2053168019848554.
[2]
Salman Alsam. Twitter by the Numbers: Stats, Demographics Fun Facts. url: https:
//www.omnicoreagency.com/twitter-statistics/. (accessed: 24.06.2020).
[3]
Olivia Benecke and Sarah DeYoung. “Anti-Vaccine Decision-Making and Measles Resur-
gence in the United States”. In: Global Pediatric Health 6 (July 2019), p. 2333794X1986294.
doi: 10.1177/2333794X19862949.
[4]
JeﬀBerardelli. The Rise Of Social Media. url: https://ourworldindata.org/rise-
of-social-media. (accessed on 01.04.2021).
[5]
Deep Learning - Feedforward Networks. url: https : / / www . math . purdue . edu /
~nwinovic/deep_learning.html#Feedforward_Networks. (accessed on 12.01.2021).
[6]
Bjarke Felbo et al. “Using millions of emoji occurrences to learn any-domain repre-
sentations for detecting sentiment, emotion and sarcasm”. In: Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2017). doi: 10.
18653/v1/d17-1169. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1169.
[7]
Jeﬀrey Gottfried and Elisa Shearer. News Use Across Social Media Platforms 2016.
url: https://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news- use- across- social-
media-platforms-2016/. (accessed on 21.01.2021).
[8]
IPCC. “Summary for Policymakers”. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. by T.F. Stocker et al. Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2013. Chap. SPM,
pp. 1–30. isbn: ISBN 978-1-107-66182-0. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004. url:
www.climatechange2013.org.
[9]
Christopher Williams John McGonagle George Shaikouski. Backpropagation. url: https:
//brilliant.org/wiki/backpropagation/. (accessed on 12.01.2021).
[10]
Siddharth Krishna Kumar. “On weight initialization in deep neural networks”. In:
CoRR abs/1704.08863 (2017). arXiv: 1704.08863. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1704.08863.
35 of 37
==PAGE:37==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
[11]
Stephan Lewandowsky, Klaus Oberauer, and Gilles E. Gignac. “NASA Faked the
Moon Landing—Therefore, (Climate) Science Is a Hoax: An Anatomy of the Moti-
vated Rejection of Science”. In: Psychological Science 24.5 (2013). PMID: 23531484,
pp. 622–633. doi: 10.1177/0956797612457686. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/
0956797612457686.
[12]
LZ4. url: https://lz4.github.io/lz4/. (accessed:23.01.2021).
[13]
Bjarke Mønsted and Sune Lehmann. “Algorithmic Detection and Analysis of Vaccine-
Denialist Sentiment Clusters in Social Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1905.12908 (2019).
arXiv: 1905.12908. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.12908.
[14]
K. Mortimer. “Understanding Conspiracy Online: Social Media and the Spread of Sus-
picious Thinking”. In: Dalhousie Journal of Interdisciplinary Management 13 (2017).
[15]
Dat Quoc Nguyen, Thanh Vu, and Anh Tuan Nguyen. BERTweet: A pre-trained lan-
guage model for English Tweets. 2020. arXiv: 2005.10200 [cs.CL].
[16]
Michael Palmer. Data is the New Oil. url: https://ana.blogs.com/maestros/2006/
11/page/2/. (accessed on 21.01.2021).
[17]
Paris Agreement. url: https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=
TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-7-d&chapter=27&clang=_en (visited on 03/28/2019).
[18]
Dietram A. Scheufele and Nicole M. Krause. “Science audiences, misinformation, and
fake news”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116.16 (2019), pp. 7662–
7669. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1805871115. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/content/
116/16/7662.full.pdf. url: https://www.pnas.org/content/116/16/7662.
[19]
SchiﬀSends Letter to Google, Facebook Regarding Anti-Vaccine Misinformation. url:
https://schiff.house.gov/news/press-releases/schiff-sends-letter-to-
google-facebook-regarding-anti-vaccine-misinformation. (accessed: 24.06.2020).
[20]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overﬁtting”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15.1 (Jan. 2014), pp. 1929–1958. issn: 1532-
4435.
[21]
Martin Sundermeyer, Ralf Schl¨uter, and Hermann Ney. “LSTM Neural Networks for
Language Modeling”. In: Sept. 2012.
[22]
Richard Townsend. ark-twokenize-py. 2017. url: https://github.com/Sentimentron/
ark-twokenize-py.
[23]
Yequan Wang et al. “Attention-based LSTM for Aspect-level Sentiment Classiﬁcation”.
In: Jan. 2016, pp. 606–615. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1058.
36 of 37
==PAGE:38==
Deep Learning for Stance Detection on Twitter
Master’s Thesis
[24]
Karl Weiss, Taghi Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing Wang. “A survey of transfer learning”.
In: Journal of Big Data 3 (May 2016). doi: 10.1186/s40537-016-0043-6.
[25]
Why vaccination is safe and important. url: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/
vaccinations/why-vaccination-is-safe-and-important/. (accessed: 28.06.2020).
[26]
Monika Winn et al. “Impacts from climate change on organizations: a conceptual foun-
dation”. In: Business Strategy and the Environment 20.3 (2011), pp. 157–173. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.679. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/bse.679. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/bse.679.
37 of 37
