==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Building-integrated solar panels
An analysis and a design proposal
Nicoline Friberg Klysner
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
MSc Design Innovation
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Student: Nicoline Friberg Klysner
Supervisor: Torben Anker Lenau
Project duration: 24.08.2020 - 24.01.2021
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
s153051@student.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
c
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This report describes the findings and result of a master thesis project about building-
integrated solar panels made at the Technical University of Denmark. The aim of
the project was to investigate which barriers prevent the uptake of BIPV in Denmark
and to provide a design proposal for aesthetics solar panels.
The overall goal is
to contribute to improve uptake of BIPV in Denmark through a design proposal
addressing the barriers and challenges identified in the study.
Initially, the project investigates the danish market for BIPV through a literature
research. The actor network surrounding BIPV, the barriers to BIPV, as well as the
needs and requirements for BIPV in Denmark was researched through interviews with
selected actors. Subsequent, a design process for aesthetic BIPV was conducted based
on the research. Based on the market analysis, the scope was narrowed down to c-Si
opaque facade mounted BIPV on commercially owned buildings and a requirement list
was constructed. A number of solutions for mounting was developed and evaluated
according to the requirements, through interviews and by creating and evaluating
mock-ups.
The project resulted in a design proposal named SolarFacade for ventilated facades,
which including the mounting solution SolarMount. The created solution has been
presented in drawings and a high-fidelity prototype, which was evaluated in a small
preliminary evaluation.
In conclusion, the SolarFacade system is designed to meet aesthetic needs while also
mitigating several of the identified barriers towards BIPV implementation. The design
furthermore solves some functional issues specific to solar panels.
The SolarFacade concept has the potential to serve as a starting point for further
development of a standard mounting solution for aesthetic BIPV facades.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc
degree in Design and Innovation.
Kongens Lyngby, January 24, 2021
Nicoline Friberg Klysner
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgement
Without the great willingness to help from a great number of people, this project
would not have been possible to make. I want to thank Yakov Safir, Andrea and
Henrik Höhnke, Karin Kappel, Marie Baumann, Jakob Klint, Christian Troelsgaard,
Carsten Nørgaard, Jørgen Søndermark, Signe Bang Korsnes, Hans Bering, Arne
Grøntved, and David Ørbæk, for their time and many inputs. A thank you to the staff
at the DTU workshop who assisted with their expertise in the prototype construction,
especially Jan Horne Hansen and Lin Høgh Rosenbeck. Lastly, a special thanks to
Torben Anker Lenau for the supervision and guidance throughout the project.
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgement
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Empirical data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Actor analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Design methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
The technology and the product
11
3.1
The basics of photo voltaics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Building-integrated solar panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Market analysis
15
4.1
Political frame
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Potential for BIPV in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Economics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Barriers and needs
31
5.1
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Product system overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Barriers in BIPV product system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5
Needs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
45
6.1
Scoping the design project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Requirements for BIPV facades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Inspiration from existing facade systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:12==
viii
Contents
6.4
Ideation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.5
Mounting concepts, mock-ups and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.6
A second (small) iteration of the ideation phase . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.7
Selecting a mounting concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
SolarFacade
67
7.1
Concept detailing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
SolarFacade and SolarMount
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.3
Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.4
Preliminary evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8
Discussion
85
8.1
Market for BIPV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8.2
Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8.3
Aesthetic solar panels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8.4
SolarFacade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
8.5
The next project steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
9
Conclusion
93
Bibliography
95
A Literature search
98
B Interview summaries
100
C Needs identification
130
D Requirements
134
E Evaluation matrix
137
F Ideation mounting
139
F.1
Investigations prefabricated and ventilated facades . . . . . . . . . . . 141
F.2
Ideation on mounting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
F.3
Bio inspiration - Ventilation versus waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
G Bio cards
152
H Evaluation sessions summaries
156
I
Color and structure
162
J
Detailing SolarMount
165
K Technical drawings of the prototype
170
==PAGE:13==
Contents
ix
L
Preliminary evaluation summary
182
M Pamphlet on primary project outcomes
185
==PAGE:14==
x
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The modern society depend on electricity.
We use it for cleaning, cooking, relax-
ing, communicating, working, shopping, transport, etc. The use of non-renewable
resources for energy production, contributes to climate change and the fossil fuel
stock are continuously decreasing as we consume them. Producing energy from re-
newable resources such as the sun, wind, biomass etc, are promising ways to create
more sustainable societies.
Development of both the renewable resource technologies and the products that con-
tain them, are important for the uptake and success of both.
Solar panels are a
discussed topic in terms of whether the distinct appearance is problematic for the
environment they are included in. Building-integrated solar panels (BIPV) are build-
ing components with build-in photo voltaic technology and a large focus for BIPV
development is how to create aesthetically pleasing products as opposed to BAPV
and PV plants. BIPV has existed for years, but is not yet a common product in
Denmark.
This project aim to investigate which barriers prevent the uptake of BIPV in Den-
mark and provide a design proposal for aesthetics solar panels. The overall goal is to
contribute to the uptake of BIPV in Denmark trough the design proposal.
The report describes a five month long master thesis project performed on the Tech-
nical University of Denmark. The project has two phases. A research phase and a
design phase. The research consisted of a market- and actor analysis. The market
analysis investigated BIPV technology and how the conditions for BIPV are in Den-
mark. The actor analysis provided insight on the product system, barriers for BIPV
and needs and requirements related to BIPV. Gained knowledge was used as input
for designing an aesthetic BIPV solution.
==PAGE:16==
2
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
This chapter describes; i) empirical data, ii) interviews, iii) the actor analysis, and
iv) design methods.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the project and the methods which has contributed to the diverg-
ing and converging of the solution space. The double diamond framework is adopted
from the British Design Council.
Figure 2.1: Double diamond - methods overview.
2.1
Empirical data
Empirics were collected from literature (books, academic - and non-academic papers),
web-pages and qualitative interviews.
==PAGE:18==
4
2 Methodology
2.1.1
Literature and internet research
The literature search was initiated with a structured literature search. The structured
approach was adapted to allow readers to understand what the starting point was
for the literature search. From there an investigative method was adopted, where
references in the found literature and on websites was used to find new literature.
The objective of the search was to gain an understanding of the state of the art for
aesthetic BIPV and coloring of solar cells.
2.1.1.1
Researching state of the art
For the structured search on the state of the art for BIPV the following steps was
adopted:
1. Develop a research question in a specific subject:
What is state-of-the art for colored/construction integrated solar panels?
2. List of relevant databases:
DTU FindIt (the DTU database with data providers from a large number of
other institutions and databases).
3. List of relevant keywords and phrases:
Search strings was composed iteratively until a satisfying number of hits was
found. The resulting search strings were:
i. ”Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (construction OR building OR house)”
(hits: 210)
ii. ”(Aesthetic) AND solar AND (panel OR cell)”(hits: 332)
iii. ”(colour OR color) AND (solar OR photovoltaic) AND transmission NOT
semitransparent” (hits: 137)
See appendix A for development in search phrase.
4. Search and make notes from each database to keep track of the search:
See notes and search results in appendix A.
The search was limited to English papers and papers from 2015 and newer.
2.1.1.2
Researching existing BIPV products
An internet search was done to identify products available on the danish market.
1. Develop a research question in a specific subject:
What BIPV products are available on the danish market?
2. Database:
Google
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Empirical data
5
3. Relevant keywords and phrases:
Building integrated solar panels (first 4 pages reviewed 30/8/2021)
4. Search:
The found web pages linked to other resources and the investigative method
was used.
Several other topics was researched in order to create this report.
Photo voltaic
technology, political frame for PV/BIPV in Denmark, metering schemes, economy
for PV/BIPV, and facades are some of them.
2.1.2
Interviews
Three rounds of interviews was conducted, i) interviews for the actor analysis, ii)
interviews for evaluation of concepts and iii) interviews for input/feedback on the
final design.
2.1.2.1
Actor analysis
Ten qualitative semi-structured interviews were made. The interviewees was chosen
with the aim to cover as many different type of actors/users as possible. The actors
interviewed represents the groups: Municipality, interest organization, end-user (2),
BIPV manufacturer, PV plant project manager, architect, house owner, house owner
consultant and facade entrepreneur. The interviews had preferably all been face to
face, but due to long distances and other factors, some interviews where held as video
conferences or by phone. The interviews was planned to take 60 minutes but some
took less and some took more, depending on the time the interviewee had available.
The semi-structured interview touch upon the two subjects i) What aspect of the
solar panel or the system around solar panels are causing a barrier for employment
of BIPV? and ii) What is important in order to obtain an aesthetic solar panel?
Additionally, three multiple choice questions was asked. The interviewee was asked
to elaborate the answer.
1. How do you perceive building integrated solar panels impact on the market for
PV plants? (1. It is harmful, 2. It is unimportant, 3. It is good, 4. It is
important 5. It is essential).
2. What role do you think the appearance of BIPV panels has in the dispersion of
the technology? (1. It is completely unimportant, 2. It is unimportant, 3. It is
relevant, 4. It is Important, 5. It is Essential).
3. Do you think that solar panels should be recognisable on buildings? (1. Not at
all, 2. Preferably not 3. Only recognizable for the knowing, 4. Yes slightly 5.
Yes, it should be obvious).
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Methodology
2.1.2.2
Evaluating concepts
Interviews were done to evaluate the design proposals as well. The interviews was done
virtually due to the Covid-19 restrictions. The concept sketches was presented and
qualitative semi-structured interview was conducted. Questions was individualized
to each of the actors domain. Physical meetings had been better because pointing
and gesturing to aid communication was impossible.
A single interview was done to make a preliminary evaluation of SolarMount. The
evaluation was done as an online meeting, where the solution was presented. The
interview was semi-structured and concerned opportunities and problems the solution
might contain. Because the interview wasn’t in person, some of the discussions about
the design was made difficult.
2.2
Actor analysis
The interviews was aggregated into three data sets, i) The needs and requirements
expressed by the actor either the actors own needs or needs posed by other actors, but
recognised by the interviewee. ii) The relationships between actors in the system, and
iii) main barriers and drivers/opportunities for the dispersion of BIPV in Denmark.
2.2.1
Needs and requirements
The interviews was aggregated into a set of overall needs and related requirements.
Guidelines for how to formulate good requirements was found in the book Require-
ments Engineering - A good practice guide (Sommerville and Sawyer 1997).
The
hierarchy between needs and requirements enable understanding as to which need is
affected if removing a requirement. Or the other way around, if a need disappear,
then the related requirements can be reevaluated. The list developed throughout the
project as the scope was defined, new information was found for facades mounting
and feedback was given for concepts.
2.2.2
Actor network
To understand why a product is ”successful” (popular) or not, it is important to
look at the sociotechnical dynamics. In this project, the actors in the actor network
and the relation between them, has been understood through ten interviews with
actors from seven different actor groups. The purpose of the network/system, is to
highlight how actors might impact other actors (create barriers or opportunity) and
as a result co-define the perception and development of a product. A map over the
product system was created showing the actors situated in the product system. The
relationship between actors is described in a large perspective.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Design methods
7
2.2.3
Barriers and opportunities
A list of barriers was defined based on the interviews. A map over the product system
shows the origin of the barriers. Opportunities (drivers) for BIPV was also defined
based on the interviews.
2.3
Design methods
This section describes all the methods used in the process of creating a design sugges-
tion for facade mounted BIPV. The methods described are; needs and requirements
specification, ideation, evaluation, mock-up, design detailing and prototyping.
2.3.1
Ideation
To get from the definitions on what the solution should and should not be, to an actual
physical design, require a creative process. Different brainstorming approaches was
used.
• Topic based
• Asking What if ..?
• Inspired by existing solutions
• Biologically inspired
• Guided ideation
’Topic based’ are simply brainstorming on a specific topic while ’asking what if ..?’
is a method to try and think outside the box by forcing one self to ask ’what if’ and
then having to say something new. And then repeating with new questions. The last
three methods are described below.
2.3.1.1
Inspiration from existing methods
One of the needs found in the interview was that the solar panel and the mount-
ing solution should be similar to know facade materials and mounting methods. The
ideation for mounting solution was therefore greatly inspired by existing facade mount-
ing systems. Facade mounting systems was researched and ideas was made for how
to adapt these to solar panel.
2.3.1.2
Biologically inspired
Looking at how nature solve problems can be a great source of inspiration. For this
project it was investigated how a facade can be kept water resistant while allowing
ventilation. A functional decomposition was done and phenomenon/solutions was
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Methodology
sought on asknature.org. The promising phenomenon’s was described in bio-cards.
As new information was uncovered, this research became redundant.
2.3.1.3
Guided ideation
After the first round of ideation, concepts and evaluation a number of guidelines for
”the good solution” was formulated. Another small ideation was done based on these
guidelines.
2.3.2
Concept evaluation
The concepts was evaluated with three different methods, i) by three actors, ii)
through the process of creating mock-ups and iii) based on requirements. The evalu-
ation created the basis on which a decision for a design can be made.
2.3.2.1
Evaluation with actors
The concepts were presented to three stakeholders: an architect [9] a BIPV manu-
facturer [1] and a facade project manager [12]. The three different areas of expertise
made sure the products was evaluated on a wide range of different parameters. The
evaluation contributed with additional requirements and needs to the requirements
list.
2.3.2.2
Mock-up
Mock-ups was made to further evaluate the concepts the concepts (except one). The
mock-ups provide quick insight about appearance and mounting process. The mock-
ups were made from cardboard, wooden sticks, tape, and glue.
2.3.2.3
Evaluation matrix
The requirements list was used to evaluate the concepts. The relevant requirements
was selected and the concepts was graded from 1 to 4. The process was used to ensure
that all relevant aspects had been considered in each concept and the result was used
as a guideline for which concepts have biggest potential. The grading is not an exact
science and the result should therefore not be taken as a definitive answer.
2.3.3
Design detailing
For the detailing of the design, the book Systematic Design of Industrial products by
Eskild Tjalve (1979) was utilized. The book present a systematic way to consider
how industrial products can be designed. The basic structure where already in place
(the concept) and needed was the definition of a final form.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Design methods
9
2.3.4
Prototyping
A high fidelity prototype was made to showcase the final design suggestion.
The
prototype was specified in technical drawings and the parts were manufactured by
workshop staff at DTU, with exception of the panel coloring and wiring dummy.
==PAGE:24==
10
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
The technology and the
product
This chapter briefly describes the basics of photovoltaic (PV) technology and solar
panels.
How do PV work?
What types of PV cells exists?
What is a building-
integrated solar panels?
3.1
The basics of photo voltaics
A solar cell, also called a photo voltaic (PV) cell, is made from a semi-conductor
material. The solar cell (crystalline silicon) has two sides where different atoms are
introduced (doping) in order to create a charge (Mertens 2019. On one side a doping
atom with fewer valence electrons than silicon is introduced (p) and on the other side
a doping atom with more valence electrons than silicon is introduced (n) (Mertens
2019).
This is called a p-n junction.
The p side thus has free electrons and is
negatively charged while the n side has holes (available spots for electrons) and is
positively charged. A metal back plate and metal bars on the front acts as contacts.
The front contact is partial (bars going across the cell) so that the radiation can
pass through. When the radiation hit the solar cell the photons are absorbed and
electron-hole pairs are created. The electron moves up to the front contact and the
hole moves towards the back contact due to the electrical charge (Mertens 2019).
3.1.1
Electricity generation
The amount of electricity generated by a solar cell depend on both the efficiency of
the solar cell and the amount of radiation hitting the solar cell. Some of the radiation
from the sun reaches the solar cell directly, this is called direct radiation. Some of the
radiation is scattered by the molecules in the atmosphere and then reach the solar cell
as diffuse radiation (Mertens 2019). Lastly, some of the radiation hits other objects
such as the ground or surrounding buildings and is reflected. This is called reflected
radiation. The combined radiation of direct, diffuse and reflected radiation constitutes
the total radiation hitting the solar cell (Mertens 2019). The sun irradiates 1367 W
m−2 at all times. When the sun passes through the atmosphere, light is absorbed and
shattered by molecules and the spectrum of light that reaches earth is thus changed.
==PAGE:26==
12
3 The technology and the product
In other words some of the energy is lost. The declination of the sun determines the
air mass (AM) the irradiation needs to pass through and thus how much energy is
lost. AM 1 is the vertical and shortest route through the atmosphere. AM 1.5 is
1.5 times the length of AM 1. At AM 1.5 the irradiance of the sun is 1000 W m−2
(Mertens 2019).
Solar cells (c-Si) typically has an efficiency between 15-22 % (Mertens 2019), which
mean that of the incoming energy the cell convert 15-22 % of it to electricity. A lot of
efforts has and are still put into increasing the efficiency of solar cells to make them
more affordable. Next section look into the different types of solar cells and their
efficiency levels.
3.1.2
Solar cell generations
The different types of solar cells are commonly divided into four generations. The
tradeoff between the generations are mainly price vs efficiency. Data for solar cell
research efficiency has been collected by NREL in figure 3.1.
• 1st generation
The first generation of solar cells are made from crystalline silicon, either poly-
or mono crystalline or gallium arsenide (Luceño-Sánchez, Díez-Pascual, and
Capilla 2019). Their efficiency ranges between 15-22 % (Mertens 2019). Il
• 2nd generation
The second generation of solar cells focus on thin film technologies and include
amorphous silicon, cadmium telluride/cadmium sulfide (CdTe/CdS) and cop-
per indium gallium selenide (CIGS) solar cells (Luceño-Sánchez, Díez-Pascual,
and Capilla 2019). These can be produced cheaper due to the decreased mate-
rial use and cost less than the 1st generation, but the efficiency is lower than
generation 1 (Luceño-Sánchez, Díez-Pascual, and Capilla 2019). The efficiency
ranges between 7 - 15 % (Mertens 2019).
• 3rd generation
The third generation solar cells include organic (polymer)-based solar cells, Per-
ovskite cells and Dyed-sensitized solar cells.
The 3rd generation accepts an
increase in cost (compared to generation two) in the pursuit of better efficiency
(Luceño-Sánchez, Díez-Pascual, and Capilla 2019).
• 4th generation
The fourth generation solar cells uses nanomaterials like metallic nanoparticles,
metal oxides and carbon nanotubes (Luceño-Sánchez, Díez-Pascual, and Capilla
2019). The cells can be manufactured cheap, but thus far the efficiency of cells in
the fourth generation is below 12% (Luceño-Sánchez, Díez-Pascual, and Capilla
2019).
Generation 3 and 4 solar cells are mostly at a basic research state, while generation
1 and 2 has been commercialized and tested in real applications (Luceño-Sánchez,
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Building-integrated solar panels
13
Díez-Pascual, and Capilla 2019). The obtained efficiency of the different solar cell
types has been plotted by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) (see
figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Solar cell efficiency overveiw (NREL 2020).
Types of solar cells used for BIPV are crystalline silicon, amorphous silicon (thin
film), sandwich cells (SPV), transparent solar cells, polymer cells, dye-sanitized cells,
copper indium galium selenide cells (CIGS) and inverted pyramid cells (A. Mehravaran
2019). The first generation (crystalline silicon cells, blue on figure 3.1) are dominant
on both the international and national market (Luceño-Sánchez, Díez-Pascual, and
Capilla 2019)(Dyck-Madsen and Risum Bøndergaard 2011) constituting 90% of (PA
Energy Ltd 2016) the global market.
3.2
Building-integrated solar panels
One solar cell is 156 mm x 156 mm. When several solar cells are combined (typically
in series (Mertens 2019)) in a panel, it is called solar panel. A group of solar panels
installed together is called a solar array. The total installed system is called a solar
plant.
Solar panels on buildings are either building-applied photovoltaics (BAPV) or building-
integrated photovoltaics (BIPV). BAPV is mounted on top of the building envelope,
typically on the roof, while BIPV replace building components on either the facade,
the roof or other e.g.
shading on a balcony (Eder et al. 2019).
BAPV has been
==PAGE:28==
14
3 The technology and the product
the dominating type on the market, while BIPV struggle to live up to the foreseen
potential (Curtius 2018). BIPV is defined by the International Energy Agency (IEA)
”A BIPV module is a PV module and a construction product together, designed to
be a component of the building. A BIPV product is the smallest (electrically and
mechanically) non-divisible photovoltaic unit in a BIPV system which retains
building-related functionality. If the BIPV product is dismounted, it would have to
be replaced by an appropriate construction product.” - IEA (iea-pvps.org)
It can be difficult to recognise if a solar panel is part of the building envelope or applied
on top of the actual climate screen. The multi-functionality of building-integrating
solar panels saves the expenses of having two layers; the climate screen beneath and
solar panels on top as with BAPV.
3.2.1
Photo voltaic plant components
To utilize the power produced by the solar panels, a number of additional components
are needed. i) an inverter which converts the electricity from DC to AC. ii) a feed-in
meter which deliver electricity to the public electricity grid and iii) a user meter that
measures the consumption of the household. iv) Lastly these components needs to
be connected with some cables. Furthermore a battery is necessary for storage, if the
produced energy should be made available at another time than when it is produced
(Mertens 2019).
3.2.2
Importance of placement
The solar cell is dependent on the incoming solar radiation and therefore the area
of the solar panel is essential. The issue for up-scaling PV capacity thus becomes;
where to find space available for installing solar panels? Large scale solar arrays can
be found on fields, where the angle of the panels can be optimized independently.
This solution utilize land, which could be used for other things such as agriculture
or forests. The other option is to place the solar panels on the available space found
on most buildings envelopes. This has the benefit of utilizing available space which
often does not have other application alternatives.
3.2.3
The technology and the product
The focus has for many years been on on improving the effect, lifetime and price
of solar cells. In the Danish strategy for diffusion of PV technology from 2009 (PA
Energy Ltd 2016) there is no mentioning of aesthetic concerns. Dyck-Madsen and
Risum Bøndergaard 2011 also mention that focus has been on the technical improve-
ments for efficiency, while the design aspects including BIPV have not developed
much. Based on the amount of literature on the subject of color and aesthetics, the
focus on aesthetics and BIPV seem to be increasing ( section 4.4).
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Market analysis
A market analysis was done to understand the conditions for BIPV in Denmark.
The market was investigated asking; How does legislation influence the dispersion of
BIPV? What is the potential for BIPV in Denmark? How is the economy for different
scenarios? And what is state of the art for BIPV?
4.1
Political frame
The political frame has played a large role in the market of PV technology through
regulations and support schemes.
In this section the political and organizational
interest in PV is investigated by looking at the governmental goals along with the
regulations for producing and selling electricity from PV plants.
4.1.1
Goals for PV electricity
’The integrated National Energy and Climate Plan’ was published by the danish min-
istry of Climate, Energy and Utility in 2019. The Danish government aims to be
one of the leading countries in combating climate change (Klima-Energi- og Forsyn-
ingsministeriet 2019). By 2030, at least 55 % of the gross final consumption of energy
should be renewable energy (Klima-Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet 2019), about 4
% of this is predicted to be solar energy by 2030. Since 2005 Denmark has had a
strategy for solar energy (PA Energy Ltd 2016). The newest strategy was published
in 2016 by PA Energy in collaboration with EUDP Energistyrelsen and Dansk Sol-
celleforening (PA Energy Ltd 2016). The strategy suggest that the goal for solar
energy should be 5% of the national consumption by 2020 and 15% by 2035 which is
around 5 TWh or 6 GW capacity (PA Energy ltd 2016). Ten primary areas of actions
is defined in the strategy, one of these focus on BAPV and BIPV stating that;
”Design, architecture, aesthetics and mounting will play a growing role for future
application of solar cells in urban environments, on buildings and other build area.
The effort will primarily be directed towards danish applications but export
opportunities should be included as well”. - PA Energy ltd 2016
In 2020 a law about promoting renewable energy was passed. The law states that
grants will be offered from the Climate, Energy and Supply ministry to smaller energy
==PAGE:30==
16
4 Market analysis
productions (such as solar cells) who utilize technology that are significant for future
diffusion of renewable energy (Klima- Energi- og Bygningsministeriet: Energistyrelsen
2020).
4.1.2
Settlements and support schemes
There has been several changes to the billing mechanisms and support schemes for
solar plants in Denmark. The rules for solar plants also varies depending on the plant
size and who owns the plant. The changes are briefly described in this section to
provide a basic understanding of some of the political regulations that play a role in
the adoption of PV technology in Denmark.
Two support schemes has aided the implementation of PV technology in Denmark;
feed-in-tariffs (FIT) and yearly net metering:
With yearly net-metering the prosumer can free of charge use the electrical grid and
the grid practically become a storage facility for the solar plant owner. If a person
deliver 1 kWh to the grid, that person can use 1 kWh from the grid at any given time
within that year. In Denmark the yearly net-metering was passed in 1993 and caused
a great increase in installed capacity during especially 2012 (407 MW) (PA Energy
Ltd 2016).
FITs are used to increase the market by ensuring a fixed price for the excess electricity
sold to the grid and thus provide security against varying electricity prices (Mathiesen
et al. 2017). From 1999 to 2004 Denmark had a FIT, ensuring that excess electricity
was sold for 0.60 kr/kWh.
4.1.2.1
Subsequent changes
From 2004 to 2012 a new settlement called the 60/40 settlement was introduced
(Mathiesen et al. 2017). With the 60/40 settlement the prosumer would receive 0,60
kr/kWh the first ten years and then 40 kr/kWh the next ten years (Mathiesen et
al. 2017). In 2012 the net-metering changed to hourly instead of yearly, the FIT
was changed to accommodate for lost benefits (Mathiesen et al. 2017). For a limited
period the FIT would be 1.30 kr/kWh and then it would gradually be lower (1.02
kr/kWh in 2015 and 0.88 kr/kWh in 2016). For large commonly owned PV plants
(e.g. owned by businesses) the settlement was 1,45 kr/kWh. The settlement obtained
by the prosumer would be viable for ten years and then the electricity would be
sold at market price (SPOT). Plants that was not connected to a consumption unit
was settled at 0.90 kr/kWh. The FITs applied for specific sizes of solar plants and
in 2013 the FIT was limited to only include private plants (Mathiesen et al. 2017).
The modifications was made due to a loophole allowing larger plants to utilize the
settlement, which was meant only for plants below 400 kW capacity (Mathiesen et
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Potential for BIPV in Denmark
17
al. 2017). In 2013 a law was adapted allowing tenants to be part of the settlement too,
though they would need to individually renounce their right to individually choose
the electricity provider (Mathiesen et al. 2017). This complicates the inclusion of
solar energy in apartment buildings. The European Union is currently looking at
improving the conditions for energy communities [3]. In 2013 it was also agreed that
municipalities was considered electricity production units if owning solar plants and
therefore would be regulated according to the Danish Electricity Act. This means that
the plants needs to be operated under a separate corporation (Mathiesen et al. 2017).
Exemptions for municipal owned plants can be made if the plant are integrated into
the building, if the installation is included in the building energy frame calculations or
if the municipality apply for exemption. The 60/40 settlement was closed in 2016 due
to the wast amount of people applying for 60/40 settlement for their PV installations,
and the energy was then sold at SPOT price (Mathiesen et al. 2017). In 2017 the
hourly net metering was replaced by momentarily net metering. It was also decided
that electricity consumed directly by the prosumer is no longer exempted from paying
a subscription fee to the electricity company as they had been previously (Mathiesen
et al. 2017).
Mathiesen et al. 2017 conclude in the report on photovoltaics from
2017, that the changes in regulations for PV has impacted the implementation rate
negatively. The current schemes for PV plants have momentary net metering at the
FIT of 0.74 /0.77 kr/kWh for residential and non private installations respectively
up to 20 MW. Above the 20 MW, the electricity is sold at SPOT price. The average
electricity price was 0,34 kr/kWh in 2019 Poulsen, Stryg, and Capion 2019, but it can
vary greatly during the day and year. Up to 6kW plants are allowed for residential
installations (Mathiesen et al. 2017).
4.2
Potential for BIPV in Denmark
To understand the potential for BIPV in Denmark, it is relevant to look at several
things; i) the electrical grids ability to manage solar energy, ii) the Danish climate,
and iii) The current and expected PV capacity in Denmark?
4.2.1
The electrical grid
Solar energy can relatively easy be integrated in the Danish electrical grid according
to the Danish strategy for solar energy from 2016 (PA Energy ltd 2016). The issue
with solar energy, is that the production of electricity vary greatly depending on the
weather. The fluctuating energy production is challenging for both wind and solar
energy. The overproduction is called overflow and for solar energy this occur when
the weather is very sunny and the solar cells produce a lot of energy at the same time.
This can be a challenge for the electrical grid(PA Energy Ltd 2016). The challenge
is known from other RES e.g. windmills and can be solved with the same solution
(PA Energy Ltd 2016). 60,5 % of the domestic supply and 36.7% of total consumed
energy in 2018 came from renewable resources (Danish Energy Agency 2018. Despite
==PAGE:32==
18
4 Market analysis
a significant share of renewable energy in the danish energy mix, Denmark has had
no problems with lack of electricity (PA Energy Ltd 2016) and the energy security
in Denmark is considered very high (Klima-Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet 2019).
Better and cheaper storage possibilities will aid the energy security(Klima-Energi- og
Forsyningsministeriet 2019).
4.2.2
A wind energy nation
Denmark is known for producing windmills and the majority of the renewable energy
in the danish energy mix is also from wind. Comparing the economics of solar and
wind energy, the cost of solar energy is smaller than energy from off-shore mills and
is appropriating the cost on on-shore wind mills. The price on PV is decreasing more
than the price on on-shore wind, having a learning rate (the percentage decrease in
price when doubling the production) on 20% while on-shore wind is 10% (PA Energy
Ltd 2016).
The LCOE (levelized cost of energy) for solar energy is predicted to
level with on-shore wind at about 0.25-0.30 euro/MWh in 2030 (Klima-Energi- og
Forsyningsministeriet 2019). The LCoE for solar energy and wind is smaller than
coal power plants as seen in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The levelized cost of electricity (LCoE) comparing wind, solar and coal
(Klima-Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet 2019).
4.2.3
Danish weather
Denmark lies in the northern hemisphere. The sun is high in summer months and low
in winter months. The lower the sun (the closer it is to the horizon) the longer the
sun rays need to travel through the atmosphere before reaching earth (AM value) (see
section 3.1.1. The amount of solar energy thus vary over the day and over the year.
The optimal angle for solar panels in Denmark is around 30-45º in order to optimize
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Potential for BIPV in Denmark
19
the yearly yield while the winter sun is better captured with an angle of around 77º
(Dyck-Madsen and Risum Bøndergaard 2011). 0º is horizontal while 90º is vertical.
Clouds contribute to the scattering of solar rays. The scattered light is called diffuse
light and still contribute to the total radiation being converted to energy.
Denmark has an average annual sum of solar irradiation of around 1000 kW h m2.
(Mertens 2019). The amount of radiation over a year varies from area to area (4.2).
Figure 4.2: Radiation in different areas of Denmark, left: photo voltaic power po-
tential, and right: horizontal irradiation (Solargis).
4.2.4
Capacity and needed area
It is estimated that the total capacity for solar energy production in Denmark will
grow from 1.08 GW today (Statista) to 7.8 GW in 2030 (Klima-Energi- og Forsyn-
ingsministeriet 2019). The estimates for renewable energy in the energy mix from
year 2020 to 2030 can be seen in figure (4.3). It shows that solar energy is the small-
est contributor anno 2020 but will grow to be a more significant share of the RES in
the energy mix.
Even though solar energy is not predicted to be the main RES in Denmark, it is
interesting to see what it would demand in terms of land area. PA Energy Ltd 2016
has investigated just that.
The total electricity consumption in Denmark was 34
TWh/year in 2016 and would demand an area of 330 km2 (PA Energy Ltd 2016).
There is about 600 km2 build area in Denmark (PA Energy Ltd 2016). Is one fourth
of this suitable for solar panels it would potentially generate 16-17 TWh/year, enough
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Market analysis
Figure 4.3: Estimated trajectory for the overall share of renewable energy (Klima-
Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet 2019).
to cover half of the danish energy demand (PA Energy Ltd 2016). To provide 15%
of the energy demand (5.1 Twh/year) by 2035 (assuming a consumption similar to
2016) 90 km2 is needed, about the same size as Ærø. If facades are included, the
energy consumption can be covered by a smaller area of land since these take up ver-
tical space, but the area of solar panels will increase (about 21 % (Dyck-Madsen and
Risum Bøndergaard 2011)) due to the lower efficiency of facade mounted solar panels.
4.3
Economics
A frequent question asked about PV technology is; is it profitable? The economy for
solar panels are generally a bit difficult to calculate because it depends on several
variables such as, the sun radiance, the plant size, the plant location, the prize of pur-
chase and mounting, tax deductions, amount of own consumption and the settlement
entered (see section 4.1.2) (PA Energy Ltd 2016). The electricity prices varies during
the day and year and the metering and FIT changes depending on the time the plant
is purchased, the plant size and the ownership.
This section briefly describes; i) two papers predictions for payback periods for BIPV,
ii) variables in solar panel efficiency (the controllable ones), iii) Price comparison to
other building materials and iv) Life cycle assessment for BIPV.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Economics
21
The findings are later used in the scoping of the project and to understand found
barriers.
4.3.1
Payback period
The payback period is the time it takes for the investment to earned itself back. The
income from the solar plant is made from savings on own consumption and the earn-
ings made on excess electricity.
4.3.1.1
Comparing different scenarios
Mathiesen et al (2017) has investigated the payback period for roof mounted and
field PV plants under the different settlement scenarios. The payback time is very de-
pendant on especially the net-metering type (yearly, hourly or momentary) but also
the FIT and the amount of own consumption (Mathiesen et al. 2017). The operation
and management (OM) cost of PV plants are fairly low but the inverter needs to be
replaced every 10-20th year. It was found that the payback period for residential PV
plants are 9-11 years if the 60/40 settlement and yearly net metering is used. While
the plant wont pay itself back within the 30 years guaranteed lifespan, if the net
metering is hourly and the electricity is sold to SPOT price. For housing associations
and public schools the payback period is calculated to around 5-7 years (Mathiesen
et al. 2017). The low payback period can be attributed to a high own consumption
among other things. A business owned plant is calculated to have a payback period
17-21 years. Businesses has lower electricity taxes, which decreases the value of own
consumption, making the payback period longer (Mathiesen et al. 2017). According
to Mathiesen et al.’s findings, the most profitable case assuming hourly net metering
and SPOT price is public schools closely followed by housing associations, businesses,
private and lastly free ground mounted PV plants. The privately owned PV plant
and the free ground mounted PV plant risk not earning back the investment within
30 years, if no FIT or metering settlement is put in place to improve the earnings from
having a solar plant. The settlement differences for types of PV plants in Denmark
alter the picture slightly, especially privately owned plants improve greatly if the
net-metering is yearly instead of hourly. The own consumption changes from around
97% to 35% (Mathiesen et al. 2017) . The settlement has little influence on the build-
ings with high own consumption (public school (91%), housing associations (73%)
and commercially owned (85%), making these building less vulnerable to changes in
settlements.
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Market analysis
4.3.1.2
BIPV as the complete facade envelope
The payback period for facades is naturally longer, as the efficiency of facade mounted
PV is smaller. At the same time the investment cost for BIPV is smaller than free
standing PV pants, as the BIPV panel can replace a building component. Gholami
H. and Røstvik N.H. (2020) argue that the life cycle cost analysis (LCCA) for facade
mounted BIPV need to include both the savings from material replacement and the
environmental and societal benefit (Gholami and Røstvik 2020). Gholami H. and
Røstvik N.H. (2020) investigated the feasibility of BIPV as facade skin on the com-
plete building facade. Included in the calculations are the environmental and societal
benefits of minimized distribution losses (which is about 6%), lowered power delivery
cost, and savings from carbon taxes. Decrease in PV efficiency is 0.5%. The annual
OM (operation and management) cost is set to around 1% of the initial cost of the
system while replacement of inverters usually cost 17% of the systems initial cost and
needs replacement every 10th year (Gholami and Røstvik 2020). The lifespan is 30
years. Net present value (NPV) is used to understand the potential present value of
an investment. The cumulative NPV for different facades and roof can be seen in
figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: European average cumulative NPV for BIPV systems facing different
directions (Gholami and Røstvik 2020).
The variation in savings and income is big. The roof is clearly a more economical
choice than the facades as expected. Mathiesen et al. 2017 also calculated an average
of the five different directions and calculated the cumulative NPV over 30 years (figure
4.5. The graph also show the NPV for the ”old” way of calculating where the cost of
the substituted building component is not subtracted from the investment cost. The
discounted payback period for the roof, south facade, east facade, west facade, and
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Economics
23
north facade is 5, 6, 13, 12 and 30(+) years, respectively, with a 5% discount rate
(Mertens 2019). The study shows that while it is true that the economy is a great
deal better for the roof, the utilization of southern facades and even west and east
facades can return investments within the products lifespan. Calculations show that
for house in Denmark the roof, south, east, west, and north facade has a DPP of
approxemately 5, 5, 3, 3, and 27 years. The reasons the roof and south facade are
very similar in DPP is because the irradiation used for calculation is 1051 for the roof
and 926 for the south facade. In other European countries the difference in radiation
is naturally greater.
Figure 4.5: Average cumulative NPV of BIPV building envelope in European coun-
tries (Gholami and Røstvik 2020).
It should be noted that a significant efficiency decrease (e.g. due to coloring) will
have a big impact on the NPV and the payback time.
4.3.2
Variables in plant efficiency
This section investigates the variables impacting the efficiency of solar panels. Plac-
ing solar panels at different angles, applying color, ventilation and the the solar cell
efficiency are parameters which define the final solar panel efficiency. Calculations
are made to showcase which impact these variables has on the energy production.
One household has an electricity consumption about 3000-4000 kWh/year (Mertens
2019). The sun irradiates about 1000 W m−2 (Mertens 2019). A silicon solar panel
has an efficiency of 15 - 22 % (Mertens 2019). The specific yield is approximately
920 kWh (kWp a)−1 in Denmark (PA Energy ltd 2011). The common 6 kWp plant
is thus 28-40 m2. kWp stand for kilo watt peak and defines the peak efficiency of a
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Market analysis
solar plant. A 6 kWp plant is able to produce 6 kWh under standard test conditions
and full radiation.
Kilowatt peak (kWp) = Radiation (kW m−2) × area (m2) × efficiency (%))
Yield (kWh a−1) = Kilowatt peak (kWp) × specific yield (kWh (kWp a−1))
Efficiency (%) = PV efficiency × (1 - color reduction) × (1 - heat reduction) × (1 -
angle reduction).
The energy production of one 40 m2 plant has been calculated for the scenarios;
BAPV, BIPV with no color and BIPV with color (see figure 4.6). A best case and a
worst case scenario was used. In the worst case scenario the efficiency of the module
is 15%. The effect for crystalline solar cells decrease with temperature increase (ap-
proximately 0.5 % pr degree Celsius) (Dyck-Madsen and Risum Bøndergaard 2011).
BIPV generally lose 5 % efficiency due to worse ventilation compared to BAPV (Dyck-
Madsen and Risum Bøndergaard 2011). For the worst case scenario the pv efficiency
is 15%, there is a 5% efficiency loss to heat and a 40% loss to coloring.
For the
best case scenario the efficiency is 22%, it is assumed that the ventilation is sufficient
and the loss to coloring is 10%. The calculations are made for a south facing roof
and a south facing facade. According to Dyck-Madsen and Risum Bøndergaard 2011
facades loose about 21% efficiency compared to a roof angled at 45 degree. The area
needed for a 6kWp plant was calculated for the same scenarios (see figure 4.7).
Figure 4.6: Comparison of efficiency of 40 m2 PV plant for different scenarios.
Figure 4.7: Comparison of area needed 6kW PV plant for different scenarios.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 State of the art
25
4.3.3
BIPV price compared to other building materials
Common facade materials in Denmark cost around 400 - 1000 dkk/m2 (glass 400-600
dkk/m2, stone 600-1000 dkk/m2) (HSHansen and Gaia Solar 2015). BIPV facade
panels cost around 1000 kr/m2 (HSHansen and Gaia Solar 2015). The exact price
of facade materials and mounting vary. A project even used facade materials costing
2000 dkk/m2 [5] potentially making BIPV a cheaper choice.
4.4
State of the art
State of the art for BIPV in Denmark was researched. This section is divided into i)
which commercial BIPV product exists on the danish market, and ii) which coloring
techniques exists/ are being researched?
4.4.1
BIPV products on the Danish market
Below are presented a number of BIPV products available on the Danish market.
The examples below are meant as an indicator of where the the market are currently
at, but is not an exhausted list of existing products or technologies on the market.
Examples of the product from the different manufactures are showed in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.9 demonstrate some of the colors available from the different manufacturers.
Danish BIPV manufacturers/suppliers;
• CFR Energy Modules by Danish Solar Engergy LTD. 5 standard colors; red,
blue, grey and two green nuances,
• Solaxess facade by Solaxess (sold by Solar Partner). Colored film, available in
6 colors at Solar Partner.
• Kromatix by SwissINSO (used by SolarLab). Color treated glass, angle sensitive,
available in 6 colors.
• Customized panels by Racell. Colours and texture customisable.
• Ennogie-taget by Ennogie. Available in black.
• T-roof, x-roof and xs-roof by SolarTag. Available in black.
• Skala and PowerMax by Avancis Solar (German product sold by Klimaenergi
A/S). Available in 8 colors at Klimaenergi A/S.
• Zappa and Linea by Komproment. Available in black.
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Market analysis
Figure 4.8: From top left horizontally to bottom right corner: CFR Energy pan-
els, Solaxess facade panels, Kromatix/SolarLab panels, Racell panels,
Ennogie-taget panels, xs-roof panel, Skala panels, and Zappa panels.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 State of the art
27
Figure 4.9: Other color options. From top left horizontally to bottom right corner:
Colors for CFR Energy panel, examples of colors for Solaxess panels,
example of colors using Kromatix, example of Colors for Racell Panels,
and lastly an example of another color (blue) by Komproment.
4.4.2
Coloring solar panels
Colors can be created with pigment or with structural coloring. Pigment absorb some
wavelengths and reflects others while structural coloring lets some wave lengths pass
through and reflect other. This characteristic makes structural color promising for
coloring of solar cells.
The perceived color of an object is determined by the wave lengths of the reflected
light (chromaticity) and the amount of reflected light (brightness) (Eder et al. 2019).
To create the perception of color, a part of the light spectrum from the sun is reflected.
The reflected energy does not reach the solar cell and the efficiency of the solar panel
is decreased (Halme and Mäkinen 2019). The question thus becomes how to obtain
satisfying colors for solar panels without loosing too much efficiency.
4.4.2.1
Coloring methods
Different methods of coloring can be difficult to compare, since the colors produced
by the different methods are not the same and thus the theoretic limit for efficiency
is not the same either (Halme and Mäkinen 2019). Coloring methods suitable for
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Market analysis
opaque solar panels can be divided into 3 overall categories (adopted from Eder et
al. 2019 and modified).
• Coating of solar cell
Example: Varying the anti-reflective (AR) coating.
The color is varied by
modifying the thickness of silicon nitride antireflective coating, this cause a
14-50% decrease in efficiency depending on the color (Klampaftis et al. 2015).
• Interlayers
Colored film integrated in the solar panel as an extra encapsulate e.g. by lami-
nating it inside the module. The interlayers can be made with special ink on a
film (Eder et al. 2019). The efficiency reduction is dependent on the interlayer.
• Modified front glass
Below is examples of different ways to obtain color through modification of the
front glass (Eder et al. 2019):
– Surface treatment
Example: Spectrally selective coating which as up to 40% loss in efficiency.
– Ceramic paste
Example: A dotted pattern allow for light to reach the solar cell and the
efficiency loss is less than 20 %.
– Sandblasting
– Digital glass printing
Special ink is used to create motives.
– Satin finish and glass printing
Reduces glass transparency and a matte surface is obtained.
– Mineral coating
– Colored glass
– Solar filters
Example: Elective filters reflecting the diffuse radiation within the visi-
ble spectrum while allowing the infrared radiation to pass through. The
example has a 40% reduction in efficiency (Eder et al. 2019).
4.4.2.2
Coloring research
Research in coloring methods for c-Si solar cells are presented below. The existence
of these researches demonstrate a need for/interest in developing better or different
coloring methods.
• Luminescent materials
<10% reduction in efficiency (Klampaftis et al. 2015).
• Selectively Modulated Aesthetic Reflector Technology (SMART)
Nanophotonic coating, 41-30% efficiency loss depending on the color (Soman
and Antony 2019).
==PAGE:43==
4.4 State of the art
29
• Coating with Ag nano-particles (green color)
<10% decrease in efficiency (Peharz et al. 2017).
• Nanophotonic structures (SiNx)
efficiency increase (Zhang et al. 2019).
• Structural color film
3D periodic structures and layers of SiO2 and TiO2 (Jo et al. 2020).
Figure 4.10: From left:
Luminescent material, SMART coating, Ag coating,
Nanophotonic structures (SiNx) (Eder et al. 2019) .
4.4.2.3
Structural color film
A promising technology for coloring solar panels is structural color film (Jo et al. 2020).
This section describes the basics of how structural color film work, how it can be
integrated in a solar panel and which efficiency losses can be expected.
As the name ’structural color film’ implies, the technology creates color structurally
as opposed to pigment.
Pigment absorb some wavelengths while reflecting other
wave lengths. Structural color let some wavelengths pass through while reflecting
some wavelengths.
All the incoming radiation is either used for coloring or pass
through to the solar cell. An efficiency loss well below 10% is theoretically expected
for narrow wavelength band reflection (Eder et al. 2019). The exact efficiency loss
caused by a given color depend not only on the method of coloring but also on
chromaticity and brightness (Halme and Mäkinen 2019). The chromaticity is defined
by the wavelength. The brightness is defined by how much of the specific wavelength
is reflected (saturation). The reasons chromaticity impact the efficiency are that the
solar spectrum contain different amounts of specific wavelengths and the PV cells are
more sensitive to some wavelengths than other (spectral response) (Eder et al. 2019).
Structural color occur because periodic nano-structures in the surface of the ma-
terial cause reflection of specific wave lengths. The wavelengths reflected depend on
the size of the periodic nano patterns (Sun, Bhushan, and Tong 2013). Different
structural color mechanisms exists. The most common in nature is film interference
(Sun, Bhushan, and Tong 2013). Film interference happen when a medium reflects
light in both its upper and lower boundary and the reflections interfere with each
other (Sun, Bhushan, and Tong 2013). It is the thickness of the film which determine
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Market analysis
the color. In nature some structural colors are made from more than 100 layers, and
produce very bright colors (Sun, Bhushan, and Tong 2013).
The perceived color (chromaticity) of some structural colored surface depend on
the angle of incident light and the relative position of surface and observer, in other
words the color is iridescent. Examples of iridescent structural color is seen in the
jewel beetle, soap bubbles and poly-crystalline Si solar cell with an anti-reflection
coating (figure 4.11).
Figure 4.11: Examples of iridescent and angle-independent structural color. From
left: jewel beetle (shutterStock image), soap bubble (shutterstock im-
age), poly-crystalline Si solar cells (private image Racell solar cell) and
Morpho butterfly (picture from Chung et al. 2012).
The angle dependency is for many applications, including solar panels, generally
not a desired trade [1][9] . Researchers has found that not all examples of structural
color in nature is angle dependent. The blue wings of the Morpho butterfly remain
blue independent of the viewing angle (Chung et al. 2012) (see figure 4.11). The
structure on the butterfly wings are periodic, multilayered ridges with small disor-
ders and random variation.
A combination of interference, diffraction, scattering,
and pigment-induced absorption causes the angle-independent bright color (Chung et
al. 2012). This phenomenon has been researched and tried bio-mimicking by Jo et al.
(2020) and Chung et al. (2012). The reproduction is challenging (Chung et al. 2012)
and the fabrication of the bio-inspired film, is expensive to manufacture because the
method is highly complex (Jo et al. 2020). A group consisting of various stakeholders
including researches at DTU are working on a product for coloring solar panels with
structural colored film called ColorFoil.
ColorFoil can be integrated in a solar panel as an extra layer between solar cell and
front panel. Decoupling the coloring from solar cell processing and front panel pro-
cessing is an advantage for production and stock keeping, because the customizing
step is moved further down the production chain. Including a film in a solar panel
is relatively cheap compared to other coloring processes e.g. coating the front glass
[1]. In the design process described later in this report, it is assumed that ColorFoil
will be developed and can be integrated in the proposed design to provide aesthetic
colors with low efficiency loss.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Barriers and needs
In previous chapters several BIPV products available in Denmark was listed. Nev-
ertheless, BIPV is not common in Denmark. Therefore the following questions was
asked; who has an impact on the uptake of BIPV products? What barriers exist
for uptake of BIPV in Denmark? And which needs and requirements do actors have
for BIPV products? These questions were investigated through interviews with ten
actors from different actor groups. The result is i) a product system map showing
actor groups and how they play a role in the BIPV life, ii) the system map showing
actor subgroups and in which groups the interviewees belong, iii) barriers for BIPV,
and iv) needs for BIPV.
5.1
Interviews
Interviews was held with different actors to obtain knowledge about i) which obsta-
cles exists for the dispersion of BIPV and ii) which needs the actors have for BIPV
solutions. The knowledge about barriers provide insight on what might cause the slow
adoption of BIPV in Denmark and the knowledge about needs creates the foundation
for creating a BIPV design.
Selecting the actors to interview, was done with consideration to which actors have
a big impact on the uptake of BIPV. It was furthermore sought to have as many
actors from different actor groups and subgroups as possible. The overview of actors
started as a list and the interviews was planed continuously. The interviews were
conducted with one BIPV panel manufacturer [1], two private owners of BAPV [2][6],
one organisation driving implementation of BIPV [3], two building owners (one mu-
nicipality [4] and one company [8]), one building owner consultant [5], one occupied
with installation and operation of large PV plants [7], one architect [9], and one facade
entrepreneur [10]. The numbers are used to reference to the actors. The references
indicates that the information either comes from that person or that the statement
is based on something mentioned by them. None of the statement are direct quotes
and should be perceived as the authors interpretation of provided information. The
interviewed actors are listed below. An overview of which actor groups the intervie-
wees belong to is showed on the system map in figure 5.2.
==PAGE:46==
32
5 Barriers and needs
Project contributors:
Yakov Safir, CEO Racell, BIPV manufacturer [1]
Andrea and Henrik Höhnke, private BAPV owner [2]
Karin Kappel, architect and secretarial leader in Solar City Denmark [3]
Marie Baumann, architect in the Department of Urban Building Renewal, Cph mu-
nicipality [4]
Jakob Klint, chief advisor Kuben Management A/S, Building owner consultancy [5]
Christian Troelsgaard, private BAPV owner [6]
Carsten Nørgaard, senior project manager SolarPolaris former Gaia employee [7]
Jørgen Søndermark, project manager RealDania, Building owner [8]
Signe Bang Korsnes, senior consultant Architema A/S, architect [9]
Hans Bering, key account manager HSHansen A/S, facade entrepreneur [10]
Arne Grøntved, CEO Solar Partner ApS, BIPV manufacturer [11]
David Ørbæk, project manager and owner Facaden A/S, facade entrepreneur [12]
5.2
Product system overview
The product system surrounding BIPV is depicted in figure 5.1. The mapping of
the product system provides an overview of the interactions between actor groups.
The map consists of six groups; Life cycle, development, operation, decision makers,
political frame and information/incentive. The life cycle group could be divided into
pre-use and use. Each group has several subgroups as seen from the illustration. The
actor groups are numerated and the following text will use these numbers for refer-
ence.
(1) The life cycle of BIPV is illustrated across the middle part of the illustration
and is a chronological story of the life of a BIPV product. Resource extraction and
disposal is not included, but would be important to consider in a sustainability per-
spective. For the purpose of understanding barriers and opportunities for product
uptake it is less important.
The partial life cycle includes six steps; manufactur-
ing of components, assembling, mounting, installation, and use and maintenance. (2)
Technical- and product development is driven by research, which therefore point down
at the manufacture and the assembling steps of the BIPV life cycle (NREL) to in-
dicate this influence. (3) Decisions about BIPV inclusion in buildings are made by
the building owner. The specifics of the decision (which type, look and amount) will
often be influenced by information from sales persons and inputs from architects. The
entrepreneurs (responsible for the mounting of BIPV) might also provide information
of technical character to the building owner and architect. The decision is further-
more impacted by (4) the political frame and external sources of (5) information and
incentive. The political frame consists of legislation including, but not limited to,
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Product system overview
33
Figure 5.1: BIPV product system.
taxes, subsidies, permits and regulations. Organisations acts as drivers for BIPV by
providing information and/or incentives, e.g. interest associations for (building inte-
grated) photovoltaics or sustainability. Certifications can also play a significant role
in incentivising BIPV. The decision (3) enters the life cycle of BIPV (1) either before
assembly of the panel (customized product) or after the assembly (standard product).
The information and incentive (5) actors can impacts the political frame by providing
information. The political frame (4) impacts the use stage of the BIPV life cycle by
defining the profitability of operating solar cells etc. The laws and regulations for
BIPV electricity production impacts the electricity provider as well, as well as the
specific prices of an electricity provider influences the use phase. The use phase of
BIPVs life cycle is furthermore influenced by the climate and the system parts which
the BIPV panel rely on. The inverters are typically the least durable component.
The climate, system and electricity providers are in the actor category (6) operation.
Maintenance for the BIPV panels is generally small. Having to exchange inverters
every 10 year (Gholami and Røstvik 2020) are the most common system maintenance,
while keeping the panels clean and keeping shadow from vegetation away, might be
required as well from time to time [2].
==PAGE:48==
34
5 Barriers and needs
5.2.1
Actors in the product system
Different human and non-human actors constitute the different actor groups of the
product system (see figure 5.2).
Some actors holds a position in more than one
box in some instances. The BIPV supplier can be both the manufacturer of some
parts, the assembler, the salesman and informer and be in charge of mounting. But
sometimes the manufacturing, sales and mounting is taken care of by other actors.
Non-human actors influence the system just as much as human actors. Inverters are
the most commonly replaced component in the system. Other non-human actors are
legislation and the climate.
Figure 5.2: BIPV product system with actors. The interviewed actors is illustrated
on the map showing the covered actor groups and subgroups.
5.3
Barriers in BIPV product system
The barriers identified through the interviews, was aggregated into eleven overall
barriers. The list does not cover all barriers for BIPV in Denmark, but the ones
which was identified through the conducted interviews.
The barriers are marked
on the BIPV map on figure 5.3 where the barrier occur. None of the barriers are
insurmountable, but make including BIPV troublesome.
Overall barrier for dispersion of BIPV in Denmark:
1. Aesthetic noise
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Barriers in BIPV product system
35
2. Lack of product information
3. Lack of knowledge
4. Cost
5. Concern for efficiency loss
6. High complexity
7. Life cycle assessment
8. Late adoption in construction process
9. Lack of (standard) mounting solution
10. Legal changes/ barriers
11. Lack of affordable storage
12. Lack of complete roof/facade fitting solutions
13. Not on the agenda
Figure 5.3: Barriers on the actor network.
1) Aesthetic noise, is a barrier concerned with the lack of possibility to integrate
solar panels in a way, where the specific area does not stands out from its surrounding
components in an unpleasing manner [4].
Angle dependency is a very noticeable feature, welcomed in some instances, but mostly
not [1][9].
2) Lack of product information about the economics (efficiency) and mounting is a
==PAGE:50==
36
5 Barriers and needs
hindrance for decision makers. Lack of mounting information can be a barrier, be-
cause the entrepreneur cannot receive the information right away and then it is easier
to choose something else with easier accessible information [9]. There is a compet-
itiveness among the BIPV suppliers and a fear of international competition, which
might influence the availability of information [1][3].
3) Lack of knowledge is an issue, mainly because the calculation of economics is
complex. Without easy access to simple information about the economics of BIPV
through e.g. case studies [9] and reference houses [10] it is difficult to convince deci-
sion makers that BIPV is a good idea from an economical perspective. There is also
a general lack of knowledge about existing BIPV products [5].
4) Expensive products and processes is a barrier for implementing BIPV. Solar energy
has become a lot cheaper through the years, but there is still an opinion or at least
a perception that BIPV is too expensive [9] [10]. The cost for implementing BIPV
derives both from the product, but also from a largely customized process [3]. The
payback period needs to be somewhere around 10 years for most customers to be
interested, 20 years is too much [5]. The economics of integrating BIPV was investi-
gated in section 4.3.
5) Concern for efficiency loss is a concern mainly for facade elements because of their
position, but is also a general insecurity about when BIPV is appropriate to include
[9]. The concern for efficiency loss link to barrier 4) Cost and 7) LCA, in that the
concern for efficiency loss evolves around the need for BIPV to be both a good invest-
ment and a sustainable choice [9]. Aesthetic BIPV products often have big efficiency
losses to coloring and this makes BIPV less attractive [2].
6) High complexity refers to the numbers of things to consider when implementing
BIPV. What will the efficiency be if placing them differently or coloring them differ-
ently? How can they be mounted? How will corners be filled? What is the cost and
what is the gain? Which metering schemes and rules apply? etc. [3] [4] [9].
7) The Life cycle assessment (LCA) of building components are important in the
process of choosing between products [9]. The LCA for BIPV do not look too good
as it is [3][9]. To better understand this barrier an additional interview was made on
this particular topic with BIPV manufacturer [11]. The barrier has been described
in section 5.3.1 below.
8) Late adoption in construction process is a problem because it is increasingly diffi-
cult to include BIPV in a project the further along the project is [7][9]. BIPV is often
only included early on, if a person in the process is dedicated to including BIPV [3].
Rules for how big capacity is allowed can make it difficult to include BIPV early on
[9].
9) Lack of (standard) mounting solution is sometimes a result of late integration or
of the project being a showcase project [3] and it seems that for many project with
BIPV, they start from scratch with the mounting system [4]. Lack of a solution for,
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Barriers in BIPV product system
37
or information on, mounting, can be a barrier for choosing BIPV [9].
10) Legal barriers are caused by the legislation tied to being an electricity producer.
The rules impact both when and who can have BIPV and the expenses/profit of own-
ing solar panels. The changes of the rules and laws causes additional insecurities [2]
[3] [4]. The development in danish settlements and support schemes has been briefly
explained in section 4.1.2.
11) Lack of affordable storage has become a barrier for private households [2] [3] [6] [8]
after the net metering was changed from yearly to hourly. A high own consumption
gives the best economy under the current settlement and a way to do that would be
to have storage facilities (Mathiesen et al. 2017). The available options are perceived
too expensive and cause the investment of solar energy even more difficult to earn
beck. Powerwall by Tesla cost 43,000 dkk Europe-Solar. BYD offeres a variaty of
storage options of which one with a similar capacity to Tesla’s battery cost 46,000
dkk Europe-Solar. The guarantee is 10 years for both.
12) Lack of complete roof/facade fitting solutions makes it difficult to make nice tran-
sitions between different envelope elements and fitting the panels to various corners
and transitions [4].
13) (BIPV is) not on the agenda in the building industry, and that is a barrier for
BIPV. BIPV is simply not really in focus when planing a construction (for the most
part) and the existing BIPV projects are considered pilot projects [5].
Designing an aesthetic solution will directly mitigate barrier 1) Aesthetic noise, 9)
lack of (standard) mounting system and 12) Lack of adequate complete roof/facade
fitting, while the barriers 4) Cost, and 5) Concern for efficiency loss, should be con-
sidered in the design process as well, to obtain not only a visually acceptable design,
but also an economically, and sustainably feasible solution.
5.3.1
Life cycle assessments of BIPV
The LCAs made for solar panels with the current data shows that it will take 20-25
years to make up for the CO2 emitted in the production of the panel [11]. This looks
negative for the customers and architect and it might be concluded that solarpanels
are not a sustainable choice [11]. Calculations for LCAs are complex and the result
depend on which data is used for the processes/life-stages. The choice for some data
in the BIPV LCA creates a worse result for solar panels than is always the reality
[11]. The BIPV LCA shows a very high CO2 emission in the production of solar pan-
els because the calculations are based on having the production in China where the
energy used for production is not very green [11]. In Danish or European productions
CO2 emissions are generally much smaller. This is due to efforts put into reducing
CO2 emissions in productions [11]. Silicon can only be extracted from a few places.
Using silicon extracted in Norway cause a much smaller CO2 footprint because they
use high share of hydro power in their energy mix [11]. Installing solar panels in
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Barriers and needs
Denmark replaces energy which is partly green, while installing solar panels in China
will replace an energy mix with a larger CO2 emission. This means that the time
it takes for the CO2 savings from solar panels to break even with the emission from
the production will be shorter in China than in Denmark [11]. When calculating the
energy repressed in the future, it is done on the assumption that the mix will become
greener and greener [11]. This will only be the case if more renewable energy capacity
is installed which the current LCA does not motivate [11]. A solution to this barrier
has for Solar Partner been to produce their own LCA for their specific products [11].
5.3.2
Asking if BIPV and aesthetics matter?
Three questions was asked in all ten interviews focusing on the actors perception of
BIPV. The answers are showed in the pie charts below.
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Opportunities
39
Comments to the replies can be found in appendix B below each interview. A
general comment to the last question, do you think that solar panels should be rec-
ognizable on buildings, was that it should not be obvious, but whether it should be
completely invisible depend on the building type. Branding could be a reason for
having slightly recognizable BIPV panels.
5.4
Opportunities
The interviews was made mainly to uncover barriers and needs. But the following
opportunities were also identified:
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Barriers and needs
1. Better for building value [4]
2. Less energy loss in transport (compared to field plants) [3]
3. Savings from replacing facade components [1]
4. Space saving (compared to field plants) [9]
5. Aesthetic attractiveness [2] [9]
5.5
Needs
The foundation for a relevant design is to understand what the users (here meaning
all actors) needs or desires from the product. The needs are derived from the same
interviews as the barriers. The barriers focus on the whole product system while
the list of needs are confined to the ones relevant for designing a BIPV panel. The
mounting system impacts the design of the panel and the appearance and is therefore
a part of the design of appearance as well.
The total list of needs from all interviews (135 in total) can be seen in appendix C.
The needs was categorized in three groups; 1) Aesthetics, 2) Mounting, and 3) Eco-
nomics and sustainability. All the needs for BIPV panel design were gathered from
the interviews and similar needs from different actors was combined. This was done
by cutting out all the needs and grouping the ones that where similar.
For each need there is a reference number, an explanation, and a reference to the
actor(s) from who the need is derived. Due to interviewing style, every actor have
not been discussing the same issues. The actors supporting the need, is therefore not
necessarily confined to the list presented for each need. The actor references is there
for traceability reasons.
Furthermore, the list of needs presented in the following
tables, only represent needs discovered through the interviews.
==PAGE:55==
5.5 Needs
41
1. Aesthetics
Need
Explanation
Actors
1.1
Appearance
options
Not being confined to a few colors. Be-
ing able to fit the material to surround-
ings buildings and materials.
Being
able to vary panel size from project to
project.
[1] [7] [9]
1.2
Angle
independency
Maintaining the color when the panel is
seen from different angles.
[1] [5]
1.3
Avoid
discomfort
from
reflections
Reflections from both frame and panel
are undesirable.
[3] [5] [9]
1.4
Lively
appearance
Having material which changes with
weather conditions.
[4] [5] [9]
1.5
Discrete
appearance
Hiding the fact that the component is
PV. Visually blend in.
[All]
1.6
Recognisable
appearance
Showing that the component is PV for
educational and branding purposes.
[All]
1.7
Harmony
with
surroundings
Mottled appearance similar to natural
material ease implementation with old
materials (patina look).
[3] [4]
1.8
Integrated
with
design
It is perceived unpleasant with contrast-
ing solar panels. An area of solar panels
stands out and is an additional element
in the architecture. Corners and joints
are important for the appearance.
[3] [5] [9]
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Barriers and needs
2. Mounting
Need
Explanation
Actors
2.1
Simple
choice
Reducing decision and process complex-
ity by having a turn key system for
mounting.
The easier or the more
”usual” the installation method is, the
smaller the risk of error.
[1] [3] [4]
[7] [8] [9]
[10]
2.2
Complete
(facade)
solution
A solution for covering a facade with
the elements of windows, doors etc.
The joints and corners needs to look
good as well.
Make it easier to vary
capacity without changing architecture
by including dummies
[3] [4] [5]
[9]
2.3
Heat
protection
The high temperature of the panels can
pose a risk to its surroundings if not
accounted for.
The heat cause a cer-
tain expansion of the materials, depend-
ing on their expansion coefficient, which
can cause movement or fitting issues.
[1]
2.4
Edge
protection
Humidity creeping into the panels will
cause damage to electrical components
etc.
There is also a risk of delamina-
tion when having two glued elements if
humidity seeps in.
[1] [10]
2.5
Monitoring
Monitoring is needed to make sure the
panels are functioning.
[6] [9]
2.6
Maintenance
free
If mounted on high buildings it is im-
portant that they are maintenance free
since accessing them is difficult.
[4]
==PAGE:57==
5.5 Needs
43
3. Economics and sustainability
Need
Explanation
Actors
3.1
High
efficiency
The economy of having solar cells de-
pend on the efficiency.
The solar
cell efficiency decrease with tempera-
ture increase. Partial shadows should
be avoided because it impacts the effi-
ciency of surrounding cells as well.
[1] [2] [3]
[7] [8] [10]
3.2
Lower price
Expenses can be saved by replacing
building material with BIPV instead of
adding PV on top. Standard solutions
will help bring down the cost. The pay-
back time should be around 10 years
not 20 to be attractive.
[1] [2] [3]
[5] [7] [9]
[10]
3.3
Robustness
A lifespan similar to other building el-
ements. The aesthetic qualities should
be maintained through the lifespan.
[4] [9]
3.3
Sustainable
It is important that the material use
can be justified. Life cycle assessments
is an important tool in selecting build-
ing materials. It is acceptable to pay
more for a sustainable product.
[2] [9]
3.4
Economic se-
curity
There need to be a clear responsibili-
ty/reliability delegation in case of panel
defaults and such. The supplier should
be robust to ensure future access to
products and to being able to handle
complaints
[4] [6][10]
==PAGE:58==
44
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Designing a mounting
solution for aesthetic
solar panels
In the previous chapters, market, actor network, needs and barriers for BIPV, was
investigated. On the basis of the gained knowledge, the goal in the next chapters,
is to contribute to the BIPV field with an aesthetic design proposal for BIPV. The
mounting solution defines many aspects of the appearance, so the mounting method
is the primary focus in the design phase. Other needs and requirements (apart from
aesthetics) are also taken into consideration, to evaluate the solutions holistically and
provide the best compromise between different needs. In this chapter, possibilities for
an aesthetic mounting solution are investigated through research, ideation, interviews,
an evaluation matrix, mock-ups and a prototype.
In order to focus the effort, the scope of the project was narrowed down. A detailed
requirements list was developed based on the needs and their underlying interview
statements. The list was continuously developed during this phase as new information
arose.
6.1
Scoping the design project
Based on the market and actor analysis, a scope for the design phase was decided.
This project will provide a design suggestion for opaque crystalline silicon BIPV pan-
els for new commercially owned building facades. See examples of such buildings in
figure 6.1.
By ’commercially owned building’ is meant, office buildings, private schools and in-
stitutions, hotels, malls, airports, holiday parks, restaurants, stadiums etc. There are
generally 50/50 open (transparent) and closed (opaque) facades on high rise buildings
[10]. The reason for focusing on opaque panels, is that they have a better efficiency
(NREL). It is also not common in architecture with transparent colored building el-
ements, so opaque element is probably more desirable (Halme and Mäkinen 2019).
A number of PV technologies exists, but even though crystalline silicon cells are
==PAGE:60==
46
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
Figure 6.1: Examples of commercially owned facades (private photos).
the first commercial technology, it seems that this still has an advantageous balance
between efficiency, cost and sustainability [1].
New business buildings has a high
energy consumption and the energy consumption is distributed throughout the day
making it more likely to have a high own consumption especially during winter time,
where the sunny hours coincide with work hours. Legislation limits the opportunities
for municipals and apartment buildings and the focus is therefore on private business
buildings, though the solution might be relevant for these building types as well. New
buildings, as opposed to old buildings, have less architectural constraints, because the
panels do not have to fit in with the exiting materials and architecture of the build-
ing. Installing BIPV in old apartment buildings can cause extra costs from having
to exchange the electricity meters [5]. Lastly, branding value of including BIPV is
valuable for businesses [4], thus giving an extra incentive to spend money on the
BIPV over other materials. Choosing to design for the facade and not roof, came as a
natural choice for commercially owned buildings. Commercially owned buildings are
typically high-rise buildings. If creating an aesthetic building integrated solar panel,
the panel should be visible. If placed on a flat roof out of sight for most people, the
incentive for investing in aesthetics is not that big. In order to showcase the panels
or gain branding value, the panels should be visible from the street. Placing solar
panels on buildings with a large visitor amount, will demonstrate the technology to
more people, than putting it on private homes. The facade mounted BIPV will have
peak performance at different times at the day compared to roof mounted, this could
potentially aid the issue of overflow. Lastly the facade area is not competing with
other use purposes which rooftops are [9].
A market research from 2019 by IEA points at facade BIPV for office and/or public
buildings as a starting point for the dispersion of BIPV due to, among other things,
the lesser price pressure (Eder et al. 2019). This research has found reason to point in
the same direction for BIPVs first steps towards commonness in the building industry.
6.2
Requirements for BIPV facades
Based on the needs identified through the interviews, a list of requirements for BIPV
facade elements was created. Only needs relevant for the selected scope was included.
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Inspiration from existing facade systems
47
The list has grown and developed throughout the project, mainly through the adding
of new requirements. The list consists of 25 needs and 61 requirements distributed on
the five topics; 1. Aesthetics, 2. Mounting requirements, 3. Use and maintenance, 4.
Building skin and 5. Economy and sustainability. The requirements list is presented
in appendix D, a cutout can be seen in figure 6.2. The list shows the correlation
between needs and requirements, from who or where the requirement is derived and
how the requirements link to each other. ’Shall’ is used for mandatory requirements,
while ”should” is used for requirements which are either ”a nice to have”, something
that can be more or less true or not quantifiable. The terminology is adopted from
Sommerville and Sawyer (1997). The requirements served both as a guideline and
verification tool throughout the project, and can also be used to understand the
project decisions or to conduct a new design process.
Figure 6.2: A section of the requirements list (appendix D).
6.3
Inspiration from existing facade systems
One of the needs found in this project, was to have an easy to choose solution and
it should therefore be similar to other facade solutions. It was therefore natural to
begin the design phase by looking at existing facades and their mounting system. This
section investigate, i) common facade materials, ii) facade types, and iii) mounting
of facade panels.
6.3.0.1
Common facade materials
Opaque facade panels on the danish market are typically made of e.g. metal, slate,
tile, wood, steel, fiber-cement, aerated concrete, sandwich panels/composite, stone
e.g. basalt (based on products found researching facade panels and Hilti 0000). In
figure 6.3 the appearance of the facade materials are illustrated.
==PAGE:62==
48
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
Figure 6.3: Opaque facade Materials. From top left horizontally: Aluminium and
glass (HSHansen A/S), steel (Kingspan Group), slate (Komproment),
tile (Komproment), tile (Komproment), fiber-cement (Cembrit A/S),
concrete (Komproment), sandwich (Kingspan Group), stone (zurface).
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Inspiration from existing facade systems
49
6.3.1
Facade types
Two interesting facade types was found; prefabricated facades and ventilated facades
(Cupa-Danmark) [10]. Curtain walls were also considered, but due to the heat from
the solar panels, the backside should not be accessible, as it would be with curtain
walls (see figure 6.4).
Figure 6.4: From left:
Ventilated facade (Komproment), prefabricated facade
(HSHansen) and curtain wall (HSHansen).
6.3.1.1
Ventilated facade systems
Ventilated facades are a type of facade cladding. The outer layer is mounted on top
of the load-bearing construction with an air-gap in between. Typically, there is some
isolation between the two layers or it can be inside the load-bearing wall. Ventilated
facade systems has a number of advantages. The air-gap act both as an insulator
in the winter and provides a cooling effect in the summer (Cupa-Danmark.
It is
noise reducing and has high energy efficiency (Cupa-Danmark). The insulating and
ventilating effect is caused by the air-gap. When the air between the cladding and
the load-bearing wall is heated, it creates a convection process where warm air will
rise upwards and create an airflow. Cool air is pulled in from below and the hot air is
released from the top of the canal. Onyx Solar, a Spanish BIPV manufacturer, uses
a ventilated facade system to mount their solar panels (Cupa-Danmark). Ventilated
facades can be open or closed, meaning they can have spacing between the panels or
not.
6.3.1.2
Prefabricated facade systems
The prefabricated element is a modular facade construction where as much as possible
is constructed on the ground. The panels constitute the complete outer shell with
windows, wall, insulation etc. Prefabricated facades has the advantage of shorter on
site facade closing time [10]. The PV panels can either be installed in the aluminum
frame or as a second layer to avoid having a visible metal frame [10].
==PAGE:64==
50
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
6.3.2
Existing fastening methods for facade panels
Different fastening approaches are; gluing, screwing, resting, framing and fastening.
The mounting approaches are shown in figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Mounting systems. From top left horizontally: Glued (Sikatack panel
system), screwed (Slate facade by Komproment), resting on dorn (UMA
by Halfen), resting on hangers (Zappa System by Komproment), resting
on shelf (Concrete facade by Komproment) and framed (Hansen Fasad
by HS Hansen).
6.4
Ideation
Based on the research on existing facade systems, solutions for solar panels was
ideated. Solar panels differentiate themselves from other facade materials in a num-
ber of ways. They are heat generating, they need electrical installations, they have a
core which is sensitive to humidity, and they should be replaceable if defects occur.
Existing solutions can therefore not necessarily be adopted for solar panels without
considerations to BIPVs distinct requirements. The following things were investigated
• The difference between prefabricated and ventilated facades
• Mounting solutions for ventilated facades
==PAGE:65==
6.4 Ideation
51
• Mounting solutions for prefabricated facades
• Electrical installations for ventilated facades
• Electrical installations for prefabricated facades
• How to ensure ventilation while preventing humidity damage
The sketches from ideating can be found in appendix F. The ideation on mounting
solution and electrical installations can be seen in figure 6.6. It was found that the
issue of ensuring ventilation while preventing humidity damage was not an issue for
ventilated facades.
Before realizing this, a bio-inspired ideation session had been
made. This is described in appendix F section F.3.
Figure 6.6: Sketches from ideating on fastening (left hand side) and electrical in-
stallations (right hand side). See larger versions in appendix F.
6.4.1
Designing for ventilated facades
Two facade types was considered when ideating on mounting method, prefabricated
facades and ventilated facades. Prefabricated facades enables mounting of the panels
in or on the frame on ground, making wiring easier and the connections can be pro-
==PAGE:66==
52
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
tected from rain. Prefabricated panels can also be installed quickly and for high rise
buildings it an efficient way to construct a facade. Downsides to the prefabricated
facade could be lack of easy disassembly opportunity for individual panels [9]. Fur-
thermore, will a panel placed on top of the frame (for aesthetic reasons) not contribute
to the climate screen but be purely ornamental. This contradicts the definition of
BIPV. Ventilated facades require the panels to be installed one by one on site, and for
very tall buildings (above 7 stories), prefabricated modules might be a better solution.
Most buildings in Denmark are below 7 stories tall. It was decided that the solution
would be made for ventilated facades, though both options has pros and cons.
6.5
Mounting concepts, mock-ups and evaluation
Five concepts were created; HugedIn, ClickIn, HookOn, LittleFeet, and ScrewOn. The
drawings was evaluated together with three experts; one architect [9], one facade
entrepreneur [12] and one BIPV manufacturer [1]. Their different expertise ensured
consideration to a broad area of aspects. The focus when talking with the architect
was appearance and environmental impact. The focus when talking with the facade
entrepreneur was the process around installation and the function of a climate screen.
The focus when talking to the BIPV manufacturer was the load and design of the
panels. The evaluation uncovered a number of requirements, which was added to the
requirements list.
The feedback did not give a clear sense of direction for the project. Generally the
concepts all have pro and cons.
So mock-ups was made in addition.
Ideally the
mock-ups would have been evaluated with experts as well, allowing them to engage
with the physical items, walk through scenarios, and maybe have this give attention
to aspects which the sketches did not. Instead the mock-ups provided the author
with a hands-on feel of the different concepts and aspects mentioned in the evaluation
session was considered. Each concept was furthermore evaluated in regards to relevant
requirements. In the following paragraphs each concept is presented along with the
key inputs gained from the evaluation sessions, the mock-ups and related findings.
==PAGE:67==
6.5 Mounting concepts, mock-ups and evaluation
53
6.5.1
HuggenIn
The HuggedIn concept is a partial framing of the solar panel. The concept is presented
in figure 6.7
Figure 6.7: Concept HuggedIn.
Key notes from evaluation session of HuggedIn:
• It is not desirable with huge gaps between the panels (appear dark), but on
large scale buildings, the gaps will not be perceived as very large. You need a
tolerance anyways, 5-10 mm is not uncommon [9].
• A corner pole could be used for ornamentation adding reliefs [9].
• The spacing needed for screws between the panels is 8-12 mm [12].
• Spacing ensures that slight misalignment is not visible [12].
• Corners never fit, so having somewhere to absorb the tolerances is a good idea
(e.g. the corner pole) [12].
• The manufacturing could be a little troublesome but is doable [1].
==PAGE:68==
54
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
• The grooves could be made with aluminium inserts [1].
A mock-up of the HuggedIn concept can be seen in figure 6.8. It was found that the
mounting process of this concept was difficult. The panel cannot rest on the bottom
panel without being held in place and meanwhile the constructor needs to insert the
flaps into the groove and screw them on.
It was though smart to have the flaps
separate for manufacturing reasons, but it was unhandy to work with and too easy
to drop which could be dangerous when constructing a 3 story facade. The panels
rest on a bottom shelf, but the risk of the panel moving slightly out from the shelf
seem dangerous as well. The concept requires the mounting frame follow the sides of
the panels, which, assuming a thickness of 5-20 mm, will make the metal visible and
at the same time block some of the ventilation. The system allows for easy variation
of panel height but less so for panel length.
Figure 6.8: HuggedIn concept mock-up.
==PAGE:69==
6.5 Mounting concepts, mock-ups and evaluation
55
6.5.2
ClickIn
The ClickIn concept is inspired more from the idea of easy assembly and not so much
from exiting solutions as the other concepts are. The concept is presented in figure
6.9.
Figure 6.9: Concept ClickIn.
Key notes from evaluation session of ClickIn:
• Man-hours for mounting is expensive, so reducing the mounting time is a good
thing [9].
• Clicking in or hooking on is smart when mounting [1].
• Certification (CE) of the mounting method is very important and can take 1-5
years to obtain [1].
• The grooves would be possible to manufacture [1].
The ClickIn concept has not been investigated through a mock-up. The concept bears
resemblance to the HuggedIn concept faces the same risks in terms of resting on a
slim bottom shelf, and maybe even more so as the panel is not tightened towards the
==PAGE:70==
56
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
wall with screws as the HuggedIn concept. The obvious downside to this concept is
the quality requirement for the clips, if one clip is too loose, the panel risks clattering
or falling down.
6.5.3
HookOn
The HookOn concept is a mounting system placed on the backside of the panel. The
concept is illustrated in figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Concept HookOn.
Key notes from evaluation session of HookOn.
• It is better if the parts are assembled in a way that can be disassembled in order
to recycle the material [9].
• Gluing could be challenging regarding time and price [12].
• It is better to have the hook as an integrated part of the back [12].
==PAGE:71==
6.5 Mounting concepts, mock-ups and evaluation
57
• Probably cheaper than HuggedIn and less material would be needed for con-
struction [1]
• Glue is not a good idea, it has been tried and failed [1].
• Racell uses a method to fasten the hook which is very strong and has several
hooks to secure the panel [1].
A mock-up of the HookOn system can be seen in figure 6.11. The concept is easy to
mount as the system allows the constructor to hang the panel first and then fasten
it. The concept lack details into how and where the fastening would be, but some
fastening apart from the hook and or more hooks would be needed, depending on
panel size [12][1]. The mounting frame does not need to follow the panel edge on
any side, meaning that only minimal area will be blocked for ventilation and minimal
mounting frame will be visible. With this system it is easy to variate the panel length
but less so the panel height.
Figure 6.11: HookOn concept mock-up.
==PAGE:72==
58
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
6.5.4
LittleFeet
The concept LittleFeet holds the weight of the solar panel on hooks (feet) below the
panel and keep the panel in place with the feet above the panel. The concepts can
be seen in figure 6.12.
Figure 6.12: Concept LittleFeet.
Key notes from evaluation session of LittleFeet.
• It is not necessarily an issue that the hangers are visible. They can probably
be made less noticeable [9].
• The hangers would provide the facade with a kind of pattern [9].
• It is important that the panels does not clatter [12][1].
• It is generally risky to mount panels without tighten them with screws. A clamp
fastening on the hangers is an option. Glass bolts is a similar system [12].
A mock-up was made of the LittleFeet concept (figure 6.13). The panel is semi
easy to mount as it can rest on the bottom feet. The mounting frame follows the
horizontal edge but redimensioning the feet would change this. considering some of
the inputs in the evaluation and the result of the first mock-up, a second mock-up
was made as seen in figure 6.14. The feet is mad of two parts which can be separated
==PAGE:73==
6.5 Mounting concepts, mock-ups and evaluation
59
by screwing loose the outer part (see top left corner on figure 6.14). This allow the
panels to be mounted in any order (whereas before they needed to be mounted from
bottom to top) and the individual panels can be replaced without having to lift the
weight of the panels and sliding the hangers. The hanger tightens to the panel thus
incorporating the feedback giving in the evaluation session [12].
Figure 6.13: LittleFeet concept mock-up.
Figure 6.14: LittleFeet modified concept mock-up.
==PAGE:74==
60
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
6.5.5
ScrewOn
The concept ScrewOn is fastened in small flaps from the back panel. The concept
can be seen in figure 6.15.
Figure 6.15: Concept ScrewOn.
Key notes from evaluation session of ScrewOn:
• The gap between the panels to fit a screw would be 8-12 mm [12].
• The amount of screws needed per panel depend on the panel size, but a rule of
thumb is that 2-3 screws minimum per m2 [12].
• Architects usually do not mind a gap between panels for the sake of the facade
not looking like one plane surface [1].
• This concept is easily implementable for Racell due to the type of back panel
they use, while other manufacturers using glass or Tedlar might need to add a
frame to incorporate this mounting system. More and more manufactures seek
to avoid frames due to wishes from the architect [1].
==PAGE:75==
6.5 Mounting concepts, mock-ups and evaluation
61
Figure 6.16: ScrewOn concept mock-up.
A mock-up was made of the ScrewOn concept. The concept require the mounting
frame to follow the top and bottom edges of each panel and maybe the sides as well.
This equals less room for airflow, so maybe this concept is best suited for smaller
panels where the sides can be left open.
On the bottom right picture it can be
seen how the frame and flaps will be somewhat darker due to the setback but still
quite visible because the panel is quite thin (8mm). Since the requirements for the
glass thickness vary, it is difficult to say how visible the mounting will be, but it can
probably be assumed that the panels are more likely to get thinner than thicker, as
glass strengths improve [1]. The panel needs to be held in place while the screws are
put in and at the same time the constructor needs to make sure the panel is hanging
straight. Allowing the panel to be hung and then screwed on could be a way to ease
this process.
Besides the concepts for mounting other aspects related to the mounting was discussed.
The main takeaways are described in the list below. The full notes on the evaluation
session can be found in appendix H.
• The material used for the mounting frame has a big impact on the CO2 footprint
of the facade and so the material use should be minimized [9].
• It is nice to have something to look at (on the facades) and not just a completely
smooth flat surface. Having different shapes, patterns, overlap or shadows can
help provide this [9].
• Square shapes is enough, as long as size can be varied [9].
• The transportation of the panel around the building site and how it can be
lifted and mounted is very important to consider [12].
• The expensive part is what lies beneath the panel. If construction takes 40,
==PAGE:76==
62
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
then mounting the facade is about 10 [12].
• Guidelines for mounting rarely explain why choices have been made and what
to consider which leaves the entrepreneur in a difficult position when trying
to inform the customer that some of the mounting might be better if done
differently in the specific case. It would be a good thing to have the arguments
for various decisions and notes on what to consider for the mounting system
[12].
• Ventilation will dry out any moisture, the gaps does not need to be sealed. In
fact it is best to have the gaps to ensure airflow and ventilation [12].
• Both prefabricated and ventilated facades are fine options. Everything below
6-7 stories is not a problem to construct on site (ventilated facades) [12].
• The requirement for the thickness of the glass increases the higher the panels
are mounted (up around 6-8 mm) [1].
• Smaller modules can be manufactured in an automated process to lower the
extra price but generally it is more expensive to manufacture many small panels
instead of a few larger panels (20 m2) [1].
• The more panels a facade consists of, the more connections are also needed.
This is both a larger task and poses a larger risk of mistakes [1].
6.5.6
Evaluation against requirements
The concepts were evaluated against relevant requirements. The concepts was given a
score from 1-4 on 18 requirements. The full table with scores and comments about the
individual scores can be found in appendix E. The result placed HookOn as number
one, then LittleFeet, ScrewOn, ClickIn an lastly HuggedIn (see table 6.1. This result
was in compliance with expectations based on the evaluation session and mock-up
experiences.
Based on the evaluations the best choice for mounting of solar panels seem to be
HookOn, and LittleFeet.
6.6
A second (small) iteration of the ideation phase
Having conducted a design and an evaluation process have provided a larger under-
standing of possibilities and limitations for mounting solar panels on a ventilated
facade. Two concepts shows which show the biggest potential are both are similar
to existing solutions. HookOn is similar to the mounting system by Racell and also
a system by Komproment, while LittleFeet is similar to the systems used for slate
facades (see figure 6.5. The similarity to existing solution had been done in order
to comply with the need for an ’easy to choose’ solution.
It was assessed that a
new mounting solution might not contradict this need as long as it is designed for
a known facade solution. A decision was made to reiterate the design process in a
==PAGE:77==
6.6 A second (small) iteration of the ideation phase
63
compromised form to see if the gained insights could be a starting point for creating
more innovative concepts.
The following decisions were made based on the first design iteration:
1) The mounting should be mainly on the back of the solar panel.
2) The constructor should be able to first place the panel and then fasten it.
Four new ideas were formed in the second ideation phase, these can be seen in ap-
pendix 6.6 figure F.6. One of the ideas (slide) seemed promising and was included in
the evaluation along with the existing concepts. The concept can be seen in figure
6.17. A mock-up was made of Slide as well. This can be seen in figure 6.18.
Looking at the evaluation (table 6.1), Slide takes a second place in the ranking of
concepts just above LittleFeet.
Figure 6.17: Concept Slide.
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Designing a mounting solution for aesthetic solar panels
Concept
Score
HookOn
65
Slide
60
LittleFeet
59
ScrewOn
55
ClickIn
50
HuggedIn
47
Table 6.1: Result of concepts evaluation against requirements (see appendix E for
full evaluation table).
Slide was not evaluated with the three actors as the other concepts were. This is
a disadvantage because valuable input might have been missed. The rationales for
accepting the idea into the batch of concepts was the following. i) the aesthetic possi-
bilities/result when using Slide does not contradict any of the mentioned needs from
the interviewed architect [9]. ii) The mounting requirement (bracket on panel back
side) has been confirmed by the interviewed BIPV manufacturer [1] when evaluating
HookOn. iii) Lastly, the facade project manager [12] had little objections to different
mounting methods and no methods he liked more than other. The constructor/en-
trepreneur perspective is the weakest rationale of the three and in a future thorough
assessment of the feasibility of the concept, it will be the opinion of this actor group
that is specially interesting to investigate (see chapter ?? section ??).
Figure 6.18: Mock-up of concept Slide.
==PAGE:79==
6.7 Selecting a mounting concept
65
6.7
Selecting a mounting concept
Through the interviews it was found that neither of the concepts was completely
unrealistic or disliked. This meant that no concept could be eliminated based on the
interviews. The inputs given in the interviews were used to elaborate the specification
which in turn was used to evaluate the concepts. After including a new concept in
the batch of potential mounting solution, HookOn still scores highest. Slide scores
second best and third is LittleFeet. HookOn is similar to the solution used by Racell
[1], which means that the contribution to the development, if choosing this concept,
has the drawback of being less innovative. Slide is a unique concept (to the author’s
knowledge), but has the drawback of exactly the same thing -being a new solution
needing to be developed and tested and so on. Littlefeet has visible feet. This was
not perceived to be an aesthetic disadvantage necessarily [9], but it is defining for the
appearance since it would create sort of a pattern [9].
Conclusively the concept Slide was chosen for further development and investigation.
The concept has a large potential regarding aesthetics and functionality, but also
a risk of being challenging regarding mounting procedure.
Investigating the slide
concept further will reveal whether the concept has potential to be a good solution.
==PAGE:80==
66
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
SolarFacade
The concept Slide was chosen as the most interesting mounting solution to develop
further. The finished mounting solution is named SolarMount while the total system
including solar panels and dummies is named SolarFacade. The bracket consist of
two part. Part a refers to the part mounted to the substructure, while par b refers to
the part mounted to the solar panel. This chapter describes i) the concept detailing
ii) the solution iii) the prototype and evaluation.
7.1
Concept detailing
The following things needed detailing:
• Specifying form, number and the arrangement
– Clamp (F1)
– Clamping area (F2)
– Groove (F3)
– Resting (F4)
• The tightening mechanism
• The bracket shape in different scenarios (between panels, between panel and
other, and corner)
• Mounting on panel (F6)
Different designs was considered for the concept using the methodology described
by Eskild Tjalve (1979). The product function, sub function and means has been
defined in the concept creation, so this process started with quantifying the structure
and then looked at form design. The x indicate which structure (arrangement) was
selected and the following investigations (from left to right) of form for different
functional areas was then based on the previous selections, all marked with an x. A
section of the investigation is shown in figure 7.1 while the total investigation can be
seen in appendix J along with the other sketches investigating the design detailing of
SolarMount, all in a larger format.
==PAGE:82==
68
7 SolarFacade
Figure 7.1: A section of the form investigation.
Figure 7.2: The investigation of tightening mechanism.
==PAGE:83==
7.1 Concept detailing
69
The tightening mechanism is important for the safety, robustness and user experi-
ence, a brainstorm for this mechanism can be seen in figure 7.2. For adjacent panels
the brackets are often placed across from each other. Other panel are adjacent to
windows and doors and other to corners. Some panels might also differ so much in
size, that the adjacent panel will not have a bracket placed in the same height. For the
investigation of tightening method, both double and single brackets was investigated.
The corners was investigated separately to find out if a separate type of bracket is
needed or the single bracket used for ends can be utilized there as well (see figure
7.3).
The bracket part a is mounted to the substructure with screws. The bracket part b
needs to be mounted to the backside of the solar panel. The brainstorm on methods
for this can be seen in figure 7.4. SolarMount require the back panel of the solar panel
to be the load bearing component and thus sets requirements for the material used
(glass or metal). For the sake of standardising the mounting solution, meaning that
many different BIPV providers use the same system, the precise method for mounting
the bracket on the solar panel is not selected, but can be done differently depending
on the different panel designs and manufactures preferences. The presented methods
illustrates possible mounting methods, which the manufacturers can draw inspiration
from. Lastly, small angles were added to the bracket part b for easier alignment with
part a (figure 7.5).
Figure 7.3: Investigation of brackets for corners.
==PAGE:84==
70
7 SolarFacade
Figure 7.4: Potential ways to fasten the bracket (part b) to the solar panel.
Figure 7.5: Avoiding small tolerance for mounting.
==PAGE:85==
7.2 SolarFacade and SolarMount
71
7.2
SolarFacade and SolarMount
This section describes the finished solution to mounting solar panels on ventilated
building facades. The following will be described, i) the mounting procedure, ii) the
components needed for a SolarFacade, iii) load-bearing considerations, and iv) the
aesthetic possibilities.
7.2.1
Mounting procedure
The mounting procedure is illustrated in figure 7.6) on the next page. First brackets
part a is mounted on the substructure of the ventilated facade. Next the solar panel
is lifted in over the brackets, resting the bottom part of bracket part b on the bolt
of bracket part a. Sliding the panel, the grooves in bracket part b is found, and the
panel falls into place. When the bolts are correctly mounted in the grooves the panel
can be let go of. The panel rest on the top hooks on primary brackets. The electrical
installations are done and lastly the panel are adjusted, and all bolts are tightened
to fasten the panel.
7.2.1.1
Electrical installations
The panel is connected with a MC4 connection. MC4 connections are the standard
connections used when connecting solar panels [1].
7.2.1.2
Fastening
The panel is fastened with a open ended torque wrench.
The design place strict
requirements to the tool thickness. Sturtevant Richmont manufacture wrenches for
application in tight spacing, which have heads below 10 mm thickness and show that
an appropriate tool for this particular task would be possible to either find or make
(Sturtevant-Richmont). Torque measuring wrenches could be a way to ensure that
every bolt is tightened properly. Sturtevant Richmont provides this as well.
==PAGE:86==
72
7 SolarFacade
Figure 7.6: Mounting procedure for SolarMount.
==PAGE:87==
7.2 SolarFacade and SolarMount
73
7.2.2
Components for a facade
To truly integrate the solar panels in the facade and avoid ”aesthetic noise”, the BIPV
solution should be applicable to all of the facade. Different panel types and different
bracket types are needed.
7.2.2.1
SolarFacade panels - platform and architecture
To describe the product assortment needed for SolarFacade, the terms platform and
architecture has been adopted from Harlou (2006). The panels for SolarFacade all
have some general similarities such as the layering, and mounting method.
This
general structure is the product platform. SolarFacade provides different panel types
(architectures), and for each of those there would be a product assortment.
The
architectures needed are i) panels for plane facades, ii) panels for overlapping facades
and iii) dummies (see figure 7.7).
The overlapping panels are different from plane panels, because they should account
for the shadow created on all top parts of the panels. The top row of solar cells should
possibly be removed, to avoid shadow on solar cells (see figure 7.7).
Issues when implementing solar panels on a full facade are i) some locations might
be in shadow, ii) some locations are within reach (see requirement 4.1.4) and iii)
square/standard panels might not fit everywhere. These issues can be solved with one
solution - dummies. It was mentioned in one of the interviews [4], that dummies would
make the aesthetic integration of solar panels a lot easier. Dummies are panels with
the same aesthetic look as solar panels, but without PV technology. The dummies
can therefore be used in location with shadow, locations where the PV panel is a
potential hazard due to the heat production and as a modifiable component in places
where the solar panels do not fit or tolerances stacking needs to be accounted for. A
specific product assortment for panels has not been specified in this project.
==PAGE:88==
74
7 SolarFacade
Figure 7.7: SolarFacade panel architectures; standard panel, overlapping panel and
dummy. The customizing possibilities of dummies illustrated.
7.2.2.2
SolarMount - platform and architecture
To fill out a facade with a uniform appearance, a number of bracket types is needed
for different scenarios. SolarMount is thus the name of a product platform, i.e. the
general product function and form. Within the platform are a number of product ar-
chitectures which is specifically designed to a certain application e.g. a corner panel
or overlapping panels (see figure 7.8). Bracket part a exist for plane and overlap-
ping panels and in two variations; primary brackets and secondary brackets. The
primary bracket has a hook on top which the secondary bracket does not. This was
done to ensure knowing where the load is applied then the panels are not tightened.
This may or may not be necessary and should be investigated further. Within the
product architecture would be a product assortment covering different load-bearing
requirements and ventilation gap requirements (see requirement 4.1.1). A product
assortment of SolarMount brackets has not been specified in this project but would
consist of products varied in strength and length (ventilation gap size). All brack-
ets except the double bracket also needs to have a left and right side variant. As a
starting point the dummies are installed with the SolarMount brackets as well. The
dummies do not need the sliding mechanism since they do not have electrical instal-
lations, but utilizing SolarMount brackets decreases the product portfolio plus allow
the horizontal fitting of dummies as well. This aspect should be investigated further.
==PAGE:89==
7.2 SolarFacade and SolarMount
75
Figure 7.8: SolarMount architectures.
==PAGE:90==
76
7 SolarFacade
7.2.3
Load bearing
This section briefly describes considerations made for the SolarMount load bearing
capacity. The brackets should withstand, i) the self-load from the panels plus the
brackets own weight, and ii) the wind-load.
Both forces vary depending on the specific panel size, and the location and direction of
the building respectively. To gain a quick estimate on how much force the constructor
needs to apply to fasten the bolt, a back-on-the envelope calculation has been made
for the self-load. The calculations is made for the scenario of having a 2 m2 solar panel
with four brackets. The intention is to validate that a constructor would be able to
tighten the bolts by hand. Further calculations would be needed for a final validation
of the mechanical properties of the design. Fortunately there is few constraint to the
bracket dimensions, so this can be changed to accommodate load requirements.
7.2.3.1
Allocating applied forces
The forces applied to the brackets are illustrated in figure 7.9. During the mounting,
a force is applied to the bolt in bracket part a (F1a) and the underside of of bracket
part b (F1b). When the panel is mounted, but not fastened, a force is applied to the
top of primary brackets part a (F2a) and the underside of the top hook of the primary
brackets part b (F2b). When the panel is fastened a force is applied to the sides of
the bracket (F3), this is the force investigated in the calculations below.
7.2.3.2
Required fastening force
In this section a scenario for required force needed to tighten the bolts on a 2 m2
panel is investigated. The panel has 4 mm back- and front glass panels.
Weight of a panel:
Rule of thumb [1]: 2 mm glass weigh 5 kg/m2
Panel weight = 2 × 5kg/m2 × 2m2 × 2 = 40 kg
Load in newton:
Weight applied to each bracket = (40 kg + bracket weight) ÷4 ≈10kg
Loadw = 10 kg ×9.80665N/kg = 98N
Friction:
F = µs× N
Static friction coefficient for metal on metal: µs= 0.5 (Ulrich 2011)
Force needed to obtain clamping force:
==PAGE:91==
7.2 SolarFacade and SolarMount
77
Figure 7.9: Forces applied to the brackets.
Safety factor: s = 150 %
Fw = Loadw × s = 147 N
Nw = Fw ÷ µs = 294 N
The clamping force should be 294 N corresponding to 30 kg. The torque force is
now found.
Torque T = K F d (1 - l/100) (Toolbox 2018)
K: constant, normal dry: K = 0.2
d: nominal bolt diameter (m)
F: axial bolt force (N)
l: lubrication factor = 0 (%)
T = 0.2 × 294 N × 0.012 m × (1-l/100) = 0.7 Nm
The torque needed to fasten the bolt with 294 N is 0.7 Nm. Assuming the distance
between wrench grip and wrench head is 0.20 m long, the force needed for tighten
the bolt is:
0.7 Nm ÷ 0.30 m = 3,5 N
3,5 N ÷ 9.80665 N/kg = 0.36 kg
==PAGE:92==
78
7 SolarFacade
The scenario presented for tightening force to obtain required clamping force for
a 40 kg panel, showed that the bolts need to be tightened with a force of 0.36 kg.
The safety factor was estimated, and might need to be increased. Furthermore will
calculations for wind force also add to the clamping force required, especially on tall
buildings where there can be a lot of wind.
The calculations indicate that hand
tightening of the bolts are not unrealistic, and the force requirements can increase a
lot before the fastening task become troublesome. Work environment regulations for
physical strain should be investigated to understand the limitations for fastening the
bolts by hand .
7.2.4
Aesthetic possibilities
In the research phase it was found that there are two types of needs related to aes-
thetics. One is a need for variation. Variation in a building facade provide the viewer
with a larger experience while variation opportunities for the architect means better
means to provide an interesting experience, create unique designs and create designs
which fit into the surrounding environment. The second needs are general needs e.g.
the need for avoiding visible frames or mounting. This section briefly describes i) pos-
sibilities for size and shape, ii) position possibilities, iii) color and texture possibilities,
and iv) frame visibility. Figure 7.10 shows variation possibilities.
7.2.4.1
Size and shape
Size and shape of the panels can be varied. The panel thickness, and to some extent
the panel size, have no impact on the bracket dimensions. The need for different
bracket sizes are only impacted by the panel weight and possibly size. The length of
the panels define the length between brackets and larger distances increases strength
requirements for the solar panel back panel. This aspect would need further investi-
gation before conclusions can be made. The solar cells in the modules are a standard
size 156 mm x 156 mm and the size variation could advantageously be varied with this
dimension. The panels can freely be combined in different shapes and sizes (green,
yellow and blue panels). This is possible because the mounting is not reliable on
the horizontal edges or specific points on the vertical edges. Brackets on the back of
the panel can be mounted wherever on the backside along the vertical edges to allow
some panels to be higher or lower, larger or smaller, than other (green, yellow, and
blue panels).
Other shapes besides squares and rectangles can be mounted with SolarMount. It
is required that the shape has partly vertical edges for the brackets. Examples of
different shapes are given in figure 7.10.
==PAGE:93==
7.2 SolarFacade and SolarMount
79
Figure 7.10: Variation possibilities for position and size with SolarMount. Color
variation and mottled color.
7.2.4.2
Position
Three variation possibilities exist for the positioning with SolarMount. The panels can
be planar (green, yellow and blue panels), the depth position can be varied (turquoise
panels), or the panels can be overlapping (red panels).
7.2.4.3
Color and texture
Natural materials and colors are trending [1]. To accommodate a more natural look
some of the panels on figure 7.10 is mottled. The need for natural looking materials is
strong for including BIPV in exiting architecture and at times also when building in
environments with specific aesthetic guidelines. Considerations for color and nuance
can be seen in appendix I.
==PAGE:94==
80
7 SolarFacade
7.2.5
Mounting components visibility
SolarMount is a somewhat invisible mounting system. Up close the bolts and brackets
are visible in the gap between panels, but from a distance and due to the shadow on
the back side of the panels, it is assumed that the mounting system won’t be visible.
The visibility of the brackets can be seen in pictures of the prototype in figure 7.14.
7.3
Prototype
A high fidelity prototype was made to provide additional basis for evaluation. The
prototype has one functional panel, and can thus demonstrate the mounting principle.
The functionalities investigated with the prototype was; how easy it is to hook on
the panel, how the panel act when not tightened, how the access is when pulling out
a panel, and how the solution looks. The prototype brackets are scale 1:2. The gap
between the panels is scale 1:1 to allow functional testing of the mounting procedure.
The prototype illustrates a planar facade using single brackets, primary brackets and
secondary brackets.
The prototype was illustrated in technical drawings and the
prototype was then constructed by workshop staff at DTU. An assembly drawing
and a technical drawing of a bracket can be seen in figure7.12 and 7.13. All of the
technical drawings can be found in appendix K where dimensions and material is
defined for the parts as well.
The color of the panels was selected with inspiration from a new arena building in
Hillerød and a somewhat new building at DTU campus (see figure 7.11). The panels
have a warm subdued natural color, with similarities to yellow brick walls or the
color of metals such as brass or bronze. The print is mottled to create a natural look,
and a subtle indications of solar cells can be seen when up-close. The prototype is
demonstrated in figure 7.14. The prototype could include more aspects for evaluation
by adding wiring dummies and sealing of the edges.
Figure 7.11: The buildings inspiring the prototype coloring.
==PAGE:95==
7.3 Prototype
81
Figure 7.12: Assembly drawing SolarMount prototype.
Figure 7.13: Technical drawing of Primary bracket.
==PAGE:96==
82
7 SolarFacade
Figure 7.14: Prototype of SolarMount.
==PAGE:97==
7.4 Preliminary evaluation
83
7.4
Preliminary evaluation
A proper evaluation of SolarMount and SolarFacade, either as interviews or a work-
shop, was not possible to make within the time limits of this report. A preliminary
evaluation was conducted with the purpose to gain an idea about the concepts po-
tential, and which are good or troublesome parts of the concepts. The inputs can
serve as inspiration for a future evaluation or workshop. The biggest insecurity re-
garding the feasibility of the solution is the bracket design and mounting procedure.
The preliminary evaluation was therefore made with the facade entrepreneur [12] who
also evaluated the concepts suggestions in previous a interview. The meeting can be
summed up in the following main points:
• The bracket design takes important aspects into consideration such as adjusting,
demounting, accessibility, and maintenance.
• The design is estimated to be too expensive in development, production and
mounting to be a feasible solution.
• The solution could be an interesting starting point for further development.
Cost is a very important factor in the building industry and it is therefore im-
portant that solutions are competitive price-wise [12].
Many facades has custom
mounting solution to accommodate specific needs, but a standard solution is still rel-
evant and can provide a sense of security [12]. The gap between the panels could be
made large, e.g. 15 mm. Pests are not really an issue due to the heat and ventilation
in the gap behind the panels [12]. This could make the bolt a bit more accessible
[12]. The counting and installation procedure for such a solution would probably be
to either install the panels on the go, or collect the connections behind every third or
so panel. When the whole facade is up, you go back and take out every third panel
and do the installations. The total interview summary can be seen in appendix L.
Overall, it seems that the solution address and solves some problems, but faces cost
issues. Further developing the design might address the cost issues while keeping the
functions.
==PAGE:98==
84
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
The results of the analysis and the design proposal will now be discussed. The chapter
contains the following sections; i) market for BIPV, ii) barriers, iii) aesthetics solar
panels, iv) SolarFacade, and v) the next project steps.
8.1
Market for BIPV
The danish goals for increasing the RE share of the energy mix to 55 % by 2030,
include an increase in solar energy as well, though PV play a smaller role compared
to e.g. wind and bio energy. It would be interesting to understand more about why
solar energy is less prominent in the danish energy mix and whether mitigating identi-
fied barriers could make the vision for PV in Denmark increase. Design, architecture,
aesthetics and mounting is mentioned as increasingly important in the development
of PV in urban areas.
Several BIPV products already exist on the Danish market, but they are not common
in the urban landscape. BAPV and PV plants are the dominating PV products in
Denmark, most of the BAPV having been installed in 2012, when settlements for
PV energy was more favorable. Actors within the building industry and building
owners are positive towards the development of PV product towards being building-
integrated, but are also concerned about the efficiency loss related to it.
Denmark is not a very sunny country, but even so, the radiation should be enough
to make PV profitable, also on building facades. Profiting on PV is possible under
the right net-metering and FIT settlements. Unfortunately the current settlements
are not favorable. Increase in efficiency and decrease in investment price, plus devel-
opment of storage options, are ways to make the settlement barrier less significant.
All in all, there is a big market potential for BIPV in Denmark, provided that some
of the barriers for uptake of BIPV is addressed.
8.2
Barriers
Thirteen barriers all prevent the uptake of BIPV in Denmark. But, as none of them
are insurmountable, and a lot of them are co-related, the prospects for BIPV might not
be so bad. It seems that it is a matter of time before the advantages of BIPV overtake
the barriers. The barriers can be simplified to the following: The profitability needs to
==PAGE:100==
86
8 Discussion
increase, BIPV should be easy to choose and BIPV should be aesthetically acceptable.
Two primary takeaways from the barriers has been found and are described below; i)
There is a cost vs aesthetics conflict, and ii) The barriers primarily impacts decisions
makers.
8.2.1
Cost vs aesthetics
A difficulty encountered, is that efficiency (and thus cost) rival with aesthetics when
deciding on how to install PV (BIPV,BAPV or PV fields). Color is crucial to aesthetic
integration of solar panels, but cause a significant decrease in efficiency and thus
profitability. This barrier can be addressed by developing better color methods that
cause a lower efficiency decrease. Another clash between cost and aesthetics is found
in the need for customized, but simultaneously cheap products. A way to reduce
cost, could be by mass production. Options for both mass produced and customized
products can cater to both needs, and ensure that both project with large and small
budgets can include BIPV.
8.2.2
Decision makers role
It was found that the larger share of barriers for BIPV do not relate to experience
with the product, maintenance, installation, or use, but is tied to the decision and
planning part of the BIPV product system. The actor subgroups located here: sales,
designers and building owners, are the groups, which barriers, needs to be targeted
in future efforts to increase uptake. Not only do they experience the largest barriers,
but the building owners are the ’gatekeepers’, in the sense that they decide whether
BIPV is included in the project or not.
8.3
Aesthetic solar panels
BIPV is thought to improve the uptake of PV technology in urban areas by making
the solution more aesthetically pleasing.
It was validated through the interviews,
that BIPV is a desired development for PV products and that aesthetics (color) is
an important factor for BIPV uptake. It is not everyone who has a problem with
the look of plain solar panels, but a value is seen in being able to implement PV
technology more discretely, removing the need for considering loss in building value
and neighbors potential dismay.
BIPV is value adding in some scenarios, but not in all. Installing PV on existing
building and in particular flat roof buildings, BAPV is an easier, cheaper choice and
the panels are out of eye-sight. But for other scenarios, there is need for being able
to install PV without having to either hide it away or compromise the aesthetics of
the building.
Whether BIPV is aesthetically acceptable depends on the context it enters, and a less
==PAGE:101==
8.3 Aesthetic solar panels
87
demanding context can therefore be advantageous. BIPV is therefore currently more
appropriate for new architecture than for renovating old buildings. The following
sections discuss; i) Aesthetics role in uptake of BIPV, and ii) Aesthetic needs.
8.3.1
Aesthetics role in uptake of BIPV
It was found that several things impact the uptake of BIPV in Denmark. Out of the 13
barriers, three influence aesthetics directly; 1) aesthetic noise, 9) lack of (standard)
mounting, and 12) Lack of complete roof/facade fitting solutions. The barriers 4)
Cost, and 5) Concern for efficiency loss, was considered in the design process as well,
to obtain not only a visually acceptable design, but also an economically feasible
solution.
Aesthetics are not the sole and maybe not even the primary reason for a lack of
uptake in Denmark. A number of barriers, such as, lack of information, legal barriers,
and LCA results, unrelated to aesthetics was uncovered, implying that the uptake of
BIPV does not depend solely on aesthetics. You could also argue that the efficiency
loss from existing coloring methods might be the main problem with aesthetics, not
the actual appearance.
It seems that improving aesthetics can mitigate some barriers, but other barriers
should be mitigated as well before BIPV can have a breakthrough in Denmark.
8.3.2
Aesthetic needs
Aesthetics are an interplay between several elements of the appearance of an object.
The aesthetic needs can be divided into two categories; general needs and variation
needs.
The general aesthetic needs for BIPV solutions are;
· avoiding visible frame/mounting,
· avoiding reflections,
· a discrete appearance (how discrete is context dependent), and
· a complete solution (avoid PV panels becoming aesthetic noise).
The general aesthetic needs has been meet by the solution proposed in this report,
SolarFacade. The framing is assumed to be almost invisible when there is shadow on
the back of the panels and when seen from a distance. The prototype can be used in
proposed workshop to confirm whether the brackets are visible through the gaps in
an unpleasing manner. The prototype does not have matte front glass, but this can
easily be changed.
The needs for variation apply to at least;
· color,
· sizes, and
· composition of rectangular/square panels.
==PAGE:102==
88
8 Discussion
Shape, texture, patterns and positioning (overlap and dept) can also be ways to pro-
vide variation and interesting experiences, but is not required.
The aesthetic need for variation can be fulfilled to a varying degree. Either there
can be variation options within a set product assortment e.g. five colors, three panel
shapes each in three sizes. This would make mass production possible, but the prod-
ucts might not fulfill the aesthetic needs for all projects.
There can be product
variation for some features e.g. having product assortment with a number of stan-
dard sizes, but allowing the colors to be customized to each project.
Lastly, the
aesthetics can be fully customized to individual projects. The reason to consider how
much customization should be offered, is the need to make BIPV less expensive, and
mass production can be a cost reducing initiative. The decision on which product
assortment to hold, will depend on the economic strategy. A suggestion could be to
have a product assortment with standard everything and a high-end offer with full
customization options. This way low budget buildings might include BIPV, while
projects with very specific aesthetic requirements can include BIPV as well.
The
customer segment (commercially owned buildings) should be investigated further, to
estimate which product assortment to offer.
8.4
SolarFacade
This section discusses; i) SolarMount compared to state of the art, ii) choosing a
common facade but new bracket solution, iii) the customer segment, and iv) whether
SolarFacade mitigate found barriers.
8.4.1
Compared to state of the art
Investigating state of the art for BIPV was surprising. Several BIPV solutions exist
in numerous colors, which to a varying degree can be integrated in the building ar-
chitecture. Figure 4.8 shows five products for facades. Even though these solutions
exist, they are not considered options on the same level as other facade materials and
BIPV project are considered pilot projects. The lack of uptake indicates that the
solutions probably experiences some of the identified barriers as well.
For most of the found solutions it is uncertain if they are mounted as actually build-
ing integrated panels and are not just ornamental. The existing BIPV projects in
Denmark are mainly with ornamental panels [10].
It is seen from the examples in figure 4.8, that not all existing solutions are completely
aesthetically integrated. CFR energy panels and Zappa panels has a color difference
from the surrounding panels, which makes the PV panels stand out a little bit. It is
clear that an effort has been made to match the color, but even slight variations in
color, makes the solar panels stand out. Solutions by Solaxess and SolarLab cover the
whole facade, while panels by Racell and Skala panels stand out from the surrounding
materials on purpose.
==PAGE:103==
8.4 SolarFacade
89
It seems that highly aesthetic product exists, but the degree of aesthetic integration
and the efficiency loss, might be barriers to larger uptake of these products. It should
also be investigated whether they are actually building-integrated. If not, it will im-
pact the LCA and cost barrier negatively.
To ease the communication for BIPV it could be considered to add ’aesthetically-
integrated PV’ (AIPV) to the PV terminology, as the version of BAPV/BIPV which
are architecturally integrated and aesthetically pleasing, but not a part of the climate
screen.
8.4.1.1
SolarFacade - pros and cons
SolarFacade seek to contribute to the BIPV uptake by providing:
• A standard mounting solution (potentially)
• A full facade solution (no aesthetic noise)
• Access to electrical installations
• Reparation and replacement of individual panels
• Lower efficiency loss (using ColorFoil)
SolarFacade has the following drawbacks:
• Transport is less easy due to bracket flaps on the panel
• Mounting of the bracket parts require precision, both when mounting part a on
the substructure and when placing part b on part a.
• Extra component in panel assembly process
• Panels only fit SolarMount once manufactured with SolarMount brackets
8.4.1.2
Full facade solution
Providing a full facade solution with dummies makes it possible to cover the whole
facade thus avoiding aesthetic noise. At the same time the decoupling of capacity
and area, means that the solution can be included in projects earlier on, also before
knowing how much capacity is desired/relevant for the project. The decision for how
many panels should be dummies and how many panels should be PV panels, can be
made later in the process, and the planning for construction and design can continue.
8.4.1.3
ColorFoil
Integrating the concept ColorFoil with an assumed efficiency reduction below 10%
would increase the efficiency of the panels compared to existing solutions. This would
have an impact on several found barriers and make the choice for including BIPV
much easier, as coloring would not be a compromise with cost in the same degree as
it is now.
==PAGE:104==
90
8 Discussion
8.4.2
New bracket design, known facade solution
Based on the need for a standard well-known mounting solution, the ideation started
with known facade constructions and the existing mounting solutions for these. In an
effort to satisfy more needs, ideas with a higher degree of originality were added in a
second ideation round. It was assessed that a common facade type provides enough
commonality to known facade solution, and that the implementation of new bracket
types, only adds a small part that is new. It was also considered that innovation only
happen if changes are accepted. A new bracket design require not only a new panel
design and/or assembly process, but also a new production of the SolarMount bracket.
Other solutions such as ScrewOn and LittleFeet, would only require one of those. It
should be assessed whether SolarMount adds sufficient value to the mounting process
and the aesthetics, to justify creating a new production.
SolarMount is designed
specifically for solar panels and is not very relevant for other facade materials. Until
sales increases for BIPV in Denmark, the market for the brackets nationally is not
very big. The brackets are estimated to be fairly easily manufactured as they are
made from sheet aluminum and standard bolts.
8.4.3
Designed for commercially owned buildings
The scope ’private business buildings’, was selected in order to focus the design ef-
forts. The solution could very well be suitable for both publicly owned buildings
and apartment complexes as well, since the requirements difference between these
building types are regulatory not necessarily aesthetic. Though private homes, also
apartment complexes, might need a more inviting/cozy appearance than an office
building, and whether BIPV panels can provide that, should be investigated. For one
family homes, BIPV facades is less relevant because of the low height of the building
and the commonness of having plants, a parasol etc. in the garden which would cast
a shadow on the solar panels. For low-rise buildings, a roof solution might be better.
8.5
The next project steps
If there was more time for the project, the next step would be to; i) do an evaluation
workshop, ii) do more load calculations, iii) investigate the potential of ColorFoil
further, and iv) investigate use of dummies.
8.5.1
Evaluation SolarMount
An ideal evaluation of the SolarMount design proposal had been to include relevant
actors in a workshop where prototypes could be tried and a discussion between dif-
ferent actors could be facilitated. Unfortunately, this was not manageable within the
time limits of this project. Instead a short preliminary evaluation has indicated the
potential of the solution from a practical/construction point of view and provided
==PAGE:105==
8.5 The next project steps
91
inputs to what might be discussed and investigated in further evaluations or work-
shops.
The preliminary evaluation indicated that the solution is interesting from a functional
point of view and that the issues addressed with the design (mounting procedure, elec-
trical installations, maintenance, tolerance mitigation) are relevant. At the same time
the cost of the solution is estimated to be too high, and thus the solution won’t be
feasible in a marked where price is everything. Further development of the solution
to mitigate the cost issue, while maintaining the functionality, would be interesting.
This could be done in a workshop with different actors. As a minimum the workshop
should be made with an architect, a BIPV manufacturer, a facade entrepreneur, a
constructor and an electrician. Topics for discussion could be; gap between panels,
tightening mechanism, mounting procedure, electrical installations, how to lower cost,
etc.
The preliminary evaluation indicates that SolarMount might have potential and that
it would be interesting to carry on developing the concept.
8.5.2
Load calculations
Some calculations for how thick and large the brackets should be for different panel
sizes could give an indication of the solutions possibilities and maybe limitations.
These calculations would also be necessary in order to specify which bracket assort-
ment would be needed to accommodate panels of different sizes in different heights.
8.5.3
ColorFoil
It should be investigated how coloring of solar panels and dummies with ColorFoil
will look and especially how to ensure that the color of the dummies are the same as
the solar panels even though they contain no solar cells. ColorFoil is still on the draw-
ing board and there is not yet any prototypes. As soon as the prototyping begins, it
would be interesting to investigate the aesthetics by using the foil in some mock-ups.
It will also be interesting to see if nuances/mottled appearance can be produced and
generally which possibilities/barriers exist.
8.5.4
Dummies
The concept of dummies has been described but not investigated in this report. Ques-
tions about how to cut and re-seal edges, is left unanswered and should be investigated
further. The idea is that the dummies can be cut to size on-site. This will mimic the
process for other facade materials, but whether this is ideal, considering the need for
re-sealing the edges to protect the ColorFoil, should be considered.
==PAGE:106==
92
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
Based on the market and actor analysis, this report finds that there is a potential
market for BIPV in Denmark. It was however also found that several barriers for the
uptake of BIPV exist. They are all amenable to being mitigated and are furthermore
synergistic so mitigation of the barriers positively impact the other barriers. Some of
the barriers for BIPV relate to the product aesthetics, while other do not.
It was found that an appropriate scope for the design phase was using c-Si opaque
facade mounted BIPV for commercially owned buildings. The proposed SolarFacade
design is a solution for ventilated facade systems. The panels have no frames, brackets
are hidden, the system allow for disassembly of individual panels, and provide large
freedom in panel size, composition, and has three position options. In addition, the
solution ease electrical installations by allowing the panel to be loosened and pulled
out to gain access to the backside. Dummy panels are proposed as a mean to obtain
the same fitting flexibility with solar panels, as common with other facade materials.
In conclusion, the proposed BIPV solution enable the identified aesthetic needs, while
also taking other needs and requirements into consideration. The proposed solution
mitigate a number of the found barriers, mainly aesthetic noise, lack of (standard)
mounting, and lack of complete roof/facade fitting solutions. The barriers concern-
ing cost, and efficiency loss, can potentially be mitigated through having standard
solutions and using ColorFoil or other color methods with high light transmittance.
Finally, the barrier related to late adoption in the construction process, may also be
mitigated due to having decoupled the capacity and the area of installed panels. So-
larMount should probably be made cheaper in order to be a viable mounting solution,
but the proposal has potential to serve as a starting point for further development of
a standard mounting solution for aesthetic BIPV facades.
==PAGE:108==
94
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
A. Mehravaran A. Derhem, M. Nassereddine (2019). “Building-Integrated Photo-
voltaics (BIPV) for Residential and Industrial Properties”. In: American Unviersity
in Dubai.
Chung, Kyungjae et al. (May 2012). “Flexible, angle-independent, structural color
reflectors inspired by morpho butterfly wings”. In: Advanced Materials 24.18, 2375–
2379. issn: 09359648. doi:10.1002/adma.201200521. https://onlinelibrary-
wiley-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/10.1002/adma.201200521.
Cupa-Danmark (no date[a]). “Typer af facader”. https://cupadanmark.com/typer-
af-facader/. (accessed: 1.11.2019).
— (no date[b]). “Ventileret facadesystem hvad er fordelene”. http://www.cupadanmark.
com/ventileret-facadesystem-hvad-er-fordelene/. (accessed: 01.11.2019).
Curtius, Hans Christoph (2018). “The adoption of building-integrated photovoltaics:
barriers and facilitators”. In: Renewable Energy 126, 783–790. issn: 18790682.
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2018.04.001. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.
2018.04.001.
Danish Energy Agency (2018). Energy Statistics. 2018. isbn: 9788793180475.
Dyck-Madsen, Søren and Martin Risum Bøndergaard (2011). Bygnings-integreret
energi-produktion. 1st editio. Green Transition Denmark, 2011. isbn: 9788792044143.
www.ecocouncil.dk.
Eder, Gabriele et al. (2019). Report T15-07 - Coloured BIPV Market, Research and
Development. Technical report. 2019.
Europe-Solar (no date). “Batteries”. https://www.europe-solarstore.com/. (ac-
cessed: 22.11.2019).
Gholami, Hassan and Harald Nils Røstvik (2020). “Economic analysis of BIPV sys-
tems as a building envelope material for building skins in Europe”. In: Energy
204, 117931. issn: 03605442. doi:10 . 1016 / j . energy . 2020 . 117931. https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117931.
Halme, Janne and Pyry Mäkinen (2019). “Theoretical efficiency limits of ideal coloured
opaque photovoltaics”. In: Energy and Environmental Science 12.4, 1274–1285.
issn: 17545706. doi:10.1039/c8ee03161d.
Hilti (0). Ventilated facades - Technical manual. Hilti Group, 0.
HSHansen and Gaia Solar (2015). “Final report 1.1”. In:
Jo, Sunghwan et al. (2020). “Angle-Insensitive Transmission and Reflection of Nanopat-
terned Dielectric Multilayer Films for Colorful Solar Cells”. In: ACS Applied Ma-
==PAGE:110==
96
Bibliography
terials and Interfaces 12.26, 29979–29985. issn: 19448252. doi:10.1021/acsami.
0c06303. https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c06303.
Klampaftis, Efthymios et al. (2015). “Integration of color and graphical design for
photovoltaic modules using luminescent materials”. In: IEEE Journal of Photo-
voltaics 5.2, 584–590. issn: 21563381. doi:10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2392934.
Klima- Energi- og Bygningsministeriet: Energistyrelsen (2020). “Bekendtgørelse af lov
om fremme af vedvarende energi”. In: Lovtidende A 2015.1074, 1–41. doi:https:
//www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/r0710.aspx?id=159159.
Klima-Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet (2019). Denmark’s Integrated National En-
ergy and Climate Plan. Technical report. 2019, 1–132. doi:10.1016/j.surfcoat.
2019.125084. https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/EnergiKlimapolitik/
denmarks_national_energy_and_climate_plan.pdf%0Ahttps://ens.dk/
sites/ens.dk/files/EnergiKlimapolitik/denmarks_draft_integrated_
energy_and_climate_plan.pdf.
Luceño-Sánchez, José Antonio, Ana María Díez-Pascual, and Rafael Peña Capilla
(2019). Materials for photovoltaics: State of art and recent developments. Technical
report 4. 2019. doi:10.3390/ijms20040976. www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms.
Mathiesen, Brian Vad et al. (2017). The role of Photovoltaics towards 100% Renewable
energy systems Based on international market developments and Danish analysis.
Technical report. 2017.
Mertens, Konrad (2019). Photovoltaics Fundamentals,Technology, and practice. John
Wiley Sons Ltd, 2019. isbn: 9781119401049.
PA Energy Ltd (2016). Solceller. Dansk strategi for forskning, udvikling, demonstra-
tion og udbredelse. Del I - Baggrundsnotat. 2016.
PA Energy ltd (2011). Large Scale PV Plants – Also in Denmark. Technical report.
2011.
— (2016). Solceller Dansk strategi for forskning, udvikling, demonstration. Del II-
Anbefalede Indsatsområder. 2016.
Peharz, Gerhard et al. (2017). “Application of plasmonic coloring for making building
integrated PV modules comprising of green solar cells”. In: Renewable Energy
109, 542–550. issn: 18790682. doi:10 . 1016 / j . renene . 2017 . 03 . 068. http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.03.068.
Poulsen, Kristian Rune, Morten Stryg, and Karsten Capion (2019). “Elpris Outlook
2019”. In: 2–69. https://www.danskenergi.dk/udgivelser/elpris-outlook-
2019.
Solargis (no date). “Download solar resource maps and GIS data for 200+ countries”.
https://solargis.com/maps-and-gis-data/download/denmark. (accessed:
15.10.2019).
Soman, Anishkumar and Aldrin Antony (2019). “Colored solar cells with spectrally
selective photonic crystal reflectors for application in building integrated photo-
voltaics”. In: Solar Energy 181, 1–8. issn: 0038092X. doi:10.1016/j.solener.
2019.01.058. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.01.058.
Sommerville, Ian and Pete Sawyer (1997). Requirements Engineering - A good practice
guide. John Wiley Sons Ltd, 1997. isbn: 0471974447.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
97
Statista (no date). “Cumulative solar photovoltaic capacity in Denmark from 2013
to 2019”. http://www.statista.com/statistics/497491/connected- and-
cumulated-photovoltaic-capacity-in-denmark/. (accessed: 15.11.2019).
Sturtevant-Richmont (no date). “SPH Slim profile heads”. http://www.srtorque.
com/error-proofing-tools/interchangeable-heads-for-torque-wrenches/
interchangeable-heads-for-torque-wrenches/sph-slim-profile-heads-
interchangeable-heads-for-torque-wrenches/. (accessed: 20.12.2019).
Sun, Jiyu, Bharat Bhushan, and Jin Tong (2013). “Structural coloration in nature”.
In: RSC Advances 3.35, 14862–14889. issn: 20462069. doi:10.1039/c3ra41096j.
Toolbox, Engineering (2018). “Bolt Torque Calculator”. 2018. http://www.engineeringtoolbox.
com/bolt-torque-load-calculator-d_2065.html. (accessed: 15.01.2020).
Ulrich, Fisher et al. (2011). Mechanical and Metal Trades Handbook. Verlag Europa
Lehrmittel, 2011. isbn: 13 978-3-8085-1914-1.
Zhang, Yinan et al. (2019). “Coloring solar cells with simultaneously high efficiency by
low-index dielectric nanoparticles”. In: Nano Energy 62, 682–690. issn: 22112855.
doi:10.1016/j.nanoen.2019.05.065. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.
2019.05.065.
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX A
Literature search
The search alteration for the structured literature search on state of the art.
DTU FindIt search (academic papers)
Scope: 2015 < , Flexible matching, English.
1. Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (Roof OR building OR house) AND integrated
AND (frame OR support) AND (construction OR design) (hits: 210)
• Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (construction OR building OR house)
AND integrated (hits 6,063)
• Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (construction OR building OR house)
AND integrated AND (construction OR design Or Aestethics) (hits: 3,344)
• Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (construction OR building OR house)
AND integrated AND (construction OR design) AND aestethics (hits: 0)
• Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (construction OR building OR house)
AND integrated AND (construction OR design) AND (aestethics OR de-
sign OR appearance) (hits:1,037)
• Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (construction OR building OR house)
AND integrated AND (frame OR support) (hits:496)
• Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (construction OR building OR house)
AND integrated AND (frame OR support) AND “mechanical construction
(hits: 2)
• Solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (Roof OR building OR house) AND
integrated AND (frame OR support) AND (construction OR design) (hits:
210)
2. (Aesthetic) AND solar AND (panel OR cell) (hits: 332)
• (Design OR Aesthetic) AND solar AND (panel OR cell) (Hit:40,821)
• (Design OR Aesthetic) AND solar AND (panel OR cell) AND (Integrated
OR construction OR house) (hits: 11,540)
• (Aesthetic) AND solar AND (panel OR cell) (hits: 332)
3. (colour OR color) AND (solar OR photovoltaic) AND transmission NOT semi-
transparent (hits: 137)
==PAGE:113==
A Literature search
99
• (colour OR color) AND solar AND (panel OR cell) (Hit: 3,189)
• (colour OR color) AND (solar OR photovoltaic) AND transmission NOT
semitransparent (hits: 137)
In total 780 hits to accept or decline for review. A list of 104 papers was chosen
as relevant in first sweep, and then the list was narrowed further and the articles was
prioritized after how relevant they seemed.
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX B
Interview summaries
On the following pages are inserted the meeting interviews from the 10 interviews.
The summaries are formulated by the author and has since been send to the the
interviewed for validation.
==PAGE:115==
• 
==PAGE:116==
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:117==
==PAGE:118==
 
==PAGE:119==
ö
• 
• 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:121==
• 
• 
• 
• 
o 
o 
• 
==PAGE:122==
æ
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:123==
• 
 
==PAGE:124==
å
ø
==PAGE:125==
• 
å
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:126==
 
==PAGE:127==
å
• 
==PAGE:128==
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
ç
• 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
 
==PAGE:130==
å
==PAGE:131==
• 
• 
 
==PAGE:132==
ø
ç
==PAGE:133==
ç
==PAGE:134==
ç
ç
ç
==PAGE:135==
ø
ø
ø
ç
==PAGE:136==
ç
ç
ç
ç
 
==PAGE:137==
’
å
• 
• 
• 
ç
• 
• 
==PAGE:138==
o 
o 
ç
o 
o 
o 
• 
• 
o 
’
o 
o 
o 
==PAGE:139==
• 
• 
o 
o 
o 
o 
ç
o 
o 
ø
==PAGE:140==
 
 
==PAGE:141==
ç
ç
ç
ç
ç
==PAGE:142==
ç
ç
ç
“
”
“
”
==PAGE:143==
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
==PAGE:144==
APPENDIX C
Needs identification
All 135 needs and requirements discovered through the interviews.
==PAGE:145==
1
Need 
[1]
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
[10]
1
Provide aestetically desirable products 
x
2
Provide panels with different appearance 
x
3
Minimize efficiency loss from coloring 
x
4
Have coloring that are not angle dependent 
x
5
Bypass shadowed cells 
x
6
Keep temperature of cell low to keep efficiency high
x
7
Avoid injuries to poeple from heated panels (up to 80 degrees)
x
8
Avoid damage to components from heat expansion 
x
9
Avoid moisture damage in product 
x
10
Preserve the appearance over time 
x
11
Provide robust products 
x
12
Safe mounting system 
x
13
Protect junktion box from heat (safety)
x
14
Replace other building materials when installing BIPV to save money
x
15
Have the solar panels fit in with existing construction and mounting methods
x
16
Provide variation in size to follow market demand
x
17
Provide discrete/unrecognizable solar panels 
x
18
Not being visually bothersome 
x
19
Economicly similar to other options or advantagous 
x
20
Spare parts security - being able to replace parts 
x
21
Be part of the movement for more sustainable practices 
x
22
Highest possible efficiency of the panels
x
23
Cheaper storage options to improve the economy of having solar panels 
x
24
Avoid ruining the aestetics of a buldings or cities with solar panels 
x
25
Increase the use of solar energy in Denmark 
x
26
Have Denmark be a development and demonstration site for BIPV 
x
27
Provide information to aid the diffusion of BIPV
x
28
Better access to product information 
x
29
Less customization and more standardization for economic benefits 
x
30
Reduce legal barriers 
x
31
Storage options to relieve the electrical grid 
x
32
More demonstration projects 
x
33
Lowering efficiency loss from coloring 
x
34
Avoid uncomfortable reflectance from glass and frame 
x
35
Good finish on details and joints of BIPV installations 
x
36
Repeatable mounting solution 
x
37
1% solar energy by 2025
x
38
New innovations (aestetic) for satisfying solutions
x
39
Preserving the aestetics of old bulding when doing energy renovations 
x
40
A good solution for the classic red tile roof
x
41
Residents on top floors should have a nice view of the roofs as well 
x
42
Avoid having areas of the roof stand out andbeing an additional visual element 
x
43
Dummies to make fittings to roofs easier 
x
44
Color play (mottled color) for the panels to fit in with older/existing materials 
x
45
Easy installation to minimize risks of error when installing 
x
46
Clear definition of responsibility 
x
==PAGE:146==
47
Maintenace free panels for highrise roof tops 
x
48
Durable products is important 
x
49
Recognisition of panels important in some case for branding 
x
50
Spread information about posibility of using BIPV 
x
51
Involving architect becouse they communicate their work 
x
52
Solutions for roofs for best efficiency 
x
53
Avoid facade due to shadows from other buildings 
x
54
Better legislation for sharing PV electricity in appartment complexes 
x
55
Modifying the solution to fit with the danish aestetics when using international provider 
x
56
Make rules and legislation easy to keep up date with/ avoid confusion from frequent changes
x
57
Whole roof solutions look better
x
58
No angle dependency 
x
59
Target industrial/business buildings due to high electricity consumption
x
60
Avoid having to replace/remove a lot of electricity meters 
x
61
Avoid reflectance
x
62
Variation in appearance - creating a more playful/lively surface
x
63
Have the surface vary after weather 
x
64
Mineal look for harmonation with other materials often used 
x
65
Higher focus on BIPV (not a topic currently) 
x
66
Overcome scepticism for prosumerism 
x
67
Move past the phase of pilot projects and showcases 
x
68
Better rules for BIPV 
x
69
Paybacktime around 10 years 
x
70
Design buildings for optimal angles for BIPV 
x
71
Remove barrier for energy communities 
x
72
Increasing demand to lower expences 
x
73
Supplier robustness 
x
74
User friendly monitoring applications 
x
75
Cheaper electricity storage options 
x
76
Smart if PV can be integrated in new buildings
x
77
Remember/focus on the business aspect to survive
x
78
Get (BIPV) involved in the process as early as possible 
x
79
Proper and easily acessible information about BIPV for architect and entrepreneur 
x
80
Communicate what the solar panels solve/provide 
x
81
Make architects familiar with the products 
x
82
BIPV should simply be a product choice on the line with other building component 
x
83
Avoid incresing cost by designing e.g. panels which is shaped as tiles
x
84
Avoid starting over/making unique solutions 
x
85
Make the process easy
x
86
Incentive for including BIPV, either a motivated person, economy or regulations
x
87
Appealing solutions first - optimization of efficiency secound 
x
88
Appearance drives the process
x
89
Avoid seeing too many limits due to efficiency loss
x
90
Modular panels for standard houses 
x
91
Risk avoidance by having BIPV as a decorative layer 
x
92
Cheap mounting 
x
93
Better energy storage options 
x
94
Highest possible efficiency important 
x
==PAGE:147==
95
Facade panels needed due to lack of space on roof 
x
96
Avoid shadow from building elements such as elevator house 
x
97
Follow up/monitoring of the solar cells functioning 
x
98
Make it easier to know how many panels to include earlier on 
x
99
Improve perception regarding cost 
x
100 Provide knowledge of existing products/posibilities 
x
101 More example projects 
x
102 Data on business cases
x
103 Data on when it makes sence to include BIPV 
x
104 Data on price and expences 
x
105 Data on mounting 
x
106 Data comparing BIPV and other climate shields 
x
107 Keeping roof area in densly build areas free 
x
108 Data on LCA for BIPV 
x
109 Knowledge about appearance when aging (patina) 
x
110 Appearance similar to natural materials 
x
111
Seing the product in action 
x
112
Avoid reflection issues 
x
113
Color options not restricted to few colors 
x
114
Size flexibility 
x
115
Initiative for BIPV from the building owner 
x
116
To chose BIPV knowledge needs to be easily accessible in a process on a tight scedule 
x
117
Avoid uncertainty about rules for BIPV 
x
118
Have the product fit in with surrounding buildings 
x
119
Integrated rather than decorative, at least on the same level as surrounding material 
x
120 Better look for business buildings than private homes
x
121
Robust BIPV companies 
x
122 BIPV companies able to provide products for large scale projects and handle reclemations 
x
123 BIPV to include in their prefabricated panels (no technical barriers) 
x
124 Request for solar cell from the building owner 
x
125 More kommunication to the building owner
x
126 Follow innovation within building components 
x
127 Providing the posibility of BIPV panels to customers
x
128 Cheaper BIPV products
x
129 More knowledge about products for dialogue with client 
x
130 Size variation 
x
131
Opaque facade elements 
x
132 BIPV instead of BAPV to increase building value 
x
133 Mainstream BIPV products 
x
134 Reference house 
x
135 Considerations for risk of delamination 
x
==PAGE:148==
APPENDIX D
Requirements
==PAGE:149==
D Requirements
135
==PAGE:150==
136
D Requirements
==PAGE:151==
APPENDIX E
Evaluation matrix
==PAGE:152==
138
E Evaluation matrix
==PAGE:153==
APPENDIX F
Ideation mounting
This appendix shows ideation for; mounting solutions, wiring, ventilation vs water-
proofing,
==PAGE:154==
140
F Ideation mounting
==PAGE:155==
F.1 Investigations prefabricated and ventilated facades
141
F.1
Investigations prefabricated and ventilated
facades
Figure F.1: Ventilated and prefabricated facades with BIPV panels.
==PAGE:156==
142
F Ideation mounting
Figure F.2: Investigating wiring possibilities ventilated facades.
==PAGE:157==
F.1 Investigations prefabricated and ventilated facades
143
==PAGE:158==
144
F Ideation mounting
F.2
Ideation on mounting
Figure F.3: Ideation for mounting on ventilated facade.
==PAGE:159==
F.2 Ideation on mounting
145
Figure F.4: Investigating wiring possibilities prefabricated facades.
==PAGE:160==
146
F Ideation mounting
Figure F.5: Ideation for mounting on prefabricated facades.
==PAGE:161==
F.2 Ideation on mounting
147
Figure F.6: Second concept ideation - four ideas.
==PAGE:162==
148
F Ideation mounting
F.3
Bio inspiration - Ventilation versus waterproofing
Solar panels generate heat which lover the efficiency of the panel. Cooling of the
panels is therefore desired in order to cool down the panels. A common solution is
to have ventilation on the back side. To increase airflow, air must be allowed to pass
through the facade. The facade is the building envelope and climate screen. The
facade should protect the building against water. The biological world was sought for
solutions to the opposing need of an open facade to allow air flowing out and for an
closed facade for blocking water from seeping in. The functional decomposition can
be seen in figure F.7. Three principles was considered especially interesting (bold on
Figure F.7: Functional decomposition for biologically inspired search and brain-
storm.
figure F.7). The first is the use of hydrophilic and hydrophobic areas on the bamboo
leaf which channel water off the leaf surface.
The second principle is that of the
sacred fig leaf which has a drip tip. The tip efficiently run water off the leaf and
lets it dry quicker. The last a principle is the humidity sensitive valve found in some
desert flowers. They can control the humidity level within the plant to protect its
seeds. Bio cards of the three principles can be found in appendix G.
The principles of the Sacred fig leaf, the bamboo leaf and the valves of the desert
flower was used in to produce suggestions for solving the ventilation versus water-
proofing problem. Other ideas was inspired by existing solutions or produced in a
brainstorm. The brainstorming for sealing and ventilation can be seen in figure ??
==PAGE:163==
F.3 Bio inspiration - Ventilation versus waterproofing
149
Figure F.8: Sketches from ideating on how to secure proper airflow (ventilation)
while avoiding moisture entering the facade 1/2.
==PAGE:164==
150
F Ideation mounting
Figure F.9: Sketches from ideating on how to secure proper airflow (ventilation)
while avoiding moisture entering the facade 2/2.
==PAGE:165==
F.3 Bio inspiration - Ventilation versus waterproofing
151
Figure F.10: Sketches from ideating on how to secure proper airflow (ventilation)
while avoiding moisture - bio inspired.
==PAGE:166==
APPENDIX G
Bio cards
==PAGE:167==
G Bio cards
153
Bio card, Bamboo leaves channelling water.  
 
Organism: Phyllostachys aurea. 
Function: Channeling water away from leaf surface so pores can absorb CO2 from the air (figure 1).  
 
Biomimicry function: Channelling water off a surface and allowing for ventilation. 
 
Biological phenomena: A hydrophobic surface on the leaves makes water form into drops on the 
surface and roll of. The hydrophobic surface comes from epicuticular wax. The wax traps air in 
between small structures in wax which then cause the water drops to have little surface connection 
with the actual leaf. In the middle the leaf has a hydrofil line down the groove in the middle where 
the water is collected and will roll downwards and off the leaf. The bamboo lives in humid areas and 
needs to channel water off the leaves to free its poors and allow it to “breathe” CO2 from the air.  
 
Functional principle: A hydrophobic surface makes water stay in droplets/form droplets. A 
hydrophilic path guides the water off the leaf surface. 
 
 
Figure 1. Bamboo leaf channelling water (asknature.dk). 
 
 
Source:  
●
Young leaves channel water, visited november 2020, Asknature, 
https://asknature.org/strategy/young-leaves-channel-water/ 
 
==PAGE:168==
154
G Bio cards
Bio card, Leaves with drip tip. 
Organism: Ficus religiosa 
Function: Leading water off surface.  
Biomimicry function: A drip tip helps remove water from the surface and reduces risk of 
microorganisms growing on the leaf. 
Biological phenomena: The shape of the Sacred fig tree (see figure 1), efficiently guides water off the 
leaf surface with the so-called “drip tip”. The water will run downwards to the tip where the 
accumulation of water will make it drip off due to the small surface area of the tip. Leaves with 
removed drip tids retained 2.3 times more water. It is believed that the removal of water prevents 
fungi and microorganisms growth on the leaves.  
Functional principle: A tip (drip tip) on a slant surface leads water off the surface more efficiently 
then without the drip tip. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Fig tree (asknature.dk) 
 
Source:  
●
Leaves Channel water, visited november 2020, Asknature, 
https://asknature.org/strategy/leaves-channel-water/  
 
 
==PAGE:169==
G Bio cards
155
Bio card, Humidity- sensitive hilar valve in desert plant (Legume family). 
 
Organism: Trifolium repens, T. pratense, and Lupinus arboreus (figure 1). 
Function: Regulate humidity in flowers to protect seeds.  
 
Biomimicry function: Valve closing in high humidity weather.  
 
Biological phenomena: A humidity sensitive valve protects seeds of some desert plants. The seeds 
will germinate if exposed to a certain amount of water. The valve allows some moisture to pass 
through but not water and if the changes in humidity are sudden, the valve will close off. The valve is 
closed off by counter palisade cells, which absorbs water from the air (hygroscopicus). If the 
humidity is high and happens suddenly, they swell up and block the valve.  
 
Functional principle: A valve controls the humidity level inside a chamber. The valve swell up and 
close the valve if the humidity is high due to its ability to absorb moisture from the air. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Yellow bush Lupine (asknature.dk) 
 
 
Source:  
●
Valve regulates water permeability, visited november 2020, Asknature, 
https://asknature.org/strategy/valve-regulates-water-permeability/  
 
==PAGE:170==
APPENDIX H
Evaluation sessions
summaries
On the following pages are inserted the meeting interviews from the three concept
evaluation sessions. The summaries are formulated by the author.
==PAGE:171==
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:172==
Ø
æ
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:173==
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:174==
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:175==
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
ø
ø
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
==PAGE:176==
APPENDIX I
Color and structure
Figure I.1: Material and texture inspiration.
==PAGE:177==
I Color and structure
163
Figure I.2: Material and texture inspiration.
Figure I.3: Metallic colors.
==PAGE:178==
164
I Color and structure
Figure I.4: Bright colors.
Figure I.5: Matte color.
==PAGE:179==
APPENDIX J
Detailing SolarMount
==PAGE:180==
166
J Detailing SolarMount
Figure J.1: Detailing SolarMount.
==PAGE:181==
J Detailing SolarMount
167
Figure J.2: How to solve corners.
==PAGE:182==
168
J Detailing SolarMount
Figure J.3: How to solve corners.
==PAGE:183==
J Detailing SolarMount
169
Figure J.4: How to solve corners.
==PAGE:184==
APPENDIX K
Technical drawings of
the prototype
==PAGE:185==
==PAGE:186==
==PAGE:187==
==PAGE:188==
==PAGE:189==
==PAGE:190==
==PAGE:191==
==PAGE:192==
==PAGE:193==
==PAGE:194==
==PAGE:195==
==PAGE:196==
APPENDIX L
Preliminary evaluation
summary
On the following pages are the interview summary from a brief presentation and
evaluation of SolarMount.
==PAGE:197==
Ø
æ
”
==PAGE:198==
==PAGE:199==
APPENDIX M
Pamphlet on primary
project outcomes
This phamplet has been created for the contributors of the project, to provide overview
of the project outcome. The phaphlet focus mainly on presenting the design proposal.
==PAGE:200==
SolarFacade
This pamphlet covers the primary findings and the design proposal made in a 
master thesis project by the titled Building-integrated solar panels – an analysis 
and design proposal at the Technical University of Denmark.
SolarFacade is the name of the total solution while SolarMount is the name of the 
brackets. The solution is made for commercially owned buildings and are opaque c-
Si solar panels. 
The pamphlet describes : 
•
The product system
p. 2
•
Barriers for uptake of BIPV in Denmark
p. 2
•
A prototype
p. 3
•
Mounting procedure
p. 4
•
Aesthetic possibilities
p. 5 
•
Product architecture SolarMount
p. 6
•
Product architecture solar panels 
p. 7
•
Pros and cons for SolarFacade
p. 7
•
Contributors
p. 8
Author: Nicoline Friberg Klysner
Supervisor: Torben Anker Lenau
Technical University of Denmark
January 2021
Nicoline Friberg Klysner
A big thank you to the following contributors: 
Yakov Safir, CEO Racell, BIPV manufacturer 
Andrea and Henrik Höhnke, private BAPV owners 
Karin Kappel, architect and secretarial leader in Solar City Denmark 
Marie Baumann, architect in the Department of Urban Building Renewal, Cph
municipality 
Jakob Klint, chief advisor Kuben Management, Building owner consultancy 
Christian Troelsgaard, private BAPV owner 
Carsten Nørgaard, senior project manager SolarPolaris former Gaia employee
Jørgen Søndermark, project manager RealDania, Building owner 
Signe Bang Korsnes, senior consultant Architema A/S, architect 
Hans Bering, key account manager HSHansen, facade entrepreneur 
Arne Grøntved, CEO Solar Partner, BIPV manufacturer 
David Ørbæk, project manager and owner Facaden A/S, facade entrepreneur 
==PAGE:201==
Dummies are panels with the same aesthetics as the solar panels. The same color (ColorFoil) is
used in both products. The dummies have no electrical components and can be cut to size. 
The dummies can be used to:
1. Fill out corners and edges where solar panels do not fit 
2. Decouple façade area and production capacity
7
Pros and cons
Product map of BIPV 
The product map shows different actor groups, and which influence each other.
Barriers for BIPV uptake in Denmark 
Thirteen barriers were identified through interviews with 10 different actors. The
actors included in the analysis where; a BIPV manufacturer, two private owners of 
BAPV, one organization driving implementation of BIPV, two building owners (one 
municipality and one company), one building owner consultant, one occupied with 
installation and operation of large PV plants, one architect, and one facade 
entrepreneur. The barriers are: 
1.
Aesthetic noise
2.
Lack of product information
3.
Lack of knowledge
4.
Cost
5.
Concern for efficiency loss
6.
High complexity
7.
Life cycle assessment
8.
Late adoption in construction process
9.
Lack of (standard) mounting solution
10. Legal changes/ barriers
11. Lack of affordable storage
12. Lack of complete roof/facade fitting solutions
13. Not on the agenda
2
Solar panels product architecture
A full façade solution was desired. Overlapping panels can be a mean to obtain aesthetic 
variation and was included in the deign. Three panel types are needed for SolarFacade, these are 
shown in the figure below.
SolarFacade address a number of the solar panel specific requirements but
• A standard mounting solution (potentially)     
• A full facade solution (no aesthetic noise) 
• Access to electrical installations   
• Reparation and replacement of individual 
panels    
• Lower efficiency loss (using ColorFoil)
Contributions:
• Transport is less easy due to bracket flaps
• Mounting of the bracket parts require 
precision
• Extra component in panel assembly process    
• Panels only fit SolarMount once 
manufactured with SolarMount brackets
Drawbacks:
==PAGE:202==
3
SolarFacade prototype
2
The prototype was made to investigate the feasibility of the mounting procedure 
and the appearance. A degree of precision is needed both for hooking on and 
tightening the bolts, but all in all the prototype indicates that the system works. The 
brackets are slightly visible in the gaps between the panels, but it is assumed that 
with a shadowed background, this will be insignificant. 
The coloring has similarities to yellow brick wall or metals such as brass or bronze. 
The color is mottled to give the color a little bit of play and a more natural feel. The
presence of solar cells has been slightly indicated and are visible up close.
SolarMount product architectures
To fill out a complete façade a number of different brackets are needed. These are illustrated 
below. The panels can be mounted planar or overlapping. The brackets enable mounting of 
panels adjacent to each other, panels adjacent to other façade elements and corners (corner 
bracket).
6
==PAGE:203==
Aesthetics
5
4
Mounting procedure illustrated
SolarFacade deal with two types of aesthetic needs: 
1.
General aesthetic needs
2.
Aesthetic variation needs
The general needs are: 
1.
Avoiding visible frame/mounting 
2.
Avoiding reflections
3.
A discrete appearance (how discrete is context dependent)
4.
A complete solution (avoid PV panels becoming aesthetic noise)
The aesthetic variation needs are: 
1.
Color
2.
Sizes
3.
Composition of rectangular/square panels. 
Other features such as shape, pattern, and positioning can also be ways to provide 
variation possibilities and thus design possibilities. 
The coloring is thought to be implemented in the panels using ColorFoil - a 
coloring product under development at DTU. Assumption about possibilities has 
been made. 
The illustration below shows SolarFacade aesthetics and aesthetic possibilities. 
==PAGE:204==
==PAGE:205==
==PAGE:206==
