==PAGE:1==
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the
Marine Environment
The influence of surface topographies on colonising marine
biota in littoral zones
Master Thesis
DTU Byg
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
The influence of surface topographies on colonising marine biota in littoral zones
Master Thesis
January, 2021
By
Joseph W Parkinson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
J W Parkinson, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months as part of a collaboration of the
Department of Civil Engineering and the National Institute of Aquatic Resources,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. Significant input and collaboration
with the Danish Technological Institute has contributed to this thesis which is writ­
ten as a partial fulfilment for the degree, Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng, Aquatic Science and Technology.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and
marine biology.
Joseph W Parkinson ­ s181591
Signature
Date
ii
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
24/01/2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Coastal hardening, via construction of marine infrastructure, is an unavoidable
eventuality in the next few decades. Urbanisation of coastal environments is a con­
sequence of anthropogenic population increase. The impacts of ’ocean sprawl’ is
an area of concern for the health and biodiversity of marine ecosystems found in
coastal littoral zones.
Historically, concrete is the material of preference for marine infrastructure due
to many desirable properties including strength, relative cheapness and durability
in areas of high physical and chemical stress, indicative of many marine envi­
ronments. Current eco­engineering efforts are looking to increase the ecological
value of concrete use in marine environments to promote a sustainable coexis­
tence with marine ecosystems. A selection of properties of concrete including
chemical composition and surface topography modifications have thus far been
areas of engineering focus.
A continuation of research into the ecological effect of modifying surface texture
topographies of concrete is pursued during this project. 3 surface texture types
were artificially modified to varying complexities and exposed in a coastal sub­tidal
location in the Øresund for 2 months in the fall of 2020. Early marine colonisation
was analysed using image analysis techniques. Preference for initial settlement
was seen for a surface type that exhibits ridged and grooved surface modifications,
although many biotic and abiotic variables could be impacting coverage rates. The
effect of hydrodynamic variables such as salinity and temperature, known to be
limiting factors for marine colonisation on hard substrata, were subsequently anal­
ysed throughout the exposure period.
Analysis of the long­term succession of the marine sessile community on con­
crete substrate was a secondary objective. Concrete of varying composition had
undergone exposures on multi­annual scales in an inter­tidal zone at Rødbyhavn,
Southern Denmark. Biological sampling allowed for succession to be analysed
in species abundance and composition for time exposure and depth profiles, with
significant results in species composition between 5 and 10 year samples and
through the water column. However significance in species composition could
not be identified between concrete composition types.
The incidence of sessile bivalve communities, identified in 10­year biological sam­
ples, proved effective as eco­engineers for recruitment and succession in the ma­
rine community, boosting biodiversity. The construct of the species composition of
these samples are an indication of the marine communities found on the vast ma­
jority of marine infrastructure, with low surface texture complexity and no artificial
modification.
Limitations, such as time constraints and seasonal hydrodynamics proved inhibit­
ing for analysing further succession in the marine community for modified surface
texture topographies of concrete. The use of image analysis techniques for iden­
tifying initial biotic colonisation also proved limiting for identifying species compo­
sition, with methodologies such as bio­fluorescence identification of micro­biota
considered as a potential preference for continuation of research.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Joseph W Parkinson, MSc Aquatic Science and Technology, DTU Aqua
Creator of this thesis report.
I cannot overstate the help and expertise offered throughout this project and would
like to especially thank the following supervisors and people who have all con­
tributed to the outcome of this thesis:
Wolfgang Kunther, Associate Professor, DTU Byg
As my main supervisor for unerring belief, interest and expertise throughout the
duration of the thesis, with help and advice always at hand. For also offering
insights into concrete technology and providing contacts at DTU and in the industry
for progression of the project.
Jon Svendsen, Senior Researcher, DTU Aqua
As a co­supervisor for providing marine biological insights and awareness of im­
portant analytical limitations. Readily offering image analysis equipment and ac­
companying apparatus throughout the project.
Ciaran McLaverty, Postdoc, DTU Aqua
As a co­supervisor for imparting superb knowledge of marine benthic biology and
providing excellent insights and direction in developing a sampling protocol. Also
for help and guidance in identification of marine biota, with advice always at hand
throughout the thesis.
Henrik Sørensen, Product Manager, PhD, Danish Technological Institute
As an industry supervisor for providing apparatus and lab space at DTI and show­
ing great interest in the project, helping with sampling protocol at Rødbyhavn and
providing access and insight throughout.
Klaus Bræmer, Concrete Technician, DTU Byg
For help & guidance casting and creating surface textures in the concrete labs.
Jørn Lykke Jensen, Experimental Technician, DTU Byg
For expertise and handiwork in constructing rigs in the metal workshops.
Agnieszka Rzepkiewicz­Hansen, Jacob Friis­Grigoncza, Christian Brolin, DTU
Byg, For lab assistance and workshop guidance, help and expertise.
Thomas Larsen, Land Inspector, Special Consultant, Coastal Zone Management
For assistance in identifying an exposure site and guidance for the logistics of
establishing a location.
Danish Maritime Authority
For granting permissions for aquatic research activity.
And of course to Katie, for her design help and support throughout.
iv
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Objectives
3
3
Background Theory
5
3.1
Artificial Marine Structures & Reef Technology
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Concrete Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Early marine colonisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Benthos in Danish coastal waters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Methods
15
4.1
Concrete Casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Surface Topography Roughness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Exposure Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Image Analysis Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Rødbyhavn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results
41
5.1
Surface MDP Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Kastrup Havn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Rødbyhavn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
61
7
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
69
A Appendix
73
A.1 Diving Itinerary & Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 DTI Concrete Recipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.3 Kastrup Havn GoPro Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.4 Rødbyhavn Samples Biota
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The defining trend of the modern­day anthropocene is escalating population growth
and the consequential impacts this has on the world’s ecosystems. Mechanistic
models predict an increase in population that expects to exceed 9 billion by the
year 2050 (Lee 2011). This is an unprecedented challenge to authorities. The in­
crease in population at coastal zones is expected to rise considerably with a 60­70
percent increase since 2000, resulting in over a billion people residing directly by
the coast according to every scenario of climate representative socio­economic
pathways (Merkens et al. 2016).
Services that enhance prosperity and socio­economic growth provide the draw
for anthropogenic migration to coastal environments, with access to fisheries, lo­
gistics, travel and leisure among some of the most relevant factors. Population
pressures exerted on coastal infrastructure however, will become intensified, with
an expected escalation in coastal construction required to meet demand (Sala et
al. 2000).
The expansion of coastal urbanisation and construction of coastal structures such
as harbours, waterways, breakwaters, coastal protections and emerging energy
technologies such as tidal and wave hubs will lead to considerable coastal ’hard­
ening’ along coastlines. Dubbed ’ocean sprawl’ this is a process which could have
severe effects for coastal habitats, many of which support delicate marine ecosys­
tems and high bio­diversity in inter­tidal and littoral zones (L. Firth et al. 2016).
To accommodate both ’ocean sprawl’ and the preservation of native marine ecosys­
tems a carefully considered balance of eco­engineered conservation efforts are
required to achieve sustainable growth as outlined by the UN sustainable develop­
ment goals; with the encompassing aim to satisfy policies such as the EU Water
Frameworks Directive and Marine Strategy Frameworks Directive (Kallis and But­
ler 2001).
Whilst this is an ongoing process in recent marine infrastructure construction (MIC),
eco­engineering efforts have so far progressed through past failures (Bugnot et al.
2018), which is understandable considering a lack of precedent when analysing
the effects of large scale MIC on marine ecosystems over long­term temporal
scales. Research conducted to date has largely focused on in­situ construction
projects, with many based on offshore renewable projects such as wind farm foun­
dations (Petersen and Malm 2006; Glarou, Zrust, and Svendsen 2020; Taormina
et al. 2020). This research has proved interesting, as offshore MIC has been
found to support marine ecosystems in accordance with research from artificial
reef technologies, where the introduction of hard­based substrates such as metal
and concrete has been found to exhibit a comparable increase in abundance of
marine biota (Seaman and Lindberg 2009).
The vast majority of MIC is concrete­based. Concrete is favoured in MIC, popular
for its relative affordability, it’s ability to be cast into desirable structures and it’s
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
1
==PAGE:10==
longevity in marine environments (Seaman and Lindberg 2009). Currently, little
is known on the long term effects of concrete on marine ecosystems with fac­
tors such as composition, surface texture, pH content, and meso/macro surface
topographies proving interesting areas of discussion in artificial reef research.
The ecological ’value’ of concrete is a conflicting area of research, with some
properties, such as high alkalinity and leaching of heavy metals, potentially prov­
ing toxic for certain marine biota (Elkadi et al. 2010). Newly exposed artificial
structures could also prove an opportunistic habitat for colonisation of invasive
species (Herbert et al. 2017). However, research on chemical properties of con­
crete composition (Natanzi et al. 2020) and modification of surface topographies
(MacArthur et al. 2019) show concrete substrate can exhibit a beneficial influence
on early colonisation and recruitment of sessile ecological­engineers, such as bar­
nacles and bivalves, which can enhance biodiversity and improve the health of the
ecosystem (Gutiérrez et al. 2003).
This project looks to build upon existing research into the ecological value of con­
crete in the marine environment. Particularly focusing on the ease as to which
surface textures can be artificially modified, and to what effect this can have on
initial biotic recruitment. Analysing the succession of the sessile marine commu­
nity over long­term temporal scales, should also give an insight as to the benefits
of concrete use for marine ecosystems.
2
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:11==
2
Objectives
The overarching motivation for this project is to assess the ecological value of
concrete in the marine environment and define aspects of its ecological suitability
in MIC. This motivation can be devolved into objectives which look to focus on
eco­engineering efforts that can potentially benefit or at least display indicators of
conservation for marine ecosystems impacted by MIC.
Research into the process of early­settling marine biota on artificial structures and
the cascading effect on marine succession thereafter is a particular area of inter­
est. Identifying the nature of initial recruitment and early colonisers is essential
to attaining status of the marine community and the impacts that could determine
the direction of its development over time (Salta et al. 2013).
Eco­engineering concrete is a solution to providing a habitable environment for
development of a healthy marine community, with focus on artificial modification
of the surface topographies of concrete. The effect of these surface topography
modifications on the subsequent recruitment of marine biota is one of the main
objectives to this thesis. Identifying recruitment of biota that can display capa­
bilities as ’ecological engineers’ to the immediate and surrounding ecosystem is
integral for a healthy ecosystem, and presents an ideal outcome to the efforts
behind eco­engineering concrete.
The effect of composition of concrete on early colonisation and the analysis of the
the subsequent development of the community over long­term temporal scales is
a secondary objective. Access to 5­year and 10­year concrete exposure samples
of varying concrete composition are available for analysis during this project, with
the help of research from the Danish Technological Institute.
Concrete samples have been exposed at a harbour location in Southern Denmark,
as a precursor to the development of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link, and have been
left undisturbed until removal during the time­frame of this project. This presents a
rare opportunity to analyse the development of the marine community on varying
concrete substrate over a multi­annual scale.
This thesis looks to bring together previous literature on artificial reef technology,
marine colonisation on concrete substrate, eco­engineering efforts, experimental
design and scientific hypotheses in order to develop an analysis protocol, eventu­
ally looking to attain understanding of the following research questions:
Can a quantifiable difference be observed in early marine biological colonisation
for varying surface topographies of concrete?
What is the construct of succession in the epi­benthic marine community on con­
crete substrate in species abundance and diversity over long­term exposures?
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
3
==PAGE:12==
4
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:13==
3
Background Theory
In this chapter literature surrounding the role of concrete in the marine environ­
ment is reviewed. This looks to provide a thorough insight into the effect of the
properties of concrete in marine ecosystems, the developing technologies that ad­
vocate its use in marine infrastructure and its potential application as a benefactor
for enhancing ecological status of localised marine ecosystems.
An in depth review of the process of marine colonisation on hard substrate will
give an insight as to how early settlement on newly exposed artificial structures
can be an indicator of the developing status of the community over longer term
temporal scales. An analysis of the marine sessile community in colonising hard
substrata in littoral zones, including the role of eco­engineering organisms that
promote epi­benthic development of the community will also be reviewed.
Finally a collection of the review literature and accompanying research looks to
give a rounded foundation of knowledge that will provide the basis for develop­
ment of the protocol in this thesis. Selected methodologies and data analysis
techniques will be used as guidance, with the goal of formulating answers to the
research questions detailed in the Objectives, and provide a critical buffer for the
decisions taken during the Methodology.
3.1
Artificial Marine Structures & Reef Technology
Artificial marine structures can be classified as any structure of a hard substrate,
not necessarily of man­made materials, which has been placed into a marine en­
vironment (Seaman and Lindberg 2009). Most examples include structures con­
structed for services, such as harbours, breakwaters, coastal protections and off­
shore wind­farm foundations. Other marine structures, classified as artificial reefs,
are inserted into usually arid benthic environments with the goal of replicating natu­
ral reef habitats to protect, enhance, or restore the marine ecological environment,
promoting a wide range of socio­economic and environmental benefits (Seaman
and Lindberg 2009).
Increasing anthropogenic marine activity has put a stress on local marine ecology
with many man­made marine structures inhibiting localised marine ecosystems.
One of the objectives of the development in artificial reef technology and research
has been to re­establish marine communities in coastal areas diminished by the
impact of ’ocean sprawl’ and coastal urbanisation (L. Firth et al. 2016).
Reef structures benefit the behaviours and traits of much marine life by providing
mating grounds, hatcheries, and a sanctuary from predation, ultimately supporting
marine populations (Seaman and Lindberg 2009). Many artificial reef projects look
to replicate natural habitats by using materials of a natural variety, such as stone
reefs in the Kattegat Sea, where research has shown that insertion of natural stone
boulders can lead to reintroduction of marine flora and fauna (Kristensen et al.
2017; Stenberg et al. 2017). Other reef structures using artificial materials such
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
5
==PAGE:14==
as tyres, polymers, metals and accidental structures such as wrecks have also
shown success in enhancing ecological prosperity in their localised area (Baine
2001).
The majority of marine structures however, are concrete based. Concrete as a ma­
terial is preferable in marine infrastructure, attributable to its relative cheapness,
easy structural modification and long­term durability in marine environments, with
high levels of hydrodynamic and chemical stresses prevalent. Consensus from
research on the role of concrete as an ecological provider, such as analysis of the
marine communities colonising offshore wind farm foundations, show that con­
crete can have largely beneficial effects on marine communities and ecosystems
(Andersson et al. 2009; Glarou, Zrust, and Svendsen 2020; Petersen and Malm
2006; Taormina et al. 2020) and can compare to natural material based counter­
parts (Paxton et al. 2020).
This knowledge suggests a collaboration of concrete­based reef technology with
the construction of marine infrastructure to help reduce stresses on marine ecosys­
tems and even promote their sustainable co­existence in ’hardened’ coastal areas.
This developing area of research has been of focus in recent years with a number
of eco­engineering projects focusing on the chemical and physical properties of
concrete providing ecological value (L. B. Firth et al. 2016; Dennis et al. 2018;
Perkol­Finkel and Sella 2014; Natanzi et al. 2020). One such project is the use of
an eco­friendly facade coating on submerged concrete, developed by a company
called ECOncrete, which looks to enhance ecological properties of the concrete
and provide a more habitable surface for settlement (Ido and Shimrit 2015).
Properties of concrete, such as the ability to modify surface textures to simulate
cracks, crevices and roughness preferred by marine colonising biota has seen a
surge of research focus. A number of studies have tested abundance and biodiver­
sity of species composition on various surface texture modifications of increasing
complexities and topographies (Paalvast 2015; MacArthur et al. 2019; Coombes
et al. 2015). From these studies it can be seen that early settlement and develop­
ment of the marine community is preferable for surface types that exhibit a degree
of modification that is alternative to the vast majority of marine infrastructure which
have low complex, smooth surfaces.
Low complex surface topography results in vast areas of marine infrastructure
displaying little marine colonisation, which can be preferable in many places such
as harbours where unwanted colonisation, termed ’bio­fouling’, can be detrimental
to functionality for services. However, in other areas of marine infrastructure the
use of ecological engineering modifications of concrete could help to promote
marine biotic settlement in otherwise arid areas, devoid of marine life.
3.2
Concrete Technology
As mentioned, there are many properties of concrete which could benefit marine
ecosystems. To understand how these properties could provide ecological value,
the fundamentals of concrete manufacture and construction should be reviewed.
Concrete is one of the most widely used materials in the world, with its popularity
in large scale terrestrial and marine engineering attributable to many factors, such
6
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:15==
as cheapness of production, durability, but also it’s compressive resistance, and
ability to be shaped into desirable structures. The fluidity of concrete at the casting
stage has given rise to the design of many elaborate concrete structures with its
use in 3­D printing technology and computer aided design prevalent (De Schutter
et al. 2018).
Concrete is the accumulative product of fillers and binders which can be cate­
gorised into three main constituents:
• Cement
• Aggregates
• Water
Fillers consist of various sizes of aggregates from fine sand to gravel and small
rocks of various materials. Aggregates consist of generally 60­80% of concrete,
with interchangeable ratios between aggregate sizes effecting, weight, density
and cost of concrete. Binders include cement when combined with water. This is
an exact science which is dependent on the ratios of cement to water. Cement
will hydrate and harden to form concrete (Zhang 2011).
Ordinary Portland Cement
The main type of cement used in the construction industry is Ordinary Portland
Cement (OPC), a cement which reacts very fast and has high strength content
but whose concrete product is susceptible to early corrosion in the environment
(Aïtcin 2016). OPC however, is one of many cement types. Cement alternatives
such as fly­ash cement and slag cement, or blends with OPC, exhibit contrasting
hydration and hardening processes. Consequentially properties of these alterna­
tive concretes such as strength, environmental resistances, and ionic leaching
and intrusions are highly dependent on cement composition.
OPC is created by heating limestone (calcium carbonate (CaCO3)) to high tem­
peratures in a kiln where the output is called a clinker. This is then mixed with
gypsum to become cement (Aïtcin 2016), the stages of manufacture and chemi­
cal processes are detailed in Figure 3.1.
Finalised OPC clinker is made up of four main compounds: tri­calcium silicate,
di­calcium silicate, tri­calcium aluminate, tetra­calcium aluminoferrite. In an ab­
breviated concrete chemist notation, these compounds are designated as C3S,
C2S, C3A, and C4AF, where C stands for calcium oxide (lime), S for silica, A for
alumina, and F for iron oxide. The most important hydraulic constituents are the
calcium silicates, C2S and C3S (Alite in Figure 3.1) (Aïtcin 2016).
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1: Figure illustrating the process of OPC formation from limestone to
clinker in a kiln and the constituent parts formed throughout the heating process.
Borrowed from (Aiitcin 2007).
Hydration
C2S and C3S are the dominant constituents of OPC. Therefore it is these con­
stituent parts that undergo scrutiny during hydration, when OPC is mixed with
water. The process of this hydration can be described by the following reaction
equations in concrete chemist notation:
2C3S + 6H = C3S2H3 + 3CH
(3.1)
2C2S + 4H = C3S2H3 + CH
(3.2)
The calcium silicates (C2S & C3S) of cement react with water molecules (H) to
form calcium silicate hydrates (CSH) and calcium hydroxide (CH). The ratios of
calcium silicates in cement directly impacts the ’curing’ time or rate of hydration,
with C3S reacting fastest. The added gypsum in OPC manufacture is a critical
constituent in this process as it regulates hydration, preventing instant hardening,
important for mold casting and other practicalities in construction (Bullard et al.
2011).
Hydration produces high exothermic reactions and therefore it is important the
surrounding environment has moisture so as water within the concrete does not
evaporate in the process, which could cause newly cast concrete to overheat and
possibly crack (Bullard et al. 2011). Hydration is an ongoing process and therefore
water baths are used in the initial curing process (generally 28 days) to regulate
the initial reactive stresses.
8
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:17==
Concrete in the marine envrionment
Concrete is the resultant form of the hydration process consisting of a heteroge­
neous structure of aggregates, hydrate crystals, calcium hydroxide, un­hydrated
silicates and other smaller constituents (Zhang 2011). Slower reacting silicates
such as CS2, will continue to hydrate after the hardening and curing process and
is a highly relevant topic of research focus, particularly for concrete exposure in
the marine environment.
As silicates continue to hydrate, albeit at a much slower rate, a source of cal­
cium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2), or (CH) in previous concrete chemist notation, is con­
tinuously formed. This constituent is high in OPC concrete and therefore can
be attributed to the corrosiveness of OPC concrete in soft­water (lower pH) en­
vironments (Zhang 2011), indicative of marine environments. This dissolution of
calcium hydroxide into Ca+ ions and OH−bases, increases alkalinity:
Ca(OH)2(s) →Ca+(aq) + 2OH−(aq)
(3.3)
Therefore calcium hydroxide content can, after exposures in dynamic marine wa­
ters, prove corrosive for OPC concrete. An interesting note here is the poten­
tial role sessile colonisation of concrete can have on the prevention of corrosion,
although more specifically chloride corrosion of steel reinforced concrete in the
marine environment (Kawabata, Kato, and Iwanami 2012).
A presence of high bicarbonate (HCO−
3 ) saturation in sea water can initiate a reac­
tion with calcium hydroxide in concrete to form calcium carbonate (CaCO3) (Zhang
2011), equation 3.4, which consequentially happens to be one of the main con­
stituents for marine shell based life, such as many species of Molluscs (Fabry et
al. 2008):
Ca(OH)2 + Ca(HCO3)2 →2CaCO3 + 2H2O
(3.4)
A source of calcium and carbonate ions is essential for shell­building marine biota
(Fabry et al. 2008) and therefore dissolution properties of calcium hydroxide in
concrete could potentially prove beneficial to marine life and possibly encourage
marine biotic colonisation, especially in light of the impact of ocean acidification
on shell­based marine life (Fabry et al. 2008). Ocean acidification is a process
whereby increased saturation of bicarbonates in seawater, by carbonic acid dis­
solution (H2CO3), can be attributed to increased carbon sequestration from an­
thropogenic carbon emissions (Licker et al. 2019). The formation of carbonic acid
and bicarbonate can be seen in equation 3.5:
CO2(sat) + H2O →H2CO3 →H+ + HCO−
3
(3.5)
This can have a detrimental impact on the biomass of marine shell based life as
calcium carbonate dissolves in areas of high acidification (Kroeker et al. 2013;
Fabry et al. 2008), therefore calcium hydroxide dissolution in concrete could help
to redress this balance in localised marine environments. Research suggests
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
9
==PAGE:18==
artificial insertion of alkalinity into areas of acidification could potentially contribute
to conservation of marine based shell life (Gore, Renforth, and Perkins 2019).
Carbon footprint
The use of concrete is an area of conflicting appraisal, due to its environmental
impacts and socio­economic value in large­scale use. The carbon footprint of
cement manufacture is one such negative, producing approximately 7% of total
anthropogenic CO2 emissions (Ali, Saidur, and Hossain 2011). The environmen­
tal impact of concrete popularity and the consequent manufacture of cement to
meet demand, include not just the manufacturing stage, but also transport and
production of other materials used for aggregates such as sand dredging (Laleye
et al. 2020).
This huge carbon footprint should be taken into account when analysing any bene­
ficial ecological value the aforementioned properties of concrete could have on the
environment. It has been the focus of some studies where calculation of environ­
mental impact of concrete has been analysed using carbon offsetting algorithms
from the material sourcing, manufacturing stages through to ecological value (Den­
nis et al. 2018).
3.3
Early marine colonisation
To understand if concrete substrate can provide an ecologically enhanced envi­
ronment for marine colonising biota and value in artificial reef utilisation, the pro­
cesses of marine settlement on hard substrate should be reviewed. Bio­fouling will
occur upon any structure or substrate which has been exposed in marine waters,
unless anti­fouling treatment has been applied (Jones 2009). It is the process and
constituents of early settlers however, that initiate and define the eventual evolu­
tion and development of the epi­benthic marine community over the long term
(Salta et al. 2013).
The mechanisms of marine colonisation on hard substrate can be sub­categorised
into a collection of processes over successional phases and can be viewed in Fig­
ure 3.2. Hydrodynamics in the marine environment encourage the suspension
and transport of organic matter, which will settle on surfaces within minutes of
exposing substrate. Pioneer species, such as prokaryotes and micro­algaes are
recruited from the surrounding environment, and form a symbiotic bio­film consist­
ing of an extra­cellular matrix of multi single­celled species (Salta et al. 2013).
10
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Figure borrowed from (Martín­Rodríguez et al. 2015), illustrating the
mechanisms and subsequent successional stages of marine colonisation on hard
substrate.
The ability of prokaryotes but also micro­organisms such as diatoms, cyanobac­
teria, benthic dinoflagellates, fungi and protozoa to recruit and adhere to the sub­
strate depends on numerous immediate intrinsic factors such as cell size, motility,
adhesiveness but also extrinsic factors such as nutrient availability which is found
to be one of the most important regulators of recruitment (Caruso 2020). Nutrient
cycling by the microbial community in the biofilm plays a key role in recruitment
and sustaining growth (Cowan, Warren, and Fletcher 1991).
A thriving biofilm, particularly abundant in primary producers such as diatoms,
attracts secondary heterotrophic species and grazers, whilst larvae and macro­
algae spores are able to settle and colonise. This kick­starts succession in the
community and allows for macro­growth to take hold with the early indication of
sessile organisms such as Cirripedia (barnacles), macro­algaes, bivalves, sponges
and byrozoa able to succeed after weeks and months of exposure (Martín­Rodríguez
et al. 2015), dependent on environmental variables.
Later succession during and after macro­growth is important in defining the sta­
tus, health and biodiversity of the sessile community and the localised ecosystem
it supports. Larger sessile organisms provide a shelter and food source to attract
mobile fauna. Biota such as bivalves and Cirripedia are particularly important
in this respect. They provide a biogenic substrate for epi­benthic growth, boost­
ing biodiversity and symbiosis. The beneficial impact these organisms have on
healthy status of the ecosystem has promoted their role as ecological engineers
for the localised marine community (Gutiérrez et al. 2003).
Drivers of early settlement
Initial colonisation on hard substrate and development of biofilm can be attributed
to many biotic and abiotic factors and is important for defining the subsequent
succession and evolution of the sessile community (Caruso 2020).
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
11
==PAGE:20==
Biotic factors can generally be attributed to the micro­biotic interactions within the
biofilm. Co­aggregation of biota during colonisation results in dense communities
which promote competition between micro­biotic species for nutrients, predation
avoidance and inhibition of later arriving taxa, proving an early indicator as to the
early benefactors in the biofilm (Lappin­Scott and William Costerton 1989). It has
been proposed that generally, surface­associated microorganisms are mainly co­
piotrophic, whereas their counterparts suspended in the water column are mainly
oligotrophic (Katharios­Lanwermeyer et al. 2014).
Abiotic factors, sub­categorised into environmental factors and substrate compo­
sition, also have varying influence on initial microbial colonization. It has become
evident that several physical and chemical variables in the marine environment,
such as temperature, pH, salinity, inter­tidal or non­tidal location, seasonal period,
light availability, water depth, and especially oligotrophic or eutrophic conditions
all demonstrate varying effects on colonisation (Caruso 2020).
Substrate type is one such factor affecting the formation and composition of initial
bio­film development. Factors such as, hydrophobicity, surface polarization and
tension, may affect the patterns of bacterial adhesion to the surface (Cowan, War­
ren, and Fletcher 1991). Substrate roughness has also been shown to be one
of the most relevant factors in driving bacterial colonization (Mitik­Dineva et al.
2008). Indeed, surface irregularities promote biofilm formation and can provide
shelter from unfavorable environmental factors (Crawford et al. 2012).
The effect of substrate surface chemistry on micro­bacterial adhesion and sub­
sequent bio­film development has also been an area of discussion (Natanzi et
al. 2020). However inconsistencies in colonisation rates for chemically identical
substrates has resulted in a switch in focus towards the role of surface topog­
raphy, architecture and roughness on microbial attachment (Mitik­Dineva et al.
2008). The beneficial effect of surface variation on colonisation, has highlighted
the importance of providing a sheltered environment from hydrodynamics for initial
colonisation.
3.4
Benthos in Danish coastal waters
To obtain a comparative overview of species composition, it is important to review
the construct of marine benthos that colonise hard substrate structures such as
harbour walls, wrecks, reefs and other natural or artificial hard substrata in sub­
littoral and inter­tidal zones. Studies of hard­bottom fauna in European waters con­
firm that these substrates do indeed attract a larger number of both common and
rare species than soft­bottom habitats (Michaelis et al. 2019; Kühne and Rachor
1996).
A stylized drawing of the marine biota colonising a hard substrate in an offshore
wind­farm setting, Figure 3.3, gives an idea as to the biota expected to be found
colonising hard substrate in Danish coastal waters. However, it should be noted
this particular illustration is of the colonising benthos of an offshore structure,
which usually preside in an oligotrophic environment with increased hydrodynam­
ics, in comparison to coastal zones where eutrophication is generally higher and
hydrodynamics less intense (Hiscock et al. 2002).
12
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:21==
Particular attention should be paid to the incidence of sessile ecological engi­
neers in colonising benthos and their effect on development and recruitment of
biota in such communities. Recruitment of these ecological engineers, which in­
clude many shell based species of Bivalvia, Cirripedia and macro­algaes usually
arrive in late succession after weeks or months of exposure. As mentioned, they
are highly beneficial to recruitment of other sessile organisms, but also mobile
fauna, such as crustaceans, crabs, shrimp, amphipods, isopods, marine worms
and eventually benthic and pelagic fish species (Gutiérrez et al. 2003).
This increase in biodiversity serves as a valuable asset to the healthy status of the
ecosystem, whilst also benefiting socio­economic services, such as fisheries (Sea­
man and Lindberg 2009). However, the introduction of hard substrate could also
potentially favour opportunistic micro­organisms that possess competitive traits
that can out­colonise native species (Caruso 2020). This could have knock­on
effects for succession in the community and benefit the introduction and prolifer­
ation of opportunists. Danish waters are susceptible to invasive species, due to
the lake­like hydrodynamics in the Baltic (Holopainen et al. 2016) and therefore
artificial hard substrates could offer a breeding ground for opportunism (Herbert
et al. 2017).
Hydrodynamics in the Danish Straits
It is also important to realise the construct of benthic communities is highly influ­
enced not just by biotic and substrate conditions, but also by large fluctuations
in hydro­dynamics, such as temperature, seasonality, salinity, eutrophication and
nutrient depletion. The location of the Danish straits is an area of high hydrody­
namic variance. Situated between two seas, the brackish Baltic and haline North
Sea, mixing and fluxes of salinity, temperature and nutrient concentrations can be
inter­changeable and are heavily influenced by wind and weather conditions creat­
ing east or westward velocities for influxes from either sea. As an example, mean
annual salinity’s at 10 m depth varies from about 12 g/kg in the western Baltic to
about 32 g/kg in the northern part of Kattegat (Rasmussen 1995). Consequen­
tially the number of species abundance and diversity increases northwards from
the Baltic through the Kattegat (Hylleberg 1986).
The haline North Sea water is denser and has the potential to carry nutrients into
the Danish straits (Kuss et al. 2020). Due to higher density, North Sea water
flows as bottom water into the Danish Straits as the more brackish, less dense
Baltic water flows in as surface water. This creates fluctuating thermo, halo and
nutri­clines in the Danish Straits depending on seasonality, temperature and influx
velocities. Consequently, this can lead to an imbalance and limitations of nutrient
availability, with impacts for growth and diversity in the benthos (Kuss et al. 2020).
Growth periods in the Danish Straits, or blooms are seen during the spring and
fall due to an optimum balance between temperature, mixing of nutrients through
the water column and sunlight during these times.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: Figure borrowed from (Hiscock
et al. 2002), displaying a stylized drawing of
zonal communities likely to colonise artificial
hard substrate structures exposed in marine
waters. Sketches of species are not to scale.
Inter­tidal
Predominantly
barnacles
and
ephemeral algae including: the bar­
nacles Semibalanus balanoides and
Elminius modestus, sea lettuce Ulva
lactuca,
gut weed Enteromorpha
intestinalis, and laver Porphyra spp.
Kelp zone 1­2 m
Kelps, foliose red seaweeds, barna­
cles, encrusting sea mats. Mussels
sometimes dominant below kelps.
Foliose algae (including Palmaria
palmata and Polysiphonia spp. es­
pecially) may extend deeper.
Shallow subtidal, 2m­6m
(Left­side of illustration) Plumose
and
other
anemones,
sponges,
possibly hydroids. Large individuals
of the plumose anemone Metrid­
ium senile, with groups of sagartia
anemones
Sagartia
elegans
and
patches
of
hydroids,
Tubularia
larynx and sponges, Halichondria
panicea. Occasional red seaweeds
especially filamentous species.
(Right­side of illustration) Dominated
by
mussels,
Mytilus
edulis
with
scattered elements of the above and
starfish (Asterias rubens) predators.
(Hiscock et al. 2002)
14
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:23==
4
Methods
In order to achieve the goals outlined by the research question newly cast, sur­
face modified concrete will require exposure for a defined period of time in a care­
fully considered marine location. To identify early settlement and bio­fouling an
analytical protocol would require development, fundamentally based on previous
literature and methodology that looks to analyse early colonisation and species
composition on concrete based substrate.
One of the main goals when developing the protocol is to focus on an encompass­
ing usability, so that it can easily be redistributed or re­applied in similar experimen­
tal environments. The protocol would require ongoing development throughout
the duration of the project, with pro­active planning and trial and error procedures
to be documented and thus form the foundations of this report.
The fully developed identification protocol will incorporate methods using under­
water marine imagery, scrape based sampling and marine taxa identification to
be applied and tested against the newly exposed surface­texture concrete as well
as to a number of concrete plate samples which have been under exposure in
marine conditions for a 5 & 10 years in Rodbyhavn.
The 5 & 10 year exposed samples are available as part of a project commis­
sioned by the Danish Technological Institute, as a precursor to construction of
the Fehmarn Belt Mixed Link, in Southern Denmark, with focus on ionic leach­
ing and structural integrity of reinforced concrete exposed over long time periods.
However, the samples are also perfect for identifying biological settlement over a
much longer time­span, with increase in species biomass and biodiversity of the
marine community expected and will give depth to this thesis, by applying a tem­
poral analysis to the biotic construct of the successional marine community. As
the newly cast concrete will only have exposure for a limited number of weeks in
the fall, initial settlement is to be expected on a micro­biotic scale. However early
colonisation preference for surface types should be adequately analysed during
this time period.
The following Methodology details the decisions, procedures and protocols un­
dertaken throughout the duration of the thesis to achieve the previously outlined
project objectives. Methods and protocols are based on previous literature, with
the analysis of surface texture types on species composition based on (Coombes
et al. 2015). Image analysis techniques and species composition analysis for
long­term exposures are based on techniques detailed by (Taormina et al. 2020).
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
15
==PAGE:24==
4.1
Concrete Casting
Casting took place on­site in the DTU Byg concrete labs. This decision was taken
to provide close proximity to the project and allow for ease of transport. This
means that there were limitations as to how surface texture design for the con­
crete cast could be developed, mainly due to the equipment available at the DTU
concrete labs; for example access to a 3D concrete printer could have expanded
options in this respect.
Creation of surface texture was therefore manually constructed during the casting
process. Before casting, a number of decisions were required, concerning size,
weight, dimensions, composition and surface texture of concrete. After consider­
ation, concrete was cast into plate molds, 30 cm by 30 cm and a depth of 6 cm,
with a steel mesh reinforcement to provide structural tensile rigidity and ensure
longevity during exposure in the marine environment.
4.1.1
Concrete Recipe
The recipe required for casting can afford to be less specific in terms of quantities
of constituents as composition of concrete isn’t tested during the project. There­
fore the recipe focuses on producing concrete which can exhibit durability, partic­
ularly during submersion in aquatic environments and the hydrodynamic stresses
this brings. However, casting and specifically curing times immediately after cast­
ing are essential when concocting the recipe to allow ample time for manually
creating surface textures. A homogeneity of concrete composition is desirable
across surface types to eliminate the effect contrasting concrete composition may
have on recruitment of early colonising marine biota.
The recipe for each surface texture can be seen in Table 4.1. Aggregates (Figure
4.1) are granite based, at sizes 4­8mm and 6­8mm accordingly. Rapid©Aalborg
Portland Cement was used. Four separate mixes were undertaken at the DTU
concrete labs on four separate days at the beginning of August, 2020. A dry
mix of aggregates and cement was supplemented by adding water in an electric
concrete mixer. Air percentage and slump of the mix was recorded.
Figure 4.1: Aggregates used in the concrete casting
16
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:25==
ID
Surface
Type
Water
Sand
(0­4mm)
Perlesten
(4­8mm)
Ærtesten
(8­16mm)
Cement
Plasticiser
Slump
Air
Content
[l]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
[mm]
[%]
1
Normal (A)
10.75
53.24
17.40
35.32
22.9
0.5
50
5.6
2
Brushstroke (B)
12.92
52.00
17.09
34.70
22.9
0
150
1.8
3
Exposed
Aggregate (C)
12.92
52.00
17.09
34.70
22.9
0
130
1.7
4
Embedded
Mussels &
Silicon Mold (D)
12.92
52.00
17.09
34.70
22.9
0
150
1.4
Table 4.1: Concrete recipe for all mixes corresponding to surface types
Mix number 1, Table 4.1, proved to be too dry initially and curing was almost
instant, therefore 0.5% of plasticiser was added to this mix. The plasticiser used
was Dynamon Xtend 200. This allowed for the mix to be poured into pre­oiled
plate molds and settled on a vibration table for surface texture modifications to
later be applied. Mixes 2, 3 & 4, followed a different recipe which allowed for extra
time for surface modifications before curing. These recipes included higher water
content ratio and therefore did not require plasticiser.
The quantity of mix allowed for 8 molds to be cast per mix. The mix was left
overnight under a plastic cover to prevent drying of the exposed surface. The
following day the molds were broken open using hand­tools to release the plates
and recycled, cleaned and re­oiled for the next mix. The exposed plates were
then put in a water bath to cure for 14 days at 40°C. This procedure was followed
for each mix, producing 32 plates in total, 8 of each surface texture.
(a) Plates curing in water­bath
(b) Mold casting
Figure 4.2: Concrete casting
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
17
==PAGE:26==
ID
Surface texture
Complexity
Description
Replicates
A
Normal finish,
smoothed
Low
Cast into molds and surface
smoothed with a plastering float
8
B
Brush­stroke
Intermediate
Mix left to half  set and
then brushed with wire brush
8
C
Exposed aggregate
Intermediate
Mix left to half ­set and jet ­washed
to remove upper layer of cement to
expose aggregate
8
D
Mussels embedded
(WC)
High
Mussel shells randomly embedded
into the surface of mix whilst in the
molds
2
D
Silicon Mussel Mold
(WC)
High
Silicon poured over mussel shells
and left to harden. Placed in bottom
of mold, and mix poured into mold
1
Table 4.2: Surface texture designs. (WC) = wildcard. Replicates indicate number
of samples that underwent marine exposure.
4.1.2
Surface Textures
A number of surface textures were identified with previous research on this topic
proving influential in decision making (Coombes et al. 2015). The selection crite­
ria for artificial modifications of the surface of the concrete plates is integral to the
objectives of the project and required careful consideration. The primary intention
was to construct a base surface texture, with a ’normal’ finish, indicative of con­
crete surface finish in the majority of marine infrastructure construction. The other
surfaces should then exhibit a disparity from this normal finish with a varying scale
of complexity of surface texture.
The complexity of surface texture can be categorised into Low, Intermediate, and
High for the means of this project, see Table 4.2. Low, being little to no artificial
modification in surface texture, and Mean Depth Profile (MDP) of <0.5. Interme­
diate, modification on a MDP scale of above 1.0< from a smooth base. High,
modification on a MDP scale 1.0< from a smooth base, with complex design or
use of biological material (MDP measurements are detailed in the following sec­
tion 4.2). The reason for this categorisation allows for the surface textures to be
quantified which has relevance when analysing if the empirical difference in sur­
face textures has an effect on the initial recruitment and settlement of colonising
marine biota.
The surface textures chosen are displayed in Table 4.2 and can be viewed as cast
concrete plates in Figure 4.3. For the purpose of this project surface textures A, B,
C form the basis for image and statistical analysis. The reason for this being the
number of replicates available for these surface textures. These surface textures
can be categorised as having a complexity of low to intermediate.
The brush­stroke concrete, surface texture (B), provides a heterogeneity to normal
finish by creating a roughness of ridges and grooves which according to previous
research may prove to be a more habitable surface for early settlement and re­
18
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:27==
(a) Normal finish
(b) Brush stroke
(c) Exposed aggregate
(d) Mussels Embedded
(e) Silicon Mold
Figure 4.3: Surface textures
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
19
==PAGE:28==
cruitment of ecological engineers (Coombes et al. 2015). The exposed aggregate,
surface texture (C) can also be indicative of marine based concrete. The texture
is created by power washing the concrete to remove the top layer as it is setting,
which can hopefully replicate concrete affected by hydrodynamic weathering.
High complex surface textures (D) are denoted as wildcard (WC), and therefore
were not included during statistical analysis. Reasons for exclusion are due to the
unsubstantial number of replicates for these surface types. Unfortunately silicon
mold casting, see images in Figure 4.3e & 4.3d is a time and money consuming
process and in order to create the number of desired replicate plates proved un­
feasible for the timescale of this project. Rig space also only allowed for 27 plates
to undergo exposure and priority was allocated to surface textures A, B & C, as
these proved easier to quantify surface variability and streamline the objective of
the project.
However, it proved interesting to experiment with methods of creating surface
textures, with the silicon mold a particular success in creating concrete ’mussel­
shell’ like extrusions with the surface complexity of mussel shells imprinted in the
concrete. Embedded mussel shells were also experimented with as a wildcard
entry. It was interesting to observe whether embedded mussel shells as a bio­
logical substrate would have an impact on recruitment compared to the adjacent
concrete surface.
20
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Surface Topography Roughness
As mentioned, the modified surface textures as described in Table 4.2 and Figure
4.3 are categorised by complexity into Low, Intermediate and High. These com­
plexities are based on a quantification which is determined by a method which
calculates the surface ’roughness’ of the concrete.
Calculations were performed using an ELA­Textur apparatus reader on­site at The
Danish Technological Institute’s concrete labs. The User Manual describes the
ELA­Textur as an instrument for measuring macro­surface of pavements as an
indicator of surface roughness (ELAtextur 2019).
The calculation output is described as a Mean Depth Profile (MPD) which is an evo­
lution of the Moore outflow meter in combination with the SRT pendulum method or
the sand­patch method, which have traditionally been used for determining the ad­
equate macro­texture of pavements manually (Aktaş et al. 2011). The ELA­Textur
measuring device, on the other hand, is virtually unaffected by operator influences
and therefore permits quicker and more precise measurements by using a high
resolute laser sensor.
The MDP of any given surface texture is calculated by placing the pre­calibrated
instrument on a surface and starting the laser sensor which rotates twice around a
400mm circumference, see Figure 4.4. The laser takes 2000 point readings along
the circumference per rotation giving an overall MDP of the surface roughness
over two rotation. The MDP is the deviation from a completely flat surface. In
other words, an MDP = 0, would mean there is no undulation in the surface and it
would be completely smooth. A visualisation of this can be seen in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.4: ELA­Textur measuring Mean Depth Profile of surface roughness
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
21
==PAGE:30==
−1000
0
1000
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Average
Depth 
(µm)
A1
C9
Figure 4.5: Average depths in µm, ELA­Textur readings as a surface roughness
profile for each of the 2000 laser point measurements. Profiles are shown for
plates A1 and C9 as a sample of the difference between surface texture types.
The blue line represents an MDP = 0 and a completely smooth surface. MDP is
a calculation of the variance from this blue base­line for each plate. MDP(A1) =
0.41, MDP(C9) = 1.16.
There were four MDP readings taken per concrete plate. Two of the legs were
placed along an edge of the plate and moved periodically around the plate until
all four areas corresponding to each side of the plate had been measured. An
average MDP for the whole plate was then calculated. In this way a more com­
prehensive MDP reading is used which is encompassing of the majority surface
area of the plate, although this does eliminate large deviations in point readings.
Measurements were taken for each concrete plate for surface texture types A, B
& C. The average MDP was obtained for each plate of every modified surface
texture type totalling 27 plate readings altogether. Surface MDP readings were
also obtained for the long term exposure samples at the Danish Technological
Institute (DTI). The readings from these samples at the institute correspond to the
concrete plates undergoing long term exposure in the harbour of Rødbyhavn in
Southern Denmark.
22
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:31==
4.3
Exposure Protocol
Exposure of the concrete plates would require total submersion in an aquatic envi­
ronment, indicative of a littoral sub­tidal zone. The exposure should last for as long
as feasibly possible within the time frame of the project, to allow for the longest
chance of marine biotic colonisation of the plates. As the timeline of this project
takes place in the fall, cooling seas are certain to effect growth rates, therefore en­
vironmental parameters such as temperature and salinity will be closely analysed
for the duration of the exposure.
4.3.1
Exposure site
The first decision when considering the environment for exposure of the plates
was to decide upon the benefits and drawbacks of lab compared to field study.
The main objective of the project is to analyse early marine settlement on surface
heterogeneity of concrete and therefore in this case, field study could be the only
feasible option. Replication in the lab with seawater, although practically easier,
would exert a preferential bias for colonising biota in that specific sample. A field
environment allows for a number of variables to influence early colonisation, which
is desirable and encouraged but has to be taken into account during analysis.
As mentioned in Chapter 3 variables such as hydrodynamics, changing environ­
mental parameters with seasonality, inflows and outflows, substrate­type, existing
marine biota in the surrounding area and anthropogenic influence are all factors
which could have an impact on early colonising marine biota and should be taken
into consideration when choosing a sampling site.
For this project it is important when choosing a site to make sure it replicates
an environment in a coastal, sub­tidal zone. This allows for colonisation of epi­
benthic biota and sessile organisms which are habitable in the near­shore littoral
zone. Considering this, it was decided that plates would be submerged in a set­
ting close to nearby marine infrastructure around the coast of Denmark. Due to
ease of access the east coast of Sjælland, Amager and the water surrounding
Copenhagen were bookmarked as potential sampling sites.
Location analysis
A location for deployment of concrete plates required a screening process encom­
passing a number of mitigating factors. The location should primarily be of easy
access, with permissions attained from the relevant authorities. Safety will be
paramount, as the location will accessed throughout the project. Other factors
to consider include marine traffic, such as boats and other water­users, hydrody­
namics in the area and the sediment type.
Three locations were analysed through a weighted score system to determine
suitability. The score system is based on the most important factors and weighted
with a percentage accordingly. The location is then scored from 1­5 on each of
the different factors, where 1 is the lowest score and 5 is the highest score. From
Table 4.3 it can be seen that location B has the highest score of 425 compared
to locations A and C. This is mainly down to permissions that can be obtained
through liaison with authorities for this area.
Access by the location at Kastrup Havn is good, with a slipway into the water
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
23
==PAGE:32==
Locations
Weighting
A­ Rungsted Havn
B­ Kastrup Havn
C­ Amager Strandpark
Access
25
4
4
5
Permissions
25
3
5
2
Safety
25
4
4
4
Traffic
10
2
4
2
Hydrodynamics
10
5
4
4
Sediment
5
4
3
3
Total
100
365
425
350
Table 4.3: Weighted scoring system for selecting an exposure site
which is used by the adjacent kayak and sailing club, with a neighbouring winter
bathing platform. Water users in close proximity has benefits in terms of safety
protocols which allows for diving to take place in a more secure environment, with
help close at hand in emergency circumstances. However high water activity in
the immediate area brings challenges such as marine traffic, although finding a
safe location for the exposure site for was fairly easy to negotiate with the clubs
and the nearby marina.
Permissions for deploying the plates and the rigs which held them had to be ob­
tained for the research to go ahead. Contact was made with the Kyst Direktoratet
and Danish Maritime Authority who were extremely helpful in allowing the research
to be carried out in Kastrup Havn. Contact with the surrounding water­sports clubs
and the neighbouring Blå Planet Aquarium all returned positive responses, essen­
tial for allowing the research to be carried out in a holistic and co­operative envi­
ronment. A water outflow near the Blå Planet Aquarium was identified and it was
decided the plates would need to be situated over 100 metres from this area.
Hydrodynamics in the Øresund strait and immediate area are favourable for the
objectives of the project, as the plates should be fully submerged throughout the
exposure period, allowing good water movement around the rig which will hope­
fully replicate consistent coastal hydrodynamics in Denmark. This was especially
favourable compared to the lagoon location at Amager Strandpark, where little
flux of water in and out of the lagoon had the potential for benefiting opportunistic
algae growth at this location.
The Øresund is an interesting area to conduct aquatic research due to its status as
a mixing zone between two large water masses, the saline North Sea and brackish
Baltic Sea. This, as explained in the literature review, means a large salinity scale
can be observed throughout the year and influxes from either water mass can
drastically alter the environmental parameters at the exposure site. Increases in
salinity and therefore nutrient content of seawater via influx from the North Sea
during periods of intense westward water mass movements could have an impact
on growth and colonisation of plates at the exposure site.
With this in mind, the hydrodynamics in the area were carefully documented and
24
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:33==
analysed using satellite data readings from the EU’s Marine Copernicus Ocean
data website. This determines environmental variables such as temperature and
salinity at the exposure site. The exposure site is situated on the east coast of
Amager, with prevailing winds from the south­west, translating into offshore winds
and flat conditions at the exposure site, ideal for diving access. A diving safety
protocol and timetable can be located in the Appendix A.1 which details the dates
and procedures taken for diving when visiting the site during the exposure period.
One issue potentially identified when looking at Table 4.3 is the sediment type in
the immediate area. There is a majority sandy bottom at the exposure site, which
could see sediment shifts over a period of time or during a period of high weather
activity. This could result in plates becoming partially covered by sediment, po­
tentially affecting biological interaction with the rig. After a few scouting missions,
there proved to be enough vegetation and solid substrate to approve this location.
However, this issue was to be kept in mind during the design process of the rig,
which was developed to hold the plates a substantial height above the sediment.
Figure 4.6: Exposure site at Kastrup Havn, August 2020.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
25
==PAGE:34==
4.3.2
Rig Design
As mentioned during the location analysis, the plates were reserved for deploy­
ment at an exposure site by Kastrup Havn, Figure 4.6. The plates would require
complete submersion and suspension above the sediment. Therefore a rig for
preventing this would need to be designed, developed and constructed before
the plates could undergo exposure.
75
60
1095
600
402.5
30
350.018
400
(a) Computer­aided design
(b) In construction
Figure 4.7: Rig design and construction
From Figure 4.7 the computer­aided design and finished rig can be observed. The
rig was designed using the Creo Parametric software package, with according
dimensions so as the plates could sit comfortably in the pre­designed slots. It
was decided the rig would need to hold the plates surface texture side facing up,
so as each plate would receive the same amount of light on the textured face, thus
eliminating bias for growth or settlement for any plate.
The rig was constructed over a couple of weeks, on­site in the DTU metal work­
shops with the superb help and craftsmanship of the lab technicians. Steel bars
were measured and cut according to the rig design and welded. Three rigs would
be required to hold 27 separate plates. A bar was placed above the 3x3 grid of the
rig (Figure 4.7) designed to hold a camera in place, which would be programmed
to take regular images of the submerged plates throughout the exposure. During
construction a decision was made to use GoPro cameras and therefore it was
important to make sure the distance from the bar to the top of the 3x3 grid was at
least 620 mm, so the wide­lens Go­Pro could incorporate the entire surfaces of
the plates when situated in the rig.
Rigs and plates were deployed on the 6th of October. 24 plates, 8 of each sur­
face texture type A, B & C were arranged randomly across the three rigs during
deployment so as to eliminate any undesirable rig bias. 3 of the ’high complexity’
plates were deployed into the remaining slots.
26
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:35==
4.4
Image Analysis Protocol
Exposure of the concrete samples lasted from early October for two months until
early December. During this exposure time it was essential to monitor early marine
biotic colonisation of the plate surfaces. It was decided the most practical and
successful way to achieve this was to use imagery by developing a pre­defined
protocol for how images should be taken and the regularity of this practice.
4.4.1
Imagery
Imagery is an important tool in marine subterranean observation. Many technolo­
gies and research are heavily reliant on using underwater imagery to obtain and
extract data, analysing the development of marine communities and ecosystems
over temporal scales. The use of cameras in aquatic environments ranges widely
from handheld diving companion cameras to large sub­autonomous or remotely
controlled vehicles. What is certain, is that camera use underwater is tricky to
operate, expensive and technologically impractical compared to taking images on
land (Wang et al. 2019).
The use of cameras in an aquatic environment comes with obvious practical hur­
dles, such as secure placement, hydrodynamic impacts, marine biotic colonisation
and technical limitations which can all impact quality of images. These limiting fac­
tors were considered when developing an analysis protocol.
It was decided for the purpose of this project, to use GoPro Hero 3 & 4 generation
cameras. 3 cameras required, one for each rig. These cameras are light, portable
and designed for underwater use, with a series of attachments which make them
perfect for use during this project. Another essential reason for using GoPro cam­
eras is the additional Blink firmware attachments for GoPro developed by CamDo.
These attachments allow the cameras to be programmed to take one image on a
pre­defined time­loop and the camera to be switched off in between to conserve
battery life.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.8: Equipment for taking images, including GoPro, casing and Blink
firmware.
The cameras, using the Blink firmware, were programmed to take one image ev­
ery 30 minutes in daylight hours 0800­1800 initially, resulting in 20 images a day
stored on a large 32GB SD card, per camera. The battery conservation means a
fully charged Go­Pro could be left submerged for over a week before running out
of power, meaning visits could be more sporadic and less time consuming atten­
tion required for retrieving the cameras, replacing batteries and uploading images.
The diving protocol and itinerary can be found in the Appendix A.1. Cameras and
attachments were loaned with the kind help from researchers at DTU Aqua for the
duration of the project, see Figure 4.8.
The cameras were attached using clamps which would be fixed to the bar of the rig
with the camera facing down­wards with the lens shot incorporating the 3x3 grid
of the rig with the concrete plates, surface texture side up. The fully submerged
rig with camera set­up can be seen in Figure 4.9a, whilst a sample of a GoPro
image of the concrete plates can be seen in Figure 4.9b.
(a) Functioning rig with attached camera
(b) Sample of GoPro image of plates in­situ
Figure 4.9: Rig setup and GoPro imagery
28
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:37==
As can be seen from Figure 4.9b the image doesn’t fully incorporate the surface
area of all the plates, which proved to be a setback for analysis purposes. This
can be attributed to hydrodynamics, or incorrect setup skewing the camera angle.
Fortunately the image analysis protocol could be re­constructed to account for the
missing surface area of parts of the plates, using a percentage coverage analysis
technique.
4.4.2
Image Processing
Images, as mentioned, were captured on a half­hourly basis, during daylight hours
from 0800­1800. This allowed for 20 images a day, from the the 6th October 2020
through to the 6th of December 2020 (45 days in total), resulting in 900 images per
rig. Obviously this is a huge amount of images to analyse image by image, there­
fore one image was chosen per day for each rig. From these hand­selected daily
images, an image was selected on a three/four­day basis for analysis purposes.
The reasoning for this was that from initial early image analysis, little change in
percentage coverage could be noticed on a daily basis and for the purposes of
this research a bi­weekly analysis would suffice.
Note, the rigs and plates were submerged on the 8th of October, however the
cameras were only fully functional from the 15th October due to installation prob­
lems with the camera firmware. Therefore the plates had been exposed for over
a week before analysis could start, and images could only be selected from the
15th October 2020.
Daily images chosen for analysis purposes were selected by following a screening
criteria. Images should not be partially covered by algae entangling the camera
lens or covering the plate surfaces. Images with refraction colouring should be
discarded, although it was desirable to select images with good light exposure
during the best daylight hours. As images would be analysed on colour change
on the plate surfaces, images with highest definition and clarity would be selected
to best determine colonisation.
Selected images were then analysed using computer software PhotoQuad, which
follows the methodology for image analysis by a number of similar studies for
analysing underwater reef imagery, specifically (Taormina et al. 2020). Photo­
Quad self­describes as a custom software for advanced image processing of 2D
photographic quadrat samples, dedicated to ecological applications (Taormina et
al. 2020).
PhotoQuad tools utilised for image analysis purposes included, image calibra­
tion, image enhancement, management of user­specific species libraries, grid cell
counts and estimation of relative­to­quadrat area and percentage coverage, all
functional in a layer­based environment within PhotoQuad. Figure 4.10 illustrates
the analysis procedure for selected images.
The Photoquad analysis procedure created a percentage coverage output in quan­
titative data format using the grid selection technique (Figure 4.10d) for each
quadrat. A quadrat (red line perimeter in Figure 4.10b) was hand­drawn along
the edges of each plate. This allowed for the image to be re­calibrated to cor­
respond to the current plate quadrat. This is important as lens distortion in the
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) Imported GoPro image
(b) Enhancement, quadrat & calibration
(c) Super­imposed grid within quadrat
(d) Grid coverage selection
Figure 4.10: Screenshots depicting the Photoquad image analysis procedure from
4.10a to 4.10d for obtaining percentage algal coverage of plate surfaces. Image
taken 22nd October 2020
image means number of pixels, on which the percentage coverage is obtained, is
different for each plate. By drawing a quadrat for each plate and re­calibrating the
image to the known distance (30 cm) across each plate, an accurate percentage
coverage of the pixels for each plate can be obtained. Grid selection depended
on user discretion. As a rule of thumb selected grids, figure 4.10d, should have
above 50% coverage to require selection.
This percentage coverage technique is essential for this analysis purpose, as it
can be seen in Figure 4.10a that the GoPro import misses the surface area of
some plates. By hand­drawing the quadrat and re­calibrating the image a per­
centage coverage can still be calculated for the existing surface area, which can
be determined as a sample of the plate, thus eliminating the need for each surface
area to be identical for statistical analysis purposes.
Using this procedure, percentage coverage data for each plate could be exported
for selected images, eventually providing a rate of percentage coverage over du­
ration of exposure time for each surface texture. This then allows for statistical
analysis of whether there is preferential biotic colonisation of any particular sur­
face texture.
30
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:39==
4.5
Rødbyhavn
As mentioned, the research objectives of this thesis are two­fold. The newly cast
plates exposed at the sampling site at Kastrup Havn look to analyse the incidence
of early marine biotic colonisation on surface topographies of concrete. The sec­
ondary objective looks to analyse the development of the marine community on
concrete samples over long­term exposures.
Luckily, 5­year and 10­year samples became available for analysis during the the­
sis, with the help of researchers from the Danish Technological Institute. A number
of concrete samples of varying concrete composition have been left submerged
in a location directly adjacent to the ferry terminal at Rødbyhavn in Lolland, South
Denmark. Concrete samples here are primarily being tested for long­term struc­
tural integrity in the marine environment as a pre­cursor for use in construction of
the Fehmarn Tunnel Fixed Link between Denmark and Germany.
On the 27th October, 3 concrete plates were due for removal so as cores could be
taken, 2 plates had been left exposed in the harbour for 5 years, whilst the other
plate had been left for 10 years. The plates were available to first be biologically
sampled before cores were taken, allowing for later analysis of samples in a labo­
ratory. A scraping protocol was developed to maximise efficient use of the limited
time for sampling during the removal.
Figure 4.11: Arrangement of concrete plates in the harbour at Rødbyhavn. Wall
is south facing. 3 plates were designated for removal. Edges were encased in
steel and therefore not included in the sampling protocol.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Crane removal of concrete plate
(b) DTU plate
(c) A­U plate, biological samples scraped
(d) A­U plate
Figure 4.12: Images showcasing the removal of concrete plates DTU, A­U and
F­U from Rødbyhavn sea­wall, and the marine colonisation of the plate surfaces
before biological sampling. In figure 4.12c biological scrapes can be observed.
32
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:41==
4.5.1
Concrete Compositions
Each of the 3 plates exhibit varying concrete compositions, which is important
to note as composition can have an effect on initial marine biotic colonisation of
concrete, depending on a number of variables such as pH, leaching & absorb­
ing properties, as previously discussed in Chapter 3. The plates earmarked for
removal were labelled A­U, F­U & DTU. The DTI plates, A­U & F­U had under­
gone exposure for 5 years since their last removal in November 2015, whilst the
DTU plate, labelled such as this plate is a sample originating from DTU­Byg, had
undergone exposure for 10 years without removal.
The DTU sample is cast with Aalborg Portland, low alkali cement. The two DTI
samples are cast with two different binders (A­U: Aalborg Portland low alkali ce­
ment ­ as the DTU sample, F­U: Aalborg Portland, low alkali cement – fly ash –
silica fume). The concrete compositions of the removed plates are provided by
the Danish Technological Institute and can be viewed in the Appendix A.2.
4.5.2
Sampling Protocol
To obtain biological samples from the surfaces of the 3 plates a scraping protocol
was developed to accurately and independently take enough samples that could
successfully allow for meaningful statistical analysis. It was decided that 9 inde­
pendent samples would be scraped per plate surface. The DTU plate allowed for
scrapes to be obtained from both sides of the plate, 9 per side, as it was due for
transport back to DTI, whilst for the DTI plates only one side could be scraped
as the plates were immediately put flat onto one side after being removed with a
crane. This meant a total of 36 independent scrapes were taken, 9 for A­U, 9 for
F­U and 18 for DTU.
A preliminary visit to Rødbyhavn in early October allowed for dimensions of the
plates to be taken as well as a visual scan of the biological colonisation of sur­
faces. This visit was essential in terms of constructing an efficient scraping proto­
col. Plates measured two metres in height, one metre width & 0.2 metres depth,
with 1.3 metres submerged vertically. It was therefore decided scrapes would be
taken in a 3x3 grid, to maximise distance between and thus independence of sam­
ples, see Figures 4.12c & 4.13 for an illustration of the sampling procedure with
dimensions. This sampling procedure creates a depth bias, which is taken into
account during statistical analysis.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
33
==PAGE:42==
1000mm
200mm
75mm
150mm
200mm
1300mm
2000mm
150mm
300mm
200mm
TIDE LINE
A
B
C
F
E
D
I
H
G
Figure 4.13: Sketch of sampling procedure, and dimensions of sampling areas
and concrete plates at Rødbyhavn.
Scrapes were taken systematically 1­36, working from the bottom right of the plate
(scrape ID: A) towards the top left (scrape ID: I), before moving onto the next plate.
Both sides of the DTU plate were sampled first before moving onto the east facing
sides of the A­U and F­U plates. Scrapes were performed by marking the 15cm
by 15cm scraping area relating to the dimensions in Figure 4.13, and using a paint
scraper to remove the sessile biota. All biota was captured as best as possible in
plastic zip­lock bags and preserved in 96% ethanol for transportation back to the
DTU­Byg laboratories. Ethanol killed any mobile fauna in the samples allowing
for their inclusion in laboratory sorting and identification.
34
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:43==
Image Analysis
Images of each sample area was taken before scraping using an iPhone cam­
era, which proved useful for analysis purposes. The same technique using the
Photoquad analysis software described in Section 4.4.2 was used for determining
percentage cover of sessile fauna such as macro­algae.
A quadrat was super­imposed onto the outline of the 15 x 15 cm sampling area,
so an accurate coverage of the area scraped could be obtained when processing
the image in Photoquad, see Figure 4.14. In the eventual data collection percent­
age cover was used only for macro­algae abundance, whilst abundances were
noted for all other sessile biota such as bivalves and Cirripedia (barnacles). Note
abundance counts for Cirripedia include ’live’ organisms, and not vacated shells.
(a) Sample ID: DTU.D4
(b) Sample ID: FU.B29
Figure 4.14: Images of sampling area pre­scrape showing colonising sessile or­
ganisms. Images would be processed for percentage coverage using Photoquad
Imaging Software.
4.5.3
Laboratory Analysis
Samples were transported for sorting and identification analysis at the DTU­Byg
laboratories. Sample bags containing preserved scraped biota were emptied into
a sorting tray. Samples were sorted into easily identifiable taxonomic groups, pri­
marily (Figure 4.15) :
• Macro­algaes
• Isopods
• Amphipods
• Large crustaceans (Crabs & Shrimp)
• Cirripedia (Barnacles)
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
35
==PAGE:44==
• Annelids & Polychaetes (Marine worms)
• Bi­valves (Mussels)
• Other (not easily identifiable)
• Remains
Figure 4.15: Sample ID: DTU.N14, separated into taxonomic groups for identifi­
cation purposes and abundance counts.
This initial sorting was undertaken throughout November 2020, and was essential
for providing abundance counts of mobile fauna found within the samples. From
the scrapes, sessile fauna such as barnacles and bi­valves could also be quanti­
fied by an abundance count. However it proved necessary to obtain a percentage
coverage for sessile algal coverage which would then be separately statistically
analysed, due to unit metrics. Other studies analysing the marine community
for sample scrapes use a technique which dries the algae and gives a weighted
biomass, although due to time constraints, image analysis for percentage cover­
age proved to be the best methodology in this case. Remains, such as broken
shells and unidentifiable algaes were kept for future use if needed.
Once sample sorting was completed, identification could begin. The goal was to
identify fauna to family level for all sorted taxonomic groups. In some cases where
identification proved easier, genus classification could be identified. However for
the majority of fauna, identification was at family level with species inferred. For ex­
ample, one such amphipod species identified with regular occurrence was termed
Aoridae sp.1, where Aoridae is the family taxon and sp.1 infers it is a species of this
family. Using this identification technique, mobile fauna from all samples could be
separated and identified accurately to determine the constituents and abundance
of the colonising marine community.
Progression to identification at the genus, species level would obviously be prefer­
36
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:45==
able to give a more precise insight to the biodiversity of the marine community.
However, three weeks in December 2020 were allocated for identification pur­
poses and due to time constraints it proved impractical to identify to these more
specific taxonomic levels.
The high abundances of sessile fauna and flora (macro­algaes) means that these
biota were classified by an overarching classification that did not partake in the
species identification process due to the time constraints mentioned. Barnacles
were classified as Cirripedia, macro­algaes were accumulated as a percentage
cover per sample, whilst bivalves were classified into three groups:
• Bivalves with epi­benthic growth, see Appendix A.4 and Figure A.4d, where
algae and other sessile organisms would attach to the bivalve shell.
• Bivalves without epi­benthic growth
• Juvenile bivalves, those less than 1cm
Potential genus/species classification are detailed in the Appendix, A.4. Samples
were identified using a taxonomic key, specifically The Handbook of The Marine
Fauna of North­West Europe, (Hayward and Ryland 1995), with help and guid­
ance from DTU Aqua.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
37
==PAGE:46==
4.6
Data Analysis
Data collection, primarily from percentage biotic coverage of newly exposed con­
crete at Kastrup Havn, was analysed for variance between surface types. Vari­
ance was determined by a one­way ANOVA test for dependent percentage cover­
age. Variance was then analysed at time steps corresponding to image analysis
dates across the time series, to determine any significance in coverage of any sur­
face type at a particular time during the two month exposure period. A post­hoc
Tukey analysis for pairwise comparisons within surface texture types was sub­
sequently performed, to identify significant preference to specific surface texture
types at the specified dates during the exposure period.
A time series of percentage biotic cover was also analysed via a beta regression
analysis using a beta­distribution conversion of data (beta.reg in R) to apply a
general linear model to determine coverage rate. As data is percentage, propor­
tionally based it is not appropriate for a linear regression model as this can exceed
lower and upper bounds, which is constricted to [0,1] for this data­set (Ferrari and
Cribari­Neto 2004).
From this initial beta regression, specified time periods throughout the exposure
period were selected to give a more accurate representation of coverage rate at
these specified time periods. Fluctuations in rate of percentage coverage could
then be compared to dynamics in environmental variables, with suggestions for
the influence of these variables on the increase or decrease in percentage biotic
coverage at the specific time periods.
Secondly, data collected from samples obtained from Rødbyhavn, constructed a
community matrix consisting of abundance counts for mobile and most sessile
species for each sample. Note that quantitative data obtained for macro­algae
is a percentage cover entry and not an abundance count and therefore should
be treated as such during analysis. This is due to impracticality in obtaining a
preferable abundance count for macro algae coverage.
The community matrix presents multivariate data in multiple dimensions. There­
fore transformation of the data into a 2­dimensional ordination space is essential
for presentation purposes. Ordination scores for species and samples data were
obtained using the Bray­Curtis Dissimilarity method (Bray and Curtis 1957):
BCij =
n=−1
∑
k=0
|yik −yjk|
(yik + yjk)
(4.1)
Equation 4.6, BCij represents the Bray­Curtis index score bound by [0,1], and is
the dissimilarity between objects i and j, k is the index of a variable and n is the
total number of variables y.
One of the assumptions of the Bray­Curtis measure is that the samples are taken
from the same physical size, which is correct for this analysis, and is unaffected by
additions or removals of species that are not present across samples. Bray­Curtis
dissimilarity scores on an index between [0,1], with 0 meaning highest similarity
38
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:47==
of species composition between samples and 1 proving highest dissimilarity be­
tween samples.
A matrix of Bray­Curtis distances can be correlated with non­metric dimensional
scaling (NMDS) scores after transformation of distances data into 2­dimensional
space. To calculate the 2­dimensional configuration fit with original Bray­Curtis
distances, then a plot of one against the other should be monotonically increasing.
The scatter of points around this increasing correlation line determines the degree
of stress. Iterations for transformation of distances data led to a stress value of
1.112, which is a desirable stress factor below 0.2, and can be visualised by a
Shepard plot, figure 4.16.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
Observed Bray−Curtis
Distances
Ordination
Space
Figure 4.16: Shepard plot illustrating the relationship between ordination dis­
tances in the NMDS space and Bray­Curtis Dissimilarity scores. Stress factor
= 0.112.
Community matrix data was then statistically analysed using a Permutational Mul­
tivariate Analysis of Variance test (PERMANOVA). Factors analysed included vari­
ables such as concrete composition type between plates and depth profile of sam­
ples. Posthoc pair­wise tests were also conducted to analyse significance within
factors. PERMANOVA tests use the Bray­Curtis dissimilarity method and Bonfer­
onni correction for p­values in posthoc tests.
4.6.1
Environmental Variables
For the duration of the exposure period at Kastrup Havn, environmental variables
in terms of salinity and temperature in the local area were highly interchangeable,
due to changing seasonality and mixing of water masses. To analyse whether en­
vironmental variables have any effect on marine biotic colonisation of the plates,
data can be obtained via in­situ measurements or utilising satellite observations.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
39
==PAGE:48==
Although in­situ measurements give a more accurate and localised reading of
variables, for the purpose of this project satellite data proved sufficient to give
a suitable overview of variables in the adjacent area. Satellite data cannot give
accurate data in immediate coastal areas, therefore data for time­series analy­
sis was obtained to the closest available location, longitude (12.6805°), latitude
(55.6415°) see Figure 4.17. For comparison the exposure site is located at, longi­
tude (12.6542°), latitude (55.6399°).
Figure 4.17: Visualisation of bathymetry off the east coast of Amager. Approxi­
mate location (red circle) of satellite data extraction for environmental variables.
The ’x’ marks the exposure site.
Data was extracted from the EU Marine Copernicus website, in net­cdf format.
The BALTICSEA­ANALYSISFORECAST­PHY­003­006 dataset, a pre­defined re­
gion encompassing the Øresund Strait for physical ocean variables, included vari­
ables for surface temperature, surface salinity and bottom salinity. Daily means
of these variables were extracted for analysis from the 6th October to the 6th De­
cember. This data gives an encompassing overview of the the changeable vari­
ables mentioned, in the closest available location to the exposure site over the full
duration of exposure. A visual comparison provided inference of a relationship
between changes in environmental variables and biotic colonisation or growth on
surfaces of plates at Kastrup Havn for specified time periods.
40
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:49==
5
Results
By following procedures and protocols outlined in the Methodology, separate data
sets were obtained from the two sampling sites at Kastrup Havn and Rødbyhavn.
A time series of percentage cover and hydrodynamic variables and a species
versus samples community matrix, respectively. The presentation of data and
subsequent statistical analysis described in section 4.6, look to provide a critical
examination of the research questions detailed in the Objectives. Mean Depth Pro­
file (MDP) measurement readings for quantifying surface roughness for all surface
types are also detailed, as described in section 4.2.
Figures and statistical analysis were produced using R statistical software, with
utilisation of packages ’ggplot’ and ’vegan’. The ’adonis’ function, located in ’ve­
gan’ was also utilised for performing PERMANOVA analysis (Martinez 2020). All
data collected is original apart from, as previously mentioned, data imported from
EU Marine Copernicus website for analysis of environmental variables in the Øre­
sund.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
41
==PAGE:50==
5.1
Surface MDP Measurements
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
A
B
C
DTI
avgMDP
Surface
A
B
C
DTI
Figure 5.1: Average MDP readings for all three artificially modified surface texture
types A, B & C. MDP measurements for long­term exposure plates from the Dan­
ish Technological Institute (DTI) including the DTU plate exposed at Rødbyhavn.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
A
B
C
DTI
avgMDP
Figure 5.2: Average MDP boxplot with mean error bars, and bootstrapping confi­
dence intervals for all surface types.
42
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:51==
The MDP measurements taken correspond to the newly exposed plates at Kastrup
Havn but also the DTI plates scheduled for removal at Rødbyhavn. These plates
from DTI are labelled as such: A­U, F­U & DTU. The surface textures of these
plates are considerably smoother and have a lower MDP than that of the artificially
modified plates cast in the DTU labs. This is due to these plates being cast in fully
encasing molds. As there only DTI plates scheduled for removal, the variance in
surface texture is minimal as can be seen in Figure 5.1.
From Figure 5.1 it can be seen that surface types B and C possess an MDP of
mostly above 1, whilst surface type A displays an MDP below 0.5. There is a
greater disparity in MDP values for surface type B, due to the nature of the brush­
stroke modification, compared to the other surfaces, but in general it can be seen
that this surface type has the highest MDP values. This is true apart from one
outlier for a plate of surface type C which has an MDP of above 2, which can be
attributable to some over vigorous jet­washing when exposing the aggregates.
As can be seen from Figures 5.2 & 5.3 surface types can be statistically defined
as significantly or non­significantly different to each other. Surface types C & B
exhibit no significant difference to each other, although both are significantly differ­
ent to surface type A and the DTI plates. Whilst surface type A has no significant
difference to the DTI plates. Significance levels were tested to 95% confidence
levels. This information is critical in defining the categorisation of each surface
texture type and influenced the decision to categorise surface type A & DTI plates
as having Low complexity. Surfaces B & C are categorised as Intermediate com­
plexity.
−1
0
1
B−A
C−A
C−B
DTI−A
DTI−B
DTI−C
p<0.01
Non−Sig
Figure 5.3: Pairwise confidence interval analysis for a Tukey Analysis of Variance
between all surface types. Red bars indicate significance to <0.01 confidence
interval. Green = no significance in average MDP between pairs.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
43
==PAGE:52==
5.2
Kastrup Havn
0
25
50
75
100
Oct 18
Oct 25
Nov 01
Nov 08
Nov 15
%
Surface
A
B
C
Figure 5.4: Times­series, illustrating percentage biotic coverage of plates per sur­
face texture type A, B & C. Error bars show deviation from the mean coverage for
each sample of the different surface textures at specific dates.
Figure 5.4, shows the percentage coverage of the surfaces of the concrete plates
exposed at the site in Kastrup Havn for the period of image analysis of exposure
from 15th October to 19th November. Plates were exposed for longer than this
but as plates were almost fully covered by late November, it proved needless to
continue image analysis after this date. Biotic coverage did become more dense
after this date, however the methodology detailed in section 4.4 was viable for
analysing initial colonisation on newly exposed concrete.
Error bars show a high variation in coverage across plates for all surface types
initially up until and including analysis on the 22nd October, before variation across
samples decreases after this date, as error bars become smaller and coverage
is more uniform across plates. Preference for colonisation can be observed for
surface type B throughout exposure, followed by surface type C, whilst surface
type A displayed least affinity for colonisation throughout exposure.
This preference for surface type B (brush­stroke grooves) can be statistically anal­
ysed. Table 5.1, calculates ANOVA posthoc Tukey­pairwise comparisons for all
combinations of surface types, A:B, B:C & A:C with p­values for every combina­
tion at each date analysed. Bold p­values in the table indicate significance level,
α= 0.05.
From this table it can be seen that surface B was significantly different in coverage
44
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:53==
for all but two dates when compared to surface A. Increasing variation in samples
during initial colonisation in the first few weeks until the 22nd Oct, is most likely the
reason for non­significance at this date.
As variance between samples decreases throughout exposure, as seen by error­
bars in Figure 5.4, surface type B shows significantly greater independence from
surface A, but also surface C from the 26th Oct to the 2nd Nov. Initially during
the first weeks of exposure no significant difference could be detected between
these two surface types, again probably due to high variance in coverage between
samples.
Throughout exposure there could be no significant difference detected between
surface types A (smooth ­ normal) and C (exposed aggregate), until one such
incidence of significance on the 7th November. By the 19th of November there
could be no significance detected between surface types, due to all surface types
becoming close to fully colonised in terms of percentage coverage by this date.
Tukey Pair­wise comparison: p­values
Date
A:B
B:C
A:C
15th Oct
p<0.01
0.282
0.143
18th Oct
0.041
0.178
0.673
22nd Oct
0.072
0.143
0.912
26th Oct
p<0.01
0.034
0.197
30th Oct
p<0.01
p<0.01
0.223
31st Oct
p<0.01
p<0.01
0.356
1st Nov
p<0.01
p<0.01
0.579
2nd Nov
p<0.01
p<0.01
0.681
3rd Nov
p<0.01
0.126
0.309
7th Nov
p<0.01
0.088
0.048
11th Nov
p<0.01
0.148
0.059
15th Nov
0.012
0.451
0.109
19th Nov
0.222
0.940
0.356
Table 5.1: Table showing pair­wise comparison p­values for the Tukey post­hoc
analysis for all combinations of surface texture types A, B & C. P­values in bold
font indicate significance to α = 0.05 significance level. A test was performed for
percentage algae coverage for each date indicated.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
45
==PAGE:54==
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oct 18
Oct 25
Nov 01
Nov 08
Nov 15
%
Surface
A
B
C
Figure 5.5: Plot of percentage biotic cover over time, illustrating a multiple beta
regression analysis of the data for surface texture types A, B & C. This gives
an indication of the rate of percentage biotic coverage over the the full analysed
exposure period.
Beta Regression Analysis
To get an idea of the rate of colonisation across the exposure period for each sur­
face texture type, a beta regression analysis was performed on the percentage
data. This is performed as data is thought to be beta distributed, with propor­
tional, percentage outputs. From Figure 5.5 a beta regression fit can be observed
for each surface type. Surface types display similar rate of growth in terms of
percentage coverage over the full duration of exposure.
This is probably not a good representation of growth on surface types as for Sur­
face B it can be seen that coverage was already quite high compared to A & C.
100% is the upper limit and therefore coverage plateaus towards this capacity
towards the end of analysis, meaning coverage rates are almost identical for all
surface types when analysing this figure over the full exposure period.
However, from Figure 5.4, it can be seen that coverage rates fluctuate throughout
the exposure period. For example, a decrease in average percentage coverage
can be observed in surface type A from 22nd Oct ­ 26th Oct. To analyse this further,
time periods were segmented corresponding to the distinct fluctuations, or ”growth
periods’ in coverage when observing Figure 5.4. These segmented time periods
are detailed in Table 5.2. Here β coefficients from a beta regression analysis
for each time period can be observed. Corresponding transformations of these
coefficients into percentages show much coverage has proportionally increased
or decreased in this time period.
46
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:55==
It can be seen from Table 5.2 that there was a depression in coverage rate and
for surfaces types A & C a decrease in percentage coverage for the time period
22nd Oct ­ 29th Oct could be observed. A subsequent large increase in coverage
after this, period 29th Oct ­ 3rd Nov, can then be observed, with surface coverage
for surface type A increasing 35 % in this short time period. However, rates of
percentage increase and decrease are similar between surface texture types for
each time period, suggesting surface complexity at this stage has little effect on
the fluctuations in coverage rate. Therefore it could be potentially inferred that en­
vironmental variables are affecting the change in percentage coverage rate during
these time periods.
Beta Regression Coefficients
Surface
15th Oct ­ 22nd Oct
22nd Oct ­ 29th Oct
29th Oct ­ 3rd Nov
3rd Nov ­ 19th Nov
β
%
β
%
β
%
β
%
A
0.2505
28.47
­0.0244
­2.42
0.3003
35.02
0.1207
12.83
B
0.2796
32.27
0.0127
1.27
0.2229
24.97
0.0869
9.09
C
0.2016
22.34
­0.0044
­0.45
0.2645
30.27
0.1312
14.02
Table 5.2: Beta regression coefficients for estimates of the biotic coverage rate
during selected time periods throughout the exposure. A corresponding percent­
age coverage increase/decrease for each time period can also be observed for
each surface texture type A, B & C.
Environmental Variables
10
20
30
40
5
10
15
20
Oct 15
Nov 01
Nov 15
Dec 01
Temp (°C)
Salinity (g/kg)
Figure 5.6: Time­series showing the environmental variables from satellite data
of closest available extraction location to the exposure site in Kastrup Havn see
Figure 4.17. Sea­surface temperature is shown on the left y­axis, whilst surface
salinity is on the right y­axis.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
47
==PAGE:56==
When analysing satellite data for environmental variables for the exposure period,
Figures 5.6 & 5.7, a large spike in salinity can be seen beginning 20thOct. Salinity
at the bottom of the water column rises from just above 10g/kg to above 30g/kg in
the aforementioned location offset of the exposure site in Kastrup Havn, whilst sur­
face salinity, although less haline, matches salinity increase at the bottom peaking
at 22g/kg by late October. This is suggestive of influx of North Sea water and can
be visualised in Figures 5.8 & 5.9, where high surface salinity, indicated by yel­
low in the spatial plots of the Øresund, can be observed during the time period
circa 26thOct ­ 2ndNov. Temperature can be seen steadily decreasing in Figure
5.6 which has the potential to slow growth and inhibit coverage throughout the
progression of the exposure period.
This increase in salinity at the exposure site suggests correlation with the ’growth
period’ in percentage biotic coverage seen on the plate surfaces 29thOct ­ 3rdNov.
Another large increase in surface salinity can be seen 23rd Nov, however plates
were almost 100% colonised by this period, and therefore no incidence of a po­
tential growth period could be identified due to image analysis being limited to
identifying initial colonisation.
10
15
20
25
30
Oct 15
Nov 01
Nov 15
Dec 01
g/kg
Salinity
Bottom
Surface
Figure 5.7: Time series of bottom and surface salinity extracted from local satellite
data measurements at closest available location to the exposure site in Kastrup
Havn, for the duration of the exposure period.
48
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.8: Surface salinity satellite data measurements of the Øresund Strait over
the exposure period from 15th October to 2nd November. Each subplot shows daily
mean surface salinity for the stated date. The colour­bars denote practical salinity
units (g/kg). The red circle marks the approximate exposure site off the coast of
Amager.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.9: Surface salinity satellite data measurements of the Øresund Strait over
the exposure period from 2nd November to 1st December. Each subplot shows
daily mean surface salinity for the stated date. The colour­bars denote practical
salinity units (g/kg). The red circle marks the approximate exposure site off the
coast of Amager.
50
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Rødbyhavn
Following the scraping protocol, sample sorting and species identification outlined
in section 4.5, a community matrix of species versus samples was constructed.
This can be visualised in Figure 5.10, which gives an overview of abundances of
species identified for each sample. The data was log transformed yi = log(zi) to
provide greater clarity, as some abundance counts were very high compared to
the majority of counts which were predominantly 0 or <5.
The samples on the y­axis were labelled by their ID and coloured corresponding to
the plate they originated from. Purple = AU, blue = FU, green = DTU east (DTU­
E), orange = DTU west (DTU­W). From this it is easier to see the abundances
by sample but also by plate type. As can be seen there are identifiable trends
for abundance counts by plate type. For example, there is a high abundance of
Cirripedia and greater algae coverage for plates AU & FU, whilst there is greater
diversity of species abundances for the DTU samples, with high counts for Aoridae
and Bivalves compared to FU & AU.
A1
B2
C3
D4
E5
F6
G7
H8
I9
J10
K11
L12
M13
N14
O15
P16
Q17
R18
A28
B29
C30
D31
E32
F33
G34
H35
I36
A37
B38
C39
D40
E41
F42
G43
H44
I45
Aoridae.sp.1
Gammaridae.sp.1
Paratanaidae.sp.1
Janiridae.sp.1
Palaemon.sp.1
Varunidae.sp.1
Nereidae.sp.1
Spionidae.sp.1
Polynoidae.sp.1
Bivalvia
Bivalvia.epibenthic
Bivalvia.juvenile
Cirripedia
Macroalgae
0
1
2
3
4
Log
Figure 5.10: Tile plot showing yi = log(zi) transformed abundance data for the
species versus samples abundance community matrix. Sample ID’s are coloured
by concrete composition classifications: DTU­E, DTU­W, AU & FU. It should be
noted that macro­algae is not an abundance but a percentage coverage log trans­
formation.
There were many low abundance counts (1­2), with the majority of these located in
the DTU plate samples for mobile fauna species. White tiles indicate zero abun­
dance count which occurred with high regularity for many of the mobile fauna
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
51
==PAGE:60==
species counts in plates AU & FU. There was also almost a complete absence of
sessile Bivalvia abundance in the AU, FU plates.
The abundances of species can also be visualised in Figure 5.11. Here abun­
dances are converted into proportional ratios for each sample. This is interesting
as it gives an alternative view as to the constituents of species for each sample for
the different plate types. The figure is split into four plots corresponding to each
concrete composition type. Algae coverage is excluded so as to get an accurate
overview of proportional abundance counts.
It should be noted here that the plate types also correspond to length of exposure
time in the water at Rødbyhavn. The DTU samples, scraped from the ’east’ and
’west’ sides of the same plate have been exposed for 10 years. The AU and FU
plates consequently, have undergone exposure for 5 years since their last removal
when all colonising biota was fully removed.
It can be seen that bio­diversity of species is much higher in the DTU plates with a
higher ratio of bivalves, and amphipods, specifically Aoridae species.1 compared
to the AU, FU plates. There is also an indication of a depth profile in the DTU sam­
ples. Samples G­I, and P­R are situated closest to the tide line, see figure 4.13,
and here it can be seen there is much higher proportion of barnacles (Cirripedia),
and less bivalves.
DTU−W
FU
DTU−E
AU
J10
K11
L12
M13
N14
O15
P16
Q17
R18
A28
B29
C30
D31
E32
F33
G34
H35
I36
A1
B2
C3
D4
E5
F6
G7
H8
I9
A37
B38
C39
D40
E41
F42
G43
H44
I45
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Biota
Aoridae.sp.1
Gammaridae.sp.1
Paratanaidae.sp.1
Janiridae.sp.1
Palaemon.sp.1
Varunidae.sp.1
Nereidae.sp.1
Spionidae.sp.1
Polynoidae.sp.1
Bivalvia
Bivalvia.epibenthic
Bivalvia.juvenile
Cirripedia
Figure 5.11: Stacked bar graph showing % ratio of species per sample for each
concrete composition type: DTU­E, DTU­W, AU & FU. Macro­algae is excluded
from this plot.
52
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:61==
The AU & FU plates have a much higher proportion of Cirripedia (barnacles), and
isolated communities of bivalves with increasing bio­diversity observed in the sam­
ples with these bivalve communities. In sample D40 for the AU plate we see high
proportion of amphipods compared to other samples in the AU plate which is in­
teresting although percentage of algae coverage is high for this sample, when
looking at Figure 5.10. There is less of a depth profile obvious in plates AU &
FU compared to DTU samples with random isolated communities of fauna more
common.
Similarity Analysis
Similarity, or dissimilarity based on the Bray­Curtis method, can be visualised by
dendrograms and ordination plots and analysed using PERMANOVA tests. In
figure 5.12 a dendrogram showing similarity across samples can be seen. Dis­
similarity on the x­axis between [0,1] and sample ID’s are coloured by concrete
plate type.
From this figure it can be seen that the first divergence gives a cluster of samples
from DTU­E & DTU­W, with the majority of these samples originating from scrapes
of lower depths, figure 4.13. The lower cluster consists of AU & FU samples
with a scattering of DTU plate samples originating from the higher depth profile
near the tide line. This is to be expected as from Figure 5.11 it can be seen that
species communities are relatively similar with high proportions of Cirripedia in
these samples.
As the samples decrease in dissimilarity towards 0 (become more similar) sub­
clusters of samples, particularly in the lower cluster, combine by type, especially
for the AU & FU plates, suggesting a similarity of samples by type. The samples
from near the tide­line from the DTU plate are closely clustered to each other
although they are split between the side on which they were sampled, DTU­W &
DTU­E, with a dissimilarity divergence score of above 0.5.
In figure 5.13, another dendrogram depicts similarity between species orientation,
based upon which samples they were found in. From this figure it can be seen
that similarity between all Bivalvia classifications suggests they are found together
in many samples. It can also be seen that mobile fauna that are found in the
company of Bivalvia are the isopod, Janiridae sp.1 and amphipod Aoridae sp.1,
with Aoridae sp.1 scoring a particularly low dissimilarity in comparison with epi­
benthic bivalves. Other biota in this top cluster displaying similarity are sessile
organisms such as macro­algae and Cirripedia with a low dissimilarity score of
<0.25 between these groups.
Marine worms, or polychaetes polynidae sp.1 & spionidae sp.1, display a fairly
close similarity to each other, suggesting they are generally located together in
samples. Another polychaete, nereidae sp.1 is likely to found with other fauna
such as crabs, shrimps and other mobile crustaceans which have relatively low
abundances. These biota, residing in the lower cluster, display high dissimilarity to
being found with sessile organisms such as Bivalvia, macro­algae and Cirripedia.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
53
==PAGE:62==
R18
F42
P16
Q17
D40
E32
G34
B38
D31
A28
H35
G7
H44
I9
C30
B29
H8
I36
F33
C39
E41
G43
A37
I45
E5
O15
A1
D4
N14
B2
M13
K11
C3
J10
F6
L12
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
Dissimilarity
TYPE
AU
DTU−E
DTU−W
FU
Figure 5.12: Dendrogram illustrating dissimilarity between samples, using the
Bray­Curtis method. Samples are coloured by concrete composition type.
Paratanaidae.sp.1
Palaemon.sp.1
Varunidae.sp.1
Gammaridae.sp.1
Nereidae.sp.1
Spionidae.sp.1
Polynoidae.sp.1
Cirripedia
Macroalgae
Aoridae.sp.1
Bivalvia.epibenthic
Janiridae.sp.1
Bivalvia
Bivalvia.juvenile
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Dissimilarity
Amphipod
Barnacles
Bivalve
Crab
Isopod
Macroalgae
Polychaete
Shrimp
Figure 5.13: Dendrogram illustrating the dissimilarity for species occurrence in
the community analysis using the Bray­Curtis method.
54
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:63==
Ordination plots display similarity scores for both species and samples in 2­dimensional
space, as seen in figure 5.14. A non­metric multidimensional scaling method
builds a rank of dissimilarity for samples and for species of ecological nature and
is represented by ordination of the greatest variance in 2­dimensions by the axes
NMDS1 and NMDS2 (Kenkel and Orlóci 1986). A ’goodness’ of fit for using this
NMDS method in two­dimensional space can be seen in Figure 4.16 in section
4.6 where stress is <0.2 and therefore classified as exhibiting a good fit for this
community data.
As can be seen in Figure 5.14, sample scores are labelled by their ID’s and
coloured by plate type, whilst species scores are labelled by their species identifi­
cation. This ordination plot is busy, but gives a good overview of similarity between
samples and the relationship of species within this space.
A dense clustering of samples from the AU and FU plates can be seen closely
ranked to macro­algae and Cirripedia towards the right of the plot. Towards the
left of the plot a more sparse clustering of DTU samples can be observed, closely
ranked with a greater diversity of species many of which are mobile fauna but also
include the three classifications of sessile Bivalvia which are all closely ranked.
This corresponds to previous figures where high biodiversity in the DTU samples
can be linked to abundance of Bivalvia.
Aoridae.sp.1
Gammaridae.sp.1
Paratanaidae.sp.1
Janiridae.sp.1
Palaemon.sp.1
Varunidae.sp.1
Nereidae.sp.1
Spionidae.sp.1
Polynoidae.sp.1
Bivalvia
Bivalvia.epibenthic
Bivalvia.juvenile
Cirripedia
Macroalgae
A1
B2
C3
D4
E5
F6
G7
H8
I9
J10
K11
L12
M13
N14
O15
P16
Q17
R18
A28
B29
C30
D31
E32
F33
G34
H35
I36
A37
B38
C39
D40
E41
F42
G43
H44
I45
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
−1
0
1
NMDS1
NMDS2
AU
DTU−E
DTU−W
FU
Figure 5.14: Ordination plot illustrating similarities for both species and samples
in 2­D ordination space. The sample ID’s are coloured by concrete composition
type.
Due to busyness within this ordination plot it was decided to subset species and
samples scores into separate ordination plots and to statistically analyse the effect
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
55
==PAGE:64==
of influencing factors, such as concrete plate type and depth profile on species
composition and samples similarities.
In figure 5.15 a similar ordination plot as in Figure 5.14 is seen with only species
scores visible. These scores clustered by species higher order classifications,
defined by the legend key. The use of spider diagrams and centroids provide an
average score for each classification helping to visualise classification clustering.
It can be seen that sessile Bivalvia are closely ranked together, suggesting a close
community of these sessile organisms, whilst polychaetes on the other hand are
much more independent with a high dissimilarity between species visualised by a
wider scattering across the ordination space.
Aoridae.sp.1Gammaridae.sp.1
Paratanaidae.sp.1
Janiridae.sp.1
Palaemon.sp.1
Varunidae.sp.1
Nereidae.sp.1
Spionidae.sp.1
Polynoidae.sp.1
Bivalvia
Bivalvia.epibenthic
Bivalvia.juvenile
Cirripedia
Macroalgae
−0.5
0.0
0.5
−1
0
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
Amphipod
Barnacles
Bivalve
Crab
Isopod
Macroalgae
Polychaete
Shrimp
Figure 5.15: Ordination plot locating species within the ordination space. Spi­
der diagrams connect and colour code the nominal descriptive species types, de­
scribed in the legend.
In figure 5.16 an ordination plot of sample dissimilarities exhibits clustering by
spider diagrams and centroids for plate type, and is colour coded as such. It
can be seen from this plot that there are distinct distances in species composition
between the 5­year plates FU & AU and the 10­year DTU plate. The centroids for
the two sets of DTU samples are closely positioned, although samples are spread
further in ordination space, with some samples displaying a closer similarity to
samples from the AU, FU plates, for example G7, I9 & P16.
In contrast samples from AU, FU generally exhibit less dispersion in ordination
space, suggesting closer similarity between samples. However the centroids for
the two plate types are further removed from each other suggesting there may
56
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:65==
be an overall difference between the plate types in species composition for AU &
FU. A lot of samples are densely congregated to the right of the plot suggesting
high similarity between these samples which is to be expected from analysing
previous figures where high Cirripedia abundance and macro­algae coverage in
these samples mean close similarity.
A1
B2
C3
D4
E5
F6
G7
H8
I9
J10
K11
L12
M13
N14
O15
P16
Q17
R18
A28
B29
C30
D31
E32
F33
G34
H35
I36
A37
B38
C39
D40
E41
F42
G43
H44
I45
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
a
a
a
a
AU
DTU−E
DTU−W
FU
Figure 5.16: Ordination plot illustrating similarities for samples. Sample ID’s are
connected by spider diagrams based on concrete composition type.
A final ordination plot, Figure 5.17, shows similarity of samples clustered and
coloured by depth profile. As seen in Figure 4.13 in section 4.5, samples were
arranged into a 3x3 grid and therefore a vertical depth profile could influence the
species composition within the samples. In this figure samples scraped from the
topmost of the grid near the tide­line are classified as ’Top’, the next level of the
grid is ’Middle’ and the samples scraped at the bottom most level are classified
’Bottom’.
Here it can be seen via spider diagram and centroid clustering that there is a
noticeable distance between the centroids of the Top classified samples compared
to that of the Middle and Bottom samples. The dispersion of samples are greatest
for Middle and Bottom samples with a substantial amount of samples displaying
high similarity to each other as well as a number of Top samples. This is illustrated
by the dense clustering which can, as before, be attributed to high abundances
of macro­algae coverage, Cirripedia abundance and little existence of species
biodiversity proving the similarity in these samples.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
57
==PAGE:66==
A1
B2
C3
D4
E5
F6
G7
H8
I9
J10
K11
L12
M13
N14
O15
P16
Q17
R18
A28
B29
C30
D31
E32
F33
G34
H35
I36
A37
B38
C39
D40
E41
F42
G43
H44
I45
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
a
a
a
Bottom
Middle
Top
Figure 5.17: Ordination plot illustrating similarities for samples by depth profile.
Spider diagrams connect sample ID’s by depth, concerning whether the sample
was scraped from the Top, Middle or Bottom of the plate. See diagram in Figure
4.13 in section 4.5.2.
PERMANOVA
Factors
R2
F­stat
p­value
Depth
0.180
10.844
<0.01
Type
0.420
16.831
<0.01
Depth:Type
0.198
3.965
<0.01
Table 5.3: PERMANOVA test: Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance for
environmental factors Depth, Type and Depth & Type when analysing significance
in the community matrix. Bold p­values indicate significance, α = 0.05.
To statistically analyse the effect of these factors, plate type and depth profile, on
species composition a PERMANOVA test was performed, Table 5.3. From these
results it can be seen that for all factors and combination of factors there is a highly
significant effect of the factors on species composition, with p­values <0.01. This
suggests that there is a significant depth profile to the community composition
on the concrete plates between Top, Middle and Bottom samples which can be
visualised by the ordination plot, Figure 5.17.
It also suggests that concrete plate type has an effect on species composition,
58
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:67==
which is to be expected as the DTU scrapes are 10­year exposure samples, whilst
the AU, FU samples are 5­year exposures. However to further analyse the effect
of type, pairwise comparisons must be conducted post­hoc to completely anal­
yse as to whether the different concrete composition of the plate types between
the five year samples AU & FU, has a significant effect on species composition.
As the concrete composition of the DTU plate is the same for all DTU samples
(scrapes from both sides of the same plate), analysis for significance of concrete
composition can only be performed for the 5­year plates.
This pairwise analysis can be observed in Table 5.4, where significant p­values
were calculated for effect of species composition for Bottom and Top samples, as
well as Middle and Top samples, but not for Bottom and Middle samples, sug­
gesting the depth profile significance effect on species composition is from the
Top level of samples, originating from near the tide line. Significant p­values were
calculated for pairwise combinations of 5 year and 10 year types, as expected.
No significance was detected between the two sets of 10 year samples from the
DTU plate. Most interestingly there was also no significance detected between
the species composition for samples of AU & FU suggesting there is no signifi­
cant effect of the different concrete recipes of these concrete plates on species
composition over 5 years of exposure.
PERMANOVA Posthoc pair­wise comparisons
Factor
Pairs
R2
F­stat
p­value
p­corrected
Depth
Bottom : Middle
0.020
0.463
0.620
1.000
Bottom : Top
0.234
6.736
0.016
0.048
Middle : Top
0.199
5.488
0.004
0.012
Type
DTU­E : DTU­W
0.056
0.959
0.385
1.000
DTU­E : FU
0.417
11.468
<0.01
0.024
DTU­E : AU
0.415
11.369
<0.01
0.018
DTU­W : FU
0.415
11.364
<0.01
0.012
DTU­W : AU
0.376
9.672
<0.01
0.042
FU : AU
0.215
4.384
0.011
0.066
Table 5.4: PERMANOVA posthoc pairwise comparison tests for factors Depth &
Type. Bold font indicates significance, α = 0.05. P­value correction using Bonfer­
roni method.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
59
==PAGE:68==
60
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:69==
6
Discussion
The overarching aim of this thesis project is to assess the ecological value of
selected properties of concrete in the marine environment. The ease as to which
concrete can be constructed and modified to simulate natural hard substrate and
reef habitats is one of the driving factors behind this aim, with modification of
surface topographies and the consequent effect on initial biotic colonisation an
area of particular focus.
The relatively vacant area of research on long­term exposure of concrete on biotic
succession and development of the marine community is also an area of focus,
with rare access to concrete plates of varying composition left undisturbed for 5­
10 years in a marine infrastructure setting at Rødbyhavn. Analysing succession
over long­term temporal scales gives an unfettered insight into the construct of
the colonising community and an indication as to whether concrete can provide
long­term ecological value in marine environments.
The overall aim is to add to eco­engineering efforts that look to advocate the use of
modified concrete in construction of marine infrastructure, promoting conservation
and sustainable co­existence of ecological and socio­economic services in coastal
areas. The objectives derived from these aims led to the development of research
questions:
Can a quantifiable difference be observed in early marine biological colonisation
for varying surface topographies of concrete?
What is the construct of succession in the epi­benthic marine community on con­
crete substrate in species abundance and diversity over long­term exposures?
Surface Roughness
The MDP measurements of surface texture roughness in section 5.1 define the
complexity classifications of the each surface texture type. From the results it can
be seen that samples from surface type A and DTI plates can be classified as
having a low, normal complexity (<0.5 average MDP), indicative of non­modified
concrete used in the majority of marine infrastructure. Surfaces B & C, exhibit
similar average MDP readings and are thus classified as intermediate complexity
(>1 average MDP). There were no surface type D samples of high complexity clas­
sification analysed due to insufficient replicates of these surface types to provide
critical analysis.
A greater MDP variation in surface type B samples could have an effect on initial
colonisation coverage readings compared to surface type C, however as average
MDP readings display no significant difference between these surface types it
is more likely that the nature of surface modifications effects initial colonisation.
Surface type B is a brush stroke surface modification, creating rows of ridges and
grooves, whilst surface type C is an exposed aggregate modification, removing
the top layer of cement to expose stone­based aggregates of various sizes. This
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
61
==PAGE:70==
surface type could be more indicative of concrete which has undergone long­term
exposure or weathering.
Due to time constraints during the thesis, availability of rig space for holding plates
securely in the marine environment and the need for replicates to enhance statisti­
cal critique, only 3 surface texture types were selected for analysis. No high com­
plexity surface modified plates were analysed for initial biotic percentage coverage
due to the aforementioned impracticalities, however for future research adding
extra surface complexity factors to the research would be interesting to get an
indication of the effect of surface topographies on initial colonisation.
It should be noted here that 24 plates, 8 each for surfaces texture types A, B & C
were selected for exposure, however as one of the camera technologies proved
faulty only 18 plates could be analysed fully during the exposure period. Fortu­
nately 5 plates of each surface type could be analysed, giving balance to repli­
cates, allowing for statistical analysis, although the full quota of replicates would
have been preferable.
Initial colonisation for surface texture complexities
From the results section 5.2, we see a percentage coverage of the artificially modi­
fied surfaces of newly exposed plates at the exposure site in Kastrup Havn. Cover­
age is identified by colour change as surface bio­film develops by initial settlement
of primary colonising micro­organisms (Salta et al. 2013). Succession by further
recruitment of primary and secondary colonisers, led to an increase in density of
biota which can be observed as the plate surfaces become fully covered over the
duration of the exposure period.
Image analysis techniques allow for any preferences for initial attachment, adhe­
sion or settlement on particular surface texture types, to be identified. From the
results and ANOVA analyses it can be seen there is a significant preference for
surface type B for almost all image analysis time steps throughout the exposure.
This suggests a preference for initial colonisation and development of a bio­film on
this surface, allowing for earlier recruitment of secondary and tertiary colonisers
that succeed initial colonisation to create denser biotic communities.
Preference for surface type B over surface type C is also interesting as average
MDP reading between these surface types were insignificant, suggesting the na­
ture of modification by creating a pattern of ridges and grooves could be beneficial
for early colonisation. This is supported from research by (Coombes et al. 2015),
indicating a preference for the settlement of eco­engineering cyprid (barnacles)
larvae on grooved surface texture, in comparison to exposed aggregate counter­
parts. Artificial modification and the creation of grooves and troughs allows for
shelter from hydrodynamic stresses on the substrate surface, which could be a
reason for increased settlement on this surface type.
In comparison, the slowest colonising surface type was the low complexity sur­
face type A, which demonstrated significantly slower percentage coverage over
exposure to its higher complexity counterparts, particularly surface type B. This
is supported by literature, and is indicative of the ecological issues surrounding
the use of this non­modified surface texture type in the majority of marine infras­
tructure. However, percentage coverage did reach almost full capacity during the
62
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:71==
exposure period, albeit at a slower rate.
Unfortunately exposure time was not sufficient enough to analyse succession over
a longer period, which could have been a more encompassing indicator of surface
type preference for the colonisation of ecological engineering sessile organisms.
The succession stage reached after these few weeks was on a mainly micro­biotic
scale. As a perspective for future study, longer­term exposures would be required
to fully analyse the effect of surface texture type.
Looking at the construct of species composition of initial settlement on a micro­
biotic scale is also an area of interest for further research. The incidence of pri­
mary producers in the biofilm which can contribute to the recruitment of secondary
and tertiary heterotrophic colonisers could be essential for the succession and de­
velopment of the subsequent community (Martín­Rodríguez et al. 2015; Caruso
2020). Using bio­fluorescence to identify micro­organisms and algae types, such
as diatoms, blue­green algae and dino­flagellate abundance in the bio­film of ini­
tial colonisation is a technique that could be utilised in this respect and should be
considered for future applications (Kahlert and McKie 2014).
This could be useful as a modification to the protocol in this project as there are
limitations to using image based analysis. For example percentage coverage was
based on a user­specific decision of colour change on the substrate and does not
give an indication as to the species composition of initial colonisation, which the
bio­fluorescence technique could potentially be used for, analysing the succession
in micro­biotic colonisation at specific time intervals during exposure.
As previously mentioned there are many biotic and abiotic factors affecting coloni­
sation. What can be observed in section 5.2 is the indication of a ’growth period’,
or colour change by increased density of percentage coverage on the plate sur­
faces for all variations of surface texture types, Figure A.2 in the Appendix shows
images illustrating this change and it can be viewed graphically in Figure 5.4. This
growth period could potentially be attributed to a change in hydrodynamics and
possible nutrient availability stimulating growth in the local area at Kastrup Havn.
The variations in hydrodynamics in the Øresund, as previously described, can
be highly interchangeable. The location of the exposure site in a mixing area
between two large water masses, the haline North Sea and brackish Baltic creates
large fluctuations in salinity (Rasmussen 1995) throughout the year, dependent
on weather conditions. This is most prevalent in the winter months when storm
surges and strong winds are commonplace. Seasonality also has a large influence
on primary production. In the fall decreasing temperatures and light attenuation
limit growth, however nutrient depletion especially in nitrogen can also limit growth
(Kuss et al. 2020). Therefore little growth is expected from the fall through the
winter months.
Analysis of average temperature and salinity readings at the exposure site in Fig­
ures 5.7 & 5.6 and surface salinity in the Øresund in Figures 5.8 & 5.9 show a
peak of salinity in late October/ early November, as temperatures gradually de­
cline. Bottom salinity in Figure 5.7 are higher than surface salinity, although peaks
and troughs correlate, suggesting influx of dense saline bottom water from the Kat­
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
63
==PAGE:72==
tegat, into the Øresund. The salinity readings at the surface show and increase
from 10g/kg to 23 g/kg at the peak during this high salinity period further suggest­
ing influx from the North Sea.
The potential for this influx of North Sea water could have implications for biotic
colonisation of plate surfaces at Kastrup Havn, as limiting nutrients have the po­
tential to be brought in to stimulate growth. Research suggests that nitrogen can
be the limiting factor in algal growth in the winter months, even more so than tem­
perature and light (Kuss et al. 2020).
This could be the case for the observed ’growth period’ at Kastrup Havn, where
growth is correlated with higher salinity readings in the area. However this can only
be suggestive as increased salinity readings, although attributable to influx from
the North Sea, are not always indicative of increased nutrient levels which were not
measured in this analysis. Also, as mentioned throughout this project, there are
a mitigation of biotic and abiotic factors which influence growth and colonisation
on hard substrate, with nutrient availability being one, albeit important, factor.
Long­term succession of biotic community
From the results section 4.5 an analysis of the sessile marine community on 3
concrete plates of varying concrete composition under long­term exposure in Rød­
byhavn can be visualised. Methodology for biological scrape samples from the
surfaces of the plates are detailed in section 4.5.2. Plates were arranged verti­
cally, simulating construction indicative of concrete substrate used in marine in­
frastructure such as harbour walls and coastal protections. The location within
a harbour and ferry port offers some hydrodynamic protections compared to off­
shore/ coastal locations, however it could potentially effect species compositions
due to land run­off, and decrease in mixing through the water column. Increased
marine traffic in this area has the potential for carrying non­native species into the
local marine ecosystem.
A distinct vertical profile of species composition on concrete substrates can be
observed from the inter­tidal line, down to 1.5 metres sub­tidal depth, and can be
visualised in the NMDS plots and Permanova analysis for depth profile between
samples. This shows a significant distinction between the samples near the tide­
line and the sub­tidal samples situated lower down in the water column on the
plate surfaces. This is to be expected, with the sessile community at the tide line
consisting of a greater abundance in Cirripedia and macro­algaes, whilst sub­tidal
communities of bivalves, particularly mussels, are expected in the lower samples
(Martín­Rodríguez et al. 2015; Hiscock et al. 2002).
From the 3 plates that were removed, 2 of the plates sampled (AU & FU) had
undergone exposure for 5 years since their last removal, whilst one plate (DTU)
had undergone exposure without removal for 10 years. 18 biological samples, 9
per west and east facing side were scraped for the DTU plate. For the 5­year
plates 9 samples were taken per plate from the east facing side. It is important to
note the direction the plates were facing as this could suggest a difference in light
attenuation, although this could not be statistically analysed.
From the tile and proportional ratio plots, Figure’s 5.10, 5.11 it can be seen that
there is a greater biodiversity in the 10 year samples, with mobile fauna such
64
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:73==
as crustaceans proving particularly diverse. The 5 year plates were generally
more abundant in sessile Cirripedia and macro­algae cover, with little incidence
of mobile fauna in these samples. 10 year plates were also abundant in sessile
Cirripedia and macro­algae. These were found particularly at the tide­line and as
epi­benthic growth on bivalves. The increased incidence of bivalve communities
on the 10 year plates was the distinctive difference between the 5 and 10 year
samples.
This significant difference in species composition between the 5 and 10 year sam­
ples, after Permanova analysis between plate types, can be visualised in the
NMDS ordination plots. The incidence of biotic succession can clearly be seen be­
tween 5 and 10 year samples. The increase in biodiversity in species composition
could potentially be attributed to the bivalve abundance in the 10 year samples,
which as previously mentioned, can act as eco­engineers for recruitment in the
marine community (Gutiérrez et al. 2003). This can be further evidenced by the
abundance of bivalves with epi­benthic growth found in these samples. The inci­
dence of bivalve abundance usually occurs later in succession compared to Cir­
ripedia abundance. This is expected due to the early settlement of Cyprid larvae
in the succession timeline (Martín­Rodríguez et al. 2015) and can be observed in
the species composition of 5 and 10 year samples.
An in depth look at the construct of the sessile communities can be seen via the
dendrogram for species similarity in Figure 5.13. This shows the likelihood that
species are found together, providing an insight as to which species effect recruit­
ment and succession of the marine community. From this plot we see that bivalves
are closely related to Aoridae sp.1 and Janiridae sp.1. These mobile fauna are
found in high abundance in the majority of sub­tidal 10 year samples and adds
to the suggestion that bivalves can act as eco­engineers for recruitment in the
community by potentially providing habitat cover and food sources for these small
crustaceans.
This is backed up when looking at the classification and description of the biota in
the Appendix A.4 in Table A.2. Aoridae sp.1 are found to generally reside in epi­
benthos, whilst Janiridae sp.1 are also found to reside among sessile organisms
such as barnacles and macro­algaes. The descriptions of species found in Table
A.2 seem to correlate with the construct of native sessile communities found on
artificial hard substrate in littoral waters, Figure 3.3.
However one such species, Varunidae sp.1, which after identification could be
classified as Brachynotus sexdantatus, is a crab originating from the Mediter­
ranean. The description suggests this specie is invasive in European waters. As
a mobile species of late succession and recruitment, this is most probably not
attributable to the concrete substrate, but more likely attributable to the harbour
location where these crabs have presumably been introduced by shipping.
An important test when analysing species composition similarities is the the pair­
wise Permanova comparisons. Significant difference could be observed between
plate types, which is expected due to the vast difference in exposure times, allow­
ing for long term succession in the marine communities between plates. However,
the pairwise comparison between the two 5 year samples can give an indication
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
65
==PAGE:74==
of the effect of concrete composition on species composition. From this analysis
no significant difference could be analysed between plates FU & AU, suggesting
the effect of concrete composition has little to no effect on species composition
over this exposure time at this location.
The composition ratios of cement and concrete for plates AU and FU be seen in
the Appendix A.2. The concrete composition of the DTU plate correlates to the
AU plate. These concrete plates use mainly Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC),
which as described in chapter 3, can exhibit high alkalinity after long term expo­
sure in marine environments which can have varying impacts for marine biotic
colonisation (Natanzi et al. 2020).
The concrete composition of the FU plate is mainly OPC based, with a small con­
stituent of fly ash in the cement and in the concrete composition. However as seen
from the Permanova analysis this difference in composition has no significant ef­
fect on species composition. This however is an interesting area of discussion,
and it would have been preferable to sample more plates of varying concrete
composition to analyse species composition for different concrete types. Only 3
plates were scheduled for removal during the time frame of the thesis, however
this could be an interesting perspective for continuing research if more plates are
scheduled for removal in the future.
It should also be mentioned in this discussion that the analysis of the marine
sessile communities on the plates at Rødbyhavn, is for settlement on concrete
substrate of smooth non­modified surface topographies. All plates at Rødbyhavn
were cast in fully encasing molds meaning surface complexity was low with almost
no variation between samples in surface roughness.
Average MDP measurements for these samples were <0.5, Figure 5.1. This is
highly indicative of the majority of marine infrastructure (MacArthur et al. 2019;
Coombes et al. 2015), with an absence of artificial eco­engineering efforts to pro­
mote marine colonisation, and therefore the analysis of the species composition
of these samples should be attributed as such. As perspective for future research,
it would be very interesting to see a variation in surface texture complexities for
these long­term exposures and the effect these eco­engineering efforts may have
on the biodiversity of species composition and abundance of the marine commu­
nity over long­term succession.
66
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:75==
7
Conclusion
The ultimate goal of this thesis is to contribute to insights and eco­engineering
efforts on the ecological value of concrete in the marine environment. Marine
colonisation will occur on any artificial inserted structure exposed in a marine en­
vironment. The nature, rate and diversity of colonisation of substrata is effected
by a number of biotic, abiotic and environmental factors, with varying degrees of
influence.
From the collection of results obtained and discussive insights it can be concluded
that factors such as surface topography of concrete substrate and potentially the
fluxes in environmental variables are influential on initial colonisation in a singular
sub­tidal environment of a hydro­dynamic area such as the Øresund. Particularly,
initial colonisation was preferred for modified surface textures of an intermediate
complexity which displays grooves and ridges of surface texture.
Further analysis of 5 and 10 year concrete substrate exposures give an insight
into the successive community colonising concrete, indicative of the surface to­
pographies of the majority of marine infrastructure. Significantly distinct commu­
nities were observed for succession at 5 and 10 years. The incidence of ecolog­
ical engineering sessile organisms such as bivalves demonstrate the potential of
these organisms to increase recruitment and succession in the marine community,
boosting biodiversity.
However, an increase in sample replicates and surface texture complexity factors
would give extra depth to these analyses for both initial colonisation and long­term
succession, with the effect of concrete composition an interesting side­note. Limi­
tations to image analysis is an area for development. The use of bio­fluorescence
identification of micro­biota during initial colonisation could give a potential insight
into early species composition proving an indicator to later succession for various
surface texture complexities.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
67
==PAGE:76==
68
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
Lee, Ronald (2011). “The Outlook for Population Growth”. In: 333.6042, pp. 569–
573.
Merkens, Jan Ludolf et al. (2016). “Gridded population projections for the coastal
zone under the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways”. In: Global and Planetary
Change 145, pp. 57–66.
Sala, Osvaldo E. et al. (2000). Global biodiversity scenarios for the year 2100.
Firth, Louise et al. (Sept. 2016). “Ocean sprawl: challenges and opportunities for
biodiversity management in a changing world”. In: Oceanography and marine
biology 54, pp. 189–262.
Kallis, Giorgos and David Butler (2001). The EU water framework directive: mea­
sures and implications. Tech. rep., pp. 125–142.
Bugnot, A. B. et al. (2018). “Learning from nature to enhance Blue engineering of
marine infrastructure”. In: 120, pp. 611–621.
Petersen, Jens Kjerulf and Torleif Malm (2006). Offshore windmill farms: Threats
to or possibilities for the marine environment.
Glarou, Maria, Martina Zrust, and Jon C Svendsen (2020). “Using Artificial­Reef
Knowledge to Enhance the Ecological Function of Offshore Wind Turbine Foun­
dations: Implications for Fish Abundance and Diversity”. In: Journal of Marine
Science and Engineering 8.5.
Taormina, Bastien et al. (Aug. 2020). “Succession in epibenthic communities on
artificial reefs associated with marine renewable energy facilities within a tide­
swept environment”. In: ICES Journal of Marine Science 77.
Seaman, W and W J Lindberg (2009). “Artificial Reefs”. In: Encyclopedia of Ocean
Sciences (Second Edition). Ed. by John H Steele. Second Edition. Oxford: Aca­
demic Press, pp. 226–233.
Elkadi, Mirella et al. (2010). “Depth Profiling (ICP­MS) Study of Toxic Metal Buildup
in Concrete Matrices: Potential Environmental Impact”. In: 2.10, pp. 3258–3269.
Herbert, Roger J. H. et al. (2017). “Epibenthic and mobile species colonisation of a
geotextile artificial surf reef on the south coast of England”. In: 12.9, e0184100.
Natanzi, Atteyeh S. et al. (2020). “Influence of concrete properties on the initial
biological colonisation of marine artificial structures”. In: 159, p. 106104.
MacArthur, Mairi et al. (2019). “Maximising the ecological value of hard coastal
structures using textured formliners”. In: Ecological Engineering: X 1, p. 100002.
Gutiérrez, Jorge L. et al. (2003). “Mollusks as ecosystem engineers: The role of
shell production in aquatic habitats”. In: Oikos. Vol. 101. 1. John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd, pp. 79–90.
Salta, Maria et al. (2013). “Marine biofilms on artificial surfaces: structure and
dynamics”. In: 15.11, n/a–n/a.
Kristensen, L. D. et al. (2017). “Behavioural changes of Atlantic cod ( <i>Gadus
morhua</i> ) after marine boulder reef restoration: Implications for coastal habi­
tat management and Natura 2000 areas”. In: Fisheries Management and Ecol­
ogy 24.5, pp. 353–360.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
69
==PAGE:78==
Stenberg, Claus ; et al. (2017). DTU Aqua report no. 289­2015: Ecological benefits
from restoring a marine cavernous boulder reef in Kattegat, Denmark. Tech. rep.
Baine, Mark (2001). “Artificial reefs: a review of their design, application, manage­
ment and performance”. In: Ocean & Coastal Management 44.3, pp. 241–259.
Andersson, Mathias H et al. (2009). “Epibenthic colonization of concrete and steel
pilings in a cold­temperate embayment: a field experiment”. In: Helgoland Ma­
rine Research 63.3, p. 249.
Paxton, Avery B et al. (2020). “Meta­Analysis Reveals Artificial Reefs Can Be
Effective Tools for Fish Community Enhancement but Are Not One­Size­Fits­
All”. In: Frontiers in Marine Science 7, p. 282.
Firth, Louise B et al. (2016). “Eco­engineered rock pools: a concrete solution to
biodiversity loss and urban sprawl in the marine environment”. In: Environmen­
tal Research Letters 11.9, p. 94015.
Dennis, Harry D. et al. (2018). “Reefcrete: Reducing the environmental footprint
of concretes for eco­engineering marine structures”. In: Ecological Engineering
120, pp. 668–678.
Perkol­Finkel, Shimrit and Ido Sella (Jan. 2014). “Ecologically Active Concrete for
Coastal and Marine Infrastructure: Innovative Matrices and Designs”. In: Pro­
ceeding of the 10th ICE Conference: from Sea to Shore ­ Meeting the Chal­
lenges of the Sea.
Ido, Sella and Perkol Finkel Shimrit (2015). “Blue is the new green ­ Ecological en­
hancement of concrete based coastal and marine infrastructure”. In: Ecological
Engineering 84, pp. 260–272.
Paalvast, Peter (Jan. 2015). “The role of geometric structure and texture on con­
crete for algal and macrofaunal colonization in the marine and estuarine inter­
tidal zone. Proceedings of RECIF Conference on artificial reefs : from materials
to ecosystems – ESITC Caen – 27­28­29 Janvier/January 2015”. In:
Coombes, Martin et al. (Apr. 2015). “Getting into the groove: Opportunities to en­
hance the ecological value of hard coastal infrastructure using fine­scale sur­
face textures”. In: Ecological Engineering 77, pp. 314–323.
De Schutter, Geert et al. (2018). Vision of 3D printing with concrete — Technical,
economic and environmental potentials.
“4 ­ Cement” (2011). In: Building Materials in Civil Engineering. Ed. by Haimei
Zhang. Woodhead Publishing Series in Civil and Structural Engineering. Wood­
head Publishing, pp. 46–423.
Aïtcin, Pierre Claude (2016). “Portland cement”. In: Science and Technology of
Concrete Admixtures. Elsevier Inc., pp. 27–51.
Aiitcin, Pierre­Claude (2007). Binders for Durable and Sustainable Concrete. CRC
Press, pp. 56–60.
Bullard, Jeffrey W. et al. (2011). Mechanisms of cement hydration.
Kawabata, Yuichiro, Ema Kato, and Mitsuyasu Iwanami (2012). “Enhanced Long­
Term Resistance of Concrete with Marine Sessile Organisms to Chloride Ion
Penetration”. In: 10.4, pp. 151–159.
Fabry, Victoria J. et al. (2008). “Impacts of ocean acidification on marine fauna and
ecosystem processes”. In: ICES Journal of Marine Science. Vol. 65. 3. Oxford
Academic, pp. 414–432.
70
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:79==
Licker, R et al. (2019). “Attributing ocean acidification to major carbon producers”.
In: Environmental Research Letters 14.12, p. 124060.
Kroeker, Kristy J. et al. (2013). “Impacts of ocean acidification on marine organ­
isms: quantifying sensitivities and interaction with warming”. In: Global Change
Biology 19.6, pp. 1884–1896.
Gore, Sarah, Phil Renforth, and Rupert Perkins (2019). “The potential environ­
mental response to increasing ocean alkalinity for negative emissions”. In: 24.7,
pp. 1191–1211.
Ali, M. B., R. Saidur, and M. S. Hossain (2011). A review on emission analysis in
cement industries.
Laleye, Kolawolé Romaric et al. (Apr. 2020). “Impacts related to sand dredging ac­
tivity: Literature review”. In: Journal of Biodiversity and Environmental Sciences
16, pp. 19–32.
Jones, Gareth (2009). “The battle against marine biofouling: A historical review”.
In: Advances in Marine Antifouling Coatings and Technologies. Elsevier Ltd,
pp. 19–45.
Martín­Rodríguez, Alberto et al. (Apr. 2015). “From Broad­Spectrum Biocides to
Quorum Sensing Disruptors and Mussel Repellents: Antifouling Profile of Alkyl
Triphenylphosphonium Salts”. In: PLoS ONE 10.
Caruso, Gabriella (Feb. 2020). “Microbial Colonization in Marine Environments:
Overview of Current Knowledge and Emerging Research Topics”. In: Journal of
Marine Science and Engineering 8.
Cowan, Marjorie M., Tessie M. Warren, and Madilyn Fletcher (1991). “Mixed­species
colonization of solid surfaces in laboratory biofilms”. In: 3.1, pp. 23–34.
Lappin­Scott, Hilary M. and J. William Costerton (1989). “Bacterial biofilms and
surface fouling”. In: 1.4, pp. 323–342.
Katharios­Lanwermeyer, S. et al. (2014). “Mini­review: Microbial coaggregation:
ubiquity and implications for biofilm development”. In: 30.10, pp. 1235–1251.
Mitik­Dineva, Natasa et al. (2008). “Impact of nano­topography on bacterial attach­
ment”. In: 3.4, pp. 536–544.
Crawford, Russell J. et al. (2012). Surface topographical factors influencing bac­
terial attachment.
Michaelis, Rune et al. (2019). “Hard­substrate habitats in the German Bight (South­
Eastern North Sea) observed using drift videos”. In: 144, pp. 78–84.
Kühne, S. and E. Rachor (1996). “The macrofauna of a stony sand area in the
German Bight (North Sea)”. In: 50.4, pp. 433–452.
Hiscock, Keith et al. (Jan. 2002). “High level environmental screening study for
offshore wind farm developments—Marine Habitats and Species Project”. In:
Holopainen, Reetta et al. (2016). “Impacts of changing climate on the non­indigenous
invertebrates in the northern Baltic Sea by end of the twenty­first century”. In:
18.10, pp. 3015–3032.
Rasmussen, Bjarke (1995). “Stratification and wind mixing in the southern katte­
gat”. In: Ophelia 42.1, pp. 319–334.
Hylleberg, Jorgen (Sept. 1986). “Distribution of Hydrobiid snails in relation to salin­
ity, with emphasis on shell size and co­existence of the species”. In: Ophelia,
Suppl. 4, pp. 85–100.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
71
==PAGE:80==
Kuss, Joachim et al. (2020). “Changes of Nutrient Concentrations in the West­
ern Baltic Sea in the Transition Between Inner Coastal Waters and the Central
Basins: Time Series From 1995 to 2016 With Source Analysis”. In: 8, p. 106.
ELAtextur (2019). ELAtextur ­ ENG ­IWS Messtechnik GmbH Celle. URL: https:
//iwsmesstechnik.de/en/texture/elatextur/ (visited on 01/24/2021).
Aktaş, Bekir et al. (Dec. 2011). “Comparative Analysis of Macrotexture Measure­
ment Tests for Pavement Preservation Treatments”. In: Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2209, pp. 34–40.
Wang, Yan et al. (July 2019). “An Experimental­Based Review of Image Enhance­
ment and Image Restoration Methods for Underwater Imaging”. In: IEEE Ac­
cess PP, pp. 1–1.
Hayward, P. J. and J. S. Ryland (1995). Handbook of the marine fauna of North­
West Europe.
Ferrari, Silvia and Francisco Cribari­Neto (2004). “Beta Regression for Modelling
Rates and Proportions”. In: Journal of Applied Statistics 31.7, pp. 799–815.
Bray, J. Roger and J. T. Curtis (1957). “An Ordination of the Upland Forest Com­
munities of Southern Wisconsin”. In: Ecological Monographs 27.4, pp. 326–349.
Martinez, P (2020). pairwiseAdonis: Pairwise multilevel comparison using adonis.
R package version 0.4. URL: https://github.com/pmartinezarbizu/pairwiseAdonis.
Kenkel, N. C. and L. Orlóci (1986). “Applying Metric and Nonmetric Multidimen­
sional Scaling to Ecological Studies: Some New Results”. In: Ecology 67.4,
pp. 919–928.
Kahlert, Maria and Brendan G. McKie (2014). “Comparing new and conventional
methods to estimate benthic algal biomass and composition in freshwaters”. In:
16.11, pp. 2627–2634.
Concreteexpertcentre (2021). Design and production of concrete ­ Mix design ­
Concreteexpertcentre. URL: http://www.concreteexpertcentre.dk/306642.
72
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:81==
A
Appendix
A.1
Diving Itinerary & Safety
Date
Description
6/10/20
Rigs put into place, with marker buoys.
Large waves next two days.
8/10/20
Plates exposed in calmer conditions.
Cameras trialled with Blink firmware
and battery usage trial and error
15/10/20
Cameras fully functional.
Images used from this date.
25/10/20
Dive to collect SD cards and swap batteries.
One camera found to be not working.
5/11/20
Dive to collect SD cards and swap batteries.
Same camera still not working,
images from this rig not used in analysis.
16/11/20
Dive to collect SD cards and swap batteries
27/11/20
Dive to collect SD cards and swap batteries
6/12/20
Plates fully covered.
Cameras removed from rigs.
Table A.1: Diving itinerary, detailing dates and descriptions of the dive.
As can be seen from the diving itinerary, there were at least 8 dives over the dura­
tion of the project from 6th October 2020 to 6th December 2020. The decreasing
water temperature throughout the fall, location of the exposure site, and depth of
the location of the three rigs at approximately 1­2metres depth from top to bottom,
make this a safety risk and therefore a diving safety protocol was constructed with
the following procedures:
• Equipment: Neoprene Wetsuit (5mm<), hood, gloves, boots, all essential.
Goggles also useful.
• No breathing apparatus was needed as the depth of the rigs meant standing
on the rig arch was possible with head and torso comfortably out of the
water. Although to connect cameras and place plates breath was held. Pre­
planning of any diving activities meant breath was never held for more than
10 seconds.
• Acclimatisation to water before a dive to eliminate cold water­shock when
submerging head.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
73
==PAGE:82==
• Location near marina, swimming & sailing clubs meant there almost always
people in the vicinity. Before dives if there were people around they would
be notified.
• Weather check: Never go out in strong offshore, or onshore winds (big
waves). Check water and air temperatures. Little current in the area. Make
sure warm clothes to change into immediately afterwards.
• Contact onshore. Always let someone know when dive was happening, the
duration and when finished. Call before and after completion. If call couldn’t
be established, onshore contact would alert authorities.
• Most dives were completed in less than 10 minutes and time in the water
was always minimised.
74
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:83==
A.2
DTI Concrete Recipes
Figure A.1: Image of cement mixes and concrete composition for concrete plates,
developed by DTI and submerged at Rødbyhavn. Note mixes for plates A & F,
which correspond to the concrete used for plates AU & FU. Figure taken from
(Concreteexpertcentre 2021).
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
75
==PAGE:84==
A.3
Kastrup Havn GoPro Images
(a) 26th October
(b) 30th October
(c) 31st October
(d) 1st November
(e) 2nd November
(f) 3rd November
Figure A.2: A selection of daily GoPro images of one of the submerged rigs, taken
26th October, and during the increase in percentage coverage or ’growth period’,
29th October ­ 3rd November. Increase in percentage coverage can be observed
moving top left to bottom right.
76
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:85==
A.4
Rødbyhavn Samples Biota
Species ID
(Family)
Potential Genus/
Species
Description
Aoridae sp.1
Microdeutopus
A marine crustacean in the Order Amphipoda.
Smooth dorsal bodies.
Reside sub­litorally with a variety of epi­benthos,
especially in docks
Gammaridae.sp.1
Gammarus
A marine crustacean in the Order Amphipoda.
Compressed smooth dorsal bodies. Larger reniform eyes.
Mainly freshwater genus, a number of species are marine.
Paratanaidae.sp.1
A marine crustacean in the Order Tanaidaceans.
Superficially resembles an isopod. Dorso­ventrally flattened body.
Reside sandy/ muddy substrate and amongst red algae.
Janiridae.sp.1
Jaera
A marine crustacean in the Order Isopoda
Oval body. Eyes when present are dorsal.
Marine inter­tidal species located among sessile organisms,
such as barnacles, macro­algaes, sponges, bryozoans.
Palaemonidae.sp.1
Palaemon
serratus
Common prawn, marine crustacean.
Up to 110mm length, variable colour.
Inter­tidal to 40m depth. Found in pools and in weed.
Varunidae.sp.1
Brachynotus
Sexdantatus
Mediterranean crab, marine crustacean.
Carapace length ∼10mm. Olive green.
Littoral to 90m. Survives in docks warmed by power station
affluent. Presumably introduced by shipping in British Isles.
Nereidae.sp.1
Marine bristle worm, polychaete.
Long, slender. Eversible proboscis with curved jaws.
Inter­tidal, in kelp holdfasts and mussel beds, very active.
Spionidae.sp.1
Spio
filicornis
Marine bristle worm.
∼30mm long and fragile. Short stout.
Pinkish. Reside in low water and shallow
sub­littoral zones, clean sand.
Polynoinae.sp.1
Harmothoe
Marine bristle worm. Elongated, narrow and fragile.
18­20mm long and segmented.
Found in shallow sub­littoral European waters.
Bivalvia
A mollusc commonly known as a mussel.
Two bilateral mainly symmetrical shells encasing foot.
Filter feeders. Sessile organisms attaching to fixed substrata
Bivalvia epi.
Mussels with evidence of epi­benthic growth on shells of other
sessile organisms such as Cirripedia, other bivalvia/molluscs
and macro­algaes
Cirripedia
Barnacles and their allies. Highly modified Class of crustaceans.
Their free swimming Cyprid larvae attach to substrate before
metamorphosing into adult barnacles, consisting of six plated
exoskeleton shell.
Found on all types of fixed substrata and sessile organisms.
Macro­algaes
A huge variety of species. Simplest classification by colour.
Red, brown, green.
Table A.2: Table describing species identified from samples of the long­term ex­
posure concrete samples in Rødbyhavn. Species family or higher order identified
in Species ID, whilst potential genus/species identification is also proposed. De­
scriptions using taxonomic key reference (Hayward and Ryland 1995).
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
77
==PAGE:86==
(a) Aoridae species.1
(b) Gammaridae species.1
(c) Spionidae species.1
(d) Nerediae species.1
(e) Janiridae species.1
Figure A.3: Stereo­microscope images of mobile fauna found in Rødbyhavn Sam­
ples. Scale is true for each image.
78
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
==PAGE:87==
(a) Varunidae species.1
(b) Cirripedia (Barnacles)
(c) Palaemon species.1
(d) Bivalves, juveniles & epi­benthic growth
Figure A.4: Camera images of larger mobile and sessile fauna found in Rødby­
havn Samples.
The Ecological Value of Concrete in the Marine Environment
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
