==PAGE:1==
Memory Oﬄoading for Remote
Attestation on IoT Devices
Jeppe Hagelskjær Østergaard
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of this thesis is to research whether the remote attestation protocol
used for IoT devices can be oﬄoaded to increase its eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness.
An approach is outlined: the attested device oﬄoads its memory and uses mes-
sage authentication codes (MACs) to ensure authenticity and integrity. The
implementation of the oﬄoading procedure includes the usage ARM TrustZone
in order to have a trusted component such that the results of the protocol can be
trusted. Lastly, a memory locking scheme is proposed and discussed to allow the
oﬄoading to securely be performed while the device simultaneously performs its
normal application.
The protocol was then implemented on a TrustZone-capable microcontroller
and was shown to successfully oﬄoad its memory to a connected fog node.
The increased memory coverage allows the detection of additional malware and
misconﬁgurations, making it more eﬀective than traditional static remote at-
testation. The method is, however, less eﬃcient due to the required memory
transmissions and the security requirements for the communication between the
oﬄoading device and the fog node.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet med denne afhandling er at undersøge hvorvidt remote attestation-protokollen
brugt til IoT apparater kan oﬄoades og derved øge dens eﬀektivitet og eﬃci-
ens. Metoden til at opnå dette blev beskrevet: det forespurgte apparat oﬄoader
sin hukommelse og bruger message authentication codes (MACs) til at sikre au-
tenticitet og integritet. Den implementerede oﬄoading-procedure benytter ARM
TrustZone til at skabe en betroet komponent, således at resultaterne af protokol-
len kan stoles på. Derudover forslåes og diskuteres en memory-locking-teknik
som kan benyttes således at oﬄoadingen kan foregå samtidigt med apparatets
almindelige funktionalitet.
Protokollen blev implementeret på en microcontroller med TrustZone, og blev
vist til succesfuldt at kunne oﬄoade sin hukommelse til en forbunden fog node.
Den øgede hukommelsesdækning gør det muligt at detektere yderligere malwa-
re og miskonﬁgurationer, hvilket gør protokollen mere eﬀektiv end traditionel
statisk remote attestation. Metoden er dog mindre eﬃcient på grund af de nød-
vendige hukommelses-transmissioner og sikkerhedskravene til kommunikationen
mellem apparat og fog node.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared over ﬁve months (30 ECTS credits) at the De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University
of Denmark, DTU in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc degree
in Computer Science and Engineering. It is assumed that the reader has a basic
understanding of cryptography and embedded systems.
Lyngby, 24-January-2021
Jeppe Hagelskjær Østergaard
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I, Jeppe Hagelskjær Østergaard, would like to thank my co-advisor Edlira
Dushku, Postdoctoral Researcher at DTU Compute, for suggesting me the topic
of the project and being a constant help and guidance throughout the project. I
would also like to thank my advisor Nicola Dragoni, Professor at DTU Compute,
for managing the project and being of help throughout the entire process.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement and research objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Background
9
2.1
Remote attestation overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Memory and hardware architecture of embedded devices . . . . .
12
2.3
Adversary model on remote attestation approaches . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Memory locking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
ARM TrustZone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Literature Overview
23
3.1
Architectural diﬀerences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Integrity of embedded application (static and dynamic)
. . . . .
27
3.3
Diﬀerent approaches to remote attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Oﬄoading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Proposed Approach
37
4.1
Proposal introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Overview of the proposal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Sensor node design: Operating system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Sensor node design: Sensor hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Sensor node design: Microcontroller and device application
. . .
47
4.7
Remote attestation of peripheral devices (temperature sensor) . .
50
4.8
Memory analysis of sensor node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.9
Security of the oﬄoading protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.10 Using memory locking for a secure and interruptible oﬄoading
procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.11 Discussion of the proposed approach and its opportunities and
challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5
Proof of Concept
69
5.1
Creating the sensor node application using FreeRTOS
. . . . . .
70
5.2
First iteration of oﬄoading procedure (Uninterruptible, no security) 73
5.3
Remote attestation of peripheral temperature sensor . . . . . . .
76
5.4
Porting the sensor node and oﬄoading procedure to TrustZone .
78
5.5
Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
.
84
5.6
Discussion of memory locking for oﬄoading . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.7
Evaluation of using oﬄoading as an alternative to current remote
attestation protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6
Conclusion and Future Work
105
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Today, electronic devices are getting increasingly deployed online and are getting
integrated into almost every aspect of our everyday lives. Data is constantly
being collected, transferred and processed by tiny devices located everywhere,
in our homes, on the streets and in the industry. These devices often operate in
network to perform services such as smart lighting, smart homes, smart cities
and a wide range of sensors and actuators in the industry. The network of small
devices being online and inter-connected to perform various functions on a large
scale compose the so-called The Internet of Things (IoT). In recent years, the
number of IoT devices has grown rapidly and is currently around 9.5 billion
devices and expected to grow even further, reaching 28 billion in 2025 [1].
Along with the exponential growth of IoT, security and privacy concerns have
also arisen due to the often poor security guarantees present on IoT devices,
such as devices having weak passwords, unencrypted networks or vulnerabili-
ties to various cyberattacks. Typically, IoT security is not a focus throughout
the product development life cycle. Security considerations are instead often
included late in the design and prototyping phase. Furthermore, only half of
all organizations issue remote updates for their devices after deployment [2]. In
fact, critical vulnerabilities can even be found on medical devices, such as insulin
pumps not authenticating the legitimacy of the user or blood refrigeration units
only being protected by hard-coded passwords [2].
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
These security ﬂaws open up an attack vector for malware. An example of such
malware is Mirai [3], which targeted networked Linux systems such as routers,
cameras and embedded devices in 2016. The malware exploited the fact that
these devices would often use the same factory default username and password.
This allowed the malware to gain access to over 600,000 devices with a list of
just 60 username and password combinations [4]. This malware resulted in the
infected devices being used as a botnet to deliver several distributed denial of
service (DDoS) attacks. One of them against the largest web-host provider in
Europe, OVH, exceeding 1 Tbit/s in traﬃc, making it the largest ever recorded
DDoS attack. Although the original developers of Mirai have been arrested,
variants of Mirai are still being used to infect IoT devices.
While Mirai targeted Linux systems, these systems are not the only ones open to
attacks. In October 2018, the most popular OS for IoT and embedded systems,
FreeRTOS, was analyzed by zLabs, a mobile security research team. It was found
that AWS FreeRTOS, a popular version of FreeRTOS maintained by Amazon,
had a vulnerability in its TPC/IP component enabling remote code execution,
DoS and information leaks. This vulnerability was also found in the derivations
of AWS FreeRTOS: OpenRTOS and SafeRTOS. As these derivations are used in
the aerospace and medical industries, such vulnerabilities could have had serious
consequences [5].
It was seen in Stuxnet that attacks are not necessarily used to convert devices to
be used in botnets. Some attacks may instead be used to change the behaviour of
systems, even to the point of destroying them, while still remaining undetected
[6]. In Stuxnet, the system controlling Iran’s nuclear centrifuges was infected
and remained undetected by sending back readings corresponding to expected
readings of the system. This allowed it to maliciously change the rotor speed
of the centrifuge and remaining hidden until the change in excessive vibrations
destroyed the centrifuge. This is an example of how a device can mistakenly
appear to operate correctly, when actually causing disastrous consequences if
the data reported is not accurate.
These are just some of many attacks against IoT devices. This warrants an
increased focus on IoT security and strategies against malware. Considering
the constrained resources and low-cost design of IoT devices, the traditional
security solutions are not suitable for such devices. For instance, public key
encryption may not be viable due to its computational complexity, and other
cryptographic primitives may cause signiﬁcant amounts of time to compute. In
addition, the IoT devices are often not physically accessible and have to be
updated and checked for malware by remote access.
Aimed at securing IoT devices, Remote attestation is a method of detecting
malware on remote systems, where an external trusted party called the Veri-
==PAGE:15==
3
ﬁer can verify the integrity of a potentially untrusted device called the Prover.
Typically remote attestation is classiﬁed into either static and dynamic schemes.
The static schemes [7][8][9] attempt to verify the regions of memory which do
not change during runtime, speciﬁcally the program binary. In these schemes,
the Prover typically computes a hash value of its program binary and sends it
to the Veriﬁer. The Veriﬁer can then compare this hash value to a list of hashes
of each legal program binary to determine whether Prover is trusted. Diﬀer-
ent from static approaches, dynamic schemes [10][11][12] attempt to verify the
regions of memory which change during runtime, speciﬁcally the RAM. These
schemes may use techniques such as monitoring to the execution ﬂow of the
device to determine whether or not the device is functioning as intended. A
hash can be calculated representing the ﬂow of the device, which can then be
sent to the Veriﬁer.
There are however limitations of each of these attestation schemes. First of all,
computationally intensive functions must be used to perform the attestation
protocols, which causes downtime for low-end embedded devices. This downtime
may make the protocols unsuitable for devices in time-critical scenarios.
In
addition, verifying the program binary does not guarantee the integrity of the
device as it will not detect runtime attacks, which exploit vulnerabilities to
perform buﬀer overﬂow attacks or return-oriented programming attacks [13].
As such attacks do not necessarily change the program binary, they will not
be detectable by static attestation. Even though dynamic remote attestation
schemes aim at detecting these attacks, these schemes introduce high overhead
and complexity while some attacks still remain undetected, as explored further
in this project. To reduce the overhead, some dynamic attestation approaches
[11][12] introduce special customized hardware to the Prover, which however
raises the cost of the device.
To deal with hardware limitations, this project proposes a computation oﬄoad-
ing approach to outsource the computational tasks to a powerful platform with
more resources and better computational capabilities. Oﬄoading can be useful
in the context of remote attestation to address the limitations of state-of-the-art
protocols. For instance, by outsourcing the procedure, a more resourceful device
might be able to increase the eﬃciency by reducing the associated downtime of
the IoT device. Furthermore, it may also increase the eﬀectiveness by expanding
the protocol to attest additional memory regions, making use of the additional
resources to analyse the memory in more detail.
Using oﬄoading in connection with remote attestation has however not been
tested, so the beneﬁts which it provides and the challenges in its implementa-
tion are not thoroughly researched. This project aims to evaluate the viability
of using oﬄoading to improve the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of the remote at-
testation protocol.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.1
Problem statement and research objectives
Security is currently a massive issue for embedded devices. With the growth
of IoT, billions of small resource-constrained devices are now online and many
of them are not properly secure. While the prevention of malware is critical,
the detection of malware or malfunctioning devices can be just as important,
especially in industries such as the nuclear and medical industry where malfunc-
tioning equipment cannot be tolerated. In this setting, it is crucial to be able to
correctly determine whether a device is in a legal state or not. Every aspect of
the device’s software, memory contents and peripherals in use must be veriﬁed
in order to assuredly declare the device to be trustworthy.
Static remote attestation can be used to verify the integrity of remote resource-
constrained devices. This is done by calculating the hash of the program binary,
which an external Veriﬁer can then verify. However, computing hashes is a com-
putational intensive task, which may take a low-end embedded device a signif-
icant time to produce. This can cause issues as the protocols often require the
device application to be suspended, while the attestation is performed, leading
to a signiﬁcant downtime of the device application. This downtime makes the
protocol unsuitable for devices in very time-critical applications. Furthermore
solely verifying the program binary does not detect runtime attacks as they are
likely to only aﬀect the RAM. Memory regions such as the RAM are ignored
in static attestation, as the variance is high, causing the veriﬁcation method of
verifying by hash to be impractical. The issue of runtime attacks can be partly
addressed by dynamic attestation, which can attest the execution ﬂow of the
device. This does, however, not necessarily detect runtime attacks as long as
the attacks do not break the expected execution ﬂow. Furthermore, dynamic
attestation will add undesired overhead to the application or require additional
hardware.
Lastly, many remote attestation schemes proposed in the literature do not de-
tail their actual implementation on hardware as they are protected by patents.
Thus, it is very diﬃcult to reproduce existing attestation schemes and/or in-
vestigate the work of devices which may be running an application alongside
the attestation procedure, such as the consequences to the program structure
and whether the OS can be paused to run the protocol. In addition, devices
(Provers) may be non-monolithic, consisting of one or multiple physically con-
nected peripheral devices. These peripheral devices may also inﬂuence the de-
vice state and reportings of the device. For example, a humidity sensor node
may consist of a microcontroller connected with a humidity sensor chip and
a Bluetooth communication module. If either the humidity chip or the Blue-
tooth module is misconﬁgured, the sensor node may fail to correctly report
the humidity-readings, even if the microcontroller’s program binary is correct.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Problem statement and research objectives
5
These incorrect readings may then lead to other devices or actors in the system
to either get an incorrect representation of the humidity or wrongfully act upon
these misreadings, further propagating the error caused by the misconﬁgured
device. In the Stuxnet example, if the rotor speed of the centrifuge is deter-
mined by one device based on readings of another device, any incorrect readings
could lead to erroneous speed-settings and destruction of the centrifuge.
One interesting approach to improve the remote attestation protocols is oﬄoad-
ing the attestation computations to a more powerful device, as computation of-
ﬂoading is often used to increase eﬃciency by outsourcing computational tasks
to more-capable platforms. Furthermore, this powerful platform may enable
analysis of additional more regions, increasing the eﬀectiveness of the attesta-
tion. This analysis may also be more in-depth, as it is no longer limited by the
performance capabilities of the resource-constrained Prover. This, however, re-
mains to be thoroughly researched, implemented and tested. What this project
will aim to answer, can be formulated into the following research question:
Is oﬄoading the remote attestation procedure a viable alternative to
state-of-the-art remote attestation protocols?
This project’s focus is on researching, designing and implementing a protocol
to securely oﬄoad the attestation procedure to a platform with more computa-
tional resources. The proposed protocol will then be evaluated in terms of its
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. The main goal of the project is to investigate the
beneﬁts and practicality of the oﬄoading approach through realistic assump-
tions.
The main objectives can be summarised as follows:
• Investigate the oﬄoading approach and propose a new remote attestation
protocol that improves attestation of IoT devices.
• Design the security features of the proposed oﬄoading protocol such that
it is resilient against common attacks on remote attestation protocols. The
proposed procedure must provide at least the same security guarantees as
the existing remote attestation schemes.
• Analyze the challenges of attesting non-monolithic devices, such as em-
bedded systems using peripheral devices as sensors.
• Explore and discuss the opportunities and challenges which arise when
implementing the oﬄoading protocol on actual hardware, using recent
research and technology.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
• Evaluate the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of using oﬄoading for the remote
attestation protocol.
1.2
Contributions
This project researches the beneﬁts which oﬄoading may provide to remote
attestation, along with the security requirements of the protocol. In addition,
the protocol is implemented as a proof of concept to show the feasibility of the
technique and to properly investigate its eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness.
The project consisted of developing a sensor node on an LPC55S69 microcon-
troller in order to implement and test the oﬄoading procedure in a realistic
scenario with an IoT device having a certain memory layout and an operating
system. The oﬄoading procedure was securely implemented on the sensor node
by using ARM TrustZone [14]. The oﬄoaded memory includes the ﬂash (both
program binary and data sections), the RAM, the boot ROM, certain periph-
eral addresses and accessible memory of connected peripheral devices. Once the
sensor node oﬄoads its memory to a fog node (e.g., a laptop), the fog node,
which acts as a Veriﬁer, successfully veriﬁes the trustworthiness of the sensor
node.
The oﬄoading allows for diﬀerent approaches to veriﬁcation such as attesting
memory using byte-by-byte comparisons and makes way for complex veriﬁca-
tions of RAM using memory-analysis of the application software. These new
methods of veriﬁcation lead to a more eﬀective attestation of the device, as run-
time attacks performed in the RAM may be detectable, the conﬁguration of the
peripherals and data variables in ﬂash can be veriﬁed and the state of connected
peripheral devices may also be attested in detail.
This project brings the following main contributions to the research ﬁeld of
remote attestation:
• The project designs, implements and evaluates oﬄoading as a means for
enhancing remote attestation. The protocol was successfully implemented
and tested on an embedded system as a proof of concept. The implemen-
tation included the attestation of more complex memory regions, such as
RAM and other memory regions which may impact the functionality of
the device.
• The project implements a secure oﬄoading protocol by using ARM Trust-
Zone to guarantee isolation of the protocol from the untrusted device appli-
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Outline
7
cation and applying HMACs to ensure authenticity and integrity between
the Prover and Veriﬁer.
Furthermore, the project proposes a memory
locking scheme to prevent the vulnerabilities associated with interruptible
execution of the remote attestation procedures.
• The project expands the oﬄoading procedure to attest non-monolithic
systems. While peripheral devices cannot be fully attested, the proof of
concept show that the proposed protocol successfully veriﬁes peripheral
devices based on the contents of their accessible registers.
• The project shows how the device’s memory usage could be used advan-
tageously in the oﬄoading procedure and highlights the limitations that
current trusted execution environments provide for the protocol.
• The project discusses the advantages, disadvantages and requirements
of using oﬄoading for remote attestation.
The conducted experiments
demonstrate that oﬄoading increases the eﬀectiveness by covering more
memory, but at the expense of decreased eﬃciency in more data being
transmitted and authenticated.
1.3
Outline
As remote attestation concepts and the associated techniques may be somewhat
obscure for those new to the subject, some relevant background information are
provided in Chapter 2. Literature relating to the subject including the state-
of-the-art remote attestation protocols is then reviewed in Chapter 3. Next,
Chapter 4 proposes and discusses an approach of using oﬄoading in the context
of remote attestation, along with a security analysis of the requirements which
the proposed design must guarantee. The chapter will also present how oﬄoad-
ing may address the limitations of other remote attestation protocols. Chapter
5 ﬁrst describes the proof-of-concept implementation of oﬄoading remote attes-
tation procedure running on a low-end embedded device acting as a simple IoT
sensor device and then evaluates whether oﬄoading is useful in improving the
remote attestation protocol. Finally, the concluding remarks of this work are
presented in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter will introduce the concepts and technical background necessary to
fully comprehend the remainder of the thesis. First, an overview is given for the
concept of remote attestation. The memory architecture of embedded devices
is then described and the adversarial model in the context of remote attesta-
tion protocols is presented. Finally, two important technologies are discussed,
memory locking and TrustZone, as they will be used to ensure security in the
proposal for oﬄoading the remote attestation protocol.
2.1
Remote attestation overview
Remote attestation is a two-party security protocol, which allows an external
trusted Veriﬁer (Vrf) to verify the integrity and authenticity of a remote and
potentially untrusted device, the Prover (Prv). Typically the process consists
of Vrf sending a challenge to Prv, to which Prv must answer correctly to prove
its trustworthiness. If Prv answers incorrectly Vrf is made aware and can then
act accordingly. While remote attestation has several uses, in the context of
this project remote attestation will involve online low-end embedded devices
acting as the Provers. These devices will be physically distant from the Veriﬁer,
requiring the attestation protocol to be performed remotely.
==PAGE:22==
10
Background
The most widely used method of remote attestation is the interactive attestation,
as shown in Figure 2.1. This consists of Vrf requesting a proof of integrity from
Prv. Prv will then compute a hash of its ﬁrmware, along with a signature to
authenticate the computed hash in order to prove its trustworthiness to the Vrf.
Figure 2.1: Interactive remote attestation.
In general, remote attestation protocols assume that Prv, and Vrf have knowl-
edge of a shared secret key k and Vrf knows which ﬁrmware f should reside on
Prv. This expected ﬁrmware could, as an example, be the latest release of the
software deployed on Prv’s platform.
Vrf initiates the attestation by generating a nonce N and sending it to Prv,
as shown in Figure 2.1.
The nonce N is used to guarantee the freshness of
the result, ensuring that the response is connected to the recent request. Upon
receiving the nonce N, the Prv will then compute a hash over its memory region
containing the application (e.g. the program binary in ROM). The hash which
Prv computes must be authenticated in order to ensure that it is not faked or
tampered with by a third party. The signature s is then computed by calculating
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Remote attestation overview
11
the message authentication code (MAC) on the concatenation of the hash and
nonce. The MAC operation uses the key k and a cryptographically secure hash
function: s ←mack(hash(f)||N). The signature is then sent to Vrf, which will
use this to verify the authenticity and integrity. This is done by ﬁrst calculating
the hash of the expected ﬁrmware h′ ←hash(f ′) then calculating the expected
signature, s′ ←mac(h′||N).
If the signatures s and s′ match, then Prv is
deemed trustworthy, if not, it is deemed untrustworthy.
As remote attestation is done on low-end systems with limited performance
capabilities, the procedure is often based on symmetric-key cryptography. Con-
sequently the authentication is ensured with MACs using a secret key shared
between Prv and Vrf. As the MAC or digital signatures in this project serve
the same purpose and the attestation protocols technically could be performed
using either method, both may be referred to by the term signature throughout
the project. While public-key cryptography may seem like the intuitive choice
for some of these exchanges, it is excluded from this project’s proposal due to
high computational requirement. Even though the problems of the initial key
exchange and key updates are related research issues, usually the key manage-
ment topic is considered out of scope of the remote attestation protocols, and
will consequently mostly be ignored for this project.
The integrity of the device is typically attested by verifying the device’s pro-
gram binary, which will typically remain static during software execution and
reside within the non-volatile memory of the device. This is a so-called static
remote attestation. The current methods of static attestation through hashing,
will also be referred to as traditional remote attestation throughout this report
and will be used as a benchmark to evaluate the proposal of oﬄoading the pro-
cedure. Contrary to static, dynamic attestation is not limited to the program
binary, but instead acknowledges that the device may be attacked by tampering
with its stack or heap, typically located in its volatile memory. Such dynamic
memory cannot be predicted by hashing, leading to diﬀerent approaches for at-
testation such as validating the device application’s execution ﬂow. A variety
of alternative attestation procedures will be discussed in Chapter 3.
The variant of the static interactive remote attestation procedure discussed so
far is, however, insecure. An adversary who has compromised the ﬁrmware may
take the role of Prv and respond with hashes, which do not correspond to the
actual conﬁguration.
To prevent this, the trusted attestation software must
be isolated from other non-trusted software on the device, such as the device
application. The attestation software must also have exclusive access to the
secret shared key, requiring some form of protected memory.
There are diﬀerent methods of achieving such isolation (discussed in Section
3.1). However, for simplicity’s sake, the device can be thought of as consisting
==PAGE:24==
12
Background
of a trusted component and a non-trusted. The trusted component will have
exclusive access to a trusted region of the memory and will run its trusted
code without any non-permitted interruptions from the untrusted code. This
component will run the remote attestation procedure, while the non-trusted
component will contain the software not associated with the procedure, the
software for the device’s normal operations.
2.2
Memory and hardware architecture of em-
bedded devices
IoT devices will typically be deployed on embedded platforms using hardware
smaller, cheaper and more power eﬃcient than regular computers. These devices
will consist of volatile memory, RAM, and non-volatile memory, usually ﬂash.
The non-volatile memory is often referred to as the read-only memory (ROM),
although may be writable by the device’s application. As an example, the ROM
may be split into a section containing the program binary and a data section
containing calibration values or encryption keys which can be kept even after
power-loss. To distinguish between the data and the program binary in ﬂash,
the data region will be called data ﬂash and the program region program ﬂash.
This distinguishing is worth noting as the program ﬂash may be identiﬁable
by its hash, but the data ﬂash and consequently the ﬂash in its entirety may
have as many valid hashes as possible states of the data ﬂash, thus making it
impractical to verify using hashing.
Furthermore, IoT devices may consist of a power supply, often a battery and
voltage regulation, a microprocessor, communication (radio, Bluetooth, WiFi)
and attached sensor peripherals (temperature/ﬂuid/air sensors, cameras, micro-
phones). Depending on the device, these hardware-additions may be integrated
into the microcontroller or hardware which the device is based on, or they may
be added by the IoT device designer. This distinction may seem unimportant,
but can have consequences for the memory structure and the way in which the
intra-communication of peripherals and sensors work in the particular device.
The memory of devices range from low-end devices with tens to hundreds kilo-
bytes of RAM and ROM (e.g. the OpenMote-B) to high-end devices with gi-
gabytes of RAM and ROM and capabilities of running OSes such as Windows
IoT and Linux distributions (e.g. the Raspberry Pi 4 B series).
Memory architecture is traditionally split into von Neumann and Harvard ar-
chitecture. In the von Neumann system instructions and data share the same
data-bus, consequently data and instructions are stored in the same memory.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Memory and hardware architecture of embedded devices
13
This leads to the von Neumann bottleneck: as the system cannot access data
memory and program memory simultaneously, it leads to reduced throughput.
The Harvard architecture instead has separate busses for instructions and data
and has a strict separation between instructions and data. However, most con-
temporary processors listed as Harvard are actually Modiﬁed Harvard Architec-
ture and do not have a strict separation between the instruction and data space,
while supporting concurrent data and instruction access. Typically this modiﬁ-
cation has a common address space, while including a separate instruction and
data cache. This is the case for the ARM architecture and x86, although they’re
listed as being of "Harvard" architecture. Most of the ARM Cortex-M proces-
sor core line is listed as being Harvard architecture, with M0, M0+, M1 and
M23 being von Neumann and M3, M4, M7, M33, M35P, M55 being (modiﬁed)
Harvard.
The von Neumann and Harvard architecture are both vulnerable to diﬀerent
kinds of attacks. Code injection is when an attacker injects data containing
code into the memory of an application. When the application then reaches or
is redirected to that area of the memory, it will start executing the injected code.
This could be done in the way of a buﬀer overﬂow attack, where the application
takes an input of arbitrary length and copies it into a memory structure of a
ﬁxed size. If the length of the input data exceeds that of the memory structure,
the data will overﬂow into the stack. The attacker can use this to replace the
current data on the stack with a new return address and new instructions to
execute. The consequences of code injection attacks are very serious as it allows
the attacker to execute arbitrary code on the device, which can be used to
extract data, recruit the device for a botnet or other malicious purposes.
It is commonly said that code injection attacks are only possible for von Neu-
mann architectures because of Harvard’s separation between instruction and
data space. However, this leads to a misconception because of the lack of distin-
guishing between pure and modiﬁed Harvard architecture and neglects the fact
that so-called Harvard systems are typically not pure but instead modiﬁed Har-
vard architecture. Code injection attacks are in fact possible on many systems
labeled as Harvard, as they have a uniﬁed address space [15].
Return-oriented programming attacks [13] can also be performed on the system
without the use of code injection. Here an attacker carefully chooses chunks
of the application program which is then executed in sequence. Chaining these
chunks together allows the attacker to execute arbitrary code on the device
without the use of code injection. These attacks can thus be performed without
changing the code, by instead hijacking the control ﬂow. [13]
==PAGE:26==
14
Background
2.3
Adversary model on remote attestation ap-
proaches
Since the goal of remote attestation is ensuring the integrity of a device, the
security of the protocol is of great importance. This section will detail common
adversaries and attacks in the context of remote attestation. The adversaries
are as follows:
• Software adversary: A software adversary is an adversary who compro-
mises the software of the device by changing the application to execute
their own malicious code.
• Physical adversary: A physical adversary is an adversary with physical
access to the device to be attested.
This adversary has the ability to
remove and scan the memory of the device, the RAM, ﬂash and even
trusted/protected memory on the attestation hardware.
They are also
capable of performing hardware-based side-channel attacks on the system
or performing fault injection attacks on the device.
Preventing attacks from a physical adversary require various precautions
which are often not considered in remote attestation designs. However,
some collective remote attestation designs, discussed in Section 3.3.1, do
take measures to detect such attacks.
• Mobile adversary: The adversary runs malware on the device, but is
able to relocate the malware to a diﬀerent device to avoid detection.
Malware which may delete itself or relocate to another device to avoid
detection is referred to as transient malware, while malware that moves to
a diﬀerent memory region on the same device to avoid detection is referred
to a migratory malware.
As with the adversaries, the common attacks on remote attestation will also be
described:
• Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks: A malicious MITM may take
place between Prv and Vrf. Upon the trusted Prv answering the attesta-
tion request with an invalid hash, the MITM may replace this with a valid
hash. This would lead to Vrf mistakenly noting Prv to be valid. Such an
attack is illustrated in a scenario without the necessary security features
on Figure 2.2. MITM may also reversely choose to invalidate a valid hash
or to drop the authentication request sent to Prv, which would prevent
Prv in revealing their state at all.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Adversary model on remote attestation approaches
15
This is commonly solved by Vrf and authenticating Prv’s response using
a MAC or digital signature. It is, however, important that the key used
for signing is only accessible from to the trusted attestation procedure.
The MITM scenario can be especially relevant in the case of a trusted
and untrusted component co-existing on the same platform, allowing the
untrusted software to tamper with the messages being sent and received.
The case of the MITM dropping attestation requests or responses is com-
monly ﬁxed by the request being associated with a time-frame in which
a response must be provided. If no response is provided, the device is
regarded as compromised.
• DoS attack: As stated, traditional static remote attestation procedure
will require Prv to compute hashes and signatures on its low-end hard-
ware. Due to the computational complexity of these computations the
attestation request may lead to a signiﬁcant downtime of the device ap-
plication.
This can be exploited by an attacker.
The attacker may impersonate
Vrf and send an attestation request to Prv, who will then suspend its
application to reply with a result. The attacker can then ignore the results
and repeat the process of requesting attestation of Prv to continuously
keep its application suspended.
This attack may be solved by authenticating the attestation request from
Vrf. The veriﬁcation of the authenticated request will, however, require
Prv to perform certain cryptographic functions, which may themselves halt
the system. For this reason, the issue often remains unsolved for attes-
tation designs, however non-interactive remote attestation procedures at-
tempt to solve this by initiating the attestation locally (see Section 3.3.2).
• Replay attack: A replay attack can be performed by an attacker re-
playing the result of an older successful attestation. In the case of Vrf
requesting a hash of the ﬁrmware, a malicious Prv or MITM could instead
provide an older hash, which is known to be valid.
This is often solved by the attestation request containing a nonce to be
combined with the result, thereby ensuring freshness.
• Time-of-check to time-of-use (TOCTOU) attacks: TOCTOU at-
tacks are a class of attacks which exploit the time-frame between a system
performing a check and acting according to the result of that check. The
attacker may change the system state between the time of check and the
time of use to invalidate the results of the check, causing the system to
act in unintended ways.
In the context of remote attestation, there may be a period of time be-
tween attesting a device and using said device. The relevancy of TOCTOU
will, however, depend on the use of the device. It will be more relevant
==PAGE:28==
16
Background
in the case of a device in the medical industry being attested before its
on-demand operation rather than in the case of an IoT sensor device con-
stantly being in use.
In Section 2.4 memory locking is discussed as a
method of preventing TOCTOU attacks.
Figure 2.2: Man in the middle attack on interactive remote attestation proto-
col without authenticity guarantees.
2.4
Memory locking
Memory locking is, in this context, the act of ensuring that a speciﬁc memory
region cannot be modiﬁed. This ensures that the memory region remains in the
same state from when it is locked until it is unlocked again. Memory locking
exists in Linux and is used to lock memory pages into RAM, preventing them
from being paged to the swap area. This is done using the commands mlock()
and munlock() to lock and unlock respectively [16]. It is a useful technique for
both real-time applications where paging would cause delays and for security
software as paging could allow an adversary access to conﬁdential memory.
IoT devices will typically be of limited resources, running on low-end embedded
hardware, consequently making cryptographic operations such as encryption,
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Memory locking
17
hashing and signing slow. As these operations are needed in remote attesta-
tion, the procedure will lead to a certain amount of down-time dependent on
the computation power and the size of the memory being attested. If the re-
mote attestation procedure instead was interruptible by the untrusted software,
it would be vulnerable to mobile adversaries, moving the malware to another
device (transient malware) or having the malware move itself in the memory
(migratory malware) to avoid detection during the attestation.
Memory locking has been proposed for remote attestation [17] in order to allow
for the attestation procedure to be interruptible, while still ensuring temporal
consistency of the processed memory. In other words, the result will accurately
reﬂect the state of the memory region at some point in time, which may be used
to secure against transient and migratory malware.
The paper discusses the following memory locking schemes and their eﬀects on
temporal consistency and by extension their resilience to transient and migratory
malware:
• No-Lock: The memory region is not locked at all. This does not ensure
any temporal consistency, thus making the system vulnerable to both mi-
gratory and transient malware. This technique is mostly useful for com-
parison.
• All-Lock: The memory region is locked for the entire duration of the pro-
cessing. Ensures temporal consistency, thus protecting against migratory
and transient malware.
• Dec-Lock: Starts out with the entire memory region locked, as in All-
Lock. However, as the memory is processed, it is gradually unlocked. This
method oﬀers the same guarantees as All-Lock while being less restrictive.
• Inc-Lock: Contrary to Dec-Lock, this method starts with the entire mem-
ory unlocked. It then gradually locks the memory as it processes it. Only
when the entire memory has been processed is the memory region again
released. Inc-Lock does provide temporal consistency at the time which
the attestation ﬁnishes. This will be enough to detect migratory malware,
however it does not protect against transient malware, as it may have time
to delete all traces of itself.
• Cpy-Lock: Works by locking the memory then copying the memory to
another location, after which the memory is again freed. The copied mem-
ory can then be processed, reducing the restrictions on the original mem-
ory. This technique ensures the same guarantees as All-Lock, but requires
extra memory to accommodate the copying.
==PAGE:30==
18
Background
• Extended locking: Extended variants, such as All-Lock-Ext and Inc-
Lock-Ext, can be used instead of their normal counterparts if consistency
is needed until the memory has been attested by the Veriﬁer. This is done
by locking the memory until the attestation is ﬁnished, which is useful to
prevent TOCTOU vulnerabilities.
The results from the paper can be seen summarised in Table 2.1. The methods
granting security against both types of malware will be All-Lock, Dec-Lock and
Cpy-Lock.
As Dec-Lock is less restrictive than All-Lock, while granting the
same security, it will be preferable. Cpy-Lock will in most cases be excluded
due to the limited memory of embedded systems. Depending on the security
requirements, Dec-Lock may be extended to Dec-Lock-Ext if the system must
prevent TOCTOU attacks.
Migratory Malware
Transient Malware
No-Lock


All-Lock


Dec-Lock


Inc-Lock


Cpy-Lock


Table 2.1: Diﬀerent methods of memory locking and whether they are resistant
towards malware.
2.5
ARM TrustZone
Arm TrustZone [14] is a technology by which this separation of components
can be achieved, and is available and integrated into several microcontrollers
on the market today. It was introduced as a security feature in the Cortex-
A Arm processors in 2004.
For many years, the use and information about
TrustZone has been scarce as development platforms for TrustZone were lacking
and not cost eﬀective [18]. The technology did, however, start getting used to
improve security on mobile devices, although the information surrounding it
was still lacking because of a general reluctance to disclose information about
the technology and developers being required to sign non-disclosure agreements
(NDAs) before getting the technical details regarding their chips’ TrustZone
implementation [19].
Since then, TrustZone has been introduced to the ARMv8-M architecture in
late 2016, using a diﬀerent implementation of TrustZone more geared towards
==PAGE:31==
2.5 ARM TrustZone
19
low-end devices. This implementation has in recent years become widely used
and researched. However, a lot of the TrustZone research and implementations,
especially for the ARMv8 architecture, are still very recent, being from 2017
and on-wards.
ARM TrustZone is centered around splitting the system into a secure and a non-
secure (also called normal) domain and enforcing this separation by hardware.
Both domains are completely hardware separated and have their own privileges.
At any given time, the processor operates either exclusively in the secure or the
non-secure domain.
While TrustZone for ARMv8-A (Cortex-A) and ARMv8-M (Cortex-M) are very
similar as they are both built on the same foundation, there are slight diﬀerences.
TrustZone for ARMv8-M extends the architecture with new features and further
separates the secure parameters from the rest of the application. There are also
changes to the state transition between secure and non-secure, as the ARMv8-M
performs the transition in hardware unlike the ARMv8-A, which employs secure
monitor software [20]. With the separation done in hardware, new opportunities
arise to constrain the OS to the normal domain, while the secure methods
can reside in the secure world without the need for OS interference.
These
architectural diﬀerences should be kept in mind, as research and sources on
TrustZone before 2016 will be based on the Cortex-A architecture and may not
be valid for this project.
A visualisation of the diﬀerences between the two can be seen in Figure 2.3. The
ARM Cortex-A performs the transition to the secure world through the secure
monitor, which acts as a context switch triggered by a hardware interrupt or the
software instruction SMC. This transition will set the processor’s Non-Secure
(NS) bit, which is readable from the Secure Conﬁguration Register (SCR) and
propagated throughout the system. In short, the security state in Cortex-A is
determined by this bit.
==PAGE:32==
20
Background
(a) TrustZone Cortex-A.
(b) TrustZone Cortex-M.
Figure 2.3: Diﬀerences between TrustZone on Cortex-A and Cortex-M.
On the other hand, the Cortex-M does not have the secure monitor. It does not
need to go through any transitional mode and does not have a NS bit deciding
its state. Instead, Cortex-M’s security state is entirely decided by whether the
code being executed is in a secure region or a non-secure one. As shown in the
Figure 2.3b, the transition is possible from anywhere in the application. The
software can be brought to the secure world by an interrupt (IRQ) or with a
function call and return in the same manner whether the software is operating
in thread or handler mode. Avoiding the transitional state also improves the
speed of the transition in Cortex-M over the Cortex-A [21].
When discussing TrustZone henceforth it will implicitly be the Armv8-M (Cortex-
M) version unless stated otherwise, as this is the platform available for the
low-end devices relevant in the context of remote attestation.
The processor will either run in a secure or a non-secure state with access to
either secure or non-secure ﬁrmware, data, peripherals, memory and resources.
This is visualised in Figure 2.4, where it is seen how each area is either designated
to the trusted or the non-trusted domain. The memory space is separated into
secure and non-secure addresses. The non-secure addresses can be accessed by
all the software on the system, while the secure memory space is split into secure
and non-secure callable (NSC). Secure addresses are only accessible by secure
software, while NSC are addresses reserved for instructions allowing the software
to transition from the non-secure state to secure [19]. Non-secure code calling
the secure functions directly will result in an exception, so to avoid this non-
secure software can call permitted secure functions through the NSC section.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 ARM TrustZone
21
This entry-point to the secure world, residing in the NSC section is also called
the veneer table.
It should also be noted that TrustZone itself does not ensure that the system
will be secure. TrustZone provide the means to which a secure system can be
developed, but it has to be implemented correctly. If the software is not properly
written and the separation between secure and non-secure states is not properly
implemented, an attacker may still able to exploit this and attack the system.
As code gets more diﬃcult to evaluate as it grows, it is recommended to keep
the secure code as minimal as possible and keeping the amount of entry-points
few, while performing most operations in the non-secure state. Several criti-
cal vulnerabilities have been discovered in popular TrustZone implementations
spanning over several systems and OSs [22]. These vulnerabilities range from
compromising the kernel using buﬀer overﬂow exploits to lack of isolation be-
tween secure and non-secure due to debugging channels. It should also be noted
that while TrustZone may be secure in software, a physical adversary could
possibly still attack the system. Fault injection attacks have been successfully
performed on several ARMv8-M TrustZone microcontrollers [23].
Figure 2.4: TrustZone view of a system. The system is split into non-trusted
(grey) and trusted (green).
==PAGE:34==
22
Background
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Literature Overview
This chapter presents various state-of-the-art remote attestation protocols, along
with various papers, research and design propositions, in order to create an
overview of recent developments within the ﬁelds of remote attestation, oﬄoad-
ing and topics useful to these ﬁelds. The diﬀerent remote attestation protocols
and literature will then be discussed, highlighting their limitations. Finally, a
proposition for a new approach to remote attestation will be proposed based on
the limitations of the current designs.
3.1
Architectural diﬀerences
There is currently a variety of ways of performing remote attestation, some of
which require speciﬁc hardware or hardware modiﬁcations and some of which
rely purely on software. The remote attestation designs are typically split into
software-based, hardware-based and hybrid designs. These three design archi-
tectures will be discussed in the following subsections.
==PAGE:36==
24
Literature Overview
3.1.1
Software-based remote attestation
Software-based remote attestation is a method which does not rely on any spe-
ciﬁc type of hardware, but instead relies on precise timing of speciﬁc events and
the known associated time boundaries. It may also be based upon the memory
constrains of the device. As an example, SoftWare-based ATTestation (SWATT)
[7] uses the fact that an infected device would have to redirect memory access
from the compromised code to a location containing the legitimate code.
SWATT requires that the embedded device’s ﬁrmware has a memory veriﬁcation
procedure which Vrf can prompt remotely by sending a randomly-generated
challenge. This challenge will initiate the veriﬁcation process, by having the
embedded device traverse its own memory in a pseudo-random manner. The
traversal is determined by using the randomly-generated challenge as a seed for
the device’s pseudo-random number generator. It then iteratively accumulates
a checksum of the memory, traversed in this manner. If an attacker has altered
the program binary it would be detected in the checksum, and to hide this
alteration they would need to redirect the memory-access to another location
where the valid memory is stored. Due to this redirection slightly increasing the
time of the veriﬁcation procedure and the procedure running for several rounds,
the increase in time will be noted by Vrf, which will then mark as device as
being untrusted.
An attack on SWATT have however been uncovered, called the memory shad-
owing attack [24]. The attestation relies on very strict assumptions about the
machine code cycles required for diﬀerent instructions. The main loop of the at-
testation procedure consist of 23 cycles, and they assume a memory redirection
would require 3 extra cycles using branch and compare instructions.
How-
ever, most of the program memory of a common sensor applications is typically
smaller than the total available memory of the device. The unused memory may
be easily predictable, such as uninitialised ﬂash having the value 0xFF. Given
this, malware could be hidden in the last quarter of the ﬂash (which likely would
be empty), while redirecting access from this quarter to the third quarter by
only ﬂipping one bit of the address (11xx...x to 10xx...x). This can be done by
only using 2 more instruction cycles, resulting in a implementation only 7.4%
slower than the original in the their TinyOS implementation. This is lower than
the 13% overhead speciﬁed by SWATT, thereby breaking the procedure.
Some other remote attestation approaches do not focus on precise timing, but
instead on the memory constrains of the device, by not giving any space for
the malware to reside in [25]. As previously mentioned, sensor devices usually
have a lot of their memory empty and set to a default value. To avoid malicious
software using this empty memory, the memory can be ﬁlled with data. This
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Architectural diﬀerences
25
data must however be pseudo-random, as any patterns in the data will cause
it to become compressible, which would again make room for malware. Due to
the time required to generate these pseudorandom numbers, it will be noticeable
by Vrf if Prv is generating these when requested, instead of using the already-
generated numbers from memory. The memory is now ﬁlled with pseudorandom
data, which Prv will traverse to accumulate a check-sum in the same manner
as in SWATT. As Vrf also has knowledge of the pseudorandom memory, the
checksum can then be compared to the valid checksum. If it diﬀers, the device
will be considered untrusted. As with SWATT, this protocol also solely veriﬁes
the static program binary, not dynamic memory such as RAM.
Attacks on this type of software-based attestation have, however, also been
proposed and executed. One of these is the compression attack. As previously
mentioned, if the empty space of memory is ﬁlled with pseudo-random numbers
it cannot be compressed. The original code of the application can however still
be compressed, reducing the size by 11.6% or 2.3KB on average IoT sensor
software, leading to the aforementioned compression attack. Here, the original
code is compressed, making room for malware in the freed space [24].
3.1.2
Hardware-based remote attestation
Hardware-based remote attestation can either indicate that the attestation is
done entirely on a specialised dedicated hardware or using Trusted Execution
Environment (TEE) technologies, which can be found on some embedded sys-
tems. Specialised hardware such as a TPM can be costly, and may therefore by
unattractive for low-end embedded IoT devices, which are limited in cost and
hardware to what is strictly necessary.
ARM TrustZone is an example of a TEE and is increasingly made available
for embedded systems. This technology will allow for the software to be split
into a untrusted component, running the OS and the device’s functionality,
and a trusted component containing the remote attestation procedure and any
secret keys associated with the procedure, such as keys for symmetric or public-
key cryptography. This ensures that the untrusted component, which may get
infected by malware, does not have access to the code running the attestation
procedure and does not have access to the secret keys used by the procedure.
Sancus [26] is a security architecture for networked embedded devices. It is a
hardware security extension, which can be implemented as an FPGA on cer-
tain "Sancus-enabled" devices. It allows for the extension to perform remote
attestation without trusting any of the device’s infrastructural software. The
attestation can be initiated by Vrf sending the request along with a desired start
==PAGE:38==
26
Literature Overview
memory address and length. The result is an HMAC-value for the requested
region, which Prv sends as a reply. Soteria [27] is similar to Sancus, being im-
plemented in the same manner, while expanding the functionality and ﬁxing
some prior issues.
LO-FAT [11] and Atrium [12] are other examples of attestation using hardware.
They will be discussed in detail in Section 3.2 as they a good example of attesting
the dynamic memory of software using hardware-implemented ﬂow-control.
3.1.3
Hybrid architecture for remote attestation
Hybrid remote attestation is based on a co-design between hardware and soft-
ware. This design may consist of a small read-only memory region or hardware
to control and monitor memory access rules. The architecture is characterised
by only requiring minimal changes to the underlying hardware.
SMART (short for Secure and Minimal Architecture for (Establishing a Dy-
namic) Root of Trust) [28] is one of these hybrid designs and uses minimal
hardware modiﬁcations to ensure security of the procedure. It allows for com-
plete isolation of a code region from the rest of the software. This ensures that
even if the system is untrusted, it can perform trusted execution of this secure
code region. It also enforces access control for an area of the ROM for the secret
key, such that code outside of the attestation procedure cannot access it.
The attestation procedure is challenge-based. It is initiated by Vrf sending a
challenge to Prv, the embedded device. Vrf also sends the boundaries for the
desired region to be attested, a nonce to avoid replay attacks and an address
Prv will pass control to after the attestation. During the attestation Prv will
compute a hash of the desired region, incorporating the nonce. The result is
sent to Vrf who will verify it. The hash must be cryptographically secure and is
implemented as an HMAC-function using a secret key, known to Prv and Vrf.
The attestation procedure implementation requires three guarantees: the secret
key must not be leaked from the secure memory, the execution of the procedure
is atomic; never allowing partial execution and lastly that bugs should not allow
for memory exposure or key leakage. If a breach of the rules is met, SMART
resets the device deleting all data memory.
The hardware modiﬁcations for SMART, involves modiﬁcations to the micro-
controller data-bus, although the exact implementation details of the SMART
design are not disclosed. As a consequence, the alleged security of the design
cannot be evaluated and the design itself cannot be implemented for this project.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Integrity of embedded application (static and dynamic)
27
TrustLite [29] addresses the limitations SMART has with regards to memory
access violations and interrupts. SMART does not handle these and relies on the
platform to reset and delete all memory. It also does not allow for updating the
key at runtime. TrustLite allows for strongly isolated modules, called trustlets.
It uses an execution-aware memory protection unit (EA-MPU), programmable
at compile-time, to conﬁgure rules regarding these trustlets. Trustlite also sup-
port interrupts, by implementing a secure context switch to handle the switch
between the secure and non-secure state.
Lastly TyTan [8] expands on TrustLite by allowing the key and EA-MPU rules
to be programmable at runtime. Like SMART, TrustLite’s and TyTan’s imple-
mentation detail are not publicly disclosed, preventing further evaluation and
use in the project.
3.2
Integrity of embedded application (static and
dynamic)
Static remote attestation focuses on verifying the memory which remains static
throughout the use of the device. The secure remote attestation procedure on
the embedded device will usually calculate a hash of the program binary, sign
it and send it to the Veriﬁer.
While most approaches to remote attestation are static and focus on the software
within the device ROM, some development has been done to attest the dynamic
memory as this will help detect runtime attacks. Runtime attacks may pre-
serve the program kept in ROM, but instead hijack the ﬂow of the program for
malicious purposes, such as the case with the aforementioned return-oriented
programming attack or to simply manipulate variables without violating the
execution ﬂow. One technique of verifying the control ﬂow, C-FLAT (Control-
Flow Attestation for Embedded Systems Software) [10] is a design which aims
to detect runtime attacks, which hijack the applications control-ﬂow.
Return-oriented programming attacks may corrupt the application’s stack or
heap to maliciously change the execution ﬂow of the application. These attacks
may reuse benign code to dynamically produce malicious programs without
having to inject any malicious instructions. Because of this, the previous static
software analysis will be unable to detect these runtime attacks, as the program
binary hash remains the same.
C-FLAT monitors the execution ﬂow and provides an attestation response based
on the legality of this ﬂow. It functions by calculating a hash based on each
==PAGE:40==
28
Literature Overview
branch instruction taken in the code, resulting in a cumulative hash based on the
path the code followed. The application can then send the cumulative hash to
Vrf, who will verify whether the measurement corresponds to a legal path. Loops
or recursive calls will lead to a high amount of possible legal measurements,
making the process of veriﬁcation diﬃcult.
C-FLAT can be implemented in a TEE, such as TrustZone, and requires rewrit-
ing all control ﬂow instructions, such as branch, to transfer control to the TEE
which will record these branches for the cumulative hash. This does, however,
also introduce a signiﬁcant overhead to the application.
LO-FAT (Low-Overhead Control Flow ATtestation in Hardware) [11] is another
approach to control-ﬂow attestation. It aims to prevent the same attacks as C-
FLAT, but instead opts for a hardware implementation. Similar to C-FLAT it
computes a cumulative hash corresponding to the path of the program, while
being based on hardware instead of a TEE. The overhead associated with C-
FLAT is discussed in the paper, remarking that it makes the approach unsuited
for attestation. This change from TEE to hardware will signiﬁcantly reduce the
overhead of the application, thereby ﬁxing the issue with C-FLAT.
LO-FAT’s system model consists of two main components, a branch ﬁlter and
a loop monitor. The ﬁlter will act on the branch, jump and return instructions,
extracting the source and destination address of the branching. The loop mon-
itor will extract the loop path, the number of iterations and branching targets.
This information will be formed into a hash value representative of the control
ﬂow, which will be signed and sent to Vrf.
Atrium [12] is a design which aims to solve TOCTOU vulnerabilities present on
SMART, C-FLAT and LO-FAT. The paper presents attacks on the aforemen-
tioned attestation schemes, then it proposes the Atrium design to prevent these
attacks using attestation of both the control-ﬂow and the function execution.
Atrium is hardware-based and is implemented using an FPGA with a design
similar to LO-FAT, using an instruction ﬁlter and loop encoder.
3.3
Diﬀerent approaches to remote attestation
In more recent years, there has been developments towards collective remote
attestation and self-attestation of devices to solve certain scalability issues that
comes with attesting large sensor networks.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Diﬀerent approaches to remote attestation
29
3.3.1
Collective remote attestation
As the size of IoT systems grow, the previously discussed remote attestation
methods become harder to scale. Collective Remote Attestation (CRA) pro-
tocols have been developed to address this issue. SEDA (Scalable Embedded
Device Attestation) [30] is the ﬁrst design to address the problem of scalability
in the context of remote attestation. SEDA consists of two phases: ﬁrst, all
devices are introduced into a swarm, then an online phase of actual attestation.
The online phases consists an arbitrary node being selected as the initiator.
Starting from this node, the attestation will then be done recursively across
the swarm. A spanning tree will be built containing each node, two nodes will
be connected in the spanning tree if they are neighbours in the communication
graph. Each node will attest their children across the swarm and accumulate
all attestation results reported from their children. The swarm is able to be at-
tested by Vrf who picks an arbitrary node in the swarm, which will then send an
attestation report to Vrf. The report will be binary output describing whether
the attestation was successful or not. The scheme can be seen in Figure 3.1,
where a node is chosen as an initiator, a spanning tree is created, throughout
which the attestation is performed, lastly being veriﬁed by Vrf.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the SEDA online phase. Source: SEDA paper [30].
Since SEDA, many CRA protocols have been developed to improve the protocol
in various ways. DARPA [31] addresses the issue of physical attacks on SEDA.
The paper argues that physical attacks cannot be ignored when considering a
context of multiple Provers, such as in the scenario of a network of devices.
The issue is that when a network is left unattended, as in the time between
attestation procedures, a physical attack may be performed on a device. DARPA
alleviates this issue by adding a secure heartbeat to each device in the network.
The heartbeat will be broadcast at regular intervals to the device’s immediate
neighbours, proclaiming its presence. The DARPA protocol will however not
reveal which devices have been compromised.
SANA (Secure and Scalable Aggregate Network Attestation) [32] addresses the
fact that SEDA requires trust in all intermediaries, thereby requiring them all
to have a TEE and participate in the attestation. SANA relies on there being a
==PAGE:42==
30
Literature Overview
majority of trusted nodes, but will allow untrusted untrusted aggregation nodes.
An Optimistic Aggregate Signature (OAS) is proposed where each Prover signs
their attestation and accumulates the result to a single signed signature for the
network. When veriﬁed, this signature also reveals the identity of compromised
device and their software conﬁguration. This is an improvement over the the
binary result seen in SEDA.
Other developments in CRA include SCAPI [33] which improves DARPA in
informing which devices are compromised. SCAPI employs a periodic session
key among all non-compromised devices. Only devices which has the old key
may receive the updated session key, thereby excluding compromised devices.
DIAT [34] is another recent development which extends the attestation to also
cover dynamic attestation. It uses control-ﬂow attestation as with C-FLAT and
LO-FAT, but reduces the veriﬁcation overhead by using a more simple approach
to hashing the execution path, resulting in less possible legal hashes.
3.3.2
Self attestation
Generally, remote attestation will consist of one party, Prv, sending information
about the content of its memory to another party, Vrf, who will then from that
information deem Prv to have a valid conﬁguration or not. However, a scheme
can also be devised where Prv attests itself. This will require that the result
from Prv is trusted, which could be achieved by the use of hardware-based or
hybrid design. The self-attestation can either be interactive, where Prv will
still receive a nonce and hash of a valid conﬁguration, or non-interactive, where
the attestation is triggered internally and Prv must have knowledge of the valid
conﬁgurations. In any case, Prv will internally compare its conﬁguration with
the valid conﬁguration and send Vrf a binary output representing whether the
conﬁguration is valid or invalid.
The non-interactive self-attestation can be
seen on Figure 3.2, where the attestation is triggered internally, after-which the
attestation is performed entirely on Prv with Vrf merely checking the result and
verifying the authenticity.
SeED (Secure Non-Interactive Attestation for Embedded Devices) [9] attempts
to solve the issues of DoS attacks in remote attestation by not being interactive.
Recall that DoS attacks can be performed on Prv, by sending unauthorised
attestation requests (Section 2.3). The design requires Prv to use a pseudoran-
dom number generator to generate a random attestation time (triggering the
attestation process) using a secret random seed. This seed is known only to Prv
and Vrf in order to prevent mobile adversaries operating between the attesta-
tions. At the attestation time the result will be produced by Prv, timestamped,
authenticated (using MAC based on secret shared key) and sent to Vrf.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Diﬀerent approaches to remote attestation
31
Figure 3.2: Non-interactive self-attestation.
ERASMUS (Eﬃcient Remote Attestation via Self-Measurement for Unattended
Settings) [35] also presents itself as an alternative to on-demand attestation.
It diﬀers from SeED in placing its own self-measurements in its non-secure
memory. Vrf can then request these measurements as a history of Prv’s state and
decouples how often the device is measured from how often the measurements
are veriﬁed by Vrf.
==PAGE:44==
32
Literature Overview
3.3.3
Distributed attestation
Recent advancement have also been made in the area of remote attestation in
the context of distributed systems.
ESDRA (Eﬃcient and Secure Distributed Remote Attestation) [36] moves away
from having a centralised Veriﬁer as this is a single point of failure. Instead the
network is divided into clusters, based on reducing the communication distance.
Each cluster will have a cluster head and each node will attest its neighbours,
while the cluster head will recheck the results and send them to the Veriﬁer.
Current CRA protocols rely on uninterrupted execution of the attestation pro-
tocols, requiring neighbouring devices to suspend their normal operation. To
avoid this suspension, Secure Asynchronous Remote Attestation (SARA) [37]
has recently been proposed. SARA aims to attest distributed IoT service com-
municating by a publish/subscribe scheme. It attests not only the IoT services
but also that the communication exchanged has not maliciously inﬂuenced the
communicating devices.
SARA uses a logical vector clock, which allows Vrf
to construct a historical graph of the service interactions and identify which
exchanges may have inﬂuenced the state of Prv.
3.4
Oﬄoading
Computation oﬄoading is the transfer of computational tasks from one proces-
sor to another. The second processor can be a hardware accelerator, another
powerful platform or the cloud, but will typically have more resources and higher
computational capabilities. In the context of IoT networks, it is often used out-
sourcing a computational task to another powerful platform or the cloud in order
to preserve energy, such as the case with battery-powered sensors. For remote
attestation it may however be useful to take advantage of the cloud’s computa-
tional capabilities to improve the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of the attestation.
As this project will use oﬄoading as part of its proposed remote attestation
design, it is necessary to investigate whether the current oﬄoading techniques
and whether they can be applied to the project.
The use of oﬄoading for this project will diﬀer slightly from its use in other
contexts. Due to the on-demand nature of the attestation process, Prover may
oﬄoad its memory contents directly to the Veriﬁer. This requires Veriﬁer to
be a more resourceful device than Prover such as a fog node. Instead of the
application itself being oﬄoaded, it will solely be the memory being oﬄoaded.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Oﬄoading
33
Additionally there will be no considerations of whether to oﬄoad or not, as
the IoT device will not have the computational capabilities and the knowledge
concerning legality of memory contents to perform the attestation itself. Thus,
the relationship between the oﬄoading device and the computing fog node diﬀers
from other fog computing models. [38] [39]
The eﬃciency of this project’s protocol will be evaluated with regards to the cur-
rent methods of remote attestation, therefore any unnecessary overhead added
by the act of oﬄoading should be minimised. Consequently, the exact protocol
will be created according to the security guarantees provided by the competing
attestation protocols, rather than using any common communications protocol
for oﬄoading.
A work of interest is CloneCloud [40], which is a system which allows mobile
devices to oﬄoad their execution to a device clone operating in the cloud. This
allows for the transfer of a computations from one device to a clone of the
device existing in a virtual machine in the cloud. The virtual clone will consist
of the same hardware and OS, thus replicating the functionality of the oﬄoading
device. This idea of having a device clone in the cloud, is somewhat useful for
this project. However, what is mostly of interest is the memory-layout of the
cloud clone, rather than its capability to run tasks. Due to these diﬀerences
the CloneCloud technique is not directly applicable to this project, but the core
idea of keeping a virtual clone of the Prover with the same memory contents
may be useful.
Remote attestation has recently been proposed a cloud service [41], allowing
the device to oﬄoad the attestation process to the cloud. The suggested system
includes a cloud service, RAaS, described as being a clone of Prv, which may
perform the attestation on its behalf. The cloud service could itself function as
Vrf, reducing the need of a third party to initiate the attestation. This paper
theoretically discusses that executing to remote attestation as a cloud service
may reduce the computational overhead required by the IoT device to perform
remote attestation procedure.
RAaS is, however, a new area of research and the paper explicitly states that
the work is an ongoing eﬀort. The feasibility of the design is not yet certain
and the exact security guarantees between the cloud service and IoT devices
are not speciﬁed. These aspects may both aﬀect the eﬃciency of the procedure
and determine whether it is an improvement over traditional remote attestation.
Furthermore, the work is mainly concerned with the increasing the eﬃciency and
decreasing the battery usage, while the opportunity of increased eﬀectiveness is
not investigated in detail. In short, several details which still needs investigation
and evaluation before RaAS can be used as an alternative to traditional remote
attestation.
==PAGE:46==
34
Literature Overview
Some recent literature within the ﬁeld of oﬄoading will also be reviewed. Several
of these works in the ﬁeld focus on the scalability of oﬄoading and fog computing
and adjusting for the heterogeneity of IoT environments and the cloud. Het-
erogeneity in this context refers to the diﬀerent hardware and software the IoT
devices consist of, their diﬀerent purposes and the diﬀerent amount of resources
they have available
The paper IoT-Fog Optimal Workload via Fog Oﬄoading [42] discuss ways to
optimise the workload of the fog nodes. It proposes a scheme consisting of three
stages. In the ﬁrst stage, the fog node will categorise its incoming request de-
pending on the required workload, calculating the processing wait time required.
It will then maintain its queue size according to the workload of its tasks and
the total delay required to compute them. The second stage consists of the fog
node maintaining its capability. If a queued request is bigger than its capability
the fog node will oﬄoad the computation from the congested node to another
less congested fog node. Third stage is centered around deciding whether to of-
ﬂoad to another node based on a list of the nodes’ locations and on their current
loads.
A recent paper [43], discusses as a similar approach of distributing the workload,
however with the heterogeneous nature of the fog nodes being taken into account
and focuses on minimising the energy use and delay for the end-devices. This
system model is considerably more complex, but the focus on energy and delays
is useful in the context of sensor networks.
Lastly, the paper Large-scale Oﬄoading in the Internet of Things [44], takes
another approach to the scaling of oﬄoading (in the context of low-powered
device to cloud). It also addresses the heterogeneous nature of the IoT envi-
ronment. The paper introduces an Autoscaler mechanism, which operates as
an interface between the oﬄoading-tasks and the diﬀerent cloud computing re-
sources. The Autoscaler distributes the task to the cloud back-end using round
robin scheduling to the available cloud servers, The technology adds a 150 ms
overhead per request, but it in turn improves the dynamic scaling for oﬄoading
in IoT scenarios.
3.5
Discussion
There are certain shortcomings of the current attestation procedures, the software-
based attestation protocols have several documented attacks against then. Fur-
thermore they rely on strong assumptions about the adversaries and have strict
timing requirements for the Prv-Vrf-network.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Discussion
35
While the hybrid designs rely on architecturally good designs due to them al-
legedly only requiring minimal hardware modiﬁcations, they are, however, cur-
rently limited to static attestation and due to the designs not being publicly
available they cannot be expanded on. Hardware-based architectures have tra-
ditionally been more expensive as they require additional components. Further-
more the proposed hardware protocols are still limited to static attestation or
attestation by execution ﬂow, both of which have certain vulnerabilities.
TrustZone has however recently started becoming available for low-end devices
and should have the security requirements necessary for implementing remote
attestation. This makes TrustZone viable for static attestation designs. Dy-
namic attestation on TrustZone has also been proposed and implemented, C-
FLAT attests dynamic memory by monitoring the execution ﬂow, however, it
does create a large overhead while still being vulnerable to attacks which do not
disrupt the execution ﬂow. The consequences of using TrustZone-based remote
attestation are also not discussed in detail, whether the underlying application
of the device is aﬀected and whether the requirements posed by the attestation
procedure would make the device suited for real-world scenarios.
An issue of static remote attestation is the computation of hashes and authen-
tication, which may take signiﬁcant time to compute on low-end devices. These
computations may require the device functionality to be paused until the attes-
tation is completed, as interference or key-leakage will invalidate the trustwor-
thiness of the procedure. The consequent downtime may cause these protocols
to be unsuited for devices operating in critical infrastructure. Furthermore, the
proposed static remote attestation designs will usually focus on validating the
embedded devices using hash values of their program binary. This is reason-
able, as the attestation design does not have the resources to perform complex
forensics on the dynamic memory regions. However, neglecting the remaining
memory such as the RAM, the region of memory-mapped peripherals and data
ﬂash, may lead to the attestation concluding that the device is in a valid state,
while peripherals are wrongly conﬁgured or buﬀer overﬂows attacks are being
executed in the RAM. In short, limiting the attestation to program ﬂash does
not give a complete picture of the state of the device.
Ideally, the result of the remote attestation should accurately indicate whether
or not the device is in a legal functional state and whether or not the results
of the device (such as the reportings of a sensor node) can be trusted. Several
current approaches only approximate this result, based on the program binary.
Dynamic attestation is also an option, but will either be cause a large overhead
or require additional hardware.
Furthermore attesting the control ﬂow also
fails to completely validate the device, as malware can still cause malfunctions
without changing the ﬂow of the program.
==PAGE:48==
36
Literature Overview
Oﬄoading the memory to a computationally powerful device, such as a fog
node, could improve the eﬃciency of the remote attestation and reduce the
time the functionality of the device is halted during the attestation. It could
also allow for attestation of the more complex memory regions. The fog node
will have signiﬁcantly more computation power and resources, which may make
attestation of both static and dynamic memory possible.
This would bring
remote attestation closer to achieving an complete picture of the Prv’s state and
being able to accurately determine whether a device can be trusted. Whether
oﬄoading improves the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness would need to be researched
and tested on an embedded device.
Additionally, interruptibility of the attestation procedure should be considered.
Making the remote attestation procedure interruptible could allow the device
functionality to run while being attested, alleviating the issues regarding down-
time for devices in critical scenarios.
Interruptible procedures are, however,
vulnerable towards migratory and transient malware, which may escape de-
tection from attestation protocols, as the hashing and signing of memory are
not atomic operations. However, the technique of memory locking may protect
against these malware as it protects the temporal consistency of memory, which
ensures the integrity of the computations on said data.
Current methods of oﬄoading cannot be directly applied to the project due
to the somewhat unique relationship between Prover and Veriﬁer.
However,
CloneCloud presents the idea of having a device clone in the cloud, which could
be useful in the context of remote attestation. The work is not directly applica-
ble, but the core concept of keeping an accurate "clone" of a device can be used
as inspiration. The idea of RAaS has also been proposed, however the feasibility
still remains to be tested and a lot of the details of it are too vague to be put
to use. However, the ideas presented are extremely useful and the work will be
used as a basis for this project.
With regards to the discussed oﬄoading techniques, fog congestion could be
signiﬁcantly reduced, as the overload is distributed over several fog nodes. This
technique may need some adaption to be used for the purpose of oﬄoading
remote attestation, however the core concept is useful. It may be diﬃcult to
scale this project’s proposal to large sensor networks, however, these techniques
presented may alleviate the issues.
In conclusion, current remote attestation designs have certain limitations, which
oﬄoading may help overcome. The details of the procedure would however need
to be speciﬁed, such as achieving the security necessary in oﬄoading and inves-
tigating whether oﬄoading and verifying memory regions besides the program
ﬂash is feasible. In addition, it is desired to investigate whether the implementa-
tion of oﬄoading remote attestation would be suited for a real-world application.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Proposed Approach
Given the limitations of current remote attestation protocols, this project pro-
poses the use of oﬄoading in the context of remote attestation.
If memory
is oﬄoaded from a resource-constrained Prover to a more powerful device, the
attestation procedure can be expanded to attest more regions of memory and
consequently improve the eﬀectiveness of remote attestation. Additionally, it
may reduce the computations performed by the Prover, thereby increasing its
eﬃciency. This chapter will investigate the viability of oﬄoading memory to im-
prove remote attestation. In addition, this chapter deﬁnes the security require-
ments of the protocol and discusses the limitations, opportunities and challenges
of oﬄoading.
4.1
Proposal introduction
To illustrate the limitations of current static remote attestation protocols, Figure
4.1 presents the memory of a common embedded system, in which the attested
memory is shown in green and the non-attested memory is shown in grey. This
system consists of a microcontroller with a ﬂash memory, several sections of
SRAM, a boot ROM and memory-mapped peripherals such as GPIO, ADC,
I2C. This system may, as an example, be an IoT device using attached mod-
==PAGE:50==
38
Proposed Approach
ules and sensors to perform non-native operations of the microcontroller, such
as temperature/humidity readings and wireless communication, e.g., Bluetooth.
As these attached devices may have their own internal memory and conﬁgura-
tion, this will increase the possibly states of the IoT device and consequently
the number of invalid states in which the IoT device performs erroneously. The
existing static remote attestation schemes attest only the program memory (the
ﬂash memory shown in green in Figure 4.1). This only gives a partial view of the
system and may fail to detect if the stack or heap memory is being exploited,
if peripheral addresses and peripheral devices are misconﬁgured or if invalid
calibration values are kept in the data ﬂash, all of which causing the device
to enter a faulty state and producing results which cannot be trusted. Worth
noting, is that the boot ROM should technically also attestable by several static
attestation procedures as it should remain static, however it is not mentioned
in the current protocols, presumably because it is assumed to be safe.
Figure 4.1: Example of device and its attested memory using traditional static
remote attestation.
To increase the eﬀectiveness of remote attestation, oﬄoading will be used to
transfer the Prover’s memory to a more resourceful device, such that more
memory may be attested.
If the entire memory of the device is accurately
reported it would be possibly to correctly attest the system, assuming that Vrf
can distinguish between valid and invalid memory.
Embedded devices in critical scenarios may be unable to suspend their work to
perform a long attestation procedure. Therefore another focus of the project will
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Project scope
39
be to use oﬄoading to make attestation more eﬃcient or to alleviate the issue of
suspension by making the the procedure interruptible. Interruptible procedures
may however be susceptible to interference from malware, which will have to be
prevented using techniques such as memory locking.
4.2
Project scope
To limit the scope of the project, the attestation procedure will be performed
on a single device. Furthermore, to avoid having to design multiple IoT devices,
the remaining IoT network will be simpliﬁed to a single fog node, acting as both
the Veriﬁer and transmitter/receiver for any communication necessary with the
IoT device application. The communication between these two will be a one
hop connection as to abstract away from the underlying network architecture.
The project focuses mainly on the IoT device’s role in the protocol, as most of
the challenges in remote attestation are associated with its resource constraints
and this device being remote. Consequently, the issues of the security of the
fog node, cloud security and architecture will be considered out of scope of this
project.
As IoT devices on the market would be diﬃcult to reverse-engineer and repro-
gram, it was instead decided to make a simple IoT device from scratch, which
can be designed and implemented exactly as required.
In short, the security requirements in focus will primarily be for the oﬄoading
procedure on the IoT device and ensuring that the communication between the
device and the fog node is secure.
4.3
Overview of the proposal
In order to give an overview of the proposal, the ideal version of the memory
oﬄoading protocol and its results will be presented.
This will be the basic
concept which will be transformed throughout the project according to security
requirements, limitations and viability of the procedure
Figure 4.2 illustrates a simpliﬁed version of the protocol.
• The Veriﬁer is a fog node, which for the implementation of the project
==PAGE:52==
40
Proposed Approach
will be a laptop connected to the Prover. The fog node has the ability
to request attestations of the Prover and verify the results. For now it
is assumed that the Veriﬁer has knowledge of all valid combinations of
memory M and has the ability to check whether a given memory m is
part of this set.
• The Prover is an IoT device made on a microcontroller split into a trusted
oﬄoading procedure and an untrusted sensor application. The Prover’s
trusted oﬄoading procedure will be able to transfer the device’s memory
m, consisting of the device’s RAM, ﬂash etc., if prompted by the Verﬁer.
Figure 4.2: The simpliﬁed protocol of attesting a device using oﬄoading.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Sensor node design: Operating system
41
Figure 4.3 shows the ideal results of oﬄoading. If the protocol is successful the
entire memory of the device may be oﬄoaded, giving the Veriﬁer a complete
state of the device, which can then be used to accurately determine whether
the device can be trusted. Ideally, the microcontroller will be able to securely
gather the memory of the connected peripheral devices and forward it to Vrf
such that the entire device can be veriﬁed.
Figure 4.3: Ideal result of device and its attested memory using oﬄoading for
remote attestation.
4.4
Sensor node design: Operating system
The proposal for oﬄoading largely relies on what will be possible and practical
on actual hardware. Its feasibility tightly relies on the layout of IoT devices
memory and whether or not it is eﬀective and eﬃcient compared to other re-
mote attestation protocols. Therefore, the ﬁrst step of the project will be to
design the low-end IoT embedded device, in which the remote attestation will
be performed. This allows for a memory analysis to be performed and will al-
low for designing a remote attestation procedure which takes advantage of the
memory layout and may co-exist with the device’s functionality. For simplicity,
the protocol will be designed for a very simple IoT sensor node, doing regular
sensor measurements and sending these measurements to another device.
While such a device does not necessarily need an operating system (OS), the
presence of an OS makes the development easier.
OS’s are also popular for
==PAGE:54==
42
Proposed Approach
development of embedded systems and it will therefore be preferable to design
an oﬄoading procedure which can co-exist with the OS on the platform.
For the choice of OS it was desired to use an OS common for low-end IoT devices.
According to a survey by the Eclipse foundation [45], the most commonly used
OS for IoT devices are currently: Linux, Windows, FreeRTOS, none, MBed
OS, Contiki, TinyOS and RIOT OS. Linux and Windows mostly being used by
gateways and edge nodes. A stripped-down Linux requiring 1MB of RAM and
1MB of ROM and Windows IoT requiring 256 MB RAM (128 MB free to OS)
and 2 GB Storage [46]. As this project focuses on low-end devices with limited
resources, Linux and Windows are excluded.
FreeRTOS was chosen based on its popularity in IoT, its easy thread implemen-
tation, real-time functionality and the level of control it grants over interrupts
and hardware. FreeRTOS is also advantageous in being low-level, highly cus-
tomisable and with direct access to starting and stopping threads, disabling
interrupts etc.
4.4.1
FreeRTOS
As FreeRTOS will be used in designing the sensor node, its functionalities and
terminology must brieﬂy be explained.
FreeRTOS is written in C (with some assembler code), it is designed to be
be simple, having a small memory footprint and fast execution. It supports
multitasking, allowing multiple tasks to be run seemingly concurrently, as the
OS switches rapidly between them. Each task has their own allocated stack,
which they respectively maintain.
To support communication between the tasks the OS provides queues, mutexes
and semaphores. Queues are thread-safe and are often used as a FIFO buﬀer
for intra-task communication. The queues are of ﬁxed sizes and can be used un-
block suspended tasks, waiting for messages in said queue. The semaphores and
mutexes provide means of implementing synchronisation or mutual exclusion of
resources. These FreeRTOS structures are typically allocated dynamically, but
it also has the option of static allocation in order to place these structures at
speciﬁc memory location.
FreeRTOS is a real-time OS, meaning that the embedded system is required to
respond to certain events within a strictly speciﬁed time-frame. To reach this
requirement, the scheduler must be predictable and thereby deterministic. The
determinism is reached by allowing the threads to be assigned a priority, which
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Sensor node design: Sensor hardware
43
the scheduler uses to determine the order of execution.
The scheduler also allows tasks to suspend themselves. Tasks can be delayed for
a ﬁxed period or block until a certain resource becomes available or a speciﬁc
event occurs.
Each task has its own stack memory so on context switches
between tasks, the contents of each register is simply pushed to the stack using
an assembler code macro. On switching back, the register contents are then
popped back from the stack.
The words tasks and threads can be used somewhat interchangeably in this
context. However, task is the word used in FreeRTOS and will therefore be
used throughout this report.
4.5
Sensor node design: Sensor hardware
The IoT device will be designed with simplicity in mind, however it is of interest
to investigate the consequences of remote attestation on non-monolithic devices.
Therefore the sensor node application with consist of two peripheral sensor,
which will be prompted for data at a ﬁxed interval. This data will then be
reported to a third party in order to simulate a larger network which relies on
accurate readings from this device. Doing this, it will be possible investigate
the consequences of using remote attestation on a real device and seeing how
the device’s application are aﬀected by the attestation procedure and vice versa.
Lastly this design is also used in order to analyse the memory of a "typical" IoT
device.
4.5.1
Peripheral sensor overview
For this project two peripheral sensors was chosen, a temperature sensor and
a water sensor.
Diﬀerent IoT systems may use diﬀerent types of peripheral
devices. However, this project simply needs two distinct sensors in order to show
the challenges and opportunities when working with a non-monolithic system
with diﬀerent peripheral devices.
The temperature sensor was chosen as a digital sensor, the Bosch BME280, to
integrate a component with its own memory in the form of registers and to
integrate some digital intra-device communication (as in I2C, SPI, I2S etc.).
The second sensor was chosen as an analog sensor, a simple no-brand sensor,
==PAGE:56==
44
Proposed Approach
giving a voltage output depending on the water level. The peripheral sensors
can be seen on Figure 4.4.
(a) Digital temperature sensor.
(b) Analog water level sensor.
Figure 4.4: The two sensors used for the sensor node application.
For illustrative purposes the device can be imagined to be a temperature and
water sensor IoT device in a server room. The device will each 100ms report
the temperature and water level of the room. Connected to this device may be
an array of other devices. This IoT system may function as an anti-ﬁre system,
turning on the sprinklers if an increasingly high temperature is measured over
a number of samples. Another device may be reading the water level the device
reports, ready to turn oﬀthe servers and enable a countermeasure if a water
leak happens. In any case, it could have disastrous consequences if any of the
devices went oﬄine to perform a remote attestation procedure while a ﬁre broke
out. Likewise, it would also be disastrous if remote attestation was omitted and
the sensor node was hacked and started reporting a high temperature to the
sprinkler system, ﬂooding the room and in turn not reporting the water level.
This is a simpliﬁed example of how such as sensor node could have a critical
role in an IoT system and how it may propagate errors to the other devices in
the system if left unchecked.
4.5.2
Water level sensor
The water level sensor is an analog sensor and will give a voltage output de-
pending on how immersed it is in water. It works as a resistor whose resistance
varies by the water level. As it is purely analog, has no internal memory and
consequently cannot directly be attacked by malware. It is supplied with voltage
and ground using two of the sensors pins, while the last pin will output a voltage
depending on the water level. The output is equal to the supply voltage when
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Sensor node design: Sensor hardware
45
the sensor is immersed in water and fully conducting and is equal to ground
when the sensor is dry and is not conductive.
This voltage level has to be converted to a digital value to be used in the device.
This conversion will be done by the internal analog-to-digital-converter (ADC)
of the device (a feature present on most microcontrollers).
The accuracy of
the ADC will depend on the cost of the hardware, however, accuracy is not
of concern for the purposes of this project. For the same reason, the voltage
output of the sensor will be assumed to be linear between the maximum value
of being covered in water and the minimum of being dry. The digital output
will depend on the resolution of the ADC, given as number of bits, n. Using
this, the percentage of water covering the sensor can be calculated as:
water% = 100 · outputADC
2n
The output can, however, depend on the ADC conﬁgurations, which can be
written to and read using the memory addresses of the ADC peripheral. The
ADC must be conﬁgured to use the correct resolution and input and is in this
case conﬁgured to be triggered by a speciﬁc interrupt, which ensures that sensor
readings are done at a regular interval. If these settings are misconﬁgured, the
sensor may report incorrect readings, which would not only cause this device
to behave incorrectly, but the misreadings could propagate errors to other de-
vices in the IoT network, whose behaviour depend on the sensor-readings being
accurate. As a consequence, the memory associated with the ADC-peripheral
will need to be oﬄoaded and validated in order to fully attest the state of the
device.
4.5.3
Temperature sensor - Bosch BME280
The Bosch BME280 is a digital humidity, pressure and temperature sensor.
For the purposes of this project the accuracy of the data or the pressure and
humidity functionality is not of much importance. Mostly the BME280 will be a
representation of a typical digital sensor and peripheral device in an IoT device.
The sensor can be communicated with using either SPI or I2C communication.
I2C will be chosen for the project as transmission speed is not of importance.
The datasheet strongly recommends that data is read using a burst read, which
is speciﬁed as sending the slave address, the desired register address, after which
the sensor starts reading out data from that address and on-wards until it no
longer receives an ACK [47]. An example of this can be seen in Figure 4.5,
==PAGE:58==
46
Proposed Approach
where register 0xF6 and 0xF7 is read, after which the master stops the read
by no longer replying ACK. The write is however done in the simple manner of
sending the slave address, the register address then the data. Note that correct
conﬁguration of the I2C peripheral must be veriﬁed in the same manner as for
the water sensor. However, in this case the external memory residing on the
digital sensor must also be veriﬁed to ensure correct readings.
Figure 4.5: Sensor I2C burst read of register 0xF6 and 0xF7. Source: data
sheet [47].
The sensor consists of a variety of registers, 8 read-only registers containing raw
humidity, temperature and pressure data. 3 read-write registers for conﬁgura-
tion, 2 read-only for calibration data and 1 read-only each for the status, chip-id
and a reset-registers. The memory map of the sensor can be seen in Figure 4.6.
Worth noting, is that the shown registers are not necessarily contiguous, there
are registers in between the mapped register, which are not documented in the
datasheet. By experimentation it is found that these registers can be read with-
out issues and do not disturb the burst read of the memory.
Figure 4.6: Temperature sensor BME280 memory map. Source: data sheet
[47].
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Sensor node design: Microcontroller and device application
47
Please also note that the device starts in sleep mode and requires that the
mode-register is set to normal mode and the oversampling registers are set to a
non-zero value before the sensor will give accurate results.
If this sensor has a wrong value in its mode or oversampling register it would
report back an incorrect result. As these registers are not checked by current
methods of remote attestation, a device could report back as being in a correct
state with a legal memory hash, while having a corrupt sensor reporting incorrect
temperature values to other IoT devices on its network.
As external digital
sensors are not directly linked to memory addresses, they will not be taken into
account in current methods of remote attestation, even though their state is
essential to the performance of the sensor node. If a mobile adversary exploits
a vulnerability to change the state of this peripheral sensor and then deletes all
traces of itself from memory, the invalid state cannot be detected by current
methods of remote attestation.
4.6
Sensor node design: Microcontroller and de-
vice application
4.6.1
Hardware
The prototype for the sensor node was ﬁrst chosen to be on an evaluation-kit
LPCXpresso54114, which is an evaluation kit for the LPC541xx MCU chips from
NXP. All of them using the ARM Cortex-M4 core running at up to 100MHz,
having up to 256KB on-chip ﬂash memory and up to 192KB total SRAM. Due
to these speciﬁcations the microcontroller unit (MCU) will be considered some-
what representative of low-end embedded devices.
The processor is a modi-
ﬁed Harvard system, meaning that it does have a shared memory space. The
memory map of the device can be seen on Figure 4.7.
The evaluation-kit’s
chip, LPC54114J256, has 256 KB ﬂash and 4 RAM-modules, SRAM0, SRAM1,
SRAM2 and SRAMX totaling 192 KB RAM. These memory regions and their
addresses are noteworthy, as they will later be used in the oﬄoading process.
The goal of the procedure will be to oﬄoad all these memory regions.
The diagram for the system can be seen in Figure 4.8. The IoT sensor node con-
sists of the microcontroller, the digital temperature sensor and the analog water
sensor. External to this device is the fog node, which may request for the device
to be attested. To further simplify the system, sensor readings will be sent to
the fog node (instead of a third party, which would require additional hardware)
and the fog node will act both as Vrf and the initiator of the attestation.
==PAGE:60==
48
Proposed Approach
Figure 4.7: Memory map of LPC5411x. Source: user manual [48].
Figure 4.8: Hardware diagram: IoT device and fog node.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Sensor node design: Microcontroller and device application
49
4.6.2
Software: Device application
Lastly the software of sensor node will be detailed. As the underlying OS will
be FreeRTOS, the application will be split into tasks, each performing their own
individual jobs.
In short, the device application will consist of producing a the temperature and
an indication of the water level. The temperature and water data will be sent
to a connected device at a ﬁxed time interval. This ﬁrst requires one task to
read the temperature and one task to read the water sensor. In order to send
the data a task handling the communication is needed. More speciﬁcally, one
task is need to handle incoming transmissions and one is needed to handle out-
going transmissions. Additionally in order to have some non-essential processes
running and enabling debugging on the device, a task toggling the application
LED as a heartbeat each 1000ms and a task reading the state of the buttons
are created.
The initial communications will be UART-based as this does not require any
further hardware. However the system will be made in such a way that a more
methods of communications can be added with minimal changes.
Each of the objectives will be assigned their own task:
• Temperature sensor task: Measures temperature and sends data to
the UART transmit task.
• Water sensor task: Measures the water level and sends data to the
UART transmit task.
• UART transmit task: Handles outgoing transmissions.
Reads data
sent to this task and sends it further to its destination via UART.
• UART receive task: Handles ingoing transmissions. Reads the trans-
missions and reacts accordingly, such as initialising the attestation proce-
dure.
• LED task: Performs an LED heartbeat by toggling the LED.
• Button task: Reads the state of the button and performs a debugging-
related action if the button is pushed.
This application will be referred to throughout the report as the "untrusted"
or non-secure device application.
While this application is not made to be
inherently insecure, it is proved by the many successful attacks on embedded
==PAGE:62==
50
Proposed Approach
devices, that vulnerabilities may exist, regardless of whether the developers are
aware of them or not. This application will diﬀer from the secure oﬄoading
procedure, which will be isolated from this application, but residing on the
same device. The details of securing the oﬄoading procedure will be discussed
in Section 4.9, however for now, the oﬄoading procedure will be considered to be
trusted ﬁrmware residing on the device, while being isolated from the non-secure
device application.
4.7
Remote attestation of peripheral devices (tem-
perature sensor)
Section 4.5.3 explained how the conﬁguration of the registers of the temperature
could impact its given measurements. The state of peripheral devices is typically
not considered in the remote attestation literature, even though a misconﬁgured
sensor could cause the node to report erroneous results. This is a limitation
which oﬄoading may solve.
As previously stated, transient malware may infect an embedded device and re-
conﬁgure attached peripheral devices. An attacker could, as an example, attack
the discussed temperature sensor by sending an I2C command to change the
mode from normal to sleep. This attack could also be performed by maliciously
changing the register addresses and data bytes of legitimate commands, which
may make the attack possible without changing the execution ﬂow.
One of the goals of oﬄoading the remote attestation procedure is to expand the
attestation to cover more memory than just the program ﬂash, such as the RAM
and data ﬂash to get a more complete image of the device. To get a complete
image of the device, the state of the peripheral devices would, however, also
needed to be taken into account.
This prompts the idea of also oﬄoading the accessible registers on peripheral
devices, such as the temperature sensor. With an improved remote attestation
procedure the register contents of any attached digital devices could be veriﬁed
along with the other memory.
This could be realised by the secure oﬄoading procedure, reading all accessi-
ble registers and transmitting them along with the rest of the memory. For
this to work, the procedure would need to have exclusive access to the periph-
eral addresses associated with the communication. This can either be done by
enforcing access control of the peripheral channel (I2C, SPI) to prevent the un-
trusted software of interfering with the reading or it could be done by making
==PAGE:63==
4.8 Memory analysis of sensor node
51
this part of the attestation procedure uninterruptible.
It will not be possible to completely verify peripheral devices as they may only
be partly be accessible. This procedure will assume that the peripheral device
is trusted and is replying truthfully to the register requests. This is, however,
a fair assumption as long as the only attack surface for the peripheral device is
the I2C channel. This assumption may not hold for reprogrammable peripheral
devices and devices with more attack surfaces, such as Wi-Fi modules. These
devices would instead require their own trusted component, deploying remote
attestation protocols similar to the proposal of the project, if they were to be
properly attested. However, in the context of this project, peripheral devices
will be assumed to only be accessible through their respective communication
channel with the microcontroller.
Physical attacks will also be diﬃcult to prevent, as an attacker could physical
change the digital sensor to one of their own choosing if it follows the commu-
nication protocol and communicates using the syntax of the replaced sensor.
Physical attacks is therefore an issue which will be diﬃcult to prevent, given a
resourceful physical attacker.
In addition to attestation of the peripheral devices, the system’s peripheral
addresses used for these external devices must also be veriﬁed. This memory
region cannot be hashed due to its many dynamic status registers. Additionally,
registers will also often be a speciﬁc length, four bytes long in this case, which
may leave bits not being associated with any functionality and having undeﬁned
read-values, [48] causing even more possible valid hashes. As the ADC, I2C,
GPIO peripheral etc. are memory-mapped, the oﬄoading of these regions should
not diﬀer from the oﬄoading of other addressable memory. This assumption will
however have to be veriﬁed in the implementation of the procedure.
4.8
Memory analysis of sensor node
To investigate how the memory of the sensor node application was being utilised
a memory analysis was performed. This analysis will reveal whether the ﬂash,
RAM, boot ROM and peripheral device registers adheres to some structure,
which can be predicted and used in the veriﬁcation process. The details of the
sensor node’s application are discussed in Section 5.1, but the exact details of the
implementation are not important for the analysis provided in the section. The
memory map of the device (Figure 4.7) is, however, important as every region
of memory will be analysed and discussed. The device consists of boot ROM,
ﬂash memory, the temperature sensor registers and 4 diﬀerent RAM regions
==PAGE:64==
52
Proposed Approach
SRAM0, SRAM1, SRAM2 and SRAMX (the peripheral addresses will at the
current time not be discussed)
The program ﬂash is expected to remain static throughout the use of the ap-
plication.
The application is programmed into the ﬂash and no part of the
application is programmed to write to the ﬂash. Consequently, the program
ﬂash can still be veriﬁed using hash values, since Vrf would only have to know
a limited amount of legal hashes corresponding to all legal program versions.
This analysis will therefore mainly involve the RAM used by the applications.
First, the FreeRTOS memory analyser, built into MCUXpresso IDE, was used to
extract the memory addresses allocated to each task and queue. The addresses
of these were noted for the following analysis. By using these, it was possible to
get information about where in the memory the diﬀerent structures lie. Then,
using this information, the queues, tasks and the timer was plotted into the
memory map in the address and information columns, as depicted in Figure 4.1.
As the application for the moment does not require much space in RAM, it is
entirely located in SRAM0 (64KB), with the heap start being set to 0x20000000
and the stack start (not to be confused with the FreeRTOS stacks, which are
task-speciﬁc) being set to 0x2000F000. To avoid noting the full addresses, these
will henceforth be noted by their oﬀset from 0x20000000, e.g. 0x2000F000 will
be noted as 0xF000.
The diﬀerent FreeRTOS structures (the tasks and queues) did remain static,
occupying the same addresses between resetting or reprogramming the device.
This is due to the structures being allocated statically and before the scheduler
has been started. As an example, for this version of the application, the UART
Transmit Queue will always occupy address 0x3EC and the LED Heartbeat
Task address 0xD94 in RAM.
A problem may arise with dynamic allocation of FreeRTOS structures after
the scheduler has begun. If a task is allocated dynamically, the Vrf will not
know where in memory it is located, making the process of attesting the RAM
and memory locking even more complex. Some trusted scheme of exchanging
the structure location could perhaps be derived, but this project will instead
be limited to statically created structures, such that Vrf has knowledge of the
layout beforehand.
To further analyse the memory, it had to be oﬄoaded from the device. This was
done using the oﬄoading program, detailed in Section 5.2. The details of the
program will be explained in its respective section, however described brieﬂy:
the sensor node will transmit each memory region which is then recorded as .txt
and .bin ﬁles by a Python program on the fog node.
==PAGE:65==
4.8 Memory analysis of sensor node
53
Complete readings of the memories were taken over the course of a day in
order to get an accurate representation of the memory regions used. The ﬁrst
oﬄoad was done after the device had booted, then 15 more were then over
the course of 10 hours.
To further analyse the memory activity throughout
these memory readings, a Python-program was written to calculate how many
times each memory region changed over the course of the readings (found in
veriﬁcation_software/memory_analysis/memory_analysis.py). This program
compares each reading of the memory with each other: the ﬁrst reading is
compared with the second, the second with the third etc. Each block of memory
(of 0x10 bytes) which changes value between two readings is noted. This process
is done for each memory-region of the device, the RAM, ﬂash, boot ROM etc.
The results showed that the only memory regions changing during runtime were
SRAM0 and the temperature sensor registers, meaning that the ﬂash, boot
ROM and SRAM1, SRAM2, SRAMX were static during runtime.
Address
Information
Changes
Changes (1 Task)
0x2000 0000
No speciﬁc info (heap start)
15
15
0x2000 0100
15
15
0x2000 0200
15
15
0x2000 0300
UartTxQ (0x3EC - 0x4CC)
15
15 (0x370)
0x2000 0400
15
15
0x2000 0500
TmrQ (0x514 - 0x634)
15
15
0x2000 0600
vTaskUARTTransmit (0x644 - 0x7E4)
15
15 (0x600-0x630)
0x2000 0700
13
0
0x2000 0800
vTaskSensorTempRead (0x8B4 - 0xA8C)
15
0
0x2000 0900
15
0
0x2000 0A00
15
0
0x2000 0B00
vTaskSensorWaterRead (0xB24 - 0xCF4)
15
0
0x2000 0C00
0
0
0x2000 0D00
vTaskLed (0xD94 - 0xF74)
15
0
0x2000 0E00
0
0
0x2000 0F00
15
0
0x2000 1000
vTaskButton (0x1004 - 0x11E4)
15
15
0x2000 1100
8
0
0x2000 1200
IDLE (task) (0x1274 - 0x145C)
15
15
0x2000 1300
0
0
0x2000 1400
Tmr Svc (timer) (0x14E4 - 0x16C4)
15
15
0x2000 1500
15
15
0x2000 1600
15
15
0x2000 1700
Scheduler (236B)
15
15
...
No changes in this area.
0
0
0x2000 F000
Stack (main and ISR)
15
15
Table 4.1: SRAM0 memory map with recorded amount of changes per 0x100
byte region between 16 memory oﬄoads.
==PAGE:66==
54
Proposed Approach
The SRAM0 information can be seen in the Changes-column of Figure 4.1,
where the memory is split into chunks of 0x100. The results show how the ﬁrst
6KB (0x0000 - 0x1700) are being actively used by the device. There a some
inactive blocks in-between, but most of it changes between each oﬄoad. After
0x1700 there is a large gap without any activity until the last block of SRAM0,
where the stack is located. Even though each FreeRTOS task has their own
stack, the normal stack is still used by main and by any interrupts. There is
also space which in unaccounted for, before the ﬁrst queue and in-between each
structure. The last space, after the software timer, is also unaccounted for, but
it likely hosts the scheduler, which is created after the last task.
In addition to researching the memory consumption of the whole system, it is
also of interest to research the memory consumption of a scenario with a single
task running. This is helpful to see if memory locking can be applied to some
regions of the system, while running tasks in others.
The experiment will be to observe how much of the memory space a single task
would use, in a situation where all the tasks and FreeRTOS structures have
been created, but have been suspended. Meaning that they are allocated, but
the scheduler will be ignoring them and their stack will remain static. To test
this, the application was edited to suspend all tasks except the button task, the
task which monitors the state of the MCU board’s button. The button-task was
chosen as it does not use any queues, timers or rely on any other tasks. The
oﬄoading procedure and analysis was repeated for this new application and the
results can be seen in the column Changes (1 Task) in Figure 4.1. It is seen how
the stack is still active and along with the top of the heap to addresses 0x640,
where the UART Transmit task starts. While the queues themselves are not
active, the memory surrounding them are. Additionally the memory allocated
for the button task, the idle task, software timer and scheduler remains active.
It should be noted that when cryptographic primitives are added to the com-
munication and oﬄoading the stack-size of the UART task (or task associated
with method of communication module) and stack associated with the oﬄoading
procedure will increase. Changing the method of communication from UART to
a wireless method may similarly have consequences for the required stack size.
However, while the memory layout may change, the analysis is still useful as it
outlines the general memory behaviour.
The temperature sensor registers 0xBD, 0xBE, 0xC1 and 0xF3 were also re-
vealed to change in-between the oﬄoads. The last register, 0xF3, is the status
register of the sensor containing a bit indicating whether the sensor is busy
measuring and a bit indicating whether the sensor is busy copying data. As
this register is read-only and cannot be changed maliciously, it will be have to
be ignored by the attestation process. The ﬁrst three registers however are not
==PAGE:67==
4.9 Security of the oﬄoading protocol
55
described in the sensor datasheet as they are in the region between calibration
(0x88 to 0xA1) and id (0x0D). Presumably these registers are used internally
by the sensor, but it cannot be said what they are for and how they aﬀect the
temperature readings. If these registers are read-only they can be safely ignored
in the attestation, however if they can be written to they may aﬀect the device
and could be an attack vector for transient malware creating lasting damage
which is not detectable. To ensure safety it will be necessary to ensure that any
undocumented registers of the sensor used in a device are read-only or do not
have any negative eﬀects if written to.
As a consequence to the observed patterns in the device’s memory, there are
some opportunities and challenges for the attestation procedure. First of all,
program ﬂash, the boot ROM and the unused RAM are all static throughout
the use of the program. This opens up the possibilities of memory locking while
attesting these regions as they are not used by the application. The sensor values
are also mostly predictable as most remain static.
However, certain regions
cannot be predicted as they lack documentation and change during runtime. The
RAM does, however, pose some challenges to interruptible procedures. There
are certain areas of the memory being used by FreeRTOS even when the system
is idle, such as the idle task and any created software timers. The application
also constantly uses the heap and the stack to handle system interrupts.
It
should be noted that while these parts of the RAM are problematic for the
procedure, only 10% of SRAM0 (about 6KB) is actually used by the application.
The remaining SRAM0 and the SRAM1, SRAM2 and SRAMX is completely
static and is therefore very predictable.
In conclusion, only the RAM in use by the application will give issues during
oﬄoading. This part of the RAM does however adhere to a predictable structure
regarding the placement of FreeRTOS objects (tasks, queue, timers).
While
the content of these objects may be diﬃcult to verify, the structure itself is
predictable, as long as the objects are statically allocated. The program ﬂash
and boot ROM remain static and therefore veriﬁable by hash and the analysis
of the sensor reveals that most of the registers are predictable, thereby opening
some possibilities of peripheral device veriﬁcation.
4.9
Security of the oﬄoading protocol
To address the security of the device and the remote attestation protocol, an
attack model will be identiﬁed. The project mainly concerns the security from
the device’s perspective, rather than security of the fog node or related infras-
tructure. Thus, the following attacks will be possible against the protocol:
==PAGE:68==
56
Proposed Approach
• Attack on integrity of transmitted data (software adv.). Malware may
send data, not corresponding to the actual data on the device.
• Attack on integrity of transmitted data (MITM). Another device may
capture and change the data being transmitted.
• Attack on integrity of memory (mobile adv.).
Transient malware may
delete itself to avoid detection when the attestation request is received. If
malware modiﬁes the memory after the attestation request is received, it
is in essence violating the integrity of the response.
• Attack on authenticity of transmitted data (software adv). Malware on
the device responds to the attestation request, instead of the intended
attestation procedure.
• Attack on authenticity of transmitted data (MITM). Another device re-
sponds with data to the attestation request. The response will not be
corresponding to the data of the requested device.
• Replay attack. Software adversary responds with previous, valid response
to the attestation request.
• Attack on availability of device.
DoS attack on device, preventing the
device from doing its normal operations by sending false attestation re-
quests.
• Physical attack on the device. The attacker has physical access to the
device and can perform various attacks to compromise the device.
• TOCTOU attack. Software adversary infects system in-between attesta-
tion and use.
The proposed oﬄoading procedure aims to ensure the same security guarantees
as traditional static remote attestation. By ensuring the same security guaran-
tees the the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of oﬄoading can then be compared to
current methods in a fair manner. These security guarantees will be as follows:
• Ensuring integrity. Integrity must be ensured for the data transferred in
the protocol. Neither the non-trusted device application or a MITM must
be able to tamper with the data without notice. Furthermore the data
must reﬂect the state of the system at the point it receives the attestation
request.
• Ensuring authenticity. Vrf must be able to verify that the data originates
from the trusted oﬄoading procedure.
==PAGE:69==
4.9 Security of the oﬄoading protocol
57
• Ensuring freshness of result (preventing replay attacks). Ensures that old
data cannot be used in response to an oﬄoading request.
These are the security requirements which the procedure must achieve. The
system will not protect against TOCTOU attacks and will instead initially be
suited for IoT devices which are constantly performing a service, instead of
devices performing an on-demand functionality. The procedure will also not
protect against DoS attacks and physical attacks, as these are often not solved
by current designs. Instead, it can later be ensured against DoS attacks and
physical attacks by extending it the same manner as the possible variations of
the static remote attestation protocol, making the it non-interactable to prevent
DoS, using secure heartbeats to prevent physical attacks etc.
First of all, the oﬄoading procedure relies on the embedded device oﬄoading
its memory to a fog node, after which the fog node completes the attestation.
However, this initial transfer of data, must also uphold the speciﬁed security
guarantees. The connection between the IoT device and the fog node (or cloud)
must be secure in order to ensure the security of the protocol. Consequently not
all cryptographic operations can be oﬄoaded to the fog node, as the oﬄoading
procedure itself must be secure, requiring the use of cryptographic operations.
As discussed in Chapter 3, static remote attestation often relies on hybrid or
hardware architecture for having a region of the memory, which only the trusted
attestation process can access (typically containing the secret key). They also
typically rely on veriﬁcation by the use of a hash and authenticity by sending a
MAC for said hash. This is reiterated as the proposed oﬄoading procedure aims
to guarantee security, while being less computationally intensive than traditional
remote attestation. For this reason, the proposed procedure will also make use
of symmetric-key cryptographic as opposed to asymmetric.
The security requirements for the device will have to be achieved partly through
secure communication and partly through secure hardware. The communication
requirements will ﬁrst be discussed, then the hardware requirements needed to
achieve such security.
4.9.1
Communications security
As for the communication the same precautions must be taken as in the tradi-
tional remote attestation. The process of oﬄoading to the fog node must ensure
authenticity and integrity. Consequently, the oﬄoading procedure, like tradi-
tional remote attestation, must also deploy a MAC to protect the authenticity
==PAGE:70==
58
Proposed Approach
and integrity of the data. The data in this case, being the memory transmitted.
In using the MAC, the device must also have means to store the secret key, while
keeping it inaccessible to non-trusted software. This will further be discussed in
the following subsection on hardware security, Section 4.9.2.
While both the traditional remote attestation and this scheme has to use MACs,
it is worth discussing whether the hashing of the memory can be avoided while
doing oﬄoading to cut down on computations. In the traditional approach the
hash is computed on the IoT device, as it is the only party with access to the
memory. However with oﬄoading, the fog node also has access to the entire
memory and can itself hash it or verify certain memory regions without it.
The exacts speciﬁcations of the MAC would have to be chosen as a compromise
between computational intensity and the cryptographic strength. Some micro-
processors may have optimised hardware for cryptographic operations, which
should also be taken into consideration. As the computational intensity of the
MAC will depend on the device’s hardware, the exact speciﬁcations will be left
open for the implementation. The basis for MAC should however he crypto-
graphically secure, such as a cryptographically strong hash function in the case
of using keyed-hash MAC (HMAC).
To ensure that the response matches the latest request, a nonce will be inte-
grated into the result. If the nonce is not used, the untrusted software or a
complicit MITM may interfere with the oﬄoading procedure and respond to
the attestation request with the results from a previous oﬄoading procedure.
To keep the protocol simple, the nonce will be used in the same manner as with
the traditional procedures, where the nonce is included in the request and is
concatenated with a hash of the result before signing it.
Thus, in short, both a MAC and nonce must be used in oﬄoading the memory
from the device to the fog node to ensure authenticity and integrity. Without
these, the procedure will be susceptible to MITM attacks, interference from the
untrusted software and replay attacks between the device and the fog node.
The protocol is illustrated in Figure 4.9.
This design assumes that the em-
bedded device (Prv) consists of both untrusted ﬁrmware (e.g. the sensor node
application) and trusted ﬁrmware (the oﬄoading procedure). Furthermore the
MAC is in this scenario done using HMAC with the key k, known to both Vrf
and the oﬄoading procedure. The procedure involves the attestation request
being sent from Vrf, along with the nonce N. The trusted ﬁrmware will then
reply with the requested memory m, after which it calculates the hash of the
memory, concatenates it with the the nonce and computes the MAC of it. The
MAC is then sent to Vrf, who veriﬁes it and veriﬁes that the oﬄoaded memory
is valid. If both of these are valid the device is considered trustworthy.
==PAGE:71==
4.9 Security of the oﬄoading protocol
59
Figure 4.9: Remote attestation oﬄoading, ideal procedure.
From this design proposal, it is however clear that the oﬄoading procedure also
must make use of computationally intensive cryptographic functions (hashing
and MAC) to ensure integrity and authenticity. These functions may serve as a
computational bottleneck, which may limit the eﬃciency of the procedure. The
speed of transmitting the memory may also highly inﬂuence the eﬃciency, if
the transmission speed is signiﬁcantly slow compared to the time required for
cryptographic computations.
The hashing before the signature is not strictly needed. If the nonce is of a ﬁxed
==PAGE:72==
60
Proposed Approach
size and is not reused, the HMAC can be performed securely directly on m. In
reality, the time required for the signature performed on the hash (32 bytes for
SHA-256) is however negligible compared to the hashing of KBs of memory.
Removing the hashing to improve eﬃciency would merely lead to the signature
instead performing the computations on KBs of memory. The hash is performed
ﬁrst as the extra computations will be negligible and it provides a ﬁxed-length
input for the authentication scheme. This allows for greater ﬂexibility in the au-
thentication schemes as some schemes such as CBC-MAC requires ﬁxed-length
inputs to be secure and public-key schemes such as RSA digital signatures have
a maximum input length. This also grants the option of sending the hash in-
stead of m in some case where the memory is known to be static (e.g. for the
program binary).
Another idea for increasing eﬃciency is splitting the procedure into two phases.
One phase of oﬄoading, which adheres to uninterruptibility, memory locking
or whichever mechanism is in place to secure temporal consistency. Then the
second phase, consisting of the computationally intensive functions, hashing and
signing, where the restrictions are lifted and the device resumes its functions
concurrently with the remainder of the oﬄoading procedure. This can however
lead to situations where the memory changes in-between the two phases, which
will invalidate the signatures on the data. For example, if the memory of the
RAM is transmitted, after which use of the RAM resumes, the state of the
memory will have changed between the initial transmissions and the second
phase. If a signature is computed on the data having its new state, it will not
match the data’s state at the time of transmission. This issue invalidates this
approach to the procedure as the integrity and authenticity can no longer be
veriﬁed.
A third option is instead of using a cryptographically secure hash to compute
h = hash(m), a computationally lighter operation such as the non-cryptographic
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) or a weaker cryptographic hash such as MD5 or
SHA-1, while at the signature-step still using a cryptographically secure HMAC
such as SHA-2. This would signiﬁcantly reduce the required computations as
the initial hash is performed on kilobytes of memory, while the signature is
performed on a few bytes, the hash-output concatenated with a nonce. However,
using a less collision-resistant hash function opens the possibility for malware
to construct itself in a pattern that would result in a collision for the hash
function, creating a seemingly "valid" program state.
For example, CRC is
an error checking hash function built on linear operations, which makes the
operation reversible and thereby not collision resistant. It is therefore possible
for an attacker to create malware in such a way, which would appear to cause a
valid device state using CRC. It may be a challenge for an attacker to modify
their code to collide with lighter collision-resistant hash functions. However as
it is technically possible, a strong hash function is recommended for the this
==PAGE:73==
4.9 Security of the oﬄoading protocol
61
step.
In conclusion, the oﬄoading protocol must use the same cryptographic functions
as the traditional remote attestation protocols in order to ensure integrity and
authenticity of the transmitted memory. Consequently, the oﬄoading procedure
will not signiﬁcantly improve the eﬃciency of remote attestation, as the process
in both cases must spend time calculating a hash of the memory and a signature
before normal operations can be resumed. Oﬄoading may however still have
signiﬁcant improvements regarding the eﬀectiveness of the protocol.
4.9.2
Hardware security
Since the protocol involves the use of a secret shared key, the device will need to
have a way of keeping this key secret even if the untrusted application is infected
with malware. If the device had no protection of the key, malware would have
the opportunity of itself playing the role of Prv in the oﬄoading protocol. It
could take the nonce and concatenate with the expected conﬁguration of the
system, possibly stored by a third party, then itself read the secret key and
sign the hash. Vrf would have no way of distinguishing this malicious response
from a valid one, and would wrongly verify the integrity of the infected device.
Moreover, if the procedure is interruptible, the hardware must ensure that the
context switch between the secure procedure and non-secure application does
not leak the key to the untrusted application. Even when the key is used in RAM
or used in a hardware signature engine the procedure must not leak information
which can be used to derive the key.
Creating these key protection mechanisms in software is not viable, as the mal-
ware could be adapted around them or ignore them completely. In a scenario
where a serious vulnerability allows the attack to run arbitrary code, they may
also have the ability to overwrite or ignore such software protections. This ex-
cludes the software-based architectural approach and leaves the hardware and
hybrid architecture.
Some hardware-implemented method must be put to use, to ensure that the
key is only accessible by the trusted remote attestation procedure. The obvious
choice for implementing this may be the hybrid designs of SMART, TrustLite
and TyTAN, as these allegedly allows for the process to be made secure using
minimal hardware modiﬁcations. However, as these designs are not publicly
available, they cannot be evaluated or implemented. Due to this, they will not
be further discussed.
The remaining option is a hardware-based architecture. Among these, ARM
==PAGE:74==
62
Proposed Approach
TrustZone is the most viable option due to its recent availability in embedded
systems. It is also the architecture of choice for other recent remote attestation
designs. TrustZone was discussed in detail in Section 2.5. Due to the Armv8-M
release of TrustZone and an increased interest from the industry and academia,
the use of TrustZone is now more widespread and it can be found in a variety
of platforms.
The research on some platforms is still somewhat scarce and
the available details regarding the technical implementations are also lacking.
FreeRTOS has, however, been implemented on some TrustZone devices and
recent resources do exist for further implementation [49]. Worth noting, is that
no such implementation seem to exist for the other popular IoT OSs Contiki,
Riot and TinyOS, while developments have been made for Linux such as OP-
TEE, a companion to the Linux kernel [50].
Using TrustZone, the device’s software can be split into a trusted oﬄoading
procedure residing in the secure world (with the secret key) and the device’s
application residing in the normal world. TrustZone can then be conﬁgured to
enable secure context switching between the secure and normal world and to
enforce access control to prevent the normal world from accessing resources as-
sociated with the oﬄoading procedure. TrustZone will, if used correctly, ensure
that the key does not leak to the untrusted application, thereby ensuring the
authenticity and integrity of the procedure.
The oﬄoading request is, as with current interactive attestation designs, as-
sumed to reach the trusted attestation procedure before the untrusted appli-
cation. If this assumption does not hold, transient malware may be able to
detect the request and delete itself before the attestation. This would change
the device’s state after the attestation request, thereby violating integrity.
4.9.3
Summary
While oﬄoading may seem like a more eﬃcient approach to remote attestation,
it does require the same cryptographic primitives as traditional static remote
attestation, if it has to ensure the same security guarantees. It still requires
computing cryptographic hashes and MACs to ensure the authenticity and in-
tegrity of the oﬄoaded data. However, oﬄoading is a more eﬀective attestation
approach because it attests memory regions which are not considered by existing
remote attestation schemes in the literature.
This MAC, including with the nonce, will ensure integrity, authenticity and
freshness of the result. It will prevent MITM attacks, but hardware enforce-
ments are required to prevent the shared secret key from leaking to a software
adversary. To prevent the key from leaking, TrustZone will be used to enforce a
==PAGE:75==
4.10 Using memory locking for a secure and interruptible oﬄoading
procedure
63
strict separation between the trusted oﬄoading procedure and the non-trusted
device application. This extends the security to cover both MITM attacks and
software adversaries. The combination of security in communications and the
hardware enforcements, fulﬁls the requirements of integrity, authenticity and
freshness.
In short, the oﬄoading protocol ensures security by making uses of MACs,
hashing and the use of a nonce. It will however not be more eﬃcient than tradi-
tional remote attestation, if it provides the same security guarantees. However,
oﬄoading approach may still allow for a more eﬀective attestation procedure.
4.10
Using memory locking for a secure and in-
terruptible oﬄoading procedure
As described in Section 2.4, memory locking can be used to ensure the integrity
of the memory while it is being oﬄoaded and to protect the procedure against
migratory and transient malware. This will allow the secure oﬄoading proce-
dure to be interruptible by the untrusted software, allowing the oﬄoading and
the device application to run simultaneously. With the device application run-
ning simultaneously, the time required by the attestation procedure is of less
importance, as it does not prevent the device from performing its duties.
The memory analysis (Section 4.8) explained that most of the the device’s mem-
ory was static during the use of the application. The active memory was the
peripheral sensor and the RAM, more speciﬁcally about 6KB of SRAM0 while
SRAM1, SRAM2 and SRAMX remained inactive. In other words, memory lock-
ing can be used to prevent writes to the ﬂash and most of the RAM without
causing any issues for legal software. By locking it, a mobile adversary will be
prevented from changing it during oﬄoading, while not causing issues under
normal circumstances. The active region of SRAM0 will however be a lot more
diﬃcult to lock as it is constantly be in use by the application. For this reason,
most of this section will mainly be concerned with the issues related to memory
locking of active RAM.
The following security concerns should be addressed before making the attesta-
tion or oﬄoading procedure interruptible:
• Switching between the trusted attestation procedure and the untrusted
application running on the system, may leak secret keys and information
to the untrusted application.
==PAGE:76==
64
Proposed Approach
• Malware on the non-trusted application may interfere with the oﬄoading
process.
• Any malware present can migrate or delete itself to avoid detection.
Using TrustZone for the oﬄoading procedure, as described in Section 4.9.2,
should solve the ﬁrst two issues. To address the ﬁrst issue, the context switch
between non-secure and normal can be implemented in TrustZone in such a way
that the secure memory, cache and registers do not leak into the non-secure
world, thereby not creating an attack-vector for malware. The second issue is
solved by TrustZone’s separation between the secure and normal world. The
secure oﬄoading process will be located in the secure world and the device
application will be located in the non-secure world, which does not have access
to the resources associated with the secure attestation procedure.
However, the third issue of vulnerability to migratory and transient malware, is
not natively solved by using TrustZone. Temporal consistency of the memory
must be achieved at the time of the attestation request, and memory locking
can be used to achieve this.
TrustZone may enable the implementation of memory locking as it does have
the possibility of assigning memory to either the secure or normal world. This
prompts the idea of having the oﬄoading procedure dynamically allocate mem-
ory to the secure world in order to prevent the non-trusted device application
from accessing it.
Using the results from the memory analysis (Section 4.8) an optimal pattern of
memory-locking/unlocking of the active RAM could be developed. A pattern
could be made such that the essential tasks would have the highest uptime,
while the unessential would be locked the longest. If Dec-Lock was used, the
memory-block containing sensor-read-tasks and the UART-transmitter could
be unlocked ﬁrst, along with the UART-transmit queue (UartTxQ) to quickly
re-enable the device functionality.
It is, however, not that quite as simple, as the scheduler, the timer and the idle-
task all require the use of their respective memory regions even when the system
is idle. Additionally, the FreeRTOS scheduler would also need temporarily sus-
pend the unessential tasks. As if they are entered, they will need to be able to
save their state to the stack during the context switch associated with yielding
the task. If the memory is locked, then the scheduler cannot yield control of
said task. Consequently, each task would have to be suspended and resumed in
accordance with the progress of the memory locking scheme. In other words,
the memory locking scheme will be in reality be quite complex if to be done on
a task-to-task basis.
==PAGE:77==
4.10 Using memory locking for a secure and interruptible oﬄoading
procedure
65
Such a scheme would require the oﬄoading procedure to have complete knowl-
edge of the memory layout of the application.
It must know exactly which
memory addresses are associated with which tasks.
If locked memory is ac-
cessed by an active task, an ISR, scheduler or similar the system will generate
an exception and may crash depending on how exceptions are handled. The
memory locking scheme must therefore be carefully constructed to not lock any
resources which may be used by the application.
From the results of the memory analysis (Section 4.8), one could devise a scheme
for the memory locking mechanism. As discussed, all tasks could ﬁrst be sus-
pended, before the memory area of those tasks can be locked. The main stack,
the heap and the scheduler will be necessary for the application to run so these
will have to be attested in an uninterruptible phase of the procedure.
The
attestation process could then oﬄoad and unlock the memory in the order of
most important to least important using the Dec-Lock scheme, while resuming
each task after their respective memory region is unlocked. As an example, the
oﬄoading and locking scheme could be done as follows:
• The attestation request is received, interrupts are disabled and all tasks
are suspended.
• The memory area of the main stack is oﬄoaded and unlocked.
• The memory area of the main heap (before the allocated tasks) is oﬄoaded
and unlocked.
• The memory area of the idle task and software timers are oﬄoaded and
unlocked.
• The memory area of the scheduler is oﬄoaded and unlocked.
• Start allowing interrupts from the application.
• The memory area of the queue for the communication transmissions task
is unlocked (e.g. UartTransmitQueue).
• The memory area of the communication transmission task is oﬄoaded and
unlocked (e.g. UartTransmitTask).
• The communications task is resumed (vTaskResume(UartTransmitTask)).
• The memory area of the temperature sensor task is oﬄoaded and unlocked.
• The temperature sensor task is resumed (vTaskResume()).
• (repeated for each task before the process moves on to inactive memory)
==PAGE:78==
66
Proposed Approach
As seen in the memory analysis, any one task should only require the mem-
ory allocated for the task itself, the scheduler, the main stack, the main heap
(before the FreeRTOS structures), idle task and timers. Using a scheme such
as this should then provide the highest up-time while oﬄoading all of the de-
vice’s memory. In this way the critical tasks could be unlocked early, then the
less important tasks before moving on to the ﬂash memory and other static
areas. Depending on the application, areas of the data ﬂash or peripheral ad-
dresses could even be unlocked before moving on to less important tasks. The
device could then quickly resume its most critical functions, while the rest of
the memory is analyzed.
As an alternative to the complicated memory locking of active RAM, a simple
approach will also be proposed. In the case of this device’s application, there
is a large amount of unused space, the memory used is only about 10% of
SRAM0, while SRAM1, SRAM2 and SRAMX is completely unused. The Dec-
Lock could again be deployed, but the active memory would not be unlocked
until it is attested. After an uninterruptible period of attesting the active RAM,
the procedure is then made interruptible and the static and less troublesome is
oﬄoaded while the application runs simultaneously. This approach will only be
made interruptible after oﬄoading the active RAM memory, but given that most
of the memory is static, it will still be a large upgrade from an uninterruptible
procedure.
While this approach still requires knowledge of how much RAM
the application uses, it still signiﬁcantly reduces complexity of the scheme and
the restrictions posed on the system designer (relying on statically allocated
structures etc.).
In conclusion, memory locking can be used to achieve temporal consistency
of the oﬄoaded memory. This will also ensure that migratory and transient
malware cannot escape detection, provided that the memory locking is controlled
by and used in combination with TrustZone. As most of the device’s memory
remains static under its use normal use, memory locking will not interfere with
the device’s application during the majority of the process. However, the active
RAM will be more challenging to memory lock, while simultaneously running
the application. This is due to each active task depending on more than one
memory region.
To solve this, the oﬄoading procedure could either remain
uninterruptible while processing the active RAM or a complicated scheme of
unlocking the system task-by-task could be developed using knowledge of the
device’s memory layout.
==PAGE:79==
4.11 Discussion of the proposed approach and its opportunities and
challenges
67
4.11
Discussion of the proposed approach and its
opportunities and challenges
As the downtime associated with a typical remote attestation procedure makes
it unsuitable for devices in critical infrastructure, this project proposes to ad-
dress this issue by oﬄoading the device’s memory to a more powerful Veriﬁer.
The security requirements of the procedure does however limit the eﬃciency
of oﬄoading, making it perform approximately the same cryptographic opera-
tions. The proposed oﬄoading procedure can however be made interruptible,
while using the mechanisms of TrustZone and a memory locking scheme can be
used to prevent the security vulnerabilities that comes with interruptible pro-
cedures. This will alleviate the issues associated long attestation procedures, as
the device can run its application while attesting.
A sensor node running a typical application of reading sensor data and trans-
mitting was designed for the project. The memory of the application was then
analysed in order to gain insight in how the sensor node uses its memory. It
was found that most of the memory remained static, while a small part of the
RAM was actively being used. The activity of the RAM was further analysed
which revealed information about which area was associated with which task.
This information can be further used in the attestation process to determine
whether a device is infected. It can also be used in connection with memory
locking, to create a scheme, which minimises the downtime of the procedure
by unlocking the memory one task at a time. Additionally it revealed that the
peripheral devices could be further analysed, which will contribute in getting a
more complete image of the attested system.
In short, oﬄoading does seem to be a method which can provide the Veriﬁer with
a more complete view of the system, which can then be used for a more eﬀec-
tive attestation, taking into account the RAM, peripheral addresses, peripheral
device registers and data ﬂash in addition to the program ﬂash.
Theoretically, the eﬀectiveness of oﬄoading is far greater than current remote at-
testation protocols, however, it does require more information about the Prover.
The Veriﬁer will need to know the legal conﬁgurations of the peripheral addresses
and devices and the valid ranges of values in the data ﬂash. Additionally, struc-
tural information about the RAM will be needed in order to properly verify
it. While it was shown that some structural information could be extracted
from a memory analysis, it will still require complex methods of forensics to
determine the validity of the active RAM. The large data transmissions and the
computations involved may also make the protocol less scalable for large sensor
networks and unsuited for use in distributed remote attestation. The state-of-
==PAGE:80==
68
Proposed Approach
the-art oﬄoading methods discussed in Section 3.4 could alleviate some of the
scaling issues by distributing the work over multiple fog nodes, however it may
still be mostly suited for attestation of smaller networks. However, given that
some devices will have higher security requirements than what current remote
attestation protocols can provide, oﬄoading could be used in scenarios where
a high degree of security must be ensured. The extra requirements for Veriﬁer
may still be acceptable in critical environments where faults cannot be tolerated,
such as the nuclear and medical industry.
To correctly determine the eﬀectiveness of using oﬄoading for remote attesta-
tion, it will also be necessary to prove that the method is feasible. The method
is theoretically very eﬀective, covering the entire memory of the device, however
whether it is feasible remains to be shown. Additionally, to determine whether
or not the method is a viable alternative to current remote attestation proto-
cols, the eﬃciency will have to be further measured. Oﬄoading also adds the
transmission of memory in addition to the required cryptographic functions,
further prolonging the procedure. Due to these concerns about the viability of
the procedure and whether the memory coverage is possible, a proof of concept
will be needed to accurately determine the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of the
proposal.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Proof of Concept
In this chapter the sensor node will be designed and the proposed oﬄoading
procedure will be implemented on it. The main goal of the implementation is
to show that oﬄoading is feasible and viable rather than making it a perfect
implementation. Furthermore, implementation of the IoT sensor node applica-
tion, the non-secure program sending temperature/water sensor values, will not
be the focus, but is merely used to test the proposal in a realistic scenario.
The sensor node was ﬁrst implemented on a LPC5411X evaluation board with
a simple oﬄoading procedure as the initial proof of concept. Then the appli-
cation was moved to the TrustZone capable processor LPC55S69, whereafter
the oﬄoading procedure was improved to ensure the security of the protocol.
This chapter details the design process somewhat chronologically, starting with
the device application, then a simple oﬄoading procedure and lastly a secure
oﬄoading procedure with certain additions and improvements.
The application for the ﬁrst board (no security) can be found in mcu_software/
old_board/sensor_node, while the second board (secure TrustZone implemen-
tation) can be found in mcu_software/sensor_node_s and mcu_software/
sensor_node_ns.
==PAGE:82==
70
Proof of Concept
5.1
Creating the sensor node application using
FreeRTOS
The project application is based on NXP’s MCUXpresso software development
kit (SDK) for the LPC5411X. This SDK contains example-projects such as: sim-
ple setup of ADC and I2C, interactions with the board GPIO and a FreeRTOS
port for this speciﬁc microcontroller. The FreeRTOS port is conﬁgured for the
hardware and provides functions for setting up tasks, queues, semaphores etc.
It also includes a conﬁg-ﬁle, FreeRTOSConﬁg.h, which allows for customising
the OS, such as stack size conﬁguration, debugging features etc. In addition to
this, the SDK port contains a chip library containing functions and structures
for interacting with the hardware. This helps minimise the low-level bit toggling
and direct register and peripheral interaction, as these structures and functions
can be used instead.
Figure 5.1: Initial device-setup consisting of the LPC5411x evaluation board
and the two connected sensors.
The hardware is setup is as shown in Figure 5.1. There is the evaluation board
containing the microprocessor, USB interfaces, buttons, LEDs and easily ac-
cessible pins for the general-purpose IO (GPIO), ADC, I2C etc. Connected to
the board are the two sensors. The water level sensor connected to the ADC1
of the device (port 0, pin 30). The Temperature sensor on the other hand, is
connected through I2C, using a pin, SDA, for data (port 0, pin 26) and a pin,
SCL, for the clock (port 0, pin 25).
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Creating the sensor node application using FreeRTOS
71
A diagram of the application from a software perspective can be seen in Figure
5.2. The ﬁgure shows how each piece of hardware has its own associated task to
interact with it, while the communication is handled by both a task for ingoing
and outgoing communication. The sensor tasks each use the FIFO queue, UART
Transmit Queue, to have their data transmitted by the UART transmit task. In
the case of another communication method being used, the sensor tasks would
simply have to be rerouted to the queue.
The oﬄoading process will be discussed in Section 5.2. However, it may seem
counter-intuitive that the oﬄoading process accesses the UART directly, by-
passing the UART transmit task. This is done to have the oﬄoading process
bypass the FreeRTOS OS and have it be able to run while suspending as much
other activity on the processor as possible. This also beneﬁts the transfer speed
of the process, as it does not rely on other tasks. The oﬄoading procedure can
either be started by the UART Receive Task receiving an attestation request or
for debugging purposes by pressing the button on the board.
Figure 5.2: Application task diagram.
The main-loop consists of ﬁrst setting up the necessary hardware, the clock
is conﬁgured and the buttons, the UART and the I2C communications are
initialised. The FreeRTOS queues, timers and task are setup, after which the
scheduler is started.
While some of the tasks and structures are somewhat self-explanatory, the others
will be high-lighted and explained as they are especially important to aspects
of the oﬄoading procedure:
==PAGE:84==
72
Proof of Concept
5.1.1
Temperature sensor task (vTaskSensorTempRead)
This task communicates with the temperature sensor using I2C in accordance
with the writing- and burst-reading protocol described in Section 4.5.3. The
task consist of ﬁrst initialising the sensor (temp_sensor_init()), by setting the
ctrl_meas (address 0xF4) and conﬁg register (address 0xF5). First, the mode
register bits are set corresponding to normal mode (mode[1:0] = 11) and the
oversampling is set to 0x04 (osrs[2:0] = 011).
The task then enters its loop. This starts by requesting the sensor measure-
ments, doing a burst read from address 0xF7 to 0xFE, reading both the pressure,
the humidity and the temperature. For this application only the temperature
data is used, which is done by merging the read bytes into a 32-bit signed inte-
ger then using the data-sheet compensation formula to get the temperature in
degrees Celsius.
This temperature is then put into the UART-message struct and sent to the
back of the UART transmit FIFO queue, after which the task sleeps for 3000
ms before repeating the loop again.
5.1.2
Water sensor task (vWaterSensorReadTask)
Unlike the temperature task, the water sensor task operates on an analog sensor
and the measurements will have to be done by converting the voltage level from
the sensor to a digital value. To do this the processor ADC is utilised. Being
analog, the oversampling feature done in the temperature sensor will also need
to be done manually.
The task is started by initialising the ADC channel 1 to run on the pins con-
nected to the physical water level sensor. It is set up with a 12-bit resolution,
setting up the sequencer to sample and using an interrupt for said sequencer to
indicate when the conversion is done.
The loop consists of sampling 10 measurements over 3 seconds, then computing
the average and sending this to the UART transmit queue.
==PAGE:85==
5.2 First iteration of oﬄoading procedure (Uninterruptible, no security) 73
5.1.3
UART transmit task (vUARTTransmitTask)
The UART transmit task works by blocking on the previously discussed UART
transmit queue. When a message appears in this queue, the task is awoken and
will craft a string according to this message’s type and data. Each message
starts with an incremental timestamp followed by a message decided by the
message type, either being temperature, water or debugging. The message will
in the form of "Temperature: 1234" for 12.34 degrees Celsius or "Water level:
50%" for a water sensor half immersed in water.
5.1.4
Outcome
When running the application results seen in Listing 5.1 are produced. Each
3000ms the device sends the measurements from its sensors, prepended with
an incremental timestamp. This is the eﬀect of the each sensor task sending
their measurements to the UART transmit task, which then transmits it using
UART. While UART will not be the method of communication for such a device,
it works well for this prototype.
1
112
Temperature: 2445
2
113
Water
level: 10%
3
114
Temperature: 2444
4
115
Water
level: 9%
Listing 5.1: Output from the device running its application.
5.2
First iteration of oﬄoading procedure (Unin-
terruptible, no security)
As a working application for the sensor node has been created, the oﬄoading
procedure is developed to oﬄoad the device’s memory. For the ﬁrst iteration
of the oﬄoading procedure, the focus will simply be oﬄoading the memory,
without any concerns for security. The program will revolve around sending its
memory byte-by-byte and having the receiving fog node capture it.
As the memory structure diﬀers between microcontrollers, the oﬄoading proce-
dure will be made in a way that is easily customisable according to the speciﬁc
chip in use. The memory for this program will correspond with the previously
discussed memory map for LPC5411X (Figure 4.7).
==PAGE:86==
74
Proof of Concept
When the oﬄoading is initiated, interrupts are disabled to pause all other ac-
tivity on the microprocessor. As FreeRTOS and the scheduler relies on these
interrupts, this eﬀectively suspends the rest of the system. The data is then
read and transmitted according to the protocol seen in Figure 5.3. Due to the
memory not being contiguous and to distinguish the regions more easily on the
fog node, the memory is sent region-by-region. The oﬄoading of temperature
sensor will be described in detail in Section 5.3 and the peripheral addresses
are added in Section 5.5 on the TrustZone board. However, the ﬂash, SRAM,
boot ROM and SRAMX will be transmitted directly be reading their associated
memory addresses.
Figure 5.3: Non-secure implementation of oﬄoading procedure.
==PAGE:87==
5.2 First iteration of oﬄoading procedure (Uninterruptible, no security) 75
In Listing 5.2 the application code for the transmission of memory can be seen. It
is called with a start and end address, after which it cycles through the memory
sending each byte one at a time using the UART. Each oﬄoading procedure is
starts with sending the string "OFFLOAD" to the fog node, followed by the
name of the memory region, then the function is called using the start and
end address as arguments. The current program cycles through the ﬂash, the
continuous SRAM region (SRAM0, SRAM1, SRAM2), the boot ROM and the
SRAMX. The function is called ﬁrst with the ﬂash memory space 0x00000000 to
0x00040000, then the RAM, the boot ROM and SRAMX in the same fashion.
1
static
void
memory_transmit (uint32_t
addr_start , uint32_t
addr_end
){
2
for (uint32_t i = addr_start; i < addr_end; i++){
3
uint8_t* ptr = (uint8_t *) i;
4
uart_send_char (* ptr & 0xff);
5
}
6
}
Listing 5.2: MCU transmission of memory region byte-by-byte.
Along with the MCU application, a Python program was made for the fog node
to capture the memory being sent. Currently a Linux computer is acting as
the fog node, although any device capable of serial communication and running
Python, would work in its place. This iteration of the program can be found
in veriﬁcation_software/old_board/memory_watcher.py. It has two states, a
TEXT state and a DATA state. When in the TEXT state the program will
simply print to the terminal whichever messages the device may be sending,
typically being water level, temperature readings and debugging messages. The
second state, DATA, is the state used for oﬄoading. Here, all data transmitted
will be recorded such that the fog node may keep an accurate copy of the
transmitting device’s memory. The DATA state is entered by the device sending
the the code "OFFLOAD" followed by its name for the memory section e.g.
"FLASH", then the python looks up the memory size of said section and records
until data equivalent to the memory size has been transmitted.
When the oﬄoading procedure is initiated, the Python program will enter its
DATA state, note the memory area as reported by the MCU, it will then lookup
the size of said area and start logging all the data being sent. After a memory
area has been sent the data is kept in a list-structure, which is at last saved to
an easily readable .txt-ﬁle and a binary .bin-ﬁle for hashing and comparisons.
Each ﬁle is saved to the logs folder and is named after the respective memory
region, such as "LOG_SRAM.bin", "LOG_FLASH.bin" etc.
As this project is mainly focused around the oﬄoading, rather than the attes-
tation itself, this program will not analyse most of the memory in detail. The
peripheral sensor will however be attested in detail by checking its registers
==PAGE:88==
76
Proof of Concept
byte-by-byte to show the attestation possibilities of oﬄoading (this will be the
topic of Section 5.3). This iteration of the software simply compares the of the
data to the previously received hash in order to detect changes in memory. This
is also expanded in Section 5.5.
In Listing 5.3 the result of the oﬄoading procedure is seen from the fog node’s
perspective.
For each memory area processed, information regarding the of-
ﬂoading is written to the terminal. It is seen how each memory region is sent,
after-which its hash is computed and compared to its previous hash. The sensor
undergoes a more complex veriﬁcation instead of using hash and is discussed in
the following chapter.
1
****
2
OFFLOAD
SENSOR
3
SENSOR
offloaded
(110 B). time
elapsed: 10 ms.
4
SENSOR
hash is
identical
to
previous.
5
SENSOR
has a valid
configuration
6
7
OFFLOAD
FLASH
8
FLASH
offloaded
(256 kB). time
elapsed: 22.71
seconds
9
FLASH
hash is
identical
to
previous.
10
FLASHCODE
hash is
identical
to
previous.
11
FLASHDATA
hash is
identical
to
previous.
12
13
OFFLOAD
SRAM
14
SRAM
offloaded
(160 kB). time
elapsed: 13.954
seconds
15
SRAM
hash
differs
from
previous!
16
17
OFFLOAD
BOOTROM
18
BOOTROM
offloaded
(32 kB). time
elapsed: 2.641
seconds
19
BOOTROM
hash is
identical
to
previous.
20
21
OFFLOAD
SRAMX
22
SRAMX
offloaded
(32 kB). time
elapsed: 2.811
seconds
23
SRAMX
hash is
identical
to
previous.
24
25
****
Listing 5.3: Vrf receiving the oﬄoaded memory using memory_watcher.py.
5.3
Remote attestation of peripheral temperature
sensor
In order to attest to the integrity of the sensor the oﬄoading procedure added
an extra step was added to also oﬄoad the registers of the sensor. Since the
microcontroller does not have direct access to these registers, it instead starts
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Remote attestation of peripheral temperature sensor
77
the procedure by initiating an I2C burst read starting from the ﬁrst mapped
register, 0x88 the calibration register, to the last, 0xF5 the conﬁguration register,
following the previously-described sensor memory map (Figure 4.6). This results
in 110 byte-sized registers being oﬄoaded.
After the MCU has read the data using an I2C burst read, it is then sent byte-
by-byte to the fog node. This iteration of the procedure also ignores security
requirements and is extended to ensure security in Section 5.5.2. Because of the
nature of the data, it cannot be veriﬁed by a hash. Speciﬁcally the registers such
as the status-register and the undocumented registers may be unpredictable.
Instead a white-list of allowed data values per register is created.
This is a
relatively simple way of verifying the state of the temperature sensor, but it will
serve as a proof of concept of verifying without the use of hashes.
A cut-out of the white-list of approved values for the peripheral sensor (veriﬁca-
tion_software/white_lists/SENSOR_white_list.txt) can be seen in Listing 5.4.
It is formatted as to have the address followed by the allowed values. If any
value is allowed, the wildcard ∗is used. This wildcard is used in the case of
undocumented registers and the status register. The control (ctrl) and conﬁg
(conf) registers each have a value which is important to the functioning of the
device. The calibration data (0xE0-0xF0) is static and speciﬁc to this particular
sensor, so these were read and noted while the device were in a trusted state. In
the case of this sensor they are read-only, but other sensors may have similarly
important registers which are not write-protected, thus requiring veriﬁcation in
order to ensure trustworthy readings.
1
de : *
2
df : *
3
e0 : 00 # Calibration
data 2 START
4
e1 : 81
5
e2 : 01
6
e3 : 00
7
e4 : 10
8
e5 : 2b
9
e6 : 03
10
e7 : 1e
11
e8 : 00
12
e9 : 41
13
ea : ff
14
eb : ff
15
ec : ff
16
ed : ff
17
ee : ff
18
ef : ff
19
f0 : ff # Calibration
data 2 END
20
f1 : *
21
f2 : 00 #ctrl_hum
22
f3 : *
#Status
register
23
f4 : 6f #ctrl
meas
==PAGE:90==
78
Proof of Concept
24
f5 : 02 #Config
Listing 5.4: Register white-list for digital temperature sensor.
To attest the sensor, a short function was added to the ﬁrst iteration of the
Python oﬄoading program discussed in Section 5.2. The attestByWhiteList()
function opens the log of the sensor data and the white-list of legal register
values saved as a text-ﬁle on the machine. The program then goes byte-by-byte
through the ﬁles comparing each value of the sensor to the white-listed value.
If a value at a speciﬁc address is not on the white-list, the program will ﬂag the
sensor as having an invalid conﬁguration, which is then reported to the terminal
during the attestation process. In Section 5.5 this method is also expanded to
be used on peripheral addresses and the data ﬂash, which are also attested
byte-by-byte.
The oﬄoading procedure also opens up for attestation for the RAM. A simple
approach such as this could be employed to check certain memory addresses of
the RAM against a white-list. This could be used to check if small memory areas,
such as the FreeRTOS task deﬁnitions and boundaries remain static and whether
predictable regions, such as the queue-structure contain values according to
those expected of the device. From the memory analysis the addresses of the
FreeRTOS queues are known, and could be attested by the fog node, comparing
the values to the ranges expected by the application.
5.4
Porting the sensor node and oﬄoading pro-
cedure to TrustZone
As discussed in Section 4.9.2, porting the application to a TrustZone-compatible
device is necessary to ensure isolation between the oﬄoading procedure and the
device application. Furthermore, it ensures that the secret shared key used in
the oﬄoading procedure is only accessible by the procedure itself.
Porting the device to a TrustZone-capable device will be the ﬁrst step in ensuring
the authenticity and integrity of the oﬄoading, as the new device may have
speciﬁc hardware functions for hashing and authentication, which may be faster
than using a generic cryptographic library.
As TrustZone was required by the application, a new board enabling this tech-
nology was put to use. The LPC55S69, a TrustZone-enabled MCU operating at
up to 150MHz, having a crypto-engine, 640KB ﬂash memory and 320KB RAM.
==PAGE:91==
5.4 Porting the sensor node and oﬄoading procedure to TrustZone
79
Speciﬁcally the LPC55S69-EVK is used, an evaluation board featuring USB-
access and pin-access to the MCU. Unfortunately no TrustZone device with
integrated wireless communication could be found, leaving the communication
as UART for now. As this MCU is also of the LPC series, most of the applica-
tion can remain the same, although it will be changed to use the new drivers.
The new board setup with the sensors connected can be seen on Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: IoT
sensor
node
implemented
on
the
TrustZone-enabled
LPC55S69.
TrustZone allows for the application to be split into a secure and a non-secure
world. Due to this, the project will ﬁles will also be split into a non-secure and a
secure folder. The ﬁles can be found in mcu_software/sensor_node, the secure
folder appended by _s and the non-secure by _ns. The non-secure world will
only be able to enter the secure world through the non-secure callable area of
the secure world, using the veneer table. This is done by deﬁning the secure
oﬄoading function in both the non-secure and secure nsc_functions-ﬁles. The
memory region holding the veneer table will also have to be deﬁned as NSC in
the TrustZone settings, done in Section 5.4.1.
Figure 5.5 shows the application being split into a secure and a non-secure world.
The secure world consist of the oﬄoading procedure and has its own speciﬁc
ﬂash memory region where the procedure and and the secret key is located.
In fact, both the secure world and the non-secure world will have their own
respective ﬂash and RAM memory, the allocation of which will be described
in Section 5.4.1. As seen in the ﬁgure, the hardware is also included in the
non-secure world, this is due to the hardware being connected with a speciﬁc
==PAGE:92==
80
Proof of Concept
internal region of peripheral addresses. The LED is for example addressable by
writing to the memory address of the GPIO pin and the temperature sensor
is addressable by writing to the memory address of the I2C interface. In other
words, it is actually possible to secure the hardware if its corresponding memory
region and its associated interrupts are assigned to the secure world.
Figure 5.5: Application task diagram split into a secure and non-secure world.
While more of the application could have been assigned to the secure world, the
intention is to limit the secure world as much as possible to limit attack vectors.
As the possibilities of software bugs increase with the code size, most of the
software will be assigned to the normal world, while only the software related
to the oﬄoading procedure will be made secure.
The processor boots in the secure world (main_s.c), and using the SystemI-
nitHook() it initialises the TrustZone at the earliest opportunity, using a call to
the tzm_conﬁg.c which will be described in detail in Section 5.4.1. The func-
tion then enters the secure main function, which boots the hash engine (further
described in Section 5.5), the address of the non-secure main function is then
noted, after which the system enters the non-secure world.
The non-secure world contains more or less the same application as the previous
board, described in Section 5.1. The port does however require a few changes.
The pin-layout is diﬀerent and consequently the UART, I2C and ADC are asso-
ciated with diﬀerent addresses. Some conﬁgurations are also slightly diﬀerent,
as the microcontrollers have diﬀerent ways of conﬁguring the hardware. The
application is however functionally the same with regards to the functionality
of the tasks, and most of the changes are not worth noting for the purposes of
==PAGE:93==
5.4 Porting the sensor node and oﬄoading procedure to TrustZone
81
this project.
The oﬄoading procedure has however been moved to the secure world. The
procedure itself is split into a non-secure function (oﬄoading_ns.c) and a secure
function (oﬄoading_s.c). The non-secure function is called when receiving an
attestation request from the UART receive task. This attestation request is
followed by an 8-byte nonce sent by Vrf. The attestation can also be triggered
by the button as a debugging measure, with the nonce being a default value.
The non-secure function then uses the TrustZone veneer table to enter the secure
region containing the secure part of the procedure.
The secure oﬄoading procedure is again functionally equivalent to the previ-
ous version. However with the memory regions deﬁned to ﬁt the new device.
The procedure is also changed to add integrity and authenticity, which will be
explained in Section 5.5.
5.4.1
TrustZone settings
The application has been split into two domains, the secure world and the non-
secure world. However TrustZone still has to allocate memory and interrupts
to the respective worlds in order to to enforce the isolation between them. It
is also necessary in order to designate certain peripherals (UART, I2C, hash
engine etc) to either the secure or non-secure world.
The TrustZone conﬁguration ﬁle is tzm_conﬁg.c, where the settings are writ-
ten bit-by-bit to their respective registers. However, MCUXpresso IDE allows
setting this ﬁle using a graphical user interface, the Trusted Execution Environ-
ment (TEE) ConﬁgTool, which will be used to get a more clear overview of the
settings.
First, the user memory regions are deﬁned. This is the memory regions of the
program and their desired security level. These security levels will need to be
enforced by the following settings and the conﬁguration tool will give errors if
the settings do not match. The current conﬁguration can be seen in Figure 5.6
where the secure ﬂash is deﬁned to be the ﬁrst 0xFE00 bytes, leaving 0x200 bytes
for the veneer table, deﬁned as NSC. The secure and NSC ﬂash totals 64KB
total. The rest of the ﬂash, starting from 0x0001_0000, is then deﬁned as non-
secure. Similarly the RAM is split into the ﬁrst 0x8000 bytes (32KB) designated
as secure and the rest designated as non-secure. Recall that in TrustZone, the
secure addresses are deﬁned by their secure alias. For this system, the secure
alias is found by setting bit 28 of the address: e.g. 0x1000_0000 is the secure
alias for 0x0000_0000, 0x3000_0000 for 0x2000_0000 etc.
==PAGE:94==
82
Proof of Concept
Figure 5.6: TrustZone User Memory Regions.
Next, the security access has to be conﬁgured. First the security attribution
unit (SAU) is set to deﬁne regions as either NS or NSC. The non-secure ﬂash
region and the non-secure RAM region will therefore need to be deﬁned here.
The 0x200 byte veneer table is also deﬁned here as NSC. The SAU only has
8 deﬁnable regions, so it serves as a base for the rest. While regions cannot
be deﬁned as secure here, the combination of settings will return the highest
deﬁned security level for the region, so these do not solely mean that the area
is non-secure.
Figure 5.7: TrustZone Security Attribution Unit (SAU).
The memory protection controller (MPC) is then deﬁned to control the access to
certain regions of the memory, in a more detailed manner. Each region can either
be designated as S-User, S-Privileged, NS-User or NS-Privileged. These regions
are deﬁned in accordance with the user memory region deﬁnitions, setting the
ﬁrst 64KB of secure ﬂash as S-User and the secure part of the RAM, the ﬁrst
32KB of the ﬁrst RAM, RAM0, to S-User. The rest is left as NS-User. The
conﬁguration of the ﬂash can be seen in Figure 5.8.
==PAGE:95==
5.4 Porting the sensor node and oﬄoading procedure to TrustZone
83
Figure 5.8: TrustZone Memory Protection Controller (MPC): Flash.
The memory regions are now deﬁned properly. The non-secure world will now
not be able to run code in the secure ﬂash, access secure ﬂash memory or read
the memory of the secure RAM.
TrustZone also allows deﬁning certain peripherals or interrupts as secure or
non-secure. Non-used peripherals are currently set to non-secure, and periph-
eral used in the IoT application such as communication (UART), temperature
sensor-readings (I2C) and water sensor-readings (ADC) are also set to non-
secure to keep the application functional.
However, the following section will make use of the on-board crypto engine,
HASHCRYPT, to compute hashes during the secure oﬄoading process. This
hash-engine will perform hashing and authentication on transmitted memory
using the secret shared key for authenticating. The hash-engine contains various
conﬁguration registers, registers containing its input and output data along with
an associated interrupt to process the data.
An attacker could attack this hash-engine in an attack on the HMAC-operation,
==PAGE:96==
84
Proof of Concept
which will reveal the secret shared key. This attack will be detailed in the fol-
lowing section on the HMAC operation. For now, TrustZone will be conﬁgured
to prevent the non-secure world from reading the hash-engine registers and in-
terfering with its associated interrupt.
The HASHCRYPT engine is according to the user manual, also using the DMA
channel 1, to perform its hashing [51]. To prevent the DMA from being an
attack surface for getting access to the key, DMA1 will be secured in the same
manner as HASHCRYPT. The peripheral protection unit (PPC) is deﬁned as
in Figure 5.9. The HASHCRYPT engine and DMA1 master is set to secure
privileged. Along with this the HASHCRYPT and DMA1 slave is also set as
secure privileged.
In addition to the HASHCRYPT HASH-AES interrupt and the System DMA1
interrupt is set to secure in the TrustZone interrupt security conﬁguration.
Figure 5.9: TrustZone Peripheral Protection Unit (PPC): Master/Slave priv-
ileges.
5.5
Securing integrity and authenticity in the of-
ﬂoading procedure
As proposed in Section 4.9 the oﬄoading procedure must compute MACs on
the hashes of oﬄoaded memory in order to ensure the integrity and authenticity
of the response. Additionally the procedure must make use of a nonce provided
==PAGE:97==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
85
by Vrf in order to ensure freshness of the result. This section will detail the
implementation of these in order to make the procedure secure.
A speciﬁc hash function and a base for the MAC will however need to be chosen.
While the choice of these often comes down to a choice between cryptographic
strength and computational complexity, the complexity will often depend on
the hardware performing the algorithm. Some devices may include have speciﬁc
hardware to accelerate the work of certain cryptographic functions, signiﬁcantly
reducing the time required to perform them. This makes the use of hardware-
accelerated cryptographic functions preferable to functions performed entirely
in software.
The LPC55S69 provides a hardware-implemented on-chip hash engine, support-
ing SHA-1 and SHA-2 with a 256 digest (SHA-256). Taking advantage of this
engine will allow the application to calculate the hashes faster, thereby reducing
the time required for the oﬄoading procedure. This limits the choice of the
hashing function to either SHA-1 or SHA-256. To take further advantage of the
hash-engine the MAC will also be based on one these. Thus, the signature will
be computed using HMAC with either SHA-1 or SHA-256.
SHA-1 is however unsuitable for hashing, as a collision attack has been per-
formed on it in 2017 [52], and a chosen preﬁx collision attack has been per-
formed in 2020 [53]. Due to this, SHA-256 will be used for all hashing in the
procedure.
HMAC does however not necessarily break when based on non-
collision-resistant hash functions [54], and is thus still considered secure if based
on SHA-1. However since remote embedded systems may be diﬃcult to update
after deployment and the message-size for the signature is relatively small, the
procedure will use HMAC-SHA256 to future-proof the procedure.
For use of the hash engine, LPC provides a driver, fsl_hashcrypt, this provides
a function for initialising the hash engine and calculating the hashes. There
are however no functions for calculating the HMAC, requiring it to be written
manually.
5.5.1
Creating a cryptographic library
In order to perform the hashing and signing operations, a cryptographic mod-
ule is written (mcu_software/sensor_node_s/source/crypto.c). This module
is ﬁrst called during the secure startup phase using hash_engine_init(). First
this function initialises the hash engine using the function provided by the LPC
driver (fsl_crypto.c), HASH_CRYPT_Init(). This initialises the hash engine
by providing it with a clock and resetting its associated peripheral. After this,
==PAGE:98==
86
Proof of Concept
the hash-engine LOCK-register is written to. This register will block the use
of the hash-engine by lower security levels and will cause the interrupt to be
handled in the secure world. In eﬀect, this stops the non-secure world from
accessing the engine. It is also necessary to enable when using TrustZone’s, as
the application otherwise crashes. In addition to this the HMAC-SHA256 is
initialised. Before explaining this initialising, the HMAC function itself will be
explained.
The HMAC calculation is performed as seen in the formula below, where H is
the SHA-256 hash function, m is the message (or data region) on which the hash
is calculated, the ||-operator referring to concatenation, opad is an outer padding
with a length equivalent to the block-size of the hash function, consisting of the
value 0x5c repeating.
ipad is of the same length, however consisting of the
value 0x36 repeating. These values are not arbitrary, but deﬁned by the HMAC
speciﬁcations [55]. The key is normally either hashed to reduce its length to the
block size or padded to it increase it. This implementation will however load a
key equivalent to the block size from memory, such that no length-changing is
required.
HMAC(k, m) = H((k ⊕opad)||H((k ⊕ipad)||m)
The initialisation of the HMAC would consist of loading the key from a desig-
nated secure part of the memory. However, the key is instead simply hard-coded
to avoid the implementation of the key-exchange, -saving and -loading. This is
functionally equivalent, as the key is still in the secure ﬂash, being accessed from
secure program ﬂash instead of secure data ﬂash. After the key has been loaded,
the opad and and ipad are XORed with the key, making the function slightly
faster on runtime, as this XOR-operation is only done on start-up instead of
for each HMAC. This is possible as the key is not expected to change during
runtime.
HMAC(k, m) = H((o_key_pad)||H((i_key_pad)||m)
This concludes the initialisation of the hash engine and the HMAC. Besides the
initialisation the library consists of a sha256()-function and an hmac_sha256()-
function, both seen in Listing 5.5.
The sha256()-function consists of simply
calling the hash engine driver HASHCRYPT_SHA() with the message, mes-
sage length and a pointer for the output. Recall that the LPC driver did not
contain a HMAC function, this is instead performed by doing two calls to the
SHA256-engine. First the inner hash is calculated by ﬁrst concatenating the
i_key_pad and the message. The o_key_pad is then concatenated with this
==PAGE:99==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
87
result, after which the ﬁnal hash is calculated.
Instead of actually allocat-
ing memory to concatenate the pad and the message, a modiﬁcation of the
driver’s HASHCRYPT_SHA() function is instead made to take two pointers of
each of inputs, ﬁrst feeding the ﬁrst message to the hash engine then the sec-
ond. Doing this the crypto-library can now successfully perform SHA256 and
HMAC-SHA256 operations.
The aforementioned TrustZone settings relating to the hash-engine, in Section
5.4.1, are necessary because of the following attack on HASHCRYPT from the
non-secure world. Like all peripherals on the LPC, the HASHCRYPT engine has
an associated memory address for accessing it, the address for HASHCRYPT
being 0x400A4000. The HASHCRYPT structure on this address has several
associated registers, such as CONFIG, STATUS and INDATA. The INDATA
register in particular contains a buﬀer for the ingoing data to be hashed.
Recall that to calculate the HMAC, HASHCRYPT is given the i_key_pad
concatenated with the message. If the engine is not secure, the non-secure world
would be able to access the INDATA register. If at this moment, the register
contains the i_key_pad the non-secure world would then have full access to
the padded key. The actual key can then be recovered as follows, as the XOR-
operation is linear:
key = i_key_pad ⊕ipad
The non-secure world would then have the key and would be able to answer
the remote attestation instead of the trusted component. Alternatively it could
transmit the key to a third party which could then answer future attestation
requests. The current TrustZone settings do however prevents this attack.
1
void
sha256(const
uint8_t *message_input , uint16_t
input_length ,
uint8_t* dest){
2
status_t
status;
3
size_t
output_length ;
4
5
status = HASHCRYPT_SHA (HASHCRYPT , kHASHCRYPT_Sha256 ,
message_input , input_length , dest , & output_length );
6
7
TEST_ASSERT( kStatus_Success
== status);
8
}
9
10
void
hmac_sha256(const
uint8_t *message_input , uint16_t
input_length , uint8_t* dest){
11
status_t
status;
12
size_t
output_length ;
13
14
/* hash( i_key_pad
||
message ) */
==PAGE:100==
88
Proof of Concept
15
uint8_t
inside_sha [32];
16
status = HASHCRYPT_SHA_concatenated (HASHCRYPT , kHASHCRYPT_Sha256
, i_key_pad , SHA_BLOCK_SIZE , message_input , input_length ,
inside_sha , & output_length );
17
TEST_ASSERT( kStatus_Success
==
status);
18
19
/* hash( o_key_pad
||
inner_sha ) */
20
status = HASHCRYPT_SHA_concatenated (HASHCRYPT , kHASHCRYPT_Sha256
, o_key_pad , SHA_BLOCK_SIZE , inside_sha , 32, dest , &
output_length );
21
TEST_ASSERT( kStatus_Success
==
status);
22
}
Listing 5.5: SHA256 and HMAC-SHA256 being calculated in crypto.c.
5.5.2
Securing the oﬄoading procedure
As described in Section 5.4, the call to the oﬄoading procedure is done through
a non-secure function entering the secure world by use of the NSC veneer table,
which has the address of the secure oﬄoading procedure deﬁned. The oﬄoading
procedure residing the secure world (mcu_software/sensor_node_s/source/
oﬄoading_s.c) is called by the non-secure communications task, which will pro-
vide an 8-byte nonce as an argument for the secure procedure. This nonce is
then copied into memory allocated in the secure world to prevent the non-secure
world from changing the nonce after the process has started. Using a ﬁxed size
of 8-bytes for the nonce will prevent the non-secure world from providing inputs
of arbitrary length.
This procedure will run while being interruptible, as TrustZone does not natively
block interrupts from the non-secure world when running code in the secure
world. Being interruptible will make the procedure vulnerable to transient and
migratory malware, which can be prevented by memory locking, discussed in
Section 5.6. The procedure will however remain interruptible for the time being,
as interruptibility is a goal for the project and it serves as a proof of concept
that it is possible. The procedure can however easily be made uninterruptible
if desired, by calling the inline assembler command __disable_irq() then re-
enable afterwards using __enable_irq(). This will be used to later compare
the duration of the interruptible procedure to the uninterruptible
Unlike the ideal secure oﬄoading procedure, the secure world is not granted
immediate access when a remote attestation request is received. This is due to
the communication peripheral being located in the non-secure world, as commu-
nication is an essential part of the IoT applications function. This means that
the non-secure world in eﬀects acts as a man in the middle in the oﬄoading pro-
==PAGE:101==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
89
cedure. This is however not an issue with regards to communication integrity
and authenticity as the procedure is secure against man in the middle attacks.
It may however cause an attack vector for transient malware, which will later
be discussed.
It was found by experimentation that the hash engine would crash using inputs
greater than 32KB. For this reason each region was split into chunks of maximum
32KB. It was also found that the hash engine would crash if the secure alias of a
non-secure address was supplied and vice versa (recall that TrustZone-enabled
MCUs have a secure and non-secure alias for each address). Therefore the re-
gions are further split into secure and non-secure regions. The 32KB chunks
of a memory region will be referred to as segments, using the naming S or NS
to denote the security (secure or non-secure), while each segment is alphabe-
tised (A,B,C etc.), such that the ﬂash memory is now split into: FLASH_S-A,
FLASH_S-B, FLASH_NS-A, FLASH_NS-B etc. The 32KB segments will be
individually sent and signed by the MCU.
Due to the fact of using multiple memory regions, the nonce will also have to
be expanded such that a replay-attack cannot be performed within each region.
Otherwise replaying the memory-transfer and signature of for example empty
ﬂash (having a default value) could reliably be used to hide data in the last
regions of the ﬂash by simply replaying the data transfer and signature earlier
regions. This is avoided by concatenating with an additional two numbers, the
ﬁrst representing the memory region (0x01 for sensor, 0x02 for boot ROM etc.)
and the second number incrementing per 32KB segment.
The implemented procedure can be found on Figure 5.10. The main diﬀerence
from the procedure proposed in Section 4.9 is the memory being split into regions
and the expansion of the nonce.
Each memory segment is then oﬄoaded using the function oﬄoad_memory_area()
as seen in Listing 5.6 (mcu_software/sensor_node_s/source/oﬄoading_s.c).
First by sending the memory region, as in the non-secure oﬄoading procedure,
prepended by "OFFLOAD REGION-SEGMENT". Then a hash of the memory
region is calculated using the created crypto-library’s sha_256()-function, called
with the memory region start and the region size. The resulting hash is then
concatenated with the nonce, the region-code and the segment number. This
concatenation is then authenticated using the hmac_sha256()-function, result-
ing in the MAC. The MAC is then lastly sent to the fog node, ensuring integrity
and authenticity for the oﬄoaded memory.
==PAGE:102==
90
Proof of Concept
Figure 5.10: Remote attestation oﬄoading, implemented procedure.
==PAGE:103==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
91
This procedure is repeated for each memory region and segment after which it
exits the secure world. This exit does not leak any information about the secret
key as the secure world has its own associated RAM with its own secure stack,
memory and secure context switch. Likewise, the code, the oﬄoading procedure
and hash engine reside in the secure world and also cannot leak any information.
Furthermore, the secure RAM and ﬂash will not be oﬄoaded during the pro-
cedure as these will contain information about the secret shared key. As the
memory is sent in plaintext, the attacker would be able to read the key if it is
in the stack or heap when oﬄoaded. Additionally, if stored in ﬂash, whether
hard-coded or in data ﬂash, an attacker will be able to read it. The secure ﬂash
could possibly be validated by a hash, if the secret shared key and any other
variables stored in ﬂash are known to Vrf, however the secure RAM cannot be
validated by hash due to its many states and thus cannot be validated through
oﬄoading without ensuring conﬁdentiality. The secure RAM and ﬂash can how-
ever be assumed to be trusted due to the isolation from the non-secure world
granted by TrustZone.
Furthermore, oﬄoading the secure memory does not
add any additional security against an advanced attacker. If the secure world
is breached by an attacker, they would be able to fabricate the response to the
oﬄoading request by sending data corresponding to a valid memory, thereby
hiding their presence.
The peripheral sensor oﬄoading procedure is secured by temporarily disabling
interrupts for the system, which will make the non-secure FreeRTOS tasks un-
able to interfere. It then performs an I2C burst-read of the device using a new
method which relies on polling such that non-secure interrupts will not have to
be used as part of the process. The results from the I2C-read is then authen-
ticated in the same manner as the other memory regions and sent to the fog
node. The procedure can be seen on Figure 5.11, the transmission and signing
of m is excluded from the ﬁgure, as it is treated in the same manner as the
rest of the memory regions. This will cause an unavoidable suspension of the
system, however, in the context of the small peripheral devices the suspension
will be short due to the limited memory of the device (such as 110 bytes in
this case). Furthermore, the suspension is only required for reading, as the read
memory will arrive in a secure I2C-buﬀer, where it can be authenticated without
interference.
==PAGE:104==
92
Proof of Concept
Figure 5.11: Oﬄoading the memory of the peripheral temperature sensor.
Lastly, the oﬄoading of peripheral addresses is also added to the oﬄoading pro-
cedure. It was however found that the memory region containing peripheral
addresses cannot be oﬄoaded in its entirety as some registers will be write-only
and will crash the application if attempted to be read. Instead, a package of
relevant registers to the application are sent to be veriﬁed. All read-able ad-
dresses may be desirable for some application, but this will serve as a proof of
concept. For this application, registers associated with the ADC and I2C will
be oﬄoaded to be veriﬁed by Vrf. For the I2C, three registers are oﬄoaded, the
conﬁguration (CFG) as this controls whether the device is master or slave, the
INTENSET-register as it conﬁgures the interrupts used by the I2C and lastly the
CLKDIV-register which conﬁgures the I2C clock. The four ADC-registers are
similarly oﬄoaded, CFG containing priority and power conﬁgurations, CMDH
and CMDL containing conversion and channel options, IE the interrupt enable
register and TCTRL the register which enables the triggering of the ADC in-
==PAGE:105==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
93
terrupt.
These peripheral registers are sent and authenticated as any other
memory and will be veriﬁed using a white-list as with the peripheral sensor
registers. This will ensure that malware has not misconﬁgured the peripherals
causing sensor-readings to be inaccurate. These registers will for some applica-
tions need to be compared bit-by-bit with a longer list of allowed values, but
byte-wise veriﬁcation is suﬃcient for the proof of concept. This feature can later
be added without requiring changes to the underlying protocol.
Consequently the attestation procedure is expanded from only verifying the
program ﬂash (shown back in Figure 4.1), to now verifying most regions of the
device including the accessible memory of the peripheral devices. This is shown
in Figure 5.12, where oﬄoaded and attested memory is shown in green, the
remaining in grey. It will not be possible to get a complete state of digital pe-
ripheral devices, as they will have their own programs and all of their memory
will not be accessible. Additionally, certain peripheral addresses are write-only
and cannot be veriﬁed. Nevertheless, the attestation procedure is substantially
expanded compared to other attestation designs. Recall secure memory is as-
sumed to be trusted, while the same holds for secure peripherals (such as the
hash engine and DMA1).
Figure 5.12: Device memory veriﬁed by the new oﬄoading procedure is shown
in green, unattested memory is shown in grey.
1
void
send_hmac(uint8_t* input , uint32_t
input_len , uint8_t
area_code , uint8_t
segment_num , uint8_t* nonce){
2
uint8_t
hmac_output[SHA_SIZE ];
3
uint8_t
sha256_output [SHA_SIZE ];
4
==PAGE:106==
94
Proof of Concept
5
/*
calculate
hash of memory */
6
sha256( input , input_len , sha256_output );
7
/*
concatenate (hash(f) || nonce) */
8
uint8_t
nonced_hash[SHA_SIZE + NONCE_SIZE + 2];
9
memcpy(nonced_hash , sha256_output , SHA_SIZE);
10
memcpy( nonced_hash +SHA_SIZE , nonce , NONCE_SIZE );
11
/*
concatenate (hash(f) || nonce ||
memoryArea
||
memoryAreaSegment ) */
12
nonced_hash [SHA_SIZE+NONCE_SIZE] = area_code;
13
nonced_hash [SHA_SIZE+NONCE_SIZE
+1] = segment_num ;
14
/*
calculate
then
send
hmac of the
concatenated
hash ,nonce ,
segmentCode */
15
hmac_sha256 (nonced_hash , SHA_SIZE + NONCE_SIZE + 2, hmac_output )
;
16
uart_send(hmac_output , SHA_SIZE);
17
}
18
19
static
void
offload_memory_area (char* area_name , uint8_t
area_name_len , uint8_t
area_num , uint8_t
segment_num , uint32_t
addr_start , uint32_t
addr_end , uint8_t* nonce){
20
uint8_t
hmac_output[SHA_SIZE ];
21
uint8_t
sha256_output [SHA_SIZE ];
22
23
/*
transmit
memory
region */
24
uart_send("OFFLOAD ", 8);
25
uart_send(area_name , area_name_len );
26
uart_send_char (’-’);
27
uart_send_char ( segment_num + ’A’);
// number
the
sectors
from ’A
’ to ’Z’
28
uart_send("\n", 1);
29
memory_transmit (addr_start , addr_end);
30
31
/* sign
memory
and
send
signature (sends
message
here in order
to time
the
operation) */
32
uart_send("HMAC ", 5);
33
uart_send(area_name , area_name_len );
34
uart_send_char (’-’);
35
uart_send_char ( segment_num + ’A’); // number
the
sectors
from ’A’
to ’Z’
36
uart_send("\n", 1);
37
/*
calculate
hmac of memory */
38
uint16_t
region_size = addr_end
- addr_start ;
39
send_hmac (( uint8_t *) addr_start , region_size , area_num ,
segment_num , nonce);
40
}
Listing 5.6: Secure oﬄoading procedure for each memory region.
==PAGE:107==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
95
5.5.3
Testing the procedure using the fog node Python
veriﬁcation program
For the veriﬁcation on the fog node, the previously used Python program has
been updated to support the security features (veriﬁcation_software/memory_
watcher.py).
The program contains a memory map of the device with each
regions code for the concatenation with the nonce.
The program now also
loads an HMAC key from the ﬁle secret.key when started and can initiate the
oﬄoading procedure with a speciﬁc 8-byte nonce by calling it with the argument
-oﬄoading NONCE. Not providing a nonce will default to the nonce 0x0102...07
for debugging purposes. Additionally the program has a new mode for receiving
the HMAC, after which the program calculates its own HMAC by hashing the
recently received data and concatenating it with the nonce and region code.
The two HMACs are then compared to see if the data is valid.
While the peripheral addresses, the peripheral sensor and the data ﬂash is at-
tested byte-by-byte, the remaining memory is not thoroughly attested and will
for now be attested by hashing. A function has been implemented to test each
hash of the memory against memory kept in the folder: correct_conﬁgurations.
If the memory diﬀers from the correct conﬁguration the program outputs: "Re-
gion hash diﬀers from the valid hash!". This attestation is not ideal, but it
proves that the oﬄoading works and it can help distinguish static regions from
dynamic.
The byte-by-byte attestation is performed using the white-list in the folder cor-
rect_conﬁgurations, the oﬄoaded memory is compared one byte at a time with
the allowed byte on the white-list, as described in Section 5.3. The peripheral
temperature sensor, whose data was ﬁrst requested through I2C then oﬄoaded
is now compared with legal values of the registers, to verify that the conﬁgura-
tion registers are correct. Certain peripheral addresses, those associated with
the ADC and I2C, are also checked by a white-list, verifying that their conﬁgu-
ration is correct, their associated interrupts are setup correctly etc. Lastly, the
data ﬂash is also veriﬁed, however mostly as a proof of concept, as it is currently
not in use, and will simply be veriﬁed to be empty. This is done by splitting
the segment of the ﬂash containing the data ﬂash into a code section and a data
section. The code section is evaluated by hash as normal, while the data section
is veriﬁed byte-wise. Currently the last ﬂash section FLASH_NS-R is split into
21KB of code and the last 1KB being reserved for data, which the byte-wise at-
testation is performed on. After veriﬁcation, the byte-wise attestation function
will then output "Region has a valid conﬁguration" or "Region has an invalid
conﬁguration" followed by the addresses of invalid registers. Lastly the authen-
ticity is ensured by a comparing a computed HMAC of the received data to the
HMAC received, in the same manner as with any other memory region.
==PAGE:108==
96
Proof of Concept
In Listing 5.7 the result from the oﬄoading procedure using memory_watcher.py
is seen. Before calling the program the, folder "correct_conﬁgurations" is loaded
with the expected logs (previous oﬄoaded memory) of all memory regions. In
this case the folder is loaded with logs of the device from an earlier oﬄoading
session, without the device being powered oﬀand on in-between. The ﬂash and
boot ROM is suspected to be static, while regions of the RAM, peripheral device
registers and peripheral addresses are expected to change during the runtime.
Most of the log is left out from the listing as most of the 34 segments are con-
ﬁrmed to have a valid hash and signature. At the end, the program outputs
a summary of all the errors which occurred during the attestation to give an
overview of the state of the device. It is shown how three 32KB segments of
the SRAM had an invalid hash and signature, spanning over the two ﬁrst non-
secure segments containing the non-secure heap (containing individual FreeR-
TOS stacks) and the last non-secure segment containing the non-secure stack.
The reason for the invalid hash is that these memory regions are in use dur-
ing runtime and must be attested using more advanced tools.
They do not
have a singular valid state which can be easily predicted. The invalid signa-
ture can be attributed to the memory being changed between the start of the
data-transmission and the calculation of the signature. This is inevitable as the
non-secure stack and heap will be active during runtime of the device applica-
tion. This can, however, be ﬁxed if interruptions are disallowed or if memory
locking is used on the memory in question. In fact, an experiment is done in
which the procedure is made uninterruptible, causing the non-secure segments
(and all others) to have a valid signatures as they are no longer in use.
1
$ python3
memory_watcher_v2 .py -offload
MyNonce123
2
Using
secret
key: b’key’. loaded
from
secret.key
3
Establishing
connection
with: /dev/ttyACM0
4
Starting
offloading
procedure
5
Selected 8-byte
nonce: b’MyNonce1 ’
6
****
7
OFFLOAD
SENSOR
8
SENSOR
offloaded
(110 B). time
elapsed: 2.2 ms.
9
SENSOR
has a valid
configuration (attested
byte -by -byte).
10
HMAC
SENSOR
11
SENSOR
HMAC
received
after
0.905 ms.
12
HMAC
matches
received
data.
13
14
OFFLOAD
PERIPH_ADC
15
PERIPH_ADC
offloaded
(24 B). time
elapsed: 0.3 ms.
16
PERIPH_ADC
has a valid
configuration (attested
byte -by -byte).
17
HMAC
PERIPH_ADC
18
PERIPH_ADC
HMAC
received
after
0.439 ms.
19
HMAC
matches
received
data.
20
21
OFFLOAD
PERIPH_I2C
22
PERIPH_I2C
offloaded
(12 B). time
elapsed: 0.2 ms.
23
PERIPH_I2C
has a valid
configuration (attested
byte -by -byte).
==PAGE:109==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
97
24
HMAC
PERIPH_I2C
25
PERIPH_I2C
HMAC
received
after
0.271 ms.
26
HMAC
matches
received
data.
27
28
OFFLOAD
BOOTROM -A
29
BOOTROM -A offloaded
(32 kB). time
elapsed: 776.6 ms.
30
BOOTROM -A hash is
identical
to valid
hash.
31
HMAC
BOOTROM -A
32
BOOTROM -A HMAC
received
after
0.224 ms.
33
HMAC
matches
received
data.
34
35
...
36
37
OFFLOAD
SRAM_NS -A
38
SRAM_NS -A offloaded
(32 kB). time
elapsed: 747.1 ms.
39
SRAM_NS -A hash
differs
from
the
valid
hash!
40
HMAC
SRAM_NS -A
41
SRAM_NS -A HMAC
received
after
0.43 ms.
42
HMAC
does
not
match
received
data!
43
44
...
45
46
OFFLOAD
SRAM_NS -C
47
SRAM_NS -C offloaded
(32 kB). time
elapsed: 749.1 ms.
48
SRAM_NS -C hash is
identical
to valid
hash.
49
HMAC
SRAM_NS -C
50
SRAM_NS -C HMAC
received
after
0.245 ms.
51
HMAC
matches
received
data.
52
53
...
54
55
OFFLOAD
FLASH_NS -A
56
FLASH_NS -A offloaded
(32 kB). time
elapsed: 772.6 ms.
57
FLASH_NS -A hash is
identical
to valid
hash.
58
HMAC
FLASH_NS -A
59
FLASH_NS -A HMAC
received
after
0.291 ms.
60
HMAC
matches
received
data.
61
62
...
63
64
****
65
$ ^C
66
The
following
errors
occured
in the
attestation :
67
SRAM_NS -A has
invalid
state
68
SRAM_NS -A had
invalid
signature
69
SRAM_NS -B has
invalid
state
70
SRAM_NS -B had
invalid
signature
71
SRAM_NS -F has
invalid
state
72
SRAM_NS -F had
invalid
signature
Listing 5.7: Results
from
the
oﬄoaded
remote
attestation
using
memory_watcher.py.
==PAGE:110==
98
Proof of Concept
5.5.4
Runtime measurement
To test the eﬃciency of the oﬄoading procedure, the average duration of the
transmissions and authentications are calculated. The transfer speed will de-
pend on the speed of the communication. Using the UART and a baud rate
of 115200, 32KB is transferred in 2.922 seconds, corresponding to 89,713 bits
received per second, which is approximately the same speed as the transfer on
the previous hardware. However, the LPC55S69 microcontroller allows for baud
rates above 115200. To verify that the baud rate was the limiting factor, and
memory can be transferred at higher rates, the transfer rate measured at diﬀer-
ent baud rates is seen in Figure 5.13. The maximum rate for the hardware is
1036800, at which the whole procedure takes 11.5 seconds. Unfortunately the
maximum rate currently cannot be measured for wireless forms of communica-
tions, however it does show that the memory transfer rate will scale with the
communication speed to a certain degree.
200000
400000
600000
800000
1000000
UART baudrate
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
Offloaded bits per second
Figure 5.13: Oﬄoading rate at diﬀerent baud rates.
Furthermore, the duration of the oﬄoading is proportional to the size of the
oﬄoaded memory, as seen in Figure 5.14, where the oﬄoading procedure is
performed on the non-secure ﬂash with increasing memory sizes from 1KB to
the entire (non-secure) 566 KB in 1KB increments. The memory is still split
into 32KB chunks, but this does not seem to cause any signiﬁcant delay. The
time required to calculate and send the signature is almost negligible compared
to transmission of the data itself, being 3.9 ms compared to the 3122 ms when
oﬄoading 128KB at a baud rate of 460800. The time required by the signature
==PAGE:111==
5.5 Securing integrity and authenticity in the oﬄoading procedure
99
is also approximately proportional to the size, while it varies a lot more, as
seen on Figure 5.15. These measurement are however speciﬁc to the LPC55S69
running at 150 MHz. Less resourceful processors without a hash engine may
require longer time to calculate the HMACs.
0
128
256
384
512
640
Input size [KB]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Time used [ms]
Figure 5.14: Time required for oﬄoading with regards to memory size. Mea-
sured at 460800 baud rate in 1KB increments.
0
128
256
384
512
640
Input size [KB]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time used [ms]
Figure 5.15: Time required for calculating HMAC with regards to memory
size.
==PAGE:112==
100
Proof of Concept
Furthermore, having the procedure be interruptible does not seem to have any
signiﬁcant consequences for the time required to oﬄoad, being just 1.9% slower
than an uninterruptible version where the device application is suspended. Con-
sequently, the normal application can be run while performing the oﬄoading
procedure without any signiﬁcant delay of the attestation. This was tested with
the current application for the sensor node and may also change for an applica-
tion where the non-secure world is doing computationally intensive work or will
interrupt the secure world at a higher rate.
From these results its clear that oﬄoading will not compete with current meth-
ods of static remote attestation when it comes to the eﬃciency of the procedure.
The duration of the transmission is many times larger than the time required
to compute the HMAC. This performance test is done on the LPC55S69 which
has a hash engine capable of hashing and calculating the HMAC at this speed.
The results may vary on hardware with fewer resources available.
However,
TrustZone is currently not available on very low-end hardware, which leads to
TrustZone-capable microcontroller likely also having hardware for hashing.
5.5.5
Measurements of energy consumption
Lastly, the energy consumption for the oﬄoading procedure is measured. This
is done by measuring the voltage drop over a 2.43 ohm resistor in line with
the voltage supply for the device, as suggested by the LPCXpresso55S69 user
manual [56]. Afterwards the power and then the energy consumption can be
calculated using the following formulas and the time required by the oﬄoading
procedure:
P = V 2
R
E = P · t
The power consumption of the oﬄoading is 208 mW and taking 23.3 seconds at a
baud rate of 460800. Given that the normal power consumption is 190 mW, the
excess power will be 18 mW, resulting in an excess energy consumption of 419
mJ (116 µWh). This does however vary with the baud rate as the process will
be longer and thus more energy consuming at lower baud rates. An excess 16
mW is measured at a baud rate of 115200 with the procedure taking 89 seconds,
resulting in an excess 1424 mJ, more than three times as much as the excess at
a baud rate of 460800. Note that the power measured is the power used by the
entire evaluation kit (MCU, DC-DC converter, IO etc.) and would be lower if
a simpler device is produced consisting only of the necessary hardware.
==PAGE:113==
5.6 Discussion of memory locking for oﬄoading
101
5.6
Discussion of memory locking for oﬄoading
Two diﬀerent methods of memory locking was discussed in Section 4.10, an
advanced approach and a simple approach. Most of the device’s memory re-
mains static making the majority of the process straightforward, however the
approaches diﬀer when concerning the active region of the RAM.
The simple approach starts be being uninterruptible and having all memory
locked until the ﬂash containing the program binary and all active RAM is of-
ﬂoaded. Additionally, peripheral sensor registers will have to oﬄoaded before
the system resumes and peripheral addresses must be be oﬄoaded before they
can be used. Afterwards it will unlock the active memory and allow interrupts
from the sensor node application. The approach diﬀers slightly from the pro-
posed approach from Section 4.10 as TrustZone will lock memory by designating
it to the secure world. Consequently, the ﬂash containing the program binary
must be unlocked (designated to the normal world) before the sensor applica-
tion can resumed, due to secure addresses not being readable from the normal
world. In eﬀect, both the active RAM and the regions of the ﬂash containing
the application must be oﬄoaded and unlocked before the oﬄoading procedure
re-enables interrupts, thereby resuming the sensor node application.
The application downtime of this approach will depend on how big the program
binary is, how much of the RAM is used by the sensor application and whether
the remaining ﬂash is accessed by the sensor application (e.g.
a region for
data variables). However, it will in most cases be signiﬁcantly faster than an
uninterruptible procedure, as the memory used by the application is likely less
than the maximum memory available on the device.
In the scenario of this project’s application, the device would oﬄoad the periph-
eral temperature sensor registers, the relevant peripheral addresses, the parts of
the ﬂash containing the program binary FLASH_NS-A and FLASH_NS-B and
the three active RAM sections SRAM_NS-A, SRAM_NS-B and SRAM_NS-F,
the ﬁrst two managing the non-secure heap and the last managing the non-secure
stack. The process would then become interruptible after these sections are of-
ﬂoaded. The memory locking on the remaining, inactive memory should not
cause any issues, as only malicious software would attempt to access this.
This would make the process interruptible for the majority of the oﬄoading pro-
cedure, while preventing migratory malware from avoiding detection and while
ﬁxing the issues of corrupted signatures as memory is no longer being changed
during the oﬄoading and the signing. It does however still cause some downtime
while the peripherals, the temperature sensor, two ﬂash regions and the three ac-
tive RAM regions are oﬄoaded, currently 160 KB, equivalent to approximately
==PAGE:114==
102
Proof of Concept
1.9 seconds of downtime using a baud rate of 921600. While this downtime is
short compared to the downtime of oﬄoading the entire memory without allow-
ing interruptions, it may still be undesired in some applications. The downtime
could partly be reduced by ﬁnding a more optimal memory section size, smaller
than 32KB, in order to prevent oﬄoading more data than necessary, however
to further minimise the downtime the more advanced approach will have to be
put to use.
The advanced approach consists of further viewing the active RAM as being
split into regions associated with speciﬁc tasks and structures. The memory
associated with each task is then individually oﬄoaded, unlocked, after which
the task resumed.
An example of this was given in Section 4.10, where all
task starts as suspended, then the memory associated with a task is oﬄoaded,
then unlocked, where-after the corresponding task is resumed. Prior to this,
the main stack and heap will need to be oﬄoaded and unlocked. This approach
will however require a more complex oﬄoading procedure and conﬁguring the
procedure with the deﬁnitions of the memory regions associated with each task,
along with TrustZone conﬁgurations for each of these regions.
The memory locking will not be implemented as part of the proof of concept.
This would require several additions to the procedure and modifying the oﬄoad-
ing procedure to dynamically change the TrustZone settings to lock and unlock
memory, which the time constraints of the project do not allow for.
5.7
Evaluation of using oﬄoading as an alterna-
tive to current remote attestation protocols
The implementation conforms to the security requirements presented in Section
4.9. The protocol guarantees authenticity and integrity for the transferred data
while the use of an individual nonce for each memory segment ensures the fresh-
ness of the results. Lastly, the TrustZone conﬁguration ensures that information
about the secret key used for signing does not leak to the non-trusted software.
However, the common assumption that the secure world handles the attestation
request before the non-secure world has issues being implemented in a TEE such
as TrustZone. The communication peripheral has to be non-secure for the de-
vice’s normal functioning unless communication is handled by the secure world,
which would then serve as an attack surface directly to the secure world. This
issue is not unique to this approach of remote attestation, and other protocols
implemented in TrustZone will suﬀer in a similar manner. It does, however,
cause this current TrustZone implementation to have a minor vulnerability to
mobile adversaries, where malicious software deletes itself when receiving the
==PAGE:115==
5.7 Evaluation of using oﬄoading as an alternative to current remote
attestation protocols
103
attestation request before the request is forwarded to the trusted software.
The developed procedure will currently send each memory region after which the
fog node veriﬁes the region by hash or by byte-wise comparisons with white-lists
containing the legal combinations of memory. The fog node program will note
each invalid memory region and in the case of byte-wise attestation reveal which
registers are wrongly conﬁgured. The duration of the procedure consists mostly
of transmissions of data, with the time required by the HMAC-calculation being
negligible in comparison. These measurements were made using the LPC55S69
using its hash engine with a speciﬁc sensor node application and using UART
as communication. They may vary with diﬀerent hardware and device software.
Additionally, it was shown that the procedure could be made interruptible with-
out complications and was only 1.9% slower than a non-interruptible procedure,
which makes running the device application while oﬄoading feasible.
Memory locking has not yet been implemented, so the eﬀects cannot be eval-
uated, but it will be able to ﬁx the issue of migratory and transient malware
avoiding detection during the procedure. It will also correct the issue of signa-
tures being invalidated due to data-changes, as the data would be static during
the oﬄoading. The tools necessary to implement memory locking should be
available in TrustZone.
While the oﬄoading of the remote attestation is not more eﬃcient than tradi-
tional remote attestation, it does oﬀer an increased level of eﬀectiveness. Using
oﬄoading, the attestation is expanded to cover ﬂash data regions, peripheral
addresses, accessible peripheral device memory and the RAM. This is an im-
provement over current remote attestation designs, in which misconﬁgurations
from transient malware cannot be detected and runtime attacks cannot be de-
tected if they do not deviate from the execution ﬂow (or not detected at all if
using static attestation). Additionally, the lack of eﬃciency may not be an issue,
as the memory locking mechanism will be able to keep the device application
active for the majority of the oﬄoading procedure.
The attestation of the RAM may be done using more advanced forensic tools
available to the fog node using the computational power of the cloud. While
these forensic tools were not the focus of the project, the byte-by-byte attes-
tation of the peripheral temperature sensor, peripheral addresses and the data
ﬂash should serve as a proof of concept of how memory can be attested more
rigorously by comparing certain addresses or registers with expected values in-
stead of relying on solely comparing hashes.
This attestation will, however,
require knowledge about the memory layout of the software in RAM, such as
the location of speciﬁc structures and the expected values of certain registers.
The structural knowledge can be attained by memory analysis as it was per-
formed in Section 4.8 and will also require certain structures to be statically
==PAGE:116==
104
Proof of Concept
allocated in order to reliably predict the application layout. The current veriﬁ-
cation program works by either doing byte-by-byte attestation or attestation by
hashing for the program ﬂash and RAM. The project can possibly be extended
to perform more rigorous analysis of the RAM, but for now the procedure uses
hashes, which is mainly useful to check whether unused memory remains static.
In short, oﬄoading allows for a signiﬁcantly more eﬀective remote attestation.
While traditional static attestation would only verify the program binary, oﬀ-
loading additionally allows for attestation of the data ﬂash, peripheral addresses,
peripheral devices and even RAM if a method is devised to compare the RAM
with structures found in the memory analysis. While it is less eﬃcient than
traditional static attestation, oﬄoading will be useful for devices in critical sce-
narios where computational resources, energy and time can be sacriﬁced in order
to ensure the security and intended functionality of the devices. Examples of
this could be embedded devices used in the nuclear or medical industry, where
malware or wrong conﬁgurations cannot be tolerated.
Currently the oﬄoading relies on the Veriﬁer knowing which memory regions
exist on the device, the size of them, how the nonce is expanded for them and
if some ﬂash memory is designated for data instead of code. To improve the
current protocol to work for multiple diﬀerent devices and architectures, an
information-exchange step could be added to the protocol. The trusted com-
ponent of the Prover could inform the Veriﬁer of each memory region, their
sizes, nonce expansion and of any peripheral devices and their memory size.
This could expand the protocol to work in a system of heterogeneous devices
and would eliminate the need for Vrf to know the structure of Prv beforehand.
Certain knowledge about the system is, however, still required to properly at-
test the RAM of Prv, as structural knowledge about the device application will
be needed in order to evaluate whether Prv’s software deviates from it. Ad-
ditionally, Vrf must also know the legal conﬁgurations of peripheral addresses,
peripheral device registers and data ﬂash beforehand, along with the legal pro-
gram binaries. The eﬃciency of the protocol could also be improved by giving
the option to request hashes for some regions. This is mainly useful for regions
which are expected to be static, such as the program ﬂash. However, it may also
be useful to request a hash ﬁrst for infrequently-used regions to check whether
the region has changed since the last attestation, before requesting an oﬄoad for
it. Lastly, it may be necessary to add conﬁdentiality and authentication of the
Veriﬁer to the protocol in certain scenarios where the device contains sensitive
information such as privacy-breaching content or intellectual property.
==PAGE:117==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Future
Work
The security for IoT devices is often lacking, leaving many devices vulnerable to
malware. Remote attestation is a method of verifying the integrity of a device,
but the current state-of-the-art protocols have certain limitations. Current static
remote attestation is limited to verifying the program binary, which prevents the
protocol from detecting runtime attacks. Furthermore, the downtime associated
with the protocol may make it unsuitable for devices performing time-sensitive
work.
Other approaches to remote attestation exist, but suﬀer from similar
limitations, additional hardware costs or large overhead.
This project proposes, designs and implements the usage oﬄoading in the remote
attestation process in order to increase its eﬀectiveness by covering more of the
device’s memory and increase its eﬃciency by reducing the downtime on the
attested device. First, a sensor application was designed, such that a memory
analysis could be performed and the procedure later could be implemented on a
platform. The approach to the project was then detailed, including the security
requirements of the protocol and how memory locking can be used to mitigate
the issues associated with the downtime. Using this, an oﬄoading protocol was
proposed: the device will use TrustZone in order to have a trusted environment
for the oﬄoading procedure, and MACs will be used by this trusted procedure to
ensure the integrity and authenticity of the data. Lastly, using memory locking
the procedure will be able to run simultaneously with the device application.
==PAGE:118==
106
Conclusion and Future Work
A sensor node application was developed for the LPC5411X, then ported to the
LPC55S69 microcontroller in order to have a TrustZone-capable IoT device to
implement the oﬄoading procedure on. The oﬄoading procedure was developed
and tested using an external Python program acting as the Veriﬁer. The Veriﬁer
will initiate the procedure, verify the MACs and verify each memory region by
either comparing the hashes or doing a byte-by-byte comparison of addresses or
registers. It was shown that the oﬄoading protocol is successful in signiﬁcantly
increasing the memory covered by the remote attestation protocol, allowing the
Veriﬁer to verify the entire ﬂash (the program binary and any data saved in
the ﬂash), the RAM, the boot ROM, the readable peripheral addresses and any
accessible registers on connected peripheral devices. The potential of allowing
the veriﬁcation of these memory regions was illustrated by the Veriﬁer comparing
the values of the data ﬂash, the I2C and ADC conﬁgurations and the oﬄoaded
registers of the connected peripheral BME280 temperature sensor. The RAM
will, however, need to be veriﬁed using methods not discussed in this project,
but the performed memory analysis shows that this may be feasible.
The eﬃciency of this protocol is not improved compared to traditional static
remote attestation. The oﬄoaded data must still be authenticated in order to
ensure authenticity and integrity in the protocol, and the transmission time of
large memory regions is signiﬁcant compared to the time required for comput-
ing the associated HMACs.
The duration of the procedure is, however, not
necessarily an issue as the protocol is made interruptible to allow for the device
application to run simultaneously with the oﬄoading procedure. The proposed
memory locking approach should be able to minimise the actual downtime and
allow most of the procedure to be interruptible, without compromising the secu-
rity. The eﬀectiveness is, however, signiﬁcantly improved due to the expanded
memory coverage. This allows the Veriﬁer to detect runtime attacks if the of-
ﬂoaded RAM were to be thoroughly analysed and allows the detection of illegal
register-values of the peripheral devices, data ﬂash and peripheral addresses
(I2C, ADC etc.).
In conclusion, the development of the oﬄoading protocol was successful, and
it does have advantages over traditional static remote attestation. However, it
also requires more time and computational power to attest devices. Whether
this is practical in common sensor networks will have to be decided from the
network’s security requirements.
Attesting devices with greater eﬀectiveness
will, however, be useful in critical scenarios where malware and malfunctions
cannot be tolerated, such as the medical and nuclear industry.
The project also provides the basis for future work on the topic. Memory locking
still needs to be implemented and tested to ensure the security of the protocol
when interruptible. This should be feasible by restricting the access to memory
from the normal world (the device application) by dynamically changing the
==PAGE:119==
107
TrustZone conﬁguration to move sections between the normal and the secure
world.
Using oﬄoading to attest devices requires the Veriﬁer to have information about
the memory layout of the Prover. The proof-of-concept is hard-coded to work
with the LPC55S69 using a BME280 temperature sensor and having the last
1KB of ﬂash reserved for data. However, in order to minimise the prior knowl-
edge required and allow the protocol to function in heterogeneous environments,
the device-information could instead be exchanged during an additional phase in
the oﬄoading protocol, where the device securely transmits information about
its memory layout from within the secure world. Additionally, some regions
could be marked as conﬁdential, which would then force encryption and Veriﬁer-
authentication. The attestation-request could also be expanded to allow request
for hashes for certain regions, which would increase the eﬃciency for applica-
ble regions, primarily the program binary. Furthermore, since the implemented
oﬄoading allows the attestation of RAM, new methods are required to success-
fully verify the memory. The project currently uses a combination of veriﬁcation
by hashing or byte-by-byte comparison, but the RAM is signiﬁcantly more com-
plex to analyse and will require more advanced methods of memory forensics,
which will need to be developed or adapted from other areas of research. Lastly,
investigation is needed to determine whether oﬄoading can be used to attest
larger networks and how this best could be achieved.
==PAGE:120==
108
Conclusion and Future Work
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1]
IoT 2019 in Review: The 10 Most Relevant IoT Developments of the Year.
2020. url: https://iot-analytics.com/iot-2019-in-review/.
[2]
N. Dragoni, A. Giaretta, and M. Mazzara. “The Internet of Hackable
Things”. In: Proceedings of 5th International Conference in Software En-
gineering for Defence Applications. 2018.
[3]
Mirai, NJCCIC Threat Proﬁle. 2016. url: https://www.cyber.nj.gov/
threat-center/threat-profiles/botnet-variants/mirai-botnet.
[4]
Inside the infamous Mirai IoT Botnet: A Retrospective Analysis. 2017.
url: https://blog.cloudflare.com/inside-mirai-the-infamous-
iot-botnet-a-retrospective-analysis/.
[5]
FreeRTOS TCP/IP Stack Vulnerabilities. 2018. url: https : / / blog .
zimperium.com/freertos-tcpip-stack-vulnerabilities-put-wide-
range-devices-risk-compromise-smart-homes-critical-infrastructure-
systems/.
[6]
An Unprecedented Look at Stuxnet, the World’s First Digital Weapon.
2014. url: https://www.wired.com/2014/11/countdown-to-zero-
day-stuxnet/.
[7]
A. Seshadri et al. “SWATT: softWare-based attestation for embedded de-
vices”. In: IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. 2004.
[8]
F. Brasser et al. “TyTAN: Tiny trust anchor for tiny devices”. In: 2015
52nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC). 2015.
==PAGE:122==
110
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9]
A. Ibrahim, A. Sadeghi, and S. Zeitouni. “SeED: SeCure Non-Interactive
Attestation for EMbedded DEvices”. In: Proceedings of the 10th ACM
Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks
(WiSec). 2017.
[10]
T. Abera et al. “C-FLAT: Control-FLow ATtestation for Embedded Sys-
tems Software”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS). 2016.
[11]
G. Dessouky et al. “LO-FAT: Low-Overhead Control Flow ATtestation in
Hardware”. In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual Design Automation Con-
ference (DAC). 2017.
[12]
S. Zeitouni et al. “ATRIUM: Runtime attestation resilient under memory
attacks”. In: 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-
Aided Design (ICCAD). 2017.
[13]
H. Shacham. “The Geometry of Innocent Flesh on the Bone: Return-into-
Libc without Function Calls (on the X86)”. In: CCS ’07: Proceedings of the
14th ACM conference on Computer and communications security. 2007.
[14]
Arm TrustZone Technology. 2019. url: https://developer.arm.com/
ip-products/security-ip/trustzone.
[15]
A. Francillon and C. Castelluccia. “Code Injection Attacks on Harvard-
Architecture Devices”. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS). 2008.
[16]
mlock(2) — Linux manual page. 2020. url: https://man7.org/linux/
man-pages/man2/mlock.2.html.
[17]
K. Eldefrawy et al. “Temporal Consistency of Integrity-Ensuring Compu-
tations and Applications to Embedded Systems Security”. In: Proceedings
of the 2018 on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Secu-
rity (ASIACCS). 2018.
[18]
J. Winter. “Experimenting with ARM TrustZone – Or: How I Met Friendly
Piece of Trusted Hardware”. In: 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference
on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications. 2012.
[19]
S. Pinto and N. Santos. “Demystifying Arm TrustZone: A Comprehensive
Survey”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR). 2019.
[20]
TrustZone technology for Armv8-M. 2019. url: https://developer.arm.
com/ip-products/security-ip/trustzone/trustzone-for-cortex-
m.
[21]
B. Ngabonziza et al. “TrustZone Explained: Architectural Features and
Use Cases”. In: 2016 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Collaboration
and Internet Computing (CIC). 2016.
==PAGE:123==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
111
[22]
D. Cerdeira et al. “SoK: Understanding the Prevailing Security Vulnera-
bilities in TrustZone-assisted TEE Systems”. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP). 2020.
[23]
T. Roth. TrustZone-M(eh): Breaking ARMv8-M’s security. Chaos Com-
munication Congress (36C3). 2019.
[24]
C. Castelluccia et al. “On the Diﬃculty of Software-Based Attestation
of Embedded Devices”. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security. 2009.
[25]
Y. Yang et al. “Distributed Software-based Attestation for Node Com-
promise Detection in Sensor Networks”. In: 2007 26th IEEE International
Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS). 2007.
[26]
J. Noorman et al. “Sancus: low-cost trustworthy extensible networked de-
vices with a zero-software trusted computing base”. In: USENIX Security
Symposium. 2013.
[27]
J. Götzfried et al. “Soteria: Oﬄine Software Protection within Low-cost
Embedded Devices”. In: Annual Computer Security Applications Confer-
ence (ACSAC). 2015.
[28]
K. Eldefrawy, D. Perito, and G. Tsudik. “SMART: Secure and Minimal
Architecture for (Establishing a Dynamic) Root of Trust”. In: The Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS). 2012.
[29]
P. Koeberl et al. “TrustLite: A Security Architecture for Tiny Embedded
Devices”. In: Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer
Systems (EuroSys). 2014.
[30]
N. Asokan et al. “SEDA: Scalable Embedded Device Attestation”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Com-
munications Security (CCS). 2015.
[31]
A. Ibrahim et al. “DARPA: Device Attestation Resilient to Physical At-
tacks”. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Security & Privacy
in Wireless and Mobile Networks (WiSec). 2016.
[32]
M. Ambrosin et al. “SANA: Secure and Scalable Aggregate Network At-
testation”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security (CCS). 2016.
[33]
F. Kohnhäuser et al. “SCAPI: A Scalable Attestation Protocol to Detect
Software and Physical Attacks”. In: Proceedings of the 10th ACM Confer-
ence on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks (WiSec).
2017.
[34]
T. Abera et al. “DIAT: Data Integrity Attestation for Resilient Collabo-
ration of Autonomous Systems”. In: 26th Annual Network & Distributed
System Security Symposium (NDSS). 2019.
==PAGE:124==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[35]
X. Carpent, G. Tsudik, and N. Rattanavipanon. “ERASMUS: Eﬃcient
remote attestation via self-measurement for unattended settings”. In: 2018
Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE). 2018.
[36]
B. Kuang et al. “ESDRA: An Eﬃcient and Secure Distributed Remote
Attestation Scheme for IoT Swarms”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal.
2019.
[37]
E. Dushku et al. “SARA: Secure Asynchronous Remote Attestation for IoT
Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security.
2020.
[38]
S. Yi et al. “Fog Computing: Platform and Applications”. In: 2015 Third
IEEE Workshop on Hot Topics in Web Systems and Technologies (HotWeb).
2015.
[39]
K. Akherﬁ, M. Gerndt, and H. Harroud. “Mobile cloud computing for
computation oﬄoading: Issues and challenges”. In: Applied Computing and
Informatics. 2018.
[40]
B. Chun et al. “CloneCloud: Elastic Execution between Mobile Device and
Cloud”. In: European Conference on Computer Systems, Proceedings of the
Sixth European conference on Computer systems (EuroSys ’11). 2011.
[41]
M. Conti et al. “Remote Attestation as a Service for IoT”. In: 2019 Sixth
International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management
and Security (IOTSMS). 2019.
[42]
M. Al-khafajiy et al. “IoT-Fog Optimal Workload via Fog Oﬄoading”. In:
2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Utility and Cloud Comput-
ing Companion (UCC Companion). 2018.
[43]
M. Mukherjee et al. “Computation Oﬄoading Strategy in Heterogeneous
Fog Computing with Energy and Delay Constraints”. In: ICC 2020 - 2020
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). 2020.
[44]
H. Flores et al. “Large-scale oﬄoading in the Internet of Things”. In: 2017
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communi-
cations Workshops (PerCom Workshops). 2017.
[45]
IoT Developer Survey 2019 Report. 2019. url: https://www.slideshare.
net/Eclipse-IoT/iot-developer-survey-2019-report.
[46]
Minimum hardware requirements. 2017. url: https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/windows-hardware/design/minimum/minimum-hardware-
requirements-overview.
[47]
BME280 – Data sheet. Bosch Sensortec, 2018. url: https://ae-bst.
resource.bosch.com/media/_tech/media/datasheets/BST-BME280-
DS002.pdf.
[48]
UM10914, LPC5411x User manual. NXP Semiconductors, 2018. url: https:
//www.nxp.com/webapp/Download?colCode=UM10914.
==PAGE:125==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
113
[49]
Using FreeRTOS on ARMv8-M Microcontrollers. 2020. url: https://
www.freertos.org/2020/04/using-freertos-on-armv8-m-microcontrollers.
html.
[50]
About OP-TEE. 2020. url: https : / / optee . readthedocs . io / en /
latest/general/about.html.
[51]
LPC55S6x/LPC55S2x/LPC552x User manual (UM11126). 2020. url: https:
//www.mouser.com/pdfDocs/NXP_LPC55S6x_UM.pdf.
[52]
M. Stevens et al. “The First Collision for Full SHA-1”. In: Advances in
Cryptology - CRYPTO 2017. 2017.
[53]
G. Leurent and T. Peyrin. “SHA-1 is a Shambles: First Chosen-Preﬁx
Collision on SHA-1 and Application to the PGP Web of Trust”. In: 29th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). 2020.
[54]
M. Bellare. “New Proofs for NMAC and HMAC: Security Without Collision-
Resistance”. In: Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2006. 2006.
[55]
HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication. 1997. url: https:
//tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2104.
[56]
UM11158, LPCXpresso55S69/55S28 user manual. NXP Semiconductors,
2019.
