==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Implementation of a heuristic for
solving the Dial-a-Ride problem
Jens N. Urup (S152980)
Supervisor: Stefan Røpke
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The aim of this thesis was to examine how the metaheuristic Adaptive Large Neighbour-
hood Search (ALNS) performs at solving real life instances of the Dial-a-Ride Problem
(DARP), with data instances provided by BNR A/S. BNR A/S is a danish software
company, which focus on fleet management systems.
BNR A/S are currently solving the DARP in two phases; The first phase creates some
well performing tour suggestions, and the second phase combines these into complete
routes.
The first chapter of the thesis serves as an introduction to the DARP, gives some short
examples of real life applications and provides a literature study of scientific papers that
have established the foundation of this thesis.
This is followed by the theory behind DARP and ALNS; the theory takes its starting
point in describing a simple greedy heuristic, and evolves into describing the ALNS
framework, and how this can be used for solving the DARP.
With the theory in place, the following chapter describes how the different aspects of
the heuristic have been implemented, followed by a section describing how the heuristic
were tuned, and lastly how it was tested after the testing phase.
The thesis finish of with a discussion and description of further work, and lastly a
conclusion on the entire thesis work.
In this thesis, the data sets produced from Phase 1, can be solved by using a Set Cover
Problem (SCP). A Julia implementation of this were implemented. This implementation
are able to solve the Phase 1 data sets in under 71 seconds, for two of the data sets, the
running time were under 10 seconds, and was able to improve the solution by up to 17
%, compared to the results from BNR A/S.
The ALNS implementation, was able to perform 30,000 iterations, in around ten minutes.
The results obtained from the ALNS implementation seemed promising. By using a
hybrid of ALNS and SCP, the hybrid was able to improve the ALNS solutions by 0.47%
on average.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a mas-
ter’s degree in Industrial Engineering and Management.
This thesis is the final product of a 35 ECTS points thesis, and were done in cooperation
with BNR A/S, who provided data.
Kongens Lyngby, January 25, 2021
Jens N. Urup (S152980)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost a big thanks goes to my supervisor Stefan Røpke from DTU, for the
help and guidance throughout the project period. A big thanks also goes to BNR for
providing an exciting project, and providing the project with real life data, and making
this project a success.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Dial-a-Ride Problem in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Real life applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Inspiration and previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
11
2.1
The Dial-a-Ride Problem, representation and implementation
. . . . . .
11
2.2
Solution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Implementation
27
3.1
Feasibility checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Destroy and repair methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Test and Tuning
37
4.1
Data sets used for the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Initial findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Initial tuning phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Fine tuning phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Testing phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Solutions for Phase 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.7
Hybrid of ALNS and Set Cover Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Discussion and further work
57
5.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Conclusion
71
A An Appendix
73
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A.1 Difference in λ values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 Results of tuning data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.3 Results of tuning data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.4 Results of tuning data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The Dial-a-Ride Problem (DARP) is a NP-hard combinatorial problem, which seeks to
create a number of vehicle routes based on requests from the users. The DARP is a
generalization of a number of different vehicle routing problems, such as the Vehicle
Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW) and the Pickup and Delivery Vehicle
Routing Problem (PDPVRP).
Formally, there are n users, and it is wished to create m routes, which overall minimizes
the total routing costs, while servicing every customer. Each customer will be seen as
a request, which contains a pickup location as well as a delivery location. For each of
these two locations, a time windows will be specified by the costumer, in which it can
be serviced.
1.1
The Dial-a-Ride Problem in general
The DARP has n users which will be allocated on m routes. Each user will create a
request, a request consists of a pickup location, a delivery location, and a travel category
which can be either arriving or leaving. If the travel category is arriving, the customer
has specified a time for arriving at the delivery location, however if the category is
leaving, the customer has specified a time for being picked up at the pickup location.
For each ride-share request, the distance and duration from pickup location to delivery
location can be calculated. Let R be a parameter, which denotes how much extra time
a customer is allowed to be in a vehicle, for this thesis R is constant for every customer,
but in other application it might vary, depending on the requests.
In this thesis, the longest time a customer can be in a vehicle, is defines as the direct
duration, from pickup to delivery, plus R. This is used to define the time windows of
the customer. If a customer requests to be picked up at 14:00, the travel time is 10
minutes, and R = 30. Then the pickup locations time windows will be [14:00,14:30] and
the delivery locations time windows will be [14:10,14:40]. For each pickup or delivery,
there is associated a service time denoted d > 0.
In the implementation of the DARP, the feasibility of the customer ride time, i.e. that
the ride time never exceeds the maximum allowed time, can be solved in different ways.
It can be solved by having constraints ensuring that it is never exceeded, or it can be
imposed in the time windows. For this thesis, the maximum ride time will be imposed
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
in the definition of the time windows, such that no extra constraints are necessary.
With the information, regarding every ride-share requests, it is possible to plan routes,
which are able to perform the requests. It is possible for a single vehicle to pick up mul-
tiple customers, before performing the corresponding deliveries, as long as the capacity
of the vehicle is not exceeded and the remaining constraints are still respected.
In order to solve the problem, a directed graph in which distance, ride time and time
windows are represented, can be used. The customers pickup and delivery location is
represented as a node, and the route between the two is represented as an edge.
A small example of this can be seen in the graph in Figure 1.1 below. The figure shows
three ride-share requests, in which Ap is the pickup location for customer A, and Ad is
the delivery location for customer A. The numbers in red shows the distance of the edge,
and the numbers in blue indicates the duration of this edge. For simplicity of the figure,
the time windows are not shown.
Ap
Ad
Bp
Bd
Cp
Cd
5, 6
5, 6
12, 13
Figure 1.1: Three customers shown with the travel distance and duration for the direct route
from pickup to delivery.
Figure 1.1 illustrates the direct path from pickup location to delivery location of three
requests. From the figure, it can be seen that the total distance traveled will be 22. It
seems like it can be beneficial to perform multiple pickups before their corresponding
delivery, e.g. it seems promising to pick up Cp, then Ap, then deliver Ad and lastly
delivery Cd. The shortest route which can perform all three requests can be seen in
Figure 1.2 below:
==PAGE:13==
1.1 The Dial-a-Ride Problem in general
3
Ap
Ad
Bp
Bd
Cp
Cd
3, 4
5, 6
5, 6
3, 4
3, 4
Figure 1.2: A single vehicle performing all three requests.
Figure 1.2 shows that the distance traveled is now 19, and only uses a single vehicle.
Illustrating the potential in optimizing the routes in order to both use fewer vehicles,
and also creating shorter routes, leading to savings.
Dial-a-Ride services can be either static or dynamic.
For the static case every user
request is known in advance, whereas for the dynamic case every requests are coming
throughout the day. The dynamic case rarely exists in a pure case, since most of the
time, a number of the requests are known in advance, and some new requests are coming
during the day. This allows the creation of an initial plan with every known requests,
and then whenever a new request is presented, the existing routes will be updated and
re-evaluated, taking the new request into account.
This thesis will seek to implement a metaheuristic, in order to solve real life instances
as provided by BNR A/S. The instances investigated are of taxi requests from Norway.
BNR A/S [1] is a danish based software company, focusing on fleet management expertise.
They offer a variety of products, mainly focused around taxi and fleet optimization. They
offer a mobile product, to be used in taxis which are able to help with decision support for
the drivers, this product can help in the decision making process. It gathers information
from the taxi meter and the credit card readers, this product helps in accounting. They
offer call center support, which supports the call center employees, by supplying instant
access to the fleet status information, regarding booking times, waiting times and status
information.
They offer a fleet engine, which is the building blocks of their fleet management system.
This systems is responsible for planning the routes and allocating the vehicles, to serve
the customer requests. This thesis will implement another way of solving the DARP,
as opposed to BNR A/S, and the results from this will be evaluated against the data
provided by BNR A/S.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
A Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) model will be presented, but due to the complexity
and size of the data instances, it will most likely, not be possible to solve the instances
with this, and therefore only the heuristic solutions will be reported.
1.2
Real life applications
The DARP, is an interesting problem, with practical application in real life. Dial-a-Ride
services provide a flexible way of transportation as opposed to using public transporta-
tion, which are fixed to a given route. In Dial-a-Ride services, it is possible to pick up
multiple customers, before completing the deliveries of the individuals, which can give
an overall shorter route, as opposed to servicing each of the single requests individually.
In practical applications, it can be beneficial to use such services, when commuting to,
and from work. For instance if two individuals are living and working close to each other,
then they are able to share the ride, and expenses of driving.
In Denmark, there are many different services which offer Dial-a-Ride solutions. An
example of a company offering this, is GoMore [2], which provide private car rental,
leasing and carpooling services. For the carpool service, it is possible to sign up as a
driver, or as a passenger. If an individual is signed up as a passenger, the passenger will
give a pickup location, and their desired destination, and they will then be matched up
with a driver who are going in the same direction.
By enabling carpooling, it is possible to reduce the number of vehicles on the road, which
will lead to less congestion on the roads, and it will have a positive impact on the carbon
dioxide emission.
Numbers from GoMore in 2008 [3], showed they had 255,000 trips in 2008, with an
average length of 75 km. In 2008, 15,000 persons were involved in the carpooling, a
total of 19,000,000 km were saved. This corresponds to 3,200 tons of CO2 saved, which
corresponds to 0.03% of the total emission from danish cars each year.
These numbers show a huge potential in the usage of carpooling, and in September 2020,
GoMore claimed to have 970,000 users in Denmark.
Another application of Dial-a-Ride services in Denmark, is Flextrafik [4]. Flextrafik offers
a variety of transportation possibilities, but are mainly focused around transportation
of people who are unable to use public transportation, or people who are living in rural
areas, where public transportation are not well suited for them. Flextrafik are used by
the elderly, who have to visit a hospital or a doctor, people with a physical handicap or
children who are attending a special need school.
In USA, the American Disability Act (ADA) of 1990 [5], mandates that transportation
options should be provided to those who are not able to use existing fixed-route public
transportation systems, such as bus, train or metro, due to disabilities. This act stip-
ulates that paratransit must have the same operating hours, be no more than twice as
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Inspiration and previous work
5
expensive and have reasonable travel times as fixed-route transportation systems [6].
Due to these constraints, ADA is extremely expensive. An examination from New York,
showed costs of $472 million in 2015, coming from six million rides [6].
A way to handle the high cost of paratransit can be by examining algorithmic solutions,
and using methods and mathematical models, such as the DARP.
Problems, such as paratransit or on-demand transportation are real life problems, which
can be solved by using mathematical models, such as the DARP. From 2007 to 2017, a
total of 86 scientific papers have been published on the subject, and the interest seems
to be increasing [7].
1.3
Inspiration and previous work
The DARP, as well as other variants of vehicle transportation problems have been ex-
amined for many years, and are still of great interest for researchers, to solve real life
problems. In order to gain an overview of how the problem previously has been solved
as well as modelled, a literature study has been conducted.
There exist a number of variations of the DARP, the static and the dynamic cases have
previously been mentioned. Jean-François Cordeau and Gilbert Laporte [8] describes
the single-vehicle Dial-a-Ride Problem and the multi-vehicle Dial-a-Ride Problem, which
both exists in static and dynamic cases. As well as describing the different types of
DARP, they review a number of different articles and recap how various authors have
solved the different cases of the DARP. They recap what the objectives of the research
were, as different quality criteria exist for the different projects in question. The case
examined in this thesis will be a static multi-vehicle problem, and the main objective
will be to create a number of minimum cost routes, based on distance traveled, while
respecting a number of constraints.
To solve the given DARP, the metaheuristic Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
(ALNS) as proposed by Stefan Røpke and David Pisinger [9] will be used. This pa-
per will be the main inspiration of this thesis.
The ALNS heuristic is using large neighbourhood moves in each iterations, as compared
to the more standard way, which is performing a lot of small moves. ALNS is based
on the ideas proposed by Shaw [10] in 1997, in which he proposed a heuristic called
Large Neighbourhood Search (LNS). Shaw [10] presented the idea of performing large
neighbourhood moves, instead of small changes which were the norm at that time. The
main idea in LNS is to use a single destroy method, and a single repair method, whereas
in ALNS, a number of destroy and repair methods are used, these are chosen based on
quality throughout the search. The difference between LNS and ALNS, as well as how
ALNS works, will be presented later on in the thesis.
The main idea in using ALNS, is to present a versatile local search heuristic. Most other
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
heuristics are designed to solve specific routing problems, whereas Røpke and Pisinger
[11] investigated how their implementation of ALNS would perform on five different
routing problems. The problems investigated were: the Vehicle Routing Problem with
Time Windows (VRPTW), the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP), the Multi-
depot Vehicle Routing Problem (MDVRP), the Site-dependent Vehicle Routing Problem
(SDVRP) and the Open Vehicle Routing Problem (OVRP). The paper [11] tests a number
of benchmark problems, and compare the results obtained with results from other papers.
Overall the usage of ALNS seems promising, due to the versatile nature of the search,
making it able to perform well on different problems.
In 2003, Cordeau and Laporte [12] solved the static Multi-Vehicle Dial-a-Ride Problem
(MVDARP) using TABU search. The TABU search heuristic was suggested by Glover in
1986 [13], and has since been one of the most widespread heuristic used for solving com-
binatorial optimization problems. The TABU search is performing well for the closely
related problem: the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows (PDPTW).
In 2007, Cordeau and Laporte [14] made an article which reviews the scientific literature
within DARP’s in different variants. The article presents a three-index formulation of
the DARP. The model is proposed by Cordeau [15], and is the main inspiration for the
mathematical formulation of this thesis, the model will be presented in section 2.1.
Classic VRP’s have evolved to a new class of problems, denoted Green Vehicle Routing
Problems (GVRP). GVRP seeks to help minimizing the total carbon emission in trans-
portation, whereas the classic VRP seeks to minimize the distance traveled, these new
problems are interesting to solve, in order to help in minimizing the outlet of CO2. In
[16], Zixuan Yu et al. implements a version of the ALNS metaheuristic, in order to solve
large instances of Green Vehicle Routing Problems with Time Windows (GVRPTW).
The mathematical model is closely related to classic versions of VRPTW, but the ob-
jective function is changed in order to calculate the carbon emission instead of distance
traveled.
Glaydston Mattos, and Gilbert Laporte [17], presented the Cumulative Capacitated Ve-
hicle Routing Problem (CCVRP), a variation of the classical CVRP. In the CCVRP the
objective is to minimize the sum of arrival times at the customers, whereas in the classic
CVRP, it is wished to minimize total routing cost.
CCVRP can be used after natural disasters, such as tsunamis and earthquakes, in which
it is critical to have an efficient supply chain to help the people affected by the natural
disaster. From computational experiments, Ann Campbell [18] showed that the routes
generated by CVRP, as opposed to CCVRP, would serve the communities significantly
later, since they minimized routing cost. Whereas CCVRP minimized the sum of arrival
times overall, and therefore serve more people, faster.
The papers [17] and [16], both solved the problems by using ALNS, and showed great
results from using this metaheuristic. These two papers showed how the usage of mathe-
matical models, can be used for solving real life problems. The results from [18] showed a
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Inspiration and previous work
7
great impact in helping serve the people affected by natural disasters. By their objective
function, they were able to serve more people faster, by minimizing the arrival times of
every customer.
Dimitris Bertsimas and Julia Yan [6] used the case of paratransit from New York, as
mentioned earlier, as inspiration for a DARP implementation, which were able to solve
big real life problems. They examined data sets with 3,000 to 7,000 requests on a daily
base. This is some of the biggest problems which have been solved by implementations,
and really shows the impact and usability of well performing DARP algorithms in prac-
tice.
Their methods of solving the problem were a cluster-then-route application, in which they
implements a clustering routine, which takes a divide-and-conquer approach to find high
quality clusters, routes are generated in the given clusters, and lastly the clusters are
are combined, in order to produce well performing routes.
A comprehensive comparison of different solution methods used to solve the DARP were
examined by Sin C. Ho et al. [7]. In this paper, Sin C. Ho et al. examined every paper
published with relations to the DARP from 2007 an to 2017, where the paper were
published.
They found 86 different papers published in the area of solving DARP’s. They compared
the different methods which were used to solve the problem, as well as described the
different variants of DARP, which exists.
The paper presented different benchmark data sets which are well defined, and used
throughout the literature. In this paper, the interesting benchmark data sets, are the
three DARP data sets.
The first were introduced by Cordeau and Laporte in 2003
[12], the second data sets were from Cordeau in 2006 [15] and the third data sets were
produced by Røpke et al. in 2007 [19].
The three type of data sets can be seen in Table 4.1 below:
Problem type
First reference
Number of instances
Size
DARP
Cordeau and Laporte (2003) [12]
20
3-13/24-144
DARP
Cordeau (2006) [15]
24
2-4/16-48
DARP
Røpke et al. (2007) [19]
24
5-8/40-96
Table 1.1: The three different data sets, first appearance, number of instance and size of
these.
Table 1.1 shows the three type of data sets which were used for the comparison in [7].
The size column are the min-max number of vehicles/requests for the data sets.
The comparison between solution methods, and their respective performance on the
different data set instances can be seen in Table 1.2 below:
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
DARPa
DARPb
DARPc
Gap
Gap∗
CPU
Gap
Gap∗
CPU
Gap
Gap∗
CPU
CG+LNS [20] (2013)
1.77
0.82
21.84
0.17
0.06
2.26
0.12
0.06
2.25
DA [21] (2014)
1.16
0.81
1.39
0.01
0.00
0.52
0.01
0.00
0.51
ELS [22] (2016)
1.04
0.64
9.87
0.07
0.00
1.02
0.05
0.02
1.02
ALNS [23] (2019)
0.88
0.50
0.91
0.28
0.15
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.27
H-ALNS [23] (2019)
0.50
0.32
3.49
0.05
0.01
0.63
0.05
0.01
0.65
LNS+DP [24] (2016)
3.64
2.35
66.72
0.21
0.10
5.01
0.30
0.17
4.51
Table 1.2: Overview of the implementations, which have solved the three types of data sets
from Table 1.1.
Table 1.2 shows that ALNS are performing well for solving the DARP, and seems like
a fitting metaheuristic to be used to solve the problem. The data set DARPa are the
data sets provided by Laporte in [12], DARPb are provided from Cordeau in [15] and
[19], and corresponds to small vehicle capacities. DARPc are provided from Cordeau in
[15] and [19] and corresponds to large vehicle capacities. In Table 1.2, Gap denoted the
average gap in % from the best known solution and gap∗, denotes the lowest gap in %.
CPU denotes the average computing time in minutes.
[20] solved the problems by a hybrid of Column Generation and Large Neighbourhood
Search, [21] used the metaheuristic Deterministic Annealing, [22] used Evolutionary Local
Search, [23] used Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search in the first, and in the second
they used ALNS with two improvement procedures and [24] used a hybrid of Large
Neighbourhood Search and Dynamic Programming.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Inspiration and previous work
9
Author
Title
Solution method
Objective
Jean-François Cordeau,
Gilbert Laporte[14] (2007)
The dial-a-ride problem:
models and algorithms
Recap of different
models and algorithms
Jean-François Cordeau,
Gilbert Laporte[12] (2003)
A tabu search heuristic
for the static multi-vehicle
dial-a-ride problem
Tabu search
Minimizing total route
length
Jean-François Cordeau,
Gilbert Laporte[8] (2003)
The Dial-a-Ride Problem
(DARP): Variants, modeling
issues and algorithms
Describe different models,
and the issues arising in
solving DARP
Paul Shaw[10] (1997)
A new local search algorithm
providing high quality solutions
to vehicle routing problems
LNS
1) Minimize no. of cars
2) Distance traveled
David Pisinger,
Stefan Røpke[11] (2007)
A general heuristic for
vehicle routing problems
ALNS
Describing how ALNS
can be used on a large set
of well-defined problems
Stefan Røpke,
David Pisinger[9] (2006)
An Adaptive Large Neighborhood
Search Heuristic for the Pickup
and Delivery Problem
With Time Windows
ALNS
Minimize a weighted sum
of distance traveled, sum
of time spent by each
vehicle and the number of
request scheduled
Zixuaan Yu et al.[16] (2020)
An Adaptive Large Neighbourhood
Search for the Larger-Scale Instance
of Green Vehicle Routing Problem
with Time Windows
ALNS
Minimize the total
carbon emission
Glaydston Mattos Ribeiro,
Gilbert Laporte[17] (2012)
An adaptive large neighborhood
search heuristic for the cumulative
capacitated vehicle routing problem
ALNS
Minimize the sum of
arrival times at customers
Sin C. Ho et al.[7] (2018)
A survey of dial-a-ride problems:
Literature review
and recent developments
Comparison of solutions
from different papers
Dimitris Bertsimas,
Julia Yan[6] (2020)
The edge of optimization in
large-scale vehicle routing
for paratransit
Cluster-then-route
Solve large instances
of paratransit
Table 1.3: Overview of the literature studied, in regards to objective and solution methods.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This chapter presents the theory associated with the Dial-a-Ride problem. How the
problem will be modelled, both in terms of theoretical background, and the associated
mathematical formulations which are the background of the implementation. Two math-
ematical formulations will be formulated and presented, and finally the heuristic and
framework of this will be presented.
2.1
The Dial-a-Ride Problem, representation
and implementation
The DARP is implemented on a directed graph G = (V, E), the node set V is split
into the sets {{0, 2n + 1}, P, D}, where P = {1, ..., n} is the set of pickup nodes, and
D = {n+1, ..., 2n} is the set of delivery nodes, 0 and 2n+1 are both a copy of the depot.
A ride-share request is a pair (i, n + i), in which i ∈P and n + i ∈D. For each node
vi ∈V , there is a load qi associated, with q0 = q2n+1 = 0, the load is corresponding to
the number of people being picked up or delivered, qi ≥0 for i = 1, ..., n and qi = −qi−n
for i = n + 1, ..., 2n. A service duration di ≥0 with d0 = d2n+1 = 0 is also associated
with each node.
The set of edges is defined as:
E = {(i, j) : i = 0, j ∈P, or i, j ∈P ∪D, i ̸= j and i ̸= n + j, or i ∈D, j = 2n + 1}.
The capacity of vehicle k is Qk and the maximal duration of route k ∈K is denoted Tk.
The cost of traveling along edge (i, j) with vehicle k is denoted ck
ij, and the travel time
of edge (i, j) is denoted tij.
For each node, a time window is associated, in which the customer should be serviced,
the time windows are denoted [ei, li], where ei is the start of a time window, and li is
the end of a time window. It is legal to arrive at a node before the start time window,
but service can at the earliest start at ei.
The model will use a binary three-index variable xk
ij equal to 1 if and only if arc (i, j)
is traversed by vehicle k ∈K. uk
i is the time at which vehicle k starts service at node i,
wk
i is the load of vehicle k when leaving node i, rk
i is the ride time of user i in vehicle
k. The maximal ride time is denoted by L. The Mixed Integer Program (MIP) will be
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
formulated as follows:
min
X
k∈K
X
i∈V
X
j∈V
ck
ijxk
ij
(2.1a)
s.t.
X
k∈K
X
j∈V
xk
ij = 1
∀i ∈P
(2.1b)
X
i∈V
xk
0i =
X
i∈V
xk
i,2n+1 = 1
∀k ∈K
(2.1c)
X
j∈V
xk
ij −
X
j∈V
xk
n+i,j = 0
∀i ∈P, k ∈K
(2.1d)
X
j∈V
xk
ji −
X
j∈V
xk
ij = 0
∀i ∈P ∪D, k ∈K
(2.1e)
uk
j ≥(uk
i + di + tij)xk
ij
∀i, j ∈V, k ∈K
(2.1f)
wk
j ≥(wk
i + qj)xk
ij
∀i, j ∈V, k ∈K
(2.1g)
rk
i ≥uk
n+i −(uk
i + di)
∀i ∈P, k ∈K
(2.1h)
uk
2n+1 −uk
0 ≤Tk
∀k ∈K
(2.1i)
ei ≤uk
i ≤li
∀i ∈V, k ∈K
(2.1j)
ti,n+i ≤rk
i ≤L
∀i ∈P, k ∈K
(2.1k)
max{0, qi} ≤wk
i ≤min{Qk, Qk + qi}
∀i ∈V, k ∈K
(2.1l)
uk
i ≤uk
i+n −di
∀i ∈P, k ∈K
(2.1m)
xk
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈V, k ∈K
The objective function (2.1a) ensures that a minimum cost route will be found, based
on distance traveled. Constraints (2.1b) and (2.1d) ensure that each request is served
exactly one time, and by the same vehicle, where constraints (2.1c) and (2.1e) ensure
that each vehicle will start and end its route in the depot and have flow conservation.
Constraints (2.1f) to (2.1h) define the service time, vehicle loads and the user ride times.
Constraints (2.1i) to (2.1l) ensure that those constraints will be feasible, constraint
(2.1m) ensure that a pickup will be performed before a delivery.
It can be seen that constraints (2.1f) and (2.1g) are non-linear. In order to ensure that
the model will be linear, two new sets of variables will be introduced M k
ij and W k
ij and
the following two constraints will be added to the model:
uk
j ≥uk
i + di + tij −M k
ij

1 −xk
ij

∀i, j ∈V, k ∈K
(2.2a)
wk
j ≥wk
i + qj −W k
ij

1 −xk
ij

∀i, j ∈V, k ∈K
(2.2b)
Equation (2.2a) will replace (2.1f), and equation (2.2b) will replace (2.1g). The value of
the two set of variables is set to M k
ij ≥max{0, li+di+tij−ej} and W k
ij ≥min{Qk, Qk+qi}
The DARP is normally implemented with the standard objective function from equation
(2.1a), but at BNR A/S and in this thesis, the objective function will be calculated as a
==PAGE:23==
2.1 The Dial-a-Ride Problem, representation and implementation
13
mixture of duration of a route, and the distance traveled. In order to encourage vehicles
to perform multiple requests, the objective function will evaluate the total length of a
route, compared to performing each of these requests individually. The new objective
function will then be:
P
k∈K
P
i∈V
P
j∈V xk
ij · tij + P
j∈V dj

1 −zj −xk
1,j

P
j∈D dj + P
k∈K
P
i∈P ti,i+n
+
P
k∈K
P
i∈V
P
j∈V xk
ij · ck
ij
P
k∈K
P
i∈P ck
i,i+n
.
(2.3)
In equation (2.3), a new set of variables is introduced zj ∈{0, 1}, ∀j ∈V , which is equal
to 1, if tij = 0. That is, if two nodes are at the same spot, then the service can be
performed simultaneously, and therefore the service time in this case will only be added
once. For the mathematical model, and equation (2.3), there are added two depots, it
should be noted that these are added to ensure feasibility in the routes, but are artificial,
meaning the distance from the depot and to each node are 0, the same for the distance
from each node to the depot.
It can be seen that there are two cases, at which the service time dj, will not be added.
It will not be added for the first visit in a route, and if two nodes are at the same place,
it will only be added once. This is done by adding the service time dj for every node,
and then subtracting the service time for the first request in a route, and in case zj = 1
As an example of how to calculate the objective function, a route with five request in it
will be examined. Let the total distance of the route be 38.067 kilometers and the total
distance, for each request individually be 27.25 kilometers. The total ride time of the
route is 62 minutes, and the total ride time of each request individually is 42 minutes.
None of the nodes are at the same spot, so zi = 0, ∀i for this route. The objective value
will therefore be calculated as:
62 + 3 · 9
5 · 3 + 42 + 38.067
27.25 = 2.98.
For this route, each of the request has the same service time of 3 minutes. It can be
seen, that with an objective value of 2.98, it is quite attractive to use the given route,
as compared to serving each of the five request in individual routes, where each would
have a cost of 2.
As an example, if a route would consist of only a single request, the calculation could
look as:
5 + 3
3 + 5 + 2.6
2.6 = 2.00.
So, as it can be seen, if the five request were services, in five individual routes, the total
objective value would be 10.
The top part of the first fraction, corresponds to the total duration of the route, plus
the service time of the request, without the first pickup. The bottom part corresponds
to the total duration of each request individually, plus the total service time.
The top of the second fraction, is the total distance of the route, and the bottom part
is the summed distance of the request individually.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
2.2
Solution methods
This section will present how BNR A/S is currently solving the problem, it will present
the two phases of BNR A/S current solution method. Afterwards, a descriptions of
how the problem can be solved by using ALNS is presented, as well as the theoretical
background of the ALNS.
2.2.1
Solution method at BNR A/S
BNR A/S has split the problem into two phases, one for creating tour-suggestions, and
one for finding a good set of these suggestions to create a number of minimum cost
routes, which will ensure that every customer will have their request satisfied.
Phase 1
In the first phase, BNR A/S tries to create a number of well performing tour-suggestions.
This is done by randomly choosing a combination of the ride-share requests, examine the
feasibility of these suggestions and then calculate a distance-, and cost-rating associated
with each tour-suggestion, as per equation (2.3). Right now, the algorithm are only
capable of finding routes of at most six users, but for certain rural areas it could be of
interest to create routes that can take more than six customers. Longer routes which
uses minibuses is of great interest in for example school transportation.
The data sets used in the first phase are denoted rsrData, (ride-share request data). The
data file has two different data types. The first data type holds the ride-share request
ID, the pickup ID, the delivery ID, the earliest pickup time for the pickup node and the
latest arrival time at the delivery node. In this information, there is added an extra 30
minutes in the time windows to allow for multiple pickups before making the delivery.
An example of the first data type of input is shown in Table 2.1 below.
RSR ID
Pickup ID
Delivery ID
Earliest Pickup
Latest Delivery
12733
15428
15429
2020-08-21T07:58:00
2020-08-21T08:30:00
12734
15430
15431
2020-08-21T14:00:00
2020-08-21T14:33:00
12735
15732
15733
2020-08-21T08:09:00
2020-08-21T08:45:00
12736
15434
15435
2020-08-21T14:30:00
2020-08-21T15:05:00
Table 2.1: Example of the first data type.
For the ride-share request with RSR ID 12733, it can be seen the Earliest Pickup is 07:58,
and the Latest Delivery is 08:30, meaning the ride time from pickup to delivery is two
minutes, and then, 30 minutes are added, such that multiple requests can be fulfilled in
the same route, at the same time.
With the extra 30 minutes it is possible to set up the time windows for pickup and
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Solution methods
15
delivery. For pickups, 30 minutes will be added to the Earliest Pickup, and for deliveries
30 minutes will be subtracted from Latest Delivery. So for request 12733, the pickup
time windows will be [07:58,08:28] and the delivery time windows will be [08:00,08:30].
The second data type holds the information of distance and travel time between the
nodes, each row has an ID for the pickup node, an ID for the delivery node, the distance
and travel time between the two nodes.
An example of this data type is shown in
Table 2.2 below.
Pickup node
Delivery node
Distance
Duration
15428
15429
869
120
15428
15433
3522
360
15428
15432
4869
540
15430
15431
884
180
15430
15435
5752
720
15430
15434
4405
540
Table 2.2: Example of the second data type. Distance in meters and duration in seconds.
For this data type, the distance between two nodes are given in meters, and the duration
between two nodes are given in seconds.
These two data types combined provides the information that can turn a ride-share
request, into a tour-suggestion. Table 2.1 holds the information of the origin and desti-
nation of a customer, whereas Table 2.2 can be used to find the distance and the time,
it takes to drive between two locations.
The second data type is not complet, and only holds the information of feasible distance
and travel times. If a pickup and delivery are too far from each other, either in time
or in distance, this information is excluded from the data, and the data set only holds
feasible routes. This helps in optimization, as it saves time with calculations that might
not be suitable, due to high distance or high travel times.
Phase 2
In the second phase of the problem, BNR A/S seeks to choose a subset of the tour-
suggestions which were generated in the first phase. The algorithm seeks to find a set of
tour-suggestions which minimizes the total routing costs. The routing costs are a sum
of the distance-, and cost-ratings, for every ride-share request in the tour-suggestion.
To ensure that it is always possible to have a feasible set of routes, each request will
have a tour-suggestion, in which it is the only request. The cost of the single-request
tour-suggestion will be 1 for both distance and duration rating.
Phase 2, can be seen as a Set Cover Problem (SCP). In the SCP a set of ride-share
requests {1, 2, ..., n} is given, and a set of sets S of size m of tour-suggestions. A set
s ∈S corresponds to a tour-suggestion. The objective is to find a minimum cost cover,
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
which will ensure that every single ride-share request is fulfilled, in the cheapest way
possible.
In order to create a MIP model, a constraint matrix A will be created, that holds the
information of which ride-share requests are in which tour-suggestion. The constraint
matrix will be of dimension (n, n + m), since there are n ride-share requests, and m
tour-suggestions.
As an example, there are three ride-share requests {1, 2, 3}, and three tour-suggestions:
(1,2), (2,3), (1,3) the A-matrix will look as follows:
A =


1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1


The first three columns correspond to the tour suggestions, and the last three columns
correspond to the ride-share requests, simply by being a route which only contains the
request itself. For each tour-suggestion, a cost cj ≥0 is associated. The binary decision-
variable xj, is equal to 1 if tour-suggestion j is chosen, and 0 otherwise. The MIP model
will look as follows:
min
n+m
X
j=1
xjcj
(2.4a)
s.t.
n+m
X
j=1
xjAij = 1
i ∈{1, 2, ..., n}
(2.4b)
xj ∈{0, 1}
j ∈{1, 2, ..., n + m}
The objective function (2.4a) ensure that the cost will be minimized, constraint (2.4b)
ensure that every ride-share request is fulfilled only once.
2.2.2
Solution method for this thesis
Instead of solving the DARP in two phases, a single heuristic will be implemented, which
is able to load the data sets rsrData, and create well performing tour-suggestions in a
quick and efficient way. The heuristic framework will not necessarily give the optimal
solution to the problem, but rather an approximation to the objective value. The trade-
off with non-optimal solutions is the speed of the heuristic. The running time of the
heuristic as compared to a direct solver should be significantly lower.
In order to define and present a heuristic, the terms used for this will be defined. An
instance I is an instance of a combinatorial optimization problem, in which X is the set
of feasible solutions for the instance. A cost function c : X(I) →R+, which maps from
a solution to its cost. Since the DARP is a minimization problem, it is wished to find
a solution x∗such that: c(x∗) ≤c(x) ∀x ∈X. A neighbourhood of a solution x ∈X
is defined as N(x) ⊆X, meaning that N is a function that maps a solution to a set of
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Solution methods
17
solutions. A solution x will be a local optimum in its neighbourhood N if it satisfies
c(x) ≤c(x′) ∀x′ ∈N(x).
With these definitions in place, a simple heuristic can be set up. The heuristic known as
steepest descent, is a simple heuristic that can be used in optimization. Steepest descent
will start out with an initial feasible solution x, compute x′ = argminx′′∈N(x){c(x′′)}.
Meaning it will find the cheapest solution x′ in the neighbourhood of x, if c(x′) < c(x).
The algorithm will update x = x′, the neighbourhood of the newly found solution x will
be searched for a better solution, until a local optimum x is reached.
Steepest descent is a quick, greedy algorithm, that performs well at finding local mini-
mum, with the trade-off of being stuck in local minima. A small example of how steepest
descent works, and how it can get stuck in a local minima is shown in Figure 2.1 below.
The search will start in the starting point, evaluate the neighbourhood and then perform
a step in the direction of the biggest decrease in objective value in the neighbourhood,
it will keep iterating until it hits a local minima.
Global minima
Local minima
Starting point
Figure 2.1: Example of how steepest descent can be stuck in a local minima.
Figure 2.1 shows how easy the steepest descent can be stuck in a local minima, based
on the initial solution. The search will stop once it reaches the local minima to the left,
but this will not be the global minima.
By using the steepest descent heuristic, there is a high risk of not finding the global min-
ima. Therefore a more complex heuristic such as ALNS will be used, which has methods
to avoid being stuck in local minima. In the simple case above, the neighborhoods will
simply be a point to the left, and a point to the right of the current solution.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theory
In LNS, the neighbourhoods will be defined as relocate neighbourhoods. In these neigh-
bourhoods N(x) is defined as a set of solutions, which can be created from x, by relo-
cating a request, the request can be moved to other routes, or to another position in the
route itself.
With this definition, the neighbourhoods can be defined implicitly by a destroy and a
repair method. A destroy method will destroy a part of the current solution, while a
repair method will rebuild the destroyed solution into a new feasible solution.
As the name implies, the heuristic will perform large destroy and repair moves, which
will change a large part of the solution. A simple destroy method in LNS could be
a random remove, which simply takes q random requests and removes them from the
solution. A simple repair method could be a greedy insert heuristic, which will take the
q removed requests, and sequentially insert them into the solution. Each request will be
inserted in the best possible place, and the remaining will be inserted in its, now best,
place, hence the name greedy heuristic.
A pseudocode for the LNS heuristic is shown in Algorithm 1 below.
In LNS, three
variables are of interest, xb is the best known solution, x is the current solution and x′ is
a temporary solution, which will either be discarded or become the new solution. The
function d(·) is the destroy method and r(·) is the repair method. d(x) will destroy the
solution x, and return a copy of x, when the repair method r(·) is applied on a partly
destroyed solution, it will return a feasible solution based on the destroyed solution.
The heuristic will take an initial feasible solution. This will start out as the current
best solution. On line 4, the heuristic will perform a destroy, and then a repair method,
giving the temporary solution x′. On line 5 it will be examined, if the new solution is
accepted and becomes the new solution, or if it should be rejected. The accept criterion
can be implemented in a number of ways, the simplest is to only accept solutions which
are improvements. It can sometimes be beneficial to also accept solutions that are not
improvements, but under a specified accept criteria. Line 8 checks whether the new
solution is better than the current best known solution, and if this is the case, the
solution is updated on line 9. The search will continue until the stop criteria is met.
The stop criteria can for example be a time limit, or a maximum number of iterations.
Algorithm 1 Large Neighbourhood Search heuristic
1: Input: a feasible x
2: xb = x
3: repeat
4:
x′ = r(d(x))
5:
if accept(x′) then
6:
x = x′
7:
if c(x′) < c(xb) then
8:
xb = x′
9: until Stop criterion is met
10: return xb
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Solution methods
19
The main advantage of using LNS comes to show in exploring large neighbourhoods,
the heuristic is able to explore the solution space easily, even if the problem is tightly
constrained, whereas with small neighbourhoods, it can be hard to explore the whole
solution space.
The destroy and repair methods, can be constructed in a number of various ways, but
will often be chosen based on the problem to be solved. Some methods are more well
suited for different problems, and therefore a great understanding of the problem to be
solved, as well as prior knowledge of what has worked historically, is a great advantage.
When designing the destroy methods, one have to think about the degree of destruc-
tion, which will indicate how much of the solution is to be destroyed. If the degree of
destruction is too small, the heuristic will only perform little changes, and might never
explore the whole solution space and be stuck in local minima, however with a degree
of destruction that is too high, it might remove such a big part of the solution, that
the repair method will spend a significantly long time at repairing the solution space, in
which the running time will be high, or the solutions might be of poor quality.
Shaw [25] proposed to increase the degree of destruction throughout the search, whereas
Røpke and Pisinger [9] proposed to choose the degree of destruction randomly in each
iteration, by choosing the degree from a specific range depending on the instance size.
The repair methods can either be an optimal solution, or a heuristic solution. It is
possible to create a LNS heuristic, in which a MIP solver is used as the repair method,
such that the repaired solution always will be optimal. However, the trade-off of having
optimal solutions throughout the search, will be seen in the computational time in
each iteration, it will take longer to compute an optimal solution each time, than a
heuristic solution. Although the computation time will be higher, hopefully the optimal
sub-solutions will result in fewer iterations to be computed compared to the heuristic
solution.
The advantage of using a heuristic repair method, comes in diversification of the search,
as a heuristic repair method can be well-suited for escaping local minima, whereas the
exact method might get stuck in these. The heuristic repair method will typically run
fast, and will be able to perform more iterations of the LNS as compared to using an
exact solver, giving more solutions to choose from. Unfortunately not all new solutions
found in this way will be an improvement, as the solutions found will not be guaranteed
to be optimal.
ALNS is a natural way to extend LNS, by using multiple destroy and repair methods in
the same search. By using multiple destroy and repair methods, it will be possible to
solve a broad set of test instances, since some methods might be more suitable for small
test instances, and some might be better suited for bigger test instances.
Each of the destroy and repair methods will be given an initial weight. The weight will
be updated throughout the search, based on the performance of the methods, the better
the methods are performing, the higher they will be weighted and therefore are more
likely to be chosen. In terms of neighbourhood terminology it can be said that ALNS
extends the LNS by allowing multiple neighbourhoods within the same search. A pseudo
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theory
code for the ALNS is shown in Algorithm 2 below:
Algorithm 2 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search heuristic
1: Input: a feasible x
2: xb = x; ρ−= (1, ..., 1); ρ+ = (1, ..., 1);
3: repeat
4:
select destroy and repair methods d ∈Ω−and r ∈Ω+, using ρ−and ρ+
5:
x′ = r(d(x))
6:
if accept(x′, x) then
7:
x = x′
8:
if c(x′) < c(xb) then
9:
xb = x′
10:
Update ρ−and ρ+
11: until Stop criterion is met
12: return xb
The pseudo code for ALNS compared to LNS is more or less the same, but with ex-
tensions in the ALNS. On line 2, two new sets of variables are introduced: ρ−∈R|Ω−|
and ρ+ ∈R|Ω+|, which holds the weight of the destroy and repair methods respectively,
throughout the search. On line 4, a destroy and repair method will be selected, from
their respective sets Ω−and Ω+.
On line 10, the weights of the destroy and repair
method are updated, based on how well they have performed in the given iteration of
the search.
The accept criterion used for this implementation is the record-to-record travel criterion,
in which a solution x′ is accepted if:
c(x′) −c(xb)
c(xb)
< T,
in which T is a variable, starting at T 0 and linearly decreasing throughout the search,
towards 0, T can be based on a time criteria, or iterations. If it is based on a time
criteria, it will be calculated as:
T = T 0 −T 0 · Te
Tl
,
in which Te is the elapsed time after starting the heuristic, and Tl is the maximum
running time set for the heuristic.
ρ−and ρ+ is used to select the destroy and repair method, by a roulette wheel principle,
the probability ϕ−
j of choosing the jth destroy method is calculated by the following
formula:
ϕ−
j =
ρ−
j
|Ω−|
P
k=1 ρ−
k
.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Solution methods
21
The probability of choosing the repair method is calculated in the same way.
Throughout the search, the weights will be updated dynamically based on performance.
At the end of each iteration of ALNS, a score ψ is calculated for the destroy and repair
method used, based on the following formula:
ψ = max













ω1
if the new solution is the new global best
ω2
if the new solution is better than the current one
ω3
if the new solution is accepted
ω4
if the new solution is rejected
.
In this equation ω1, ω2, ω3 and ω4 are parameters. A high value of ψ corresponds to a
successful method, it holds that ω1 ≥ω2 ≥ω3 ≥ω4 ≥0.
Let a and b be the indices of the destroy and repair method which were used in the given
iteration of the heuristic respectively, the weights of the destroy and repair methods in
ρ−and ρ+, will be updated by the following equation
ρ−
a = λρ−
a + (1 −λ)ψ,
ρ+
b = λρ+
b + (1 −λ)ψ.
(2.5)
In which λ ∈[0, 1] is a decay parameter which controls how sensitive the weights are
to changes in the performance. The weights of methods not used in an iteration of the
search will remain unchanged. The goal of updating the weights in this way, is to award
well performing methods in the search of an instance.
Methods that brings the search forward will be rewarded, which is done by the pa-
rameters ω1, ω2 and ω3 in (2.5), and methods which lead to rejected solutions will be
discouraged, which is achieved by assigning a low value to ω4.
The way of choosing destroy and repair methods described here, might favor complex
repair methods, which hopefully will yield better solutions but with a longer running
time than that of a simpler repair method. As an example a simple greedy heuristic,
will probably not give a great repaired solution, but what lacks in quality will come in
a lower running time.
Before starting the heuristic, an initial solution will be necessary. The initial solution
can be created in a number of ways, in this thesis, a simple random solution will be
implemented. The initial solution will choose a random ride-share request and insert it
in a route. The initial solution will be created by using Algorithm 3, until every request
has been inserted.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Theory
Algorithm 3 The initial route heuristic
1: List of request ID’s: ID_list
2: repeat
3:
temp_list = copy(ID_list)
4:
Insert random request into new route
5:
for Remaining requests not tried do
6:
Pick a random request from temp_list
7:
if insert(pickup, route) is feasible then
8:
if insert(delivery, delivery) is feasible then
9:
Insert pickup and delivery into the route
10:
Remove(pickup, delivery) from temp_list
11:
Remove(pickup, delivery) from ID_list
12:
else
13:
Remove(pickup, delivery) from temp_list
14:
else
15:
Remove(pickup, delivery) from temp_list
16:
Append the new route to the solution pool of routes
17: until ID_list = ∅
The heuristic will start out by creating an empty route, and insert a random request
into a route, this is done on line 2. On line 4, a new random request, which has not
previously been tried, will be selected. This is done until every request has been tried.
If it is possible to insert the request it will be removed from both the temporary list and
ID_list. If it is not possible, it will simply be removed from the temporary list, and a
new request will be tried.
This process is repeated until every request has been tried, afterwards a new route will
be created and the search will go over again. This will continue until every request from
ID_list has been inserted into routes.
Destroy methods
This section will describe the different destroy heuristics, used in this thesis. A destroy
heuristic will take a parameter q, corresponding to the number of requests to be removed,
as input.
Random removal
A simple destroy heuristic will be the Random removal heuristic, which simply takes q
random requests, and removes them from the solution. The idea behind using a random
removal heuristic, is to diversify the search by adding randomness throughout the search.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Solution methods
23
Shaw removal
The Shaw removal heuristic was proposed by Shaw [10]. The basic idea behind this
heuristic, is to remove similar requests. How similar two requests are, is a combination
of time and distance. As for time, it is the difference between the starting time window
of the pickup node of two requests. For distance it is the distance between the two
pickup nodes plus the distance between the delivery nodes. Since these two measures
are of different units, they are normalized such that they each take values between 0
and 1. The calculation of the related measure can be seen in equation (2.6) below:
R(i, j) = cA(i),A(j) + cB(i),B(j) +
eA(i) −eA(j)
 .
(2.6)
In which R(i, j) is the relatedness measure, the lower the value, the more related two
requests are. In equation (2.6), A(i) refers to the pickup of request i, and B(i) refers to
the delivery of request i.
By using the time windows and distance, it is possible to precompute the relatedness
measure before the search is started, as every part of the calculation is known from the
data. This will save time, as opposed to using a relatedness measure which is updated
throughout the search.
If the distance between two request are not given in the data, the value in the normalized
distance matrix, is set to 2, the same is done for the normalized time matrix. Therefore
the relatedness measure can take the values: 0 ≤R(i, j) ≤4.
The related measure is used to remove requests from the routes. Initially a random
request is chosen to be removed. In the following iterations it chooses requests which
are similar to the already removed requests. A randomness parameter p ≥1 is chosen
in order to introduce some randomness in the selection of requests. The lower the value
of p is, the more random it will become, and for p = 1, it is completely random. The
pseudo code for Shaw removal is shown in Algorithm 4 below:
Algorithm 4 The Shaw removal heuristic
1: Input: s ∈{solution}, q ∈N and p ∈R+
2: request r= a randomly selected request from s;
3: Set of requests: D = {r}
4: while |D| < q do
5:
r= a randomly selected request from D;
6:
Array: L= and array of all requests from s not in D;
7:
Sort L such that i < j ⇒R(r, L[i]) < R(r, L[j])
8:
choose a random number y from the interval ]0, 1];
9:
D = D ∪{L[yp |L|]}
10: remove the requests in D from s;
On line 7 in Algorithm 4, the array L is sorted. In practice in the code, this is done
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Theory
before the search for efficiency. Therefore the relatedness measure will only be calculated
once, and an array of arrays will be used to hold the request sorted, such that it is not
necessary to calculate this each time the remove heuristic is used, but only once.
Worst removal
The Worst removal heuristic, seeks to remove the q customers which have the highest
cost in the routes. In order to ensure that it is not always the same customers who are
removed from the routes, a randomness parameter p will be added as well. The worst
removal heuristic is based on Algorithm 3 from [9], and a pseudo code of the heuristic
is shown in Algorithm 5 below.
Algorithm 5 The Worst removal heuristic
1: Input: s ∈{solution}, q ∈N and p ∈R+
2: while q > 0 do
3:
Array: L = All planned requests i, sorted by descending cost(i, s)
4:
Choose a random number y in the interval ]0, 1]
5:
request r = L[yp |L|]
6:
remove r from solution s
7:
q = q −1
As an input, the heuristic will take the current solution s, the number of requests to be
removed q and the randomness parameter p. The heuristic will run until the q customers
have been removed from the solutions, on line 3 the array L, is a sorted array, of all
requests based on their cost, which is calculated as:
cost(i, s) = f(s) −f−i(s).
In which f(s) is the current cost of a route, and f−i(s) is the cost of a route, without
request i in it. On line 4, another randomness parameter y is included, on line 5, the
request r to be removed from the solution is selected, on line 6, the request is removed,
and on line 7 q is updated.
For the Worst removal, two variations have been implemented, one which penalizes
single-requests routes hard, in which they are set to have a value of 2 in L, and one
which is not penalizing them as hard, in which they will have a value of 0 in L.
A drawback of having a high penalty on single-request routes, could be if these requests
are expensive to put into other routes, then they might be placed in a single-request route
in the next iteration. If this is the case, the single-request routes might be removed in
the destroy, and then reinserted as a single-request route again.
The first implementation will have a higher chance of removing single-request routes,
whereas the other implementation will have a higher chance of removing requests, which
have a large cost in combination with other requests.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Solution methods
25
Repair methods
The repair methods are used after a destroy method has been used, and seeks to repair
the infeasible solution, by inserting the customers which were removed, back into a new
solution.
Greedy heuristic
The Greedy heuristic, is simple and time efficient. A greedy heuristic will simply insert
a given customer, into the best possible spot. It will at most perform q iterations, as it
inserts a customer in each iteration.
The change in objective function by inserting request i in route k is defined as ∆fi,k, a
request will be inserted at the position which increases the objective function the least.
If it is not possible to insert request i into route k, then ∆fi,k = ∞. The cost ci is defined
as ci = mink∈K{∆fi,k}, so ci is the cost of inserting request i at its best position over
all the routes. The problem of finding this, is to solve the minimization problem:
min
i∈U ci,
where U is the set of unplanned requests.
The heuristic is repeated until no more
requests can be inserted.
In each of the iterations, it is only the specific route, in which a request is inserted, that
will be changed, and therefore it is not necessary to recalculate insertion cost for all other
routes. An obvious drawback of a greedy heuristic is that the easiest customers will be
inserted first, and the harder and more expensive customers will be inserted later.
Regret heuristic
The Regret heuristic seeks to improve the basic greedy heuristic, by having a look-ahead
measure, in order to insert a request in the given iteration, if it will be regretted otherwise.
Define xik ∈{1, ..., m} which indicate the route, in which request i has the kth lowest
insertion cost. That is ∆fi,xik ≤∆fi,xi,k′, for k ≤k′. With these definitions, the cost ci
from the greedy heuristic, can be expressed as ci = ∆fi,xi1, and a regret value c∗
i , will be
defined as c∗
i = ∆fi,xi2 −∆fi,xi1. The regret value is the difference in cost of inserting
the request in its best route, and its second best route. In each iterations, the request i
chosen, is the one which maximizes:
max
i∈U c∗
i ,
the request is then inserted in its minimum cost position. This heuristic will choose the
request i, which will be regretted the most, by not inserting it in the given iteration,
since the higher value of c∗
i , the more it will be regretted to not insert the request.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Theory
This heuristic can naturally be expanded out to a class of regret heuristic, called regret-k,
where k is the kth route. Generally it is wished to insert the request i that maximizes:
max
i∈U



k
X
j=1

∆fi,xij −∆fi,xi1



.
(2.7)
The heuristic presented in this section is a regret-2 heuristic, and equation (2.7) is a regret-
k heuristic. The greedy heuristic presented earlier can be seen as a regret-1 heuristic,
but for optimization purposes, the greedy heuristic is implemented on its own.
In the implementation, three variations of regret-k is used: regret-2, regret-3 and regret-
4.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Implementation
This chapter will present the thoughts and reflections in the implementation phase of
the thesis. This chapter will describe how the heuristic have been designed, and how it
was implemented in Julia. The purpose of this chapter will be to illustrate how things
are designed, and later implemented in an efficient way in Julia.
3.1
Feasibility checks
To ensure feasibility of the insertion of a request, a number of feasibility checks will
be performed. As input for the algorithm is a route of length n and a request r. The
feasibility checks performed for a single request, to be inserted in a route, is shown in
Algorithm 6 below:
Algorithm 6 The feasibility checks of the insertion of a request
1: Input: A route of length n, and a request r, with pickup rP, and delivery rD
2: for i ∈{1, ..., n} do
3:
if R(rP, i) ≤γ then
4:
if Time windows are feasible with rP inserted in the route then
5:
Insert pickup rP between index i and i+1
6:
Update the capacity of the vehicle carCap
7:
for j ∈{i + 1, ..., n} do
8:
if Capacity between index i and j are feasible, with rD inserted then
9:
if Time windows are feasible with rD inserted in the route then
10:
Insert delivery rD between j and j+1
11:
Calculate the arrival time
12:
if Summed arrival time ≤max ride time then
13:
Calculate the objective value, save the index of rP and rD
14: Return: Objective function, index of rP and rD
For simplicity, and a better overview in the pseudo code, some things are omitted. If it
is feasible to insert the pickup in a route, but the feasibility check fails on the delivery,
the pickup part of the request will be removed from the route, and the route will go
back to its original state. The same happens, if it is feasible to insert the delivery with
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Implementation
regards to time windows, but the total ride time of the route is exceeding the maximum
allowed ride time, then both the pickup and delivery part of the request will be removed,
and the route will go back to its original state.
The heuristic will loop through the nodes of the route, from the beginning, and try to
insert the pickup rP initially. The heuristic will select index i ∈{1, ..., n}.
First, the relatedness of the pickup rP to be inserted is checked on line 3. By examining
if the relatedness measure R(rP, i) ≤γ is respected, γ is the level of relatedness, that is
wished to uphold. The relatedness measure, is used to speed up the feasibility checks,
by only considering requests, which are assumed to be well fitted, when inserted in the
route. If a new pickup has a high relatedness measure, with index i of the route, it is
likely to result in a bad route, with respect to objective value, or is highly likely to not
be feasible to add to the route. Therefore this check can hopefully speed up the process,
by only considering requests which are likely to be a good fit for the routes.
If the relatedness of the pickup and the node in the route is feasible, the heuristic will
check if the time windows of node i and i + 1 is feasible, when inserting the pickup in
between these two nodes. If it is feasible, the pickup rP is inserted between node i and
i + 1, and the capacity of the vehicle capCap is updated.
With the pickup inserted, the remaining of the route is investigated, with j ∈{i+1, ..., n},
it is checked if it is feasible to insert the delivery rD between node j and j + 1. If it
is possible, it will be inserted, and the arrival time at the nodes in the routes will be
updated. If the total time for the route is less than the maximum allowed time, the
objective value of the route will be calculated, and the indexes at which rP and rD is
inserted at will be saved.
Car capacity
For the car capacity check, it is assumed that the vehicles are homogeneous and have a
capacity of Q. It is possible to have more than Q people in an entire route, as long as
these are not in the vehicle at the same time, but rather are spread out over the route.
If the capacity of the vehicle is six, it is possible to have four customers in the beginning
of a route, deliver all of these, and then pick up five new customers, as the capacity at
a given time is never above six.
In order to ensure that the capacity is never exceeded, an array called carCap of the
same length as the route is created. This array will hold the information of the current
capacity of the vehicle, at the given node in the route. If node i is a pickup node, carCap
will increment the value at node i by the demand of the customer which is picked up,
denoted wi, and if node i is a delivery node, carCap will be decreased with wi. So
for a pickup it is given carCapi = carCapi−1 + wi and for a delivery it is given have
carCapi = carCapi−1 −wi.
As an example, if there exists the following three requests (2,3), (4,5), (6,7), in which
the first index is the pickup, and the second index is the corresponding delivery, and
each request is a single person, so wi = 1 ∀i. The route is [2,4,3,6,5,7], which will give
the following carCap vector [1,2,1,2,1,0].
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Feasibility checks
29
Time calculation
When checking the feasibility of a request with respect to time, the time windows of
every request in the routes needs to be respected, such that every node is visited in its
respective time window.
A simple way to check if the insertion of a request into a route is feasible, is to insert
the request, recalculate the arrival at the nodes in the route, and check if these are in
their respective time windows.
As an example, given the route from before: [2,4,3,6,5,7]. It is assumed that the travel
time between each node is 10, and the service time associated with each node is 5, then
the time at which the nodes are visited will be: [0,15,30,45,60,75]. If it is wished to
insert a new pickup between node 3 and 6, the route will then be: [2,4,3,8,6,5,7] and it
is necessary to recalculate the time at which node 6, 5 and 7 are visited. Afterwards it
is checked if the arrival time are inside the respective time windows.
If it is feasible, the delivery will be inserted in the same way, if it is not feasible, the
remaining parts of the route is tried for the delivery. If it is not possible to insert the
delivery, a new route will be tried for both pickup and delivery.
With this method, it is necessary to calculate the arrival times each time a request is
tried to be inserted into a route, before it can be determined if the insertion is feasible.
This can lead to many unnecessary calculations, and give an ineffective feasibility check.
A more efficient way of ensuring feasibility of the time windows, is to create two new ar-
rays, earliest service which holds the information of the earliest time, at which a vehicle
can start service at a node, and latest service which holds the information of, at which
time a vehicle, at the latest, can start service at a node.
These two arrays, will hold the information for each node in the route. By doing so, it
is possible, to check if it is feasible, to insert a new node in a route, between two nodes
i and j, without having to recalculate the visiting times of each node. This will save
many unnecessary calculations.
Let α(i) be a mapping function, which maps from the index in the route, to the corre-
sponding ID, i.e. α(i) gives the pickup or delivery ID, which is placed at index i of the
route. The earliest service time of node i is calculated by the following:
ESi = max

ESi−1 + tα(i−1),α(i) + dα(i−1), eα(i)

.
(3.1)
In equation (3.1), ESi is the earliest service time at node i, tα(i−1),α(i) is the travel time
between the previous node in the route, and the current node. dα(i−1) is the service time
of node i −1, eα(i) is the start of the time window, for node i.
The earliest service time at node i is either at the start of this nodes time window, or
the earliest the previous node in the route can be left, plus the travel time between the
two nodes, after the service at the previous node has been performed.
As the earliest service time of a node is the earliest it is possible to start service at a node,
this will be calculated forwards, from the start of the route. Whereas the latest service
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Implementation
is the latest time it is allowed to start service at a node. Due to this, it is calculated from
the end of the route, and then towards the start, these two calculations are performed
in inverse order of each other. The latest service will be calculated as:
LSi = min

LSi+1 −tα(i),α(i+1), lα(i)

−dα(i).
(3.2)
For equation (3.2), the definitions are the sames as those for equation (3.1), and LSi is
the latest time, service for node i can start, lα(i) is the end of the time window for node
i. Since the latest service is the latest feasible time to start service at a node, the service
time will be subtracted in the array.
The two arrays ES and LS, will be used to check if it is feasible to insert a new node
into a route. In order to determine if it is feasible to insert a node k in between node i
and j, the following two feasibility checks will be performed.
if max

ESi + dα(i) + tα(i),k, ek

+ dk + tk,α(j) ≤LSj
(3.3a)
if ESi + dα(i) + tα(i),k + dk+ ≤lk
(3.3b)
If both equation (3.3a) and (3.3b) holds, it is feasible to insert node k between node i
and j. The insertion can be visualized in Figure 3.1 below:
i
k
j
[eα(i), lα(i)]
[eα(j), lα(j)]
[ek, lk]
dα(i)
dα(j)
dk
tα(i),k
tk,α(j)
Figure 3.1: Visualization of the insertion of node k between node i and j.
As an example, there are three request (2,3), (4,5) and (6,7) in a route, with the following
times:
2
3
4
5
6
7
TW Start
406
420
461
465
476
480
Earliest service
406
423
461
468
476
483
Arrival time
430
447
464
471
476
483
Latest service
430
447
485
492
500
507
TW End
436
450
491
495
506
510
Vehicle capacity
1
0
1
0
1
0
Table 3.1: Example route with three customers inserted.
Now, it is wished to insert a new node, 8 in the route between node 5 and 6. Node 8 has
the time window [468,498], the travel time t5,8 = 2 and the travel time t8,6 = 7. Initially,
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Destroy and repair methods
31
(3.3a) and (3.3b) are calculated, in order to see if the insertion is feasible, giving:
max (468 + 2 + 3, 468) + 7 + 3 ≤500
(3.4)
468 + 2 + 3 + 3 ≤498
(3.5)
This will result in 483 ≤500 and 476 ≤498, so the insertion is feasible, and node 8 will
be inserted between node 5 and 6. With the new route, it is necessary to recalculate
the earliest service, the latest service, the actual arrival times and the vehicle capacity,
resulting in the following route:
2
3
4
5
8
6
7
TW Start
406
420
461
465
468
476
480
Earliest service
406
423
461
468
473
483
490
Arrival time
430
447
461
468
473
483
490
Latest service
430
447
478
485
490
500
507
TW End
436
450
491
495
498
506
510
Vehicle capacity
1
0
1
0
1
2
1
Table 3.2: Example route, with a new pickup node inserted.
Table 3.2 shows that the earliest service and latest service are updated, with the new
request added. It can be noted, that for this example, it is only the pickup part of the
request, which has been inserted, the delivery part will be inserted, in the same way.
The vehicle capacity is updated in Table 3.2, so it is only the feasibility checks that is
left to perform for the delivery.
3.2
Destroy and repair methods
This section will present how the destroy and repair methods have been implemented, in
order to ensure a time efficient code. The repair methods are the most time consuming
methods, as the feasibility checks have to be performed many times. Whereas in destroy
methods, it is always feasible to remove a customer from a route, and the new route
will still be feasible, but there might be parts of the route that have parts with waiting
times.
Destroy heuristics
A feasible route, from which a customer is removed, will always remain feasible, but by
removing a customer, it might have waiting time in it. As an example there is a route
with four customers in it. If a node in the middle of the route is removed, the vehicle
might have to wait before servicing the following nodes, it is always feasible to wait at
a node, before the service start.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Implementation
For efficiency in the removal heuristics, the customers will not be removed, as they are
found, but rather they will be saved in an array called custTouched, which holds the
information of which customers have been touched. Together with this, an array called
routeTouched, will hold the information of which routes these customers were in.
In the case that a route is left without any request in it, the route number will be saved
in routesToDelete.
Random removal
The Random removal method is the simplest of the three remove heuristics. It will
simply remove q random requests from the route, in order to do this, the method will
find q random request ID’s from the solution S. When finding the ID’s, the remove
heuristic will note the route, at which the request were in, such that it is only routes
which are changed that will be recalculated. If a route is not changed, it is unnecessary
to recalculate the elements, as these are unchanged.
Shaw removal
For the Shaw removal method, the actual method is implemented in a smarter way, than
it is presented in Algorithm 4. As mentioned earlier, the related array will be calculated
beforehand, and not in every iteration of the method. The related array is implemented
as an array of arrays. Each row represents a given pickup ID, and the corresponding
row, holds the remaining pickup ID’s, sorted with respect to the relatedness measure
presented in (2.6).
By implementing it as an array of arrays, it is possible to only update the individual
arrays, when it is necessary, instead of updating every row in each iteration.
A request r is selected from the array D. Initially, the array, corresponding to the request
r will be updated, by removing each ID, which have already been removed, and then
select a request to be removed from the remaining ID’s.
As an example, there exist following request ID’s [2,4,6,8,10,12,14], for simplicity, only
the first four rows are showed, and looks as the following:
2 : [4, 8, 6, 10, 14, 12]
4 : [8, 6, 2, 12, 14, 10]
6 : [4, 2, 10, 8, 12, 14]
8 : [14, 10, 12, 2, 4, 6]
For the Shaw removal, a random request ID is selected from the list of request ID. Let it
be request number 4, from this array, a new request is selected, let it be request number
6.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Destroy and repair methods
33
Initially, the heuristic will loop through the array, and remove ID’s that have been visited
before, the arrays will look as the following:
2 : [4, 8, 6, 10, 14, 12]
4 : [8, 6, 2, 12, 14, 10]
6 : [2, 10, 8, 12, 14]
8 : [14, 10, 12, 2, 4, 6]
Now, request 4 and 6 have been removed, so D = [4, 6], from this array, a random
request is picked, let it be 6, then a random request from the array [2, 10, 8, 12, 14] will
be picked, let it be 2. With this request, the array D, will be: D = [2, 4, 6]. For the
next iteration, a request is chosen from D, let it be 2. Then the arrays will look as:
2 : [8, 10, 14, 12]
4 : [8, 6, 2, 12, 14, 10]
6 : [2, 10, 8, 12, 14]
8 : [14, 10, 12, 2, 4, 6]
This procedure will continue, until q requests have been removed. In each iteration,
when visiting an array to find a request which will be removed, the heuristic will loop
through the given array, and remove the requests, which have already been removed, the
requests stored in D. By doing this, the heuristic will only remove requests from the
arrays, once these are looked at.
In a simpler implementation of this, every time a request were to be removed, every row
would have this customer removed from their respective array. This would give a much
higher running time.
The requests which are looked at will be saved in an array, called custTouched. After
the q request to be removed has been selected, the information regarding the routes that
the requests where in, will be updated.
Worst removal
The Worst removal is implemented in a smarter way, than it is represented in Algorithm 5
for efficiency.
This remove method, will start out by calculating the array L, since this information is
necessary for the heuristic. This array will hold the information regarding every request
in the solution. In order to keep track of which routes the different requests are in, an
array routeIDs is used for this.
When a customer is to be removed, the cost(i, s), will be changed for the remaining
request in the given route, and the remaining cost is unchanged. Therefore a function
deltaCost is implemented, which will calculate the difference in objective value, for the
remaining requests in a route, update their values in L, and the array will be sorted in
descending order again.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Implementation
Repair heuristics
The repair heuristic is the most computational heavy methods in the implementation,
therefore a lot of time has been invested in order to optimize the methods as much as
possible.
Both regarding specific data structures used, in which order the feasibility checks will
be performed, and if calculations could be precomputed in order to save time.
For both the Greedy heuristic, and the Regret heuristic, the same implementation tricks
was used in order to speed up the computation time. Both heuristic is build on the
matrix ∆fi,k, which holds the information of the change in objective value, by placing
request i in route k, at the spot which will minimize the change in objective value.
∆fi,k will be implemented as a two-dimensional array in Julia, initialized with zeros.
The first iteration of the heuristic will then fill out the information of the array, with
the change in objective value. If it is not feasible to insert the given node in the route,
it will receive the value ∞.
In the coming iterations, a request i, which will be inserted into route k, will be chosen
according to equation (2.7). When a request has been inserted into a route, the corre-
sponding row in the array will be removed. Due to complexity in the implementation,
it was not possible to avoid deleting the row, but for efficiency, this should be avoided.
For the coming iterations, it is only column k, which needs to be updated, so rather
than recalculating the entire array, it is only a single column which is recalculated. By
adding this, the running time decreased significantly, compared to recalculating the
entire array.
As an example, if there are four requests that needs to be inserted, and six possible
routes for these to be inserted into, the array ∆fi,k can be as below:


0.22
0.93
0.46
∞
0.30
0.33
0.61
∞
0.15
0.46
∞
0.77
0.58
0.62
0.25
∞
0.59
0.88
0.54
0.71
0.49
0.50
∞
0.20


For the greedy heuristic, it would be request 2, which was inserted in route 3, as this is
the smallest change in objective value, for every customer in every route.
If it instead, had been the regret-2 heuristic, which were to choose a request to be
inserted, it would choose request 3 and insert it in route 3, since this is the insertion,
that would be regretted the most. For this example, it is the greedy insert, that is used.
The second row of ∆fi,k will be removed, and the third column will be updated, and
will look as the following:


0.22
0.93
0.42
∞
0.30
0.33
0.58
0.62
0.35
∞
0.59
0.88
0.54
0.71
0.76
0.50
∞
0.20


==PAGE:45==
3.2 Destroy and repair methods
35
As this array only holds the information of which request should be placed in which
route, and not the specific place in the given route, two new arrays will be used to keep
track of this information. One named pickupIndex and another one named deliveryIn-
dex. They will, as the name indicate, keep track of where in a given route, the pickup
and delivery part of a request, should be inserted, to get the corresponding change in
objective value.
These two arrays will have the same dimension as ∆fi,k, and will simply hold the infor-
mation, an example of how these two arrays could look can be seen below, in which the
left array is pickupIndex and the right is deliveryIndex


2
3
9
∞
4
1
1
3
8
∞
3
2
2
2
1
6
∞
8




3
6
10
∞
5
2
3
5
9
∞
6
3
3
4
2
7
∞
9


It is possible that a single request can be placed in multiple places in a route, but it is
only the best found place that is of interest, and thus only this, that is saved.
By having these three arrays, it is possible to find which request should be placed in
which route, by finding the lowest value in ∆fi,k. Once the index of this has been found,
it is possible to find the index in the route to place the pickup and delivery in O(1) time
in pickupIndex and deliveryIndex. The implementation of the repair heuristics can be
be shown in pseudo code in algorithm 7 below:
Algorithm 7 Overall ∆fi,k calculation
1: Input: A list of removed requests q
2: for r ∈routes do
3:
for Pickup P ∈q do
4:
Set ∆fP,r = ∞
5:
Get: ∆f, Pidx, Didx from Algorithm 6
6:
if ∆f ≤∆fP,r then
7:
Update ∆fP,r, pickupIndex and deliveryIndex
In Algorithm 7, routes on line 2, can be both a specific route, or a list of routes, such
that this algorithm can be used both in the first iteration, and in the following iterations,
in which only a single route is calculated.
It is simply the ID of the pickup, that is used in ∆fP,r.
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Test and Tuning
This chapter will present the test and tuning phase of the thesis. For testing the ALNS
implementation, four data sets were provided. Three of these data sets was used in the
tuning phase, and the fourth data set was used to create 10 new data sets which was
used to test the heuristic on.
For testing the SCP model, five data sets were available, from which two of these provided
the objective value obtained from BNR A/S.
The sections will present how the data sets are set up, initial findings and an initial
overall testing phase. From the foundation of this, a more detailed fine tuning phase
were conducted to find the final parameters for the heuristic. With these parameters
in place, the heuristic was tested on never seen data sets to measure performance. A
comparison between solutions obtained from BNR A/S for their Phase 2 model, will be
compared to the SCP model implemented, the section will lastly present a hybrid of
ALNS and SCP.
4.1
Data sets used for the thesis
The data sets, used for this thesis, consists of information regarding what time a customer
can at the earliest, be picked up at the pickup location, and what time they can at the
latest arrive, at their corresponding delivery location. The requests comes in pair, with
a pickup ID, and a delivery ID.
The data sets holds the information regarding distance and travel time between the
different pickup and delivery locations, if it is feasible to travel between these. If it is
not feasible, the information is not included.
The four data sets can be summarized in Table 4.1 below:
No. of request
Earliest time window
Latest time window
rsrDataCentral21
261
06:10
17:00
rsrDataCentral22
289
06:10
17:00
rsrDataCentral24
268
06:10
17:00
rsrData2020-08-19
270
05:18
17:32
Table 4.1: Overview of number of request and start of the first and last time window for the
data sets.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Test and Tuning
Table 4.1 shows that the data sets have requests from around 05:00 in the morning, and
no later than 18:00 in the evening. In order to see how the time windows of the requests
are distributed over the course of the day, the number of times a time window is starting
in a given hour interval is counted. This can be summarized in Figure 4.1 below:
[05-06]
[06-07]
[07-08]
[08-09]
[11-12]
[12-13]
[13-14]
[14-15]
[15-16]
[16-17]
[17-18]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Time windows starting in an interval
Central21
Central22
Central24
2020-08-19
Figure 4.1: Distribution of pickup and deliveries starting their time windows in the given
intervals.
Figure 4.1 shows that around half of the requests are in the morning, and around half
of the requests are in the afternoon.
For the data provided, GPS data was not included, so it was not possible to see how
the different requests are placed according to each other, but to get a picture of how the
distance are distributed for the data set used for the testing, a histogram of the dataset
distance of rsrDataCentral24 is shown in Figure 4.2 below:
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Initial findings
39
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
Distance in kilometers
Travel distance in an interval
Figure 4.2: Histogram of distance distribution for rsrDataCentral24.
Figure 4.2 shows that most of the requests are relatively close to each other. The figure
shows a histogram over the distance matrix for the data set, and it can be seen that
most of the requests are under ten kilometers from each other, and some of the requests
are more than 44 kilometers from the rest.
Since there was only four data sets available from BNR A/S, three of these was used for
tuning the parameters. The fourth and final data set was used for the testing phase.
The dataset rsrDataCentral24 was used as the base for the ten new data sets. The
new data sets was generated, by shifting the time windows around for the requests. By
shifting the data sets, the new data sets will keep the same features as for the data sets
used for tuning.
The time windows of the new data sets, has been shifted from one to ten times, and
named hereafter as rsrDataCentral24Shift-k, where k ∈{1, ..., 10}. For the data set with
the shift k = 1, the second request, will have the original time windows of the first
request, the third request will have the original time windows of the second request and
so on. For k = 10, the time windows are shifted ten places.
4.2
Initial findings
For the ALNS heuristic, a large number of parameters are used, which gives a wide
variety of parameters to be tuned on. Through the implementation phase, some of these
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Test and Tuning
parameters showed to perform well at specific values, and showed little, to no impact in
solution quality by changes in these. These parameters will not be tuned, as the tuning
phase would end up being too comprehensive and too complicated.
The first parameter which seemed to have little impact on the results, were the values of
ω. ω is used for calculating and updating the weights of the destroy and repair methods
throughout the search. A new global best solution will receive the highest value of ω
and a solution which is rejected will receive the lowest value.
In the initial testing phase, different values of the ω vector seemed to have a very little
impact the solution quality, and the values of [8,4,2,1] seemed to be performing well. For
these values, a new global best is rewarded four times more, than a solution which is
only accepted.
Another parameter, which showed prominent through the initial testing and the imple-
mentation phase, were λ, known as the decay parameter. λ determines how the weights
of the destroy and repair heuristics are updated throughout the search, where a low
value will indicate that the weight is highly dependant on how the methods performed
in the current iteration. A high value will reward a well performing method throughout
the search, the updated weights are updated based on equation (2.5). An overview of
how four different λ values will effect the weights of destroy methods, can be seen in
Figure 4.3 below:
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
2
4
6
8
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.25
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.50
Random remove
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.75
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.99
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
Figure 4.3: The destroy heuristic weights over the course of the heuristic, with different λ
values.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Initial tuning phase
41
The difference between a low and high value of λ is noteworthy from Figure 4.3. With
λ = 0.25, it can be seen that the weight on the destroy methods are highly dependant
of how they perform in the given iteration of the search, whereas with λ = 0.99, it can
be seen that the destroy heuristics weight is dependent on the performance throughout
the search.
Full size figures of the four different plots are available in section A.1.
For the implementation of ALNS, it is wished to have well performing destroy and repair
methods, therefore by inspecting the four different values of λ, it seemed like a high value
of λ = 0.99 was well suited for the heuristic.
In Figure 4.3, the ω values, as presented in (2.5), were set to ω = [8, 4, 2, 1]. From
Figure 4.3, it can be seen that for λ = 0.25, the weights are fluctuating quite a lot,
whereas for λ = 0.99, the weights are more steadily developing over time. The weights
are converging towards the same values over time. Since the acceptance criteria is being
gradually lowered throughout the search, fewer new solutions will be the global best or
accepted, and therefore receive a lower value of ω, and thus the weights of the destroy
methods will be lower over time.
4.3
Initial tuning phase
For the remaining parameters to be tuned, a set of computational experiments was
conducted. In order to see which combination of parameters was performing the best,
every parameter setting was tested against each other.
The tuning process was conducted using DTUs High Performance Computing (HPC)
service. To be able to compare the results, each test was performed for the same number
of iterations, rather than having a time limit.
For each parameter setting, eight individual test runs was performed on each data set.
For each of these eight tests, the heuristic performed 30,000 iterations. The average
performance of the heuristic was calculated over the eight tests.
In order to determine which parameter setting was performing the best, the average gap
for each setting was calculated, the average gap was calculated by:
¯Z −Zb
Zb
,
(4.1)
in which ¯Z is the average cost of a setting over the eight runs, and Zb is the best known
objective value for the data set.
The parameters which will be tested against each other are the Degree of randomness,
denoted p, which is used in Shaw removal and Worst removal, in order to add some
randomness to the choices of customers to remove.
The lower value of p, the more
random the heuristic will be, and the higher value the less. The tested values for p was
[4, 6, 8].
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Test and Tuning
The next parameter for tuning is the degree of destruction, denoted q, which corresponds
to the number of requests which will be removed from the solutions. The values here
are based on the number of requests in the data set n, with the following values: [0.10n
: 0.15n], [0.15n : 0.20n], [0.20n : 0.25n], [0.25n : 0.30n]. For the degree of destruction,
in each iteration, a random value of q will be chosen from the given interval of q. This
is done, to avoid being locked in on a specific value of how many requests are removed
in each iteration, but rather add in some flexibility in the search.
The start threshold T 0 will be tuned in order to see the impact of different starting
thresholds. The following values was examined: [0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3]. A comparison of
acceptance criteria for the four different values of T 0 is shown in Figure 4.4 below:
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
Iterations
Objective value
T 0 = 0.05
T 0 = 0.10
T 0 = 0.20
T 0 = 0.30
Current Best
Figure 4.4: Difference in when a solution is accepted based on different starting thresholds.
It can be seen that the different values for T 0, will have an impact of how many solutions
will be accepted. The lower T 0, the less solution will be accepted, and the higher value,
the more solution will be accepted, possibly giving more diversity in the search.
The last parameter to be tuned, is the Relatedness measure, denoted γ, this parameter
will be examined to see if it has an impact on the solution quality, of if it will have an
impact on the running time. γ will impact how many requests will be examined in the
insertions, by being the first feasibility check. For this parameter, the values [0.25, 0.50,
4.00] will be examined.
With these four parameters to be tuned, a total of 144 different parameter settings were
examined. The average gap will be calculated as per equation (4.1), for each of the
three data sets. The average of these three data sets will then be used to determine the
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Initial tuning phase
43
average best performing parameters over different data sets, and these will be used for
the final implementation. The values can be recapped in Table 4.2 below:
Degree of destruction
[0.10n : 0.15n]
[0.15n : 0.20n]
[0.2n : 0.25n]
[0.25n : 0.30n]
Start Threshold
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.30
Degree of randomness
4
6
8
Relatedness measure
0.25
0.50
4.00
Table 4.2: The parameters to be tuned, and the respective values which will be used in the
tuning.
The results for the three individual data sets can be found in section A.2, and the average
performance of the data sets is shown in Table 4.3 below:
Table 4.3: Average performance of the parameter tuning.
For the three data sets, the best found objective values is shown in Table 4.4 below:
Data set
Best objective value
rsrDataCentral21
147.25
rsrDataCentral22
155.13
rsrData2020-08-19
139.42
Table 4.4: The current best found objective values for the three data sets in the initial tuning
phase. Green indicates a low average gap and red indicated a high average gap.
From the values shown in Table 4.3, it seems like the degree of randomness, and the
relatedness measure are having very little impact on the average gap, whereas the start
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Test and Tuning
threshold, and the degree of destruction seems to have a big impact.
Overall it can be seen that a lower value of degree of destruction seems to result in
better solutions, and a lower start threshold also results in better solutions. Since the
best performing values are the lowest values presented in the table, it will be appropriate
to test lower values for these two parameters.
Therefore a fine tuning process will be started, where the values of degree of destruction
will be set to 4, and the value of relatedness measure will be set to 0.5, as this is were
the values, which gave the best average gap.
4.4
Fine tuning phase
For the fine tuning phase, smaller values for the start threshold will be tried, in com-
bination with smaller values for degree of destruction, which will be made in smaller
intervals as well.
For the first fine tuning test, five values were tested for the start threshold, namely: [0.01,
0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05] and five different values for the degree of destruction, namely:
[0.05n : 0.07n], [0.07n : 0.09n], [0.09n : 0.11n], [0.11n : 0.13n], [0.13n : 0.15n]. The
average performance is shown in Table 4.5 below, and the three individual data sets can
be found in section A.3.
Table 4.5: Average performance of the parameter tuning.
The values in Table 4.5 show, that a lower value of the Start threshold is performing
best, and for the degree of destruction, the current settings are performing quite fine.
Since the best found average gap was found in the lowest values, additionally fine tuning
will be performed. The degree of destruction will not be tuned further, as these values
seem reasonable. Therefore it is only the values of start threshold that will be tuned.
The values to be tuned will be [0.003, 0.004, 0.005, 0.006, 0.007, 0.008, 0.009].
The performance of the three individual data sets can be seen in section A.4, and the
average performance can be found in Table 4.6 below:
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Fine tuning phase
45
Table 4.6: Average performance of the parameter tuning.
Table 4.6 shows that the best performing parameters is now found inside of the table,
and not in the extreme points of the table. Therefore it can be concluded that the tuning
process was finished.
The best found objective values for the three data sets, in the fine tuning phase, is shown
in Table 4.7 below:
Data set
Best objective value
rsrDataCentral21
143.60
rsrDataCentral22
150.93
rsrData2020-08-19
135.95
Table 4.7: The current best found objective values for the three data sets in the fine tuning
phase.
It can be seen that the best objective values found in the fine tuning phase, all were
improvements, as to those found in the initial tuning phase.
With these newly found best objective values, the average gap, as presented in Table 4.3,
will be updated with these values. The results can be seen in Table 4.8 below:
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Test and Tuning
Table 4.8: Average performance of the parameter tuning, with the newly found best objective
values.
Table 4.8 shows, that the average gap found in the initial testing phase, is now larger,
due to the newly found best solutions. As an example, it can be seen that the previously
best found setting, had an average gap of 1.70 %, whereas it now has an average gap of
4.38 %.
With the new objective values, as presented in Table 4.7, it is possible to directly evaluate
the average gap from the initial testing phase, presented in Table 4.8, with the average
gap found in the fine tuning, presented in Table 4.8.
By looking at these two tables, it can be seen that the best parameter setting from the
fine tuning phase is quite good, with an average gap of 1.87 %.
In summary the following values will be the final values to be used for the testing phase.
Parameter name
Parameter value
Degree of destruction
[0.07n, 0.09n]
Start threshold
0.01
Relatedness measure
0.5
Degree of randomness
4
Table 4.9: Final parameter settings.
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Testing phase
47
4.5
Testing phase
For the testing phase, the parameters found in section 4.4 will be used on the ten newly
generated data sets, as presented in section 4.1.
In order to get a broad overview of the performance of the heuristic, each of the 10 data
sets, had 100 individual test runs, and the average performance will be reported.
The overall performance of the different data sets is shown in Table 4.10 below:
Data set
Average objective
Average running time
Average gap
Shift-01
143.56
907.78
2.09 %
Shift-02
138.96
756.89
1.83 %
Shift-03
140.87
784.52
1.92 %
Shift-04
143.39
765.07
1.68 %
Shift-05
146.11
744.03
1.45 %
Shift-06
146.78
760.97
1.98 %
Shift-07
143.27
762.35
2.37 %
Shift-08
144.43
868.33
1.92 %
Shift-09
145.06
749.17
1.79 %
Shift-10
144.16
872.59
2.94 %
Table 4.10: Average objective value, running time and average gap of the ten data sets.
Table 4.10 shows, that the average gap for the ten data sets is narrow. The gap is
calculated in the same way as previously by equation (4.1). The best known solution
for calculating the gap, is the best found solution for each of the 10 data set, when
performing the 100 runs.
Table 4.10 shows the data set Shift-10 has the highest average gap of 2.94 %. This data
set will be used for further examination in this section.
In order to see how the objective values were distributed, a histogram of this data set is
plotted, and is shown in Figure 4.5 below:
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Test and Tuning
141
143
145
147
0
10
20
30
40
Objective values
Objective values in an interval
Figure 4.5: Objective value over 100 test runs for Shift-10.
For this data set, the highest objective value was 147.52, the lowest objective value was
140.04, the average objective value was 144.16 and the median was 144.30.
From the histogram in Figure 4.5, it seems like the objective values are more or less
normally distributed around the mean. 81 of the test runs had objective values between
143 and 146. Since a majority of the objective values are located in this interval, it
makes sense why the average gap is at the level as presented in Table 4.10.
To visualize how the objective value is performing over time, the objective values ob-
tained, for a single run on data set Shift-10, is shown in Figure 4.6 below:
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Testing phase
49
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
145
150
155
160
Iterations
Objective values
Global best solution
Accepted solutions
Rejected solutions
Accept threshold
Best values
Figure 4.6: Solutions throughout the search, plotted together with the current best found
solution and the acceptance threshold.
Figure 4.6 shows, that the heuristic will start with a high objective value, but it will
converge towards a much lower objective value, in the first hundred iterations. The first
iterations are not showed in the plot for simplicity, the initial objective value was 238,
but converged to below 169 in 100 iterations.
In Figure 4.6, the red dots are the objective value obtained in a given iteration which
are rejected, the green dots are accepted solutions, and the blue dots are the new global
best solutions. The blue line is the current global objective value and the green line, is
the acceptance threshold. In order to keep the figure a bit more simple, the objective
value is only plotted each 100th iteration, or if the new solutions is a global best. Due to
this plot criteria, it seems like there are more global best solutions, than e.g. accepted
solutions, but this is just due to the criteria of plotting every new global best solution.
As it is shown seen in Table 4.11 below, the number of global best solution only account
for around 0.59% of the solutions.
New global best
Better than previous
Accepted solutions
Rejected solutions
178
2,721
8,411
18,690
Table 4.11: Distribution of the four different types of solutions.
From the plot, it is clear that most of the solutions are around the acceptance criteria.
this is due to the fact that a new solution is based on the last accepted solution, through-
out the search. The plot in Figure 4.6, is cropped, because it is interesting to look at
the objective values, which are close to the acceptance criteria.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Test and Tuning
In Figure 4.7, the full plot can be seen, in which some of the new solutions are very far
from the acceptance criteria. One solution, had an objective value of above 250.
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
150
175
200
225
250
Iterations
Objective values
Global best solution
Accepted solutions
Rejected solutions
Accept threshold
Best values
Figure 4.7: Evolution of the destroy methods, throughout the search, for the data set Shift-10.
For a single run of the heuristic on a data instance, it is interesting to look at the differ-
ence in serving the given requests as routes, as compared to serving them as individually
requests. The data set shift-10 is used, in which there are 268 requests in total. The re-
sults of serving the 268 requests as routes, instead of individually is shown in Table 4.12
below:
Individually
As route
Ratio in %
Time
2455
3825
155 %
Distance
1582.157
2445.825
156 %
Objective value
536
144.99
27 %
Table 4.12: Difference in distance, time and objective value, by serving the requests as routes,
compared to serving them individually.
Table 4.12 shows that for both distance and time there is an increase by serving the
requests as routes, as compared to serving them as single requests. But even though
there is an increase of 55 % and 56 % respectively, Table 4.12 shows that there is
a significant saving, with regards to the objective value, by servicing the requests as
routes, and not as single requests.
From the table it can be seen that the distance and time are higher when serving the
requests in combined routes, as opposed to serving them individually. However, even
though the distance and travel time are increased, the objective function will ensure
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Testing phase
51
that request are to be served in a route in combination with requests which are close
by. For the distance and duration calculation for the individual request, it is simply
the distance and time from pickup to delivery, whereas for the route, the vehicles are
moving between requests. So for the individual calculations in Table 4.12, the number
is just for the requests individually, but the distance for traveling between requests are
not included, so in reality the distance and duration for serving the requests individually
are likely higher than the numbers presented in the table.
From the solution presented in Figure 4.6 and Table 4.12, some of the routes are per-
forming significantly well. One of the routes, consisting of the three requests (15622,
15623), (16196, 16197) and (15916, 15917) are performing well. For the requests, the
first element is the pickup, and the second element is the delivery. The route with these
respective times is shown in Table 4.13 below:
15622
16196
15916
15623
15917
16197
TW Start
461
461
477
480
480
480
Earliest service
461
471
490
496
500
504
Arrival time
461
471
490
496
500
504
Latest service
464
474
493
499
503
507
TW End
491
491
507
510
510
510
Vehicle capacity
1
2
3
2
1
0
Table 4.13: Route of three requests from the solution.
Table 4.13 shows that the three pickups are performed, before performing their corre-
sponding deliveries.
This route is performing significantly well, since the distance, time and objective value
are actually lower, by performing the requests as a combined route, instead of performing
them individually. An overview is shown in Table 4.14 below:
Individually
As route
Ratio in %
Time
41
28
68.29 %
Distance
32.48
20.08
61.82 %
Objective value
6
1.48
24.67 %
Table 4.14: Difference in distance, time and objective value, by serving the requests as routes,
compared to serving them individually.
Table 4.14 shows that the distance and time for the route of the three requests are lower,
compared to serving each of the request individually. Since this is the case, it will be
rewarded greatly in the objective function, which for this route is 1.48. The route is
illustrated in Figure 4.8 below, in which it is only the duration between nodes which are
showed for simplicity.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Test and Tuning
15622
16196
15916
15623
15917
16197
19
19
3
7
16
3
1
1
Figure 4.8: The route as presented in Table 4.14, green nodes are pickup nodes and red nodes
are delivery nodes.
From the provided data, there is no information regarding the locations of customers,
so the route as seen in Figure 4.8, is just shown as a simplified graph.
From Figure 4.8, it is clear that by serving the requests in the same route, as compared to
serving them individually, the total distance and time are smaller, as shown in Table 4.14.
The reason behind the better times and distance, might be due to the fact, that the
delivery 15623 and 15917 are in the middle of the nodes 15916 and 16197. Which is why
it is of great interest to perform multiple pickups, before conducting the corresponding
deliveries.
Another example of a route, which is performing better than servicing the requests
individually, but not as good as previous is shown in Figure 4.9 below:
16206
16320
16207
16321
15482
15483
5
15
4
4
14
10
15
Figure 4.9: Another route from the same solution as the route from Figure 4.8, green nodes
are pickups and red are deliveries.
Figure 4.9 shows that some routes will be combinations of performing multiple pickups
before their deliveries, and then perform some requests, by just performing the pickup
and performing the delivery immediately after.
When looking at the first two request, it can be seen that the duration of performing
them as a route will be 4 + 4 + 14 = 22, whereas the duration individually will be
5 + 15 = 20. However, in this calculation the travel time from the first request to the
next is not included. If it was wished to serve the first two request as individual routes,
the travel time between the requests should be accounted for as well. From the data, the
travel time from 16207 to 16320 is four minutes, and travel time from 16321 to 16206
is 14 minutes. With these numbers, the lowest travel time, by performing the requests
individually, will then be 4 + 5 + 15 = 24, showing that it is in fact better to perform
multiple pickups before their corresponding deliveries.
==PAGE:63==
4.5 Testing phase
53
It is of interest to see how many times the different destroy and repair methods were
used on average, throughout the search of the, in total 1,000 heuristic runs. The average
number of times the destroy and repair methods were used is shown in Figure 4.10 below:
Greedy heuristic
Regret 2
Regret 3
Regret 4
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
6,000
6,500
7,000
7,500
8,000
Average times used
Figure 4.10: The average number of times the different methods were used, over the 10 data
sets.
Figure 4.10 shows that, that the Greedy heuristic is used the least, whereas the three
different variations of the Regret-k heuristic on average were used, close to the same
amount. On average Regret-4 was used 7668 times and Regret-2 was used 7880 times.
The effect of different values of k in regret-k does not seem to have a big impact on how
often they were used in the search.
As for the destroy methods, it can be seen that Shaw removal were used the least, and
Random removal is used close to the same number of times on average. Whereas it can
be seen that Worst removal 1 is used much more than both Random removal and Shaw
removal.
It seems like the Regret-2 and Worst removal 1 are the best suited destroy and repair
methods for this type of problem.
It should be noted that Worst removal 1 is the removal heuristic which punish single-
request routes the most.
The evolution of the destroy and repair methods throughout the search can be seen in
Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12 below:
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Test and Tuning
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Iterations
Destroy methods weight
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
Figure 4.11: Evolution of the destroy methods, throughout the search.
Figure 4.11 shows that the Random removal and Shaw removal, are the worst performing
methods, and Worst removal 1 is performing the best, but closely followed by Worst
removal 2.
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Iterations
Repair methods weight
Greedy heuristic
Regret-2
Regret-3
Regret-4
Figure 4.12: Evolution of the repair methods, throughout the search.
Figure 4.12 shows that the Greedy heuristic is by far the worst performing of the four
different heuristics, and that Regret-k, for the different k values, seems to be performing
more or less equally good.
==PAGE:65==
4.6 Solutions for Phase 2
55
4.6
Solutions for Phase 2
In section 2.2.1, a mathematical model, which is able to solve the SCP, was presented.
The SCP model can be used to solve the Phase 2 data sets, which were provided by
BNR A/S.
For Phase 2, five different data sets were available. These data sets were generated from
the Phase 1 implementation from BNR A/S. For the five data sets, only two of them
had the objective value found by BNR A/S in them, these two can be used to determine
the quality of the SCP MIP model. The solver used for this, is the COIN-OR Branch
and Cut Interface (Cbc) solver, which is a freeware solver, that provide a reasonable
running time, compared to commercial solvers such as CPLEX.
The five different data sets were solved by the MIP model presented in section 2.2.1,
implemented in Julia, and the results is shown in Table 4.15 below:
Data set
BNR obj. val
MIP obj. val
% Improvement
MIP running time
2020-07-13
N/A
183.49
N/A
70.69 sec
2020-07-14
N/A
185.48
N/A
3.11 sec
2020-07-15
N/A
197.19
N/A
4.73 sec
2020-08-18
232.05
192.63
16.99 %
8.45 sec
2020-08-19
225.54
199.45
11.57 %
4.28 sec
Table 4.15: Comparison of objective values, found by BNR and by the MIP solver.
Table 4.15 shows that the MIP model is able to solve the Phase 2 data sets quite efficient.
The objective values for the two data sets, for which BNR A/S has provided objective
values for, are a significant improvement when comparing the objective values. The SCP
model is quite efficient at solving the different data instances.
With the data provided, there unfortunately were no overlap between the Phase 1 and
Phase 2 data sets, so it is not possible to use the results obtained for Phase 2, to
determine the quality of the ALNS framework.
4.7
Hybrid of ALNS and Set Cover Problem
ALNS showed promising results in generating routes on itself. Through the search of
the ALNS, many routes will be generated. The routes which are generated throughout
the search of the heuristic, could be used as input for the SCP solver.
After termination of the ALNS heuristic, it will present the current best found solution,
however it could be the case that this is not the best combination of the routes generated.
Due to this, it is interesting to create a hybrid of the ALNS and the SCP solver.
As the ALNS heuristic are performing 30,000 iterations, before terminating, it will gen-
erate a huge amount of routes which can be used as input for the SCP model.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Test and Tuning
In the testing of the hybrid setup, only solutions which were not rejected were saved.
This resulted in that more than 80,000 routes were generated through the search of the
ALNS. Obviously many of the routes found through the search will be reported multi-
ple times, so for efficiency it will be an advantage to either only save unique routes, or
implement a cleanup heuristic afterwards, which will remove duplicates.
For the testing here, every route were simply used for input, even though duplicates
were present. The running time of the SCP implementation were still reasonable, but
there are likely room for improvement in running time, by removing duplicates before
running the model. The problem was solved using the Cbc solver as for the Phase 2
solutions of BNR A/S.
For the testing of the hybrid of ALNS and SCP, the data set rsrCentral24 was used. In
order to get an average performance for the computational experiments, 100 runs of the
ALNS were performed, and these 100 runs was then solved by the SCP model.
The computational time for the SCP model were fluctuating a lot, with running time as
low as a couple of seconds, and with running times of up to six minutes.
For every data set, the SCP model was able to find a better objective value, than were
found by the ALNS heuristic. The results can be seen in Table 4.16 below:
ALNS
SCP
Minimum objective val
142.20
141.23
Average objective val
144.89
144.20
Maximum objective value
149.20
148.31
Average gap
2.59%
2.06%
Table 4.16: Comparison of the solutions from ALNS, and for the SCP
It can be seen that the objective value were better in all three aspects of Table 4.16, and
it can definitely be beneficial to use ALNS as a way of generating routes, which can be
solved as a SCP. The hybrid is able to improve the solution found from ALNS, by 0.47%
on average.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion and further work
This chapter will serve to present a discussion of the results and processes of this thesis.
It will discuss the impact of different aspects of the heuristic, that seemed interesting to
examine from the testing phase. It will finish off with a discussion of the further work,
which could be made, with a bigger time frame.
5.1
Discussion
This section will discuss some of the results as presented in section 4.5, and look into
some of the findings as presented in chapter 4.
To be able to compare the results presented in this section, the data set used for the
heuristic are all the same. The heuristic uses the original data set rsrDataCentral24,
and not the data sets which have been shifted, as were used in section 4.5.
5.1.1
Impact of Shaw removal
Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.11 may give the perception that Shaw removal are not per-
forming very well for the heuristic, in order to examine if this is actually the case, a new
experiment will be conducted.
For this experiment, 100 new runs of the heuristic will be performed without the Shaw
removal, and 100 new runs in which Shaw removal is still in the heuristic.
In order to see the difference in the solution quality, the distribution of objective values
over the 100 runs is shown in Figure 5.1 below:
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Discussion and further work
141
143
145
147
149
0
10
20
30
40
Objective values
Objective values in an interval
(a) Objective values without Shaw removal
141
143
145
147
149
0
10
20
30
40
Objective values
Objective values in an interval
(b) Objective values with Shaw removal
Figure 5.1: The distribution of objective values with or without Shaw removal.
From Figure 5.1, both of the settings of the heuristic seems like they are more or less
normally distributed.
To determine if one setting is better than the other, more details are shown in Table 5.1
below:
With Shaw removal
Without Shaw removal
Minimum running time
573.28
508.71
Median running time
589.76
523.28
Average running time
590.55
526.04
Maximum running time
612.67
562.55
Standard deviation running time
7.95
11.23
Minimum objective value
141.83
141.47
Median objective value
144.99
145.34
Average objective value
145.01
145.29
Maximum objective value
149.37
149.38
Average gap objective value
2.50%
2.70%
Table 5.1: Comparison between different aspects of the two settings, with or without Shaw
removal.
Table 5.1 shows the the running time for the setting without Shaw removal are lower, and
that the best found solution were found in a setting without Shaw removal. However, it
can also be seen that the other aspects regarding objective value seems more promising
for the setting with Shaw removal.
To see if there is a difference between how often the different destroy and repair methods
were used, if it is not possible to choose Shaw removal, is shown in Figure 5.2 below:
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Discussion
59
Greedy heuristic
Regret 2
Regret 3
Regret 4
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
0
10
20
30
40
Percentage distribution
(a) Objective values without Shaw removal
Greedy heuristic
Regret 2
Regret 3
Regret 4
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
0
10
20
30
40
Percentage distribution
(b) Objective values with Shaw removal
Figure 5.2: The distribution of the destroy of repair methods for the setting with or without
Shaw removal.
Comparing the two percentage distribution of destroy and repair methods from Fig-
ure 5.2, it can be seen that the distribution of the number of times the methods are
used, are more or less the same.
For the destroy methods, the distribution between Random removal, Worst removal 1
and Worst removal 2 are more or less the same for the two settings. For both settings,
the Random removal is the least used, Worst removal 1 is the most used, and Worst
removal 2 is used almost as much as Worst removal 1.
In conclusion, the biggest difference in solving this data set with or without Shaw re-
moval, is most noticeable in the running time. For which the method without Shaw
removal is around 10 % faster. This might be because of the complexity and extra cal-
culations, which are made in the Shaw removal.
The most noticeable advantage of having the Shaw removal in the heuristic, seems to be
with regard to the average gap, as the heuristic seems to be performing better on aver-
age with it, but the difference in objective values is not very significant. The removal of
Shaw removal, does not seem to effect how often the other destroy and repair methods
are used.
The reason for the performance of the Shaw removal might be due to it not being suited
for this type of data sets, or it can be in the implementation of it. For this thesis, the
relatedness measure, as shown in equation (2.6), is calculated by examining the distance
between requests, and with regards to the start of their time windows.
The relatedness measure implemented in this thesis, is a simplification of the measure
as implemented by Shaw [10]. In the paper by Shaw [10], the relatedness measure is
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Discussion and further work
defined as:
1
R(i, j) = αcij + β |ti −tj| + γTij + δ |qi −qj| .
In which cij is the travel distance, going from i to j, ti is the start of service at i, Tij is
equal to 1 if i and j are served by the same vehicle, and 0 otherwise, qi is the quantity
of goods at i. α, β, γ, δ are used to tune which of the four measures are most important
in the calculations. The values for cij, qi, ti are all normalized in the range [0,1].
This implementation is much more advanced, than the relatedness measure used for
this thesis. Due to the complexity of this relatedness measure, it should have a higher
computational time, since it is necessary to recalculate the equation in each iteration of
the heuristic.
From these results it seems that Shaw removal implemented in this thesis, can be left
out. The impact from this Shaw removal with regards to the objective value is not
significant enough to justify the extra running time.
It could be interesting to implement the relatedness measure calculation as Shaw [10].
In order to be able to draw conclusions between the different methods, the Shaw removal
has still been used for the remaining tests.
5.1.2
Impact of the relatedness threshold
From section 4.3, the relatedness threshold γ, were set to 0.5. For the testing phase,
three different values were tested, to see if they had an influence on the solution quality.
From the initial testing phase, it did not seem like this parameter, had a big impact
on the solution quality. This section will see how different values of this parameter will
impact the solutions.
The relatedness threshold was examined to see if it had an impact on the objective value,
it was assumed to be able to have an influence on the running time of the heuristic. The
impact on the running time, could be a reason to decrease the threshold, if this did not
limit the search, and would result in worse objective values.
To examine how the running time and objective value were affected by different values
of γ, a test of 13 different values were conducted. Starting at 0.04 and incrementing by
0.04, to 0.52. The impact with respect to objective value is shown in Figure 5.3 and the
running time is shown in Figure 5.4 below:
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Discussion
61
p = 0.04
p = 0.08
p = 0.12
p = 0.16
p = 0.20
p = 0.24
p = 0.28
p = 0.32
p = 0.36
p = 0.40
p = 0.44
p = 0.48
p = 0.52
p = 4.00
140
142
144
146
Average objective value
Figure 5.3: Impact of γ value on the objective value.
p = 0.04
p = 0.08
p = 0.12
p = 0.16
p = 0.20
p = 0.24
p = 0.28
p = 0.32
p = 0.36
p = 0.40
p = 0.44
p = 0.48
p = 0.52
p = 4.00
500
550
600
650
Average running time
Figure 5.4: Impact of γ value on the running time.
Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4 shows that, the value of γ has no significant impact on the
objective value, whereas it indicates an impact on the running time. It seems like a lower
threshold value will impact the running time, and it seems like the impact on objective
value is minimal.
Even though it can be seen that the average running time is significantly lower for
p = 0.04, compared to the remaining, it does not make sense to check lower values for
p. The lower the threshold is, the fewer request are examined for the insertion, testing
showed that for lower values than p = 0.04, the solution quality were much worse than
the quality presented above.
It is hard to determine if a specific value of the threshold is significantly better than
others, since the difference in both running time and objective values are not particular
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Discussion and further work
noteworthy. It is only the running time of p = 0.04, that is significantly better than the
the other settings, but the objective values obtained for this setting is not better than
the remaining.
So, as stated in section 4.3, the threshold parameter γ does not seem to have a significant
influence on the performance of the heuristic.
5.1.3
Impact of the size of time windows
For every data set in this thesis, BNR A/S has allowed for the customers to be in the
vehicle for 30 minutes more, than the direct route from pickup to delivery, to allow for
multiple pickups before performing their deliveries.
This section will examine how the given time windows are affecting the solutions ob-
tained. As a recap, a request is split into a pickup and a delivery. For a given request,
the pickup time windows can be [478,508] and the corresponding delivery will have the
time windows [480,510]. This shows that the direct travel time from pickup to delivery
is 2 minutes, and the time windows are 30 minutes wide.
To examine the effect of how the time windows affect the solution quality, both larger
and smaller time windows will be examined. Four new sizes of time windows will be
tested. With the sizes of of 20, 40, 50 and 60 minutes. For these new time windows, the
original time windows will be expanded in both directions, by half the amount. As an
example, for the 40 minutes time windows, the previous time windows before will now
become [473,513] and [475,515]. This is done for all four new time window settings. The
results is shown in Table 5.2 below:
Time window
size
Average
Objective
Average
Running time
Minimum
Objective
Average
Gap
Average
Distance
20 minutes
193.23
550.31
191.67
0.81%
2598.40
30 minutes
144.95
594.93
142.06
2.03%
2447.93
40 minutes
117.62
633.33
115.14
2.15%
2203.82
50 minutes
101.02
708.88
98.12
2.96%
2075.94
60 minutes
89.74
798.38
86.46
3.80%
1962.84
Table 5.2: Comparison between different sizes of time windows.
Table 5.2 shows that by allowing slightly bigger time windows, the average objective
value will be significantly lower. Table 5.2 shows that by allowing the time windows for
the requests to be 40 minutes, compared to the original 30 minutes, the objective value
will decrease by 18.95%, and the total distance traveled will be 9.97 % lower.
An interesting topic for future research, could be how performance of the real life appli-
cation would be influenced by allowing slightly larger time windows for the customers,
with respect to customer satisfaction.
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Discussion
63
5.1.4
Impact of accept criteria
For the ALNS framework, an acceptance criteria is used, in order to determine which
new solutions will be accepted. In this thesis, the record-to-record travel criteria was
used. In order to see if this accept criteria was performing as hoped, it can be compared
to a much simpler acceptance criteria, which is to only accept solutions that are better
than the current best solution.
This criteria will check if a new solution is better than the current best found solution,
and will use the current best solution as a foundation of the new solutions. To determine
if the acceptance criteria used for this thesis, was performing well, 100 new test runs
were conducted, in which it is only a new best solution that is accepted. The results for
this test, will be compared to those found in Table 5.1 with Shaw removal in it. The
comparison between using the two different acceptance criteria is shown in Table 5.3
below:
Record to record acceptance
Accept new global best
Minimum running time
573.28
575.31
Median running time
589.76
629.79
Average running time
590.55
626.55
Maximum running time
612.67
662.89
Standard deviation running time
7.95
18.77
Minimum objective value
141.83
144.14
Median objective value
144.99
148.09
Average objective value
145.01
148.06
Maximum objective value
149.37
152.38
Average gap objective value
2.24%
4.44%
Table 5.3: Difference between using record-to-record accept, and only accepting new global
best
Table 5.3 shows that the average running time of the heuristic which only accepts new
global best solutions, is higher than that, which uses the record-to-record travel accep-
tance criteria. The change in running time, is hard to determine if it comes from the
change in acceptance criteria. The heuristic ran on DTUs HPC, and throughout the test-
ing phase, it seems like the running time can be influenced by other implementations
which are running on the HPC together with the testings for this thesis.
It is more interesting to examine the changes in objective value, as the objective val-
ues, by using the record-to-record travel acceptance criteria are performing significantly
better, than by simply only accepting a new global best.
By using a more complex accept criteria, such as record-to-record travel, compared
to only accepting solutions which are improvements of the global best. By accepting
solutions, which are not improvements of the current best solution, the search will be
much more diversified, and this is a great help, at escaping potential a local optima.
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Discussion and further work
For future work, it could be interesting to examine other accept criteria, such as the
simulated annealing.
5.1.5
Impact of initial solution
The initial solution used for this heuristic, is a simple random solution. In the testing
phase it was found that the initial solution often were quite high. It was clear, that in the
first iterations of the heuristic, the newly found solutions were often improvements. It
seemed like the initial solution was not satisfiable, and that it could be easily improved.
It is interesting to examine if the initial solution has an impact on solution quality, and
to see if it could improve the solutions obtained by starting out with another initial
solution. To examine this, all four of the repair methods will be used to create the
initial solution. The results of using the four repair methods as the initial route, as
compared to using the random initial start, is shown in Table 5.4 below:
Random start
Greedy
Regret-2
Regret-3
Regret-4
Minimum running time
573.28
531.44
590.19
579.95
585.07
Median running time
589.76
605.40
633.00
623.97
614.21
Average running time
590.55
592.45
628.65
621.96
615.33
Maximum running time
612.67
631.65
658.60
649.73
673.23
Standard deviation running time
7.95
29.36
16.22
15.13
17.23
Minimum objective value
141.83
142.89
141.75
142.98
142.34
Median objective value
144.99
144.81
144.88
145.07
145.02
Average objective value
145.01
145.20
145.03
145.29
145.08
Maximum objective value
149.37
149.06
149.31
148.40
148.63
Average gap objective value
2.30%
2.43%
2.31%
2.50%
2.35%
Table 5.4: Comparison between five different initial routes.
Table 5.4 shows that a new global best objective value is found using the Regret-2 heuris-
tic, to generate the initial solution. The average gap is updated, using this value. The
average gap for the heuristic with a random initial solution, compared to the heuristic
with Regret-2 as initial route is almost identical. In order to have a reference point
for the difference by using Regret-2 as the initial route, the solution as presented in
Figure 4.6 is shown in Figure 5.5 below:
==PAGE:75==
5.1 Discussion
65
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
Iterations
Objective values
Global best solution
Accepted solutions
Rejected solutions
Accept threshold
Best values
Figure 5.5: The solutions throughout the search, by having the Random initial solution.
A run of the heuristic, by using Regret-2 as the initial route, is shown in Figure 5.6
below:
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
Iterations
Objective values
Global best solution
Accepted solutions
Rejected solutions
Accept threshold
Best values
Figure 5.6: Solutions throughout the search, plotted together with the current best found
solution and the acceptance threshold, with Regret-2 as the initial solution.
By comparing Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6, it can be seen that the initial objective value is
starting out at a much lower value by using Regret-2 as the initial solution. In Figure 5.5
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Discussion and further work
the plot is cut at 190, but the initial objective value is 225, but in order to be able to
see the values, it was decided to only show a cutout of the plot.
From the two figures, although they are converging at different rates, they are both
converging towards the same objective value, more or less.
New global best
Better than previous
Accepted solutions
Rejected solutions
147
1,634
2,375
25,844
Table 5.5: Distribution of the four different types of solutions.
From Table 5.5, and compared to the results in Table 4.11, it can be seen that far more
solutions are rejected in the Regret-2 implementation, as to previous. This might be
caused by the lower initial solution, as it is therefore is less likely to have a new solution
which is lower than previous.
5.1.6
Impact of number of iterations
For the tuning and testing phase of this thesis, the heuristic were set to run 30,000
iterations, this number were chosen, since initial testing showed that this number of
iterations, seemed like a great trade-off with regards to solution quality and running
time. In order to see how the solution would change, if the heuristic were allowed to
perform either 50,000 and 100,000 iterations instead. To test the impact, the heuristic
were tested under the same circumstances as before, and the results is shown in Table 5.6
below:
30,000 Iterations
50,000 Iterations
100,000 Iterations
Minimum running time
573.28
999.08
1660.21
Median running time
589.76
1967.85
1956.73
Average running time
590.55
1033.03
2012.29
Maximum running time
612.67
1082.77
2314.81
Standard deviation running time
7.95
29.85
191.89
Minimum objective value
141.83
141.41
139.06
Median objective value
144.99
142.59
142.27
Average objective value
145.01
144.04
142.32
Maximum objective value
149.37
145.77
144.19
Average gap objective value
4.28%
3.58%
2.34%
Table 5.6: Impact of the maximum number of allowed iterations.
Table 5.6 Shows that by allowing to perform more iterations, the solution quality will
increase.
By allowing to perform 100,000 iterations, instead of 30,000 the average objective value
will decrease by 2.69, which corresponds to a decrease of 1.85%, however, by allowing
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Further work
67
100,000 iterations, the average running time is more than three times larger.
The evolution of solutions over iterations is shown in Figure 5.7 below, in which the best
found objective value for 30,000 iterations are plotted in as well.
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
1 · 105
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
Iterations
Objective values
Global best solution
Accepted solutions
Rejected solutions
Accept threshold
Best values
Best objective for 30,000 iterations
Figure 5.7: Solutions throughout the search, plotted together with the current best found
solution and the acceptance threshold, together with the average solution for 30,000 iterations.
Figure 5.7 shows that it is possible to obtain better values by allowing more iterations.
In the figure, the best found objective value of 141.83 is plotted as the black line. It can
be seen that after around 75,000 iterations, there are quite a lot of solutions which are
better than the best found solution from performing 30,000 iterations.
5.2
Further work
This section will present thoughts and recommendations regarding further work. The
section will present aspects that could be interesting to investigate, and different aspects
from the implementation which could be used to further improve the solution quality of
the heuristic, in terms of computation speed.
5.2.1
Potential bottlenecks
In order to discover potential bottlenecks of the current implementation, the Julia func-
tion Profiling was used. Profiling is a good way to find potential bottlenecks for Julia
code. Profiling will show at what parts the code, the most time is used when running
the code.
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Discussion and further work
From a single run of the heuristic, it could be seen that 9.15 % of the time was spend
in the destroy methods, whereas 90.85 % of the time was spend in the repair methods.
The distribution of the methods is shown in Table 5.7 below:
Method
Percentage distribution
Random removal
00.27 %
Shaw removal
00.90 %
Worst removal 1
04.14 %
Worst removal 2
03.84 %
Greedy heuristic
18.79 %
Regret-2
24.56 %
Regret-3
26.19 %
Regret-4
21.31 %
Table 5.7: Distribution of running time of the heuristic, over different destroy and repair
methods.
In the insertion heuristic, the earliest service time, arrival time, latest service time and
vehicle capacity will be updated each time a new pickup or delivery is inserted into the
route. For the implementation of this thesis, each of these arrays will be updated in
every spot, this was implemented due to simplicity. However, it is possible to implement
it in a more efficient way.
For the earliest service time, if a request is inserted between nodes i and j, the earliest
service times of all nodes in the route, which are visited before node i, will stay the same.
So it is not necessary to recalculate these. Since the arrival times of the vehicle are based
on the earliest the nodes can be serviced, the same applies for the arrival times.
For the latest service time, if a pickup is inserted between node i and j, the times after
node j, will remain the same.
As an example, the route in Table 3.2 from section 3.1 is used, in which node 8 is inserted
in between node 5 and node 6. In Table 5.8 below, the information regarding the route
is color coded, the green values are unchanged values, and the red values is the updated
values.
2
3
4
5
8
6
7
TW Start
406
420
461
465
468
476
480
Earliest service
406
423
461
468
473
483
490
Arrival time
430
447
461
468
473
483
490
Latest service
430
447
478
485
490
500
507
TW End
436
450
491
495
498
506
510
Vehicle capacity
1
0
1
0
1
2
1
Table 5.8: The route from Table 3.2, in which green marks unchanged values, and red are
updated values.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Further work
69
Table 5.8 shows that when inserting a new node in a route, that a significant amount of
the computations are unnecessary.
A way to avoid this, is by updating the calculations of how the earliest service and latest
service are calculated, such that they will start at the index, which needs to be updated.
By doing so, the computational time should be lower, since the calculation of earliest
service time, latest service time and arrival times are calculated many times throughout
the heuristic.
5.2.2
Further work on feasibility checks
For the feasibility checks, in which the time windows are checked with the earliest service
time and the latest service time of the customers, it is possible to speed up the heuristic,
by using equation (3.3b), the equation is repeated below:
ESi + dα(i) + tα(i),k + dk+ ≤lk.
(5.1)
This equation, is used to determine if it is possible to visit node i, and drive to node k,
before the end of this nodes time window.
In the current implementation, when inserting a request into a route, the heuristic is
going through the entire route. But by inspecting equation (5.1), it can be seen that
the arrival times and earliest service time will only increase throughout the route. If the
left-hand side of equation (5.1) is larger than the right-hand side, the current heuristic
will try to insert node k in the next place of the route, that is between node i + 1 and
i + 2. However, if the left-hand side is larger than the right-hand side, it will not be
feasible to insert the given request later on in the route, and therefore it is possible to
simply break the heuristic if this is the case, and try to insert a new request in the route,
and try the failed request in another route.
5.2.3
Further work on the repair methods
For the repair methods, the three arrays used for storing the change in objective value,
the index of the pickup and the index of the delivery, could be updated in a more efficient
way, than they were done.
In the current implementation, whenever a new request had been inserted in the route,
the corresponding row for this request was deleted from the array. A more efficient
implementation would be to ensure that, if a request had been inserted, it could not be
inserted again. A way to ensure this, could be to insert a high cost on the corresponding
row, such that the request would not be inserted in later iterations. This method was
tried, but due to many issues with getting this to work, it was deemed sufficient to
simply delete the rows in each iteration.
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Discussion and further work
5.2.4
Implementation of dynamic measures
The data examined in this data set were all static, and assumed to be with perfect
information, however for real life applications, it is likely that there will be some dynamic
and uncertain request to be added throughout the day.
It is likely that there could be cancellations on the day, or that there are added extra
requests during the day. For a more robust implementation, it should be possible to
account for new request to be added, or for cancellations.
A way to implement this in the heuristic, could be to create an initial plan for the day,
as the heuristic have done in this thesis. Then, if there are cancellations, the route at
which the request is in, will obviously need to be reoptimized, but there might be better
ways to connect the remaining requests now.
This could be done by looking at every request which are close by in time and distance,
and then try to reoptimize these requests again. Obviously the cancellations would have
to be given in a reasonable time frame, such that it is possible to redirect vehicles.
If a new request needed to be added to the current plan, it might not be necessary to
reoptimize the entire plan, but to simply examine the requests which are close by in
time and distance, which would be reoptimized with this new request.
It could be done by splitting the day into time windows, such that if a new request is
added, at e.g. 12:00, then the request which is performed before 11:00 or after 13:00
will not be affected by the new request. By splitting into time windows, it would ensure
that the reoptimization could be done efficiently, and the change by adding or removing
requests, should not interfere with every route throughout a day, as this could lead to
unnecessary confusion for the drivers.
Obviously some tests of how this could be implemented in reality would have to be done,
but it could be interesting to investigate the possibilities of being able to solve the real
life problems more dynamically.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The main objective of this thesis was to implement an Adaptive Large Neighbourhood
Search metaheuristic, which were able to solve the Dial-a-Ride problem. The goal of the
implementation of the metaheuristic was to be able to find well performing routes, in a
short amount of time.
The motivation of this thesis, was to see how ALNS would perform on real life data sets,
provided by BNR A/S. Currently, BNR A/S have a working method for creating their
routes, which are split up into two phases and it was therefore interesting to investigate
if ALNS could produce solutions of high quality.
Due to the size of the data sets, the ALNS metaheuristic seemed fitting, as it is not
possible to solve the data sets by the mathematical model presented in section 2.1.
The Set Cover Problem, presented in section 2.2.1, showed in section 4.6 that it was able
to produce high quality solutions for the data sets in a short amount of time. These
solutions provided by the SCP was better than the corresponding solutions provided by
BNR A/S. Although there were no data available regarding running time of the Phase
2 implementation from BNR A/S, making it difficult to compare. The results presented
in this thesis seemed to be well performing. This aspect of the implementation would
be possible to implement right now at BNR A/S, if it is of interest.
In 5.1, it was illustrated that by performing 100,000 iterations with an average running
time of around 33 minutes, the heuristic was able to produce solutions that were bet-
ter, than the solutions produced when performing 30,000 iterations with running times
around 10 minutes.
Based on this, and the results presented in section 4.5, together with the results pre-
sented in section 4.7, it can be concluded that the ALNS implementation in this thesis
seem to be performing well at solving the data instances provided by BNR A/S, both
in the pure ALNS implementation, and in the hybrid of ALNS and SCP.
Although the results seems promising, there is still room for improvement, and there are
a lot more aspects which could be interesting to examine and cover, such as more work
on the metaheuristic.
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Difference in λ values
A.2
Results of tuning data sets
Table A.1: Parameter tuning for rsrDataCentral21
==PAGE:84==
74
A An Appendix
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
2
4
6
8
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.25
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
Figure A.1: λ = 0.25
Table A.2: Parameter tuning for rsrDataCentral22
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Results of tuning data sets
75
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.50
Random remove
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
Figure A.2: λ = 0.50
Table A.3: Parameter tuning for rsrData2020-08-19
==PAGE:86==
76
A An Appendix
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.75
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
Figure A.3: λ = 0.75
A.3
Results of tuning data sets
Table A.4: Parameter tuning for rsrDataCentral21
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Results of tuning data sets
77
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Iterations
Destroy weights
λ = 0.99
Random removal
Shaw removal
Worst removal 1
Worst removal 2
Figure A.4: λ = 0.99
Table A.5: Parameter tuning for rsrDataCentral22
==PAGE:88==
78
A An Appendix
Table A.6: Parameter tuning for rsrData2020-08-19
A.4
Results of tuning data sets
Table A.7: Parameter tuning for rsrDataCentral21
==PAGE:89==
A.4 Results of tuning data sets
79
Table A.8: Parameter tuning for rsrDataCentral22
==PAGE:90==
80
A An Appendix
Table A.9: Parameter tuning for rsrData2020-08-19
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
GoMore - Homepage. https://gomore.dk/. Accessed: 2021-01-10.
[2]
BNR - Homepage. http://www.bnr.dk/home.html. Accessed: 2021-01-10.
[3]
Bæredygtig bilisme er en mulighedhed med samkørsel - GoMore. https://www.ft.
dk/samling/20081/almdel/MPU/bilag/58/603247.pdf. Accessed: 2021-01-10.
[4]
Flextrafik homepage. https://www.moviatrafik.dk/flexkunde/typer- af-
flextrafik. Accessed: 2021-01-10.
[5]
American Disability Act. https://www.ada.gov/cguide.htm. Accessed: 2021-01-
10.
[6]
Dimitris Bertsimas and Julia Yan. “The edge of optimization in large-scale vehicle
routing for paratransit”. In: ().
[7]
Sin C Ho et al. “A survey of dial-a-ride problems: Literature review and recent
developments”. In: Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 111 (2018),
pages 395–421.
[8]
Jean-François Cordeau and Gilbert Laporte. “The dial-a-ride problem (DARP):
Variants, modeling issues and algorithms”. In: Quarterly Journal of the Belgian,
French and Italian Operations Research Societies 1.2 (2003), pages 89–101.
[9]
Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. “An adaptive large neighborhood search heuris-
tic for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows”. In: Transportation
science 40.4 (2006), pages 455–472.
[10]
Paul Shaw. “A new local search algorithm providing high quality solutions to
vehicle routing problems”. In: APES Group, Dept of Computer Science, University
of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, UK (1997).
[11]
David Pisinger and Stefan Ropke. “A general heuristic for vehicle routing prob-
lems”. In: Computers & operations research 34.8 (2007), pages 2403–2435.
[12]
Jean-François Cordeau and Gilbert Laporte. “A tabu search heuristic for the static
multi-vehicle dial-a-ride problem”. In: Transportation Research Part B: Methodolog-
ical 37.6 (2003), pages 579–594.
[13]
Fred Glover. “Future paths for integer programming and links to ar tifi cial intelli
g en ce”. In: Computers operations research 13.5 (1986), pages 533–549.
[14]
Jean-François Cordeau and Gilbert Laporte. “The dial-a-ride problem: models and
algorithms”. In: Annals of operations research 153.1 (2007), pages 29–46.
==PAGE:92==
82
Bibliography
[15]
Jean-François Cordeau. “A branch-and-cut algorithm for the dial-a-ride problem”.
In: Operations Research 54.3 (2006), pages 573–586.
[16]
Zixuan Yu et al. “An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search for the Larger-Scale
Instances of Green Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows”. In: Complexity
2020 (2020).
[17]
Glaydston Mattos Ribeiro and Gilbert Laporte. “An adaptive large neighbor-
hood search heuristic for the cumulative capacitated vehicle routing problem”.
In: Computers & Operations Research 39.3 (2012), pages 728–735. issn: 0305-
0548. doi: https : / / doi .org / 10. 1016 /j . cor. 2011 .05 .005. url: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305054811001298.
[18]
Ann Campbell, Dieter Vandenbussche, and William Hermann. “Routing for Relief
Efforts”. In: Transportation Science 42 (May 2008), pages 127–145. doi: 10.1287/
trsc.1070.0209.
[19]
Stefan Ropke, Jean-François Cordeau, and Gilbert Laporte. “Models and branch-
and-cut algorithms for pickup and delivery problems with time windows”. In: Net-
works: An International Journal 49.4 (2007), pages 258–272.
[20]
Sophie N Parragh and Verena Schmid. “Hybrid column generation and large neigh-
borhood search for the dial-a-ride problem”. In: Computers & Operations Research
40.1 (2013), pages 490–497.
[21]
Kris Braekers, An Caris, and Gerrit K Janssens. “Exact and meta-heuristic ap-
proach for a general heterogeneous dial-a-ride problem with multiple depots”. In:
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 67 (2014), pages 166–186.
[22]
Maxime Chassaing, Christophe Duhamel, and Philippe Lacomme. “An ELS-based
approach with dynamic probabilities management in local search for the Dial-A-
Ride Problem”. In: Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 48 (2016),
pages 119–133.
[23]
Timo Gschwind and Michael Drexl. “Adaptive large neighborhood search with
a constant-time feasibility test for the dial-a-ride problem”. In: Transportation
Science 53.2 (2019), pages 480–491.
[24]
Ulrike Ritzinger, Jakob Puchinger, and Richard F Hartl. “Dynamic programming
based metaheuristics for the dial-a-ride problem”. In: Annals of Operations Re-
search 236.2 (2016), pages 341–358.
[25]
Paul Shaw. “Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve
vehicle routing problems”. In: International conference on principles and practice
of constraint programming. Springer. 1998, pages 417–431.
