==PAGE:1==
Towards 
a 
user-centric 
building 
design 
process 
through 
development 
of 
an 
integrative 
design 
platform
Anders Bomann Christensen
Niklas Rosenkilde Rasmussen
Sebastian Dahl Meier
s144578
s130064
s141192
January 2021
==PAGE:2==
i 
Title Page 
Towards a user-centric building design process through development of an integra-
tive design platform. 
The project seeks to determine how the layman might best be included in the professional building 
design process with a digital platform. This is explored though the development of a proof-of-concept 
application. 
På vej mod en brugerorienteret designproces gennem udvikling af en integrativ 
design platform 
Projektet forsøger at bestemme hvordan lægmand bedst kan indgå i den professionelle bygnings-
designproces ved brug af en digital platform. Dette udforskes gennem udvikling af et proof-of-concept 
softwareapplikation. 
 
Authors: 
Anders Bomann Christensen 
s144578 
 
Niklas Rosenkilde Rasmussen 
s130064 
 
Sebastian Dahl Meier 
s141192 
M.Sc. Programme: 
Architectural Engineering 
University: 
Technical University of Denmark 
Institute: 
Department of Civil Engineering 
Project period: 
August 3rd 2020 to January 24th 2021 
ECTS-points: 
30 ECTS per student 
Supervisor: 
Tim Pat McGinley 
==PAGE:3==
ii 
Preface 
This project was written at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) during the months from August 
2020 to January 2021 as the concluding thesis of the Master of Science (MSc) programme in Architectural 
Engineering. It was made as a collaboration between three graduate students, Anders Bomann Christen-
sen, Niklas Rosenkilde Rasmussen, and Sebastian Dahl Meier under the supervision of Associate Professor 
and Head of Studies Tim Pat McGinley. 
The project seeks to determine how the layman building owner might best be included in the professional 
building design process with the use of a digital platform. This is explored though the development of a 
proof-of-concept design platform application. The programming code including comprehensive docu-
mentation have been made publicly available as an open-source repository on GitHub (see Appendix A). 
We would like to express our immense gratitude to our project supervisor, Tim Pat McGinley. He has 
been supportive right from the beginning of the project and has contributed with excellent guidance and 
encouragement throughout. We would also like to express our profound appreciation to the head of CLT-
Denmark, Per Thomas Dahl, who has guided and helped us devise this project and who has been very 
supportive and always prepared with advice and sparring. Lastly, we would like to thank all the people 
who helped us by giving their opinions and suggestions during interviews and conversations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anders Bomann Christensen 
Niklas Rosenkilde Rasmussen 
Sebastian Dahl Meier 
 
==PAGE:4==
iii 
Abstract 
This study seeks to propose a way for the non-professional building owner to be included as an active 
participant in the design process of single-family housing in collaboration with the professionals of the 
AEC (Architecture, Engineering and Construction) industry. 
Through the development of a proof-of-concept design platform, we explored the solution of supporting 
an informed design environment that would let the building owner express, analyze and evaluate their 
ideas in active collaboration with the industry professionals. Through an agile development process, it was 
possible to explore the solution through several iterations and consult representatives of both building 
owners and industry professionals to steer the concept and implementation in their direction. 
The result was a design platform software application, created with Unity and C# programming. The plat-
form allows the building owner to express their ideas using simple comprehensible spatial elements and 
provides information and statistics to enable the user to evaluate their design ideas and inform their deci-
sions. External collaborators can use the platform to participate actively in the design process regardless of 
their existing tools and procedures since the generated building information can be exported into industry 
standards as well as customized formats and all the functions and features of the platform were made ex-
pandable and modular, such that they can be defined and customized to fit into established practices. 
Therefore, it is concluded that a realization of the customer-centralized design platform concept might be 
a feasible undertaking with potential to provide substantial benefits to the AEC industry and is worth 
further research and development. 
==PAGE:5==
iv 
Table of Contents 
Title Page ................................................................................................................................................................ i 
Preface.................................................................................................................................................................... ii 
Abstract ................................................................................................................................................................. iii 
Table of Contents ................................................................................................................................................ iv 
List of Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................................ v 
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................... 1 
2. Background ....................................................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1. Historic Context ................................................................................................................................. 4 
2.2. The Needs of the Industry ................................................................................................................. 6 
2.3. Evaluation of Current Practices ...................................................................................................... 11 
3. Methodology ................................................................................................................................................... 18 
3.1. Design Science Research Methodology .......................................................................................... 18 
3.2. Agile Software Development .......................................................................................................... 22 
4. Design and Development ............................................................................................................................... 23 
4.1. The Concept of the Integrative Design Platform .......................................................................... 23 
4.2. Implementation Overview .............................................................................................................. 24 
4.3. User Interface ................................................................................................................................... 29 
4.4. Design Framework ........................................................................................................................... 41 
4.5. Ontology ........................................................................................................................................... 53 
4.6. Building Information Accessibility ................................................................................................. 56 
4.7. Active Participation.......................................................................................................................... 61 
5. Demonstration ................................................................................................................................................ 67 
6. Evaluation........................................................................................................................................................ 70 
7. Conclusion ...................................................................................................................................................... 76 
Bibliography ........................................................................................................................................................ 82 
Appendix A. Documentation............................................................................................................................. 86 
Appendix B. How to Create an Extension Module ......................................................................................... 87 
Appendix C. Interview Transcription .............................................................................................................. 89 
==PAGE:6==
v 
List of Abbreviations 
AEC 
Architecture, Engineering and Construction 
API 
Application programming interface 
BDS 
Building Description System 
BIM 
Building Information Model 
CAD 
Computer Aided Design 
CLT 
Cross Laminated Timber 
FEM 
Finite Element Method 
gbXML 
Green Building XML 
GUI 
Graphical User Interface 
HVAC 
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
IFC 
Industry Foundation Classes 
ISO 
International Organization of Standardization 
IxD 
Interaction Design 
JSON 
JavaScript Object Notation 
MEP 
Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing 
OS 
Operating System 
POV 
Point of View 
RDF 
Resource Description Framework 
RVT 
Autodesk Revit file format 
UI 
User Interface 
UML 
Unified Modeling Language 
UX 
User Experience 
XML 
Extensible Markup Language (file format) 
==PAGE:7==
Introduction | 1 
1 
1. Introduction 
The primary purpose of this project has been to enable future house owners to become a primary partici-
pant in the design process whilst also ensuring that the design process remains knowledgeable. For most 
clients, the current building design process, happens in consultation with industry professionals such as 
architects. The architect is then in charge of the design process, which will often involve collaboration 
with other parties across the construction industry. 
To clients wishing to be actively involved in the design, the established professional process can arguably 
feel rigid or sluggish. There are many places where the expectations, wishes and ideas of the client might 
not translate well into the process, the reasons of which might be numerous: The client has perhaps not 
explored their own ideas to their full extent and consequently knows not whether the idea is actually what 
they want, the client perhaps finds it difficult to express their ideas to the architect, or finally, the architect 
might perhaps simply be unable to convey the solution in a way that “sells” it to the client. Our interviewee, 
a client in this situation, has been in contact with four architects in relation to her future home and ex-
pressed frustration that she could not take part in the architectural concept design. She experienced that 
she had to wait until the concept was detailed into drawings and she felt that they either did not understand 
her wishes correctly, did not listen, or thought they knew what she wanted (interview reproduced in Ap-
pendix C). As expressed by Frimpong & Dansoh, the rigidity and sluggishness can lead to the client feeling 
unheard, creatively restricted, and unable to experiment with different design options without spending a 
lot of time and resources on professional help (Frimpong & Dansoh, 2016) (Royal Institute of British 
Architects, 2019). Generally, all of these aspects may well lead to dissatisfaction and inconvenient changes 
for the parties responsible for the design, and thereby leads to both prolongment of the process and eco-
nomic consequences. 
As an alternative to the established process, the client could explore different design ideas by themselves, 
either by sketching or modelling possible solutions. However, not every client is in any way guaranteed to 
have the technical knowledge required to evaluate their own designs e.g., in terms of practical limitations, 
rules, and regulations. As a result, the client might end up with designs that may not be practically viable 
and a lot of wasted effort. This means that the client still needs to consult industry professionals, although 
only for technical knowledge. Our interviewee has also attempted this approach, and expressed that she 
preferred it, although a long time has passed and the project has still not moved forwards (interview 
==PAGE:8==
1 | Introduction 
2 
reproduced in Appendix C). It could seem that the consultants are able to help the client with their lack of 
technical knowledge, but the client must be able to manage the project themselves and know exactly what 
they want before it can be tested. 
The general needs of the professional industry have been examined through research (see section 2.2.1) 
and, as luck would have it, share many similarities to the problems described above. Several researchers 
have attempted to foresee the future trends of the AEC industry based upon the challenges it currently 
faces. These predictions are summed up through surveys and reviews of the industry dynamics made by 
McKinsey & Company into nine foreseeable industry shifts. Many relate to more mercantile aspects of the 
industry, however, several of them are highly relevant to the problems that the client faces. It is recognized 
that the industry needs to provide more customer-centric solutions such as "Direct-to-customer digital 
interaction channels and interfaces connecting to BIM [Building Information Modeling] and building-
management systems allow better integration into the value chain." (Ribeirinho, et al., 2020). Additionally, 
the research shows that future companies will integrate either by assertion of control of the whole value-
chain or by consolidation into larger corporations, which calls for end-to-end business models. "Actors 
from building services, such as architects and structural engineers, will provide their services more inte-
grated in the ‘one-stop-shop’ business models and less as independent actors in the building process." 
(Ribeirinho, et al., 2020). These changes are anticipated to happen through technical innovation 
(Ribeirinho, et al., 2020). 
Many of the aspects imperative to achieve integrated digital solutions such as those described above are 
represented in the principles of openBIM as formulated by buildingSMART. Through openBIM, build-
ingSMART identifies six key principles: interoperability, open and neutral standards, reliable data ex-
change, collaboration workflows, flexibility of choice of technology and sustainability (BuildingSMART, 
2021). The principles of openBIM constitute a set of clear strategies to approach the work towards the 
future industry prospects (see section 2.2.2). They will, therefore, be a significant consideration in the 
following evaluation of the current customer-centric solutions.  
An evaluation of the current practices, in the online configurators trying to create customer-centric solu-
tions, has been undertaken (see section 2.3.1) and will serve as the context to our solution. The current 
solutions can be split into those using a pre-designed approach and those using an object-based approach. 
The solutions based on a preconfigured approach tends to provide the users with a safe design 
==PAGE:9==
Introduction | 1 
3 
environment, where the user can configure their house by choosing between “allowed” solutions. As a 
result, the user is relatively limited in the degree of design freedom. In contrast, the configurators with an 
object-based approach provides the user with a limitless number of choices and configuration opportuni-
ties. As a result, the user needs technical qualifications, to obtain a favorable house design. The underlying 
processes of the examined configurators often appear to utilize a closed BIM-environment, restricting the 
flexibility and opportunities for collaboration. Additionally, most do not deliver interoperable solutions or 
provide any open and vendor neutral standards. Few, if any, of the existing customer-centric solutions 
incorporate any principles of openBIM although the benefits of interoperability, open standards, collabo-
ration, and flexibility of choice of data are made clear by buildingSMART. 
Our problem definition considered, we seek to develop a digital solution that provides both the means and 
the information needed for an end user to express and evaluate their design ideas and become an active 
part in the process of designing a custom-made house. Furthermore, we want the solution to be set up 
such that it allows industry professionals (e.g., engineers, manufacturers) to both utilize the information 
created by the user and contribute information and functionality to the solution themselves. This approach 
should, therefore, both facilitate providing users with the information they might have needed from such 
parties but will also enable collaborators to improve upon the solution in its entirety. 
==PAGE:10==
2 | Background 
4 
2. Background 
This chapter provides the reader with background knowledge regarding historical context, evaluation of 
the current approaches, and a discussion of the current practices in selected online platforms. 
2.1. Historic Context 
To understand the processes of the modern building industry, some historical knowledge about engineers, 
architects and craftsmen is essential. This is presented in the following sections, in the narrow scope of 
what is relevant for this project. 
2.1.1. Master Builder 
Historically, the engineers, architects and craftsmen rose from the decline of the master builder. The mas-
ter builder was the single person responsible for entire construction projects and an equally skilled engi-
neer, architect, and craftsman. They knew the laws of construction of the time—improved and shared first 
by word of mouth and later noted in lodge books. These laws were general rules of geometry and propor-
tions, such as the height of a beam as a function of its span or the diameter of a column being dependent 
on its height. The rules were scalable and independent of units—but always relied on the rod of the master 
builder, “the great measure”. Each construction project had one “great measure”, which had to be used for 
every dimension—from spans in vaults to diameters of columns (Powell & Powers, 2011) (Lluís i Ginovart 
& Jover, 2014).  
As the master builder himself oversaw everything from the design to calculations and the execution on 
site, there was minimal need for exchange of information and only one silo to search for information. 
 
Figure 1. Organizational chart of a Master builder workflow (Modified from (Emprin-Gilardini, 2000)). 
2.1.2. Digital Design, CAD 
The start of the digital design era, as we know it in the AEC-industry of today, takes its outset in Ivan 
Sutherland’s PhD thesis at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the early 1960s. Through his doctoral 
thesis, Ivan Sutherland developed Sketchpad, the first GUI enabling designers to draw directly on the com-
puter instead of communicating designs to the computer through text-inputs (Sutherland, 1964). Due to 
Master Builder 
Client 
Assistants 
==PAGE:11==
Background | 2 
5 
the expensive costs of implementation at the time, the early commercial CAD-software were only utilized 
in industries with complex or high-value products, where the time and cost savings made the implemen-
tation profitable (Llewelyn, 1989). Some of the benefits of CAD-system implementation have been high-
lighted by P.L. Selby at the sixth International conference and exhibition on computers in design engineering in 
1984 as the possibility of reusing designs, erase and implement changes with higher ease (Selby, 1984).  
The introduction of CAD in the AEC-industry changed many of the traditional design patterns, but the 
process was still rather linear—despite the easier implementation of changes. 
 
Figure 2. CAD project process graph (Modified from (PARTNERING I PRAKSIS, 2005)). 
2.1.3. Digital Design, BIM 
The forerunner to BIM, Building Description System (BDS), was developed and described in the 1970s, by 
Charles Eastman. His paper, “General purpose building description systems” (Eastman, 1976), describes 
how every component of a construction project should be considered as elements and stored in a database 
as attributes of the element.  
The geometry, attributes, and location information are all stored on a single record, 
called a form file. (Eastman, 1976, p. 20) 
Through the 1980s, serval software systems were developed with a BIM-approach. In 1984 the first com-
mercial BIM software for a personal computer were released under the name ArchiCAD (GRAPHISOFT, 
2020). Soon after followed by Tekla (Trimble, 2020), Vectorworks (Vectorworks, 2020) and PRO/Engineer 
(ptc, 2020). 
The development of BIM has streamlined the process and centralized the workflow around the file/data-
base. The process is still rather linear, but the digital tools have enabled it to be more efficient. Where the 
designers of the later phases in the CAD-era only had early phase information in the form of drawings 
from which they then had to draw their own designs, BIM made it possible to digitally exchange data such 
as the geometry and attributes of elements for direct use in the later phases. 
Client 
Architect 
Architect / 
Engineer 
Contractor 
Supplier 
Construction 
programme 
Proposal 
Project 
Execution 
==PAGE:12==
2 | Background 
6 
 
Figure 3. BIM lifecycle process (Modified from (DTU, 2021)). 
2.2. The Needs of the Industry 
To clarify the criteria of evaluation, this section will examine the needs of the AEC industry: first in relation 
to how the AEC-industry predicts its future and secondly through a vendor neutral collaborative process 
vision based on open standards. 
2.2.1. The Industry’s Predictions 
The future of the construction industry is, like many other industries, one riddled with uncertainty and 
also one that is facing progression in all parts of the sector (Groote & Lefever, 2016), (Nielsen, 2016), 
(Espersen, 2018), (Ribeirinho, et al., 2020). An analysis, The Next Normal in Construction, made by manage-
ment consulting firm, McKinsey & Company, consolidates the opinions of 400 leaders in the construction 
industry from across the world, representing many different segments of the industry value chain 
(Ribeirinho, et al., 2020). According to this analysis, changes are happening in the market characteristics; 
these changes are represented by an increase of clients wanting more complex products from their con-
struction projects (e.g., more information throughout the project, higher project complexity, higher degree 
of involvement etc.), but at the same time, they want the entire process of designing and constructing 
buildings to be simplified. Along with these market changes, disruptive developments are emerging within 
the entire value chain of the industry, indicating a future where segments along the value chain may be less 
divided—a claim that is shared by several actors in the industry, such as the Danish Construction Associa-
tion (Nielsen, 2016), the Danish Association of Architectural Firms (Espersen, 2018), and the Buildings 
Performance Institute Europe (Groote & Lefever, 2016). These developments are generally characterized 
BIM 
Conceptual design  
Detailed design  
Programming 
Tender 
Production  
Handover  
Operation 
==PAGE:13==
Background | 2 
7 
by a rising level of digital products and processes used throughout the industry, more advanced production 
methods, and a new generation of industry players and materials.  
The changes in the market environment along with the disruptive movements identified within the con-
struction industry combine into a wave of transformation of the industry dynamics. Such a transformation 
of the industry should be approached correspondingly, and, according to (Ribeirinho, et al., 2020), the 
future dynamics of the industry will thus be characterized by a series of shifts. More than 75% of the in-
dustry leaders surveyed agree upon nine shifts that are likely to occur in the construction industry, and 
more than 60% agree that they are likely to occur already within the next five years. As such, the shifts are 
not guaranteed to happen, and some may only happen to a certain degree. Many of the shifts identified by 
(Ribeirinho, et al., 2020) has also been identified by the Buildings Performance Institute Europe as upcom-
ing trends within the industry (Groote & Lefever, 2016). If the shifts are to happen, they are expected to 
bring about radical changes of the industry. Companies are thus expected to enter a disadvantageous stage 
or even succumb to challenging competitors, should they choose to disregard following the flow of trans-
formation outlined by the nine shifts that have been outlined below (Ribeirinho, et al., 2020). 
1. Product-based approach 
Building projects will be carried out using an increasing number of standardized components that 
are produced in factories, providing assembly line-like conditions that heightens safety and preci-
sion. Additionally, components or entire buildings may thus be promoted through online market-
places or platforms, where customers and clients may customize the products according to project 
specific needs. 
2. Specialization 
Companies will begin to redirect more resources towards specific niches in the market (e.g., focus-
ing on certain types of building projects) in order to better distinguish themselves from other com-
panies. 
3. Value-chain control and integration with supply chains 
Companies will start managing an expanded range of services along the value-chain of a construc-
tion project. For instance, an engineering company may obtain or partner with architectural firms, 
component manufacturers, contractors etc. The outcome of such market reorganizations might be 
companies conjugating their expertise into software platforms capable of managing entire projects 
end-to-end, thereby reducing friction and delay in project processes. 
==PAGE:14==
2 | Background 
8 
4. Consolidation 
To gain the capacity of resources required for the escalating need of value-chain control, innova-
tion, technology, digitalization and human resources, companies may need to expand their footprint 
and consolidate their resources with similar companies in order to unite both resources and exper-
tise. 
5. Customer-centricity 
As companies consolidate into specialized operations offering what approximates productized solu-
tions, they may face a rising need to distinguish themselves from other companies by focusing on 
creating an engaging brand with a certain level of service quality, laying the foundation of positive 
relationships with their clients. 
6. Investment in technology 
Along with the rise of productization in the industry, investments will have to be made in order to 
both research and provide the technology and facilities needed for the higher level of automation 
and advanced manufacturing processes. 
7. Investment in human resources 
Shifts in the industry characterized by an increasing amount of technology, digitalization, and inno-
vation, cannot be achieved without people skillful enough to bring them about. Thus, as the need 
for capable people rises, the companies may have to invest in human resources in order to both keep 
and attract employees with the necessary expertise. 
8. Internationalization 
An increase of productization and off-site component production may facilitate companies extend-
ing their geographical span of operations across country borders, which will also help in gaining or 
keeping an advantageous competitive position in the industry. 
9. Sustainability 
Sustainability is already an important aspect for many companies in the industry, but its significance 
is expected to increase and affect decision-making all across the value-chain, e.g., an escalated use of 
sustainable materials as options become increasingly viable, overall greener production processes, 
an increased use of environmentally friendly energy sources etc. 
In general, the shifts outlined above may be seen as directed towards a future where companies widen their 
field of expertise significantly in order to be able to invest resources in aspects such as innovation, tech-
nology, and sustainability as well as more humanistic services, such as those concerning employees and 
clients. These aspects all fit under the prospect of extending control of the value-chain and a rise of com-
panies that can carry out all parts of a project may thus be seen (Espersen, 2018). Some companies have 
==PAGE:15==
Background | 2 
9 
already begun offering such end-to-end construction projects. An example of this is the international con-
struction company, Katerra, who have integrated an end-to-end business model including services such as 
design, engineering, material supply, off-site manufacturing, and construction. With this model they seek 
to simplify and optimize construction projects (Katerra, 2020). 
Consolidating the functions of different actors along the value-chain may help mitigating friction in the 
design and planning processes, as cross-disciplinary information may be less restricted. This may inher-
ently reduce both risks and uncertainty, but centralized accumulation of all or most information also lay 
the grounds for new ways of handling entire projects. As indicated by (Espersen, 2018), (Ribeirinho, et al., 
2020), and (Groote & Lefever, 2016), the shifts identified arguably call for more integrated processes and 
thus new business models: 
There is an opportunity to consolidate the sector, supported by […] new business so-
lutions. Direct-to-customer digital interaction channels and interfaces connecting to 
BIM and building-management systems allow better integration into the value chain. 
(Ribeirinho, et al., 2020) 
Actors from building services, such as architects and structural engineers, will provide 
their services more integrated in the ‘one-stop-shop’ business models and less as inde-
pendent actors in the building process. (Groote & Lefever, 2016) 
In that regard, end-to-end online platforms may prove to be effective facilitators of many of the shifts 
outlined above and might act as a central stage for all segments of the value chain. Integrating all phases 
from initial concept to production and construction could be managed through a five-dimensional BIM 
model, thus considering both time and costs in addition to regular three-dimensional modelling. Incorpo-
ration of features in the platform such as automated engineering design computations and analyses, man-
ufacturing data, logistics etc. could provide the end user designing the building with live feedback or even 
automate a range of procedures. Feedback directly related to the building design could be applied in terms 
of suggestions or practical design limitations, e.g., structural constraints or element specifications. Such 
feedback could arguably reduce interface frictions along the value chain that would traditionally appear in 
later phases of the project. Along with the ability to initialize a project with a BIM model already in the 
early design stages, an integrated design platform could thus help enable a more informed design process 
==PAGE:16==
2 | Background 
10 
and better decision making throughout the project (Ribeirinho, et al., 2020), (Dissanayake & Mendis, 
2018), (Jing, 2020).  
2.2.2. Criteria for Success  
Attempts have been made to approach the current industry needs and shortcomings through strategies for 
the future processes. An example of this is the collaborative process, named openBIM, developed by build-
ingSMART. BuildingSMART is a global nonprofit organization striving to strengthen collaboration and 
digital workflows in the AEC industry through the development of open standards. OpenBIM is a vendor 
neutral collaborative process that is inclusive of all stakeholders, allowing the stakeholders to share their 
data across any BIM compatible software (BuildingSMART, 2021). 
openBIM processes can be defined as sharable project information that supports seam-
less collaboration for all project participants. (BuildingSMART, 2021) 
The approach is based on open standards and collaborative workflows and, according to buildingSMART, 
removes the problem of vendor constrained BIM data formats. Applications developed for openBIM elim-
inates disconnected workflows and breaks down the data silos (BuildingSMART, 2021). 
BuildingSMART presents at their webpage the following list, recognized as the principles of openBIM: 
- 
Interoperability is key to the digital transformation in the built asset industry. 
- 
Open and neutral standards should be developed to facilitate interoperability. 
- 
Reliable data exchanges depend on independent quality benchmarks. 
- 
Collaboration workflows are enhanced by open and agile data formats. 
- 
Flexibility of choice of technology creates more value to all stakeholders. 
- 
Sustainability is safeguarded by long-term interoperable data standards. 
The six principles of openBIM have a lot in common with the future industry prospects. Especially the 
previously identified shifts concerning product-based approaches, specialization, value-chain control and 
integration with supply chains, consolidation, customer-centricity, and investment in technology overlap 
the openBIM principles. The principles constitute a set of concrete strategies to approach the work towards 
==PAGE:17==
Background | 2 
11 
the future industry prospects. Used as such, they constitute important considerations in the evaluation of 
customer-centric solutions. 
2.3. Evaluation of Current Practices 
In the light of the construction industry’s vision of the future, this section seeks to discuss how the very 
same industry currently makes use of the digital methods available. Mainly how BIM is utilized to support 
close collaboration across stakeholders—compared to buildingSMART’s proposals in openBIM. 
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) describes that BIM is an integrated method for digitizing the 
process in the AEC industry. The entire process throughout the lifetime of a construction project should 
be centered around the digital models, and cooperation between various stakeholders of a project should 
use BIM as the focal point. BIM is used as a method that should support a closer cooperation in the indus-
try. Furthermore, a full implementation of BIM is denoted as a troublesome process due to its deep branch-
ing, which also causes actors without BIM knowledge to be unable to participate in the processes (DTU, 
2021). 
The current practices in the industry might not have reached the full potentials of BIM yet. The introduc-
tion of BIM has arguably strengthened the collaboration in the AEC industry and the current process is 
indeed centered around digital models. Yet, the exchange of data and the collaboration methods introduced 
with the current BIM workflow might not be optimal. The exchange format of the data embedded digital 
models is often handled in static or proprietary formats. Even if handled by an open standard like IFC, 
most programs cannot import IFC in a way that allows the full potential of sharing and collaboration across 
disciplines and stakeholders. Additionally, as described by DTU, a full implementation of an integrated 
BIM process usually entails exclusion of all actors without BIM knowledge. These shortcomings will ar-
guably lead to abrupt processes and optimization within specialized silos. 
==PAGE:18==
2 | Background 
12 
 
Figure 4. Reinterpretation of the BIM lifecycle process—illustrating BIM silos in the various phases. 
Figure 4 gives our interpretation of the current BIM lifecycle process, visualized as an adjusted and perhaps 
more realistic version of the BIM process in the AEC-industry. In the figure, every phase and participant 
have their own isolated BIM silo. The seamless exchange of shared data across different BIM compatible 
software, as described in openBIM, might not be as seamless in the current approach. Most commercial 
BIM software lacks the ability to import and dynamically utilize the content in open file formats. This 
derives abrupt BIM processes, as data might get lost in translation between various phases and stakehold-
ers. Thus, the different stakeholders optimize their own processes within their somewhat self-contained 
BIM silos. Some commercial BIM software vendors develop entire BIM-ecosystems such that data is share-
able across different applications within their own ecosystem. As a result, the process might tend to be 
non-vendor-neutral, since users are not able to utilize their application of choice, in a given workflow, 
unless it is a part of the ecosystem. The following outlines what we identified as the most critical gaps in 
the current approach. 
• 
The exchange of digital building information is handled in open file formats that are not fully im-
port-supported in all commercial BIM applications. This results in stakeholders unable to reach the 
full potential of the shared work. 
• 
As a result of the exchange challenges, many stakeholders end up optimizing projects within silos—
instead of utilizing co-optimization. 
• 
Persons unable to fully use BIM cannot participate—this is usually the case for the building owner. 
• 
Data and method are often fused into commercial ecosystems—this can lead to processes that are not 
vendor-neutral. 
Detailed design  
BIM 
Conceptual design  
Programming 
Tender 
Production  
Handover  
Operation 
BIM 
BIM 
BIM 
BIM 
BIM 
BIM 
==PAGE:19==
Background | 2 
13 
2.3.1. Current Customer-centric Solutions 
There are many customer-centric solutions made for house configuration currently on the market. The 
following section presents and discusses how the current online configurators have attempted to solve the 
gaps in the current approach. Research of various platforms and solutions for online configuration has 
been carried out. The platforms will be introduced and the most relevant platforms are discussed in detail. 
Innobrix1 is a platform for creating online house 
configurators. Their configurators are used by a 
range of sites and are all based on premade BIM mod-
els, created in traditional BIM software, and then 
presented in the online solutions.  
Habitat 212 is a German housing company dedicated 
to designing affordable houses. They have created an 
online house configurator based upon preconfigured 
solutions. 
Shape Diver3 Provides an online platform for pub-
lishing Grasshopper4 files. The logic and parametric 
definitions, created in a Grasshopper graph, are trans-
lated into user design options in an online environ-
ment. 
Hypar5 is a platform to generate, design and share 
AEC content, online. The platform is not directed to-
wards a non-professional user. Nevertheless, it 
pushes the limits for online platforms in the AEC-in-
dustry.  
 
1 https://innobrix.co.uk/  
2 https://habitat21.com/  
3 https://www.shapediver.com/  
4 Grasshopper is a plugin for Rhinoceros 3D for parametric modelling through visual programming. 
5 https://hypar.io/  
==PAGE:20==
2 | Background 
14 
Generally, the current customer-centric solutions can be grouped into a preconfigured approach and 
an object-based approach. In the preconfigured approach, the platform makes premade designs available 
for the user to customize and generally provides a safe design environment where the user can choose and 
combine “allowed” solutions. In the object-based approach, the user has total freedom to customize every 
object. 
Preconfigured Solutions 
Creatomus6 is a firm specialized in the creation and facilitation of online house configurators—they are a 
major player on the market for house configurators and has since 2017 developed configurators for busi-
nesses that are selling modular houses in the UK and Estonia. Through this project we consulted the CEO 
of the company, he explained how they translate the modular house solutions of their customers into BIM-
models containing various configurations. These BIM-models are then published in a version of their 
framework customized to the needs of the customer (see examples below).  
 
Figure 5. House configurators7 - by Creatomus. 
 
6 https://www.creatomus.com/
7 https://configurator.creatomus.com/project/tube?tab=review
https://configurator.creatomus.com/id/BJ2oJ26W3AWiepeui?tab=sizeshapetype
http://www.wearetown.co.uk/configurator/
==PAGE:21==
Background | 2 
15 
Common to all the configurators created by Creatomus is the underlying framework. The design is pre-
sented in a three-dimensional environment, where the user can explore the selected options by navigating 
around the scene. In the left side of the browser window, a selection menu is presented to the user. The 
selection menu is acting as a step-by-step guide, where the user is guided through the entire customization 
process. By utilizing a step-by-step menu it is ensured that the user considers all the available design op-
tions. In our opinion, the house configurators created by Creatomus communicates the various design 
options very well and is intuitive and easy-to-understand. Unfortunately, the degree of design freedom is 
limited to the amount of predesign compositions as the configurator only presents a static set of design 
possibilities, which have been uploaded in the form of predesigned BIM models. As the entire process is 
handled by a single company, it is hard to tell how well they handle the exchange of model data to external 
parties.  
In conclusion, the platforms of Creatomus enable users without any BIM knowledge to participate in the 
BIM process to some extent. However, since the choice of the user is limited to a choice between prede-
signed configurations of BIM models, it is a very limited participation. The user is not an active collabora-
tor in any design nor detailing. Additionally, the whole process is kept within the company and no external 
collaboration with other parties is suggested. 
Compared to the principles of openBIM, the platforms of Creatomus leaves numerous gaps. In relation to 
the previously identified principles of openBIM, we have evaluated the online configuration platform so-
lutions of the user-centric preconfigured approach, and tried to conclude whether each principle have been 
embraced by the solution: 
 Interoperability 
 Open  
✓ Reliable 
 Collaboration 
 Flexibility 
 Sustainability 
 
==PAGE:22==
2 | Background 
16 
Object-based Approach 
Another online house configurator is LIGNUM8, an architectural web application, developed by SPACE-
GOO9. LIGNUM’s concept is based on a collection of predesigned houses, consisting of user editable build-
ing elements. The user is guided through a step-by-step menu, consisting of four steps:  
1. Choose - the user selects one of the predesign houses.  
2. Customize the selected house.  
3. Ground - modify the terrain. 
4. Decor & edges - furnishing the house. 
The platform is rather complex, but it provides the user with many design options. In the customize step 
users can modify almost everything, drag walls onto new endpoint, insert, or delete a wide range of build-
ing elements (illustrated in the figure below). 
 
Figure 6. LIGNUM Customize step. 
In addition to the great freedom of design, LIGNUM gives the user two export formats. They can either 
export their design as a PDF floor plan, or as an IFC file (see Figure 7). The opportunity to export an IFC 
file, enables the user to communicate their design ideas into the current BIM workflow. 
The menu of the platform is complex and there are many options to consider throughout the design pro-
cess. This is both what makes the platform great, in regards of design freedom, but it may also daunt a non-
professional user. It is commendable that the customize step of the platform is kept in an 2D environment, 
 
8 http://www.spacegoo.com/lignum/index.php?constructor=Demo1 
9 http://www.spacegoo.com/  
==PAGE:23==
Background | 2 
17 
but enables the user, at any time, to inspect the impact of their design decisions in a 3D view. The provided 
export formats enable the user to communicate their design ideas into the current BIM workflow, though 
with the challenges discussed earlier. No further implementations have been incorporated to ensure a more 
seamless exchange of data, as described in openBIM. Throughout the design process, the user is not pro-
vided with any guidance nor information regarding buildability, and it seems like there are no constrains 
at all. This supports the freedom of design, but as a non-professional user, you might end up designing a 
house that is not buildable. 
 
 
Figure 7.  LINUM IFC export. 
Compared to the principles of openBIM, the LIGNUM platform leaves quite a few gaps. In relation to the 
previously identified principles of openBIM, we have evaluated the online configuration platform solu-
tions of the user-centric preconfigured approach, and tried to conclude whether each principle have been 
embraced by the solution: 
 Interoperability 
 Open 
 Reliable 
 Collaboration 
 Flexibility 
✓ Sustainability 
 
==PAGE:24==
3 | Methodology 
18 
3. Methodology 
The process throughout this project has been propelled by two primary methodologies—the agile software 
development methodology as well as the design science research methodology. The following sections will 
present the two methodologies along with outlines of how they have been employed in our project. 
3.1. Design Science Research Methodology 
The process of this project has been structured around the design science research methodology. As op-
posed to natural sciences, that often aim to understand some current reality, the goal of design science is 
to develop new solutions that solves an initial human problem (March & Smith, 1995). The outcome of 
using this methodology is often a sort of technological product and relevant demonstrations and tests 
hereof. These are then evaluated in terms of how well it manages to solve the initial problem. This assess-
ment is based on a set of solution objectives that work as metrics and define the goals that the solution 
should achieve to be considered an improvement compared to current solutions. Lastly, the problem and 
solution are to be communicated to relevant audiences (e.g., industry professionals etc.) so that they may 
review and assess the utility and effectiveness of the project outcome (Peffers, et al., 2006). The whole 
process is iterative and open, hence, a given solution may be demonstrated and evaluated before returning 
to the development step, demonstrated again etc. An overview of the steps of the methodology and how 
they have been applied in this project is outlined in Figure 8 and will be explained in more detail in the 
following sections. 
3.1.1. Problem Identification  
The problem identification step considers current practices or processes within a given field and identifies 
a problem in these aspects. The research of this problem should help acknowledge and justify the need for 
a solution (Peffers, et al., 2006).  
As presented earlier, we have through our research identified a problem regarding people that want to 
have a house built and also have a desire to be actively involved in the design process. We therefore rec-
ognize a call for a solution that may both enable the client to become a primary driver of the design process 
whilst also ensuring that the design process remains knowledgeable, i.e., the solution should address the 
need for the user to be informed about practical aspects that may affect the design. 
 
==PAGE:25==
Methodology | 3 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Overview of the design science research methodology that has been followed in the undertaking of this project. 
 
 
Problem  
identification 

It is difficult for an end user to be an active part of the design 
process. 
Objectives of  
solution 

Enable end-users to express design ideas. 

Develop informative design environment.  

Make data accessible to outside parties. 

Enable outside parties to contribute to the design process.  
Design and  
development 

Development of a proof-of-concept software platform. 
Demonstration 

Internal testing and demonstration for relevant parties. 
Evaluation 

Assess results from demonstration and relate them to solu-
tion objectives. 
Communication 

With the platform in its current state, no official papers outside 
this one will be published. 
 
STEPS 
PROJECT OVERVIEW 
==PAGE:26==
3 | Methodology 
20 
3.1.2. Defining Objectives of Solution 
The solution objectives act as a help to guide the development process towards specific goals. The objec-
tives should be inferred from the problem specification and may be seen as metrics that help assess the 
solution performance in regard to the problem (Peffers, et al., 2006).  
Given our problem definition and the arguments presented in the introduction (see section 1), the objec-
tives of the solution were recognized as the following: 
1. Support end users to effectively express their design ideas as functional digital objects. 
2. Provide an environment that facilitates communication of diverse information to the user. 
3. Make generated building information accessible to industry collaborators. 
4. Enable outside parties to participate actively in the design process, on their terms. 
3.1.3. Design and Development 
During the design and development stage, a solution should be formed, which aims to solve the initial 
problem. The development of the solution should therefore include determining and devising functional-
ities that may facilitate the realization of the solution objectives (Peffers, et al., 2006).  
In order to establish a solution that may embrace the objectives of the solution, we have developed a proof-
of-concept design platform—an application created in the cross-platform game engine, Unity (see section 
4.2). The design platform allows using simply shaped spatial elements to compose a building and the data 
generated from this process can be exported to various conventional formats. The user interface of the 
platform is set up to support functionalities that may facilitate communicating various information to the 
user during the design process. Additionally, we have made the platform modular, thus making it possible 
for any external party to implement custom functionalities into the platform. 
3.1.4. Demonstration 
The demonstration step is where the developed solution is exposed to a display of how well it solves the 
initial problem. This may be done through activities that apply the solution in suitable manners and which 
may be targets for evaluation (Peffers, et al., 2006). 
Due to the inherent iterative nature of both the design science research methodology as well as the agile 
development methodology, several demonstrative activities have been performed throughout the project 
==PAGE:27==
Methodology | 3 
21 
duration to demonstrate the validity of our solution—the design platform. This has been done as to help 
assess the current functionality of the platform and thus secure that the development progress towards a 
solution that adhere to the objectives the best way possible.  
In addition to continuous internal testing and assessment, we consulted relevant outside parties. Both dur-
ing and as part of the initial development stages, we have spoken to clients interested in becoming active 
parties in designing their own houses. As such, they are arguably quite representative of the kind of user 
the platform is targeted towards. In addition to potential users, we have been in contact with the CEO of 
CLT Denmark—a consulting company specialized in the use of cross-laminated timber (CLT) in construc-
tion projects of all sizes, including many single-family houses. This contact has helped regularly assess the 
current state of the design platform and, thereby, provided valuable feedback for the functionalities tar-
geted towards the professional parties. 
3.1.5. Evaluation 
This step concerns the assessment of how well the solution solves the identified problem. The assessment 
includes a comparison of the results obtained through the demonstrations to the objectives of the solution, 
but might also include aspects such as quantitative measures, surveys, or feedback received. Depending on 
the outcome of the evaluation step, the design and development stage may be revisited in an attempt to 
provide a solution that better solves the initial problem. 
Given the iterative nature of both the DSRM as well as the agile development methodology (see section 
3.2), we have evaluated our internal demonstrations continuously throughout the project. Overall, the 
external demonstrations offered a better understanding of the potential users of the platform, and thus 
allowed us to conduct both internal demonstrations and evaluations more effectively. Ultimately, the eval-
uations of the platform enabled us to assess how well we have solved our objectives as well as to reflect on 
how the solution may be improved by future work.  
3.1.6. Communication 
The last step concerns communication of the content of all the steps made throughout the project to ap-
propriate audiences, such as practicing professionals or other parties acting within the relevant field of 
research (Peffers, et al., 2006).  
==PAGE:28==
3 | Methodology 
22 
Due to the limited scope of this project in terms of time and resources the platform has only, as of now, 
been developed as a proof-of-concept. Official publications, outside of this paper, are therefore not deemed 
to be relevant as a part of this project. Considering the iterative nature of the Design Science Research 
Methodology, however, this thesis itself will become the communication in relation to the future devel-
opment of the design platform, so the inclusion hereof must—by its very nature—be relegated to future 
works. 
3.2. Agile Software Development 
During our project, we have adopted practices from the agile software development methodology into our 
process. In agile software development, the software product is continuously developed and tested in small 
iterations. This approach differs considerably from the more traditional waterfall development, where the 
whole piece of software is to be planned and developed in its entirety before being implemented, docu-
mented, and tested (Rigby, Sutherland, & Takeuchi, 2020). One of the primary motivations behind the 
iterative approach in agile development is that it allows software projects to continuously evaluate the 
efficacy and value of the software product and then instantly adapt the development in accordance with 
the evaluation (Fowler, 2020). In this manner, the agile development methodology can be said to share 
some essential aspects with the design science research methodology, namely the iterative approach to 
development, implementation, and evaluation. As such, the two methodologies may be said to complement 
each other.  
 
Figure 9. Illustration of the agile software development process, where the software is iterative developed and  
evaluated throughout the whole project duration. 
The development process of the design platform has been highly iterative. Many of the functionalities that 
were parts of the initial concepts of the platform have been changed due to—and several are direct products 
of—the evaluations carried out iteratively throughout the project duration. Although they are the results 
of iteration, all these functionalities will be presented somewhat sequentially in the following section. 
==PAGE:29==
Design and Development | 4 
23 
4. Design and Development 
This chapter describes the creation of our solution—a digital design platform. The project sought to inves-
tigate the possibilities of rethinking the early phases of the current building design process, towards being 
more user-centric and BIM-linked. The main foci of our solution have therefore been the involvement of 
the building owner, the data link between the building owner and the industry professionals and the re-
quirements of this approach. The development of the solution is shown, first, by an introduction to the 
visions for the concept and, thereafter, a comprehensive presentation of the platform itself. This is fol-
lowed by sections that details and examines the most vital aspects of the platform. 
4.1. The Concept of the Integrative Design Platform 
The concept of the integrative design platform can be compared to the idea of a genius master builder (see 
section 2.1.1). A mind that can hold all data, all design considerations, and all ideas and design concepts at 
once. A neural network where all information flows and interacts freely, such that all parts of the design 
can freely influence each other, and the design can reach the optimal solutions that will benefit the building 
as much as possible. The integrative design platform is a model, database, and toolset where every part of 
the building design process is linked and given the ability to inform every other part of the building design 
process. The designer can freely sketch and information from all aspects of the building (e.g., structural, 
thermal, architectural, and economic) both temporal and spatial are available to inform the design. The 
concept is visualized in Figure 10. 
 
Figure 10. The integrative design platform connects every procedure and participant of the design process in a central network of collabora-
tion. 
==PAGE:30==
4 | Design and Development 
24 
The central design platform, the modules and collaborators, and the links between them are all vital to the 
concept. The design platform (represented by the center cloud) is the central part, which the user inter-
acts with. Interaction could occur though a web generator interface that allows customization of the overall 
design and individual parts to various degrees. The design platform feeds the overall design information 
to its modules and collaborators which, in return, delivers information back to inform the design process. 
The modules and collaborators (represented by boxes and persons) fulfill functions that relate to the 
building design. From huge considerations such as structural analysis design to smaller considerations such 
as visualization. There could for example be modules for: Architecture, Economy, Time and planning, 
Laws and regulations, HVAC etc. Each of these modules can further be divided into smaller modules. For 
example, the architecture module can be split into modules such as visual qualities, daylight, room func-
tions, user flow and proximity. The links between them (represented by the lines) can be of variable prox-
imity. Some modules will necessarily be closely linked, and others can only be remotely linked depending 
on the properties of the modules, collaborators, and the data that is exchanged with the design platform. 
By structuring the building design process around this concept every part of the building design process is 
linked and given the ability to inform every other part. It is our hope that this will allow the user to design 
in an informed manner, based upon information from all aspects of the building. 
4.2. Implementation Overview 
A software application realization of the integrative design platform concept has been developed and im-
plemented as a part of this project. This was done to show how the concept can be materialized, and to 
further explore the challenges and opportunities of the concept. Within the time and resource limits of 
this project, it has only been possible to develop a proof-of-concept application. To further reduce the 
implementation of the proof-of-concept application it was chosen to focus on needs expressed by CLT 
Denmark, thus the application in its current state is focused towards generating single-family houses in 
CLT. The application works and can, although limited, be of some use. Although a lot of interesting func-
tionalities were found to be highly relevant to a fully developed design platform (see Table 4 in section 
4.7), only a lesser selection of these functions was chosen and implemented. We have strived to implement 
the features and functions that would represent the final platform as fully as possible. This section seeks to 
give the reader an overview of what has been developed and implemented, and how it can be used. 
==PAGE:31==
Design and Development | 4 
25 
The proof-of-concept design platform was implemented as a stand-alone executable software application. 
It was developed using the game engine Unity and the programming language C#. Unity was used as a 
basis for the design platform since it could supply a central framework to assist with a range of low-level 
functions, such as game loop, components, physics, graphics, and secure that the application could easily 
be built for multi-platform use, such that it could either be used as a web platform or a binary executable 
application. The programming was all done in C# and consists of about 8.000 lines or 323.000 characters 
incl. spaces, written in Microsoft Visual Studio. To make use of expanded functionality, such as PDF export 
utilities or mesh geometry handling, several software libraries were also included. The whole Unity project 
and the entire source code has been comprehensively documented and both project, data, code, and docu-
mentation has been made publicly available as an open source repository on GitHub. From there, it can be 
downloaded and inspected, for example using Unity and Microsoft Visual Studio. For further information 
see Appendix A. 
The overall structure of the implemented application can, due to its interconnected and multidimensional 
nature, be difficult to understand from the documentation alone. If the implemented functions and fea-
tures, instead, are grouped according to their use, the platform can be presented from the perspective of 
the user. As seen in Figure 11, the user interacts with the central design platform, represented by their 
desktop and can, from there, fulfill many roles and functions by interacting with different parts of the 
platform.  
 
Figure 11. The various roles and functions performed by the platform in relation to the user. 
Each of the screens in Figure 11 represents a different part of the platform wherein the user will interact 
differently, although in practice all these parts have been integrated into a coherent whole. Some of the 
parts will be more user oriented and take the form of user interfaces while others will operate in the 
==PAGE:32==
4 | Design and Development 
26 
background. A normal workflow through these parts of the program could for example be, first, that user 
designs by giving inputs of various kind to the platform. The design, however detailed it is, can then be 
visualized and analyzed. It can also be further detailed with the use of automation, and the results of 
analyses, statistics of design, products of automation etc. can be used to inform the user. Data, from results 
to design, can be shared in collaboration with other users. The features of the program that have been 
implemented to support each of these functionalities in the application, are structured in Figure 12. 
 
Figure 12. Overview of all the functionalities that have been implemented in the design platform. 
==PAGE:33==
Design and Development | 4 
27 
The platform is built with a graphical user interface with a menu system that lets the user find, interact, 
and use all the implemented functionalities. The menu system, and the functions of the program are built 
to be flexible, such that the functionality of the program can be extended by imported modules. This lets 
the user expand the design platform as discussed in section 4.7. The user can create a new project or load 
a preexisting one if a previous project has been saved. The data of the project is then stored in a flexible 
database, represented by an ontology that allows the model to take on different usable forms—an idealized 
model that are well suited for analyses and design, and a materialized model that is suited for detailing and 
drawings. The ontology is explained in section 4.5. 
The design is initiated by creating a new project. Metadata, such as name, author, address etc. is then 
added. The design framework allows the user to place spatial objects to represent the rooms and spaces of 
the building. These objects can be selected, whereafter they can be moved, rotated, or deleted and their 
shape can be modified further by manipulating the lines of the shape. Openings can also be added in the 
form of windows and doors and the specifics of the roof can be chosen. The objects of the design can also 
be classified and improved by attached data and parameters. The whole design process is guided by the 
limits and constraints imposed by the platform or imported modules. The design framework is explained 
in detail in section 4.4 below. 
Analyses can be conducted to test the design. As soon as the user begins to design, an idealized model (see 
Figure 25) is created and maintained alongside the design data. Design information, based on the user’s 
design, can be utilized by modules that analyze the design in multiple different ways. Currently, the plat-
form can analyze the walls to find statistics about CLT elements and the types of joints between them, 
calculate quantities and statistics about the spaces placed, estimate a rough total building price, and conduct 
simplified structural analysis to suggest which elements should be the load bearing ones based on the span 
of the elements above. 
Information about the design and the analyses that has been conducted can be delivered depending on 
how the design platform and its modules define the importance of the information. Information can be 
given to the user in several different ways. Exigent information might be delivered via pop-up messages 
while other information can be delivered via quiet methods, such as tooltips or colorization of design ele-
ments. A dashboard menu provides a central method that is the most flexible way to deliver information 
==PAGE:34==
4 | Design and Development 
28 
in the form of widgets that can be individually customized by the modules. The user interface and its in-
formative aspects are further examined in section 4.3 below. 
Automation is possible for many tasks in the platform. The idea is that external modules will be developed 
to further automate the workflow, but some automation has already been implemented to serve as exam-
ples. Currently the platform calculates fabrication data and BIM modeling of the building elements. The 
user can also create PDF drawings of their design and setup simple schedules and quantities of building 
elements.  
Visualization of the design is possible in two ways. While drawing, the user sees all the spatial objects 
that constitute the building model and can choose whether wall thicknesses should be displayed. To help 
the user get a spatial understanding of the scale and shape and as to evaluate the decisions made for the 
design, we have implemented a 3D Point of View (POV) visualization mode. In this mode, the user is 
placed into a 3D world in which the house is rendered. In here, the user controls the camera in the same 
way as in an FPS (first person shooter) video game and is free to walk around (and inside) the building to 
inspect the design interactively as if they were there themselves. The 3D POV mode is further explained 
and shown in section 4.3.1 below.  
 
Figure 13. Examples of idealized shape model (top left), automation of PDF plan drawing (top middle), export to gbXML (top right), export 
to IFC (bottom left) and export to Revit (bottom right, example house from Autodesk is shown). 
Information Accessibility is supported through a flexible database and export functionality. To allow 
the platform to be flexible and accommodate many kinds of data, a graph-based database was developed in 
==PAGE:35==
Design and Development | 4 
29 
which data as well as properties and relations can be stored such that they are easily found and used. The 
design can currently be exported into several formats that are widely used in the building industry: IFC, 
gbXML, and directly into Autodesk Revit. The database and export standards are further examined in 
section 4.6 below. 
4.3. User Interface 
In the development of the parts of the platform targeted toward the end user, a user interface is an essential 
aspect as represents the bridge between the information inherent in the platform and the user. It is what 
connects every slice of information tied to a project with the user and it is what facilitates the possible 
solutions to the challenges of the user. Without an interface that may properly communicate the funda-
mental functionalities of the platform, the user might be left incapable of performing their intended actions 
and the foundation of the platform falls apart as the platform cannot achieve its intended purpose. The 
user interface may therefore be seen as an essential aspect in regard to enabling the user to both compre-
hend information about their design process but also how to utilize this information. As such, an important 
point in the development of this platform have been to set up an engaging user interface that is easy to 
understand and which may facilitate the communication of information between the platform and the 
user. Additionally, the interface should help provide the users with the support they may need through 
their design process and do so without being too intrusive or confusing. 
As with most professional design software designed for desktop use, the scope of user interfaces in the 
context of this project concerns the employment of a graphical user interface, or GUI. A GUI consists of 
different graphical elements (e.g., text or pictures) assembled into interface content such as windows, 
menus, and buttons, that communicate to the user how they should navigate through the application and 
its functionalities. In the development of our GUI, we have attempted to compose the interface elements 
in a way that communicate their functions in the simplest way possible, the reason for this being it listed 
as a very important characteristic of an efficient interface by several acclaimed sources (Usability.gov, 
2020), (Interaction Design Foundation, 2020)).  
The process towards creating a graphical user interface has been highly iterative. Consistent with the na-
ture of agile software development, the GUI has undergone continual adjustments to be able to support all 
the features that have been added throughout the development process. In the early stages of the process, 
the primary intention of the GUI was just to provide some way to access the functionalities we were 
==PAGE:36==
4 | Design and Development 
30 
currently working on—an example from one of these early iteration stages are seen on Figure 14. As can 
be seen from the screenshot, the interface was somewhat plain and basic—a result of the limited function-
alities implemented at the time.  
 
Figure 14. Overview of the user interface as it appeared during early design iterations. 
As more features and functionalities were added over the course of the project, we began to structure the 
GUI with menus etc. and devote some attention to user friendliness. The resulting user interface is seen in 
Figure 15. The primary parts of the user interface overlays the 2D canvas, where users may design and 
communicate their ideas to the platform (see also section 4.4). If the users want to insert elements onto the 
canvas, they may pick such elements using the primary menu located at the left side of the screen. This 
menu is where the user may navigate through the platform and acts as an essential link between all func-
tionalities of the platform, such as functions to set up a project, design a building, inspect analyses in the 
dashboard etc. Sub-functionalities associated with the current actions of a given user is found in the con-
textual menu at the bottom of the screen; as of now, its primary purpose is to provide options to modify the 
geometry of the spatial elements. These primary functionalities and how they facilitate the flow of infor-
mation between the user and the platform are detailed further in the following sections.  
==PAGE:37==
Design and Development | 4 
31 
 
Figure 15. Overview of primary user interface (UI) elements in the design platform. 
Although a range of functionalities has been implemented in the user interface, it should be noted that the 
user interface is a proof-of-concept and may therefore lack both essential and desirable features that com-
monly exists in conventional applications. In the scope of this project, and as with the platform in its whole, 
the primary goal in regard to the user interface has been the development of a core platform, which sub-
sequent content (such as described in 4.7) may then evolve and improve. 
Primary Menu 
Proper navigation design facilitates access to information and may enhance the user’s understanding of a 
product (Justinmind, 2020). As such, for the user to access the functionalities and information provided by 
the platform, an efficient navigation in the platform has been essential. In most professional design soft-
ware users rely on menus to navigate their way through the application. Menus may provide an overview 
of all aspects of a program, as it allows users to look at possible actions whilst finding one suited for their 
situation.  
2D canvas 
Contextual menu 
Primary menu 
==PAGE:38==
4 | Design and Development 
32 
 
Figure 16. Overview of the primary menu, from which all primary functionalities of the platform can be accessed. 
In order to provide a simple, but flexible navigation system to enable the user to shift through the platform 
and its functionalities, a side menu has been implemented. The menu has been placed on the left side of 
the screen; a location that is included in recommended options by several organizations specializing in 
User Experience (UX) design (Yale University, 2020), (Whitenton, 2015). Our overall approach regarding 
the design of the menu is inspired by the Nielsen Norman Group’s guidelines for menu design (Whitenton, 
2015). As such, we have sought to create a simple, hierarchical menu where the functionalities have been 
separated into different tabs that correspond to a range of categories; as of now, there are six primary 
categories signified by distinct icons, which are listed in Table 1 below. The functionalities found on each 
tab in the interface are set up in a list, which has been divided into smaller subcategories using descriptive 
headings (see Figure 16). The only exception to this structure is the Dashboard tab, which is set up with 
widgets (see the Dashboard section in this chapter). Along with their names, every functionality is repre-
sented with an icon in order to aid the comprehension of the interface, which is consistent with the guide-
lines set up by Nielsen Norman Group (Whitenton, 2015). 
 
 
Home 
Project 
Build 
Dashboard 
Analyze 
About 
==PAGE:39==
Design and Development | 4 
33 
Table 1. Overview of tabs in the primary side menu. 
 
Home 
This is where the user may manage their project data, e.g., save, load, 
and export to different formats.  
 
Project 
This tab is for managing essential project information, such as project 
name, address etc.  
 
Build 
This is where the user may design the primary components of the 
building, e.g., insert spaces and openings as well as manage the roof. 
 
Dashboard 
This is where the user may inspect and manage all sorts of project 
information from the platform and the modules.  
 
Analyze 
While currently not implemented, this is where the user can select 
and interact with analysis tools, e.g., daylight analyses, structural anal-
yses etc. 
 
About 
A short description about the project and the platform. 
2D Canvas 
As stated, one of the primary purposes of the user interface is to facilitate the communication of the 
thoughts and ideas that the user may have to the platform—and optimally in a quick and simple manner. 
The primary interface for the user to express their ideas has therefore been realized through the imple-
mentation of a 2D canvas. The 2D canvas is where the user may express and work with their ideas and 
thoughts by inserting and manipulating spatial elements in order to design their house (see also section 
4.4). It is also where the user may inspect and modify the plan layout to their liking through interaction 
with the building elements. It is set up as a 2D plan view of the building as this provides the user with an 
overview and control of the building layout while designing. The canvas itself is designed to resemble 
squared paper, the primary purpose of which is to indicate the grid layout of the project, which the spatial 
objects snap to. Additionally, it currently serves as one of the primary means to provide a sense of scale for 
the user, as there are no measurements shown on the canvas as of yet.  
==PAGE:40==
4 | Design and Development 
34 
 
Figure 17. Functionalities found in upper right corner of canvas.  
In the upper right corner of the 2D canvas, a small range of functionalities have been implemented. For 
instance, the canvas view can be controlled using the View options menu in the upper right corner of the 
canvas (see Figure 18). This menu currently lets the user to choose whether to hide the wall lines allowing 
them to play with the spatial design in a more conceptual manner. The View options menu is set up to 
support modularity, allowing future implementations or modules to add additional options for the canvas 
view, e.g. options for specific building elements, room tags etc. Should the user want to explore their design 
more interactively, they may do so by engaging the 3D Mode, which is entered by pressing the 3D button. 
A more detailed description of the 3D Mode is found in section 4.3.1. Additionally, equivalent to many 
conventional applications, an exit button is found in the upmost right corner.  
 
Figure 18. The View options menu currently allows the user to toggle the visibility of the wall lines. 
 
 
Exit 
View options 
3D Mode 
==PAGE:41==
Design and Development | 4 
35 
Contextual Menu 
With the intention of facilitating information between the user and the platform, we have also sought to 
find ways to simplify this exchange. A step in this direction is to make information and possibilities that 
are relevant for a given task at hand easily available at the appropriate time. For this reason, we have im-
plemented a contextual menu. According to Nielsen Norman Group, who specializes in user experience 
design, a contextual menu may help users spend less time searching for relevant tools needed in a given 
situation as it narrows down the range of available options (Kaley, 2020). As such, a contextual menu may 
help informing users about their current tasks and communicate potential actions that may facilitate their 
advancement through their design process. At the same time, a contextual menu may better communicate 
actions that arguably may not be directly relevant in the primary menu, e.g., actions related to properties 
of specific elements etc. 
Currently, we have implemented a contextual Modify menu that make actions available related to modifying 
the spaces that the user has inserted onto the canvas. The menu and its available actions are shown on 
Figure 19. It appears at the bottom of the screen when the user is in select mode, which can be entered 
through the primary menu or if the user clicks on a space while not currently inserting a space. Though 
currently only set up to support modification of spaces, the aim for the contextual menu is to support 
different functionalities depending on any current selection, be it spaces or other specific buildings ele-
ments such as openings or walls.  
 
Figure 19. Contextual menu containing actions for modifying spaces. 
Dashboard 
One of the primary objectives in the conception of this platform is modularity—an objective that is effec-
tuated through the concept of modules (see 4.7). Many of these modules might need to display information 
to the user. Such information could be the results of analyses, statistics regarding the building, buttons for 
module specific interaction or something entirely else. This means that the design platform needs to 
Move 
Rotate 
Edit boundary 
Properties 
Delete 
==PAGE:42==
4 | Design and Development 
36 
support a flexible way for the modules to display their information, where it is easily accessible to the user. 
In order to give the design platform a central place where all information from the modules can be reached, 
a dashboard was developed. 
 
Figure 20. Overview of the Dashboard—a container for widgets that can display a wide range of information, such as schedules, charts etc. 
The visibility of the widgets shown in the Dashboard can be toggled via the ‘Select Widgets’ menu. 
The Dashboard can be reached from the main menu and acts as a container for rectangular graphical ele-
ments termed widgets (see Figure 20). Widgets provide a means of communication from any module to the 
user and can contain close to any type of 2D content, i.e., text and other graphical content such as charts, 
graphs, figures, images, animations etc. All the graphical content within a widget is defined entirely by the 
creator(s) of the corresponding module. However, in order to ensure a certain degree of readability and 
consistency throughout the Dashboard, size constraints have been implemented—thus, the Dashboard cur-
rently only supports two sizes of widgets: a large, full-width widget and a smaller, square widget of half the 
full width. The dimensions of the small widget are locked both vertically and horizontally, creating a square 
widget. This was done in order to simplify the layout by avoiding large gaps between widgets. The dimen-
sions of the large, full-width widgets are only locked horizontally but have no vertical constraints, which 
may prove convenient for displaying types of information that might call for a high degree of flexibility, 
e.g., schedules and lists which vertical extent often cannot be assumed constant. As they fit into a grid, the 
two available sizes enable a simple, modular setup of the Dashboard. The setup of the Dashboard is carried 
Dashboard 
Widget selector 
Widget 
==PAGE:43==
Design and Development | 4 
37 
out by inserting the large widgets in the order they are read internally in the platform while smaller widgets 
are paired before they are added to the Dashboard. The size of the Dashboard is fully flexible and automat-
ically fits any number of widgets. To enable the user to filter out information or modules they might deem 
unnecessary or irrelevant, a menu have been created in which the user can toggle the visibility of every 
available widget (see Figure 20). A widget is considered available automatically as soon as the platform 
reads the corresponding module, and it is subsequently added to the Dashboard environment. As such, 
modules created by any actor may be implemented quickly to provide the user with new features and in-
formation. 
As mentioned, the appearance of the widgets may vary as greatly as their content seeing as the creator(s) 
of the widgets have complete freedom to control the layout and appearance of their content. In this regard, 
it could arguably be beneficial to create a standardized system of module development, which could contain 
widget templates or provide functions to automatically set up widgets of types that are likely to be used 
often, e.g., lists, schedules, graphs, and diagrams etc. Such a system could help streamline the appearance 
and consistency throughout the Dashboard and thus facilitate an environment that is less likely to confuse 
the users. 
4.3.1. 3D Mode 
One of the primary goals of this project is to establish a design environment that better integrates the end 
user in the design process. To realize this goal, we have sought to facilitate the user’s comprehension of 
their project and design process as to provide them with the feedback needed to respond to the results of 
their own design process. As a given end user may be a layman, they might be unable to fully comprehend 
the scale and spatial relations of their design if it is only conveyed through a two-dimensional environment 
(Kovach, 2020), (Saleh, Rafi, & Woods, 2011). Consequently, we have implemented a 3D environment, 
3D Mode, which lets the users ‘walk’ around inside their designed house, allowing them to explore their 
design in a more intuitive manner. Inspecting their design in an interactive three-dimensional environ-
ment may help to provide users with a different, deeper, comprehension of their design than what they 
might grasp from viewing it on the 2D canvas (Kwartler & Longo, 2009), (Batty, et al., 2000). Additionally, 
according to an analysis of the impact of 3D visualization by (Saleh, Rafi, & Woods, 2011), the ability to 
review a building design in 3D encourages end users to participate in the design process helps to improve 
their understanding of the information inherent in the design.  
==PAGE:44==
4 | Design and Development 
38 
The 3D Mode may be engaged at any time by the user by pressing the 3D button in the upper right corner 
of the 2D canvas. Currently, entering 3D Mode completely exits the 2D Canvas and, as such, there are no 
design- or editing functionalities available while in this environment. The user may ‘walk’ around using 
the W, A, S, and D buttons on the keyboard and look around by moving the mouse. Screenshots from the 
3D Mode are shown on Figure 21 below. 
 
Figure 21. Screenshots from 3D Mode in which the user may interactively explore their house. 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
Design and Development | 4 
39 
4.3.2. Communicative Features 
As stated, one of the purposes with our design platform is to inform the user about their process and also 
help them design a solution that is buildable. One of the ways we attempt to achieve this is with a modular 
platform (see also section 4.7), i.e., allowing industry professionals to extend the capabilities of the platform 
through development and addition of their own functionalities. Such modules could carry out all sorts of 
analyses or evaluations, the results of which may have to be communicated to the user in some way. A 
module with high update frequency (see section 4.7.2) may have to inform the user in the moment they 
carry out a triggering action. Such information could be indicated by red coloring, as is currently done 
when an moved object overlaps another. However, more direct communication could also prove neces-
sary; e.g., one could imagine that the user wishes to place a door in a wall and a module, which performs 
structural computations, would want to prompt the user about the loss of its structural integrity. Other 
modules may want to provide information in a different way, e.g., prompt a message that the user’s changes 
affects aspects that are not directly visible, such as analysis results etc. 
In order to provide the platform as well as the modules with ways to inform the user in different ways, we 
have developed a small range of communicative features. These serve as easily accessible, standardized, 
functions of communication that are integrated into the design platform to be utilized by developers at 
will. An overview of the currently implemented communication features is given in Table 2. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
4 | Design and Development 
40 
Table 2. Overview of currently integrated communicative features in the user interface (UI) 
Notifications 
Notifications allow communication of messages that 
does not need any direct feedback from the user, but 
serves to provide information, e.g., about current sta-
tus etc. 
The notification functionality is set up so it can be 
called as a command with desired message, duration, 
and screen location. It is currently used to e.g., message 
the user about the project save location and for infor-
mation about controls in 3D mode. 
 
Modal windows 
The modal window allows communication of mes-
sages that require full attention from the user, as it is 
superimposed onto the screen, fading out all other 
screen content. The user must then consider the infor-
mation given and answer by pressing a button.  
The modal window is set up to support control of mes-
sage as well as the buttons. 
 
Tooltips 
Tooltips are short, informative notes that may be used 
to describe functionalities when e.g., hovering over el-
ements or visual objects, such as buttons. These are 
useful for any object that does not have an explicit text 
object attached.  
They are currently used to describe most of the buttons 
not accompanied by text, e.g., buttons in the upper 
right corner of the canvas as well as buttons in the con-
textual Modify menu. 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
Design and Development | 4 
41 
4.4. Design Framework 
The design framework is the part of the platform that handles the creative interaction between the user 
and the platform—it is where ideas are sketched, and dreams are formed. In order to let non-professional 
users, express their design ideas, and to provide a tool where laypersons may both explore and investigate 
their designs without the need of professional consultants, a solid and intuitive design framework is essen-
tial. As the design framework manages the interaction between the user and the platform, our development 
of the design framework has been inspired by characteristics of interaction design (IxD): 
IxD defines how users will interact with the design solution we have made through-
out the UX process. This includes evaluating target user groups’ technical know-
how, user needs, and our vision for the experience we want our users to have.10 
Related to our design framework, the characteristics of Interaction Design applies to various aspects. The 
user groups’ technical know-how is directly tied to our vision that the platform should embrace non-
professionals. It is of great importance that any layperson without any deeper construction knowledge or 
experience should be able to express their house design ideas through our design framework. The user 
needs may, in terms of our project, be considered a better way to interact with the professionals in the 
AEC-industry. Our vision for the experience is to create a design framework that entices the client to 
explore various versions of their design ideas and to produce a platform that does not make the non-pro-
fessional user feel insufficient in the design process. Furthermore, it is important for us that the user does 
not feel limited by the design framework. Instead, it should support their creativity. 
The resulting concept for the design framework, therefore, is structured around a simple and functional 
main topology that the user utilizes to design the primary components of their house—the spaces. To re-
duce the object limitations that this approach entails, two additional design functions are currently inte-
grated to enable the creation of openings and roofs—all of them are aspects to be explained in the following 
sections.  
 
10 https://www.uxpin.com/studio/blog/interaction-design-elements/ 
==PAGE:48==
4 | Design and Development 
42 
4.4.1. Topology 
In the development of the design framework, three overall concepts for user-design-input were consid-
ered. These concepts and our assessments of which concept best fitted our vision of the platform are pre-
sented below. 
1. 
The preconfigured solutions. This is a widely used 
procedure for online prefabricated house configura-
tors. Many module-based configurators (see 2.3) are 
available online, which consist of fully pre-modeled 
solutions. The client is allowed to pick between vari-
ous options, or type in their needs—this will then re-
turn the most suitable variant from the predeter-
mined solutions.  
2. 
Object-based approach. The success of commercial 
BIM software signifies the useability of the concept. 
The approach, in this scope, is to design a limited ob-
ject library for the design platform, consisting of the 
essential objects, to model the shell of a single-family 
house. The client can choose and fit various BIM ob-
jects together, controlled by preset constrains and 
physical roles.  
3. 
The drag-and-drop concept. This approach is in-
spired by the notion of spatial conceptualization and 
represents the overall form and relations between 
spaces, that may be dragged and dropped. By utilizing 
non-manifold topology11, it is possible to create sim-
ple representations of the building and its envelope 
and layout.  
 
 
 
11 Non-manifold topology consists of bodies composed by faces, the faces are either internal or external. Internal faces 
separate two non-manifold bodies; external faces separate a body from the surroundings. Non-manifold topology can 
share edges and it cannot be machined out of a single block (Aish, Jabi, Lannon, Wardhana, & Chatzivasileiadi, 2018). 
Figure 22. Visualization of the three user input concepts. 
==PAGE:49==
Design and Development | 4 
43 
In our assessment of the three approaches, we found the preconfigured solution approach to be too re-
strictive and without the ability to support a design framework that allows the user to freely play with and 
investigate their own ideas. Despite the certainty, which a less creative and self-confident user might re-
ceive from the preconfigured-solution-approach, its lack of design freedom has led to our dismissal of this 
approach. On the other hand, the object-based approach would likely entail uncertainty for a non-profes-
sional, as the ability to fit building components together would require the clients to have a great amount 
of construction expertise—the approach would thus likely exclude many potential users. In addition to 
construction knowledge, an object-based approach would likely force the user to familiarize themselves 
with 3D modeling, as the complexity of manually fitting together all the elements of a building’s shell would 
require great spatial understanding.  
Consequently, based on our intention of a platform to enable non-professionals to explore their own de-
sign ideas without being forced to consult professional advisors, we found that a drag-and-drop based 
approach would fit our design platforms requirements best. By utilizing the spatial enclosure of prede-
signed 2D spaces, we realized that it was possible to generate a three-dimensional building based on the 
2D design environment. The simple 2D representation of the drag-and-drop approach supports an intui-
tive interaction for the user, and the design process does not require a deeper construction knowledge nor 
spatial understanding. The process can be compared to a jigsaw puzzle—only without any wrong compo-
sitions. The user interacts with the design framework using the Build menu (see Figure 23), from which 
they may choose a desired 2D space shape and place it on the 2D canvas. The freedom of design dependents 
on the amount of different space shapes available to the user. The 2D canvas provides the user with a 
squared grid that helps to arrange the space shapes, since each shape snaps to the grid pattern. This helps 
the user to avoid mistakes from placing spaces close to each other without shared edges. Along with the 
grid, the user is guided through the design process by the edge color of the spaces, which turns red if it 
collides with another space.  
==PAGE:50==
4 | Design and Development 
44 
 
Figure 23. Design Framework UI. 
To ease the design process and to improve the user experience, a contextual modify menu is accessible 
while designing (see section 4.3 about the menu). From the modify menu, the 2D space shapes of the 
building may be modified to fit the user’s needs. 
 
Figure 24. The contextual space modify menu. 
The five implemented modification functionalities accessible from the modify menu are each described in 
the following table. 
Table 3. Contextual Modify Menu. 
 
 
 
Move 
A space can be relocated. A click on the 
move button in the modify menu enables 
the client to drag the selected space to a new 
location. 
Build menu 
Space shapes 
2D canvas 
Collision 
==PAGE:51==
Design and Development | 4 
45 
 
 
 
Rotate 
The selected space can be rotated by a click 
on the rotate button in the modify menu. 
For every click, the selected space is rotated 
90̊. 
 
 
 Edit Boundary 
The edit boundary button spawns handles 
at the edges of the selected space. The han-
dles allow users to drag and modify the 
shape. To avoid zero-length edges, the han-
dles resist modifications that would make 
an edge shorter than one grid square. 
 
 
Properties 
When a space is selected, and the properties 
button is pressed a properties menu shows. 
In the properties menu it is possible to clas-
sify the selected space as a room/function 
and/or set a custom property, as a string. 
 
 
 
Delete 
The delete button immediately deletes the 
selected space. 
 
==PAGE:52==
4 | Design and Development 
46 
Whilst the user is drawing and designing, corresponding internal data in the design platform is created 
and manipulated—e.g., the internal ontological definition of idealized model elements such as faces, and 
interfaces allows creation of elements such as walls and slabs. Although this data may be somewhat com-
plex, the user is only presented with a simple and lightweight conceptual representation of the data in the 
form of polygons (see Figure 25). Thereby, they only need to consider the overall design and layout instead 
of a stammering, computationally heavy and detailed model.  
 
Figure 25. The simple and lightweight representation of the design data presented to the user. 
Through this approach it is possible to let the user generate the desired data and the necessary models 
already in the early steps of their design process. Compared to the current flow of a BIM-based approach, 
this approach can be seen as an inversed version. A publication from Advances in Architectural Geometry 
2018 (AAG18) (Aish, Jabi, Lannon, Wardhana, & Chatzivasileiadi, 2018) describes this flow inversion as 
such: 
In traditional BIM, the 3D material representation is the defining model while the 
drawings are the derived models. With architectural topology, the idealized non-man-
ifold topological representation becomes the defining model and the 3D material rep-
resentation is now the derived model. (Aish, Jabi, Lannon, Wardhana, & 
Chatzivasileiadi, 2018) 
Where the current practice starts with a complex building model, from which a simple model for analysis 
can be extracted, we start with the creation of a simple non-manifold model already from the point where 
the user designs their building. At any later point, a more intricate material model consisting of manifold 
Design environment 
Conceptual model 
==PAGE:53==
Design and Development | 4 
47 
topology12 may be derived to enable visual representations of the building elements. The use of different 
representations in the form of non-manifold compared to manifold topology is further discussed by Aish 
et. al.: 
Typically, idealized models are far less detailed than material models, therefore lighter 
and more easily edited. In addition, the different topological components of the ideal-
ized model (faces, edges, vertices) can be used as the “supports” for the related building 
components in the material model. (Aish, Jabi, Lannon, Wardhana, & 
Chatzivasileiadi, 2018) 
As described, the two representations of the same model have a very different purpose. The non-manifold 
topology is therefore essentially used for conceptual representation whereas the manifold topology is used 
for concrete material representation. These two methods of representation have been implemented in the 
design platform in the form of the Idealized Model and the Material Model (illustrated on Figure 26). 
 
Figure 26. The idealized and material model representations. 
The idealized model is a non-manifold topology representation of the “drawing-input” of the user and 
provides a conceptual representation of the design in a way that can easily be used for a range of analyses 
in the early design phase. The idealized model is created and maintained in the background from the ac-
tions of the user in the design framework, already from the start. It is constructed in a way such that the 
entities and relations are easily usable, since non-manifold topology is directly relatable to a range of anal-
yses (Aish, Jabi, Lannon, Wardhana, & Chatzivasileiadi, 2018). The idealized model could for example be 
 
12 Manifold topology consists of bodies composed of faces; the faces separate the body from the surrounding envi-
ronment. The interior side faces the body and the exterior the surrounding environment. Manifold topology cannot 
share edges, but it can be machined out of a single block of material (Aish, Jabi, Lannon, Wardhana, & 
Chatzivasileiadi, 2018). 
Material Model 
Idealized Model 
==PAGE:54==
4 | Design and Development 
48 
used for energy analysis requiring using the collection of spaces as representations of various thermal zones 
and the adjacency between those. Another example of use could be structural analysis based on the Finite 
Element Method (FEM). The information for the FEM analysis could easily be obtained from the idealized 
model in the form of faces, edges, and vertices, representing structural elements. Generally, there are a 
plethora of opportunities for use of the non-manifold topology data from digital fabrication analysis to 
architectural circulation analysis. 
The materialized model is a manifold topology representation of the “drawing-input” of the user and 
provides the necessary connection from the ideas of the user to the realities of the design and its objects, 
as they are conventionally understood by BIM. The materialized model is derived and maintained from 
the idealized model. For example, the vertical faces of the idealized model are the basis for walls while 
horizontal faces are the basis for slabs. The translation into the materialized model is performed automat-
ically but both the user and the extension modules (see section 4.7) can affect it to a varying degree. The 
materialized model is equivalent to the representation of multiple industry BIM programs and will be the 
foundation of further element detailing and collaboration with conventional industry disciplines. The ma-
terialized model can also help the user to understand their design spatially. The materialized model is 
shown to the user when the building is visualized in the 3D POV mode, in which the user can explore the 
spatial impact of their design decisions (see Figure 21). 
In sum, the design platform offers a system for the non-professional user to render their ideas and designs 
into three distinct representations: the design drawing, the idealized model, and the material model. The 
ideas of the user are made usable through the design framework and happens from the very start of the 
design process. 
4.4.2. Openings 
Openings can also be added to the building by the user. By utilizing openings, the user can plan the flow 
through the house. As it might seem difficult to some non-professionals, flow planning is not required to 
generate accessible building information. However, if the user wants to explore the internal design in 3D 
mode, it is not possible to enter the building without doors. 
Openings relate to either one or two faces, depending on their location in the building (further explained 
in section 4.5). The user manually installs openings by choosing either a door or a window, as illustrated 
in Figure 27. After choosing the desired opening type, a 2D representation follows the mouse position, 
==PAGE:55==
Design and Development | 4 
49 
snapping to the closest canvas grid intersection. The representation of windows and doors differs in both 
size and color to inform the user of their type. As the mouse approaches the inserted spaces, the opening 
snaps to the closest space edge. This triggers the activation of a sub grid and the opening is rotated such 
that it aligns with the direction of that edge. The size of the sub grid is currently set to a tenth of the canvas 
grid—this is illustrated with yellow lines in the figure below. The sub grid was implemented to support a 
more detailed installation of openings.  
 
Figure 27. Installing openings in the 2D layout. 
In addition to the flow planning, the installation of openings adds further details to the material model. As 
for the spatial topology, a simple representation of each opening is added to the idealized model. From the 
idealized representation of openings, a representation corresponding to the opening type, is added to the 
material model. The material model wall of which an opening is placed in, is regenerated as the geometry 
of the opening must be subtracted before the opening object is installed. As for the 2D representations of 
openings, the material model representation differs as illustrated below. 
Openings 
Door snaped 
to canvas grid 
Sub grid 
Door snapped 
to sub grid 
Window 
==PAGE:56==
4 | Design and Development 
50 
 
Figure 28. Material model representation of openings. 
4.4.3. Roofs 
No house can be built without a roof, and we have therefore implemented a function for the user to design 
a roof for their house. As the user is not in guaranteed to be qualified to evaluate their own designs in 
terms of practical limitations, rules etc., designing a roof may arguably be a technical task, and we have as 
such currently implemented a fully automated roof generation procedure. The roof creation is based on 
the spaces that the user has placed onto the canvas and covers them all with one uniform roof. This auto-
matic creation allows for countless of different roof designs to be quickly assessed without the user having 
to draw anything—a few examples of variations are illustrated on Figure 30 below. 
 
Figure 29. Examples of the three current roof types generated in using different angle- and overhang settings. 
The user may control the design of the roof using a small range of settings that may be managed using the 
Roof menu, which is accessed through the Build tab (see Figure 30). From this menu, users may choose 
between three types of roof: flat, hipped, or gabled. Additionally, the user can control the overhang as well 
as the angle—the latter only enabled for hipped and gabled roof types. Based on the settings chosen, the 
roof is then automatically created and can currently be inspected by entering 3D mode. 
Window 
Door 
==PAGE:57==
Design and Development | 4 
51 
 
Figure 30. The Roof menu allows the user to manage the roof settings. The user can change the roof type  
as well as the overhang and angle of the roof. 
The automatic roof creation has been made using a straight skeleton algorithm (Aichholzer, Aurenhammer, 
Alberts, & Gärtner, 1995), in which the topological skeleton of the roof boundaries, seen as a closed poly-
gon, is determined. A straight skeleton may be regarded as the interference patterns resulting from an 
inward wavefront propagation of the polygon edges (Biedl, Held, Huber, Kaaser, & Palfrader, 2015). Ex-
amples of this procedure is seen on Figure 31, where the resulting straight skeletons are shown in green 
for two different polygons. The procedure provides a way to quickly generate a roof with uniform angles 
on all faces corresponding to many traditional roofs (Sugihara & Khmelevsky, 2018) (Kužel, 2018).  
 
Figure 31. Visualization of straight skeletons (shown in green) of two different polygons (black outlines). 
The straight skeleton algorithm has been implemented using an external library, Procedural Toolkit13, which 
contains various functions for procedural generation of geometry, including functions for determining the 
straight skeleton of a polygon. The functionality provided by this package generates a closed mesh of the 
whole roof using the external edges of all spaces placed onto the canvas. This closed mesh corresponds to 
the idealized model of the roof. In order to gain both more control of the idealized model as well as the 
ability to generate a materialized model, the individual faces of the roof are identified by analyzing the 
mesh geometry and iteratively grouping mesh faces that share vertices and normals. With all roof faces 
 
13 https://github.com/Syomus/ProceduralToolkit  
==PAGE:58==
4 | Design and Development 
52 
individualized, the design of the roof (i.e., creating gables and overhang) may then be controlled by ma-
nipulation of the face vertices. 
 
Figure 32. Example of a gabled roof created using the implemented straight skeleton algorithm. 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
Design and Development | 4 
53 
4.5. Ontology 
The ontology provides a system wherein design and building data is made accessible and usable to every-
one. It is vital to the concept of the design platform that the design data can be used—to its full potential—
by the user as well as every collaborator. The collaborators will, naturally, have very different needs com-
pared to the user, end even have different needs among them according to their methods and procedures. 
The various needs require that the design and building data is flexible in both representation and relation. 
The ontology, therefore, seeks to translate the client’s “drawing-input” into both the idealized and materi-
alized model with different possibilities as described in section 4.4.1 above. 
The ontology of the platform is structured in a hierarchy of object classes. They represent the most im-
portant elements and relationships of the building and are structured into a hierarchy. The classes of the 
ontology are shown as a UML class diagram14 in Figure 33. 
 
Figure 33. The classes of the ontology drawn as a UML class diagram. 
 
14 https://www.conceptdraw.com/How-To-Guide/diagrams-software-tools-for-design-uml-class-diagram 
==PAGE:60==
4 | Design and Development 
54 
The idealized or conceptual classes starts with the Building at the top of the class hierarchy. It is seen as a 
conceptual representation of the whole building model and acts as a container and constructor of building 
elements and does not contain much informational data. Immediately below the building level, the hierar-
chy is structured into spaces, each relating to a room or spatial function in the building. As shown in section 
4.3, the Space is the main modeling object that the user interacts with to design the building. Spaces con-
tain data relating to the physical building space and contained building elements, and they possess a number 
of faces. A Face can be thought of as the boundaries of a space and they serve the purpose of structuring 
the relations to other spaces and building elements that are adjacent to its parent space.  
The relation classes comprise the Interface and Opening classes, which are more abstract objects that 
contain information about the boundaries of objects that can be shared with other objects, for example the 
section of a wall shared between two rooms (or between a room and the outside, in the case of an outer 
wall) can be represented by an interface and the section of wall wherein a door or window is placed can be 
represented by an opening. They both define a sub-area of a boundary object (e.g., a face) and contain the 
properties and information data of this sub-area. In the case of the interface, this sub-area is found based 
on the location of the other spaces, and in the case of the opening, this sub-area of the face is inferred from 
the location where the user has chosen to place a door or a window. 
The materialized building elements are represented in the last type of objects: Wall, Slab, Door, and 
Window. The purpose of these objects is to give the elements 3D representations that can be compared 
to their equivalent real world physical building elements and serve as the basis for visualizations and draw-
ings. 
The whole object hierarchy have been used to model a simple example building consisting of two spaces 
with a door between them and a single window to the outside. This model is shown in Figure 34 and, for 
the same example, the relationship references between all the class objects in the underlying data structure 
is shown in Figure 35. The classes and the elements they represent are given identical names and it is 
suggested to compare the two figures to understand how the classes of the ontology relate to the building 
model. It should be noted that all the physical objects, such as the walls, slabs, doors, and windows, are not 
represented in Figure 34, as they would occupy the exact same place as their interfaces and openings. 
==PAGE:61==
Design and Development | 4 
55 
 
Figure 34. Example of a simple building and identification of its data class objects. Note: all material building elements have been left out. 
 
Figure 35. Class relationship of all the objects in the example. 
In sum, this object class ontology can be seen to allow both the spaces, as well as all relations between 
objects and their boundaries to be defined and represented. The materialized model classes are easily im-
plemented since they mainly consist of a representation (which could come from anywhere) and only de-
pend upon reference to a single relation class. To allow for expansion of these objects, for example to 
objects representing furniture or technical systems, new material classes might be developed. It is thought 
that general material element classes using imported geometry could fill this role, e.g., by the creation of 
modules that allow the user to utilize external building component libraries, such as BIMobject15. This has 
 
15 BIMobject (https://www.bimobject.com/) is an online library of dynamic digital building objects, provided by the 
manufacturers. We consulted the company, and they are open for collaboration in innovative projects.  
 
==PAGE:62==
4 | Design and Development 
56 
not been deemed within the scope of this project and has therefore not yet been developed. The space-
based modeling approach combined with the ontology, is therefore, shown to provide a system to repre-
sent the building design in a way that is both easily maintainable and can supply data with a high degree of 
usability. 
4.6. Building Information Accessibility 
The accessibility of information to all the active parties of the design process is every bit as important as 
the integration of the user. If user and collaborator cannot be allowed to participate fully, the result—coun-
ter to the goals of this project—will be two separate design processes where the user is only actively in-
cluded into one of them. While the inclusion of the building owner is obvious, since this is the central goal 
of the platform, the ease of use and accessibility of the industry professionals need to be kept in mind, to 
secure that they are allowed to participate fully as well. Hence, the goal is to create the design platform in 
such a way that the design is as accessible as possible. 
In deciding our approach to information accessibility, design collaboration can be seen as a combination 
of procedures and data. The data is a digital representation of the design while the procedures are what 
creates and modifies it. The data might be amorphous such that it can fit the processes of each professional 
collaborator. The methods, however, are often firmly ingrained in the procedures of each professional 
collaborator. To make sure that the data generated by the design platform is usable to everyone involved 
in the process the data needs to be available to be used in whatever environment the collaborators prefer. 
For some collaborators, this may take place in the design platform, which will be detailed in section 4.7. 
As seen in Figure 36 this establishes some requirements for the collaboration. 
 
Figure 36. The data exchange to each collaborator. 
In other words, the communication to the collaborators must be in a standardized format that they can use 
in their further work and the communication from the collaborators must be flexible enough to make 
room for all information no matter how well standardized or defined it is. 
==PAGE:63==
Design and Development | 4 
57 
4.6.1. Export Standards 
The export capabilities of the design platform directly influence the platform’s ability to collaborate with 
external parties. It is therefore necessary to find a method to integrate the design, as fully as possible, into 
the existing workflow of the collaborator. A major consideration in this development has been to find the 
right formats and secure that everyone can be allowed to receive and continue the work from the design 
platform at any point in the process. 
The building information of the platform can be exported into multiple widely used formats including 
gbXML, IFC and Autodesk Revit. These formats were chosen for the proof-of-concept program to repre-
sent a wide selection of industry standard formats. If none of these formats fit a collaborator, it should be 
noted that section 4.7 explains the possibility to further expand the export ability by defining and imple-
menting one’s own export function through an extension module. In a finished design platform imple-
mentation, several more export options might also be added. 
Green Building XML Schema (gbXML) 
gbXML is a format “[…] developed to facilitate the transfer of building information stored in CAD-based 
building information models […] to design more energy efficient buildings” (Green Building XML Schema, 
Inc., 2021). With its focus on energy, it has been widely used to exchange analyses and results where 
gbXML import and export functionality is currently possible “[…] in over 50 engineering and analysis 
modeling tools, gbXML has become a defacto [sic.] industry standard schema” (Green Building XML 
Schema, Inc., 2021). 
Despite its interoperability gbXML is a static format that is not usually modified and is often used as the 
intermediate sharing format between different programs, so few programs allow the user to modify the 
data directly in the format, yet analysis results and such data can be appended to it and saved again. The 
wide support for gbXML allows the design platform to communicate its data to a wide array of different 
kinds of software merely by the implementation of gbXML export functionality. The gbXML export func-
tionality is implemented in the design platform in the form of a button that will export all the relevant 
parts of the design into a gbXML file, which can later be imported into another program. 
Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) 
IFC is one of the most widely used and compatible formats of the building industry. It is developed by 
buildingSMART as “[…] an open, international standard and promotes vendor-neutral, or agnostic, and 
==PAGE:64==
4 | Design and Development 
58 
usable capabilities across a wide range of hardware devices, software platforms, and interfaces for many 
different use cases” (buildingSMART, 2019). According to buildingSMART there are hundreds of pro-
grams that can create or use IFC data (buildingSMART, 2019). 
Since IFC has become the industry standard, it is practically guaranteed that exporting into this single 
format will secure a standardized and well supported way to communicate with the majority of the pro-
grams used in the industry. A possible downside is that while the standard is open, it is left to each company 
to implement it themselves, and the data can be interconnected in multiple ways which makes it hard to 
make changes to an IFC file. To change elements of an IFC file it would usually have to be imported, 
changed, and then exported. This process can easily lead to lost data since the full standard might not be 
implemented or used for both the import and the export in all programs. IFC, therefore, can be said to 
offer a widely supported way to share static data from the design platform, but will be hard to modify. 
As described by Building Smart, IFC is usually employed by software tools that “[…] will provide interfaces 
to end users to export, import, and transmit data in some IFC format” (buildingSMART, 2019). This ap-
proach was followed in this project and the IFC export function was implemented as a button that will 
export the building data from the design platform. 
Autodesk Revit (RVT) 
Autodesk Revit is a BIM design platform, and thereby has a lot in common with this project. As described 
by Autodesk, “[Revit] is a design and documentation platform that enables you to use a single, integrated 
building information model to conceptualize, design, and finally document a project” (Autodesk inc., 2019). 
Revit allows multiple disciplines to work, detail and share their design and is used by professionals as their 
primary design platform. 
The data of the platform, in its native form, is usually inaccessible to applications outside of Autodesk’s 
software ecosystem, which seem to be due to the commercial basis of Autodesk. Data will usually have to 
be exported to a static format to be used in other applications. Using this singly directed data flow, it can 
be difficult to manage frequent changes to and from Revit. 
Since this project uses the single family CLT home as an example and CLT Denmark uses Revit in their 
modeling and fabrication programming, it was decided that the platform should be able to export design 
data into Revit. Many file formats can, at this time, be imported into Revit, but will mainly function as 
static geometry overlay and will not be modifiable. To obtain a sufficient link directly from the design 
==PAGE:65==
Design and Development | 4 
59 
platform to the production of CLT panels, the import into Revit should, instead, be imported into native 
Revit objects that are modifiable in Revit afterwards. Due to the closed commercial nature of applications 
such as Revit, it requires a remodeling of the design from inside Revit. Therefore, the data transfer to and 
from Revit have been developed as a Revit add-in, such that it can be executed inside the Revit model. 
Section 4.7 will further discuss the process wherein the design platform should be open to the development 
of a similar integration into other programs. 
4.6.2. Flexible Database 
In order to support active collaboration, the design platform must also be able to import data. If this was 
not the case, the platform would—contrary to our objective—only function as a start point for the design 
process. In other words, the ability to receive data from every imaginable collaborator is very important 
for the design platform to serve its purpose well. The true modular design platform is envisioned to be 
open for use in designing any imaginable building and, as such, the number of collaborators and their data 
requirements cannot be known before the project has begun. 
To provide a data structure that may properly comprehend the complex composition of information of a 
building, we have employed a property graph structure. Additionally, graph databases are highly flexible, 
as they allow the addition of new data into the existing structure without losing functionality (neo4j, 2020). 
As such, with the design platform currently being in a proof-of-concept state, there is not a critical neces-
sity to map out extensive specifications with regard to future use cases. The graph structure has been im-
plemented using neo4j, which is a property graph database software that can be used in a variety of pro-
gramming languages and supports both online and offline databases (neo4j, 2020). A property graph is a 
set of nodes (objects) and edges (relationships) that may both be assigned any number of properties, pro-
vided as key-value pairs. As an example, the relationship characterized by a door hosted in a wall could be 
represented by two graph nodes connected by an edge (defining the relationship of the wall having an 
opening) as shown in Figure 37. All three entities can then be assigned a range of properties, such as their 
dimensions etc. 
==PAGE:66==
4 | Design and Development 
60 
 
Figure 37. Example of two graph nodes (two building elements) and an edge (their relationship) in a prop-
erty graph. All three entities can have any number of properties, given as key-value pairs. 
Contrary to the commonly used relational data structure, i.e., tabular datasets divided into columns and 
rows, where the relationships between the data is pre-defined (Amazon, 2021), a graph data structure al-
lows for a more dynamic approach, as new data and relationships can be added without compromising the 
original data. Additionally, graph databases are often hundreds to thousands of times faster than relational 
databases, making them highly efficient with regards to deep and complex queries (Vukotic & Watt, 2014). 
Graph databases can be implemented in different ways and there exists different structures to choose from. 
The property graph is suitable for use in connection with an object-oriented programming language, such 
as C#, which Unity—and therefore our design platform—is built with. The objects created by the user, such 
as spatial elements, openings etc., are currently stored using the minimal amount of data deemed necessary 
to recreate objects with the same exact specifications along with parameters that might be useful to access 
through the database. As an example, the minimal amount of data currently needed to recreate a space is 
its shape (e.g., L-shaped), type (e.g., bathroom) as well as its corner vertices. A sample excerpt of the data 
stored for a space is seen on Figure 38.  
 
Figure 38. Sample of data that is saved for a single L-shaped spatial element, in JSON format. 
Wall 1 
 
HAS_OPENING 
Door 1 
id: 213 
type: NVQ 
height: 2800 
thickness: 150 
id: 187 
type: 9M 
height: 2100 
width: 900 
id: 41 
direction: out 
 
{ 
        "id": 4389, 
        "name": "lshape", 
        "shape": 1, 
        "type": 15, 
        "area": 17.5, 
        "vertices": [ 
            "(3;0;3)", 
            "(3;0;-5)", 
            "(0;0;-5)", 
            "(0;0;0)", 
            "(-6;0;0)", 
            "(-6;0;3)" 
        ] 
    } 
==PAGE:67==
Design and Development | 4 
61 
At the current stage of the design platform, users are able to both save and load their design both to/from 
the neo4j database (run on a local server), as well as to JSON format, which neo4j supports. Interacting 
with the neo4j database either requires hosting a local database (requiring installation of their software) or 
connecting to a remote database, which has not been employed at this point. The ability to save in JSON 
format, however, provides users with a way to save and load their projects without a connection to a neo4j 
database. Additionally, the format works well for interchanging data, as it is completely language inde-
pendent and it may therefore facilitate outside parties both accessing and utilizing the data generated 
through the platform.  
As a result, our proof-of-concept implementation of this project has shown that a graph database can be 
used, but any significant potential that might be gained from using the database has therefore not been 
realized yet. The graph data structure established in its current form, however, helps provide a foundation 
from which future functionalities may benefit from and supports the overall modular nature of the design 
platform. For instance, the property graph structure conforms well with our intention of enabling outside 
parties to easily access, utilize, and enrich the data generated through the platform. As mentioned, the 
neo4j database system supports online hosting, meaning that the database could act as a central hub for all 
data to be stored, always accessible for all involved parties. This would help ensure that all parties always 
operate with the same information and make changes easier to manage, since they can be handled as soon 
as they appear, e.g., by using event-driven functionalities to automatically adapt to incoming changes. 
4.7. Active Participation 
The vision of the design platform strives for every collaborator of the building design process to participate 
actively and concurrently therein. This means that every professional participant, the architect as well as 
the production company, needs to be able to have their say on several things, including for example limi-
tations, considerations, and optimal choices. 
Participation, in accordance with the vision, contains some inherent challenges, which must be considered 
in the development of any solution. First, every participating individual can have different needs and 
wishes and, second, the number of professional participants, involved in any given project, may change 
drastically from project to project. To solve these challenges, a system for active and concurrent participa-
tion is necessary, based on rules that can accommodate everyone and the specific tasks left in an open and 
undefined manner. 
==PAGE:68==
4 | Design and Development 
62 
Therefore, we chose to separate the platform into multiple parts, a core, and several modules. The core of 
the design platform connects the user to the ontology and data structure through the functions of the 
graphical user interface. The idea is that all other functionality is built into individual software modules 
that can be enabled and disabled according to the needs of the user and its collaborators and even be de-
veloped completely detached from the design platform. In this way, any professional collaborator can freely 
define their own participation through the development of their own extension module. 
4.7.1. Module functions 
Each extension module can, in theory, supply any imaginable function to the user of the platform. In terms 
of the established building industry functions, each might be imported into the platform in the form of a 
module. We have compiled a table of functions (mapped to their traditional discipline), as shown in shown 
in Table 4, each of which could be included in the design platform in the form of an extension module.  
Table 4. Industry functions that can be relevant as extension modules grouped by their traditional discipline. 
The underlined functions have been implemented in the proof-of-concept to some degree. 
Architectural 
Indoor Climate 
MEP 
Visualization 
Facilities  
Management 
Visual qualities 
Materials 
User flow 
Proximity 
Accessibility 
Interior design 
Daylight 
Ventilation 
Thermal comfort 
Acoustics 
Air Conditioning 
Mechanical 
Electricity 
Plumbing 
Thermal insulation 
Solar heating 
Rapid prototyping 
3D visualization 
Virtual reality 
Augmented reality 
Existing surroundings 
Topography 
Maintenance 
Security 
Cleaning and gar-
bage 
Production 
Project  
Management 
Structural 
Environment 
Fire Protection 
Interoperability 
Buildability 
Fabrication 
Scheduling 
Economy 
Time planning 
Laws and regulations 
Loads 
Member design 
Joints/connections 
Life Cycle Assessment 
Pollution 
Certification 
Evacuation plan  
Smoke simulation 
Classification 
As evident from Table 4, there are a lot of possibilities for modules to include in the design platform. Yet, 
each functionality comes with its own advantages and limitations. It is therefore important to be aware of 
the kind of modules that are needed for each specific user and project. 
It can be difficult to understand the various prerequisites and necessities in the context of the design plat-
form, where the traditional professions of the building industry are dissolved into a single coherent 
==PAGE:69==
Design and Development | 4 
63 
network, and it becomes impossible to order module functionalities into any timeline or hierarchy. Instead, 
it can be useful to group them according to how they are used. 
 
Figure 39. The roles of the modules in the design platform. 
Limit modules are meant to enforce limits and avoid errors, whether the limits are physical or are derived 
from production or laws and regulations. An example of this could be a module that enforces a limitation 
on the spans of elements based on structural calculations. 
Estimate modules are used to predict and create data where none exist. The idea is that data can be as 
detailed as it is available. If none exist it can be created based upon assumptions and statistics. While the 
project gets more detailed, estimated data can be replaced by known data. Data that can be estimated could 
for example be the non-constrained dimensions and materials of building elements. 
Automate modules contain functions for elaboration and detailing. They are used to allow the building 
to quickly progress to a more detailed state where it can for example be analyzed or visualized. Based on 
the simple space-based input from the user—and estimation modules where data does not exist—rules and 
procedures can create details and geometry, for example drawings and models. 
Analyze modules are meant to explore the design through analyses and simulations. These modules will 
be able to answer some of the conceptual and more complex issues and connections in the design with the 
goal to inform the decisions of the user. An analysis module could for example estimate the average yearly 
heat loss, or the amount of sunlight in a room on any given day. 
Evaluate modules are meant to measure the qualities of a design to allow the user summarized ways to 
quickly assess their work to be able to assist in decision making throughout the design process. For exam-
ple, the estimated thermal insulation performance of the building could be evaluated in the scale of BR20 
to evaluate the thermal performance of the building. 
The general roles of the modules enable us to envision their use and, thereby, generalize their require-
ments. To analyze and evaluate the design successfully, the modules will need to read detailed design 
data, functions for the analysis/evaluation itself, and a way to communicate the results to the user. In lim-
iting and automation of the design, the modules will need to be able to control, modify and simulate user 
Automate 
 
Estimate 
Analyze 
Evaluate 
  
Estimate 
==PAGE:70==
4 | Design and Development 
64 
input and methods of giving user feedback of varying importance related to design decisions. Lastly, alt-
hough estimation seems inherently independent, it requires the basis of the design data to improve its 
estimations. These requirements will all shape the design platform if different ways. 
4.7.2. Module Requirements for Implementation 
In order to accommodate modules of varying functionality into the design platform, it is necessary to ex-
amine the features they need to successfully operate. When their needs are understood, the interface be-
tween the core of the design platform and the modules can be created in a way that accommodates their 
requirements. From the function groups above, it was identified what kind of features were required by 
each of them. To further examine the requirements, they can be mapped as seen in Figure 40. 
 
Figure 40. The individual parts of the integration of every extension module into the design platform. 
Note that a communication map like this, exists for each individual module. 
Feedback exigency describes the level of attention that the module requires from the user. A module 
with high exigency cannot be ignored. It could for example be a module that imposes physical or legislative 
constraints on the design. A module with low exigency, in contrast, can be completely ignored by the user. 
These modules will either never require the attention of the user or only require it when the user specifi-
cally request it. To accommodate both ends of the spectrum, the modules will need a wide array of com-
munication formats. 
Design prescriptiveness describes the degree to which the module can dictate the design. A module with 
high prescriptiveness can dominate the decisions of the design, while a module with low prescriptiveness 
is only used for suggestions or optional information. This distinction does not concern the question of 
whether data is produced by the module since the data can be connected in other ways. Modules that are 
highly prescriptive will need access to modify the design data and user decisions in as many places of the 
design as possible while others will only need to read the data now and then. 
==PAGE:71==
Design and Development | 4 
65 
Communication covers a combination of data transfer dependency and frequency. Some modules would 
need to communicate frequently with the platform and depend on the data from the design platform to 
function while others might only run when they are activated and could function without any input from 
the design platform. Modules that require frequent communication may have to be allowed to “hook” 
themselves to the runtime loop to run every frame or to update procedures based on rarer events while 
others can receive ways to update based on manual buttons. The dependency of data could require the 
modules to have access to both the ontology database and data from the application runtime environment. 
In sum, the profile of a module in each of the relations examined above leads to certain objectives. De-
pending on the feedback exigency, the module will need varying methods of sending feedback to the 
user. Modules with exigent communication will send feedback in the form of warnings that grab the full 
attention of the user while quiet and silent modules will need the option to give notifications or infor-
mation that is not even visible before it is sought by the user. The design prescriptiveness of a module 
shows that the module needs several methods to affect the design varying from control to suggestion or 
nudging of the actions taken by the user tied both to messages and the objects themselves. The varying 
communication shows that some modules will need closely attached ways to “hook” themselves into the 
application runtime loops and environment data and access to ontology database and activation buttons. 
4.7.3. Implementation of Expansion Framework 
As shown by the variation in both functionality and requirements above, some modules need to be inte-
grated so closely that they must be built into the core of the design platform while others might not even 
be necessary for most users. To allow flexibility in the degree of integration we think modules should be 
allowed to be connected in three overall ways. 
 
Figure 41. The three ways to integrate modules into the design platform. 
==PAGE:72==
4 | Design and Development 
66 
The Built-in modules require the deepest integration. These are developed alongside the design platform 
itself and will always be a part of it. As such, they are not extensions of the platform but rather parts of our 
codebase and are always a part of the runtime environment of the application. The extension modules 
can be developed alongside the design platform, even by external companies and collaborators since we 
have designed a way to import externally developed modules (see Appendix B). They are not loaded by 
default but can be activated by the user. They are therefore not required for the platform but may be down-
loaded at any later point in time and imported for that specific use. When they are loaded, however, they 
become an integrated part of the design platform on the level of built-in modules and gain full access to all 
the data of the platform since they communicate directly with the runtime environment of the program. 
The external modules can constitute entirely separate applications from the design platform and there-
fore, they cannot access the runtime environment of the design platform. Communication with these mod-
ules, therefore, happens through standardized datafiles as detailed in section 0. 
==PAGE:73==
Demonstration | 5 
67 
5. Demonstration 
Demonstrations of the design platform have been conducted in several ways throughout the project. Since 
the platform was developed using the agile software development method where the program at each it-
eration, is built, tested, and deployed into a functional prototype (Hellem, 2017), it has been possible to 
perform the demonstrations multiple times, both externally and internally by using the intermediate soft-
ware prototypes. The demonstrations were conducted to evaluate and question the functionality and fea-
tures as well as the direction of development itself. They have, thereby, served as a guide for the develop-
ment process as a whole. To gain a full understanding of the uses of the design platform for all the partic-
ipants of the building design process, we have attempted to target the demonstrations at every participant, 
from building owner to industry professionals. The following sections will detail the conditions of the 
individual demonstrations 
External Demonstrations 
External demonstrations of the program were conducted at multiple iterations of the development. This 
was done by demonstrating the concept and application to actual people representing the different users 
and collaborators of the platform. To represent both extremes of the building design process, we demon-
strated the platform to both building owners, and professionals actively participating in the building design 
process. Through a mixture of demonstrations of the ideas, visions, drafts, and actual implementations of 
the application, we sought to gain insights into how each person might want to use the platform, what sort 
of difficulties they had in using the application and what they needed and wished for in terms of application 
features, user experience, and building information. Due to the limited scope of the project, we were only 
able to perform these demonstrations on a smaller scale. Yet, the external demonstrations had the possi-
bility to show a lot of information, that might only be gleaned from the actual users, and would also allow 
us to improve our internal testing through a better understanding of how the platform would be used. 
Two main groups of persons were represented in our external demonstrations: users and collaborators. 
The user of the platform, for which it was demonstrated, was an aspiring building owner. We interviewed 
a couple who were currently in the process of designing their future home. The interview was performed 
early in the process, which represents the first iteration of the design platform. At that point we had de-
veloped an initial draft of the platform, that had not yet been implemented into software. The interview, 
therefore, predominantly focused on understanding the difficulties, which the user currently faces in the 
==PAGE:74==
5 | Demonstration 
68 
industry design process, but also included the demonstration of the idea and concept of the actual platform. 
The interview was recorded and a transcription hereof is reproduced in Appendix C. The results of the 
interview helped steer the project towards the objective of user inclusion through valuable information 
about how the user wished to be (and how they were currently not being) involved in the building design 
process as well as give a clear idea of the kind of information the building owner might want, and how this 
ought to be communicated. 
To represent a collaborator of the platform we chose mainly to focus on the role that CLT Denmark have 
in many building projects: advisor in relation to the use and production of building materials. We demon-
strated the ideas, concept, drafts, as well as working implementations at multiple iterations throughout the 
process. This enabled us to understand their role better, and thereby, to represent them better in the in-
ternal testing. We gained an understand of what information the manufacturer of building parts would 
want from the early design and how this might be structured and standardized to ease their work process. 
Furthermore, their constraints and wishes for the design were clarified, such that we could better lead the 
user to create a design that aligned with them. 
Internal Demonstrations 
Internal testing and demonstration of the program was also conducted at every iteration in the process. 
The internal test took the form of hypothetical uses of the platform, wherein we, based on the perceived 
needs of the different kinds of users and collaborators, would attempt to use the platform to perform their 
relevant tasks. In contrast to an external demonstration, internal demonstrations allowed both numerous 
and rapid testing since they could be conducted at any time as soon as a need were seen. Additionally, the 
results would be experienced first-hand, which meant that no interpretation of the results were necessary. 
It was attempted to test the platform from the perspective of several different kinds of users and collabo-
rators in the platform. 
The first example of use was the end user, who would like to design a house. In testing the platform as the 
building owner, we attempted to base our perspective upon many different kinds of people that could find 
themselves in this position. This included people with different needs and wants for their house, seeking 
to design houses of varying layout and type. It led us to many decisions about the ontology, types of build-
ing elements and the approach to drawing and design. We also based our perspectives upon people with 
different kinds of expectations and technical abilities, which showed how the platform could be improved 
==PAGE:75==
Demonstration | 5 
69 
in terms of communications, how to structure the sources of information, how to explain the functions 
and procedures to the user, and how to let the user understand what they were doing within the applica-
tion. 
The second example of use was the professional collaborator directly involved in the building design pro-
cess. As described above for the external demonstrations, this could be represented by many different dis-
ciplines but was chosen as the advisor in relation to the use and production of building materials, as rep-
resented by CLT Denmark. To conduct the demonstrations, we explored the usual needs from the building 
material production and planning relating to the tender and the later work process. This led us to discover 
what information is important for them, what kind of data they would like to be able to export, and what 
standards they usually use to make the data from the platform compliant with their existing processes and 
procedures. 
The last example of use was the professional collaborator indirectly involved in the building design process, 
participating passively and in a standardized manner. This participation could for example be by providing 
procedures or data that relate to multiple projects and uses. They are, as such, not connected to the building 
design project in any way but are, instead, solely connected to the design platform application itself by 
providing extension modules that all users of the platform can use in their projects. To demonstrate how 
this could be done, we attempted to develop extension modules from an entirely unconnected environment 
and importing them into the platform afterwards by following our guide, which is reproduced in Appendix 
B. The demonstrations highlighted a lot of errors and difficulties in the process and gave us ideas about 
how to further open the platform for extensions. 
Conclusion 
In sum, the iterative software development method allowed us to build and demonstrate the application, 
both externally and internally, multiple times through the development. The demonstrations were tar-
geted at diverse kinds of representatives of the different users and served to steer the development process 
as well as the specifics of the platform to align it better to their needs and wishes. The external demonstra-
tions explained the needs and wishes of the real people that would use the platform and constituted a basis 
for the examples of use for the internal demonstrations. The internal demonstrations could be made rap-
idly and frequently. They gave us a tool to evaluate whether the changes made through development ac-
complished the identified objectives. 
==PAGE:76==
6 | Evaluation 
70 
6. Evaluation 
This chapter concerns the evaluation of how well the integrative design platform might address the prob-
lem of client inclusion in the professional design process. The project has sought to prove the feasibility of 
the concept through the development of demonstration of a proof-of-concept software implementation of 
the platform. In its current state, the platform may therefore warrant a wide range of functionalities in 
order for it to amount to a legitimate solution to the problem. Instead, the focus of the development has 
aimed to identify and accommodate all the capabilities that a complete solution should include. In the fol-
lowing sections, we will seek to assess our progress through evaluation of the four solution objectives 
(presented in section 3.1.2) and how future efforts may push the platform towards becoming a complete 
solution. 
6.1.1. User Design Ideas as Functional Digital Objects 
In order to create a design platform that integrates a non-professional client in the process of designing a 
single-family house, it was important to establish an environment where users could express their ideas. 
This is reflected in the first solution objective that regards the user input interface, and how the platform 
translates simple operations into digital building objects. 
This interface, the design framework (described in section 4.4), is based on a spatial topology that enables 
the user to express design ideas through simple operations. To express their ideas, the users may design 
their house by dragging and dropping spaces inside a 2D environment. Concurrently, underlying proce-
dures handle the entire generation of objects, which are represented by an idealized model (e.g., lines and 
surfaces) and material model (e.g., 3D objects such as walls).  
The design framework was frequently tested internally, but without proper demonstrations involving end-
users, it was difficult to fully assess whether the platform was able to effectively express design ideas of 
non-professionals. Nevertheless, the internal tests allowed us to frequently perform assessments and 
thereby identify implementations that were not as intuitive as intended. External demonstrations were 
carried out involving both professionals and non-professionals. Overall, the demonstrations inspired the 
implementation of a wide range of functionalities and also adjustments of already existing functionalities. 
The prioritized implementations of openings and roofs derived from demonstrations, as it was mentioned 
from both professionals and non-professionals as essentials in their understanding of designing a house. 
==PAGE:77==
Evaluation | 6 
71 
Additionally, the ability for the space boundaries to be edited—by dragging a wall to extend or reduce its 
size—is an adjustment of an earlier implementation where the sizes of the spaces were predetermined. 
The design framework is based on a flexible topology, that enables the user to express their design ideas, 
and supports generation of functional digital building objects. The effectiveness of the framework lies in 
the simple manner whereby user interactions generate a building design, without requirements of 
construction knowledge. The functionality of the building objects, derived from those simple user inputs, 
is demonstrated through generation of external accessible and usable design information, objectified in the 
various export files. 
As the platform is currently in a proof-of-concept state, the absence of some functions will, undoubtedly, 
impose limits on the possibilities of design. Among notable missing functions are capabilities such as 
adding additional building elements, editing more elements, providing multi-storey support, generating 
beams and columns, supporting element properties, etc. However, it is important to keep in mind that the 
implementation of such functions could increase the required amount of technical expertise from the user. 
It is our goal to let every design idea be expressed and a future version of the platform should experiment 
adding abstract generic classes and inheritance to allow definition of a wider range of objects while keeping 
the ontology simple. For the users proficient with modelling software, an expert-mode might also be a wel-
come feature in the platform in the future. 
As a next step in the development of the design framework, comprehensive demonstrations involving both 
professionals and non-professional users would provide an improved understanding of the needs inherent 
in both target groups. Furthermore, a survey could help supply knowledge about competencies of users 
regarding both technical knowledge and how they operate in the platform. 
6.1.2. Creating an informative environment 
Our second solution objective regards our intention to make our design platform able to communicate a 
wide variety of information that the user may need in their design process.  
Through the interview performed in the early stages of our process with a client currently in the process 
of designing a house, it became apparent that any kind of information that may help the clients better assess 
their own designs would be helpful. More information would help the user gain a more knowledgeable 
design process and thereby alleviate the need for professional assistance. Helpful information could be 
==PAGE:78==
6 | Evaluation 
72 
anything related to the building process as well as the platform itself; from elementary aspects (e.g., 
communication of the platform’s functionalities) to more theoretical aspects (e.g., information about all 
sorts of design consequences and statistics). 
Currently, the state of platform is a proof-of-concept and the overall amount of functionalities is therefore 
somewhat limited. Many functionalities are likely to arrive in the form of modules, for which the content 
and frequency of information to be conveyed may vary just as much as their purpose. In order to try 
accommodate such vast diversity of information that may be inherent in a design process, our primary 
focus in this regard has been to develop a range of communicative functionalities able to convey 
information of various types. Functionalities such as notifications and modal windows have may convey 
short messages or warnings in an instant, while the dashboard allows the communication of any sort of 
information that may be represented graphically, e.g., by text, figures, or pictures. The platform thus 
supports communication of diverse information. However, seeing as the amount of functionalities in the 
platform is currently somewhat limited and the developed features has not been extensibley used, future 
functionalities—integrated directly or through modules—may well call for ways to communicate that have 
not been considered. 
As such, it is arguably difficult to assess whether the present features encompass all the capabilities required 
to provide sufficient feedback to the user obtain a knowledgeable design process. Functionalities of the 
platform may be extended with future iterations and new communicative features may well be warranted. 
In this regard, demonstrations and interviews with professional users may provide valuable knowledge of 
the types of information that may be required. Furthermore, comprehensive demonstrations involving 
numerous end-users will arguably prove essential in order to fully assess the quality and effectiveness of 
the platform in terms of providing the information needed through the design process, but also to gain 
more extensive knowledge about what type of information may be warranted.  
6.1.3. Accessibility of Building Information  
To make the building information accessible to industry collaborators, several features have been imple-
mented. Originally, the main effort was to create standardized output formats. The chosen formats, IFC 
and gbXML, are industry standards (or de facto) and the idea was, therefore, that they would make the 
data effectively accessible to as many as possible following the approach of standardization. 
==PAGE:79==
Evaluation | 6 
73 
The external demonstrations, namely the interviews with industry professionals in the form of CLT Den-
mark, showed how far from a silver bullet the standardized approach was. The industry standards were 
used by the company, but due to limitations in the standards, they were not fit for use for every function 
of the design process and most functions where therefore covered by other formats. For example, due to 
the technical nature of IFC, all communication with the layman client instead used SketchUp and due to 
its static and complex format, CLT elements were remodeled inside Revit for detailing. Their use of stand-
ards showed how easily the standardization approach might be rendered invalid the moment a project 
collaborator did not support the given standard. The results of the demonstrations could be summed up 
into two concrete sub-objectives for the platform. The data from the design platform should not be static 
after it had been exported and, more importantly, the platform should also not be tied to specific standards. 
Every collaborator should be able to access the design data in the standards they use. 
The current solution, while still containing standardized export functions, is based on the alternative strat-
egies of flexibility and modularization. To show that the design data could be exported in a way that is 
flexible and modifiable we developed a way to import the data into native Revit elements. Additionally, to 
make the design data as customizable and modular as possible we developed a way for every collaborator 
to define and implement their own way to export the design data. While this approach shows that it is, 
indeed, possible to allow every collaborator to define their own methods of export, it might not be possible 
for all of them to develop and program extension modules based on their technical know-how and pro-
gramming abilities. We imagine that the process of extending the platform should therefore be refined to 
target as many collaborators as possible, which would entail design for user friendliness, probably by stand-
ardizing the customization methods or development of a method that avoids programming. 
Future work in this subject should start in the same manner as this project, with an understanding of the 
collaboration process. We gained an understanding of the collaboration in our proof-of-concept case, but 
to understand how the current solution would work on a larger scale we would need to demonstrate to a 
lot more users. Our proof-of-concept solution has quickly become tailor made for CLT Denmark, but we 
cannot know whether their procedures are shared by other industry professionals. 
==PAGE:80==
6 | Evaluation 
74 
6.1.4. Active Participation 
To enable the collaborators of the design process to participate actively, every collaborator needed to be 
able to participate. Due to the dissimilarity collaborators that should be accommodated, it was necessary to 
develop a system wherein the collaborators themselves could define and develop their ways participation. 
Our first approach to a solution to the collaboration in the dissimilar plethora of data and functions was 
an all encompassing ontology, and an approach of generalization and outsourcing. The idea was that as 
long as the ontology was built to accommodate all kinds of data, the data could, at first, be estimated 
through generalized methods. While the design process proceeded, and work was communicated and out-
sourced to collaborators, the data was improved and adjusted. Thereby, there would never be insufficient 
data and it would always be possible to improve where it was needed. 
The demonstrations brought attention to the fact that the industry professionals already defined their own 
procedures, methods and data. To avoid the choice of either being too general (i.e., to be able to include 
every possible procedure) and being too specific (whereby we would have to implement the specifics of 
every procedure) we instead moved a step back. Instead of developing any procedure, we would develop a 
way for the collaborators to define their own procedures. This would be implemented in the form of a 
system for inclusion of extension modules to the platform. Through the ontology, graph database, and the 
system for expansion of the platform the data of the platform can be freely expanded and the expansion 
modules themselves can be developed by anyone with relevant programming knowledge. In evaluating the 
modular approach to collaboration, it is necessary to evaluate the module requirement accommodation, 
the ontology, and the interaction between the modules. 
The requirements of the modules, as described in section 4.7.2, might be used to evaluate how they are 
accommodated in the platform. The Feedback, conveyed by the modules to the user, are accommodated 
by establishing various means of communication, e.g. tooltips or widgets as shown in section 4.3.2. This 
allows facilitation of many different types of feedback. Design prescriptiveness has not been fully ac-
commodated in the form of standardized procedures, however, the modules are allowed full access to cre-
ate, modify, or delete all elements. This gives the modules the means to change whatever they need to, but 
without a standardized procedure, it might be difficult to implement when developing the modules. Addi-
tionally, prescriptive modules might also need a way to suggest changes without actually performing them. 
The dissimilar Communication to and from the modules is currently accommodated by the three 
==PAGE:81==
Evaluation | 6 
75 
different levels of integration: built-in modules, extension modules, and external modules. The varying 
integration level allows the platform to accommodate both ends of the spectrum in terms of dependency 
and frequency. Modules that need access to the runtime environment’s main loop or data variables etc. will 
be able to do so as built-in or extension modules while modules that need independence (e.g., to be inte-
grated into other programs) can be implemented as external modules and still have access to the data and 
procedures of the application. An intermediate form of integration might also be needed for the modules 
that need to act on some specific conditions, which would be worth examining. 
The interaction between the modules is currently still unmanaged. As seen often in the building industry, 
the management of collaboration can be a very important issue. If the methods or data from different 
modules collide or interfere, there needs to be plans for the management of these. It is not certain that the 
user will be able to undertake this role, so one might imagine the collaboration management might either 
be automated to some degree or be the responsibility of an industry professional consultant acting through 
a management module/framework. 
To fully understand the collaboration processes and test how the modular approach would accommodate 
the procedures of the collaborators, it would be necessary to test the platform by implementing it into a 
real-world project and interpret the advantages and shortcomings. This will also, imaginatively, expose 
any issues concerning holes in the ontology, user friendliness, and collaboration management. 
==PAGE:82==
7 | Conclusion 
76 
7. Conclusion 
The primary purpose of this project has been to enable a future house owner to become a primary partic-
ipant in the design process whilst also ensuring that the design process remains knowledgeable. As a solu-
tion to this, we have proposed a software platform that allows users to express their ideas in an informative 
environment and which allows professional parties to both participate actively in the process and also 
utilize the information generated through it. In consideration of the extensive range of capabilities needed 
to achieve a solution that fully incorporate every technical aspect needed, our development process has 
been concluded with a proof-of-concept design platform. 
To facilitate the materialization of the users’ ideas, the platform currently enables users to place and edit 
spaces of various shapes. This allows them to create a simple, function-based interpretation of a single-
story building. Additionally, we have successfully implemented functionalities allowing users to place 
doors and windows, and also to customize automatically generated roofs. The users may therefore be said 
to only be capable of materializing their ideas to a limited degree and, thus, a multitude of design tools, 
such as more element types, multi-story support, editing tools, etc., may be warranted. 
To establish an environment that facilitates communication to the user, we implemented a range of basic 
communicative features, with the dashboard being the most versatile as it allows for a wide range of infor-
mation to be displayed. At this time, it is difficult to fully conclude whether the present features contain all 
the capabilities required to effectuate a knowledgeable design process. Therefore, as the functionalities of 
the platform are extended in future iterations, development of new communicative features may well be 
warranted. 
To make the building information generated through the platform accessible to industry collaborators, we 
have implemented a range of export functionalities predominantly with the aim to support common in-
dustry standards. Hence, the platform currently supports exports to open formats such as IFC, gbXML, 
and JSON, as well as closed environments, such as Autodesk Revit. Furthermore, as a consequence of the 
modularity of the platform, collaborators gain the ability to define their own methods of export. With the 
range of possible ways to retrieve the information contained in the platform, the data may arguably be 
considered accessible. 
==PAGE:83==
Conclusion | 7 
77 
To allow outside parties to participate actively in the design process on their own terms, we have imple-
mented a way for collaborators to define their own procedures as modules. Thereby, collaborators may 
create expansion modules themselves, providing them with almost infinite possibilities to extend the func-
tionalities of the platform. Given such freedom, outside parties may evidently be considered able to affect 
and participate in the design process. As commonly seen within the building industry, managing this col-
laboration can prove a significant issue and, seeing as the interaction between the modules is currently 
unmanaged, future work may warrant development of tools for such management. 
To expand the proof-of-concept into a complete solution for the market, considerably more work would 
need to be done—possibly the most urgent in all regards being the conduction of comprehensive demon-
strations with both professionals and non-professionals. Such demonstrations could perhaps most im-
portantly help assess the quality and effectiveness of the platform, but also help improve the understanding 
of aspects such as the needs of the target groups in terms of both functionalities and information, thereby 
facilitating the improvement of the overall performance and user experience.  
In conclusion, this project has developed the concept of the customer-centralized design platform and 
shown how a realization hereof might be a feasible undertaking with potential to provide substantial ben-
efits to the AEC industry and is worth further research and development.
 
==PAGE:84==
Appendix A | Documentation 
82 
Bibliography 
Aichholzer, O., Aurenhammer, F., Alberts, D., & Gärtner, B. (1995). A Novel Type of Skeleton for 
Polygons. J. Univers. Comput. Sci. 12, 752-761. 
Aish, R., Jabi, W., Lannon, S., Wardhana, N. M., & Chatzivasileiadi, A. (2018). Topologic: Tools to explore 
architectural topology. AAG2018 - Advances in Architectural Geometry (pp. 316-338). Göteborg: 
Klein Publishing GmbH. 
Amazon. (2021, 1 04). What is a Relational Database? Retrieved from Amazon Web Services (AWS): 
https://aws.amazon.com/relational-database/ 
Autodesk inc. (2019, Feburary 28). knowledge.autodesk.com. Retrieved Janurary 2, 2021, from Are Revit and 
BIM same…? Distinguishing between BIM and Revit.: https://knowledge.autodesk.com/search-
result/caas/simplecontent/content/are-revit-and-bim-same-E2-80-A6-distinguishing-between-
bim-and-revit.html 
Batty, M., Chapman, D., Evans, S., Haklay, M., Kueppers, S., Shiode, N., . . . Torrens, P. M. (2000). 
Visualizing the City: Communicating Urban Design to Planners and Decision Makers. London: Centre 
for Advanced Spatial Analysis (CASA) University College London. 
Biedl, T., Held, M., Huber, S., Kaaser, D., & Palfrader, P. (2015). Reprint of: Weighted straight skeletons 
in the plane. Computational Geometry, 120-133. 
buildingSMART. (2019, June 6). Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) - An Introduction. Retrieved Janurary 2, 
2021, from buildingSMART International: https://technical.buildingsmart.org/standards/ifc 
BuildingSMART. (2021, January 22). What is openBIM. Retrieved from BuildingSMART International: 
https://www.buildingsmart.org/about/openbim/openbim-definition/ 
Dissanayake, R., & Mendis, P. (2018). ICSBE 2018 - Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Sustainable 
Built Environment. Singapore: Springer. 
DTU. 
(2021, 
January 
17). 
BIMlab. 
Retrieved 
from 
Hvad 
er 
BIM?: 
https://www.bim.byg.dtu.dk/bimlab/hvad-er-bim 
Eastman, C. (1976). General purpose building description systems . Computer Aided Design - Volume 8, 17-
26. 
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography 
83 
Emprin-Gilardini, V. (2000). Master builder of the Middle Ages and design build of today : an analysis and 
comparison. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Espersen, L. (2018, 02 28). Danske Arkitektvirksomheder: Opbrud i byggeriets værdikæde. 
Byggeri+Arkitektur. 
Fowler, 
M. 
(2020, 
11 
19). 
The 
New 
Methodology. 
Retrieved 
from 
martinfowler.com: 
https://martinfowler.com/articles/newMethodology.html 
Frimpong, S., & Dansoh, A. (2016). Client perspectives on relationships with architects on private house 
projects. International Journal of Qualitative Research in Services. 
GRAPHISOFT. 
(2020, 
December 
7). 
Our 
story. 
Retrieved 
from 
GRAPHISOFT.com: 
https://graphisoft.com/why-graphisoft/our-story 
Green Building XML Schema, Inc. (2021). About. Retrieved Janurary 2, 2021, from gbXML: 
https://www.gbxml.org/About_GreenBuildingXML_gbXML 
Groote, M. D., & Lefever, M. (2016). Driving Transformational Change in the Construction Value Chain. 
Building Performance Institute Europe. 
Hellem, D. (2017, October 12). What is Agile Development? Retrieved Janurary 11, 2021, from 
docs.microsoft.com: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/learn/agile/what-is-agile-
development 
Interaction Design Foundation. (2020, 11 15). User Interface Design. Retrieved from Interaction Design 
Foundation: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/ui-design 
Jing, C. W. (2020, 12 11). Digital Technology for Construction Value Chain. Retrieved from SIPMM 
INSTITUTE: https://sipmm.edu.sg/digital-technology-construction-value-chain/ 
Justinmind. (2020, 11 15). Navigation design: Almost everything you need to know. Interaction design: Your 
full 
guide. 
Retrieved 
from https://www.justinmind.com/blog/navigation-design-almost-
everything-you-need-to-know/ 
Kaley, A. (2020, 11 3). Contextual Menus: Delivering Relevant Tools for Tasks. Retrieved from Nielsen Norman 
Group: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/contextual-menus/ 
Katerra. (2020, 12 8). Vision. Retrieved from Katerra: https://www.katerra.com/vision/ 
==PAGE:86==
Appendix A | Documentation 
84 
Kovach, L. (2020, 11 5). How Virtual Reality (VR) in Architecture Can Improve The Design Workflow. 
Retrieved from Iris VR. 
Kužel, V. (2018). Procedural building reconstruction from building outlines. Prague: Faculty of Mathematics 
and Physics - Charles University. 
Kwartler, M., & Longo, G. (2009, 8 12). Visioning and Visualization: People, Pixels and Plans. Applied 
Spatial Analysis and Policy. 
Llewelyn, A. (1989). REVIEW OF CAD CAM. Computer-aided Design, 297-302. 
Lluís i Ginovart, J., & Jover, A. C. (2014). Design and medieval construction: The case of Tortosa cathedral 
(1345-1441). Construction History Vol. 29, No.1, 1-24. 
March, S. T., & Smith, G. F. (1995). Design and natural science research on information technology. 
Decision Support Systems 15, pp. 251-266. 
neo4j. (2020, 11 7). What is a Graph Database? Retrieved from neo4j: https://neo4j.com/developer/graph-
database/ 
Nielsen, M. H. (2016, 9 2). Byggeriets værdikæde er under forandring. Building Supply. 
(2005). PARTNERING I PRAKSIS. Dansk Byggeri, Danske Arkitektvirksomheder, Foreningen af 
Rådgivende Ingeniører, TEKNIQ. 
Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., E. Gengler, C., Rossi, M., Hui, W., Virtanen, V., & Bragge, J. (2006). The Design 
Science Research Process: A Model for Producing and Presenting Information Systems Research. 
Claremont, California: Claremont Graduate University. 
Powell , K., & Powers, K. (2011). The Great Builders. Thames & Hudson Ltd. 
ptc. (2020, December 7). A Quick History of PTC and PTC Creo. Retrieved from ptc.com: 
https://www.ptc.com/en/blogs/cad/a-quick-history-of-ptc-and-ptc-creo 
Ribeirinho, M. J., Mischke, J., Strube, G., Sjödin, E., Blanco, J. L., Palter, R., . . . Andersson, T. (2020). The 
next normal in construction. McKinsey & Company. 
Rigby, D. K., Sutherland, J., & Takeuchi, H. (2020, 11 29). Embracing Agile. Retrieved from Harvard 
Business Review: https://hbr.org/2016/05/embracing-agile 
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography 
85 
Royal Institute of British Architects. (2019). Client & Architect: Developing The Essential Relationship. London: 
RIBA. 
Saleh, A., Rafi, A., & Woods, P. (2011, 6). Evaluating the Use of 3D Computer Visualisation to Support 
User’s Participation in Architectural Design Process. Conference: 3rd Proceeding International 
Conference on Applied & Creative Arts: Beyond Boundaries (ICACA). 
Selby, P. (1984). The impact of CAD on architectural practice- challenges, benefits and prospects. CAD 84. 
6th International Conference and Exhibition on Computers in Design Engineering (pp. 148-155). 
Guildford: Butterworths. 
Sugihara, K., & Khmelevsky, Y. (2018). Roof report from automatically generated 3D building models by 
straight skeleton computation. 2018 Annual IEEE International Systems Conference (SysCon), 1-8. 
Sutherland, I. E. (1964). Sketchpad, a man-machine graphical communication system. Annual ACM IEEE 
Design Automation Conference (pp. 6.329-6.346). New York: ACM, 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New 
York, NY, USA. 
Trimble. (2020, December 7). About . Retrieved from tekla.com: https://www.tekla.com/about/about 
Usability.gov. (2020, 11 15). 
User Interface Design Basics. Retrieved from Usability.gov: 
https://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-interface-design.html 
Vectorworks, I. (2020, December 7). Company History. Retrieved from Vectorworks.net: 
https://www.vectorworks.net/company/history 
Vukotic, A., & Watt, N. (2014). Neo4j in Action . Manning. 
Whitenton, K. (2015, 09 15). Menu Design: Checklist of 15 UX Guidelines to Help Users. Retrieved from Nielsen 
Norman Group: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/menu-design/ 
Yale University. (2020, 11 4). Usability & Web Accessibility - Navigation. Retrieved from Yale University: 
https://usability.yale.edu/web-accessibility/articles/navigation 
 
==PAGE:88==
Appendix A | Documentation 
86 
Appendix A. Documentation 
The proof-of-concept application developed with Unity and C# has been comprehensively documented 
and everything has been made publicly available. 
The source code and all the data files and assets of the Unity project has been added to a repository on the 
website GitHub. From there, the repository can be cloned or the whole project downloaded. The cloned 
or downloaded directories contains everything needed to run or further develop the application using 
Unity and Microsoft Visual Studio. The repository can be found by following the link: 
https://github.com/deswaks/design-platform 
A comprehensive documentation has been made for the whole codebase. This means that all functions and 
classes, with all its fields, parameters, constants, and methods, are described and classified to a level where 
it is usable by anyone with knowledge of C# programming to a sufficient degree. The documentation can 
be found in in the externally included Appendix D, although an interactive version can be found in the 
above GitHub repository and directly at the following link: 
https://raw.githack.com/deswaks/design-platform/master/Docs/html/index.html 
or 
 https://rawcdn.githack.com/deswaks/design-plat-
form/3c3aee16af16e13205ae60567d2ed05c757da36d/Docs/html/index.html 
To run the application, it is necessary to either (1) clone the repository from GitHub and build to using 
Unity to fit to the used platform (e.g., Windows or Mac OS) or (2) download the already built executable 
file located in the “bin” folder of the repository. This pre-built file only works for computers running Win-
dows. 
==PAGE:89==
How to Create an Extension Module | Appendix B 
87 
Appendix B. How to Create an Extension Module 
Installation 
1. Download and install Unity 
2. Create a new Unity project in the Unity Hub 
3. Install ProBuilder in Unity 
Set-Up 
1. Copy the Extension resources folder into your unity assets folder. The extension resources 
folder contains dependencies, base classes and templates for use in extension development. Note: 
It might be necessary to press “help” → “Reset packages to default” in unity afterwards. 
2. Create a folder (for example named “scripts”) in your Assets folder. 
3. Create an Assembly definition in your newly created folder. 
Development Guidelines 
To be sure the module functions as intended in the Design Platform there are a few development guidelines 
that must be followed. 
Assembly 
All new scripts and classes must be placed in the assembly definition folder created in step 2 of the set-up 
step. Alternatively, they can be put in their own assembly although then references must be managed cor-
rectly. 
Module Initialization 
When the module is loaded by the Design Platform, the Init() method of the ModuleInitializer class 
is automatically called. As can be seen when inspecting the file ModuleInitializer.cs the Init() 
method is set up to create the widget by default, but it can be changed to do as one sees fit. 
Widget 
To create a widget, the class must inherit from the predefined DesignPlatform.Core.Widget class. This 
means that the newly created widget class must implement two methods: CreatePanel() and 
UpdatePanel(). An example implementation of both can be found in the MyWidget.cs example widget. 
==PAGE:90==
Appendix B | How to Create an Extension Module 
88 
Assets 
To use assets in the extension module, they must be packaged in an asset bundle and loaded using the 
LoadAsset method of the AssetLoader class like shown below.  
GameObject asset = AssetLoader.LoadAsset<GameObject>("myassetbundle", 
"myasset") 
Namespace 
To avoid conflicts you must remember to use a namespace for all your classes in the module. This also 
includes the classes from the Extension resources folder (ModuleInitializer, AssetLoader and MyWidget) 
that are by default in the namespace “MyModule”. This namespace must be renamed. 
Import Into the Design Platform 
Create a folder for your module in the modules folder of the design platform program directory. Create a 
subfolder named Assets (for example modules/myModule and modules/myModule/Assets) 
1. Asset Bundles 
a. Build the AssetBundles 
b. Copy the AssetBundles (eg. myUnityProject/Assets/StreamingAssets/myAssetBundle) 
c. Paste them into a subfolder named Assets in the module folder (eg. modules/myMod-
ule/Assets/ myAssetBundle) 
2. Assemblies 
a. Build the module 
b. Copy the dll assembly files for your module (eg. myUnityProject/Library/ScriptAssem-
blies/myAssembly.dll) 
c. Paste them into the module folder (eg. modules/myModule/myAssembly.dll) 
==PAGE:91==
Interview Transcription | Appendix C 
89 
Appendix C. Interview Transcription 
Note: The names of persons and companies, from which we did not obtain permission, have been cen-
sored. The interview is transcribed in Danish since it was conducted in Danish but will be paraphrased in 
English when used in this report. 
Interviewperson: 
[…] vi har haft denne her byggegrund i fem år og vi har snakket om at bygge i 
fire år. Så det er en lang proces, og det kommer vi nok også til, men sådan er [vi] bare og vi lever mens vi 
er i de der processer. Vi har lige fået en underskrift på vores andet hus i dag, som vi egentlig har haft lejet 
ud, og som vi egentlig gerne ville beholde men der har været en masse ting, der har gjort at nu skiller vi os 
af med det. Og det gør så at vi nok får sat ret meget gang i processen. 
Men ellers er vi på et punkt hvor vi har besluttet os for at det skal være CLT. Det er vi ikke i tvivl om. Og 
vi vil rigtig gerne have det så simpelt, som muligt. Og vi går ikke i banken for at spørge hvor meget vi må 
låne, vi går i banken og siger at det er det her vi vil låne. Og så vil vi gerne prøve at bygge så billigt, som 
muligt, så vi prøver at vende det om. Ja og så vil vi gerne prøve at bygge så bæredygtigt og så åndbart, som 
muligt, og åndbarheden og naturlige materialer er rigtigt vigtige for os. 
Så har vi haft en arkitekt inde over for et år siden. For [vores] projekt er lidt anderledes end andre i hvert 
fald. Vi har været hos et hav af arkitekter lige fra [Arkitekt 1], og så til [Arkitekt 2]. Så vi har været sådan 
alt igennem sådan prismæssigt og arkitektmæssigt og vi ville egentlig gerne bruge rigtig mange penge på 
arkitekter og ideer fordi vi vidste at det var ligesom udgangspunktet at det skulle være godt fra starten, 
men jeg synes vi sådan har løbet panden mod en mur hver gang hvor vi sådan… Altså hold kæft hvor har 
det været svært, og det er det bare stadig. 
Men det endte med at [Arkitekt 1] tegnede et hus, og det var vores udfordring også, det var at vi har en 
1200 stor m2 grund, men vi vil også gerne have erhverv på grunden. [Vi] (jeg er uddannet jurist, men ved 
siden af) der tager vi ud og laver stenovnbagte pizzaer og nørder rigtig meget det, og vi sælger sådan nogle 
stenovnsbagte pizza-ovne og [min partner] arbejder inde i DBU og har selv passion der, så vi ville rigtig 
gerne mange ting på grunden: Vi ville gerne have en kunstbane, vi ville gerne have et hus, vi ville gerne 
have at min mor skal bo i et ”tiny” hus, vi ville gerne have kælderen blev i huset, vi ville gerne have et 
orangeri, vi ville gerne have… Der var rigtig mange ting vi ville have på grunden. Så det tegnede hun 
faktisk en rigtig fed planløsning, så det har vi ikke være ked af. Der fik hun ligesom sådan sat et punktum 
==PAGE:92==
Appendix C | Interview Transcription 
90 
for hvordan tingene skulle være på grunden. Huset hun tegnede, var rigtig fed og hun har nogle rigtigt 
fede ideer, men [vi] var bare ikke sådan, du ved, med nede i maven. Og hun havde tegnet et meget lille hus. 
Vi vidste vi ville bo småt, men hun havde tegnet et alt for lille hus. Jeg tror det var 90 m2 i grundplan. Det 
var bare for småt for os, og den måde hun havde indrettet det, synes vi ikke hun havde lyttet til de ting, 
som [vi] sådan… Og så endte det faktisk med, fordi vi havde det andet hus, og vi blev i tvivl og der skete 
en masse ting, at vi ikke rigtigt vendte tilbage til hende. Og så sad vi lidt henne og tænkte: Vi bliver nødt 
til at arbejde videre og gøre noget andet hun ligesom havde hjulpet os lidt ad vejen og nu måtte vi videre. 
Og der hvor den er landet lige nu, det er at vi skulle huske at tænke kreativt fordi CLT kan en hel masse, 
og der er ikke rigtigt mange arkitekter, som har prøvet at tegne eller bygge med CLT. Jeg har snakket med 
de to arkitekter, som er i Danmark, som den ene [Arkitekt 3], der har bygget et hus, og så en der hedder 
[Arkitekt 4], som er en tysk-dansk arkitekt, der har tegnet et par huse i CLT, og han bliver meget 
voluminøs for mig. Og så har jeg været lidt i tvivl sådan rent økonomisk om vi overhovedet kunne komme 
i nærheden af at booke ham hvis vi også gerne ville holde omkostningerne nede. Fordi [vi] vil gerne have 
et råhus, der står færdigt, og så vil gerne alting selv, fordi vi vil ikke have et nyt køkken eller et nyt bad, vi 
vil gerne bruge et gammelt køkken og bad, altså alt skal være genbrug og bæredygtigt, så derfor ville 
150.000 til ham som arkitekt jo nærmest være det vi kunne lave et køkken for, for eksempel. Så der er også 
afvejningerne i forhold til økonomi og at vi ikke bliver forført. Fordi vi har været hos alle de her arkitekter 
og man bliver jo forført hver gang. Altså hold op, hvor er det lækkert, og ej hvor lyder det spændende og… 
Men vi prøver hele tiden at hale os ind på den der helt kærne, eller essensen vi gerne vil. Så det har vi ikke 
lyst til selvom det kunne vi godt. Vi kunne godt gå ud at bruge 4 mio. eller 5 mio. på et hus. Det er bare 
ikke det vi har lyst til. Så vi står lige nu med at have [Arkitekt 1s] tegninger, som vi ligesom skal arbejde os 
ud fra. 
Og så har jeg tegnet selv et… Det blev så ikke et ”tiny house” til min mor men… fordi hun synes det bliver 
for småt, fordi hvis vi nu skal transportere det væk, som egentlig var drømmen, at kunne hun tage det 
under armen og så tage det ”tiny” hus med. Så hvis hun blev træt af at bo med os, eller hvis vi lige pludselig 
fandt på at rejse til Grønland, så skulle hun have den mulighed. Men hun kunne bare mærke at det blev 
for småt, så jeg har tegnet og designet et hus på 34 m2 og det synes hun fungerer rigtig godt. Det er ligesom 
nogle af de elementer hun havde brug for, et ordentligt køkken og et ordentligt soveværelse. Så det er 
faktisk der vi er lige nu. 
==PAGE:93==
Interview Transcription | Appendix C 
91 
[…] 
Os: 
Samarbejdet med arkitekten, det lyder som om I har prøvet lidt forskelligt nu. Har det været meget 
sådan baseret på det i selv har kommet med af tegninger og ideer, eller har de ligesom taget det helt fra 
bunden, arkitekterne. 
Interviewperson: 
Vi har også været hos [Arkitekt 5], og der var det meget sådan han hørte hvad 
vores drømme og tanker var og så fløj han med derudad, og det blev bare for vildt på en eller anden måde. 
[Arkitekt 1] bad os om… Hun kom og var her i haven, og så bad hun os om, sådan i grove skitser, at 
fortælle. Så har vi… Inde hos [Arkitekt 2], der var det meget sådan overordnet, hvor de sagde ”nu kommer 
vi med nogle ideer”. Det [vi] har kunne mærke, det er at vi skiller os nok lidt ud fordi hver gang vi har 
været nogle steder, så siger arkitekterne ”ej i har snakket om den der grund og I har alt muligt, men I har 
slet ikke nævnt hvordan jeres køkken skal se ud,” og det er sådan noget de siger alle folk snakker om, det 
er køkken eller hvordan badeværelset skal se ud. Og der har [vi] det sådan lidt: jamen det kan vi jo bare 
ændre for fanden, det kan vi jo bare lave om hvis vi ikke gider at have det som vi har det. 
For os er det mere funktionaliteten i alle de ting vi gerne vil. Og der syntes vi bare at [Arkitekt 1] på en 
eller anden måde greb de tanker og ideer vi havde ret hurtigt, i forhold til mange af de andre, der kunne 
man sådan mærke de har sådan en faglig stolthed, de har sådan en måde at gå ud fra og de har en vis ide 
om at ”jamen det ved vi bedre”, så der virker de meget som dem der ville på banen, ikke? Og jeg skal ikke 
sige om jeg synes det ene eller det andet var rigtigt, men vi er nok bare lidt anderledes […], fordi vi gerne 
vil være så meget inde over det hele. Men godt ved at vi selvfølgelig skal have hjælp, og at vores 
kompetencer på nogle områder ikke slår til overhovedet, så det skal være et samspil med de her mennesker. 
Jeg har ikke 100% tjekket det endnu, men jeg vil sige at Per har været skidegod i CLT, altså han har virkelig 
forstået os, hvad det er for nogle mennesker det er vi tænker… Han er skidegod til sådan at blive: ”Ej det 
skræmte jer fordi det var for dyrt. Det kan jeg godt forstå. Skal jeg ikke prøve at være mellemmand? Eller 
hvor [uforståelig] Eller jeg kan også…” Han er sådan sindssygt god til at hive fat i os. Men jeg tror også at 
vi er svære. Jeg tror vi er rigtigt svære, men selve udformningen er nok den største udfordring for os og 
materialevalg. Det er sgu der vi strander rigtig tit. 
Os: 
Har det så, i arkitektsamarbejdet, været at arkitekterne har arbejdet færdig med en ide, og så 
fremlagt for jer, eller har I kunne være med undervejs i processen? 
==PAGE:94==
Appendix C | Interview Transcription 
92 
Interviewperson: 
Altså vi har jo kun fået tegnet det ene hus af [Arkitekt 1], og der endte det jo med 
at hun sagde, at vi skulle vende hurtigt tilbage til hende, og så ville hun rette til. Og der kunne vi bare se, 
at der var alt for meget der skulle rettes til på det hus hun havde tegnet. Og vi var også ret skuffede over at 
det blev afvist ovre på kommunen, fordi de sagde at det var et toplanshus og vi måtte kun bygge et 
halvandenplanshus dernede, som vi godt vidste. Så vi var også sådan lidt ”arrr” fordi de ikke havde taget 
højde for de der få ting, der er i lokalplanen, som selv jeg kunne regne ud. Det var vi også lidt skuffede 
over, så vi har faktisk ikke vendt tilbage til hende og der er der jo så gået det år her, ikke. Men det kunne 
vi lige så godt, altså jeg tror ikke at [Arkitekt 1] sådan… Hvis vi ringede til hende i morgen og sagde at nu 
er vi der, og hvad kan vi gøre, og vi ville selvfølgelig betale hende penge for at hjælpe os videre i processen, 
om hun ikke ville være klar på det. Det er bare [os], der sådan lige skal finde ud af kan hun nu også hjælpe 
os derhen hvor vi gerne vil, tror jeg. 
Vi har jo selvfølgelig valgt at gå med CLT, og det har hun jo ingen erfaringer med. Og jeg kan jo se at CLT, 
med dens styrker åbner op for en masse muligheder i udhæng og i udformning af tag indvendigt og sådan 
noget, og det kunne jeg godt mærke, der kunne jeg godt tænke mig en arkitekt, der kunne hjælpe os med 
på vej, der kunne sige [uforståelig] og hvad man skulle gøre her. Det tror jeg bare ikke at [Arkitekt 1] 
kunne hjælpe os med fordi hun ikke har erfaringen i det. Men det er det spørgsmål, som jeg sagde tidligere, 
hvor fanden vi så skal gå hen at få den hjælp. 
Os: 
Ja, der er ikke særligt mange med den erfaring i Danmark endnu. 
Interviewperson: 
Nej. Nu har jeg så en mand, der er fra Sønderborg og taler flydende tysk, så vi har 
faktisk overvejet om man så skulle prøve at finde nogle tyske arkitekter fordi at de selvfølgelig er langt 
mere foran både Tyskland og Østrig. Men det er sgu også problematisk at begynde at bruge en tysk arkitekt 
tænkte vi. Og vi ville egentlig… eller det er jo også en af vores mantra eller værdier at vi også gerne vil 
bruge lokalt og dansk, eller altså. Vi bliver hele tiden sådan udfordret på alle de der parametre. Hele tiden. 
Os: 
Så hvad er processen her i den nærmeste fremtid? Vil I så evt. finde en ny Arkitekt, eller vil I selv 
prøve at tegne noget? Eller hvordan vil I gøre? 
Interviewperson: 
Ja men processen er nu at jeg har jo tegnet min mors hus og det er vi rigtigt 
tilfredse med og det kan vi også godt, i en CLT-sammenhæng, bruge. Det er nemlig med sådan et stort 
udhæng og sådan en lidt ensidig taghældning, så der tror jeg faktisk bare at vi hiver fat i Per og spørger, 
hvordan får vi nu de her tegninger forvandlet, og en ingeniør og nogle beregninger og alle de her ting? I 
==PAGE:95==
Interview Transcription | Appendix C 
93 
forhold til vores eget hus, der tror jeg det ender med at vi enten måske spørger [Arkitekt 1] om hun vil 
hjælpe os, eller Per og trækker på nogle af de mennesker som Per har været involveret med. En af de to 
ting. 
Per henviste os også til Hovmand, der ligger inde i byen, og de skrev så til os. De præsenterede sig ikke 
eller noget. Vi havde et kort møde og så skrev de at de kostede 3000 eller 2000, så kunne de komme ud til 
et formøde. Og vi var bare sådan helt: hvad går det formøde ud på? Hvad skal vi have ud af det? Og 2000 
kr. for et formøde, hvor de kommer i vores have. Altså det var sådan meget udefinerbart og det blev jeg 
sådan helt sat af på. De var slet ikke interesserede i os, de var mere interesserede i bare at komme ud at lave 
et formøde og… Ja. 
Os: 
Få lidt penge? 
Interviewperson: 
Ja måske, men vi har jo haft masser ude, som ikke skulle have nogle penge for lige 
at komme ud at lære os at kende. Det handler jo også meget om kemi. Så vi tænker nå okay, så kommer 
hun ud og så er det ikke lige det, og så har vi brugt 2000 på dig. Så det blev vi sådan lidt skræmt af, hvis jeg 
skal være ærlig. 
Os: 
Ja. Det kan være vi lige kan fortælle hvad vi har tænkt på, eller sådan. Fordi vores projekt handler 
om at vi gerne vil lave et værktøj til opstart, til f.eks. sådan nogle som jer, der går med ideen om at bygge 
et hus i CLT. Så det skulle ligesom være et tegneværktøj hvoraf man så… En masse ting kan uddrages 
automatisk. Hvad kan man sige? Som kan få det hele… Både selvfølgelig hjælpe til at projektere og tegne 
huset ud fra de simple tegninger, der bliver givet, men også til at føre det videre til arkitekt og ingeniør og 
sådan. 
Interviewperson: 
Altså sådan… Jeg skal bare lige forstå, så vi er ikke inde i CAD, som i et 
tegneprogram? Det er mere en platform eller? 
Os: 
Ja. En online baseret platform. En web-baseret platform. 
Interviewperson: 
Okay hvor man så… Hvor vi kan tegne? Eller er det arkitekterne? Eller? 
Os: 
Ja både og. Det er ikke meningen at det skal være en platform hvor man sidder og detaljerer på 
højt niveau. Det er mere en platform hvor man laver det grove design, eller sådan, og så er der en hel 
masse, der ligesom automatisk kan udledes fra det. 
==PAGE:96==
Appendix C | Interview Transcription 
94 
Interviewperson: 
Ej det lyder megafedt. 
Os: 
Ja fordi i nogle af de tilfælde, der kunne det måske være meget fedt at kunne sidde selv at prøve at 
arbejde med det, ikke? Og få noget respons tilbage. Måske i forhold til pris eller i forhold til 
ingeniørberegninger og sådan nogle ting også. 
Interviewperson: 
Det vil sige hvis jeg… Ligesom hvis vi tog udgangspunkt i at jeg har siddet og 
arbejdet i SketchUp f.eks., så går man ind og tegner huset. Og vil man så få… Så vil man få noget feedback 
på hvad det vil koste at tegne sådan et hus, eller at bygge sådan et hus og hvad det er for nogle materialer 
man har brug for? Ah okay. Smart. 
Os: 
Ja. Og det skulle også. Det kan jo blive kæmpestort, og der er jo rigtigt mange ting at tage hensyn 
til. Så vi har rigtigt mange tanker om hvad vi godt vil have det skal kunne. Også at skulle lave 
produktionsmateriale til CLT-fabrikken og sådan noget, og prøve at springe en masse trin over, hvor der 
skal dyre mennesker ind over ellers. Man kan sige at den utopiske vision ville være at den kunne alt. Det 
kommer den nok ikke til, men hvis den kan hjælpe lidt ad vejen, så ville det selvfølgelig også være en stor 
hjælp. Nu er det selvfølgelig ikke noget du behøver at have overvejet og sådan, men er der nogle ting du 
kunne forestille dig ville være bedst at vide i processen eller nogle ting, der kunne være rart at vide, som 
f.eks. prisoverslag ud fra simple tegninger? 
Interviewperson: 
Det lyder jo megagenialt. Det ville jo være lige præcist sådan noget [vi] ville have 
haft glæde af. Fordi det netop… Hvis vi vælger denne her tagkonstruktion, hvad koster det, kontra at vælge 
en anden tagkonstruktion. Hvad koster det hvis vi gerne vil sætte et hak på huset, hvis vi gerne vil have en 
vinkel på? Hvad koster det hvis vi vælger én tykkelse af CLT fremfor en anden? Hvad ville det koste at 
sætte de her vinduer i fremfor… Der ville jo være… Hvis vi brugte konventionel isolering fremfor 
træisolering? Alle sådan nogle ting. Det ville jo være… Hvis vi sætter loftsvinduer i, ville det så være 
fordyrende i forhold til ikke at gøre det. Altså alle de der tanker, som man sidder med og ikke aner noget 
om. Det lyder jo supergenialt. 
Os: 
Det er fedt at høre. 
Interviewperson: 
Det ville jo netop gøre at mange af de der led, hvor man lidt føler at man har 
masse ideer og tanker, men man bliver nødt til at have nogle, der ligesom kan formidle det ud på det der 
papir, ikke? Hvor at det ville jo være megafedt at kunne få svar selv. Og netop også i forhold til 
==PAGE:97==
Interview Transcription | Appendix C 
95 
byggetilladelse. Hvis vi laver trempel så høj, og hvis vi sætter det her ind, hvad gør det f.eks. for 
byggetilladelsen, ikke? At man havde det inde i et program så man vidste at det her hus—i mit område—
det ville blive godkendt hvis du gør det indenfor de her rammer. Det ville også være megagenialt. 
Os: 
Jamen det lyder da godt. Det er motiverende for os. 
Interviewperson: 
Ja og så kunne det være endnu mere… Altså noget, der også ville være godt det 
var at netop også det her med… Nu tænker jeg lidt på at der er de gutter der tidligeres projekt. Jamen hvad 
så hvis man bruger konventionelt frem for bæredygtige materialer? Hvad har det af betydning? 
Os: 
Så årsagen til at I har valgt CLT til jeres råhus, det er bæredygtighed og åndbarhed af materialet 
Interviewperson: 
Altså jeg synes det opfyldte alle de kriterier, som [vi] har gået og drømt om. Vi 
skal ikke bruge dampspærre. Dvs. vi skal ikke tænke på noget som helst plastic eller noget der pakker os 
ind. Alt vil være åndbart fordi vi så vil lade det stå råt og så vil bruge træfiber-batts eller noget andet 
udvendigt og så beklæde det med enten skiffer eller nogle aluminiumsplader eller træ, ikke? Så man kan 
sige at der, der opfyldte det alle de krav omkring åndbarheden. Så hurtigheden i det. Det kan jo stå på rigtig, 
rigtig kort tid. Dvs. [vi] skal ikke gå at kigge på et hus som ikke bliver lukket af lynhurtigt. Det bliver bare 
to tre dage så bliver det lukket af og så kan vi gå at arbejde at bruge al den tid vi har brug for inde i huset. 
Ja så var der selvfølgelig også det her med det bæredygtige og at det er træ. Man kan jo så altid gå i 
ekstremerne at diskutere transporten og der er også nogle af de der, når jeg er inde i de der 
bæredygtighedsforummer, så siger de at træet er for tungt og sådan nogle ting, i forhold til den måde man 
så laver konstruktionen på. Jo, så bygger vi også på skruefundament, fordi vi har en grund der er meget 
naturskøn så vi vil gerne prøve at bevare så meget af den som muligt. Og det gør jo f.eks. også at med 
CLTen, der behøver vi ikke tænke på radonspærre. Der kan vi simpelthen også bare isolere uden at tænke 
på fugt og radonspærre og alle de ting. Så der er simpelthen så mange plusser i byggeprocessen, som vi i 
hvert fald kan se. Så når vi gerne vil have at det skal stå råt, som træ indvendigt, så giver det også god 
mening. Det kan godt være vi vil lave en enkelt væg med noget tapet eller vi vil komme noget andet træ 
på eller sådan noget, men i det store hele vil vi rigtigt gerne have at det står råt. 
