==PAGE:1==
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scatter­
ing of Light
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
Master Thesis
January, 2020
By
Arne Kratz
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department for Applied Mathe­
matics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Physically Based
Rendering Theory and Probability Theory.
Arne Kratz ­ s182839
Signature
Date
ii
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This Thesis investigates multiple ways of efficiently sampling a surface for the effects
of subsurface scattering. Many methods have been presented over the years, some of
which will be investigated here for the sake of comparison. The main focus lies on a
progressive point cloud method and various ways of efficiently selecting samples from it
to reduce computation time while simultaneously selecting the samples that will contribute
most to the end product. We investigate both how to efficiently find the most important
samples by presenting various ways of assigning probabilities across an object and then
compare various techniques in regards to how to evaluate those samples.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Associate Professor in Computer Graphics, DTU
Project Supervisor
iv
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
3
3
Theory
5
3.1
The rendering equation for subsurface scattering of light . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Hierarchical Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Monte Carlo Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Importance Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Progressive Point Cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.6
Use eye path tracer to calculate importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.7
Importance of iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Sampling Methods
19
4.1
Local Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Range Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Light Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Results
35
6
Discussion
41
7
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
44
A Appendix
47
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Comparison between simple reflection model and subsurface scattering,
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BSSDF01_400.svg . . . .
1
1.2
Comparison between diffuse, dipole approximation and path traced refer­
ence, Source: Marschner, Levoy, and Hanrahan 2001 . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.1
Marble Buddha, Diffusion Approximation Only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Marble Buddha, Diffusion + Single Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Comparison between MIS and normal sampling, Source: Veach 1998 . . . 10
3.4
Bunny Scenes, Far and Close . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
Tracing Visible Vertices, Source: Toshiya Hachisuka, Ogaki, and Jensen
2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.6
Sampling noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.7
Importance of Iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.1
Sampling along the normal, Source: Alan King, Conty, and Fajardo 2013
. 21
4.2
Missing the surface, Source: King et al. 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Sampling along the normal, problem region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Multiple Importance Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Local Disk Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.7
Stanford Bunny, Marble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.8
Sphere Sampling, 122 seconds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.9
Sphere vs Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1
Marble Buddha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Scene Scale: MM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Scene Scale: CM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.4
Scene Scale: DM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.5
High Intensity Light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
A.1 Symbol Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
The term ”Subsurface Scattering” refers to the phenomena when light passes through a
translucent material and scatters beneath the surface until it either gets completely ab­
sorbed or leaves the material at another location. It is an important visual aspect of many
materials such as marble, wax or skin. In computer graphics, when not accounting for
this effect, often by simply assuming that light leaves the object at the same location (see
Figure 1.1), object will often appear much rougher than they should. An example of this
can be seen in Figure 1.2.
When depicting translucent materials in computer graphics, there are computational chal­
lenges that are not present when we simply assume an object to have a perfectly diffuse
surface, but will gain a significant boost in realism, due to the resulting soft shadows and
smooth edges.
Figure 1.1: Comparison between simple reflection model and subsurface scattering,
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BSSDF01_400.svg
Directly evaluating the full light transport can quickly become very costly especially for
highly scattering material such as milk where light can scatter hundred or thousands of
times before being fully absorbed by the material. Various simplifying approximations
have been developed over the year which speed up computation but often still run into
the problems that they are non­trivial to sample efficiently.
This Thesis will focus on the latter by investigating and comparing various techniques used
to effectively overcome the problem of having to sample the entire surface for realistic
results.
The goal of this Thesis is to investigate various methods of effectively sampling and eval­
uating the BSSRDF models for translucent materials with a main focus on a progressive
point cloud method, that is introduced in Chapter 3. The BSSRDF model itself is not of
major concern and for our results we use the classical dipole model introduced in Jensen’s
original paper.
Various models and materials are used throughout this thesis and, unless otherwise stated,
these materials are specified according to Jensen’s original paper (Marschner, Levoy, and
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
1
==PAGE:14==
Hanrahan 2001). It should also be noted that all Ray­Tracing shaders are run entirely on
the CPU and not on the GPU.
Figure 1.2: Comparison between diffuse, dipole approximation and path traced reference,
Source: Marschner, Levoy, and Hanrahan 2001
1.1
Goals
The goal of this Thesis is to investigate current methods of efficiently sampling the surface
to be able to evaluate the diffusion approximation for translucent material. The main
focus is on investigating how to utilize a progressive point cloud used in a progressive
Ray­Tracer to be able to Importance Sample surface point to efficiently sample the most
relevant parts of the object.
1.2
Outline
The next chapter will outline other approaches with regards to the rendering of translucent
materials, including some sampling methods and alternative BSSRDF models. Then in
chapter 3 we will lay out the theory, such as Monte Carlo Integration, the Progressive
Point, and Importance Sampling of the Surface, which is required to describe the methods
outlined in chapter 4, where we will first investigate a local sampling approach originally
proposed by Marschner, Levoy, and Hanrahan 2001. After that we will describe three
different methods of handling the progressive point cloud. Chapter 5 presents rendering
of various scenes using these methods, which we will then discuss in chapter 6.
2
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:15==
2
Related Work
Apart from the Standard Dipole other BSSRDF models have been proposed over the
years such as quantized­diffusion (D’Eon and Irving 2011) and models that incorporate
direction as well (J. R. Frisvad, T. Hachisuka, and Kjeldsen 2014). More recently learned
BSSRDF models have been investigated as well in Vicini, Koltun, and Jakob 2019.
Lightcuts: a scalable approach to illumination (Walter, Fernandez, et al. 2005)
Originally the Lightcut method was made to solve the many­light problem, to simplify eval­
uation in scenes with tens of thousands of lights, by clustering nearby lights together to
form approximative cluster, which reduced the number of shdaow rays that needed to be
traced and thus improved performance significantly in those cases.
Single­pass Scalable Subsurface Rendering with Lightcuts (Arbree, Walter, and
Bala 2008)
This paper presents one of multiple ways of how lighcuts can be used to evaluate BSS­
RDFs. It combines the idea of both clustering lights together and clustering the gather
points used to evaluate the BSSRDF resulting in two binary clusters, which get refined as
needed.
While not the main focus of the paper, (Walter, Khungurn, and Bala 2012) also supports
the evaluation of translucent materials.
Multiresolution Radiosity Caching for Global Illumination in Movies (Schubert and
Batali 2012)
As a side note, this paper also mentions a method of sampling for a BSSRDF, which
involves going one mean free path below the surface along the inverse surface normal
and sampling a direction on the unit sphere to cast a probe ray. In that vein it is a very
similar approach to the local sampling technique we investigate in Section 4.
A Frequency Analysis and Dual Hierarchy for Efficient Rendering of Subsurface
Scattering (Milaenen et al. 2019)
This paper tries to estimate the possible bandwidth of the BSSRDF on a per­pixel bases
and creates a dual­tree hierarchy, with one tree over the pixels and another over the
illumination samples. Especially the bandwidth estimation might lay grounds for future
work.
A learned shape­adaptive subsurface scattering model (Vicini, Koltun, and Jakob
2019)
While the BSSRDF model itself is not the focus of our Thesis, it is nonetheless a worth­
while thing to note the progress when it come to learned models. On top of this, the
paper uses a learning based approach to place the surface samples efficiently around
the translucent object, which may also be relevant to this Thesis.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
3
==PAGE:16==
4
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:17==
3
Theory
In this chapter we will lay out the underlying Theory that serves as a background for the
rendering methods presented in the next chapter. For the symbols used in this chapter,
consult Table A.1 in the Appendix.
3.1
The rendering equation for subsurface scattering of light
When rendering, we calculate the outgoing radiance at a surface point xo on a translucent
object as such (Marschner, Levoy, and Hanrahan 2001):
Lo(xo, ⃗ωo) = Le(xo, ⃗ωo) +
∫
A
∫
2π
S(xi, ⃗ωi, xo, ⃗ωo)Li(xi, ⃗ωi)cosθidωidAi
(3.1)
In this entire Thesis we will assume that all our materials are non­emitting so from now on
we will omit the emission contribution Le for simplicity:
Lo(xo, ⃗ωo) =
∫
A
∫
2π
S(xi, ⃗ωi, xo, ⃗ωo)Li(xi, ⃗ωi)cosθidωidAi
(3.2)
Many BSSRDF models make some simplifying assumptions. To keep things fairly simple
we will use the standard dipole model by Marschner, Levoy, and Hanrahan 2001 as the
BSSRDF for all results used in this thesis. The model is split up into a single scattering
(S(1)) component and diffusion approximation (Sd) component:
S(xi, ⃗ωi, xo, ⃗ωo) = Sd(xi, ⃗ωi, xo, ⃗ωo) + S(1)(xi, ⃗ωi, xo, ⃗ωo)
(3.3)
Figures 3.1 and 3.2 show the difference of only using the diffusion approximation and
combining it with the single scattering component. In this Thesis we are interested in
finding efficient ways to sample the diffusion approximation, so for the rest of this Thesis,
we will omit the single scattering term.
Their diffusion approximation is defined as follows:
Sd(xi, ⃗ωi, xo, ⃗ωo) = 1
πTi(η, ⃗ωi)Rd(∥xi −xo∥)To(η, ⃗ωo)
(3.4)
Here Rd is the diffuse reflectance:
Rd(r) =
1
4π2 (zr(1 + σtrdr)e−σtrdr
d3r
+ zv(1 + σtrdv)e−σtrdv
d3v
)
(3.5)
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
5
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Marble Buddha, Diffusion Approximation Only
Figure 3.2: Marble Buddha, Diffusion + Single Scattering
6
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Hierarchical Sampling
As we will later see, there are a multitude of ways for sampling the surface to evaluate a
BSSRDF. In a followup to the original paper, Jensen introduced a hierarchical technique
to efficiently sample and evaluate the diffusion approximation.
It is a two­pass method, where the first pass consists of sampling point across the entire
surface while ensuring a sampling amount of about A
l2u , with lu being the mean­free path
and A being the total surface area of the object we sample.
The samples are then stored in an octree where the leaves are individual samples and
each parent node stores information of all its children, namely, the illumination weighted
average position, the total surface area represented and the total irradiance form all chil­
dren.
This method has several advantages. First it allows efficient reuse of sampled points,
especially when the material is sufficiently translucent. Secondly due to the reuse of
samples it performs very well even under higher resolutions and also gives the possibility
of using other performance techniques on top.
However, it also has numerous problems. First, as mentioned in the original article, the
amount of samples required increases for denser materials and can become a serious
problem with regards to memory. It also does not account for sampling relative to what
can actually seen by the camera, thus spending unnecessary time on sample that might
not be relevant at all.
The second pass consists of evaluating the samples at each shading point by clustering far
away samples, that by themselves would have low contribution, to speed up computation.
3.3
Monte Carlo Integration
This section will briefly introduce Monte Carlo Estimators and the basic estimator to evalu­
ate 3.2. During the rest of this thesis that estimator will be redefined based on the sampling
method used.
3.3.1
PDFs and CDFs
Before going into the notion of Monte Carlo estimators, let us quickly talk about the notion
of Probability Density Functions (PDF) and Cumulative Density Functions (CDF).
For a random variable X the CDF P(x) is defined to be:
P(x) = Pr{X ≤x}
(3.6)
The PDF p(x) of X on the other hand is defined to be the derivative of the CDF:
p(x) = dP(x)
dx
(3.7)
For a uniform random variable the PDF is necessarily a constant, as any value within
the chosen domain would need to have equal probability. So for example, the PDF for a
uniform random variable over the interval [0, π] would be
pπ(x) = 1
π
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
7
==PAGE:20==
As this is constant and always integrates to one over the domain. When working with
Monte Carlo Estimators we need to be able to randomly sample values from one or more
distribution. This is not always straight forward. In many cases, on viable to do this is the
Inversion Method (M., W., and Humphreys 2016). Given some random distribution, we
find the corresponding CDF and calculate its inverse CDF −1. We can then sample a
uniform random variable ξ ∈[0, 1] and calculate CDF −1(xi) as our sampled value. Lets
showcase this for the uniform case from above. Let
Pπ be the CDF for pπ:
Pπ(x) =
∫x
0
pπ(y)dy =
∫x
0
1
πdy = x
π
We then find the inverse:
Pπ−1(x) = πx
Using this we can uniformly randomly sample a value over the domain [0, π] by calculating:
Pπ−1(ξ) = ξπ
3.3.2
Monte Carlo Estimators
Solving the integral in eq. 3.2, or most rendering related equations directly, is not feasible
in most cases as it entails accounting for the incoming lighting on the hemisphere of di­
rections over the entire surface of an object. One way to do so is Monte Carlo Integration.
Consider for example a function f. For its integral F over some interval [a,b] and N
uniform random variables X1, ..., XN, the Monte Carlo Estimator FE would be (M., W.,
and Humphreys 2016):
FE = b −a
N
N
∑
i=1
f(Xi)
(3.8)
More generally, if the distribution of our random variable is non­uniform, then the estimator
becomes:
FE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
f(Xi)
p(Xi)
(3.9)
The reason Monte Carlo Estimator are useful because they provide the correct result on
average as the expected value E[FE] is:
E[FE] =
∫b
a
f(x)dx
(3.10)
We will omit the proof for this here (see for example chapter 13.2 in M., W., and Humphreys
2016).
8
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:21==
Extending on this let us take a look how the Monte Carlo estimator would look for equation
3.2. Let us assume for now that we sample both the incoming directions and the surface
area uniformly. This would lead us we the PDF for the area:
pA(x) = 1
As
,
where As is the total amount of surface area and the directions:
pω(x) = 1
2π
Let N denote the number of position samples (xi,p) and M denote the number of directional
samples (wi,q the Monte Carlo Estimator for 3.2 then becomes:
1
NM
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
q=1
S(xi, ⃗ωi, xo, ⃗ωo)Li(xi, ⃗ωi)cosθi
pdf(xi,p)pdf(wi,q)
(3.11)
=
1
NM
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
q=1
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo −xi,p∥)Ti( ⃗
wi,q, ni, nmed)Li(xi,p, ⃗
wi,q)cosθi,q
pdf(xi,p)pdf(wi,q)
(3.12)
=
1
NM
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
q=1
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo −xi,p∥)Ti( ⃗
wi,q, ni, nmed)Li(xi,p, ⃗
wi,q)As2π
(3.13)
3.4
Importance Sampling
One thing that can ultimately define the efficiency of an estimator is how we choose to
collect our samples. In many cases, doing it uniformly random results in poor performance
as it can be very likely that the samples collected contribute very little or nothing at all to the
end result It would thus make sense to collect the sample based on an estimation of their
importance to the overall result. The general idea is that the PDF of our samples should
have a similar form to the function we want to evaluate. We will see some examples of
this later when we explore alternative ways of sampling the surface. For now, a simple
example for this would the sampling of incoming directions in eq. 3.2. If we for now
assume that the lighting intensity is roughly equal from all directions, then the directions
become less relevant the closer they get to being perpendicular to the surface normal as
the cosine factor goes to 0. It can thus be beneficial to choose a sampling distribution for
the incoming directions, where more relevant directions have a higher probability of being
sampled. The usual approach is to sample on a cosine­weighted hemisphere, which
results in the following PDF:
pcos(ω) = cos(θ)
π
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
9
==PAGE:22==
3.4.1
Multiple Importance Sampling
We will quickly run into problems though if the integral we want to estimate consists of
multiple functions. It is highly unlikely in most cases that we can find a single sampling
distribution that is a good fit for all of them. For this case we make use of the notion of
multiple importance sampling, which describes a method to effectively combine multiple
sampling approaches. Let fM be some function consisting of some combination of N
functions f1, ..., fn and let pfi describes a PDF that we think is a good fit to sample for fi.
Our Monte Carlo Estimator, using Multiple Importance Sampling then becomes (M., W.,
and Humphreys 2016):
1
N
N
∑
i=1
1
ni
ni
∑
j=1
fi(Xj)wi(Xj)
pi(Xj)
(3.14)
Figure 3.3: Comparison between MIS and normal sampling, Source: Veach 1998
Here, wi is a weighting functions that is used to weigh the i’th sampling approach to all
other sampling approaches. A common weighting function and the one used for this
Thesis is the Balance Heuristic (Veach 1998:
wj(x) =
njpj(x)
∑N
i=1 nipi(x)
(3.15)
3.5
Progressive Point Cloud
Recall from Section 3.2 where we specified an approach of sampling using a point cloud
consisting of samples that are collected uniformly across an object’s surface. It used a
pre­pass to collect a samples uniformly across the surface that would be evaluated in
a hierarchical approach. While vastly more effective than just naively sampling random
points at every shading evaluation, there are still some problems, especially concerning
the construction of the point cloud.
First of all it can require a large amount of space for highly scattering materials.For good
results the method requires a point density in the area of e−σtr∥xo−xi∥. This can quickly
become prohibiting in scenes with multiple translucent objects. Additionally it also has
the problem that it requires the samples to be selected evenly across the entire surface.
There are several methods of doing so, , but it always results in additional computational
10
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:23==
expense. On top of this, by considering the entire surface evenly we give equal weight
to areas that might be vastly difference in their importance to the overall result. A simple
example of this would an object with large portions of it lying in shadow. The rest of
this chapter presents a sampling technique(based upon a method briefly presented by
J. R. Frisvad, T. Hachisuka, and Kjeldsen 2014 and detailed by Corso 2014) and several
optimizations that help to mitigate these and other problems. Most of the evaluations
methods presented in this Thesis will rely on this sampling technique. The method starts
with a prepass where a number of irradiance samples will be calculated. In a progressive
path tracer this pass would be done at the start of each iteration. The samples a calculated
as follows:
Let M be a mesh with N triangles with a total surface area of Atotal. The total surface area
of M is equal to the sum of the area of all N triangles. To uniformly samples Ms surface we
first need to randomly select one of its triangles. This can be done uniformly by assigning
each triangle a probability relative to their surface area. Let Ti be some triangle in M with
surface area Ai. The PDF for selecting Ti would then be defined as:
p(Ti) =
Ai
Atotal
(3.16)
This results in the triangle being selected uniformly according to their surface area. After
a triangle has been selected a point on it would be randomly sampled uniformly across
its surface, so any x on Ti would have the following probability to be selected:
pTi(x) = 1
Ai
(3.17)
This results in a constant PDF for any point x on the surface of M:
p(x) = pTi(x)p(Ti) =
1
Atotal
(3.18)
As the BSSRDF contribution has an exponential falloff with regards to distance it makes
sense to concentrate on sampling points closer to xo, we also introduce an acceptance
function acc(x) for points to be either accepted or rejected, along with a probability function
pacc(x). Our acceptance function is defined as:
acc(∥xo −xi∥, ξ) =
{
1
if ξ < e−σtr∥xo−xi∥
0
otherwise
(3.19)
From this the probability function is defined as:
pacc(∥xo −xi∥) = e−σtr∥xo−xi∥
(3.20)
Using this evaluation approach the new Monte Carlo Estimator becomes:
1
NM
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
q=1
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo −xi,p∥)Ti( ⃗
wi,q, ni, nmed)Li(xi,p, ⃗
wi,q)cosθi,q
pdf(xi,p)pdf(wi,q)pacc(∥xo −xi,p∥)
(3.21)
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
11
==PAGE:24==
=
1
NM
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
q=1
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo −xi,p∥)Ti( ⃗
wi,q, ni, nmed)Li(xi,p, ⃗
wi,q)Aπacc(∥xo −xi,p∥, ξp)
e−σtr∥xo−xi∥
(3.22)
3.5.1
Improving the surface samples
Until now when we initialized the sampling points for an iteration, every point on the mesh
had the same probability for being selected, with the PDF of any point on a triangle Ti
being
1
Ai and the PDF for any triangle
Ai
Atotal , resulting in the PDF of any point on the
mesh being
1
Atotal . However not all parts of the mesh surface are equally important when
evaluating the BSSRDF of the relevant points on the mesh. Figure 3.4 shows an example
of this. The scene consists of a marble bunny and a directional light. The scene scale
is in decimeter, so the bunny is fairly dense. While about half of surface area is visible,
and thus relevant even for dense materials, in Figure 3.4a only a small fraction is visible in
3.4b which is a closeup on the bunnies ear. The problem is that with the uniform approach
from above, the sampling is exactly the same for both case, even though the sample
for calculating 3.4b should be focused around the ear instead of the entire mesh. This
problem can be solved by giving areas on the surface different importance values based
on how relevant they are relative to the total computation. In the case of Figure 3.4b, the
rest of the body from the bunny is hardly ever relevant, so those areas should be sampled
with lower probability, while in the case of Figure 3.4a the side of the bunny facing the
camera should be sampled more densely than the other side.
(a) Full Bunny
(b) Closeup (ear)
Figure 3.4: Bunny Scenes, Far and Close
In the next two sections we will take a look at how one might calculate these improved
probabilities. For now lets assume that every triangle vertex in the mesh has been as­
signed some weight. A triangle Ti, comprised of the vertices vi,0, vi,1 and vi,2, with weights
wi,0, wi,1 and wi,2 would then have a weight that as the average of its vertex weights:
w(Ti) = wi,0 + wi,1 + wi,2
3
(3.23)
12
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:25==
Let WM be the sum of all triangle weights of a Mesh M. Then the PDF of selecting some
triangle in the mesh is defined to be:
pM(Ti) = wi,0 + wi,1 + wi,2
3WM
(3.24)
3.6
Use eye path tracer to calculate importance
There a numerous ways of how the vertex weights could be calculated. One such way
is to give each triangle vertex a weight based on its distance to the nearest point that is
visible to the camera. That way we prioritize points that are nearby to possible shading
points, which are the ones that are most likely to give a high contribution, especially if the
material is fairly dense.
One way of calculating this to perform a pre­pass before the first time we create the point
cloud for a translucent object. Here we simply trace one or rays from the camera/eye for
every pixel until we hit the surface of the object and then save the hit location. We also
account for the case where mirrors or transparent object are in the scene when trying to
find visible parts of the object. Figure 3.5 shows an example of this where we find visible
spots on the wall even through the glass sphere in the middle. The number of bounces the
ray can perform due to reflections etc. can be bound to an upper limit to lower computation
cost. Then for some triangle vertex vi, let ei be the closest vertex we have traced in this
pre­pass. Then the weight of vi is:
w(vi) =
1
∥xo −xi∥
(3.25)
How the closest vertex is found is up to implementation. For our results we stored the
vertices from the pre­pass in a Kd­tree and used it to perform nearest neighbour search
to calculate the weights. After the weight calculation is done, the camera­vertices can
be discarded. If the scene changes over time due to animations, then this pass must be
computed again every time the scene changes.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
13
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.5: Tracing Visible Vertices, Source: Toshiya Hachisuka, Ogaki, and Jensen 2008
Adaptive Sampling
In this section we present an alternative approach to calculating the vertex weights from
Section 3.5.1. Instead of having an expensive pre­pass to calculate the weight of each
triangle vertex, we can also iteratively improve the weights during the rendering process.
Assuming that the scene does not change between iterations, we can examine which
sample points were most relevant in the computation from the last iteration and use this
to adjust the importance of the surface area. Let wi be the weight of the i’th triangle
vertex of the mesh. When using a sample point s for the BSSRDF calculation we can
then evaluate its importance ws (by for example looking at how often it was used/relevant
in the current iteration) and distribute that importance across the triangle it is in based on
its barycentric coordinates. For a sampling point, located in the j’th triangle face fj with
barycentric coordinates (u, v, w = 1−u−v), we can then increase the weight of the three
vertices of the face:
w1 = w1 + u ∗ws,
w2 = w2 + v ∗ws,
w3 = w3 + w ∗ws
The weight of a triangle face is then again evaluated by the average of its vertices:
wT = w1 + w2 + w3
3
(3.26)
Now the pdf for a triangle face becomes its weight multiplied by its area relative to the
sum of all triangle weights and areas:
14
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:27==
pdf(Tj) =
ATj ∗wTj
∑n
i=1 wTi ∗ATi)
(3.27)
In the first iteration all weights are 1, which gives us the original uniform distribution of
sampling points.
3.6.1
Increase Precision
Sampling a triangle uniformly can lead to problems when giving each triangle an impor­
tance weight that is not just dependant on the size of the triangle. Consider a low­poly
mesh such as a simple marble block, as seen in Figure 3.6. Due to the different weights
based on their distance to the closest eye path vertex, two adjacent triangles can have
vastly different weights even though they otherwise are identical. This problem also arises
in our adaptive approach as its weighting is nearly identical to eye path vertex approach.
A way of solving this is to increase the precision of the importance weighting of each
triangle. Instead of uniformly sampling a triangle after importance sampling a specific
triangle, our improved approach is to assign a weight to each point in a triangle according
to average of their weights and the distance to each of three vertices. Let si be some point
on a triangle with vertex weights w1, w2 and w3. In the original method the pdf of selecting
si would be constant across the entire triangle. Ideally the pdf for a point with barycentric
coordinates u,v on the triangle T, would be: pdfT (u, v) = u ∗w1 + v ∗w2 + (1 −u −v) ∗w3.
However, it turns out that finding sampling points according to this pdf proves difficult,
so we need to approximate it. One way of doing this is to split the triangle up into three
triangles of equal weight. This can be done by finding the barycenter:
P = w1 ∗v1 + w2 ∗v2 + w3 ∗v3
w1 + w2 + w3
We can then use the barycenter as a splitting point, to create three new triangles out of the
original one. Each of these triangles will have the same weight, which is one third of the
original triangles weight. The triangle furthest away from the vertex with the highest weight
would then have the biggest area, which would reflect the lower pdf for any one point in
that triangle. To sample a point we would then select one the new triangles with equal
probability and sample a point within that triangle with uniform probability. To improve the
likeness to the ideal pdf mentioned earlier, we could repeat the splitting step, by recursively
splitting the sub triangles and then picking one of the sub triangles at random to sample
our point. As the number of sub triangles approaches infinity, we reach the ideal pdf, so
we choose our splitting level depending on how precise the weights within a triangle need
to be.
3.7
Importance of iterations
Another thing to consider is that the first few iterations should contribute less to the end
result, especially if there is a considerable increase in average sample over iterations.
Figure 3.7 shows this. The scene for these images is a closeup of a dense marble statue.
Figure 3.7a shows the result of the first iteration, where the average amount of relevant
samples is 4,4. After 1 iteration, the average number of samples has become 506, which
can be seen in Figure 3.7b. However, the high variance from the first iteration is still
present, because each iteration is weighed the same. If we weigh iterations based on their
amount of relative samples we can significantly improve the result. Figure 3.7c shows this
case, where the second iteration is set to be more than 100 times more important. Another
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
15
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Sampling noise
approach would be to ignore the results of the first few iterations and only use the weights
that were calculated during those evaluations.
16
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:29==
(a) 1 Iteration
(b) 2 Equal Iterations
(c) 2 Weighted Iterations
Figure 3.7: Importance of Iterations
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
17
==PAGE:30==
18
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:31==
4
Sampling Methods
The following chapter resolves around presenting various method of sampling the surface
of a translucent object. This is split into two separate sections. First we will investigate a
local sampling technique as first mentioned by Jensen Marschner, Levoy, and Hanrahan
2001 with improvements provided by Alan King, Conty, and Fajardo 2013. After this we
will take a look at three different methods of evaluating the progressive point cloud that
was introduced in the previous chapter.
4.1
Local Sampling
Before going over the methods make use of the progressive point cloud presented in the
previous chapter, we will look at a method that proves very useful when working with very
dense materials as the problem with all methods that sample the entire object surface
is that they require a very dense set of data points to be accurate, many of which might
rarely never be used which wastes both memory and computational effort. This local
sampling technique avoids these problems and, in contrast to all the other methods that
are investigated in this thesis, requires no pre­pass and has no memory overhead.
Consider a translucent object that we want to shade. Considering the exponential falloff
over distance present in the BSSRDF model, it makes sense that we should focus our
search for samples on nearby surface points. This can be done by sampling a random
search distance that prioritizes nearer samples. We define our PDF as such:
pexp(x) = σtre−σtrx
(4.1)
The corresponding CDF is:
Pexp(x) =
∫x
0
pexp(y)dy = 1 −e−σtrx
(4.2)
For our use of these functions x would be the distance between our sample and the current
surface point we want to shade (xo). At each shading point xo we randomly sample a
distance and an angle. The angle will be sampled uniformly across 2π, while the distance
will be sampled according to the exponential falloff: e−rσtr, where r is the distance from a
sample to the shading point and σtr is the effective transport coefficient introduced earlier.
These values will then be used as follows. Let no be the surface normal at xo, θo, be the
sampled angle and d be the sampled distance.
Recall the rendering equation for subsurface scattering:
Lo(xo, ⃗wo) =
∫
A
∫
2π
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo −xi∥)Ti( ⃗wi, ni, nmed)Li(xi, ⃗wi)cosθidwidA
We can then define Av to be the surface area A viewed from the view direction v and
let |dA/dAv| be (As shown in Mertens et al. 2003):
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
19
==PAGE:32==
|dA/dA′| =
1
v · no
With no being the surface normal at the shading point xo. Let us define the following
function:
int(r, α, v) =
{
1
if a ray in direction v, starting at (r, α) intersects with the object surface
0
otherwise
(4.3)
Here (r, α) are polar coordinates and denote a radius angle angle. If we define dAv in
polar coordinates:
dAv = int(r, alpha, v)rdrdα
(4.4)
Then we can reformulate dA as
dA =
1
v · no
int(r, α, v)rdrdα
Assuming some max radius Rmax for our distance sampling, the integral would then be­
come:
Lo(xo, ⃗wo) =
∫
2π
∫Rmax
0
∫
2π
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo−xi,p∥)Ti( ⃗wi, ni, nmed)Li(xi,p, ⃗wi)cosθidwirdrdα
The monte carlo estimator for this would be:
2π
NMK
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
q=1
K
∑
l=1
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo −xi,p,q∥)Ti( ⃗
wi,l, ni, nmed)Li(xi,p,q, ⃗
wi,l)cosθi,lrpint(rp, αq, −no)
pdf(rp)pdf(xi,p,q)pdf(wl)
The 2π factor comes from the fact that, given a radius r, we would uniformly randomly
choose an angle θ to sample the polar coordinate (r, θ), so the pdf would be
1
2π.
There are three other relevant pdfs in this estimator:
The first one for rp describes the pdf for the sampled radius, which is sampled according
to the exponential falloff of the BSSRDF and is defined as :
pdf(rp) = e−σtrrp
The scond one for xi,p,q describes and is defined as:
pdf(xi,p,q) = ⃗no ·
⃗
ni,p,q
20
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:33==
Lastly pdf(wk) describes the probability of sampling a cosine weighted hemisphere for
sampling the irradiance at the sample loaction:
pdf(wk) = cosθk
π
Figure 4.1: Sampling along the normal, Source: Alan King, Conty, and Fajardo 2013
4.1.1
Implementation
Using this method in a ray­tracer is fairly straightforward. Whenever we shade a point on
a translucent material choose a random axis according to the aforementioned probability
distribution. Then we need to sample a point on a disk. This involves both sampling a
radius and angle. The angle is sampled uniformly: 2πξ1, where ξ1, is a uniform random
variable in the interval [0,1]. The radius is then sampled according to the exponential
falloff by inversion resulting in r = −log(ξ2)
σtr
, with ξ2 being a uniform random variable in the
range (0,1]. The disk is then positioned such that the normal of the disk is then the inverse
of the chosen axis. Using the angle and radius we then find the point on the disk an cast
a ray from it in the inverse direction of the chosen axis and a max length of double the
sampled radius. We can then check for intersection with the object to find sample points
close to the shading point.
4.1.2
Multiple Importance Sampling
There is however a problem with sampling this way. Based on the local geometry, there
is a chance of the probe rays missing the object entirely. Consider for example Figure
4.2, where the sample rays are parallel to the object’s surface, thus missing it in all cases.
Large portions of the local geometry are rarely hit using the current method. Figure 4.3
shows this problem in action, where most of the noise is in crevices of the robe and gen­
erally regions with quickly changing curvature. One way to solve this problem is by also
sampling along the tangent and bi­normal using multiple importance sampling. For any
shading point xo, whenever we want to find a new sample, we would randomly choose one
of the three axes instead of just the normal. The probability distribution used in this thesis
for the normal, tangent and bi­normal is (0.5, 0.25, 0.25), which is the same distribution
as used in the original paper by King et. al. A possible extension to this could be to adapt
these probabilities based on the local geometry. For a simple box for example, it would
be enough to only sample along the surface normal. The differences between these two
approaches can be seen in Figure 4.3 and 4.4. We can see here both the advantages and
disadvantages of using all axes. The high­frequency noise that a particularly noticeable
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
21
==PAGE:34==
in the crevices of the robe are completely gone. However, we have basically swapped
these localized fireflies with more uniform noise across the entire surface, which most of
the time is more desirable especially considering that this method has a better conver­
gence, as the fireflies in Figure 4.3 usually take considerable computation time before
they completely disappear.
Figure 4.2: Missing the surface, Source: King et al. 2013
Figure 4.3: Sampling along the normal, problem region
22
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.4: Multiple Importance Sampling
Another problem that needs to be addressed is how to handle probe rays that hit multi­
ple points in the object. Just using the first point hit would not result in a correct picture.
The most straightforward approach of handling this would be to evaluate all points along
the ray, but this could be costly especially if the sampling radius gets larger for more
translucent materials. Another approach would be to choose a sample at random. This
would preferably be done in an importance sampling fashion where samples closer to
the shading point are chosen with higher probability as they are more likely to have a
relevant contribution to the end result. The probability for any hitpoint xi would simply
be pdf(xi) = e−σtr∥xi−xo∥
d
, where d to summed probability of all N hitpoints and is used to
normalize the pdf:
d =
N
∑
i=1
e−σtr∥xi−xo∥
4.1.3
Problems
While the local method performs well for near diffuse materials it has a major flaw in
environments with high intensity lighting environment. Consider for example the following
setup, as shown in Figure 4.5, where the head of a marble statue is illuminated by a small
high intensity laser. Even though the lighting falloff is exponential in the distance, the
contribution of the laser stays relevant almost to the bottom of the statue. This case cannot
efficiently be solved by only sampling locally as the sampling weight is only dependant on
the distance and not on the illumination that arrives at any given point on the object. For
environments like these there is a need to complement the local sampling with a method
that considers illumination on the entire object.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
23
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.5: Reference
Figure 4.6: Local Disk Sampling
24
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Range Sampling
In section 3.5 we briefly discussed a simple way of evaluating the samples in our progres­
sive point cloud (equation 3.19), where we accepted/rejected a sample with a probability
relative to their distance to xo. The problem with this method is that it still needs to go
through each sample to perform the distance computations necessary to see if the sample
gets rejected or not, which becomes quite expensive especially if most samples get re­
jected due to the material being dense. In this section we will take a look at two techniques
that are based on reformulating the rejection approach and achieve better performance
through the use of efficient data structures.
4.2.1
Reformulating the rejection sampling
Let xo be some position on a translucent object. Then for any such xo we sample a
distance d according to the falloff of e−σtr∥xo−xi∥. We will then use this distance to accep­
t/reject samples with. We can thus simply 3.19:
acc(x, d) =
{
1
if x <= d
0
otherwise
(4.5)
Having to only sample this distance value once for each xo allows us redefine the accep­
t/reject problem such that we instead only evaluate samples within the sampled distance
from xo. This allows us to use any data structure that allows for efficient range search. In
our case we use a Kd­tree. Each entry into our tree would at least require the following
information.
• Position, 3D vector (96 Bit)
• Irradiance RGB value, 3D vector (96 bit)
As with the local sampling technique we can importance sample a random distance with
the function −log(ξ)
σtr
.
When evaluating Lo(xo, ⃗ωo) for any xo we would then traverse the tree to find all the sam­
ples that are within the sampled distance of xo. For every sample, when evaluating its
contribution we need to also consider the probability the sample had of being included.
Lets start by defining the CDF for this case. Recall the PDF for the sampled distance:
pacc(x) = σtre−σtrx
We found that the corresponding CDF was:
Pacc(x) = 1 −e−σtrx
Since the CDF denotes the probability of the sampled distance being less than or equal to
the input value then we can use that to define the probability that the sample was included.
Suppose we have traversed our Kd­tree and found K position samples x1, ..., xK. All of
these samples have a distance to xo that was less than or equal to the sampled distance
d. The chance for this happening for any sample i would be equal to the chance of d being
higher than ∥x0 −xi∥, which would be equal to 1 −P(x) as per the definition of a CDF.
Thus the probability of any sample being included would be:
pd(x) = 1 −Pacc(x) = e−σtrx
(4.6)
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
25
==PAGE:38==
We can then reformulate our Monte Carlo Estimator as follows:
1
NM
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
q=1
To( ⃗wo, no, nmed)Rd(∥xo −xi,p∥)Ti( ⃗
wi,q, ni, nmed)Li(xi,p, ⃗
wi,q)As2π
(4.7)
There are some niche cases where this method would perform worse than the simple
accept/reject method and that would be if a overwhelming majority of the samples have a
high likelihood of being accepted, in which case the overhead of building the Kd­tree and
traversing it is outperformed by simply looping over all samples. However, this has never
been an issue in any of the scene composition tested in this Thesis, even for the most
dense of materials and it is fair to assume that it will rarely be a real issue.
A small problem of this method is the noise it creates, if there is only a low number of
iterations. Consider the example in Figure 4.7. For all three results we used 500000
surface samples. Figure 4.9b uses the old approach rejection approach from section 3.5,
while the other two use the new approach from this section. Figure 4.9b and 4.7b use a
single pass while Figure 4.7c uses ten passes with 50000 samples each. We can see that
the result from the new approach with multiple iterations has less noise than the one with
a single pass, because the problem with using few iterations is that the sampled distance
for any shading point can be so small that no relevant samples were found even though it
could be very possible that there are multiple nearby samples that would have contributed
significantly to the result, resulting in black spots. Figure 4.9b does not have this problem,
even though it only uses one pass, as we accept/reject on a per sample basis instead of a
per­shading point basis. However, we can see that it is significantly slower than the new
approaches.
(a) Rejection, 1 pass,
996 seconds
(b) Range, 1 pass,
53.5 seconds
(c) Range, 10 passes,
53.7 seconds
Figure 4.7: Stanford Bunny, Marble
Another small problem with the this approach is the exact opposite situation the one we
jsut mentioned. Sometimes the sampled distance can be so large that it encompasses
the entire object, even though the material might be very dense, which for a large amount
of samples can create a bottleneck, where the evaluation of a single shading point can
take significantly longer than any other point on samples that are most likely not relevant.
However this case is very rare as the probability falls of exponentially with distance.
We will also in the next chapter see that this method has the same problem with high
intensity lighting (see Fig. 4.5) as the local sampling method.
26
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:39==
4.2.2
Sphere Tree Sampling
In the last section we sampled a acceptance distance at each shading point xo to limit
the samples we consider. An alternative approach to this would be to instead sample a
distance at each sample location. In the pre­pass while we collected our desired amount of
surface samples we can also sample a random distance for each of them. This distance is
sampled identical to how it was done in the previous sections ( −log(ξ)
σtr
). Now each sample
is represented by a position xi, and radius ri and can thus be thought of as a sphere of
influence each sample has. To see if a sample would be considered for evaluation at xo,
we could simply check if xo lies within that sphere. Our acceptance function of a sample
(xi, ri) then becomes:
acc(xi, ri, xo) =
{
1
if ∥xo −xi∥<= ri
0
otherwise
(4.8)
Implementation
A simple way to efficiently accept/reject samples is to store them in a bounding volume
hierarchy. Assume we have K samples x1, ..., xK with radii r1, ..., rK. We construct the
hierarchy as as tree. The leaves of the tree are represented by the individual samples
and their radius. Each other node in the tree then represents a cluster containing all
its children in it, with the root representing all K samples. We will create these cluster
nodes as follows. We will start with creating the root of the tree. The root is represented
by a bounding sphere that encompasses all the spheres defined by the K samples. To
define the two children of the root we will then find the sample xfar that is furthest away
from the average position of all samples. We then find another sample xother which is
the sample furthest away from xfar. These two samples are now used to create two
clusters. Each sample is now assigned either to xfar or xother, whichever is closer, until
all samples has been assigned to on of the two clusters. Both clusters are then defined
by a bounding sphere that encompasses all samples within them, similar to the root. This
process is repeated recursively until the resulting clusters only contain a single sample,
which makes them a leaf.
Traversing the tree to find relative samples is fairly straightforward. Assume we want to
find samples to evaluate the BSSRDF at xo. We check if xo is within the bounding sphere
of of the root. If it is not, then we return an empty list of samples. Otherwise, we do the
same check for both children. We do this recursively and if we reach a leaf node and see
that xo is within the bounding sphere of that leaf, we ad the sample of that leaf to our list.
Once we have no more node to evaluate we return the list of samples.
Figure 4.8 shows the result when applying this new method on the same bunny model as
in the previous section. We can see that the noise made by the dark spots is not present
here, as it is much more likely that each shading point evaluates at least a few samples,
especially if the sample count is high. However, we can see that it takes considerably
longer to evaluate the same amount of samples compared to before. We will mostly fix
this problem in the next section.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
27
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.8: Sphere Sampling, 122 seconds
Incorporate Irradiance
One big advantage of sampling the distance for each surface sample instead of at the
shading point is that we can incorporate other information about the sample than just its
position. Consider for example a shading point xo and two surface samples x1 and x2.
Both are equally far away from xo but are at different locations on the object. x1 is barely
illuminated while x2 is illuminated by a high intensity light source. It is fair to assume that
x2 will have a higher influence on the final color of xo than x1 but until now, all the methods
we mentioned would weigh them equally because they only regard distance. Using our
new sphere approach we could scale the sphere radius up and down based on the amount
of illumination that was received at a sample. There a various ways one could approach
this. We decided to use an extra weight that is based on the irradiance at each sample.
Let Lavg be the average irradiance across all samples in the point cloud and α >= 1 be a
control variable to limit how much the radius can be scaled up or down. All results in this
Thesis use α = 10. Then the weight of each sample becomes:
wr(Li, Lavg, α) = 1 −
log(Lavg
Li )
α
(4.9)
Assuming we have already sampled a random radius for a sample, we will then scale the
radius as such:
rscaled(ri, Li, Lavg, α) =
ri
min( 1
α, wr(Li, Lavg, α))
(4.10)
To properly calculate the probabilities when evaluating a sample we also need to save the
value of min( 1
α, wr) with each sample. When evaluating a sample xi, the probability for it
to have been chosen then changes to:
28
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:41==
psphere(xi) = e−σtr∥xo−xi∥min( 1
α,wr)
(4.11)
Figure 4.9 shows the improvements we get out of this. All examples used 500000 surface
samples for each pass. We can see a significant speed­up compared to the normal radius
we used before as we are now basing the radius on the overall contribution of a sample
and not just the distance, which results in less samples that we need to evaluate. We can
also see when comparing Figure 4.9c and 4.9d that using (roughly) equal time we get a
much better result using the new approach, as it manages to do three passes instead of
one in the same time, without needing to disregard important samples in each pass.
(a) Normal Sphere, 1 pass, 122 seconds
(b) Scaled Sphere, 1 pass, 18.2 seconds
(c) Scaled Sphere, 3 passes, 47 seconds
(d) Range, 10 passes, 53.7 seconds
Figure 4.9: Sphere vs Range
Recall, that using the local or Kd­tree approach, we can run into problem with high­
frequency lighting like for example lasers. Consider for example the previously mentioned
scene in Figure 4.5. Using the previous approach or the local sampling method results
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
29
==PAGE:42==
in fireflies and would take forever to converge to the correct result as the methods only
focus on distance and not light intensity. In this new approach, however, we can scale the
radius according to the average illumination in the scene which gets rid of this problem.
We will see a comparison for this in the next chapter.
Optimizations
There might be a possibility to further optimize the sphere radius sampling as it right
now uses a fairly simple implementation of a hierarchical sphere­tree compared to the
optimized kd­tree used for the original approach. The problem would be identical to a
sphere collision detection.
30
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:43==
4.3
Light Cuts
As briefly mentioned in Chapter 2, Lightcuts were introduced by Walter, Fernandez, et al.
2005, as a way to solve the ”many light problem”, that is the problem of rendering scene
with tens­ or hundred of thousands of lightsources, often virtual point lights (VPLs). The
methods starts by constructing a light tree out of the light sources in the scene. A light tree
is a binary tree where each leaf represents a light source and each other node in the tree
represents a cluster consisting of all the light sources in that node’s sub­tree, such that the
root of the tree is a representation of all light sources in the scene. Each non­leaf node,
also called cluster, contains the total power of all the lights in the leaves of the clusters
sub­tree, and the axis­aligned bounding­box encompassing all the positions of the lights
in that sub­tree. In our case, lights are actually irradiance samples from our progressive
point cloud, which we described earlier A light cut is then a collection of clusters that to­
gether contains the leaves of the entire tree. The roughest cut of a light tree only contains
the root and the largest cut consists of all the leaves in the tree and corresponds to just
evaluating all the samples the tree is based on directly. In the original paper, clusters
were represented by a representative light that was selected beforehand. This approach
is problematic however. Already in the case for light sources a single representative is
often not a good fit to represent the entire cluster relative to all possible shading points.
This problem is even more significant in our case because of the exponential falloff com­
pared to the inverse squared falloff present for lighting. We solve this by following the
approach used for stochastic lightcuts (Yuksel 2020). Here the representative for a clus­
ter is calculated on the fly for each shading point, which gives a better fit in exchange for
a higher computation cost when evaluating the tree.
4.3.1
Building the tree
Each leaf in the light tree will represent a sample and consist of the following information:
• Position, 3D vector
• RGB Irradiance, 3D vector
The remaining nodes in the tree are clusters that are representations of all their child
nodes, similar to how we built the tree in the previous section.
There are various ways how such a tree can be build. depending on how what strategy
we use to cluster the lights.
The simplest, but slow, way of constructing such a tree is to continuously find the two
closest clusters/lights and create a new cluster out of them, with the two clusters/lights as
its children. This is done until there is only one cluster which represents the root of the
tree.
Calculating the representative sample
When evaluating the tree to find the total contribution of the samples for a shading point
xo we traverse the tree from the root. For each node in the tree we evaluate we calculate
the representative sample for that cluster. The way this is done, is to calculate the the
Sd term for both child clusters. As the distance for the calculation we use the shortest
distance between the bounding box of the cluster and xo, and for the radiance we use the
average radiance from all samples of the cluster. Lets call that total contribution Lci. We
then select one of the two children c1 and c2 at random, with their probabilities being:
wc1 =
Lc1)
Lc1 + Lc2
wc2 = 1 −wc1
(4.12)
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
31
==PAGE:44==
We then repeat the procedure for its children and so forth, until we reach a leaf, which
will be our representative for the evaluated cluster. We also keep track of the probability
of the representative by keeping the total product from all the probabilities used to select
the representative.
Calculating Error
When deciding is we just evaluate a cluster or need to further traverse its sub­tree we
calculate an error estimation. If that estimation is below a user­specified bound then that
cluster is deemed accurate enough and is part of the cut. For the error estimation we use
the same approach as Jensen and Buhler 2002 used in their hierarchical approach, using
the solid angle spanned by all the samples in the cluster:
∆ω =
Av
(⃗x −⃗Pv)2
Here Av is the area represented by all the samples in the cluster and Pv is the average
position of the samples in the cluster, weighted by their irradiance values.
Finding A Cut
With the error estimation in place we can now start evaluating the tree. Assume we want
to find the overall contribution arriving at a shading point xo. We start traversing the tree
from the root and calculate the error for the root. If it is below the chosen threshold then
we just calculate the representative sample for the root and are done. The cut consists
then only of the root node. Otherwise, we take the two child clusters, calculate their error
and put them into a priority queue, which represents the current cut. The queue is sorted,
such that the first element that gets removed from the queue is the cluster with the highest
error. If the error of that cluster is below the threshold, then we put it back into the queue
and are done. Otherwise we split the cluster up into its two children and put them back
into the queue and repeat until we are below the error threshold. To improve performance
we may also specify a maximum cut size. If that size is reached then we may stop and just
return the current cut even though it has an error above our threshold. When evaluating
the contribution of each representative sample in the cut, it will be divided by the probability
it had to be chosen.
Calculating Contribution
When we want to find a light cut we have a few conditions. First we want the error of each
cluster estimate, which is calculated based on the clusters’ representative to be beneath
a certain threshold, in our case 2%. However, this can often lead to lengthy calculations,
so we also limit the size of the cut, such that the running time remains reasonable. A cut
size of 10 was used for the examples below. We start with evaluating the tree at the root
cluster. If this cluster estimate is below the error threshold we just return the result of that
cluster, otherwise we add its children to our sample list. Then we get the cluster from our
list with the highest error and evaluate the representative lights and error estimate, where
after we again put them in the sample list until either our error conditions or the maximum
cut size is reached.
After finding a suitable cut the final contribution for the shading points is evaluated by
summing the contribution of the representative lights, which a scaled based on their prob­
abilities to have been chosen in their sub­tree.
Choice of error threshold and cut size
The choice of error threshold and maximum cut size is mainly a trade off between per­
formance and quality. Below we can see how changing these parameters can affect the
overall result.
32
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:45==
4.3.2
Optimizations
When finding the representative for a cluster it often happens that we have to redo the
same calculations for some clusters, when calculating the probabilities for each relevant
node in a sub­tree. Therefore it makes sense to keep a cache of these calculations.
Another optimization which is also used in the original paper is to reuse the representative
sample of a node for the child node that contains that sample and only recalculate the error
and probability.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
33
==PAGE:46==
34
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:47==
5
Results
In this chapter we will show comparisons between the methods outline in Chapter 4 and
how they perform in various scenes. In the next chapter we will then discuss the results in
detail. Apart from the reference pictures and unless otherwise stated, all results have been
rendered in 10 minutes. Three different scenes are used for the results: Happy Buddha,
Cornell, and High Intensity. The ”Happy Buddha” scene consist just of a marble statue
(Happy Buddha) and a directional light. The ”Cornell” scene consists of the Cornell Box
but instead of blocks, there is a marble statue in the middle (Erato). The ”High Intensity”
scene is that same marble statue but the head is encased in a box that contains an area
light of extremely high intensity. When describing the results using the point cloud we will
use the terms ”uniform” and ”weighted”. ”Uniform” describes the approach of sampling
the surface uniformly as described in Section 3.5. For the ”weighted” approach we will
use the approach from Section 3.6. The reason we use this approach over the adaptive
from Section 3.6 is that it is easier to compare it to other methods, as the adaptive method
has many parameters that can influence its effectiveness such as the importance of each
iteration, how much weight is assigned in each iteration and the complexity level when
calculating the weight across a triangle.
All the following results have been computed on a computer with the following specifica­
tions:
• NVIDIA GTX 1070
• Intel Core i5­4590 CPU @ 3.30GHz
• 16 GB DDR3 Memory, 1333 MHz
• Windows 10 Home
The following 3D models were used for the results below and throughout the Thesis:
• Stanford Bunny (McGuire July 2017)
• Erato (McGuire July 2017)
• Happy Buddha (McGuire July 2017)
• Cornell Box (Jeppe Revall Frisvad 2020)
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
35
==PAGE:48==
(a) Local Sampling, RMSE: 0.03
(b) Range Sampling, RMSE: 0.028
(c) Sphere Sampling, Normal, RMSE: 0.0085
(d) Sphere Sampling, Scaled, RMSE: 0.0055
(e) Lightcut, Cutsize: 5000, RMSE: 0.0128
(f) Reference
Figure 5.1: Marble Buddha
36
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:49==
(a) Local Sampling,
RMSE: 0.21241
(b) Range Sampling, Uniform,
RMSE: 0.0185
(c) Range Sampling, Weighted,
RMSE: 0.0186
(d) Sphere Sampling, Scaled, Weighted,
RMSE: 0.038
(e) Lightcut, Cutsize: 500, Weighted,
RMSE: 0.0287
(f) Reference
Figure 5.2: Scene Scale: MM
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
37
==PAGE:50==
(a) Local Sampling,
RMSE: 0.22
(b) Range Sampling, Uniform,
RMSE: 0.03734
(c) Range Sampling, Weighted,
RMSE: 0.048
(d) Sphere Sampling, Scaled, Weighted,
RMSE: 0.035
(e) Lightcut, Cutsize: 50,
RMSE: 0.0562
(f) Reference
Figure 5.3: Scene Scale: CM
38
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:51==
(a) Local Sampling, RMSE: 0.126
(b) Range Sampling, Uniform,
RMSE: 0.1068
(c) Range Sampling, Weighted,
RMSE: 0.0422
(d) Sphere Sampling, Scaled, Weighted,
RMSE: 0.022
(e) Lightcut, Cutsize: 50,
RMSE: 0.059
(f) Reference
Figure 5.4: Scene Scale: DM
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
39
==PAGE:52==
(a) Lightcuts
(b) Sphere Sampling, Normal
(c) Sphere Sampling, Scaled
(d) Reference
Figure 5.5: High Intensity Light
40
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:53==
6
Discussion
In this chapter we will take a look at the results from the previous chapter and discuss
how the different methods presented in this Thesis have performed under specific cir­
cumstances.
6.0.1
Marble Buddha
The marble Buddha is a very simple scene with only a single object and a directional
light. All methods give at least fairly decent results. That being said, both the local and
the range sampling methods perform significantly worse than the rest with is mostly due to
the high­frequency noise that they exhibit. Both sphere sampling variations perform fairly
equally, with the scaled approach being a little better. This would be expected as there
in this scene is no highly notable variance in illumination across the entire object, except
for the few areas that lie in complete shadow, so the illumination based scaling is not as
much of a help as it would be in more complex scene compositions. If the object would
have been lit by an area light instead,m we would even expect the local sampling method
to perform even worse as it doe snot have the benefit of reusing illumination computations
and sampling an area light is more costly than a simple directional light.
6.0.2
Density Comparison
In this section we will compare all evaluation methods with regards their effectiveness
relative to the scale of the effective transport coefficient. As a test scene we have used
the Cornell Box with a marble statue and scaled the scene between mm and dm to see
the effect a larger effective transport coefficient has on the performance of the individual
methods. Figure 5.2 shows the scene on a millimeter scale. Here, every method that
made use of the progressive point cloud is nearly identical to the reference picture, while
the local sampling method has considerable noise. This is as expected as a low trans­
port coefficient results in that further away samples still contribute a decent amount to the
overall result, which means that the point cloud method are able to reuse a considerable
amount of the pre­computation that was done in the pre­pass for constructing the point
cloud. The local method does not have the same luxury. Here it needs to sample the
indirect lighting and the area light for every shading point for every surface sample, which
results in a lot of re computation, slowing the calculation down significantly. On the other
hand we can also see that there in this is no difference between uniformly sampling the
surface (b) and using the importance sampling technique from (c­e), which is to be ex­
pected as almost the entire surface area of the object is relevant for the calculations when
σtr is significantly low enough.
6.0.3
Niche Lighting Situation
Recall the scenario from Section 4.1. Here we had a marble statue which was only il­
luminated at the head and otherwise in complete darkness. Even when we upscale the
effective transport coefficient, the illumination will be so strong that it is visible at surface
points far away from where the light arrives on the object. As we discussed previously,
the local method is not capable at all to handle this issue as it is built upon only consider­
ing distance as an important factor, which is a fair assumption in most cases. The range
searching method is not fit to solve this problem either for the exact same purposes. We
can see from the results that the spherical case without a scaled radius is not fit to solve
it either. However, Lightcuts are capable of producing a satisfying result. This would be
expected as the evaluation of each cluster in the cut is based upon their representative
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
41
==PAGE:54==
sample which was calculated based on both its distance to the shading point and the ir­
radiance. If we use equation 4.10 for the spherical approach we get excellent results as
well, as we scale the sphere radius based on the average illumination in the entire scene,
which in this case is only the illumination received from the high intensity light. Note: The
results with the scaled sphere look a bit different due to an error on my part, which resulted
in a different light intensity used.
42
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:55==
7
Conclusion
Finally, in this Thesis we have successfully investigated, implemented and compared mul­
tiple valid approaches of sampling translucent object with regards the BSSRDF contribu­
tion. Surprisingly, the Sphere­based method proved the overall most effective method,
even though some aspects of it are still unrefined, such as the traversing of the tree and
the scaling function based on illumination, both of which can still be improved upon. Addi­
tionally, not enough detail has gone into the adaptive triangle weighting, which was done
in favor of using the more straightforward pre­pass approach of weighting the triangle ver­
tices. There is still more possible work do be done both in respect to selecting samples for
the point cloud and how to most effectively select these samples at each shading point.
Another important thing that there was no space left to consider was to account for the
change in transport coefficient per wavelength. Possible addition to the current approach
could be to sample a wavelength at each iteration and build the Sphere­Tree based on
that sampled wavelength, meaning that the sampled radii are based on the materials’
transport coefficient for that wavelength. This could also be simplified to simple sample a
color band each time.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
43
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
Marschner, Henrik Wann Jensenand Stephen R., Marc Levoy, and Pat Hanrahan (2001).
“A Practical Model for Subsurface Light Transport”. In: SIGGRAPH ’01: Proceedings of
the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive 01, pp. 511–518.
D’Eon, Eugene and Geoffrey Irving (2011). “A quantized­diffusion model for rendering
translucent materials”. In:
Frisvad, J. R., T. Hachisuka, and T. K Kjeldsen (2014). “Directional Dipole Model for Sub­
surface Scattering”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics December. DOI: doi.org/10.
1145/2682629.
Vicini, Delio, Vladlen Koltun, and Wenzel Jakob (2019). “A Learned Shape­Adaptive Sub­
surface Scattering Model”. In: Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH
2019).
Walter, Bruce, Sebastian Fernandez, et al. (2005). “Lightcuts: a scalable approach to illu­
mination”. In: Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 2005.
Arbree, Adam, Bruce Walter, and Kavita Bala (2008). “Single­pass Scalable Subsurface
Rendering with Lightcuts”. In: Compute Graphics Forum April. DOI: 0.1111/j.1467-
8659.2008.01148.x.
Walter, Bruce, Pramook Khungurn, and Kavita Bala (2012). “Bidirectional Lightcuts”. In:
ACM Transactions on Graphics July. DOI: 10.1145/2185520.2185555.
Schubert, Per H. Christensenand George Harkerand Jonathan Shadeand Brenden and
Dana Batali (2012). “Multiresolution Radiosity Caching for Global Illumination in Movies”.
In:
Milaenen, David et al. (2019). “A Frequency Analysis and Dual Hierarchy for Efficient
Rendering of Subsurface Scattering”. In:
M., Pharr, Jakob W., and G. Humphreys (2016). Physically Based Rendering: From The­
ory to Implementation. URL: http://www.pbr-book.org/.
Veach, Eric (1998). “Robust monte carlo methods for light transport simulation”. In:
Corso, Alessandro Dal (2014). “Real­Time Rendering of TranslucentMaterials with Direc­
tional Subsurface Scattering”. In:
Hachisuka, Toshiya, Shinji Ogaki, and Henrik Wann Jensen (2008). “Progressive Photon
Mapping”. In: SIGGRAPH Asia ’08: ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2008 papers. DOI: 10.1145/
1457515.1409083.
Alan King, Christopher Kulla, Alejandro Conty, and Marcos Fajardo (2013). “BSSRDF
importance sampling”. In: SIGGRAPH 13, Article 48.
Mertens, Tom et al. (2003). “Efﬁcient Rendering of Local Subsurface Scattering”. In: 11th
Pacific Conference onComputer Graphics and Applications, 2003. Proceedings Octo­
ber. DOI: 10.1109/PCCGA.2003.1238246.
King, Alan et al. (2013). BSSRDF importance sampling. URL: https://www.arnoldrenderer.
com/research/s2013_bssrdf_slides.pdf.
Yuksel, Cem (2020). “Stochastic Lightcuts”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics June. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3001271.
Jensen, Henrik Wann and Juan Buhler (2002). “A Rapid Hierarchical Rendering Tech­
nique for Translucent Materials”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics July. DOI: 10.1145/
566654.566619.
McGuire, Morgan (July 2017). Computer Graphics Archive. URL: https://casual-effects.
com/data.
44
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:57==
Frisvad, Jeppe Revall (2020). 02941 Physically Based Rendering and Material Appear­
ance Modelling. URL: https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/02941.
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
45
==PAGE:58==
46
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
Symbol
Meaning
i,
Ingoing
o
Outgoing
x
Location, Point
ω
Direction
A
Surface Area
M
Mesh
Ti, To
Fresnel Transmittance
S
BSSRDF
L
Radiance
σs
Scattering Coefficient
σa
Absorption Coefficient
σt
Extinction Coefficient (σs + σa)
σ
′
s
Reduced Scattering Coefficient
σ
′
t
Reduced Extinction Coefficient (σ
′
s + σa)
Sd
Diffusion Approximation
G
Reflection Parameter
D
Diffusion Coefficient
zr
Displacement of real source for diffusion. ( 1
σ′
t )
zv
Displacement of virtual source. (zr + 4GD)
nmed, ni, no
Indices of refraction (nmed is the index for the scattering medium)
Table A.1: Symbol Table
Importance Sampling for Subsurface Scattering of Light
47
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
