==PAGE:1==
SPEAKER LOCALIZATION IN THE PRESENCE OF DIRECTIONAL INTERFERENCE BY
HUMANS AND MACHINES
M.Sc. Thesis by Ingvi ¨Ornolfsson
Supervisors: Tobias May⋆, Ning Ma† and Torsten Dau⋆
⋆Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark
†Department of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld
ABSTRACT
While our sense of orientation, direction and location in the
physical world is largely anchored in our visual system, we
cannot always rely entirely on our eyes. One purpose of the
auditory system is to aid in localization and identiﬁcation of
objects when visual cues are unavailable or rendered unuse-
ful for other reasons, such as when light is scarce or when
multiple objects are competing for our attention. The increas-
ing degree with which intelligent machines interact with us in
our daily lives has also created a desire for teaching machines
to localize objects using auditory cues. This study is con-
cerned with gaining a deeper understanding of how humans
and machines localize sound sources when more than one
source is present simultaneously. A localization experiment
is performed with human listeners to learn how much of the
target signal is needed to obtain the best possible localization
performance. Inspired by how the human listeners approach
the task, three new time-frequency masking methods are pro-
posed to improve an existing machine listening system. One
of the proposed methods is shown to yield a higher localiza-
tion performance than when using the ideal ratio mask.
Index Terms— Binaural sound source localization, time-
frequency masking, source separation, directional interfer-
ence
1. INTRODUCTION
Localizing sound sources is a task that is relatively straight-
forward for humans to perform. Using a number of auditory
and visual cues, most normal hearing people are readily able
to determine where an incident sound wave originated from.
The two most important auditory cues for localization are ar-
guably the interaural time and level differences (ITDs and
ILDs) between the two ears [1]. Any incident sound wave
will have a slightly lower amplitude on the contralateral ear
due to the shadowing effect from the listeners head, as well
as a phase shift from the additional distance required to reach
that ear. Combined, ITDs and ILDs have been known for a
long time to account for the localization ability of humans
across a wide range of frequencies [2].
Mimicing this skill is useful for many audio applications,
a common example being the steering of a beamformer for
use in hearing aids [3]. A beamformer enhances a particu-
lar target direction and reduces directional interferences from
other directions. For binaural machine listening, localization
is a fairly trivial task to solve when only one target source is
present; ITDs and ILDs have been shown to be useful fea-
tures for a deep neural network (DNN) tasked with localizing
sound sources [4]. However, when the task is extended to in-
clude interfering directional sources, it becomes much more
difﬁcult for machines to achieve human performance. ITD
and ILD cues in themselves contain little to no relevant infor-
mation about what type of source produced them. Humans
can employ top-down knowledge derived from other modal-
ities and from previous experiences to aid them in localizing
one speciﬁc sound source in a setting where many interfering
sources are present. To extend the machine listening system to
be able to cope with simliar situations, ITDs and ILDs alone
will not be enough.
This study is concerned with understanding how humans
localize sound sources in the presence of directional mask-
ing noise, and how applying this knowledge may improve an
existing machine listening system. The strategy used was to
ﬁrst perform a series of localization experiments with direc-
tional interference on human subjects to see how they per-
formed. By gradually removing some parts of the target sig-
nals, it was possible to determine which parts of the auditory
image carried important cues for localization, and which did
not. Based on these experiments, an existing machine listen-
ing system was adapted to mimic how humans approached the
task. The machine listening system was then tasked with lo-
calizing sources in a similar experiment as the one performed
on human subjects, and the results were compared.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In sec-
tion 2, some of the details regarding the task and the signal
processing that relate to both the human and machine experi-
ments are outlined. Next, section 3 covers the human listening
experiments, which were performed to determine how much
of an incoming signal was necessary for humans to correctly
localize the source. Section 4 explains the machine listen-
==PAGE:2==
ing system used, and how the results of the human listening
experiments were implemented in this system. Section 5 con-
tains a discussion of the results from both the human and ma-
chine experiments, as well as the similarities and differences
between the human and machine listening systems. Finally,
some concluding remarks are given in section 6.
2. EXPERIMENT DETAILS
While the human and machine experiments were conducted
independently of each other, the task was largely the same
for both. The signals used for the experiments also share a
number of signal preprocessing steps. These details will be
covered in this section, and unless otherwise noted, they are
applicable to all experiments performed.
2.1. Task decription
In the broadest sense of the term, speaker localization could
be taken to mean the task of ﬁnding the position of an arbi-
trary speaker in all three spatial dimensions, as well as track-
ing the location of that speaker as they move around. Di-
rectional interference is a similarly broad term, that poten-
tially includes cases with numerous interferers of many dif-
ferent types. In this study, the task considered was much more
constrained. Seven discrete azimuth angles in the horizontal
plane were considered as possible source locations. The an-
gles cover a range from −45° to 45° in 15° steps. The number
of angles considered was limited by the available time for the
human experiments; each signal presentation took around 3-5
seconds, and around 1500 total presentations were to be per-
formed. The azimuth range was also limited so that listeners
could visually locate the loudspeakers playing back the sig-
nals without having to move their heads. All sources were
stationary in time. A female speaker from the Danish hear-
ing in noise test (HINT) corpus was used as the target speech
source. The HINT corpus contains 10 lists of 20 sentences
each, spoken by 12 speakers, 6 male and 6 female. The other
speakers were used for training and validation purposes.
The directional interference in the task was limited to a
single noise masker of one of two different types. The noise
was either speech-shaped noise (SSN) or speech-modulated
speech-shaped noise (SM-SSN). Both noise types were de-
signed to have the same long-term spectrum as the target
speaker. For the SM-SSN interference, the speech shaped
noise was modulated by two randomly selected and concate-
nated HINT sentences other than the target sentence. Possible
locations of the masker were the same as for the target signal,
and target and masker were allowed to be colocated.
The task was evaluated using a forced-choice response be-
tween the seven possible source locations. The response was
recorded as correct only if the chosen location was the same
as the location of the target speaker.
2.2. Signal preprocessing
Both the machine and human experiments rely on manipu-
lating or extracting information from the signal in the time-
frequency (TF) domain. To obtain the TF-representation used
in this study, the signal was sampled at a rate of 16 kHz into
overlapping frames of 20 ms duration with a shift of 10 ms.
Each frame was Hann-windowed and zero-padded to a length
of 512 samples, and a short-time discrete Fourier transform
(STFT) was computed. To further reduce the dimensionality
of the TF-representation, a gammatone ﬁlterbank was used
to integrate the STFT representation into 32 frequency bands
spaced according to the equivalent rectangular band (ERB)
scale, with center frequencies from 80 Hz to 8 kHz. The re-
sulting TF-representation of the signal thus contains 32 fre-
quency channels and a number of time frames depending on
the length of the input signal. This was used as the basis for
further processing in the TF-domain. The speciﬁcs of this
further processing is covered in the relevant sections.
3. LOCALIZATION IN HUMANS
3.1. Experimental setup
The listening experiments were performed at the audio-visual
immersion lab (AVIL) at DTU. Nine native danish speakers
aged 20-26 years participated in the study. All participants
reported to have normal hearing, and provided informed con-
sent to participating in the study. Each session lasted around
2,5-3 hours, of which 1,5-2 hours were spent doing listening
experiments. All experiments were approved by the Science-
Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (refer-
ence H-16036391).
Two separate experiments were performed. In both ex-
periments, listeners were seated in the middle of the AVILs
spherical loudspeaker array, where they were surrounded by
64 loudspeakers. When listeners were introduced to the tasks,
they were told that only the seven speakers in front of them
in the horizontal plane would be relevant for the study. The
seat was adjusted so that the listeners’ ears were aligned with
these loudspeakers.
To avoid any advantage gained from
head movements, listeners were instructed not to move their
heads during signal presentation.
Listener responses were
recorded with a tablet, where seven buttons corresponded to
the seven loudspeaker options. Listeners were instructed to
take breaks whenever they felt they needed one, and manda-
tory breaks were also included. Two separate experiments
were performed, which will be presented individually in the
following.
3.1.1. Experiment 1
In the ﬁrst experiment, listeners were tasked with localizing a
target sentence in the presence of a directional SSN masker.
The target sentence was modiﬁed by removing all TF-bins
==PAGE:3==
where the local target-to-masker ratio (lTMR) of that bin was
below some threshold value. The threshold value was deﬁned
relative to the global target-to-masker ratios (gTMR) of the
binaural mixture, and will be referred to as the target relative
criterion (RC). This way of deﬁning the threshold has previ-
ously been shown to be useful for predicting performance in
speech recognition tasks [5]. Using the RC for thresholding
ensured that a similar number of target TF-bins were left for a
given conditions, regardless of the gTMR. The RC is related
to the more commonly used local criterion (LC) through the
relationship LC = RC + gTMR. After removing the TF-bins
below the RC, the target signal was resynthesized and played
back to the listener along with the masking signal. An ex-
ample of this processing is illustrated in Fig. 1, which shows
the TF-representation of the processed target signal for dif-
ferent values of gTMR, LC and RC. A sentence is mixed at
a different gTMR in each row, and each column shows how
increasing the LC will affect what is left in the mixture. The
ﬁgure emphasizes the reason for using the RC for processing;
if a ﬁxed LC is used, the number of bins varies for different
gTMRs. This is not the case when RC is ﬁxed instead. When
RC is ﬁxed, the mask threshold is deﬁned relative to the mix-
ture gTMR, and each mixture will have exactly the same mask
pattern independently of the gTMR. The processed target sig-
nal was mixed with the interfering noise signal, from which
all TF-bins were used.
The gTMR and the RC were varied independently, and
a total of 21 different conditions were tested. Values used
were −10 dB, 0 dB and 10 dB for gTMR and −∞dB, 6 dB,
10 dB, 12 dB, 14 dB, 16 dB and 18 dB for RC. An RC of
−∞dB meant that no bins were removed, and in this condi-
tion, the task was equivalent to a regular speech-in-noise task.
Each condition was presented 25 times with the conﬁgura-
tions of target and masker azimuths randomly selected with-
out replacement from the 49 possible conﬁgurations. For each
presentation, a random HINT sentence was selected from the
200 available sentences.
For the listener, the result of removing some of the target
TF-bins was that the presented mixture contained only short
glimpses of the target signal. In the most extreme cases, the
resulting target signal would not bear much resemblance to
speech at all. To ensure that the listeners knew what signal
they were trying to localize, all seven RC-conditions were ﬁrst
tested with gTMR set to 1000dB1. In this case, no noise was
audible, but the target signal was still manipulated by remov-
ing bins relative to the lTMR. The listeners were effectively
listening to signals similar to the ones shown in Fig. 1. This
allowed listeners to familiarize themselves with the manipu-
lated target signal before moving on to the noisy conditions.
1The gTMR could not be set to inﬁnity, as the masker was still needed to
determine the masking pattern for removing part of the target signal.
3.1.2. Experiment 2
The goal of the second experiment was to evaluate human lo-
calization performance in reverberant conditions. In this ex-
periment, all target bins were left unaltered, and gTMR was
varied from −30 dB to 5 dB in 5 dB steps. Room reverbera-
tion was simulated by convolving the presented signals with
a 64-channel room impulse response of the DTU-MID room
- a lecture hall with a reverberation time of 1.0 s [6]. Each
gTMR condition was tested on each of the 49 azimuth con-
ﬁgurations once, resulting in a total of 392 presentations. The
experiment was conducted two times per listener, once using
SSN as the masking signal and once with SM-SSN.
3.2. Results
3.2.1. Experiment 1
The results of experiment 1 are shown in Fig. 2. The per-
formance is shown as a function of the relative criterion on
the upper x-axis, and the average number of bins left in the
target signal on the lower x-axis. The two metrics are deter-
ministically related only when the target-masker pair is ﬁxed.
A given RC-value will result in the same number of target
bins left - regardless of gTMR - if the target sentence and the
masking noise are also the same. In practice, however, the
target and masker material was varied randomly across pre-
sentations, so the number of bins left in the mixtures could
vary even when the RC was the same. The ticks on the lower
x-axis show the average number of bins left in all mixtures at
the corresponding RC.
The data from each of the 21 RC/gTMR combinations
is shown in separate boxplots.
The boxplots are centered
at the average number of bins left in that speciﬁc condition,
and illustrate the quartiles of the average percent correct (PC)
scores across the nine subjects. The line plots overlaying the
boxplots show the same data aggregated in another way. In-
stead of grouping by RC, all subject responses for a given
gTMR are gathered into seven percentile groups based on the
number of bins left in each mixture. The markers on the line
plot show the average PC score from the 225 presentations
in each of these percentile groups. The strong resemblance
between these two different ways of visualizing the data em-
phasizes the relationship between the RC and the number of
target bins left.
The dashed red graph shows listener performance in the
trial condition where no noise was present, but the target sig-
nal was still distorted. The results of this trial conditions show
that the task is not trivial even without noise masking. At RC
= 6 dB and below, listeners scored a perfect 100%, but in-
creasing RC above this point also led to a decrease in average
performance. One subject, however, managed to achieve per-
fect performance in all RCs for the gTMR = 1000 dB condi-
tion.
For each gTMR, performance is unchanged when going
==PAGE:4==
Fig. 1. Examples TF-representations showing what would be left of a target sentence for different combinations of LC and
gTMR. The resulting RC is shown above each spectrogram, and the color indicates the energy in each bin relative to the
maximum at the corresponding gTMR. Conditions with the same RC have the same masking pattern across gTMRs. This
property was the motivation for using the RC rather than the LC for thresholding.
Fig. 2. Listener performance as a function of RC and the num-
ber of bins left in each mixture. The boxplots show the sum-
mary statistics across subjects from each experimental condi-
tion. The round markers show all individual signal presenta-
tions, regardless of subject, categorized into seven percentile
groups according to the number of target bins left.
from an RC of −∞to 6 dB. Between these two conditions,
on average, around 95% of the bins have been removed, as
can be seen on the lower x-axis of Fig. 2. The remaining 1000
TF-bins where the RC is above 6 dB are enough to reach ceil-
ing performance. Increasing the RC beyond this point causes
performance to drop, indicating that the TF-bins that are more
than 6dB above the gTMR are the ones that carry important
information about the target location. Interestingly, 6 dB RC
seems to be the knee-point for localization performance re-
gardless of gTMR. At this point, the LC is very different be-
tween the the gTMR conditions; −4 dB, 6 dB and 16 dB, re-
spectively. But regardless of the absolute value of LC, this is
the marginal point where raising the criterion further will start
to reduce performance.
It should be noted that there is no guarantee that the num-
ber of bins left in the mixture, as quantiﬁed in Fig. 2, is equal
to the number of bins actually audible to the listener. As the
RC is deﬁned relative to the gTMR, a bin with a positive
RC can still be dominated by noise if LC = RC + gTMR is
less than some threshold value deemed relevant for deciding
whether the target is audible or not (typically around 0 dB)
[7] [8]. Nonetheless, it seems to predict the knee-point for
performance decrease quite well.
Consider the differences shown in Fig. 2 between the per-
formance at different gTMRs but at the same RC. The fact that
performance increases when the gTMR is increased seems in-
tuitive at ﬁrst, but warrants some additional justiﬁcation. If
the RC and thus the number of bins left is kept constant, the
effect of increasing the gTMR amounts to simply raising the
==PAGE:5==
level of the target while keeping the masking pattern and noise
unchanged. At 6 dB RC, this makes sense; the LC of the bins
included goes from −4 dB to 6 dB to 16 dB as the gTMR is
increased, meaning that some bins that were included went
from being inaudible at −4 dB LC to being perfectly audible
at 16 dB LC. But in the case where the RC is high, say 16 dB,
the difference between the gTMR conditions is not immedi-
ately clear. In this case, we again have the same number of
bins left in the mixture, and increasing the gTMR amounts to
increasing the minimum LC of the bins included. But since
all bins have a minimum LC of 6 dB to begin with, they are
all perfectly audible, so increasing the gTMR should not do
anything to aid audibility and thus performance. In spite of
this, we still see an increase in performance with gTMR for
high values of RC. The reason for this likely has to do with
intra-bin masking. While it is true that each target bin left in
these high RC-conditions is dominated by the target even for
low gTMRs, the neighboring bins may still be masking it if
they are louder. It is well known that masking can occur both
across frequency bands and forward and backward in time
[9], so a high LC is not in itself a guarantee that a given bin is
audible. If one were to plot on the x-axis of Fig. 2 the num-
ber of audible bins, the effect would likely be a shifting of
each graph towards a lower number of bins left. Each mixture
is likely to contain at least some bins which are not audible
even though the RC is high - either because the LC is low,
or because of intra-bin masking. This effect is likely more
pronounced for lower gTMRs, which means that the −10 dB
graph would shift more to the left than the others. Indeed,
it might be the case that this would shift the graphs in such
a way that they line up completely. If this were the case, it
would mean that task performance is completely determined
by the number of audible bins left in the mixture.
In summary, the RC seems to correctly predict how many
of the most target-dominated bins are required to reach ceiling
performance in some condition. It does not, however, directly
predict the performance. For this purpose, it is still necessary
to know the gTMR. If one could correctly extract the number
of audible bins from a mixture using e.g. a masking model,
it might be possible to predict performance using only this
metric.
3.2.2. Experiment 2
The results of experiment 2 are shown in Fig. 3. The two noise
types are shown in blue and red, respectively, and individual
subjects’ performances are identiﬁed by unique markers. The
average across all subjects is shown with the dashed line.
The range of gTMRs tested seems to cover the full psy-
chometric curve, from chance level of about 14% to perfect
performance.
The full range of performances is approx-
imately 20 dB wide, and 50% performance is reached at
around −12 dB for SSN and −15 dB for SM-SSN. In gen-
eral, the performance improvement in SM-SSN relative to
SSN is equivalent to about 3 dB increase in gTMR. This is
likely due to the increased possibility of glimpsing short sig-
nal segments in the case of SM-SSN. This noise type has a
much higher amplitude variance, which causes larger areas
in the TF-domain to be dominated by the target even for low
gTMRs.
Fig. 3. Results of experiment 2, where listeners were tasked
with localizing speech in the presence of directional interfer-
ence in a simulated reverberant room. SM-SSN provides a
beneﬁt equivalent to around 3 dB TMR, which is likely at-
tributable to the possibility of glimpsing the target signal.
4. LOCALIZATION IN MACHINES
4.1. System description
The machine localization system used is one that has been
studied in several different variants and iterations [4, 10, 11,
12]. The system architecture is sketched in Fig. 4. The system
is able to localize sound sources with directional interference
by utilizing a separation stage in parallel with the localization
block. The input to the system is a noisy binaural mixture.
This mixture is processed into a TF-domain representation,
which is then fed separately to the localization and separa-
tion blocks of the system. The localization block provides
a probability measure for each angle in each TF-bin, while
the separation block weighs each bin according to the likeli-
hood of it being dominated by the target source rather than
the masker. In the combination stage, the outputs of the two
previous blocks are then combined into a single, ﬁnal azimuth
estimate.
Each of the three blocks of the system will be described
in further detail in the following. The focus will mainly be on
the combination stage, as this is where the novel methods of
this study are implemented, whereas the two other stages will
be touched upon only brieﬂy. A more thorough introduction
to the DNN used can be found in [10], and the particular im-
plementation of the separation stage is explained in [12] and
is based on the method described in [13].
==PAGE:6==
Fig. 4. Schematic overview of the combined separation-localization system.
4.2. DNN-based localization
The core of the machine listening system is the DNN-based
localization stage, which has previously been trained to local-
ize sounds in various acoustic conditions [10]. This system
processes binaural cues obtained from the TF-representation
of the signal and returns a normalized probability distribu-
tion as a function of the azimuth angle for each TF-bin. The
system returns predictions for 37 angles between −90° and
90° azimuth in 5° steps. To accomodate this system to lo-
calizing only the angles relevant for this study, the evidence
from the eight left- and rightmost azimuths of the DNN were
discarded, and evidence from the remaining 21 azimuths be-
tween −50° and 50° was summed into seven bins, based on
which of the seven azimuths used in this study was closest.
For example, all evidence for azimuths 10°, 15° and 20° was
summed into the bin that predicted an azimuth of 15°. These
seven bins of evidence were then normalized to sum to one,
resulting in a discrete probability distribution for the azimuth
angles from −45° to 45° in 15° steps.
4.3. NMF-based separation
To allow the system to operate in conditions with directional
interference, the original DNN-based system was improved
with an NMF-based separation stage [12]. The NMF-based
source separation branch was based on the algorithm pro-
posed in [13], and has previously been shown to beneﬁt the
DNN-based localization system [12]. The purpose of the sep-
aration stage was to provide an estimate of the lTMR in each
TF-bin. This estimate is used in the combination stage to ap-
ply an appropriate weight to each TF-bin of the localization
stage output, the rationale being that bins that are energeti-
cally dominated by the target are also more likely to contain
binaural cues that are relevant to the target.
The NMF obtains the lTMR estimate by employing a pre-
viously trained dictionary of spectral bases, and assigning
each bin an estimated lTMR based on how well it can be ac-
counted for by the available dictionary items. One advantage
of NMF over other separation strategies is that it does not
require one to train on speciﬁc noise types; a separate noise
dictionary is learned each time a new mixture is encountered.
Only the target source dictionary needs to be trained ahead of
time. Apart from the target dictionary, the NMF-based sep-
aration algorithm has four other main hyperparameters that
control its behaviour: two rank parameters, KT and KM ,
which control the number of dictionary items used, and two
sparsity parameters, λT and λM. There was no clear heuris-
tic for assigning a value to these parameters, so these were
optimized by validating on a separate validation dataset. As
the target dictionary could not be trained before selecting a
value for KT and λT , each iteration of the NMF validation
procedure used a separate dictionary.
The resulting target
dictionary which had the best localization performance dur-
ing validation is shown in Fig. 5, along with an example of a
masker dictionary learned during separation of a mixture. The
validation procedure is outlined in Table 1 and the resulting
hyperparameters used in Table 2.
Fig. 5. The target dictionary used for the NMF-based separa-
tion stage, along with an example of a masker dictionary. The
target dictionary is trained ahead of time and ﬁxed, whereas
the masker dictionary is learned during signal presentation.
4.4. Combination stage
While both the localization and separation stages of the sys-
tem have been investigated in previous studies, the combina-
tion stage has not been given much attention until now. The
main addition of this study to the machine listening system
will be a novel method for converting the lTMR estimates of
the separation stage into useful weights for the localization
stage output. The weights will ultimately be used to integrate
the evidence from individual TF-bins according to the follow-
ing equation:
P(φ|o) = 1
T
T
X
t=1
Q
f P(φ|otf)wtf
P
φ
Q
f P(φ|otf)wtf
(1)
==PAGE:7==
P(φ|o) is the probability of the target source being present at
azimuth φ given some target weights wtf, and P(φ|otf) de-
notes the azimuth evidence obtained from TF-bin (t, f). After
integrating P(φ|o) into the seven azimuths used in this study,
the ﬁnal azimuth prediction is then the one with the highest
probability.
Previously, the weights in TF-bin (t, f) were obtained
from the separated target and masker signals using the so-
called ideal ratio mask (IRM), which is deﬁned as [14]:
IRM:
w =
 
1
exp10
 −α
 lTMR
20

+ 1
!γ
(2)
Here, exp10 denotes the base-10 exponential function, and
lTMR is measured in dB. However, the IRM is not neces-
sarily the best mapping function for the task. Indeed, any
function that maps the lTMR to a weight between zero and
one is a potential candidate for the combination stage of the
machine listening system. It is therefore convenient to use a
broader deﬁnition of the ratio mask than Eq. (2) allows. For
this purpose, the generalized sigmoidal ratio map (GSRM) is
introduced:
GSRM:
w =
 
1
exp10
 −α
 lTMR
20
−β

+ 1
!γ
(3)
This deﬁnition introduces a third parameter, β, which controls
the bias of the mapping. Increasing β by one is equivalent to
shifting the mapping 20dB in the positive direction. As in the
case of the IRM, α controls the steepness of the mapping and
γ the skewness. This is illustrated in Fig. 6, where a num-
ber of different weighting functions obtained from different
values of α, β and γ are shown. An advantage of using the
GSRM is that it is a general family of functions that covers
many well-known and commonly used gain functions, includ-
ing the IRM (β = 0), the ideal binary mask (IBM) (γ = 1,
α →∞) and the logistic sigmoid function (γ = 1). Search-
ing the hyperparameter space of the GSRM is thus ensured to
include many tried and tested mapping functions, along with
the rest of the function space spanned by the GSRM. Other
conceivable mapping functions that are not contained in the
GSRM deﬁnition - e.g. notch and bandpass mappings - exist,
but these will not be considered here.
It is possible to further extend the GSRM by making the
hyperparameter values sensitive to the incoming signal. Us-
ing ﬁxed hyperparameters is a ﬁne choice if the relevant target
evidence is expected to be found in the same lTMR region re-
gardless of the input. However, as the results from the human
experiments shown in Fig. 2 indicate, it may be that the rele-
vant lTMR region depends on the gTMR of the input. If this is
true, it is likely that there would be a beneﬁt from making the
bias of the mapping sensitive to the gTMR of the input. The
Fig. 6. Example weight mappings showing the effect of the
three hyperparameters of the GSRM. In general, α controls
the steepness, β the bias and γ the skewness, although large
values of γ also affect the bias to some extent for low values
of α.
gTMR is not directly available to the machine listening sys-
tem during separation, however, as it depends on oracle infor-
mation. Instead, the estimated lTMR can be used as a proxy
for the gTMR. In the following, two novel weight mappings
are introduced which both use a variable bias for the weight
mapping based on the estimated lTMR.
The ﬁrst, the N highest bins (NHB) mapping, is directly
inspired by how the human auditory system was shown to ap-
proach the task. Instead of relying on a certain lTMR thresh-
old value, this mapping simply sets the weights of the N bins
with the highest predicted lTMR to 1, and all other weights to
0. As can be seen in Fig. 2, using the N bins with the highest
lTMR is similar to using a ﬁxed RC threshold - as opposed to
a ﬁxed LC threshold, which is what the IBM uses. The im-
portant difference between ﬁxing RC and ﬁxing the number
of bins left is that the RC is not computable, as it depends on
the gTMR, which is not available to the system.
The second proposed weight mapping with a variable
threshold is the anchored generalized sigmoidal ratio map
(aGSRM). It is similar to the GSRM, but deﬁnes the bias pa-
rameter β relative to some anchoring point on the estimated
lTMR distibution. The mathimatical deﬁnition of the aGSRM
is similar to that of the GSRM, but has an added term βa in
the exponent:
aGSRM:
w =
1
exp10
 −α
 lTMR
20
−(β + βa)

+ 1
(4)
==PAGE:8==
Here, βa is the β-value corresponding to some anchoring
point on the lTMR distribution.
By using this anchoring
point, β can be optimized as usual, but its value represents
a threshold relative to the anchoring point.
This way, the
threshold will always be related to the lTMR estimate that
is encountered in a given presentation. The best choice of
anchoring point is likely to depend on which task is to be
solved. For this study, we used βm = max(lTMR). This was
motivated by the assumption that the bins with the highest
TMR are also the ones most likely to contain relevant binaural
cues.
Fig. 7.
Histograms showing the distribution of lTMRs in
an example mixture with oracle separation (green) and NMF
separation (blue). The value of the proposed weight mappings
at each lTMR is shown on the right y-axis.
4.5. Model validation and selection
Model validation was split into two phases. Each validation
phase was performed on a dataset that was disjoint from the
test set, both in terms of target and masker material and room
reverberation. An anechoic room was used for BRIRs, and
Table 1. Dataset splits and experimental condition parameters
Training
Validation
Test
Speker ID
F2-F6
F1
F1
Lists
1-10
11-13
1-10
Sentences
1-20
1-20
1-20
Maskers
N/A
ICRA 1&4
HINT
Rooms
Anechoic
Anechoic
DTU-MID
Azimuths
N/A
−45° to 45° , 15° steps
gTMRs
N/A
-15 to 15dB
-25 to 15dB
# of mixtures
1,000
7,000
208,250
the masking noise was taken from ICRA database [15]. ICRA
noises 1 and 4 were used, which are male-weighted stationary
speech shaped noise and female-weighted three-band modu-
lated speech shaped noise, respectively. The validation metric
was the same as the task evaluation metric, namely the num-
ber of correct localizations. A Bayesian optimization strat-
egy was used, where the values of hyperparameters tested in
a given iteration was guided by the previous hyperparameter
settings that had been tested. This strategy was chosen due to
the high computational cost of the function to be optimized,
which made grid and random searches of the parameter space
unattractive alternatives.
In the ﬁrst phase of the validation, the optimal NMF-
hyperparameters were found by using the IRM for the weight
mapping. These settings are commonly used in audio applica-
tions, so they were used as a starting point for the validation.
In the second validation phase, α, β and γ were optimized
for the NMF algorithm with the rank and sparsity parameters
found in the ﬁrst phase. In the case of the NHB mapping, the
number of bins N to include was optimized instead of α, β
and γ.
The optimal hyperparameter values found from the vali-
dation procedure are listed in Tab. 2. The difference between
the various weight mappings is illustrated in Fig. 7, which
also shows a histogram of the lTMR in each TF-bin as esti-
mated by the NMF algorithm, and a histogram of the oracle
lTMR. Even without examining individual TF-bins, it is ev-
ident from the large deviation between the oracle and NMF
histograms that the NMF-based separation stage does not pre-
dict lTMR very well. This is not unexpected, as the NMF is
validated with respect to localization performance, not sepa-
ration, and thus cannot be judged on the basis of its separation
performance.
The predicted weight from the ﬁve validated weight map-
pings are shown on the right y-axis. The IRM and GSRM
mappings are indifferent to the individual mixture encoun-
tered, and stay ﬁxed no matter the gTMR. The aGSRM and
NHB mappings, on the other hand, have a bias that is sen-
sitive to the estimated lTMR. The result is that these weight
mappings shift along the x-axis accordingly.
==PAGE:9==
Table 2. Optimal hyperparameter values
Sep. stage
KT
KM
λT
λM
Search range
[1;100]
[1;100]
[0;1]
[0;1]
NMF
97
39
0.95
0.45
Comb. stage
α
β
γ
N
Search range
[1;100]
[-10;10]
[0.1;100]
[1;1000]
IRM
19.2
-
0.221
-
GSRM
1.99
-2.60
20.2
-
aGSRM
99.6
0.11
0.102
-
NHB
-
-
-
11
Oracle
1.54
0.01
14.4
-
LocOnly
-
-
-
-
4.6. Test stage
The optimal models selected in the validation stage were
tested in an experiment similar to experiment 2 of the hu-
man study, with HINT noise and reverberation. A binaural
downmix of the 64-channel room impulse response was used
to simulate the experiment in MATLAB. 1,000 conditions
were tested for each of 17 gTMRs, from −25 dB to 15 dB
in 2.5 dB steps, for a total of 208,250 conditions for each of
the two noise types. The test was done once with SSN and
once with SM-SSN interference. The results are shown as a
function of gTMR in Fig. 8, where the results of the human
experiment are also shown for comparison.
The results for the different experiments are generally
similar, except for the fact that there is a decrease in per-
formance equivalent to approximately 3 dB in the case of
SM-SSN interference. This is opposite of what was found for
humans, who gained a 3 dB advantage in the nonstationary
SM-SSN interference. Interestingly, the LocOnly algorithm,
which does not use any separation stage, also has increased
performance in modulated noise. This means that the binau-
ral cues related to the target are indeed more prominent when
there are gaps in the noise, but the inherent difﬁculty in mod-
elling nonstationary noise means that the overall net effect
on performance when going from stationary to nonstationary
noise is negative.
The difference in performance between the four algo-
rithm varies according to the gTMR, but is never more than
10%.
Considering ﬁrst the difference between the GSRM
and aGSRM algorithms, the GSRM algorithm performs best
at positive gTMRs, while the aGSRM is best at negative
gTMRs.
A possible explanation for this can be found in
the assumptions of these two algorithms. The GSRM is not
anchored to the individual mixture, meaning that it assumes
that useful binaural cues are found in the same lTMR region
regardless of gTMR. The threshold for this region is deﬁned
by the hyperparameters of the mapping - for the settings used
here, the 50% point is around 20 dB as shown in Fig. 7. This
assumption is likely to be true if the separation is good in
terms of predicting lTMR. However, the separation by NMF
generally seems to be heavily biased, such that the lTMR is
skewed towards very low values of lTMR. Even though this
is the case, the TF-bins with useful binaural cues might still
be concentrated near the high end of the estimated lTMR
distribution. If this is true, the aGSRM is likely a good choice
of weighting, whereas the GSRM potentially performs better
in cases where the useful bins are less concentrated around
the extreme end of the lTMR distribution. Figure 7 does not
indicate where in the estimated distribution the useful binau-
ral cues lie, so it is impossible to say for sure if this is why the
GSRM and aGSRM perform better at positive and negative
gTMRs, respectively.
These observations regarding the distribution estimated
by the NMF beg the question as to why this skewing occurs
in the ﬁrst place. One explanation could be that the NMF hy-
perparameters are trained with an IRM mapping before the
weight mapping parameters are found. The IRM mapping is
ﬁxed and centered around 0 dB. Given this constraint, the
best NMF-algorithm for the task is plausibly one that predicts
a small amount of useful bins to have an lTMR at or above
0 dB, while pushing the lTMR prediciton for the less useful
and interfering bins as much towards low lTMRs as possible.
This would likely result in an estimated distribution not much
unlike the one that can be seen in Fig. 7.
Returning to Fig. 8, it seems that the IRM mapping out-
performs the GSRM at low gTMRs, and also has a slightly
higher average performance on the test set for each noise type
as shown in Table 3. Theoretically, the deﬁnition of the IRM
is encapsulated in the GSRM, and as such the GSRM should
always be able to perform as well or better than the IRM. A
likely explanation for this is that the GSRM is overﬁtting the
validation set. This is supported by the fact that the GSRM
performed better than the IRM on the validation set, but failed
to generalize to the test set. While the IRM slightly outper-
forms the GSRM in this study, it is possible that a larger and
more diverse validation set might beneﬁt the GSRM more
than it would the IRM.
The algorithm with the highest average performance be-
tween the two noise types was the one that used NHB map-
ping, in spite of it only being the best-performing algorithm
in a narrow band of gTMRs in SM-SSN intererence. This
shows that relying on a set number of TF-bins - instead of a
ﬁxed lTMR - can be a robust criterion to use in localization
tasks.
5. DISCUSSION
The NHB algorithm achieved the best performance of all al-
gorithms on both the validation and test datasets. The NHB
algorithm uses only one hyperparameter, namely the number
of bins left, whereas the other algorithms used either two or
three hyperparameters. It is possible that the more complex
algorithms would have a larger beneﬁt from a larger and more
varied validation set. On the other hand, it would also be pos-
==PAGE:10==
Fig. 8. Performance of the machine listening system with different weight mappings. Human listener performance from
experiment 2 is shown for comparison. The NMF-NHB algorithm had the best overall performance when averaged across the
two noise types.
Table 3. Mean PC scores for the proposed algorithms
Stage
Validation
Test
Noise corpus
ICRA
HINT
Noise type
01 & 04
SSN
SM-SSN
Avg.
NMF-IRM
70.4%
56.9%
51.9%
54.4%
NMF-GSRM
72.5%
55.1%
51.5%
53.3%
NMF-aGSRM
68.3%
54.0%
52.1%
53.1%
NMF-NHB
74.4%
55.7%
54.0%
54.9%
Oracle-GSRM
98%
75.8%
85.2%
80.5%
sible to expand the NHB mapping deﬁnition to allow different
weights for the N non-zero bins according to the lTMR. It is
perhaps useful to think of the NHB mapping as a variant of
the IBM, where the threshold value is selected based on the
number of bins it would include. The NHB mapping could
then be expanded to a ratio map in a similar way as the IBM
can be expanded to the IRM, with the important distinction
that the NHB mapping would still be sensitive to the individ-
ual mixture encoutered. Whether or not one uses the NHB as
a binary or a ratio mask, a potential drawback of it is that it
is not mathematically well-behaved as it relies on the max(·)
function, limiting the sort of mathematical manipulation that
can be done with it.
The human listening experiments showed a clear connec-
tion between the number of target bins left in a mixture and
the performance. It is not entirely clear whether it is truly the
number of bins that is important or rather the fraction of bins
left, as all sentences had a similar length of about two sec-
onds. Intuitively, however, a listener who is presented with
the 1000 most prominent target bins of a two-second mix-
ture is unlikely to change their mind about the location of the
target if 2 additional seconds of pure noise were presented af-
terwards. In this case, the fraction of bins present would be
halved, but the performance unchanged, suggeting that it is
indeed the number of bins that is important.
It would be particularly interesting to follow up the lis-
tening experiment presented here with a similar study where
different parts of the target distribution are omitted. If one
were to instead remove the highest lTMR bins, it would be
possible to see whether there is any useful localization infor-
mation available in the bins that are below 6 dB RC. We know
that every bin above 6 dB RC contains useful information for
localization, since performance drops monotonously after this
point. If one were to remove some of the highest lTMR bins
but leave the low lTMRs intact, and still achieve the ceiling
performance shown in Fig. 2 for a given gTMR, this would
mean that the information removed from the high lTMR bins
was compensated by low lTMR bins.
While this study showed that using a ﬁxed amount of TF-
bins is both a good model for human performance and a useful
processing stage for machine listening system, there are in-
herent differences between humans and machines that should
be pointed out. First of all, humans approach the task with
a large amount of previous knowledge and experience with
what speech and noise sound like. The machine has only
access to whatever is presented in the task, along with the
very simpliﬁed model of speech that it has learned ahead of
time for the NMF. The target and interferer signals used in
this task are so different that humans likely perform perfect
or near-perfect separation, although the separation quality is
==PAGE:11==
impossible to quantify in humans by the standards we use for
machines.
Even though the human and machine separation processes
are not directly comparable, it may seem strange that humans
need 1000 TF-bins to achieve optimal performance, while
the machine listening system needs only 11. The answer is
twofold. Firstly, as previously discussed, the actual amount
of bins available to the human listeners is likely much lower
due to intra-bin masking. This is not an issue for the ma-
chine listening system, as it is not limited by physical con-
straints of the cochlea the same way humans are, and thus
does not experience this sort of masking. Secondly, the sep-
aration and localization stages of the machine are not truly
independent of each other, but work in unison. A machine
that could correctly and consistently separate all the bins with
useful binaural cues by assigning high lTMR values to these
bins would likely beneﬁt from using more that 11 bins for lo-
calization. In a similar fashion, the machine performance is
limited by the fact that the separation stage is trained on an
IRM mapping whilst in the end using different types of map-
pings. One solution to this could be to add a second layer
of validation, where the NMF parameters are validated using
each individual weighting algorithms’ optimal hyperparame-
ters, thereby allowing the separation stage a chance to adapt
to the weight mapping used. Another way would be to simply
optimize all system hyperparameters simultaneously, but this
would require considerably larger amounts of computational
resources for the validation procedure to converge.
6. CONCLUSION
A localization experiment with interfering sound sources per-
formed on human listeners showed that performance in lo-
calization tasks is largely determined by having access to a
small amount of target-dominated TF-bins. Localization per-
formance for a given gTMR was shown to be predictable
from the number of target-dominated bins, and it was argued
that the difference observed across different gTMR conditions
could be due to the effect of intra-bin masking. This could
explain some of the variance observed in studies with local-
ization tasks, as two mixtures presented at the same gTMR
in general do not have the same number of audible target-
dominated bins.
Inspired by the human listening experiments, three new
algorithms for mapping lTMR to weights for the localization
evidence were proposed. The simplest of these, the NHB-
mapping, produced the best overall results, and outperformed
the typical IRM weighting often used for audio applications.
Although this study applied these weight functions only on
one speciﬁc DNN- and NMF-based machine listening system,
these weight mappings can potentially be useful for any au-
dio application where some sort of weight or gain needs to be
applied in the TF-domain. The relevant aspect of the localiza-
tion task considered here is the sparseness of information nec-
essary to extract from the mixture - very few bins are needed
to localize the target, so long as one can extract the correct
ones. It is possible that the NHB-weighting would prove use-
ful in other tasks where it makes sense to focus information
extraction only on short glimpses that are very likely to be
target-dominated. An example of this could be speech and
word recognition tasks where the machine listening system is
allowed to use top-down knowledge about context and mean-
ing.
7. REFERENCES
[1] J. Blauert, Spatial Hearing—The Psychophysics of Hu-
man Sound Lo-calization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1997.
[2] W. A. Yost,
“History of sound source localization:
1850-1950,” Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics, vol.
30, no. 1, pp. 050002, 2017.
[3] T. Rohdenburg, S. Goetze, V. Hohmann, K. Kammeyer,
and B. Kollmeier, “Objective perceptual quality assess-
ment for self-steering binaural hearing aid microphone
arrays,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
2008, pp. 2449–2452.
[4] N. Ma and G. Brown, “Speech localisation in a mul-
titalker mixture by humans and machines,”
in Inter-
speech, 2016, pp. 3359–3363.
[5] N. Roman and J. Woodruff, “Speech intelligibility in re-
verberation with ideal binary masking: Effects of early
reﬂections and signal-to-noise ratio threshold,”
The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 133,
no. 3, pp. 1707–1717, 2013.
[6] L. McCormack, V. Pulkki, A. Politis, O. Scheuregger,
and M. Marschall,
“Higher-order spatial impulse re-
sponse rendering: investigating the perceived effects of
spherical order, dedicated diffuse rendering, and fre-
quency resolution,” Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 338–354, may 2020.
[7] N. Li and P. Loizou, “Factors inﬂuencing intelligibility
of ideal binary-masked speech: Implications for noise
reduction,”
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, vol. 123, pp. 1673–82, 04 2008.
[8] N. Roman, D. Wang, and G. J. Browm, “Speech seg-
regation based on sound localization,” The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 114, no. 4, pp.
2236–2252, 2003.
[9] E. Zwicker, Psychoacoustics: Facts and Models, Chap-
ter 4.4: Temporal Effects, Springer, Berlin New York,
1999.
==PAGE:12==
[10] N. Ma, J. A. Gonzalez, and G. J. Brown, “Robust bin-
aural localization of a target sound source by combin-
ing spectral source models and deep neural networks,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Lan-
guage Processing, vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 2122–2131, Nov
2018.
[11] N. Ma, T. May, and G. J. Brown, “Exploiting deep neu-
ral networks and head movements for robust binaural
localization of multiple sources in reverberant environ-
ments,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2444–2453,
2017.
[12] I. ¨Ornolfsson, T. Dau, N. Ma, and T. May, “Exploit-
ing non-negative matrix factorization for binaural sound
localization in the presence of directional interference,”
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2021.
[13] Larsen J.; Hsiao F. Schmidt M. N.,
“Wind noise re-
duction using non-negative sparse coding,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Signal Processing Society Workshop,
MLSP, United States, 2007, pp. 431–436, IEEE.
[14] Z. Wang, X. Wang, X. Li, Q. Fu, and Y. Yan, “Oracle
performance investigation of the ideal masks,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Acous-
tic Signal Enhancement (IWAENC), 2016, pp. 1–5.
[15] W. A. Dreschler, H. Verschuure, C. Ludvigsen, and
S. Westermann,
“ICRA noises: Artiﬁcial noise sig-
nals with speech-like spectral and temporal properties
for hearing instrument assessment,” Audiology, vol. 40,
no. 3, pp. 148–157, 2001, PMID: 11465297.
