==PAGE:1==
Time leak analysis of workflow Petri Nets for
detecting vulnerabilities in Business Processes
Piotr Połcik (s182344)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tel (+45) 45 25 30 31
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this thesis was to design, implement and test an algorithm for detecting
time leak vulnerabilities within business processes. The outcome of the research of
existing solutions was that no implementation of such an algorithm exists to this
date. As Petri nets are a tool that is widely used for modelling and testing various
properties of business processes, it was decided that also in this case they will be
utilised, as this will make it easier to incorporate the algorithm into other tools, if
needed.
First, all of the considered cases of time leaks within business processes were
described and analyzed. Then a formalisation for the notion of time leaks and condi-
tional time leaks was formulated, along with some real-life-like examples of time leaks
within business processes. Next, an extension to Petri nets, called high-low Petri net
was defined, and the basic time leak detection algorithm was described. Then, two
extensions to the time leak detection algorithm were introduced - Petri net pruning,
where its goal was to improve the algorithm’s performance, and an extension that
allows detecting conditional time leaks.
Next step was implementing the algorithm and its extensions, along with a web
tool that exposes the algorithm to the public. The tool was then deployed using
Heroku PaaS platform.
The algorithm was then subjected to external validation by researchers, whose
main area of interest are formal methods, security and business process. Then the
tool was tested on real-life examples of business processes, to prove that the time leak
issue can be indeed found within existing processes. The last step was to subject the
algorithm to performance testing and assess the effect that the shape of the net has
on its execution time.
Lastly, test results were commented and discussed, and possible future improve-
ments were presented.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark, the Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science in fulfillment of the requirements for
obtaining a Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 19, 2021
Piotr Połcik (s182344)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my wonderful parents
- it was your love, patience and all of your sacrifices that allowed me to become the
person I am today and for that, I will be forever grateful.
I also would like to thank every member of my family - every one of you had an
immense impact on me and my life, and I cannot imagine my life without all of you
being there for me.
To Alina - my light in the dark, long, winter danish nights - you stood by me
despite us being separated for longer than some relationships last, yet you always
made me feel like we were never apart whenever we were together. I would not have
made it if it were not for your strength.
Special thanks to my supervisor, Alberto Lluch Lafuente, who made this thesis
possible despite the dire times that we were, and still, for the time being, are in.
Thank you for your patience, involvement, and for making the last half a year a
really special time that I will always remember with fondness.
To all my friends, both those that I shared my danish experience with and those
who always had the time to catch up whenever I was around - for all the help, mental
support and kind words - a big hug and a thank you, though it is hardly enough.
To every student that I had a chance to cooperate with at DTU, during the last
three years. The international environment is what makes DTU a real special place
and I wish it will never change.
A big thank you goes also to every person I had a chance to meet and work with
at Mono Solutions - I could not have imagined a better place to start my professional
career.
As scary as this experience seemed - all of you have made it seamless.
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
BP
Business Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
BPM
Business Process Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
BPMS Business Process Management System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
PN
Petri net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
WF-net Workflow Petri net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
BPMN Business Process Management Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
DOS
Denial of Service. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .32
DDOS Distributed Denial of Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
BFS
Breadth-first search. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36
DFS
Depth-first search. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36
FIFO
First-in, First-out. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37
stl
standard template library. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .61
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
GUI
Graphical User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
PaaS
Platform-as-a-Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Acronyms
iv
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Goal definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Preliminaries
4
2.1
Business Process Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Petri nets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Timing attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Problem Description
15
3.1
Time leak vulnerabilities in Business Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Types of time leak vulnerabilities in BPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Time leak vulnerabilities formal definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Other time leak vulnerabilities examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Solution Design
36
4.1
Time leak detection algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Petri net pruning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Solution Implementation
61
5.1
Algorithm implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Web tool implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:8==
Contents
v
6
Testing and Benchmarking
70
6.1
External validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3
Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7
Discussion Of Results
95
7.1
Testing results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
7.2
Benchmarking results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
8
Future Improvements and Conclusion
98
8.1
Future Improvements and Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
8.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Bibliography
102
A Time leak detection algorithm flowchart
106
B Medical Data Exchange Platform BPMN model
108
C Loan Application BPMN model
110
D Talent Seek BPMN model
113
E Github repository and web tool links
114
==PAGE:9==
vi
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Business Process Management (BPM) since it was proposed around the year 1990
had experienced periods of greater and lesser interest over time ([11], [21]). It seems
though, that the different improvements made in the numerous Business Process Man-
agement Systems (BPMSs) available on the market, as well as the increasing com-
plexity of business processes are inducing the growth in levels of interest of companies
in the BPM, as reported in [17]. Moreover, based on various sources of information
it is being predicted that the BPM industry will experience a growth of up to 10.5%
in the next five years, according to [7].
For some companies, Business Process (BP) modelling plays a more crucial role
than for others, but there is no shortage of those that use it extensively, or even
model all their processes with it [17]. Therefore, as with every business element that
might contain services accessible to the external users (though internal users should
not be underestimated either), making sure that the business process is secure is a
vital task.
Business processes can grow very large and complicated, and multiple factors
can contribute to that: the complexity (measured as the number of tasks in the
process) of the process itself, the number and granularity of involved actors, errors and
exceptions handling, conditional paths, and probably other. Assuring security under
every possible angle of such a complex entity is not an easy task, as the complexity
grows even further once interoganizationality of business processes is introduced - not
only because it results in further openness and distribution, but also because security
breaches in a single company may negatively impact the security of all companies
that are related through a business process [28].
Numerous attempts have been made at making business processes secure over the
years (e.g. [18], [27], [28], [29]). Yet, as the technology evolves, security requirements
for business processes evolve with it, as new potential threats arise and new vulnera-
bilities are exposed or created. The goal of this thesis is to design an algorithm that
can check if a business process is secure from the point of view of time - namely if an
attacker can subject a business process to a timing attack.
==PAGE:11==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Problem definition
The goal of the thesis is to develop an algorithm capable of detecting time leak vul-
nerabilities within a business process represented as a Workflow Petri nets (WF-nets).
Under the assumptions that the attacker knows the structure of a business process
that includes secret and public tasks that have a non-instantaneous duration and can
find out the start, finish and the duration of a public task, time leak vulnerabilities
are understood as a possibility for an attacker to infer the start, finish or the total
duration of a secret task. This information might be further utilised to penetrate the
system/process, disrupt its functioning and else.
1.3
Goal definition
Probably the most widely used Business Process modelling tool is the Business
Process Management Notation (BPMN). Because of this, BPMN becomes the start-
ing point of the solution proposed in this paper. A tool that is applied extensively to
checking business processes, modelled using BPMN, correctness are Petri nets (PNs),
a specific type of a graph. A BPMN model can be transformed into its simplified
Petri net version, and the correctness analysis can be run on the PN representation
of the model. The goal of the thesis is to develop an algorithm that, having a PN
representation of a business process, will be able to automatically detect and point
out the time leak vulnerabilities of a business process, giving the designer a chance
to prevent potential timing attacks on the business process.
1.4
Thesis structure
Chapter 1 provides the motivation and the aim of the project, as well as briefly
describes the structure of the thesis.
Chapter 2 provides a theoretical introduction to Business Process Management,
Petri nets, and Timing attacks.
Chapter 3 describes in detail the kind of timing attacks that are of interest in
this paper, introduces a Petri net extension used in the proposed solution, provides a
formal definition of the considered time leak cases and relations between them, and
shows a few probable real-life examples of time leak vulnerabilities. A short literature
study covering security evaluation of business process using (but not limited to) Petri
nets is also provided.
Chapter 4 provides a description of the time leak detection algorithm and its
extensions and introduces a Petri net pruning algorithm, used to reduce the size of
the search space before running the time leak detection algorithm.
==PAGE:12==
1.4 Thesis structure
3
Chapter 5 provides a brief description on both the algorithm implementation
and the web tool that was implemented to expose the algorithm to the public.
Chapter 6 presents the tests and benchmarks that the algorithm was subjected to
validate its correctness and prove its usefulness and efficiency. Also, a brief description
of meetings with external researchers is provided there.
Chapter 7 provides a short discussion of results obtained during the development
and testing of the algorithm.
Chapter 8 contains a discussion on how the project could be improved in the
future and the general conclusion of the project.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Preliminaries
The following chapter provides a short theoretical introduction on BPM and
BPMN, Petri nets and Timing attacks.
2.1
Business Process Management
The following section provides a theoretical introduction to Business Process Man-
agement.
2.1.1
What is a Business Process
A Business Process is a set of linked activities executing which results in delivering
a value to the client, be it a service or a product [33]. An important thing to note here
is that these activities can vary in type to a great extent, and an example business
process is not limited to a single type of task. Examples of such activities are:
• automatic, unsupervised tasks performed by a software component
• entirely manual, physical tasks performed by a human
• tasks performed by a human with use of a software component
In practice a business process activity can be any activity that is performed by an
organisation during its regular operation, that is necessary for the organisation to
deliver the final value to the customer. Business process plays a central role when
it comes to effective collaboration between different components along organisation’s
”value delivery chain”, it helps in process optimisation and making conscious decisions
when it comes to applying modifications [33].
Business processes play a key role not only when it comes to a process that is
already being operational, but might also be of great help in the design phase, espe-
cially when the process makes use of information systems. Properly designing such a
software component can speed up creation and release of any new functionalities, for
both existing and new products, and allow easy modifications of existing functionali-
ties in case there is such a need. These abilities can prove to be a do-or-die in today’s
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Business Process Management
5
world of fast-evolving technologies and new business requirements arising overnight
[33].
2.1.2
BPM and BPMN
Business Process Management is a management approach that concentrates on
optimising the flow (and/or a life cycle) of business processes within organisations.
It includes different elements such as theoretical concepts and methods that help in
designing, enacting and analysing the performance of a business process. At the base
of BPM lies a straightforward representation of a business process, that illustrates
various tasks and activities that are a part of the process, their constraints, correlation
and flow between them [33].
Based on such representation, further analysis and
improvements of a process can be designed and implemented.
This is where the
BPMN comes in - a standardised graphical notation that can be used to model a
business process [21]. It includes graphics and symbols that are used to represent
different kinds of activities in a business process.
The full spectrum of symbols
available in BPMN 2.0 (the current version of the standard) will not be discussed
here, but an example process represented using BPMN along with a description is
shown in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Process of an bank processing a loan request illustrated using BPMN
The above figure, in BPMN jargon called a Collaboration diagram, shows a BPMN
representation of a simple business process, where a bank processes a loan application.
The different symbols that have been used in the diagram will be discussed.
First, encasing the whole process is a Pool - a graphical representation of a partic-
ipant in a business process model. It can be a company, as in our case - the Bank, a
potential end-user (e.g. client) etc. A single collaboration diagram can contain multi-
ple participants. The first symbol (the leftmost circle within the Pool) is called a Start
Event symbol, which indicates where the process starts. There are several different
types of events that can start a process in BPMN. Next symbol represents a single
task in a business process. The white envelope symbol indicates that this particular
task is a Receive Task, and it marks the activity of receiving a message from another
collaboration participant (not shown here for simplicity). The following symbol is
==PAGE:15==
6
2 Preliminaries
called a User Task - it represents an activity performed by a user with the assistance
of a software application and is scheduled through some kind of a task list manager.
Next up is the Service Task, representing an autonomous activity performed by the
BPMS without user’s assistance - it uses an automated service, e.g. a Web service or
an automated application. The rhomboid symbol with an X represents an Exclusive
Or Gateway - the flow can go into any of the outgoing directions, depending on the
outcome of the preceding task, but only into one of them. The circular symbol that
can be seen on both XOR branches is called an Intermediate Throwing Event, and
in this particular case, the black envelope denotes that a message is being sent to
another collaboration participant. The last task symbol, also with a black envelope,
represents a Send Task, and as the previous symbol, it also indicates a message being
sent to another collaboration participant. The last symbol present in the collabora-
tion diagram - the bold-lined, empty circle, represents the End Event, which indicates
when a process (or a subprocess) ends and, similarly to the Start Event, comes in sev-
eral different types. The presented diagram is far from exhausting all the possible
BPMN 2.0 symbols, for example, another available and widely used symbol is a task
symbol containing a hand, which indicates a Manual Task - a task that is expected
to be fulfilled without the assistance of any software [15].
In real life, processes represented with BPMN are far more complex, with numer-
ous participants, sub-processes, concurrency etc. Therefore, it is necessary to include
some sort of a tool in the design process that would allow the designer to verify,
whether or not the business process contains any kinds of errors. The arguably most
essential property of a business process is the soundness - a sound business process,
once started, will eventually reach the end event and terminate, without any uncom-
pleted tasks [2]. Deadlocks or livelocks, occurring in a running business process, could
directly cause financial loses to the organisations involved in the process and probably
else. Another core property is the reachability of a business process - it is a similar
concept to the graph reachability in graph theory and when applied to a business
process means that every task within the process can be reached from the start event
(all tasks can be executed given a particular flow of the process). If there exists a task
within a business process, that cannot be reached from the start event, then there is a
great chance that the graph has been malformed, as not all possible business process
scenarios can be executed.
A tool, that is widely used to model BPMN flow and check the above and numerous
other properties, are Petri nets.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Petri nets
7
2.2
Petri nets
2.2.1
What is a Petri net
Petri nets were developed in 1962 by Carl Adam Petri. It is a special class of gen-
eralised graphs, aimed to be a graphical and analytical modelling tool, which allows
grasping the core logic of processes and systems of various kinds, both conceptually
and mathematically. It can serve the purpose of a visual aid for representing processes
and dynamic activities happening within them, thanks to the token flow mechanism
it includes. It can also be used as a mathematical tool, as with the use of Petri net
algebraic equations it is possible to perform a formal analysis of the mathematical
model responsible for the system’s behaviour [5] [4].
Not only simple processes can be modelled using Petri nets, but also asynchronous
systems that include concurrent or parallel tasks. Moreover, such a model excels at
simplicity, compared to the actual complexity of an asynchronous process itself, mak-
ing it more feasible to analyse their behaviour. Thanks to the fore mentioned token
flow mechanism, it is possible to detect phenomena such as deadlocks and livelocks,
and, when applied to a business process, verify its core properties - soundness and
reachability [5].
The versatility of Petri nets made them applicable to multiple, different in their
nature, areas, such as hardware design, distributed systems design, manufacturing,
logistics and business processes. Yet, in their original form, they are slightly limited,
and using them for more complex scenarios and applications is infeasible. Therefore,
multiple extensions to the original Petri net model have been proposed. Probably
the two most widely known are the Timed Petri nets, which introduce the concept of
time into the model, and Coloured Petri nets, which include both the time concept
and add another dimension to the mentioned tokens flow mechanism, making a PN
more suitable for modelling asynchronous systems [5].
A basic Petri net model consists of two components: structure and marking. The
net structure includes two elements called places and transitions.
Places can be
considered as the possible local states of the systems, whereas the transitions are the
activities that can happen or be performed in the system, that lead to a change in the
local states. The marking of a net is described by the use of fore mentioned tokens,
which can reside in a place. A token residing in a place sets a mark on this place
and therefore determines its local state. The global state of a net is determined by
its marking, that is the token distribution across all the places - the global state is
thus, in fact, a multiset of local states. Different interpretations of the meaning of
places, states and transitions can be created, based on the application of Petri nets.
However, traditionally places denote a type of resource, tokens residing in a place
represent the amount of a resource of that particular type, whereas a transition is
thought to be an activity, performing which consumes a resource of this particular
type. The interpretation of Petri net’s building blocks in case of modelling a BPM
==PAGE:17==
8
2 Preliminaries
will be explained later. A transition can be fired following certain firing rules resulting
in a flow of tokens, which causes the change in the local states and thus the global
state of the net changes as well ([4], [14]).
Formally, a Petri net is graph ([5])
N = (P, T, A, M)
(2.1)
where P represents a set of places ([5])
P = {P1, P2, ..., Pn}
(2.2)
graphically represented as circles, T represents a set of transitions ([5])
T = {T1, T2, ..., Tm}
(2.3)
which are graphically represented as bars, in case of instantaneous, simple events or
as a square in case of more complex events (this differentiation between the simple
and complex events representation is rather optional), A is a set of directed arcs that
connect places and transitions [5]
A = {(P × T) ∪(T × P)}
(2.4)
where (P × T) represents the input arcs of transitions, which for a transition i can
be denoted as I(Ti), representing the set of input places of a transition i, whereas
(T ×P) represents the output arcs of transitions and for a transition i can be denoted
as O(Ti), representing the set of output places of a transition i ([4], [5]).
Lastly, M is the marking of a Petri net, which is a multiset of its places, e.g
M = P →N
(2.5)
representing the distribution of tokens among the places that belong to the set P.
The net marking is modified when the transitions are fired, so it can be generalised
that M is the representation of the current global state of the Petri net. The marking
of the net at the beginning of analysis is called an initial marking (M0). A token
presence in a given place is graphically represented as a dot or a number within the
circle representing the place [5].
An arc is allowed to connect only a place to a transition or vice versa, an arc
between two transitions or two places is forbidden. A transition can only be fired if
each of its input places contains at least one token, and in such case, the transition
is said to be enabled. Once a transition is fired, a token is removed from all its input
places, and a token is added into every output place [5].
A common way of representing which transitions and places are connected by
an arc in a Petri net is by using a matrix C, referred to as an incidence matrix, of
dimensions (m ∗n), where m corresponds to the number of places and n corresponds
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Petri nets
9
to the number of transitions matrix. A single element Cij of the matrix C is defined
as [4]
Cij =



−1
for
Pi ∈I(Tj)
+1
for
Pi ∈O(Tj)
0
otherwise
(2.6)
To illustrate how an example BPMN process can be represented as a Petri net,
the BPMN example from the figure 2.1 transformed into a PN has been shown in
figure 2.2, along with its mathematical representation (for easier representation, all
elements have also a symbol assigned, shown as a value in brackets, next to their
actual name).
N1 = (P, T, A, M)
P = {p1, p2, p3, p4, p5, p6, p7, p8, p9, p10, p11}
T = {t1, t2, t3, t4, t5, t6, t7, t8, t9, t10, t11}
A = {(p1, t1), (p2, t2), (p3, t3), (p4, t4), (p4, t7), (p5, t5), (p6, t6), (p10, t11),
(p7, t8), (p8, t9), (p9, t10), (t1, p2), (t2, p3), (t3, p4), (t4, p5), (t5, p6),
(t6, p10), (t11, p11), (t7, p7), (t8, p8), (t9, p9), (t10, p10)}
M0 = {(p1, 1), (p2, 0), (p3, 0), (p4, 0), (p5, 0), (p6, 0), (p7, 0), (p8, 0), (p9, 0), (p10, 0), (p11, 0)}
A can be also represented, perhaps more clearly, using an incidence matrix
C =


∗
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
t7
t8
t9
t10
t11
t12
p1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
p2
1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
p3
0
1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
p4
0
0
1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
p5
0
0
0
1
−1
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
p6
0
0
0
0
1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
p7
0
0
0
0
0
1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
p8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
−1
0
0
0
p9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
−1
0
0
p10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
−1
0
p11
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
−1
p12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1


==PAGE:19==
10
2 Preliminaries
Figure 2.2: An example Petri net
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Petri nets
11
In this paper, a particular subclass of Petri nets is going to be used, called Work-
flow Petri nets. The net presented in figure 2.2 is actually an instance of a WF-net.
In a WF-net there are two special places referred to as i and o. The place i marks the
beginning of a workflow, it has no incoming transitions and in the state M0 it contains
a single token (and no other tokens are present in the net) The place o marks the
end of a workflow, it has no outgoing transitions and the workflow terminates once a
token appears in it [3].
It is WF-nets that are used to model business processes and check if they have
not been malformed. For instance, to verify the soundness of a business process, it
is first modelled as a slightly modified WF-net version, in which there exists a single
transition going from the place o and into the place i. Such WF-net is referred to as
strongly connected. Next, it has been proven that a WF-net is safe if and only if its
extended version is live and bounded [2].
A PN is live if and only if for every state Mi and every transition t there exists a
state Mj, that is reachable from Mi, in which t is enabled [3].
A PN is bounded if and only if for each place p and for every reachable state there
exists a natural number n such that the number of tokens in p is less than n [2].
Both of these properties can be verified by e.g. constructing the WF-net’s reach-
ability graph, and thus it can be verified if the business process is sound. There are
also other properties of business processes that can be checked using WF-nets. That
makes them a quite versatile tool for checking business processes correctness, which
is the main reason why they are used in this paper.
2.2.2
Transforming BPMN model into a PN
To be able to use Petri nets to detect vulnerabilities in business processes, first,
the process must be modelled using BPMN, which then needs to be transformed
into a PN. Thanks to the fact that PNs are not that complex, this task is rather
straightforward and it could be perhaps automatised. An example transformation of
a BPMN into a PN can be seen in figures 2.1 and 2.2. There are just a few basic
rules when it comes to mapping BPMN objects to PN elements ([10]):
• Start event is represented as a place with an outgoing arc to a transition
• End event is represented as a transition with an outgoing arc to a place
• Tasks and intermediate events are represented as a transition with one input
and one output place
• Exclusive split gateways are modelled as multiple transitions outgoing from a
single place, illustrating the routing behaviour of these gateways
==PAGE:21==
12
2 Preliminaries
• Exclusive merge gateways are modelled as multiple transitions going into a single
place
• Parallel split gateways are modelled as a single transition with multiple arcs
outgoing to different places, which illustrates the parallel execution of multiple
paths
• Parallel merge gateways are modelled as a single transition linked with incoming
arcs from multiple places
In some cases, the BPMN model might need some adjustments to represent it as
a Petri net model, as BPMN is quite forgiving when it comes to a model formulation.
These adjustments do not affect the flow of the process and the initial model is a
semantic and logical equivalent of the resulting graph. An example of such transfor-
mation has been shown in figure 2.3. Other examples include adding a single start
event (merging multiple start events) to the BPMN model, omitted merge gateways
etc. [25]
Figure 2.3: Example of a BPMN transformation
In the above example, an XOR gateway indicates that either Activity 1 or Activity
2 will be executed, never both. It does not affect how the process ends though, so
technically both end events in the flow on the left are the same. That is why they can
be merged into a single end event, by inserting a merge XOR gateway. Otherwise,
if the left model were to be represented as a PN, the resulting PN would not be a
workflow PN as multiple o places would be present.
More complex elements or mechanisms that can be included in BPMN, e.g. mes-
sage flow between multiple Pools and lanes can be represented as well, with slightly
more complex PN modules. Nevertheless, the BPMN can be modelled in its entirety
using PNs.
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Timing attacks
13
2.3
Timing attacks
In cybersecurity timing attacks are a type of side-channel attacks, in which the
attacker attempts to deduce secrets maintained in a computer system or infer various
information by measuring the response time of a system to inputs/queries [6]. These
attacks might be targeted at different elements of a secure system. A general, the-
oretical model for timing attacks have been presented in figure 2.4. In [23] Kocher
presented a theoretical approach to recovering cryptographic secrets based on the
attacker’s knowledge of the underlying algorithm’s implementation and the measured
time difference between the query and the answer to that query provided by the sys-
tem. This idea was later explored in [1] where an attack type less dependant on the
attacker’s knowledge of the system was presented.
Figure 2.4: General model of a timing attack (based on [1], Fig. 1.)
The general idea used to be that these type of attacks are only practical against
hardware security tokens (e.g. smart-cards), and are not effective against remote,
general-purpose servers, as the encryption/decryption times can be obscured by the
multiple tasks that might be running on the server concurrently. In [6] however, it
was presented that such attacks might be feasible and they should not be neglected.
Another example of a timing attack was also presented in [32]. The idea here is
that an attacker can violate internet user’s privacy and deduce what websites were
visited by him by exploiting browser caching mechanism or DNS caching mechanism,
by measuring the time it takes for the user’s browser to load a website or resolve a
DNS query. If a certain page was visited in the recent past, then there is a great
chance that its contents were cached in the user’s browser, and a DNS record was
created in the user’s DNS cache. Cached files/DNS entries will result in the page being
loaded faster, as the primary purpose of caching mechanisms is to improve the internet
==PAGE:23==
14
2 Preliminaries
browsing experience by decreasing loading times, and this improved performance is
what the attacker can exploit.
As can be seen in the above examples, timing attacks can be targeted at both
low level (less abstract) elements of a system (exploit implementation details, mea-
sure hardware performance directly to infer secrets) and higher-level (more abstract)
elements (deduce meta-information regarding a user based on system’s performance).
The next chapter (3) will present how a timing attack might look like when applied to
a business process. It will also become pretty straightforward that the timing attacks
on business processes also fit the general model presented in figure 2.4, and can be
considered as targeting higher-level element, as BPMs tend to be highly abstract.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Description
In the following chapter the problem of interest of this paper is illustrated exhaus-
tively and a brief literature study is carried out.
3.1
Time leak vulnerabilities in Business Processes
3.1.1
Time leak vulnerabilities in BPs
Let’s recall the BPMN representation of an example business process where client
applies for a bank loan, first presented in figure 2.1:
A customer of a bank, in need of a loan, goes to the bank’s web app to submit
his application online.
He fills all the necessary forms, provides all the necessary
information, and submits the application. Next, what the app does is it runs an
automatic background check of this customer, based on the submitted information,
to verify his credibility and make an assessment whether or not he is eligible for the
loan. When the assessment is finished, the client is either informed about rejection
and the process ends, or the client’s request is accepted, the bank starts processing
the request and the process ends.
Now, the assumption is that the time the application runs the client’s verification
is proportional to the number of different credibility registries (used by the bank for
the background check) he appears in as being suspicious (and there is no record of
him in a given registry if he does not appear as unreliable in them), meaning that
==PAGE:25==
16
3 Problem Description
the more unreliable the client is from the point of view of the application, the longer
the background check will last.
The client does not have any particular information regarding how the background
check is performed, which registries are being used by the app to assess his credibility
and what information they contain.
He just knows that the background check is
performed between him sending the request and receiving a response (be it approval
or rejection). From his point of view, the sending and receiving activities are low
activities (public), whereas the background check is a high activity (private), as
he has no information regarding them.
Yet, as mentioned above, even though the background check activity is a high
one, the customer can infer secret (from the bank’s point of view) information, based
solely on the duration of the process, which can be easily calculated by subtracting the
time the request was sent from the time verification result was returned to the user.
For instance, knowing several user’s private records and their associated duration of
the verification process, he could try and extract the list of credibility registries used
during the background check process by this particular bank.
As can be easily seen, this attack fits the general model of a timing attack presented
in section 2.3, figure 2.4, thus the attack was named a timing attack on business
processes.
What is also worth noticing is that it is not only dangerous if the attacker can
deduce the start, the end and the duration of the high activity. It is not difficult
to imagine a case where just noticing that a high activity has occurred can be a
security threat to the organisation/process, so the vulnerability detection in case of a
business process is not be limited to detecting the time leak vulnerability per se, but
the ability to detect the occurrence of high activity can also be considered a threat.
Having a business process represented with BPMN it is safe to assume that from a
perspective of a customer external to the process, the only low activities would be
those that concern the inter-process communication. Even if that is not the case,
BPMN provides additional tools that can be used to clearly state which activities are
low, and which are high. A problem arises once an attempt is made to transform
BPMN to PN. Petri nets, compared to BPMN, are drastically simple, and most of
the BPMN abstraction is lost in the transformation process. To be able to run a time
leak analysis on a PN representation of a business process it is necessary to know
which transitions are considered high, so an extension to the original Petri nets will
be proposed in the following section.
3.2
Types of time leak vulnerabilities in BPs
The example presented in section 3.1.1 is quite a simple one, yet it can still
be simplified to show how the vulnerabilities that the detection algorithm will be
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Types of time leak vulnerabilities in BPs
17
interested in might look like within a PN representation of a business process. There
are few cases worth considering here, and they may provide a potential malevolent
user with different possibilities and information, depending on how the high and low
tasks within the business process are aligned.
The following subsections first introduce a special notation that will be used to
represent high and low activities in a Petri net representation of a business process,
then present a few cases of time leak vulnerabilities that were considered in this paper,
and lastly provides vulnerabilities dependency graphs, in an attempt to make it easier
for the reader to understand the relations between the presented vulnerabilities.
3.2.1
High-low Petri nets
Having the BPMN representation of a process it can be easily deduced which
activities are visible to the user outside of the organisation. That information could
also be stored outside of the BPMN itself or stored as the meta information of the
model. But once the BPMN model is abstracted into a PN, this information is no
longer easily obtainable. As a result, there is no way to know which of the transitions
represent high activities and should be tested for a time leak vulnerability. To be
able to represent that, a simple, custom extension to the Petri nets notation will be
introduced.
Equation 2.1 defined a Petri net as
N = (P, T, A, M)
where P is the set of places, T is the set of transitions defined as (equation 2.3)
T = {T1, T2, ..., Tn}, A is the set of arcs and M is the net marking.
A High-low Petri net will be then defined as
N = (P, H, L, A, M)
(3.1)
where H is a set of high transitions, whereas L is a set of low transitions, such
that
T = {H ∪L}
(3.2)
where T is the set of all transitions, and
H ∩L = ∅
(3.3)
==PAGE:27==
18
3 Problem Description
meaning that one transition cannot be both High and Low at the same time.
Thanks to this simple modification to the original PN notation, the mathematical
representation of a Petri net model of a business process will be easier for the algo-
rithm to read and work with and may increase the algorithm’s performance.
The High-low Petri net notation will be used in the algorithm implementation to
represent the input Petri net. In the examples that follow, for simplicity, Hi will
denote a high transition (Hi ∈H), whereas Li will denote a low transition (Li ∈L).
The bank loan application process PN example, presented in figure 2.2 (and re-
peated below for reference), can be transformed into a High-low Petri net model with
ease, and its mathematical representation is as follows:
N2 = (P, H, L, A, M)
P = {p1, p2, p3, p4, p5, p6, p7, p8, p9, p10, p11}
H = {t4}
L = {t1, t2, t3, t5, t6, t7, t8, t9, t10, t11}
A = {(p1, t1), (p2, t2), (p3, t3), (p4, t4), (p4, t7), (p5, t5), (p6, t6), (p10, t11),
(p7, t8), (p8, t9), (p9, t10), (t1, p2), (t2, p3), (t3, p4), (t4, p5), (t5, p6),
(t6, p10), (t11, p11), (t7, p7), (t8, p8), (t9, p9), (t10, p10)}
M0 = {(p1, 1), (p2, 0), (p3, 0), (p4, 0), (p5, 0), (p6, 0), (p7, 0), (p8, 0), (p9, 0), (p10, 0), (p11, 0)}
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Types of time leak vulnerabilities in BPs
19
==PAGE:29==
20
3 Problem Description
3.2.2
Basic case
The simplest time leak vulnerability pattern that comes to mind is the one de-
scribed in the example in section 3.1.1. It involves a single high activity preceded by
low activity and followed by another low activity, as can be seen in the WF-net in
figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Basic time leak vulnerability example
As discussed before, the attacker can here use his knowledge of the end time of
L1 and the start time of L2 to deduce the start and end times (and therefore also the
duration) of H1. An important thing to notice here is that inferring this information
is possible only because the H1 is not dependant on another high activity and L2 is
dependant only on the activity H1 and no other activity.
3.2.3
Parallel (determinable latest end time) case
A little more complex case to consider is a one with parallel execution of low and
high activities. In this case (figure 3.2), depending on the flow order, two different
outcomes are possible. The flow is almost the same as in figure 3.1, but another low
activity runs parallel to the high activity H1.
Figure 3.2: Parallel time leak vulnerability example
If the high activity H1 finishes faster than the L2, the attacker can only know
when the H1 started (based on L1 end time), and that it lasted less than L2, since
L3 will run right after L2 finishes, since H1 has already finished.
If, however, H1 runs longer than (or exactly the same as) L2, then the attacker
will be able to infer also the end time (and hence the duration) of H1, as L3 will run
right after H1 has finished. In this particular scenario technically figure 3.2 could be
reduced to the flow in figure 3.1, as the activity L2 does not interfere with the flow
L1 →H1 →L3.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Types of time leak vulnerabilities in BPs
21
So this case will be considered forward as determinable latest end time case, as
here the attacker knows the start time of H1, and can infer the exact end time or just
the latest possible end time of H1 (as in the first case described above it could not
have lasted longer than the activity L2). It can be considered a second-best (from the
attacker’s point of view) scenario, as he can speculate not only regarding the start
time but also the end time of high activity.
3.2.4
Obfuscated start time
In this case, as the name suggests, the attacker is not able to infer the start time
of high activity of interest. The flow, as presented in figure 3.3, is again quite similar
to the one from the figure 3.1, but instead of a single low activity going into the high
activity, another high activity is preceding the high activity of interest (H3).
Figure 3.3: Process flow with obfuscated start time
The transition H1 was added to keep the workflow net form of the Petri net and
can be ignored in this case.
Because the activity H3 depends on the activity H2, for which the start and end
time are unknown, the start time of H3 cannot be determined, since there is no way
to know if the activity H3 starts immediately after L1 finishes, or not, as it is waiting
for H2 to finish.
The attacker can however infer the end time of H3, as it is followed by a low
activity L2. He also knows when the activity L1 started, hence he knows when the
activity H2 started. Having the duration of L1, the start time of H2 and the end time
of H3 he can try to guess when possibly H3 started, but cannot calculate the exact
value.
This specific case presented in figure 3.3 is an inverted version of the determinable
latest end time case - the attacker could try to determine the latest possible start time
here. However, this case has been included neither in the thesis nor in the developed
solution, therefore it could be considered a possible future improvement.
==PAGE:31==
22
3 Problem Description
3.2.5
Obfuscated end time
This case is similar to the one in section 3.2.4, but in this case, it is the end time
of a high activity that cannot be determined. As presented in figure 3.4, in this case,
a high activity follows directly after the high activity of interest.
Figure 3.4: Process flow with obfuscated end time
The activity of interest, H1 has a known start time since it is the same as the end
time of the low activity L1. The end time however cannot be determined, since the
start time of H2 is unknown, as it is high activity.
3.2.6
Combined cases
Probably the most important outcome of this section is that various cases can
be combined to infer information about high activities, even if they are preceded or
followed by a high activity.
If for a certain high activity there exists a way of inferring its start and end
time, then it can be considered a low activity going forward, as in the scope of time
leak vulnerabilities, under these conditions, it is indeed a low activity. Using the
knowledge inferred this way, the attacker can continue to break down further high
activities. Figure 3.5 presents an example of such a net where information regarding
a high activity can be inferred by first breaking down a high activity preceding it.
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Types of time leak vulnerabilities in BPs
23
Figure 3.5: Combined case of a time leak vulnerability
This case is so important because it points out the situation where a seemingly
safe high activity is vulnerable. The start time and the end time of activity H1 can
be inferred based on the end time of L3 and start time of L4, so full information
regarding H1 is available and hence it can be perceived as low activity. The task H2
at first seems to be an activity with obfuscated start time, as its start time depends
==PAGE:33==
24
3 Problem Description
on the end time of H1. But because the activity H1 is now perceived as low activity,
full information regarding H2 can also be now inferred.
So a process with two high activities, which might seem safe at first, is constructed
in a way that allows a potential attacker to break down start and end times of all
activities in the process. He knows what is happening at exactly what time, and can
use this information to disrupt the process and else.
3.2.7
Choice-based inference
When a workflow has two or more different flows, an attacker can guess if a
certain high activity was executed based on a fact that a low activity that is a part
of a different flow was not executed. An example of such case has been presented in
figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Flow with a choice-based vulnerability
In the above example, the attacker can guess if the activities H2 and H3 were
executed by noticing whether the activity L2 was executed or not. He cannot deduce
the start time of H2 though, as it depends also on the activity H1 that has an unknown
end time, but in a case where just the occurrence of a certain activity matters, this
vulnerability will suffice. This case falls within the area of information flow and non-
interference, and even though relevant to the problem, will not be considered here,
since a lot of research was already done regarding information flow and inferring
information from a process execution, as will be presented in the literature review.
3.2.8
Differentiation of activities
Last thing worth noticing is that it is important from the attacker point of view
to be able to differentiate low activities to exploit a time leak vulnerability, and an
example of this can be seen in figure 3.7.
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Time leak vulnerabilities formal definition
25
Figure 3.7: Example of an activities differentiation issue
From the attacker’s point of view, there are no time leak vulnerabilities in the
above process. As activities L1 are identical, the attacker does not know which flow,
the upper or the lower one, was executed, and hence if the activity H1 has been run
or not. It would be different if the attacker knew when the process was terminated,
but the assumption is that he does not have access to this information. If, however,
any of the L1 activities was a different activity, say, L2 then for the attacker it would
be obvious if H1 was executed and when the execution started.
3.3
Time leak vulnerabilities formal definition
The following sections provide a formalisation of all types of time leak vulnerabil-
ities that are taken into consideration in this paper.
Let N = (P, T, A, M) be a WF-net and ti be a transition such that ti ∈T. An
execution E of N is defined as a sequence of transitions
E = {t1, t2, t3...}
(3.4)
such that the sequence is compatible with the initial marking M and the flow
relations (if t1 is fired then it is possible to fire t2, then t3...). A time log will be
defined as a pair of mappings:
(start : T 7→N, end : T 7→N) : start(ti) < end(ti)
(3.5)
Next, let t′ <E t denote that t directly depends on t′ in an execution E, and let
pre(t) denote the set of all transitions on which t directly depends, i.e. pre(t) = {t′ ∈
E | t′ <E t}. Having this, a time log (start, end) can be said to be compatible with
an execution E iif for every transition t with pre(t) ̸= ∅
start(t) = maxt′∈pre(t)end(t′)
(3.6)
==PAGE:35==
26
3 Problem Description
3.3.1
Unconditional time leaks
An assumption is made that any execution of high activity is detectable by the
attacker with some other means. The attacker model for unconditional time leaks
knows the N, the set of activities in E (but not the order of execution), and the low
part of the time log.
Let t be a high transition. High transition t is considered to have an uncondi-
tionally determinable start time if for all executions E of N, where t ∈E and for all
time logs (start, end) compatible with E it holds that
start(t) = end(t′)
(3.7)
for some t′ ∈E that is low or has a determinable end time. An example of high
activity with determinable start time has been presented in section 3.2.5. There, the
transition H1 can be considered as t, whereas the transition L1 can be considered as
transition t′.
High transition t is considered to have an unconditionally determinable end time
if for all executions E of N, where t ∈E and for all time logs (start, end) compatible
with E it holds that
end(t) = start(t′′)
(3.8)
for some transition t′′ that is low or has a determinable start time. High activity
with a determinable end time has been presented in section 3.2.4. In this case the
transition H3 can be considered as t, and the transition L2 can be considered as
transition t′.
High transition t is considered to be unconditionally low if both equations 3.7
and 3.8 hold for t for all executions E of N. The time leak presented in the section
3.2.2 shows an example of this case, where the activity H1 can be considered as t,
whereas L1 and L2 as t′ and t′′ respectively.
Let E∗= {E1, E2, E3, ..., Ei} be the set of all possible executions of N. If an
unconditional time leak occurs for a transition ti, then for every Ei such that
ti ∈Ei the start and/or end time of the transition ti can be deduced by the attacker.
3.3.2
Conditional time leaks
The attacker model for conditional time leaks is that he knows N, the set of
activities in E (but not the order of execution) and the low part of the time log.
High transition t is considered to have a conditionally determinable start time,
if for at least one execution E of N, where t ∈E and for all time logs (start, end)
compatible with this execution, equation 3.7 holds. An example of such transition
has been presented in figure 3.8.
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Time leak vulnerabilities formal definition
27
Figure 3.8: Example of a conditionally determinable start time
In this example, in case of an execution E1 = {L1, L2, H2} the start time of the
transition H2 will be determinable. If, however, the execution E2 = {L1, H1, H2}
occurs, then the start time of H2 is no longer deducible by the attacker, since he does
not know the end time of the high activity H1.
High transition t is considered to have a conditionally determinable end time,
if for at least one execution E of N, where t ∈E and for all time logs (start, end)
compatible with this execution, equation 3.8 holds. An example of such transition
has been presented in figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Example of a conditionally determinable end time
Here, if the execution E1 = {H1, L1, L2} occurs, then the attacker will be able
to determine the end time of the activity H1.
If however the execution E2 =
{H1, H2, L2} occurs, the attacker is no longer able to determine the end time of
the activity H1, because of the unknown start time of the following activity H2.
High transition t is considered to be conditionally low, if for at least one exe-
cution E of N, where t ∈E and for all time logs (start, end) compatible with this
execution, equations 3.7 and 3.8 hold. An example of such transition has been shown
in figure 3.10.
==PAGE:37==
28
3 Problem Description
Figure 3.10: Example of a conditionally low activity
In this case, if and only if the execution E1 = {H1, L1, H3, L2} occurs both the
start time and the end time of the transition H3 will be determinable. Any other
execution will result in a high or either end or start time deducible activity.
Formalising the above - let E∗= {E1, E2, E3, ..., Ei} be the set of all possible
executions of N. If a conditional time leak occurs, then for at least one Ei such
that ti ∈Ei the start and/or end time of the transition ti can be deduced by the
attacker.
3.3.3
Determinable latest end time time leaks
The determinable latest end time time leak is a special case of the determinable
end time, and it is slightly different for the conditional and unconditional case.
Let T ′ be a set of transitions such that
T ′ ⊆T ∧∀ti ∈T ′ : (ti is low ∨ti has known start time)
and the set post(t) denote a set of transitions that depend on t in an execution E,
formally
post(t) = {t′ ∈E | t <E t′}
(3.9)
If a transition t has an unconditionally determinable start time and
∀t′ ∈post(t) : t′ ∈T ′
(3.10)
then its latest end time can be always guessed (and in fact might be equal to its
actual end time), and the transition can be considered to have an unconditionally
determinable latest end time. An example of an unconditionally determinable latest
end time has been shown in section 3.2.3.
==PAGE:38==
3.3 Time leak vulnerabilities formal definition
29
An even stricter condition can be also proposed to distinguish low transitions
from the determinable latest end time transitions, and it has been presented in the
equation 3.11
∀t′ ∈post(t) : ∃t′′ ∈(pre(t′) \ {t})
(3.11)
A transition t will have a determinable latest end time, and not the exact end
time, if and only if the t transition has a known start time, and every transition t′
that depends on t depends on at least one other transition t′′.
If, however, a transition t has an unconditionally or conditionally determinable
start time and the equation 3.12 holds, then the transition has conditionally deter-
minable latest end time.
∃t′ ∈post(t) : t′ ∈T ′
(3.12)
To strictly distinguish the conditionally low activity from the conditionally de-
terminable end time, again the equation 3.11 needs to hold. An example of such
situation has been shown in figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Example of a conditionally determinable latest end time activity
In the above example, activities H1 and H2 will have a conditionally determinable
latest end time if and only if the activity L2 is executed. If during the execution the
activity H3 is executed, the attacker will not be able to deduce the latest end time of
these activities.
3.3.4
Vulnerabilities dependency graphs
The vulnerabilities dependency graphs have been presented in figures 3.12 - 3.14
shown below.
==PAGE:39==
30
3 Problem Description
Figure
3.12:
Un-
conditional leaks de-
pendency graph
Figure 3.13: Condi-
tional leaks depen-
dency graph
Figure
3.14:
Un-
conditional to condi-
tional leaks depen-
dency graph
These graphs have been created to help both the reader and the end-user of the
application to understand the relations between vulnerability types. Two types of
symbols are used to mark a transition - a filled squared and a square with just a
border. A filled square marks a transition with an unconditional time leak, whereas
the other - a transition with a conditional time leak. Colour codes mark what kind
of leak the transition has, and the arrow depicts that a vulnerability type implies
the presence of another vulnerability type. And so, the most severe leak types have
been put at the top of the graph (this does not apply to the graph 3.14). In both
conditional and unconditional time leaks, a low activity (red) implies that the start
time (yellow), the end time (magenta), and the latest end time (green), in this case,
equal to the end time, are known. In turn, knowing the latest possible end time
implies that the start time of a transition is also known. And finally, each type of
an unconditional time leak implies that a conditional time leak of the same type also
exists, as depicted in the graph 3.14.
3.4
Other time leak vulnerabilities examples
In addition to the bank loan example presented in section 3.1.1, a few other
examples are presented below to show how an attacker can benefit from his knowledge
of a business process model and the ability to measure time.
The examples proposed here are rather simple, but their main goal is to show that
time leak vulnerabilities can be exploited in different ways, more or less malicious,
apply to dramatically different fields. In reality business processes are more complex,
so detecting a time leak vulnerability might be not that trivial for an attacker, but
the benefits could be potentially also greater.
==PAGE:40==
3.4 Other time leak vulnerabilities examples
31
3.4.1
Example 1: inferring patient’s medical condition
Imagine the following business process, presented in figure 3.15.
Figure 3.15: Medical exam with time leak vulnerability example
The main assumption here is that the queue to the doctor’s office is a public
space where everyone can see when a person goes in and leaves. So, to phrase it in
the previously used terms, the tasks Call a new patient from the queue and Patient
leaves the office are low activities, whereas all the other tasks, that concern interaction
between the doctor and the patient within the office are high activities.
As can be easily noticed, the time for a patient to leave the office if he has a medical
condition, or a new medical condition is discovered, is greater than the time to leave
the office if the patient is all right. This means that sensitive information about the
patient having some sort of a condition are disclosed, without the patient’s consent. If
the attacker had access to additional information sources, which is often the case, he
probably could infer even more specific information, as, for example, is the condition
terminal (regular visits, patient state worsens by each visit), is the condition chronic
(regular visits at a constant frequency), or even what kind of condition the patient
has. This would be an obvious example of a personal data privacy violation.
3.4.2
Example 2: finding critical parts of a web application
Imagine a potential attacker that has access to several stages of a processing
pipeline of a web application. The processing pipeline is in a sense a business process,
and as such can be modelled using a BPMN. It can and often does use services
provided by external organisations, and this web application can also be used by
external organisations.
The idea here is that the attacker can run a trial and error test, checking how the
application responds to different kinds of inputs and which part of the pipeline is par-
ticularly computationally heavy, without raising any suspicions on the app provider
side. By doing this, he can determine which part of the system is the most vulnerable,
moreover, what kind of input results in the largest response time and puts the appli-
==PAGE:41==
32
3 Problem Description
cation server under a heavy load (he might be able to locate the so-called bottleneck
of an application).
Then, using that knowledge, he can perform a more effective and perhaps more
devastating attack, for example, a Denial of Service (DOS) or a Distributed Denial
of Service (DDOS) attack, that, because of the pipeline process nature, may disrupt
the functioning of more than one organisation (as they might be interconnected and
mutually dependant via the business process).
In this example, the knowledge obtained thanks to the time leak analysis of a pro-
cessing pipeline (which is, in a sense, a business process) can be used by a malevolent
user to directly attack the service provider and affect the functioning of his services.
By doing that, he indirectly affects also the functioning of other subjects that may be
using the services, so the time leak analysis was used to the harm of multiple actors.
3.4.3
Example 3: detecting critical time for a car service app
Imagine an app that provides an Uber-like taxi service. Being able to determine
the time it takes for the service to assign a driver to a user upon request, can be a
measure of how large the traffic to the application is, and therefore how big is the
demand. A potential, simplified business process has been presented in figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Car service with time leak vulnerability example
As can be easily deduced, the New car service request and Send a response to a
user can be considered as low activities, whereas the Find an available car for a user
can be considered a high activity, as the app user does not know how the assignment
process is implemented. Knowing how long does it take to have a driver assigned can
be exploited in two different (but potentially more) ways.
If the attacker is a car service provider that uses the app, he can safely assume
==PAGE:42==
3.5 Literature review
33
that the longer it takes to find a car service, the bigger the demand at a given time
of day is. He can then use this knowledge to maximise his income, knowing when it
is most profitable for him to work, and when he can afford to increase the prices, as
the higher the demand the larger the possibility that someone will agree to a higher
price to find a transport and this may be deemed an unethical professional practice.
On the other hand, the ability to detect times of increased organic traffic could
make the application vulnerable to potential DOS and DDOS attacks. This, in turn,
can be exploited by unethical market competition, that could use this knowledge to
jam the competition’s servers to minimise their income and potentially increase their
own, not mentioning the negative effect on the user’s satisfaction levels which may
play even more crucial role in the long run.
3.5
Literature review
The only work that could be found, both by the authors and by the external con-
sultants, that researches the possibility of applying timing attacks to inferring secret
information in a system that consists of private and public activities, was the research
done by Damas P. Gruska in [16]. The model presented there is, however, slightly
different. Instead of dividing activities into high and low on a system description level,
a concept of observations is introduced, which are mappings on the set of actions that
can hide some of the actions (e.g. the secret activities), but not elapsing of time.
In [16], two slightly different attacker models are explored - one where the attacked
system can be observed only for a finite time interval, which is referred to as limited
access attacks, and the other, where the attacker can measure time only with limited
precision, referred to as limited precision attacks. From this thesis’s point of view,
quite interesting is the second approach, since the assumption made in the thesis
is that there is no delay between activities execution, which in many real-life cases
will not be true - introducing a notion of limited precision could compensate for this
assumption.
The approach that is taken in [16] is significantly more formal than what has been
and will be presented later in this thesis. The paper heavily depends on the property
of non-interference, which, from point of view of this thesis is negligible due to a
slightly different attacker model. Therefore, even though the research touches similar
topics to those presented in this thesis, the outcomes of the Gruska’s research are not
of significant value to this research, especially because no practical implementation
of the vulnerability detection mechanism was presented.
What is worth noticing
though is that the attacker model presented there is less constrained, compared to
the attacker model considered in the thesis, which makes the devised attack patterns
more plausible to execute.
Except for Gruska’s work, no other research in the time leak analysis in processes
==PAGE:43==
34
3 Problem Description
area has been found.
There are however numerous studies in related areas, that
circulate the topic of business process security.
In [18] a framework called MoSSBP has been developed, and its primary purpose
is to facilitate the process of transforming the business process security requirements
specification to its realisation. Thanks to, e.g, the introduction of graphical concepts
for specifying security requirements, it creates a clear channel of communication be-
tween the non-technical, who oftentimes are responsible for defining the business
processes and its requirements, and the technical people, who are responsible for the
business process actual implementation. The MoSSBP framework does not however
consider time leak vulnerabilities in a business process as potential attack channels.
Another interesting work is the one done by M. Leitner et. al. in [24]. This paper
was dedicated to exploring existing security extensions of BPMN, as the BPMN can
be considered the industry standard for modelling business processes. According to
the paper, the BPMN does not support modelling security aspects by default, there-
fore if the security is a concern when modelling a business process (and in majority
cases, it should be), then using BPMN extensions is inevitable. Twenty extensions
modelling the security of a business process at different levels of BPMN abstraction
have been found and analysed, yet none of them allows detecting and preventing time
leak vulnerabilities within a business process, proving yet again the relevance of the
research presented in this thesis.
An area of research closely related to the topic of time leak in BPs is this of in-
formation flow in a business process and its non-interference. Non-interference was
first defined in [13]. A high part of the system is said that it does not interfere with
a system’s low part if and only if any action performed at the high-level results in
no visible effect in the low part, meaning that no information (in any form) is passed
across security level’s boundaries [12]. If the non-interference property is not held
within a system, then a potential attacker could use the information flow to infer
information regarding a business process execution. Knowing the exact execution of
a process, the attacker could then find out start and end times of activities previ-
ously considered as high, simply because he knows if they were executed during a
specific execution, thanks to the information flow. Therefore, combining tools for
checking business process’s non-interference and the time leak detection algorithm,
could guarantee a higher degree of security.
An example of a tool for checking information flow and non-interference is the
one presented in [12], called Petri net Security Checker.
The goal of this tool is
to build Petri nets with two different confidentiality levels (high and low) and check
their structural security. They define structural non-interference as the absence of two
special classes of places - causal places, with an ingoing high transition and an outgoing
low transition, and conflict places, that has both outgoing low and outgoing high
transitions. The presence of these places may signal a potential source of information
leak, and not surprisingly, these kinds of places are also interesting from the time leak
==PAGE:44==
3.5 Literature review
35
analysis point of view. So in reality, the algorithm presented there performs a similar
analysis, but looks for slightly different properties. Combining both algorithms could
provide more extensive security assessment of a process.
Research presented in [22] can also be considered interesting from the time leak
vulnerabilities point of view. There the authors present a way of modelling infor-
mation flow in a system with multilevel security and checking its security policies
compliance, using WF Petri nets. Multilevel security means that the activities are
no longer just public or secret, but there exist multiple levels of confidentiality of
activities and the data they operate on. The business processes considered in this
thesis use only a one-level security model, so the application of this solution, if no
special steps are added, is limited to only such models. Adding multilevel security
support would increase the number of possible use cases.
Because a lot of research has been done on the topic of information flow and
the notion of non-interference, this topic will be of interest in neither the thesis nor
the algorithm implementation.
The assumption is that if a need to combine the
information flow security assessment and the time leak detection algorithm would
arise, the existing information flow research is sufficient enough to provide satisfying
results.
Last but not least, nothing has been said in regards to countermeasures that could
be implemented to prevent time leak vulnerabilities from occurring in a business
process. A great place to start would be by analysing research such as this presented
in [30]. There, a list of specific countermeasures for timing attacks has been presented.
These countermeasures have been devised against cryptographic timing attacks and
are divided into two types: Application-level and Hardware-level. As timing attacks
on cryptographic algorithms are different by nature from time leak attacks against
the business process, these strategies do not apply directly to a business process, but
based on them similar applicable strategies could be devised, e.g., adding a random
delay to each execution, as mentioned in chapter 10.1.3 in [30], could be applied by
adding a random delay to each low activity end time and start time, making it harder
or even impossible for the attacker to guess the exact start and end times of high
activities.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Solution Design
The following chapter describes the design process of the algorithm for detecting
time leak vulnerabilities and the design process of a Petri net pruning algorithm.
4.1
Time leak detection algorithm
The following section describes the algorithm devised to detect time leak vul-
nerabilities in workflow Petri nets and reasoning about it, along with its proof of
correctness and complexity estimation.
4.1.1
Algorithm description
The algorithm is a result of an iterative design process and is a third implementa-
tion of the possible solution. The first implementation was a simple recursive graph
traversal, also known as a Depth-first search (DFS) [8] graph traversal, that failed
because the type of a single node (be it a place or a transition) depends on the types
of all of its both outgoing and ingoing nodes, therefore DFS is a highly inefficient way
of propagating information across a Petri net, as it focuses on a single outgoing/ingo-
ing node at a time. The second implementation used a Breadth-first search (BFS)[8]
algorithm which is a much more efficient way of propagating information in a Petri
net, as traversing up a single level requires all the nodes in the current level to be
analysed. The third and final algorithm implementation is rather an extension to the
previous version. As it turns out, a single BFS search in a highly convoluted net is
not enough to correctly propagate transition types. If the case as presented in figure
3.5 is considered, but with added extra levels of dependencies, a single BFS traversal,
as implemented in the second algorithm version, will only work if there are at most
two levels of dependencies (a high activity depending on a high activity), but will not
work if there are more dependency levels (a high activity depends on a high activity
that depends on yet another high activity). To handle that issue, the implemented
algorithm is a looping BFS graph traversal, that runs until no change in the Petri
net state is detected.
Unlike a regular Petri net, Workflow Petri nets have a clearly defined start and
end place. This can be used to the algorithm’s advantage, as they mark the start and
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Time leak detection algorithm
37
endpoints of the traversal. Once one of these places is reached during the traversal
(depending on which place was the starting point), it can be safely assumed in a
BFS that the algorithm traversed all the nodes in the graph.
They also have an
advantageous characteristic of having a clearly defined state at the very beginning of
the algorithm - it can be safely assumed that all the (in fact, non-existing) ingoing
transitions of the start place are always high and same goes for all the (again, non-
existing) outgoing transitions of the end place.
The full single algorithm loop consists of two traversals through the whole net -
from the end place to the start place, (bottom-up) and from the start place to the
end place (top-down). This order does not affect the algorithm’s speed in any way
and has been chosen purely based on the fact that it is easier to extract the end place
from the net, using the data structures that were implemented for the algorithm.
The single loop, as described above, is being repeated until no changes are made to
the type of any of the transitions and any of the places present in the Petri net. A
pseudocode version of the main function has been shown in the listing 4.1.
1 function Main(input)
2
net = new Net(input)
3
net.WasUpdated = true
4
5
while net.WasUpdated do
6
net.WasUpdated = false
7
8
net.AnalyzeNet("up")
9
if (not net.WasUpdated)
10
break
11
net.AnalyzeNet("down")
12
end
Listing 4.1: Pseudocode for the main function
The traversal in one direction happens in the AnalyzeNet function. To be able to
traverse the net in a BFS manner, two First-in, First-out (FIFO) queues are used, for
places and transitions separately. The traversal starts by finding the traversal start
place, according to a direction passed into the AnalyzeNet function (so it is either
the start or the end place of the workflow net). The start place is first analysed and
then traversed, which means that all the outgoing or ingoing transitions, depending
on the traversal direction, are pushed into the transitions queue. The last step is
starting a loop which keeps iterating until both the transitions and the places queue
is empty, which signifies the moment of all the places and transitions being analysed.
The AnalyzeNet function pseudocode was presented in the listing 4.2.
1 function AnalyzeNet(direction)
2
transitionsQueue = emptyQueue
==PAGE:47==
38
4 Solution Design
3
placesQueue = emptyQueue
4
5
startPlace = getStartPlaceBasedOnDirection(direction)
6
startPlace.Analyze()
7
startPlace.Traverse(direction, transitionsQueue)
8
9
while (transitionsQueue != emptyQueue and placesQueue != emptyQueue) do
10
ForwardQueue(transitionsQueue , placesQueue , direction)
11
ForwardQueue(placesQueue , transitionsQueue , direction)
12
if net state has changed
13
this.WasUpdated = true
14
end
Listing 4.2: Pseudocode for the AnalyzeNet function
As mentioned above, the Traverse function is responsible for appending the el-
ements (outgoing or ingoing) to the appropriate queue (transitions queue or places
queue) based on the traversal direction. Later on, these elements are consecutively
popped from the queue, to maintain the BFS flow of the algorithm. The Traverse
function has been shortly described by the pseudocode in listing 4.3
1 function Traverse(direction, queue)
2
if direction == "up"
3
append all ingoing elements to the queue
4
else if direction == "down"
5
append all outgoing elements to the queue
6
return
Listing 4.3: Pseudocode for the Traverse function
At the core of the whole algorithm is the ForwardQueue function. In this function,
again, depending on the traverse direction, two things can happen. If the previous ele-
ment was a place, then the front element of the transitionsQueue is checked, whereas
if the previous element was a transition, then the front element of the placesQueue
is checked. If all of the elements, connected to the front element, in the direction
opposite to the traversal direction were analysed, then the front element of the queue
is popped, Analyzed and Traversed. If at least one of these elements have not been
analysed, then the first of them that has not been analysed is subjected to the analysis
and the front element of the queue is shifted to the end of the queue. This mechanism
is used to maintain the bottom-up or top-down information flow as closely as possible
and at the same time prevent infinite loops (in case loops are present in the net). The
Pseudocode for the ForwardQueue function has been presented in the listing 4.4.
1 function ForwardQueue(mainQueue, secondQueue , direction)
2
if direction == "up"
3
elementsSet = "outgoing"
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Time leak detection algorithm
39
4
else if direction == "down"
5
elementsSet = "ingoing"
6
7
if mainQueue.Front()[elementSet] has all elements analyzed
8
element = mainQueue.PopFront()
9
element.Analyze()
10
element.Traverse(direction, secondQueue)
11
else
12
element = mainQueue.Front()
13
analyze first yet Not analyzed element from elementsSet
14
move mainQueue front element to the back of the queue
Listing 4.4: Pseudocode for the ForwardQueue function
How the Analyze function is performed depends on the kind of element that is
subjected to the analysis, as it is different for transitions and places.
A single place analysis consists of two steps: counting transitions and calculating
flags and has been summed up in listing 4.5.
1 //analyze place
2 function Analyze()
3
countTransitions()
4
isEndTimeDeducible()
5
isStartTimeDeducible()
Listing 4.5: Pseudocode for the Analyze function for a place
The countTransitions function is responsible for counting the total number of
input transition that are low end (they have known end time from the place’s point
of view) and the total number of output transitions that are low start (known start
time from the place’s point of view), as shown in the listing 4.6.
1 function countTransitions()
2
this.highInputTransitions = 0
3
this.highOutputTransitions = 0
4
5
for transition in this.inputTransitions do
6
if transition is not low and transition is not low-Start
7
this.highInputTransitions += 1
8
end
9
10
for transition in this.outputTransitions do
11
if transition is not low and transition is not low-End
12
this.highOutputTransitions += 1
13
end
Listing 4.6: Pseudocode for the countTransitions function
==PAGE:49==
40
4 Solution Design
Based on the number of high input and high output transitions, the algorithm
assesses if the start time of outgoing transitions and the end time of ingoing transitions
can be deduced based on this place, so two flags are calculated using the numbers
calculated using countTransitions function.
The functions responsible for calculating these flags are isStartTimeDeducible
and isEndTimeDeducible and they are quite similar.
It can be proved (Section
4.1.2.1) that a place allows deducing the end time of an ingoing transition, regardless
of the net execution, if and only if it has no outgoing high transitions. On the other
hand, it can be shown (Section 4.1.2.2) that a place allows deducing the start time of
an outgoing transition, regardless of the flow execution, if and only if it has no ingoing
high transitions. The above conditions are consistent with the time leak definition as
shown in chapter 3. The flags calculation have been presented in listings 4.7 and 4.8.
1 function isEndTimeDeducible()
2
this.endTimeDeducible = false
3
4
if (this.highOutputTransitions == 0)
5
this.endTimeDeducible = true
Listing 4.7: Pseudocode for the isEndTimeDeducible function
1 function isStartTimeDeducible()
2
this.startTimeDeducible = false;
3
4
if (this.highInputTransitions == 0)
5
this.startTimeDeducible = true
Listing 4.8: Pseudocode for the isStartTimeDeducible function
The transitions analysis is done in two stages - first, it is being checked if the
transition’s end time can be deduced and then if the transition’s start time can be
deduced. If both of these tests evaluate to true, then the transitions type is being set
to low. If only one of them evaluates to true, then the transition type is being set
to low end or low start respectively. The Analyze function of a Transition has been
summed up in the listing 4.9.
1 //analyze transition
2 function Analyze()
3
transitionType = "high"
4
if (canDeduceEndTime())
5
transitionType = "lowEnd"
6
if (canDeduceStartTime())
7
if (transitionType == "lowEnd")
8
transitionType = "low"
9
else
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Time leak detection algorithm
41
10
transitionType = "lowStart"
Listing 4.9: Pseudocode for the Analyze function for a transition
It can be proven that (Section 4.1.2.3) an end time of a transition can be deduced
if at least one of its output places allows deducing end time.
To check that, the
algorithm iterates over all output places of a transition and checks if at least one of
them is endTimeDeducible. If yes, then the end time of the transition can be deduced,
if none of the places is endTimeDeducible, then the end time of the transition stays
high. The canDeduceEndTime function has been shown in the listing 4.10.
1 function canDeduceEndTime()
2
canDeduce = false
3
4
for place in outputPlaces do
5
if (place is endTimeDeducible)
6
canDeduce = true
7
break
8
end
9
10
return canDeduce
Listing 4.10: Pseudocode for the canDeduceEndTime function
As for the canDeduceStartTime function it can be shown (Section 4.1.2.4) that
the start time of a transition cannot be deduced if at least one of its input places is
not startTimeDeducible. The function canDeduceStartTime iterates over all input
places of a transition and checks if at least one of them is not startTimeDeducible.
If yes, then the start time of the transitions cannot be deduced, whereas if all of
the input places are startTimeDeducible, then the start time of the transition is
deducible. The pseudocode for the canDeduceStartTime function has been shown in
the listing 4.11
1 function canDeduceStartTime()
2
canDeduce = true
3
4
for place in outputPlaces do
5
if (place is not startTimeDeducible)
6
canDeduce = false
7
break
8
end
9
10
return canDeduce
Listing 4.11: Pseudocode for the canDeduceStartTime function
==PAGE:51==
42
4 Solution Design
To have a better overview of how the time leak detection algorithm works from a
high-level perspective, a flow chart has been presented in the appendix A.
4.1.2
Algorithm correctness
The algorithm is based on consecutively assessing types of transitions and places
and passing the updates to the outgoing or ingoing places or transitions, depending
on the current direction of analysis. A single graph traversal ends once all of the
elements within the graph have been analysed.
The state updates are propagated in one direction, but a single element analysis
takes into consideration both outgoing and ingoing directions. So once no change
to any of the net’s elements is detected during a single traversal, regardless of the
direction, the net must have reached a steady-state (all transitions have their final
type assessed) and the algorithm can terminate.
This approach would not be suitable to handle loops, as a single element is anal-
ysed only once all of its outgoing or ingoing elements (depending on the traversal
direction), have been analysed. The introduced loop prevention mechanism handles
this issue by randomly analysing one yet not analysed ingoing/outgoing element. This
means that the algorithm at some point must reach a state where all previously not
analysed ingoing/outgoing elements of the considered element have been analysed and
the analysis can continue, as the loop has been already handled. Thanks to the outer
loop of the analysis, the element that was analysed without having fully available
information due to the looping problem will, during one of the consecutive iterations,
receive the full set of information regarding its neighbouring elements and its type
will be finally assessed. What needs to be noted here is that this mechanism only
prevents the algorithm from getting stuck - at the current state of development, it is
not guaranteed that the result’s returned by the algorithm, in case the net contains
a loop, are fully correct.
As has been shown, the analysed net will eventually reach a steady-state, regard-
less of loops presence.
What needs to be shown now is that the reached state is
correct, meaning that transition types are assessed and propagated correctly.
4.1.2.1
End time deducible place
Let T ′ be the set of outgoing transitions of a place p. Place p is considered end
time deducible if ∀t ∈T ′ it is true that t is either unconditionally low or has an
unconditionally determinable start time. No outgoing high transitions imply that it
is always known when a token is consumed from p and as the assumption is that
the tokens are consumed immediately after being produced with no delay, then the
token production time (end time of a transition that produced it) is also known. As
the assumption is also that the attacker knows the set E, then he also knows which
transition produced the token.
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Time leak detection algorithm
43
4.1.2.2
Start time deducible place
Let T ′′ be the set of ingoing transitions of a place p. Place p is considered to be
start time deducible if ∀t ∈T ′′ it is true that t is either unconditionally low or have
an unconditionally determinable end time. No ingoing high transitions imply that it
is always known when a token is produced in p and as the assumption is that the
tokens are consumed immediately after being produced with no delay, then the token
consumption time (start time of a transition that consumes it) is also known. As
the assumption is also that the attacker knows the set E, then he also knows which
transition consumed the token.
4.1.2.3
Deducing end time of a transition
Let P ′ be the set of outgoing places of a transition t. An end time of a transition
t can be deduced if
∃p ∈P ′ : p is end time deducible
(4.1)
If that is the case then it can always be deduced that a transition t produced a
token and when this token was produced, since E is known and considered net is a
WF-net. Since all the tokens in all places pi are produced at the same time, then it
is only necessary for one of the places pi to be end time deducible.
4.1.2.4
Deducing start time of a transition
Let P ′′ be the set of ingoing places of a transition t. A start time of a transition
t can be deduced if
∀p ∈P ′′ : p is start time deducible
(4.2)
If that is the case then it can always be deduced when is the exact time a transition
t becomes enabled and since E is known and considered net is a WF-net, it is also
known if it was fired or not. Since a transition t requires a token in every input
place pi all of them must be start time deducible, since it will be the token that
is produced last that allows the transition to be fired.
4.1.3
Algorithm complexity
The time leak detection algorithm can be split into a few steps, to be able to
estimate its overall complexity. The outermost step of the algorithm is continuously
iterating over the net and updating transition types until no changes are made. A
single loop consists of traversing up and down the net. If no changes are detected
when traversing in either direction, the looping stops. In every iteration, a change
in a transition type is propagated across all levels of dependencies between initially
==PAGE:53==
44
4 Solution Design
high transitions. Therefore, the upper bound complexity of the outer loop can be
expressed as
O(h + 1) = O(h) = O(n)
(4.3)
Where:
h - number of high transitions
n - number of all elements in the graph
The +1 factor accounts for a single traversal that detects no changes. The worst-
case scenario is that, if the n is a really large number and there are only two places
in the network (start and end), then h ≈n and the complexity will be O(n) However,
it is rather unlikely that the outer loop will be executed that many times. In most
analyzed cases the total number of up and down traversals was constant and equal to
at most 3 and no case was found so far that would require more traversals. It can be
therefore assumed that the number of traversals, in reality, is a constant value and
has a negligible effect on the overall complexity.
The inner loop of the algorithm analyses each place and transition once. In case
loops are present withing the net, this does not change - each place and transition is
still analysed only once, its the analysis order that changes. Shifting the queue, as
mentioned in the listing 4.4, is constant time, therefore loops should not have any
effect on the number of iterations (as even when shifting, a single node, be it a place
or a transition, is still analysed). Therefore, the complexity of the inner loop of the
algorithm can be expressed as
O(n)
(4.4)
Where:
n - total number of elements (transitions + places) within the Petri net
The next computationally heavy step of the algorithm comes from the function
responsible for forwarding a queue. In each forward queue function call, it is first
checked if all outgoing/ingoing elements of the element that is about to be analysed,
were analysed. This requires iteration over all outgoing/ingoing elements, which can
be either the transitions (in case the analysed element is a place) or the places (if the
element is a transition). Therefore, the forward queue complexity will be different
for places and transitions. For transitions, the upper bound complexity of forwarding
the queue can be expressed as
==PAGE:54==
4.1 Time leak detection algorithm
45
O(p −1)
(4.5)
Where:
p - total number of places
The −1 factor, in this case, accounts for the fact that the transition can never have
only either outgoing or ingoing places, it must have at least one of each, otherwise,
the net would not be a Workflow net. For places, the complexity can be expressed as
O(t)
(4.6)
Where:
t - total number of transitions
Here the −1 factor is missing as a place can have no ingoing transitions (start
place) or no outgoing transitions (end place). Both of these are an upper bound as,
in reality, it is highly unlikely for a place to be connected to all transitions present
within the net and the same applies for a transition if the Petri net is a representation
of a business process.
Within the forward queue function always a single Petri net element is analysed,
either a place or a transition. The complexity of the Analyze function for both of
these elements is slightly different. In case of transitions both all input and out places
are iterated over separately, so the upper bound complexity of the Analyze function
for a transition can be expressed as
O(p)
(4.7)
The complexity will be exactly O(p) if and only if this transition is connected to
both the start place and end place directly. The actual complexity should be lower
since such a case is an extraordinary one and it is highly unlikely it could be present
in a business process. The Analyze function for a place first counts all ingoing and
outgoing high transitions, hence its upper bound complexity can be expressed as
O(t)
(4.8)
The complexity will be exactly O(t) only if the place analysed is the start or end
place that is connected to all the transitions present within the net, which, again, is
a situation rather unlikely in a Petri net representing a BP model.
==PAGE:55==
46
4 Solution Design
Having all complexity components analysed, the total upper bound on the algo-
rithm’s complexity can now be estimated. The total complexity of a single forward
queue for a place (denoted with a subscript p) and for a transition (denoted with a
subscript t) can be expressed as
Op(2t) = Op(t)
(4.9)
Ot(2p −1) = Ot(p)
(4.10)
Since a single inner loop iteration includes both the forward queue for a transition
and the forward queue for a place, then the upper bound of the inner loop complexity
will be equal to
O(n ∗(t + p)) = O(n ∗n) = O(n2)
(4.11)
since the sum of places and transitions is equal to the total number of elements. If
the possible complexity of the outer loop is also considered, then the total complexity
of the algorithm will be equal to
O(n2 ∗h)) = O(n3)
(4.12)
again that complexity is the absolute worst-case scenario and some of the scenar-
ios that would lead to achieving this complexity rule out each other. In reality, the
situations considered by the upper bounds, as described above, will seldom occur in
an actual Petri net representation of an actual business process. The algorithm imple-
mentation itself includes several places where a loop can be preemptively interrupted,
causing the intuition to suggest that the complexity in most cases will be rather closer
to that of O(n) rather than O(n3), especially for a very large n.
4.1.4
Algorithm extensions
The net analyser can be further extended to try and detect more subtle kinds of
time leaks that could be present in the net. For this paper, two additional extensions
were implemented and they will be briefly described in the following sections.
4.1.4.1
Determinable latest end time detection
This algorithm extension has been added to detect the case of the determinable
latest end time, that was previously presented in figure 3.6. In this case the attacker
can guess only the latest end time of the activity.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Petri net pruning
47
All of the initially high transitions are being analysed.
Only transitions that
have been marked as low by the main algorithm are taken into consideration. The
assessment is rather simple - if all of the transitions in the set post(t) of a transition
t (as defined in the equation 3.9) that are low, have more than one input place, then
only the max duration of a transition t can be known, as start times of its output
transitions are dependant not only on t’s end time but also on end times of other
ingoing transitions.
4.1.4.2
Conditional analysis
The conditional analysis extension is run after the main analysis is finished, to
detect the conditionally deducible end and start times. The only transitions that are
subjected to the analysis are the initially high transitions, that have not been marked
by the main algorithm as either unconditionally low or determinable latest end time.
The conditional check for the conditionally determinable start time checks if there
exists at least one execution of the net in which the start time of the transition can
be deduced. If that’s the case then it means that this transition has a conditionally
determinable start time, since under some conditions its start time can be deduced.
On the other hand, the conditionally determinable end time checks if any of the
outgoing places of a transition have at least one outgoing transition that has either
unconditionally determinable start time or is unconditionally low. In that case, if this
transition is executed, then the end time of the considered transition is also known.
The conditional analysis does not consider deeper dependencies between transi-
tions, but it analyses only the nearest neighbours of the currently analysed transition.
There are indeed some cases where the conditional time leak can occur, but the tran-
sition that allows the time leak is not a direct neighbour of the considered transition.
This time leaks are considered out of scope for the current version of this check because
such analysis would be rather a combination of time leak analysis and information
flow analysis.
4.2
Petri net pruning
As mentioned in the section 2.1.2, business processes modelled with BPMN can
grow large and complex, both in size, or one might say horizontally, but also in the
level of detail, or vertically. Nevertheless, the greater complexity of an underlying
business process, the more complex the BPMN representation and even greater the
complexity of the Petri net model, as a single element of BPMN is often represented
by more than one Petri net element.
So as the complexity of a business process grows, so does the possible state space
of its Petri net representation. Yet, from the perspective of time leak vulnerabilities,
==PAGE:57==
48
4 Solution Design
not necessarily all actions are relevant. There are some specific cases where removing
a low activity from a Petri net model will result in an equivalent, from the point of
view of high activities, model, but with a smaller state space, since the activity was
removed. Removing a single activity may not result in a significant improvement in
the algorithm’s efficiency, but if multiple activities were removed, then the resulting
gains might be considerable.
The general idea is that if a low activity is preceded only by low activities and
followed only by low activities, then it does not provide any information regarding
the start and end times of high activities. Removing such activity will not affect
the Petri net flow from the point of view of high activities (if, of course, the net is
re-modelled correctly), but will indeed lower the overall complexity of the net.
This approach however cannot be also used for the high activities present in the net
and the primary reason for that is the case shown in figure 3.5. Pruning low activities
is quite easy as finding out whether or not a single low activity can be removed
requires only looking at the activities one level below and one level above the activity
(the direct neighbours). The activities that are already low before running the time
leak analysis will not change their type, so their type is already known before running
the algorithm. In case of high activities though, their actual type is unknown until the
algorithm has been run, so removing a high activity from the initial net might affect
the outcome of the time leak analysis. Determining whether or not a certain high
activity can change its type during analysis would require looking at more distant
activities than just the direct neighbours and therefore the actual gains of running
the pruning algorithm against high activities would diminish.
During the design phase of the Petri net pruning algorithm, four cases of pruning
were considered and they were described in detail in the following subsections.
4.2.1
One-to-one low activity
The simplest considered case of pruning can be done on a one-to-one low activity,
presented in figure 4.1. For every token that transitions L1 and L2 produce, L3 can
be fired once, resulting in one token in the place p3 and enabling transition L4-L6. So
for every token produced by L1 and L2, only one transition from L4-L6 can be fired.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Petri net pruning
49
Figure 4.1: One-to-one low activity before pruning
The one-to-one transition, in this case, is the transition L3 and it refers to the
fact that this transition has only one input place and one output place. Pruning a
one-to-one transition is rather straightforward, as it does not depend on the number
of input transitions of the place p1 and the number of output transitions of the place
p2. In this case, the transition L3, its output place (p2) and outgoing arc of its input
place (p1) are simply removed. To keep the flow of the net consistent, the outgoing
arcs of the output place (p2) are assigned as outgoing arcs of the input place (p1),
resulting in a pruned net as presented in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: One-to-one low activity after pruning
In this case, every token produced by L1 and L2 allow only one transition from
L4-L6 to be fired, so it is the same case as for the net presented in figure 4.1, therefore,
the resulting flow of the net has not changed.
The total number of places, transitions and arcs after pruning are given by equa-
tions 4.13, 4.14, 4.15 respectively
P ′ = P −1
(4.13)
where:
P - number of places before pruning
==PAGE:59==
50
4 Solution Design
P ′ - number of places after pruning
T ′ = T −1
(4.14)
where:
T - number of transitions before pruning
T ′ - number of transitions after pruning
A′ = A −2
(4.15)
where:
A - number of arcs before pruning
A′ - number of arcs after pruning
4.2.2
One-to-many low activity
A little more complex case to consider is the one-to-many low activity, that can
be divided into two, slightly different cases.
4.2.2.1
One-to-many with single input transition
The less complex, favourable case is the one-to-many with single input transition,
presented in figure 4.3. For every token produced by transition L1, transition L2 can
be fired once, producing one token in all its output places p2-p4. So, in other words,
firing transition L1 will result in a single token being put in each place p2-p4.
Figure 4.3: One-to-many with single input transition before pruning
The one-to-many with single input transition, in this case, is the transition L2 and
the name refers to the fact that it has got one input place, multiple output places and
the input place has a single input transition. This is a distinct case as transforming
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Petri net pruning
51
it means simply removing the transition L2 and its input place (p1) and connecting
L2 output places as output places of L1, as presented in figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: One-to-many with single input transition after pruning
As can be seen, firing transition L1 will result in a single token being put into
places p2-p4, so the flow of the net has not been changed in comparison to the net
before pruning.
The total number of places, transitions and arcs after pruning are given, as previ-
ously, by equations 4.13, 4.14, 4.15 respectively.
4.2.2.2
One-to-many with multiple input transitions
A slightly less favourable case is the one-to-many with multiple input transition,
as shown in figure 4.5. In this scenario, for every token produced by transitions L1
and L2, transition L3 can be fired once, producing a token in each of its output places
p2-p4, so it can be assumed that each token produced by L1 and L2 results in one
token in each output place p2-p4
Figure 4.5: One-to-many with multiple input transitions before pruning
The one-to-many with multiple input transitions here is the transition L3 and the
name highlights the fact that the input place of this transition has multiple input
transitions. Pruning this case is similar to the previous one, with the difference that
here for each of the input transitions of the input place p1, there exists an outgoing
arc to each of the output places of transition L3, as presented in figure 4.6.
==PAGE:61==
52
4 Solution Design
Figure 4.6: One-to-many with multiple input transitions after pruning
This case is less favourable because the number of arcs after the transformation
highly depends on the number of input transitions and is given by the equation 4.16.
The number of removed places and transition stays the same, but the number of
additional arcs grows rapidly with each new input transition, diminishing the gains
obtained from pruning.
A′ = A −1 + T(P −1) −P
(4.16)
where:
A - number of arcs before pruning
A′ - number of arcs after pruning
P - number of output places of the removed transition
T - number of input transitions of the removed input place
4.2.3
Many-to-one low activity
Many-to-one low activity is a similar case to the previous one, but inverted and
just as the one-to-many low activity, it can be divided into two cases.
4.2.3.1
Many-to-one with single output transition
The straightforward case is the Many-to-one with single input transition, which
can be seen in figure 4.7. Firing transitions L1-L3 results in producing a token in
places p1-p3 accordingly. The transition of interest, L4, can be fired only if all its
input places p1-p3 contain at least one token, producing a single token into the place
p4. This in turn enables transition L5. In other words, L5 can be fired every time
each place p1-p3 contains at least on token.
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Petri net pruning
53
Figure 4.7: One-to-many with multiple input transitions after pruning
The Many-to-one with single input transition is, in this case, the transition L4, as
its got many input places and a single output place. Pruning this case is simply done
by removing the transition L4 and the place p4 and simply re-wiring all the input
places of L4 as input places of L5. Pruning will result in a net presented in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: One-to-many with multiple input transitions after pruning
Firing transitions L1-L3 will result in producing one token in each place p1-p3
which will then enable the transition L5, so the flow of the net has not been modified
by pruning.
The total number of places, transitions and arcs in the resulting net are given by
equations 4.13, 4.14, 4.15 respectively.
4.2.3.2
Many-to-one with multiple output transitions
Many-to-one with multiple output transitions is the more complex case, which can
be seen in figure 4.9. Transition L4, in this case, can be fired only once transitions L1-
L3 have been fired at least once, producing tokens in places p1-p3. Firing transition
L4 produces a single token in place p4, allowing firing transition either L5 or L6. This
means that firing each transitions L1-L3 exactly once, results in enabling transitions
L5 and L6.
==PAGE:63==
54
4 Solution Design
Figure 4.9: Many-to-one with multiple output transitions before pruning
The many-to-one with multiple output transitions is, in this case, the transition
L4 and the name is referring to the fact that its output place, p4, has multiple output
transitions (L5 and L6). To prune this case, each output transition of p4 has an input
arc from all the input places of transition L4, resulting in a net as presented in figure
4.10.
Figure 4.10: Many-to-one with multiple output transitions after pruning
In this case, only after each transition L1-L3 has been fired at least once, transi-
tions L5 and L6 become enabled, so the flow of the net remained unchanged. Similarly
to the case from section 4.2.2.2, this situation is less favourable as the number of arcs
after the pruning grows rapidly with the number of output transitions of the place p4.
The number of removed places and arcs is the same as in the many-to-one with single
output transition, whereas the number of additional arcs is given by the formula 4.16.
4.2.4
Many-to-many low activity
The last case that was considered during the design phase was Many-to-many low
activity. Just as in previous cases, the ”many” refers to the cardinality of sets of
output and input places of the considered low activity. In this case, the number of
both input and output places is strictly larger than 1 and an example of such low
activity has been shown in figure 4.11.
==PAGE:64==
4.2 Petri net pruning
55
Figure 4.11: Many-to-one with multiple output transitions after pruning
In the above case, all transitions L1-L3 must be fired to enable the transition L4,
firing which will produce a single token in places p4-p6. During the analysis of this
case, no general way of pruning was found that would work for all possible input and
output cardinalities combination while maintaining the same token flow. Therefore,
this case is considered unprunable.
4.2.5
Pruning approach
All possible pruning cases, described in section 4.2 were considered when devising
the pruning approach of the algorithm.
One-to-one low activity case, as well as
cases with single input/output transitions, can provide significant gains in terms of
decreasing the search space, without increasing the complexity in any other way.
On the other hand, in cases described in sections 4.2.3.2 and 4.2.2.2, based on the
equation 4.16, it can be anticipated that the more complex the pruning case, the less
significant are the gains from pruning and in the worst-case scenario the complexity
might be even increased by the number of additional arcs added while pruning.
That is why for the pruning algorithm only the three of the fore mentioned cases
were considered and only these three are subjected to pruning, namely:
• One-to-one low activity
• One-to-many with single input transition
• Many-to-one with single output transition
What is worth mentioning is that thanks to the fact that pruning of a transition
can be done if and only if all of its neighbouring transitions are low (regardless of the
pruning case), the order in which the transitions are being pruned should not matter.
An example of a net with multiple pruning cases has been shown in figure 4.12 - in
this case, the prunable transitions are transitions L2, L3 and L6 and each of them
represents a different pruning case.
==PAGE:65==
56
4 Solution Design
Figure 4.12: Complex pruning example
No matter the order in which the transitions are pruned, the result will always be
the same, as presented in figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Complex pruning example after pruning
A special case to consider here is with place p7 having multiple output transitions.
The prunable transitions remain the same, but the pruning order affects the resulting
net. If transition L6 were to be pruned first, then the transition L3 would turn into
the many-to-one with multiple output transitions case and would be considered un-
prunable. If, however, the transition L3 were to be pruned earlier, then the transition
L6 would turn into the many-to-one with multiple output transition case and would
be considered unprunable. So in such case, the order of pruning affects the pruning
result, but the resulting flow remains the same, although the nets are not the same.
The same property can be shown for an inverted example, that results in one-to-many
with multiple input transitions case. In this case, the flow also remains unchanged.
The pruning approach consists of two stages: pruning case recognition and the
==PAGE:66==
4.2 Petri net pruning
57
actual pruning. This is done inside the PruneNet function for every low transition
present in the net in a random order, as the pruning order does not affect the final
result, as shown earlier (except for the mentioned edge case).
The core logic of
PruneNet function has been presented in the listing 4.12
1 function PruneNet()
2
for transition in lowTransitions do
3
pruningCase = getPruningCase(transition)
4
if (pruningCase == "one to one")
5
pruneOneToOne(transition)
6
else if (pruningCase == "one to many single")
7
pruneOneToManySingle(transition)
8
else if (pruningCase == "many to one single")
9
pruneManyToOneSingle(transition)
10
else
11
continue;
12
end
Listing 4.12: Pseudocode for the PruneNet function
The getPruningCase function is responsible for assessing whether or not a given
transition can be pruned and is a series of ifs and checks. The general idea of the
function has been presented in the listing 4.13.
The check is based on the num-
ber of output and input elements of the transition. If these numbers match any of
the pruning cases, then it is being checked if all neighbouring transitions are low
(checkIfAllLow). Next, if the transition is either one-to-many or many-to-one, it is
checked if it is a single input transition and single output transition respectively in
the checkIfSingle. Then the pruning case is returned. The checkIfAllLow and
checkIfSingle functions are pretty straightforward and will not be described here.
1 function getPruningCase(transition)
2
numberOfInElements = transition.InElementsSize
3
numberOfOutElements = transition.OutElementsSize
4
pruningCase = "not prunable"
5
6
if (numberOfInElements == 1)
7
if (numberOfOutElements == 1) (
8
if (noOtherInputTransition(transition))
9
pruningCase = "one to one front"
10
else if (noOtherOutputTransition(transition))
11
pruningCase = "one to one back"
12
else
13
pruningCase = "one to many single"
14
else if (numberOfOutElements == 1)
15
pruningCase = "many to one single"
16
17
if (not checkIfAllLow(transition))
18
pruningCase = "not prunable"
==PAGE:67==
58
4 Solution Design
19
20
if (pruningCase == "many to one single" or pruningCase == "one to many
single")
21
if (not checkIfSingle(transition))
22
pruningCase = "not prunable"
23
24
return pruningCase
Listing 4.13: Pseudocode for the getPruningCase function
Additional checks that are worth a mention are the noOtherInputTransition
and noOtherOutputTransition checks. They are being performed only for the one-
to-one transition case and is used for detecting situations such as the one shown in
figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: A different case of one-to-one pruning
From the transition L2 point of view, L2 can be pruned. But the pruning approach
in the one-to-one case is to remove the output place of L2, thus removing also the
output place of transition L4 and therefore modifying the Petri net flow. What could
be done instead, in this case, is simply removing the place p1 rather than the place
p2, obtaining the same result net flow-wise. If, however, the place p1 would have
an additional output transition, then this one-to-one case would be unprunable, as
neither of these places can be removed.
Once the pruning case has been returned and it turns out a transition can be
pruned, the pruning is performed according to the rules described in section 4.2 and
thus it will not be described here.
4.2.6
Pruning algorithm correctness
The pruning approach correctness has been argued about in the preceding sections
by describing all the possible pruning cases, describing how they can be pruned and
showing that performing pruning in these cases does not affect the general Petri net
flow.
==PAGE:68==
4.2 Petri net pruning
59
4.2.7
Pruning algorithm complexity
As for the pruning algorithm complexity, the most expensive part of it is the
pruning case recognition, rather than pruning itself. As mentioned before pruning
recognition involves iterating over all of the low transitions present within the net.
For every transition, the number of outgoing and ingoing places is checked (constant
time) and in case a pruning possibility is detected, it is being verified that all the
neighbouring transitions are low. In case of a one-to-many and many-to-one prun-
ing case, it is also checked whether or not the outgoing/ingoing place has multiple
ingoing/outgoing transitions (constant time). Pruning itself requires iterating over
all of the outgoing and ingoing transitions to update their ingoing/outgoing places
according to the pruning approach. Therefore, having:
n - the total number of transitions within the net
m - the number of low transitions within the net
the upper bound complexity of the pruning algorithm can be expressed using the
Big O notation as
O(m ∗(n −1)2) = O(m ∗n2)
(4.17)
where the m factor accounts for iterating over all low transitions and the factor
(n−1)2 accounts for checking and then pruning all of the neighbouring transition. In
reality however, it is rather unlikely for a transition to be a neighbour of all of the
other transitions and in most cases it will be true that
m >> xi
(4.18)
where
xi - number of neighbours of a transition i
For a very large n, if it is assumed that all the transitions present in the net are
low, it will also be true that m ≈n, so it can be stated that the actual complexity is
O(n ∗n2) = O(n3)
(4.19)
Also, as all of the transitions cannot be prunable, therefore the pruning part of the
algorithm will not be done for every low transition. If this is taken into consideration
and what was stated in the equation 4.18 is also accounted for, a net where m ≈n
will be much much closer to being linearly dependant on the total number of elements,
as follows:
==PAGE:69==
60
4 Solution Design
O(n)
(4.20)
In real life, it is rather rare for a business process to consist of low activities only (in
such case running time leak detection algorithm does not even make sense). As will be
seen later, the number of low activities tends to be much smaller than the number of
high activities in a real-life scenario. Hence the complexity of the pruning algorithm
is more likely to be even better than O(n) and therefore the pruning algorithm can
be considered efficient.
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5
Solution
Implementation
The following chapter describes the algorithm implementation and covers briefly
the web tool that was developed for the project to make the algorithm easily accessible
and testable.
5.1
Algorithm implementation
The following section provides a detailed description of the algorithm implemen-
tation.
5.1.1
Technologies used
The algorithm implementation was done using C++17.
The main reason for
choosing C++ was its good performance but also its portability, as the program can
be easily compiled on any operating system to an executable. This means that the
code could be developed on one operating system and then run on another, which
was crucial as initially the project was developed on Windows and then the tool was
deployed on a Linux machine.
The project was developed using mostly the standard template library (stl). As
the algorithm was meant to be used within a web tool, a decision was made to have
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) as the primary input type for the algorithm, as it
is currently the first choice for a data-interchange format in the industry and can be
easily read and understood by humans. To parse the input passed to the algorithm
as JSON, the RapidJSON’s JSON parser and generator were also included in the
project. The algorithm implementation contains several custom classes and the most
important of them will be described in the following subsections.
==PAGE:71==
62
5 Solution Implementation
5.1.2
Main function
The main function of the program supports two types of input arguments: file
name or inline, stringified JSON. It recognizes the input type by checking if the ’.json’
file extension is present at the end of the first input argument. Within main function
four steps can be recognised (listing 5.1):
1. Check input arguments (line 3)
2. Create the PN data structure (line 9)
3. Run PN pruning (line 11-12)
4. Analyse the PN (line 14-15)
1 int main(int argc, char *argv[])
2 {
3
time_leak::NetParser::CheckArguments(argc);
4
5
bool runConditional = false;
6
if (argc == 3 && *argv[2] == '1')
7
runConditional = true;
8
9
time_leak::Net *n = new time_leak::Net(time_leak::NetParser::ParseNet(
argv[1]));
10
11
time_leak::NetPruner nPruner;
12
nPruner.PruneNet(n);
13
14
time_leak::NetAnalyzer nAnalyzer;
15
nAnalyzer.RunAnalysis(*n, runConditional);
16 }
Listing 5.1: Time leak algorithm main function
5.1.3
NetParser class
The NetParser
class is responsible for recognising the type of the input that was
passed to the program and parsing it into an easily accessible data structure (namely
rapidjons::Document class). It first checks the validity of the input arguments and
then the JSON, read either directly from the input argument or the file, is passed to
the RapidJSON’s parser.
5.1.4
Net class
The Net class is a data structure created in a way that makes it easily prunable
and suitable for efficient execution of time leak analysis algorithm, as it has been
==PAGE:72==
5.1 Algorithm implementation
63
implemented as a double-linked list. The Net class contains the parsed rapidjson
document and three map structures (listing 5.2):
• place id →pointer to a Place class (line 5)
• transition id →pointer to a Transition class for initially low transitions (line
6)
• transition id →pointer to a Transition class for initially high transitions (line
7)
These map structures contain all of the elements that are present in the net and
allow fast access to the place/transition by its id, as the complexity of the find function
of std::map is O(log n).
1 class Net
2 {
3
private:
4
rapidjson::Document net;
5
map<std::string, time_leak::Place *> places;
6
map<std::string, time_leak::Transition *> lowTransitions;
7
map<std::string, time_leak::Transition *> highTransitions;
8
...
9 }
Listing 5.2: Main Net class fields
The net structure is created in four steps, using the RapidJSON’s Document class.
1. Create all the places and put them in the place’s map
2. Create all the transitions and put them in suitable maps (low/high)
3. Link all places to their output transitions
4. Link all transitions to their output places
When linking places to output transitions and transitions to output places, also the
backward links are created (transitions to input places and places to input transitions).
Thanks to the fact that the maps store pointers to all the elements rather than
elements itself, there exists only a single instance of a place/transition at a time so
it can be updated directly and there is no need to propagate the changes to other
instances.
As a result, the created data structure contains maps of objects (both transitions
and places) that contain references to their direct neighbours in both directions. This
==PAGE:73==
64
5 Solution Implementation
greatly simplifies the graph traversal, as the algorithm can move directly between
the neighbouring elements. It also simplifies pruning, as removing an element comes
down to deleting the references to it within its neighbours and re-linking elements is
equal to adding references.
5.1.5
Element, Place and Transition classes
Element, Place and Transition classes are closely related to each other. The
Element class is a template class that implements fields and methods common for
both places and transitions, such as a list of all of the outgoing and ingoing elements,
the id, abilities to add and remove ingoing and outgoing elements and various state
checks necessary to run the algorithm correctly. This has been implemented as a
template as the list of outgoing and ingoing elements will be of a different type for
places (the lists will contain transitions) and for transitions (the lists will contain
places). The definition of the Element class has been presented in the listing 5.3.
1 template <class T> class Element
2 {
3 protected:
4
std::string id;
5
std::map<std::string, T *> inElements;
6
std::map<std::string, T *> outElements;
7
bool analyzed;
8
9 public:
10
Element<T>(std::string id);
11
12
const std::string GetId();
13
const bool WasAnalyzed();
14
std::map<std::string, T *> GetInElements();
15
std::map<std::string, T *> GetOutElements();
16
void RemoveInElement(std::string elementId);
17
void RemoveOutElement(std::string elementId);
18
const std::map<std::string, T *> GetElementsBasedOnDirection(bool
direction);
19
20
void AddInElement(T *element);
21
void AddOutElement(T *element);
22
void SetAnalyzed(bool analyzed);
23
void Print();
24
bool AllDirectionsAnalyzed(bool direction);
25 };
Listing 5.3: Element class header file
Method GetElementsBasedOnDirection returns either out elements or in ele-
ments, depending on the traversal direction passed to the function, whereas the func-
==PAGE:74==
5.1 Algorithm implementation
65
tion AllDirectionsAnalyzed is responsible for checking whether or not all outgo-
ing/ingoing elements have been analysed, depending on the traversal direction.
Both Place and Transition classes extend the Element class and add element-
type specific fields and functionalities on top of the template class. The Transition
class extends the Element template passing as the type T the Place class since all
of its outgoing and ingoing elements will be places, whereas the Place extends the
Element template passing the type Transition since all of the ingoing and outgoing
elements of a place are transitions. Both classes contain an Analyze method and in
addition to that other methods that help to implement the logic of analysing a given
element.
5.1.6
NetPruner
The NetPruner’s class only public available method is the PruneNet method which
takes a Net object as an input. It then performs pruning directly on the passed Net
object, to avoid cloning the Net object as this operation grows rather costly as the
number of elements within the Net object increases.
First, the NetPruner class uses the getPruningCase method to assess the type
of each low transition and then prunes the Net object accordingly, using suitable
methods. In addition to the pruning methods it also defines a pruningCase enum
and contains two other methods, checkIfAllLow and checkIfSingle, that perform
additional checks described in the section 4.2.
List of all available methods within the NetPruner class has been shown in the
listing 5.4.
1
...
2
enum pruningCase
3
{
4
oneToOneFront ,
5
oneToOneBack ,
6
oneToManySingle ,
7
manyToOneSingle ,
8
notPrunable
9
};
10
11
pruningCase getPruningCase(Transition *transition);
12
void pruneOneToOneFront(Transition *transition, Net *net);
13
void pruneOneToOneBack(Transition *transition, Net *net);
14
void pruneOneToManySingle(Transition *transition, Net *net);
15
void pruneManyToOneSingle(Transition *transition, Net *net);
16
bool checkIfAllLow(Transition *transition);
17
bool checkIfSingle(Transition *transition);
18
...
Listing 5.4: NetPruner class methods
==PAGE:75==
66
5 Solution Implementation
5.1.7
NetAnalyzer
The NetAnalyzer class will be the last described in this section. It also has a
single public method exposed, RunAnalysis, that is being passed the Net class and a
flag that signifies whether the conditional analysis should be run or not. This is the
class that controls how the algorithm is run and decides when the solution converged.
It controls the net traversal direction and both the inner and outer algorithm’s while
loops.
After the initial analysis has been run, the extensions for detecting determinable
latest end time and the conditional analysis are run. The results are being printed
to the std output immediately after the analysis is finished, but this could be eas-
ily adjusted if needed. NetAnalyzer also makes use of an additional helper class,
ElementUniqueFifo which is a FIFO queue implementation that allows only unique
elements to be inserted and to be inserted only once (the queue is being cleared after
a single traversal).
Thanks to how the elements have been structured the implementation is rather
clean and easily understandable. The main algorithm part is not easily modifiable
due to the fact that the algorithm is rather specific, but extensions can be easily
added to the main algorithm if a need to perform additional checks arises.
5.2
Web tool implementation
For the ease-of-use and testing of the algorithm, a web application has been de-
veloped. The application uses JSON object as an input, just as the algorithm, that
needs to follow a previously defined schema. It provides a simple net visualisation
that allows moving the Petri net elements around, provides dynamic re-rendering
of the net upon the input modification, client-side error checking and post-analysis
colour and shape description of the detected vulnerabilities.
The application consists of two main parts: Front-end and Back-end, that will be
described in the following sections.
5.2.1
Front-end
The Front-end part of the application consists of a downright simple and pretty
intuitive Graphical User Interface (GUI), as presented in figure 5.1. It contains various
ways for the user to provide input to the algorithm. First are the predefined nets
examples - these nets were also used to test correctness and the algorithm’s efficiency
to some degree as well.
Not all of the cases are valid WF-nets, but these were
implemented mainly to test the possible edge cases.
Next, there is the input text area that provides a JSON object template, so that
the user can just fill in the blanks. Worth noticing is that after loading one of the
==PAGE:76==
5.2 Web tool implementation
67
example nets, the JSON object is shown in the editor and is also editable. Once the
user has created his own net he can then save it in his browser’s local storage and
load it later if he would like, by using the second drop-down input. Last input is a
checkbox that is responsible for enabling and disabling the conditional net analysis.
The interface is also equipped with basic validation logic, to prevent a blatantly
incorrect input from being sent to the API.
Figure 5.1: Web tool GUI
The small menu underneath the text area input allows the user to save and delete
saved nets, submit the net and clear the current input back to the JSON template.
At the bottom of the interface, there is a link that allows toggling a dependency
graph of the recognised time leak types, that has been described in the section 3.3.4.
Right-most element is the legend that describes what each colour and shape that can
be found in the result graph means.
The graph-drawing part of the tool was implemented using p5.js client-side draw-
ing library. Thanks to the way updating is done in p5.js it allows live updates of the
net as the user is modifying an example using the text input. However, the library
starts having problems with handling nets that have more than approximately 300
elements, but it is rather unlikely that so many elements will be used within a PN
model of a business process, so the interface should be able to handle the majority of
real-life inputs.
The rest of the interface was implemented using HTML5, CSS3 and JavaScipt
with the Fetch API for communicating with the back-end, hence p5.js is the only
==PAGE:77==
68
5 Solution Implementation
piece of external code used in the front-end part.
5.2.2
Back-end
The Back-end of the web app was implemented using Node.js and the Express.js
web application framework, that helps to implement easy routing and provides an out-
of-the-box solution for returning static files. The reason to use Node.js was threefold:
• allows fast development - running a web server requires just a couple of lines
• natively supports JSON (used for the net schema transfer)
• is great for handling parallel requests, in a non-resource-intensive app
The back-end API provides three endpoints:
• POST /analyze
The POST /analyze endpoint is responsible for running the net analysis and returning
the results.
It requires the net passed as a body parameter of the request.
The
algorithm is run directly from a compiled executable file residing on the server and the
net is passed as a command-line argument. The results are also read from command-
line, parsed and the net is returned with appropriate colour coding appended.
• GET /nets
The GET /nets endpoint is an endpoint that returns the list of all available example
nets to the requester.
• GET /nets/:netFile
The GET /nets/:netFile endpoint returns the net content of the file specified in the
URL parameter :netFile, which is the name of the file in which the net resides on the
server.
Each net is stored in a separate file on the server, to avoid either reading a single
large file when recovering one net, or keeping this large file data in the memory. As
every single net file is relatively small, this seems to be the most efficient approach
and it could be optimised further by introducing a server-side cache service.
==PAGE:78==
5.2 Web tool implementation
69
5.2.3
Testing
A development testing routine was also created to keep the results returned by the
algorithm consistent whenever a change in the algorithm implementation was made.
The test suite consists of 30 test cases, which are the example nets that are available
in the web tool and cover both basic time leak cases, efficiency testing and various
edge cases that may occur in a Petri net. Not all of the test cases are valid Workflow
Petri nets. The test cases are run using Node.js test framework called Mocha.
A simple test script was written that iterates over all example nets, reads them
from the file, runs the algorithm passing them as input and compares the results with
the expected results, also stored in the net’s file. If the results match - the test passes.
If not - the tests failed and the change probably introduced an error to the algorithm.
No automatic testing was implemented - the test script needs to be run manually,
whenever it seems appropriate, preferably before releasing the changes to the live
server.
5.2.4
Deployment
The application was deployed using Heroku, which is a Platform-as-a-Service
(PaaS) solution.
Thanks to the Heroku’s free tier, the application can be hosted
for free (although the scalability is very limited), nevertheless it allows public access.
The deployment procedure is done semi-manually, using Heroku’s automatic de-
ployment option. A deployment branch was created in the Github repository of the
project and the Heroku app was set up to automatically deploy the code whenever
any updates are being pushed to the deployment branch. The main issue in the de-
ployment process was that the Heroku servers operate on Unix systems, whereas the
development was done on a Windows machine. This means that the algorithm’s files
cannot be just compiled into an executable on the development machine, as it will
not be possible to run them on a Unix machine. The easiest way that was found to
overcome this obstacle was to use Docker - the code is compiled inside a docker con-
tainer and the executable is copied over from the container into the local file system
and then pushed to the Github repo’s deployment branch.
All in all, as the main purpose of the thesis was to develop the algorithm rather
than create a full-fledged web application, the used technologies and methodology
was chosen having the ease-of-use and simplicity as the primary priority in mind.
The final version of the tool is available here.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6
Testing and
Benchmarking
The following chapter is dedicated to the external validation, testing and bench-
marking that the algorithm was subjected to. First, a summary of meetings that were
held with external professionals in the area of security and business process modelling
will be presented. The next section will describe the process of testing the algorithm
on real-life business processes examples. In the last section, the benchmarking process
that was done using automatic workflow Petri nets generation will be described.
6.1
External validation
During the project work, two meetings with external specialists in the area of
security and business process modelling were arranged. They provided a professional
opinion on the relevance of the described problem and possible real-life applications
of the time leak detection algorithm.
They also pointed towards multiple papers
concerning similar or related areas of research, that could be used for reference or for
scoping the project further in the future.
6.1.1
Meeting with Panagiotis Vasilikos
Panagiotis Vasilikos is a DTU PhD graduate and former lecturer, currently work-
ing as a Security Architect at the Alexandra Institute, where he is responsible for
performing security code reviews, finding vulnerabilities in open source software and
teaching about software security.
His expertise is relevant to the project as his main area of interest as a researcher
is applying formal methods to the computer system’s security verification. His PhD
thesis involved, among other topics, measuring information leakage through timing-
channel attacks, which is indirectly related to the area of interest of this paper.
The meeting was held on 9.10.2020, in the early stages of the project development,
when a prototype of the algorithm was still not ready.
During the meeting, the
==PAGE:80==
6.1 External validation
71
problem of time leaks in business processes was described, as well as the general idea
on why and when it could be relevant to concern yourself with a potential time leak
and how to detect potential leaks.
Panagiotis expressed his interest in the topic of the project and confirmed the
potential relevance of the presented problem, especially if the notion of time leaks was
combined with the notion of information flow in business processes. He also confirmed
that this approach to process security is, at least to his knowledge, a novelty and he
has not seen any prior research on this topic.
According to Panos, the core difference between the approach presented in this
project and the standard approach in information flow papers is the attacker model.
In the standard approach, the attacker is considered to have a complete knowledge
of the system, timing information included, whereas the adversary in this thesis is
assumed to have only partial knowledge. It comes down to the attacker model being
less constrained, which means that the total information that the attacker needs to
obtain to be able to exploit the system’s flaws is easier to get. Therefore, time leak
attacks, as considered in this paper, could pose a greater threat to a potential business
process simply because they might be easier to perform.
6.1.2
Meeting with Hugo A. López
Hugo Andres López is an Assistant Professor in Computer Science at the Uni-
versity of Copenhagen and currently employed as an Industrial Researcher at DCR
Solutions.
He is an experienced researcher with robust knowledge in the field of,
among others, Business Process Management and Formal Methods and his main spe-
cialisation are process-oriented technologies and their theoretical formalisation, formal
verification, adoption via software tools and empirical validation [19].
Since the theoretical foundations of this project highly depend on Business Process
Management, Hugo’s expertise is very valuable. His experience in the field would allow
him to evaluate the relevance of the problem considered in the project, as well as the
relevance of the proposed solution.
This meeting took place at a much more advanced stage of the project, on
30.10.2020, where a second version of the algorithm prototype was already live. Sim-
ilarly to Panagiotis, Hugo was rather enthusiastic about the project idea, but he also
could not find any materials or research directly related to time leaks in business
processes, so the novelty of the project was again confirmed by an external researcher.
He mentioned that what could also be explored is the application of this idea to
blockchain processes and that coupling time leak analysis with information flow anal-
ysis could give promising results.
The most crucial outcome from both meetings is the reassurance that this area
of research is indeed a novelty, which was confirmed by external specialists involved
==PAGE:81==
72
6 Testing and Benchmarking
in both security and business processes research fields. This means that the results
that could be achieved if the project was further developed in the future, could be of
interest not only to the scientific community but also to security practitioners.
6.2
Testing
The following sections describe the tests that were done on real-life business pro-
cesses modelled using BPMN.
6.2.1
Medical Data Exchange Platform
The Medical Data Exchange Platform is a project proposal made by the Cyber Se-
curity for Europe project [9]. Its main purpose is to provide trustworthiness between
different stakeholders when exchanging medical data, to create new business oppor-
tunities. The platform’s goal is to provide services that allow data anonymisation
and functional encryption for improving user’s privacy when sharing data, decen-
tralised identity management, authentication mechanism, a visualisation tool and a
data sampling tool [31].
The whole data exchange process have been modelled using BPMN, as shown in
appendix B and in [26]. In the BPMN model, three actors have been specified: a
Data Provider, a Data Consumer and the Data Exchange Platform. To perform the
time leak analysis of this BPMN model, a black box approach was taken, meaning
that each actor’s workflow will be analysed, treating all external entities as potential
attackers and as public activities only the ”touchpoint” events, which in this case are
restricted to throwing message events and catching message events. The interactions
with files and data storage will be omitted during the analysis.
What is important to notice here is that there exist different ways in which the
black box approach could be modelled. Looking at the medical data exchange plat-
form BPMN model it can be seen that the Data Provider and Data Consumer do not
communicate directly, but instead, they communicate always through the exchange
platform. So from the point of view of the Provider, the activities where the Con-
sumer communicates with the Platform are private and vice-versa. If this approach
is taken, the analysis could be used to point out what kind of information one party
(Provider or Consumer) can deduce about the interaction of the other party with the
Platform. However, if all the touchpoint events are assumed to be low, no matter
which actors are involved, then the analysis could show what kind of information
can be deduced regarding the Platform itself, assuming that the data Provider and
Consumer roles are interchangeable.
The point of the above is that in a complex business process BPMN model, there
exist multiple ways an actor can be represented using High-low Petri net since different
strategies of assigning types (high/low) to activities exist. This further increases the
==PAGE:82==
6.2 Testing
73
usefulness of the algorithm, since the analysis can be performed on all potential High-
low Petri nets representations of a business process actor. In all of the following tests,
the latter approach (all touchpoints considered low) will be taken.
So, the first step of analysing a BPMN model actor’s workflow is to transform the
workflow into a High-low Petri net. For the Data Provider actor, the High-low Petri
net model of its workflow will look as presented in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Data Provider actor’s workflow High-low Petri net representation
Once transformed into a High-low Petri net, the analysis can be run, giving the
results as presented in figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Data Provider actor’s workflow analysis results (conditional and uncondi-
tional)
As can be seen from the above figure, the activity Project anonymised data has
a determinable end time, whereas the activity Agree on T&C is unconditionally low.
The end time of the whole process is also determinable, as the end activity has a
determinable start time, as can be seen from the transition H7.
The next actor to be analysed is the Data Exchange Platform.
Its workflow
represented as a High-low Petri net has been shown in figure 6.3.
==PAGE:83==
74
6 Testing and Benchmarking
Figure 6.3: Data Exchange Platform actor’s workflow High-low Petri net representa-
tion
The transformed workflow net can then be subjected to the time leak analysis,
giving the results as presented in figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Data Exchange Platform actor’s workflow analysis results (conditional
and unconditional)
Here also time leak vulnerabilities have been found, namely the potential attacker
could find the end time of Add the anonymised data to the data collection, both end
and start time of Retrieve the requested protected file and the exact end time of when
the process ends.
The last actor in the presented BPMN model is the Data Consumer. Its workflow
transformed into a High-low Petri net has been presented in figure 6.5.
==PAGE:84==
6.2 Testing
75
Figure 6.5: Data Consumer actor’s workflow High-low Petri net representation
Once subjected to the analysis, four time leaks are discovered in the workflow, as
presented in figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Data Consumer actor’s workflow analysis results (conditional and uncon-
ditional)
The potential attacker will be able to find the start and end time of the activity
Find an appropriated data from the catalogue, the start times of activities Receive
Terms & Conditions and Receive requested file and the end time of the activity Create
a request for the data.
The workflows analysed in this example were linear, hence can be perceived as
rather simple. However, it shows that time leak vulnerabilities in simple linear pro-
cesses are practically unavoidable, therefore the activities should be aligned in a
manner that ensures that at least the most business-critical activities are protected.
6.2.2
Loan Application Workflow
The following example was made based on a model from the Model Collection of
Business Process Management Academic Initiative repository ([34]). Not all actors
have been analysed here, due to the sheer size of the example and the model itself
was slightly modified - some activities were removed, as they were irrelevant from the
time leak point of view and also the process was modified to be able to represent it
==PAGE:85==
76
6 Testing and Benchmarking
as a WF-net. The changes were made to make the example more clear and from the
practical point of view do not affect the results of the analysis.
The example has been shown (both the original and the modified version) in the
appendix C and represents a process of a Client applying for a loan to an entity called
BestLoans. The model shows two possible ways of applying for a loan - directly to the
BestLoans entity, or through a Broker - the latter was excluded from the model for
the fore mentioned reasons. Another two actors that were excluded are the Bureau
of Credit Registration and the Notary, as they were black box entities. So in the
following example, the only actors that will be analysed will be the Client and the
BestLoans actors.
Again, the same assumptions regarding which activities are initially high and
which are low were made as in the previous example. First, the Client actor model
was transformed into a High-low Petri net and the results of the transformation are
shown in figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: Client actor’s workflow High-low Petri net representation
As can be seen, this example is slightly more complex than the previously anal-
ysed, as it is not linear anymore. Upon running the algorithm against High-low PN
transformed Client model example, the results presented in figure 6.8 were obtained.
==PAGE:86==
6.2 Testing
77
Figure 6.8: Client actor’s workflow analysis results (conditional and unconditional)
In the above case, the potential attacker would be able to infer the end time of
the activity Prepare loan application, both end and start time of the activity Check
approval letter and the exact end time of the process, as all possible final activities
are low.
The second workflow process that was analysed is the one performed by the Best-
Loans actor. First, the workflow was transformed into a High-low Petri net, as pre-
sented in figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: BestLoans actor’s workflow High-low Petri net representation
==PAGE:87==
78
6 Testing and Benchmarking
Then, the transformed workflow was subjected to the time leak analysis, both
conditional and unconditional. The results of the unconditional analysis have been
presented in figure 6.10, whereas the results of the conditional analysis - in figure 6.11
Figure 6.10: BestLoans actor’s workflow unconditional analysis results
Figure 6.11: BestLoans actor’s workflow unconditional analysis results
==PAGE:88==
6.2 Testing
79
As can be seen, a few time leaks are present also within the BestLoans actor’s
workflow. This is also the first example to contain both unconditional and conditional
time leaks.
The potential attacker will be able to deduce the start time of the Prepare insur-
ance offer activity, if it is executed and also the end times of the Reject application
and Approve application activities. If the activity 10 days is executed (the true mean-
ing of this activity will be ignored for the purpose of this example) is executed, its
start time will also be known, just as well as the start time of the Draw deed with
notary activity. Last but not least, the start time of the End activity will be known,
but only if the Reject letter sent to Client is executed, as it has a conditionally known
start time.
The presented examples were less trivial than the Medical Data Exchange Plat-
form examples, both in terms of transforming the BPMN model into a High-low PN
model, but also in terms of detecting the time leaks within the workflows. This is the
kind of BPMN models that this project is aiming at - with time leak vulnerabilities
not visible at the very first glance.
6.2.3
Talent Seek - Recruitment Manager Workflow
The last example presented here will be the most demanding one, even though
at first it may seem rather trivial. The example, that was again acquired from the
Model Collection of Business Process Management Academic Initiative repository
([34]), pictures an idea of how a Recruitment process workflow may look like and the
BPMN model of the workflow has been shown in the appendix D. What constitutes
the difficulty of this example is the presence of multiple parallel activities, which are
in general perceived as more challenging to grasp by a human brain.
The BPMN model consists of two Actors - the Recruitment Manager and the
Client, where the latter is represented as a black box, therefore only the former
will be analysed here. For the increased readability, the request-response message
exchanges have been represented as a single activity since they always occur one after
the other and representing them as such will not have any effect on the Petri net
representation and the analysis results as well.
First, the Recruitment Manager actor’s workflow has been transformed into a
High-low Petri net. The same rules as before have been applied as to which activities
are perceived by initially low. The result of the transformation has been presented in
figure 6.12.
==PAGE:89==
80
6 Testing and Benchmarking
Figure 6.12: Talent Seek actor’s workflow High-low Petri net representation
The Parallel Merge (L6) has been made a low activity since both of the activities
that the merge depends on are low, hence the moment when both places p9 and p7
have a token will always be known. The transformed BPMN model has then been
subject to a time leak analysis, both unconditional and conditional, giving different
results for both of them.
The results have been presented in figure 6.13 for the
unconditional analysis and in figure 6.14 for the conditional one.
Figure 6.13: Talent Seek actor’s workflow unconditional analysis results
==PAGE:90==
6.3 Benchmarking
81
Figure 6.14: Talent Seek actor’s workflow unconditional analysis results
So in case of conditional analysis, it can be seen that the potential attacker will be
able to deduce the end time of the Identify position activity, as well as the start time
of the Review Position profile activity. The activity Review Terms and Conditions
has both deducible start time (since the end time of the XOR Split can be deduced
from the start time of the Assemble Selection Panel) and the end time. Two last
high activities - Develop Business Case and Complete Position Documentation have
a determinable latest end time since it can never be known for sure which one of them
has finished last.
The only difference between the conditional and unconditional analysis is that the
activity Review Position profile is conditionally low since its end time can be guessed
in case the activity Request Profile Changes is executed.
As has been shown in the above examples, the algorithm can handle different
levels of complexity of a BPMN model, providing valuable input as to where to look
for potential time leak vulnerabilities in a given process. In simple, linear workflow
processes this task may seem trivial, but as the complexity of a workflow increases,
the potential time leak vulnerabilities may become more subtle (like, for example,
conditional or combined) and therefore more elusive.
6.3
Benchmarking
In the area of interest of this project, no other research has been found, therefore
it can be assumed that no other solution for detecting time leak vulnerabilities in
business processes exists. Therefore, the scope of benchmarking had to be limited to
==PAGE:91==
82
6 Testing and Benchmarking
the tool itself and how it responds to varying input, so these tests could be considered
performance tests.
The idea was to create an automatised benchmarking environment, that could
iteratively generate randomised workflow Petri nets containing time leak vulnerabili-
ties, increasing the size (measured in the number of elements) of the input Petri net in
each iteration. This was done in a few steps, starting with the automatic generation
of randomised Petri nets.
6.3.1
Generating randomised Petri nets
The time leak detection algorithm expects as input a properly formed workflow
Petri net, so it is the main constraint that the Petri net generator must obey. The
generated Petri net should also include some sorts of time leaks, to properly test
the efficiency of the algorithm. The Petri net generator should work in a way that
allows the generated Petri net to be easily extended so that the size of the net can be
increased in each iteration. And, as the generator is expected to generate a different
Petri net every time it is run, some source of randomisation also must be introduced.
To fulfil all of the above requirements, the following approach was taken. Workflow
Petri nets have this property that if having two WF-nets, start place of one of them
is removed and all of its outgoing transitions are connected (with ingoing arcs) to the
end place of the other net, the resulting Petri net will still be a WF-net. So if two
WF-nets were randomly generated, they could be easily joined into one. Knowing
this, a recursive algorithm for generating a randomised WF Petri nets was devised.
The algorithm is based on the following WF-net description:
A Workflow net is:
1. A single low activity
2. A single high activity
3. A sequential composition of two WF nets
4. A branching composition of two WF nets
5. A parallel composition of two WF nets
A workflow net can thus be generated by randomly choosing one of the above
options. Selecting options 3-5 result in further extending the net (option 3 extends
the net ”linearly” whereas 4 and 5 results in creating additional branches or parallel
flows), whereas options 1-2 can be considered as ”terminating cases”, as selecting
them will result in appending a transition to a net (or a subnet of a net).
Each
case results in creating a well-formed WF-net, which can be later attached to the
predecessor from which it spawned, thanks to recursion. Thanks to the way the cases
==PAGE:92==
6.3 Benchmarking
83
4-5 were implemented, there is a possibility of creating multiple outgoing branches
from a single place (if case 4 is selected more than 1 time in a row) or multiple
outgoing parallel branches from a single transition (if case 5 is selected more than 1
time in a row).
The main control parameters of the net generator are the probability distributions
for each case, which control how much the net is likely to grow vertically (cases 4-
5) and horizontally (case 3) in a single iteration and the maximum recursion depth,
defined separately for each case 3-5, which control how many elements or branches
can be added to a net in a single iteration. The generated net can then be saved in a
file and another net can be generated. These nets can then be joined by the method
described above, so the number of elements in a test net can be easily increased while
maintaining both the randomness and the well-formedness.
This approach fulfils all the mentioned constraints:
• recursion guarantees the well-formedness of the WF net
• if one of the joined nets contains time leaks - so will the resulting net
• the nets can be easily extended by joining a newly generated net to the previ-
ously generated net in every iteration
• random, recursive generation and the possibility to tweak the generator’s pa-
rameters guarantee the net’s randomisation.
6.3.2
Time measurements
To easily measure and return the benchmarking results, the main function of the
algorithm was slightly modified. With the use of the built-in library chrono, each
unit of work (net creation, pruning, running the algorithm etc.) has been wrapped in
start timer and stop timer events, that were set to measure the time with microsecond
precision. Then, at the end of each test suite, the execution time of each action is
calculated by simply subtracting the start time of each timer from the end time of
each timer and the results are printed to the standard output.
6.3.3
Benchmark script
The language that was chosen for the benchmark script implementation was
Python, for two main reasons - packages matplotlib and numpy.
The former pro-
vides great, easy to use and highly customisable data visualisation tools. The latter
provides the user with, among other, basic linear algebra routines and other mathe-
matical functions that can be used for data analysis of the test results. At the same
time, all this is wrapped in a straightforward and easy to understand and use syntax.
==PAGE:93==
84
6 Testing and Benchmarking
The benchmarking script in every iteration uses a net generator script written in
Node.js to obtain a randomly generated net and appends the net to the net generated
in the previous iteration. This is repeated until the number of elements in the net
exceeds the limit specified in the maxNoOfElements variable. During each iteration,
the algorithm is executed using the generated net as the input. For each type of
algorithm that the time is measured for, the result is read from the standard input
and appended to a correct array. Each array entry consists of two fields - the number
of elements and the execution time of this particular algorithm type given this input
size.
Once the maxNoOfElements is reached, the loop stops and the results are plotted
using the matplotlib and numpy packages. As the obtained data has a rather large
local variability, the results were plotted using a scatter plot and a polynomial re-
gression line superimposed on top of the scatter plot. The polynomial regression was
used to illustrate the general trend of the data more clearly than with a simple linear
or scatter plot.
6.3.4
Benchmark results
The benchmarking process can be divided into two parts:
• testing on an example similar to these that can be obtained from transforming
real-life business processes
• testing on arbitrary examples, either extremely complex or unlikely to happen
in real-life
6.3.4.1
Real-life-like example
The purpose of this benchmark was to establish the following:
1. the efficiency (actual complexity) of the algorithm for creating the net data
structure
2. the efficiency (actual complexity) of the time leak detection algorithm
3. the effect of pruning on the time leak detection algorithm
4. the effect of conditional analysis on the time leak detection algorithm
In this real-life-like case the maxNoOfElements boundary was set to 10000, which
is a number significantly greater than what can be obtained from a real-life business
process transformed into a WF-net, but will allow a better estimation of the complex-
ity using polynomial regression. The probability distributions for the net generator
were set as follows:
==PAGE:94==
6.3 Benchmarking
85
P(x) =



0.1
for
x = 1
∨
x = 2
0.4
for
x = 3
0.2
for
x = 4
∨
x = 5
where x is the recursive algorithm case as described in section 6.3.1. The maximum
recursion depth for cases 4 and 5 was set to be no bigger than 2, as this value results
in at most four branches / parallel cases and for the case 3, the maximum recursion
depth was set to 10. These boundaries were established to keep the generated nets
relatively small vertically and allow them to grow horizontally, as real-life business
processes seem to in general follow this trend.
First the comparison between the net creation run time and the time leak detection
algorithm run time was made. The scatter plot of the results with a second degree
polynomial fitted has been presented in figure 6.15.
Figure 6.15: Comparison between creation run time and the time leak detection
algorithm run time in a real-life-like scenario
As can be seen, the majority of the total algorithm run time is spent on the data
structures creation. The detection algorithm execution time is close to being con-
stant when compared with the creation execution time (it will be visible later that
it is not constant). As mentioned before, the net is implemented as a double-linked
list, where each element holds a reference to its outgoing and ingoing elements. The
data structure creation algorithm heavily depends on dynamic memory allocation, so
==PAGE:95==
86
6 Testing and Benchmarking
a huge amount of elements in the net will have a heavy impact on the overall perfor-
mance, despite the attempts at optimizing the creation algorithm. However, thanks
to the efficient data structure implementation, the time leak detection algorithm itself
can be considered rather efficient, since the number of elements seems to not have a
significant impact on the execution time.
As in this chapter, the main focus is real-life-like scenarios, it is worth mentioning
that in reality, the number of elements in a WF-net that was created by transforming
a BPMN model is highly unlikely to be greater than a thousand. In figure 6.15 it can
be seen that for the number of elements between 0 and approximately a thousand,
the creation execution time is close to being constant. The extreme number of ten
thousand elements, for which the creation execution time is close to four seconds,
will probably never be reached in a real-life scenario, so overall the data structure
creation algorithm, although quite computationally demanding, is rather efficient, if
considered in the scope of real-life scenarios.
Next, the effect of pruning on the time leak detection algorithm was measured.
In each test run, the same nets were analysed, first with pruning and then without
pruning and the run time of the algorithm in both cases was measured. The results
have been presented In figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16: Comparison between the time leak detection algorithm execution time
with and without pruning
Here the results are quite surprising - it was expected that performing pruning will
have a positive impact on the overall efficiency of the algorithm, but as can be seen,
the algorithm with pruning has gotten slightly worse results than the one without
==PAGE:96==
6.3 Benchmarking
87
pruning. The difference however in the real-life-like scenarios is rather small, but it
grows with the number of elements in the analysed net. The results can be considered
proof that the complexity of both pruning and the time leak detection algorithm is
close to linear when applied to a real-life-like scenario, as mentioned before. The
difference in run time between approx. 100 elements and approx. 10000 elements is
rather insignificant, as it is just about 50 milliseconds.
The last benchmark that was done in this section was measuring the effect of
performing a conditional analysis on the time leak detection algorithm run time. In
each test run, the same nets were analysed, first without performing the conditional
analysis and then with the conditional analysis. The results have been presented in
figure 6.17.
Figure 6.17: Comparison between the time leak detection algorithm execution time
with and without conditional analysis
The conditional analysis seems to not affect the linear complexity of the time leak
detection algorithm, as can be seen by the polynomial regression fit. For nets with
a lower number of elements, running the conditional analysis seems to have almost
no impact on the algorithm execution time, but the difference increases with the
number of elements. Still, for ten thousand elements, that difference is less than ten
milliseconds.
==PAGE:97==
88
6 Testing and Benchmarking
6.3.4.2
Complex examples
The purpose of this benchmark was to assess the effect that different net com-
plexity has on the algorithm’s performance, again divided into four categories: data
structure creation, basic time leak detection algorithm, time leak detection with prun-
ing and time leak detection with conditional analysis. The last part of the benchmark
was checking how the net complexity affects the effect the pruning and conditional
analysis can have on the overall algorithm execution time. To achieve different net
complexities, five different sets of parameters for the net generator were defined:
1. Regular net
In case 1, the parameters were set to be the same as in the previous section and
this case is treated as a control group, or rather a point of reference.
2. Linear net
In case 2, the probability distributions for the net generator were set as follows:
P(x) =



0.05
for
x = 1
∨
x = 2
0.6
for
x = 3
0.15
for
x = 4
∨
x = 5
Resulting in a net with a low number of xor and or parallel branches. The maxi-
mum recursion depth was set to 6 for all cases, resulting in a maximum of 28 = 256 xor
branches coming out of a single place or parallel branches out of a single transition.
3. Xor branches
In case 3, the probability distributions for the net generator were set as follows:
P(x) =



0.05
for
x = 1
∨
x = 2
0.15
for
x = 3
∨
x = 5
0.6
for
x = 4
Resulting in a net that consists of multiple XoR branches. The maximum recursion
depth was set to 6 for all cases, resulting in a maximum of 28 = 256 xor branches
coming out of a single place or parallel branches out of a single transition.
4. Parallel branches
==PAGE:98==
6.3 Benchmarking
89
In case 4, the probability distributions for the net generator were set as follows:
P(x) =



0.05
for
x = 1
∨
x = 2
0.15
for
x = 3
∨
x = 4
0.6
for
x = 5
Resulting in a net that consists of multiple parallel branches. The maximum re-
cursion depth was set to 6 for all cases, resulting in a maximum of 28 = 256 xor
branches coming out of a single place or parallel branches out of a single transition.
5. Equal probability
In case 5, the probability distributions for the net generator were set as follows:
P(x) =



0.15
for
x = 1
∨
x = 2
0.27
for
x = 3
∨
x = 4
0.26
for
x = 5
The probabilities for each case that result in increasing the net size (both vertically
and horizontally) are nearly equal. Moreover, the recursion depth for each case was
set to be equal to 6, allowing the net to grow more vertically, compared to case 1.
This case could be considered as a slightly more complex real-life-like example.
The algorithm was run and the execution times were measured again with a max-
imum of ten thousand elements. Then, a graph for each considered category was
plotted, where the results for each considered case were presented at the same time.
The first category that will be considered is the data structure creation execution
time, that was presented below in figure 6.18.
==PAGE:99==
90
6 Testing and Benchmarking
Figure 6.18: Comparison of the data structure creation execution time for each case
As could have been expected, the creation execution time for case 1, case 2 and
case 5 is rather similar. What’s surprising here is that the case 3 seems to be more
efficient when it comes to the data structure creation execution time and this result
is reproducible and most likely it has something to do with the algorithm implemen-
tation - when multiple xor branches are present, the number of places should be
considerably smaller than the number of transitions since for every single place there
can be up to 256 transitions and creating a place, due to how the data structure is
implemented, is more computationally demanding than creating a transition. This
also explains worse performance for case 5, which has the worst data structure cre-
ation execution time, as parallel branches dominate in this case, meaning that the
number of places is greater than the number of transitions since for each transition
there could be up to 256 places. Explaining this in more detail would require go-
ing too deep into the creation algorithm implementation and therefore no further
explanation will be provided. The differences in creation times between the cases are
rather negligible and start to be noticeable for nets with more than approximately
two thousand elements.
The second category to be considered is the execution time of the time leak de-
tection algorithm, without pruning and conditional analysis. The results for each
considered case were presented in figure 6.19.
==PAGE:100==
6.3 Benchmarking
91
Figure 6.19: Comparison of the time leak analysis algorithm execution time for each
case
Again, cases 1, 2 and 5 have a similar algorithm execution time since these cases
do not differ significantly, with the case 2 being the most efficient due to the lowest
complexity of the analysed net. Case 4 has the worst execution time (and this will
be true in most of the cases) simply because in this case, the number of places is
much larger than the number of transitions and due to the algorithm implementation,
analysing a place is more time consuming than analysing a transition.
Case 3 is
somewhere in the middle - more complex than the cases 1, 2 and 5 because of the
multiple branches, but less complex than case 4 as the number of transitions here is
much larger than the number of places.
Figure 6.20: Comparison of the time leak analysis algorithm execution time with
pruning for each case
==PAGE:101==
92
6 Testing and Benchmarking
The third considered category is the execution time of the time leak detection
algorithm with pruning. The results for each considered case were presented in figure
6.20.
The case 2 has the best performance because of its linearity. As expected, cases
3 and 4 have worse performance than the linear case, since they are more complex.
What is surprising is the great performance degradation for cases 1 and 5. This could
be attributed to the fact that these nets have a higher possibility of a one-to-many and
many-to-one pruning cases occurrence and these are by far the most computationally
demanding out of all described cases.
The fourth considered category is the execution time of the time leak detection
algorithm with a conditional analysis.
The results for each considered case were
presented in figure 6.21.
Figure 6.21: Comparison of the time leak analysis algorithm execution time with
pruning for each case
The conditional analysis seems not to have any effect on the algorithm’s complex-
ity, no matter how vertically large the net is. Also, when compared to pruning, its
negative impact is not dependant on the shape of the net, since the plots for cases 1, 2
and 5 looks similar to those for time leak detection algorithm without any extensions,
as compared to the time leak detection algorithm with pruning.
The fifth considered graph in this section will be the comparison of the effect of
pruning on different cases. The results of this comparison have been presented in
==PAGE:102==
6.3 Benchmarking
93
figure 6.22. Each case has been displayed using the same colour as in the previous
graph, but here the solid lines show the results for the algorithm’s execution time
without any extensions and the dashed lines show the results for algorithm’s execution
time with pruning.
Figure 6.22: Comparison of the effect of pruning on the time leak analysis algorithm’s
execution time for each case
Cases 1, 2 and 5 performances are degraded by pruning, which is not surprising
since these cases are rather similar to the real-life-like example considered in the
previous section. The pruning also does not have a positive impact on the perfor-
mance in cases 3 and 4 - the execution time is worse in these cases if pruning is
done. So a conclusion could be drawn that WF-net pruning negatively impacts the
overall performance of the algorithm, no matter how the net is structured and how
vertically/horizontally large the net is.
Although the negative impact of the pruning is rather negligible, the primary
purpose of implementing pruning was to increase the algorithm’s performance. As it
seems to negatively impact the performance regardless of the case, there seems to be
no point in running the pruning during the analysis at all.
The last considered graph will be the comparison of the effect of conditional
analysis on each of considered cases. The results of the comparison have been shown
in figure 6.23. Again, as in the previous example, the colours are assigned case-wise,
where the solid line represents the basic algorithm and the dashed line - the algorithm
with conditional analysis.
==PAGE:103==
94
6 Testing and Benchmarking
Figure 6.23: Comparison of the effect of conditional analysis on the time leak analysis
algorithm’s execution time for each case
As could have been expected in all cases performing the conditional analysis neg-
atively affects the overall efficiency of the algorithm, regardless of the case. For some
cases, this negative effect is greater than for the others. However, the differences in
the execution time are so insignificant that they probably could be neglected, espe-
cially when the net size is below two thousand elements, which can be considered a
number large enough to cover most of existing business process models.
For all the considered cases, the probability of choosing a low or high activity was
always equal. A natural step was to also test if modifying these two probabilities
to be different would have any effect on the shape of the plots or would drastically
affect the algorithms execution time. The only visible differences, however, are so
insignificant that they could be considered within the margin of error. Therefore, the
results of this analysis will not be presented here.
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion Of Results
This chapter provides a short discussion of testing outcomes presented in the
previous chapter as well as a general summary of the achieved results.
7.1
Testing results
The algorithm was tested on real-life BPMN models, that were taken from external
sources rather than created for this thesis. In all three considered examples, time
leak vulnerabilities were found, but the results vary from case to case - for some the
discovered vulnerabilities could be more severe than for the others, but the assessment
of the severity of each possible time leak heavily depends on the kind of process and
what kind of activity is vulnerable, so it is impossible to assess this without extra
knowledge regarding the process itself.
What also needs to be mentioned is that the analysis results heavily depend on
the way the transformation from a BPMN model to a Petri net model was performed,
namely based on what rules an activity was assigned an initial high or low type.
Looking at a process from a slightly different angle may return significantly different
results, exposing vulnerabilities that were not found before. It makes the created
solution quite robust, but at the same time points out that it is not necessarily
downright simple and easy to use. Transforming a BPMN process incorrectly may
give the user a false sense of security, where the tested business process is not safe.
This cannot however be blamed on the algorithm.
The performed tests show that for simple, linear processes finding time leak vul-
nerabilities is rather straight forward - it is the more complex, larger processes, with
parallelity and branching that are more challenging to analyse. This is true especially
when assessing the conditional vulnerabilities, which perhaps could be more severe
than the regular vulnerabilities, as they are hidden in the plain sight. All in all, the
test results meet expectations and can be considered sufficient at this stage of develop-
ment, but perhaps the algorithm should be further tested for correctness, using more
complex and larger processes, to validate whether or not all possible vulnerabilities
are detected successfully.
What was perhaps missing in the testing stage was cross-validating the algorithm
==PAGE:105==
96
7 Discussion Of Results
against existing solutions. This however was not done for the reason that no other
tool for detecting time leak vulnerabilities in a business process has been implemented
yet, or at least it was not found during the research stage.
7.2
Benchmarking results
What could be pointed out in all of the graphs presented in the benchmarking
section is the presence of quite a few outliers, whose number grows especially for
higher numbers of elements in the analysed nets. These outliers could have been
expected and should not be of concern, as they are most likely a result not of the
algorithm implementation, but rather CPU scheduling. The time measured in the
benchmark was the real-time, rather than the CPU time, and since the tests were run
in a non-isolated environment, during the run time the process running it could have
been, unpredictably, put on hold to take precedence for a higher priority task. Even
when run in an isolated environment, the CPU could behave unpredictably, and as
the time resolution is rather high (the time is measured in microseconds and then
converted to milliseconds for readability purposes), even small differences would be
visible on the graph.
To back this explanation up - a randomly generated net at iteration x + 1 con-
tains the same elements as the net at iteration x, but is extended with an additional,
randomly generated part. It is not seldom that the execution time for iteration x
is longer than the execution time for iteration x + 1. If this was strictly algorithm-
implementation-dependant, then the iteration x+1 would never have a shorter execu-
tion time, since it is running on the net x, but extended with an additional, randomly
generated net.
What is worth pointing out here is that measuring CPU time instead of real-time
is rather unlikely to change the shape of the plots - what could change though is the
magnitude of the measured execution time values. If the number of elements and
the execution time are linearly dependant, then they will remain the same no matter
whether it is the CPU time that is measured or the real-time. Therefore, measuring
the CPU time would not have a considerate impact on the resulting plots.
The algorithm’s efficiency was tested in several scenarios, giving rather promising
results and confirming all of the complexity assumptions that were stated in the
design section. When tested against an input simulating a Petri net generated from
a real-life business process, it was proven that for smaller nets (up to about 4000
elements), the complexity of the algorithm seems linear. A slight curvature can be
seen for the nets with the number of elements greater than six thousand elements
(6.16), but not in all of the test cases.
The majority of the execution time of the algorithm is spent on creating the data
structure for the algorithm to be run. The complexity of the creation algorithm seems
==PAGE:106==
7.2 Benchmarking results
97
to be O(n2) and it comes from the complexity of the data structure itself. This could
be considered a trade-off of sorts - due to the complexity of the data structure, the
creation time is increased, but thanks to its efficiency - the algorithm execution time
is drastically reduced. Nevertheless, it seems that the efficiency of both the creation
and the time leak detection algorithm’s should be sufficient enough for the intended
use.
Another discovery that was made during benchmarking is that the pruning, at
least with its current implementation, degrades the algorithm’s performance. The
negative effect of pruning is not enormous, nevertheless performing pruning in its
current form does not make sense, since it simply just does not do its job. It cannot
be ruled out that there might be cases in which pruning will improve the algorithm’s
run time, but they were not found during the tests.
The negative effect of conditional analysis on the algorithm’s performance is prac-
tically negligible, especially when the impact that the conditional analysis has on
the final results is taken into consideration. The vulnerabilities that could be dis-
covered thanks to performing the conditional analysis could be considered worth the
increase in the execution time. Neither pruning nor the conditional analysis affects
the complexity of the algorithm either.
The tests performed on special net cases have proven that the shape of the net does
affect the algorithm’s efficiency, but does not affect the complexity of the algorithm, as
for all the cases the results seem to be linear. Differences in execution time between
the less complex cases and the more complex cases increase with the number of
elements, as the more complex the example the steeper its plot.
The differences
are rather small though and could be considered negligible (the biggest difference is
approx. 10 ms for ten thousand elements for the algorithm without any extensions,
between case 4 and case 2). Again, the pruning has been shown to negatively impact
the execution time, regardless of the net’s shape. So does the conditional analysis,
but the same as in the real-life-like example, this effect is rather negligible.
To sum up, benchmarking proved the expected algorithm’s complexity of O(n)
and that it is more or less invariant to the shape of the analysed net. It has shown
that the majority of execution time is spent on creating the data structure, shown
that pruning in its current form impacts the algorithm’s efficiency negatively and that
the impact of conditional analysis on the performance can be neglected, considering
how valuable is the additional information it may provide.
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 8
Future Improvements
and Conclusion
In this chapter, the possible future development of the project is discussed, and a
general conclusion regarding the outcome of the project is drawn.
8.1
Future Improvements and Extensions
The possible improvements were based on a SWOT analysis that was done for the
solution and the algorithm implementation at its current state.
Without a doubt, the biggest strength of the algorithm currently is its low com-
plexity and high performance. What has the biggest negative impact on the efficiency
(and therefore can be considered the number one weakness of the proposed solution),
is the creation of the data structure. Therefore, the most crucial improvement would
be to:
1. Improve the performance of the algorithm for creating the data structure
There is a huge difference between the execution time of the creation algorithm
and the time leak detection algorithm. This lack of performance affects the total
execution time negatively. During the development, a few attempts were made to
improve the performance but to no effect. It seems that what has the biggest impact
here is the dynamic memory allocation - it is not straightforward though to overcome
this issue since the size of the input is only known at run time. One way to overcome
this issue could be to use static memory allocation and only resort to dynamic memory
allocation when the size of the allocated memory is insufficient. This would improve
the performance for at least an input net smaller than a certain threshold, however,
the complexity would remain the same.
2. Create an adapter for easy transformation of other types of input into the
expected one (JSON)
==PAGE:108==
8.1 Future Improvements and Extensions
99
An easily noticeable opportunity is creating a way of transforming a custom al-
gorithm input data structure into the one expected by the algorithm. Currently, the
algorithm input needs to be defined as a specific JSON object, which was defined
specifically for this application. This drastically limits the usability.
Creating an adapter of sorts, that is also easily extensible, would greatly increase
the usability of the algorithm and would allow for easier integration of the algorithm
with other tools. Providing a way of defining the input and how it can be transformed
would improve it even further. And implementing such adapter is not that difficult
- in both cases, the data contains the same structure - a Petri net - so it is just a
matter of specifying how to transform one data structure into the other, and providing
additional input regarding types of transitions in the supplied net.
3. Add support for the latest possible start time vulnerability detection
As mentioned in section 3.2.3, the current version of the algorithm does not con-
sider the latest possible start time vulnerability. Adding support for this particular
vulnerability would increase the tool’s versatility and usability.
4. Fix the pruning algorithm
The current implementation of pruning does not give the desired results - rather
than decreasing the total execution time, it increases it. To achieve better perfor-
mance, new possible ways of pruning the net must be found and an efficient way of
detecting whether or not pruning might improve the performance should be devised.
5. Improve current GUI usability
Defining a Petri net using a JSON file can be quite tiresome. It should be possible
to do this rather the other way around, by implementing a drag-and-drop interface
that can generate a JSON file based on the names and connections inserted into the
net. This would greatly increase the usability of the tool and therefore the usability
of the algorithm directly.
6. Automatise transformation of a BPMN model to a High-low Petri net
The algorithm takes a High-low Petri net as input, which is an extended ver-
sion of Petri nets. This has rather low-impact on the algorithm’s usefulness, since
transforming a regular Petri net into a High-low Petri net is only a matter of deciding
which transitions are high and which are low. What poses a real problem is a fact that
transforming a BPMN model in case of larger models could be rather time-consuming.
==PAGE:109==
100
8 Future Improvements and Conclusion
Moreover, as mentioned previously, if the algorithm is fed an ill-transformed BPMN
model, the results could be incorrect.
Freedom of how the BPMN model can be
transformed into a high-low Petri net is as much an advantage as it is a flaw - an
advantage for an experienced user, who knows what exactly he wants to tests, but a
flaw to a person who is not that technical and may have troubles with achieving de-
sired transformation results. The process of transforming is not complicated though
and in many cases perhaps could be automatised, giving the end-user possibility to
choose from several options as to how to determine which transitions are high.
7. Integrate the information flow non-interference analysis with time leak vulner-
abilities detection
In the literature review section, there was a mention of information flow analysis
concerning detecting violation of the non-interference principle.
This property is
interesting also from the point of view of time leak analysis, as it allows to impose
stronger constraints on the attacker model since some of the assumptions that were
made on the attacker during the design process could be derived from the information
flow analysis (information flow would help in finding whether or not the attacker
model can have certain properties or not). Loosening up the constraints imposed on
the attacker makes the vulnerabilities assessment more credible, as it relies less on
assumptions.
8. Add multilevel security support to the algorithm
In real-life business processes, it is quite often that there exists more than one
level of secrecy. The actors participating in business processes may have different
levels of security clearance. The current algorithm and model (High-low Petri net)
assume that there exist only two types of activities - high and low. This model is
good enough if the business process security model does not consider vulnerabilities
within an organisation itself, but it does not take into consideration a situation in
which an actor crosses the boundaries of his or her security clearance and accesses
the information that should be known only to the actors with appropriate clearance.
Extending the model and the algorithm with multilevel security would allow the user
to detect also such situations, time-leak-vulnerabilities-wise.
This extension is the least important since multilevel security cases can be analysed
using the current implementation, by transforming the BPMN model into the High-
low Petri net using specific constraints. Assuming that a certain security clearance
can be expressed as a sum of (at least some) lower-level permissions, and additional
permissions (specific to this security clearance level), it would be just a matter of
performing a logical union of the ’low’ activities for the current clearance level and
the activities that are ’low’ from the point of view of lower security clearance levels.
==PAGE:110==
8.2 Conclusion
101
This could be repeated for all the possible clearance levels, and all the results combined
would give full results of the multilevel security case.
Another way of implementing this could be to simply provide a way to automatise
this level-by-level analysis procedure, by specifying available security levels and their
relations.
8.2
Conclusion
The goal of the project was to first analyse and formalise the problem of time leak
vulnerabilities within business processes, and then find an efficient algorithm to model
the process, detect and point out the vulnerabilities. During the development the
scope of the project was for the first weeks not defined too strictly and was constantly
changing, therefore initial weeks were spent on properly defining what are the exact
expected results. The final implementation of the time leak vulnerabilities detection
algorithm is an effect of an iterative process, where multiple different approaches were
taken, both in regards to modelling and the algorithm itself. The approaches that
gave the most promising results found their way to the final algorithm implementation,
but there still is a room for improvement. Apart from the algorithm implementation,
a web tool was also implemented, exposing the algorithm to the public.
During the design and development process multiple examples of practical impli-
cations of time leak vulnerabilities were given, as well as an attempt was made at
validating the idea externally, by contacting researchers that are leaders in the field
of security and business process modelling. The meetings gave quite promising results
as both of the contacted researchers expressed their interest in the idea.
To sum up, the project as a whole was exciting to work on, especially since the
proposed idea was a novelty, so there was a lot of room for experimenting and testing,
and the proposed solution might have a noticeable impact on the overall security in
business processes. As mentioned in the introduction, business process modelling is
gaining on popularity (slowly but steadily), therefore, tackling security issues before
they even have a chance to be exploited might prove to be of critical value. After all:
”It takes 20 years to build a reputation and a few minutes of
cyber-incident to ruin it.” ([20])
~ Stéphane Nappo, Global Chief Information Security Officer at Groupe SEB
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
J. -F. Dhem et al. “A Practical Implementation of the Timing Attack”. eng. In:
(2009).
[2]
Willibrordus M. P. van der Aalst. “The Application of Petri Nets to Workflow
Management”. In: Journal of Circuits, Systems, and Computers 8 (Feb. 1998),
pp. 21–66.
[3]
Willibrordus M. P. van der Aalst. “Verification of workflow nets”. In: Application
and Theory of Petri Nets 1997. Ed. by Pierre Azéma and Gianfranco Balbo.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1997, pp. 407–426.
[4]
Miryam Barad. “Petri Nets—A Versatile Modeling Structure”. In: Applied Math-
ematics 07.09 (2016), pp. 829–839.
[5]
Miryam Barad. “Strategies and Techniques for Quality and Flexibility”. In:
Springer International Publishing, 2018. Chap. 5, pp. 81–99.
[6]
David Brumley and Dan Boneh. “Remote timing attacks are practical”. eng. In:
Proceedings of the 12th Usenix Security Symposium (2003), pp. 1–13.
[7]
Business Process Management (BPM) Industry Outlook to 2025 - Growing
Need to Optimize Business Processes for Meeting the Dynamic Requirements of
Customers. PRNewswire, 2020.
[8]
Thomas H. Cormen et al. Introduction to Algorithms, Third Edition. 3rd. The
MIT Press, 2009. isbn: 0262033844.
[9]
CyberSecurity for Europe. https://cybersec4europe.eu/. Accessed: January
19, 2021.
[10]
Remco M. Dijkman, Marlon Dumas, and Chun Ouyang. “Semantics and anal-
ysis of business process models in BPMN”. eng. In: Information and Software
Technology 50.12 (2008), pp. 1281–1294.
[11]
Lenore England and Stephen Miller. “The History and Evolution of Business
Process Management”. In: 2016, pp. 27–48. isbn: 9781843347477. doi: 10.1016/
B978-1-84334-747-7.00004-2.
[12]
Simone Frau, Roberto Gorrieri, and Carlo Ferigato. “Petri Net Security Checker:
Structural Non-interference at Work”. In: Formal Aspects in Security and Trust.
Ed. by Pierpaolo Degano, Joshua Guttman, and Fabio Martinelli. Berlin, Heidel-
berg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 210–225. isbn: 978-3-642-01465-9.
==PAGE:112==
Bibliography
103
[13]
J. A. Goguen and J. Meseguer. “Security Policies and Security Models”. In: 1982
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. 1982, pp. 11–11. doi: 10.1109/SP.
1982.10014.
[14]
Roberto Gorrieri. “Petri Nets”. eng. In: Process Algebras for Petri Nets (),
pp. 35–76.
[15]
Object Management Group. Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN),
Version 2.0. Jan. 2011.
[16]
Damas P. Gruska. “Information-Flow Attacks Based on Limited Observations”.
In: Perspectives of Systems Informatics. Ed. by Irina Virbitskaite and Andrei
Voronkov. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 223–234.
isbn: 978-3-540-70881-0.
[17]
Paul Harmon and Jorge Garcia. The State Of Business Process Management
2020. BPTrends & Technology Evaluation Centers (TEC), 2020.
[18]
Peter Herrmann and Gaby Herrmann. “Security requirement analysis of busi-
ness processes”. In: Electronic Commerce Research 6 (Oct. 2006), pp. 305–335.
doi: 10.1007/s10660-006-8677-7.
[19]
Hugo A. López’s personal page. http://lopezacosta.net/. Accessed: January
19, 2021.
[20]
Interview with Stéphane Nappo. https://cyberstartupobservatory.com/
cyber-startup-observatory-ciso-week-stephane-nappo-societe-generale/.
Accessed: January 19, 2021.
[21]
John Jeston and Johan Nelis. Business Process Management. Pracital guidelines
to successful implementations. 3rd. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2014.
[22]
Konstantin Knorr. Multilevel Security and Information Flow in Petri Net Work-
flows. Tech. rep. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Telecom-
munication Systems - Modeling and Analysis, Special Session on Security As-
pects of Telecommunication Systems, 2001.
[23]
Paul C. Kocher. “Timing Attacks on Implementations of Diffie-Hellman, RSA,
DSS, and Other Systems”. In: Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO ’96. Ed. by
Neal Koblitz. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1996, pp. 104–113.
[24]
M. Leitner, M. Miller, and S. Rinderle-Ma. “An Analysis and Evaluation of
Security Aspects in the Business Process Model and Notation”. In: 2013 Inter-
national Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. 2013, pp. 262–267.
doi: 10.1109/ARES.2013.34.
[25]
Lei Li and Fei Dai. “Transformation and Visualization of BPMN Models to
Petri Nets”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science 186
(Oct. 2018), p. 012047.
[26]
Medical Data Exchange Plafrom BPMN model. https://pleak.io/pe-bpmn-
editor/viewer/1Z1tulT6s3bzfwI9VQCX/. Accessed: January 19, 2021.
==PAGE:113==
104
Bibliography
[27]
Ahmed Naved and Raimundas Matulevičius. “Securing business processes using
security risk-oriented patterns”. In: Computer Standards Interfaces 36.4 (June
2014), pp. 723–733.
[28]
Thomas Neubauer, Markus Klemen, and Stefan Biffl. “Secure Business Process
Management: A Roadmap”. In: Proceedings of the First International Confer-
ence on Availability, Reliability and Security. Los Alamitos, CA, USA, Apr.
2006, pp. 457–464.
[29]
Stéphane Paul et al. “Security Requirements Engineering for Business Pro-
cesses”. In: Proceedings of Conference on Alignment of Business Process and
Security Modelling. Riga, Latvia, Oct. 2011.
[30]
Chester Rebeiro, Debdeep Mukhopadhyay, and Sarani Bhattacharya. “Coun-
termeasures for Timing Attacks”. In: Timing Channels in Cryptography: A
Micro-Architectural Perspective. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015,
pp. 139–149. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-12370-7_10. url: https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-12370-7_10.
[31]
Alessandro Sforzin. “Specification and Set-up Demonstration case Phase 1”. eng.
In: (2020).
[32]
Edward W. Felten and Michael A. Schneider. “Timing Attacks on Web Privacy”.
eng. In: (2009).
[33]
Mathias Weske. Business Process Management - Concepts, Languages, Archi-
tectures. Springer, 2007.
[34]
Mathias Weske et al. Model Collection of the Business Process Management
Academic Initiative. Version Version BPMAI-29-10-2019. Zenodo, Apr. 2020.
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3758705. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
3758705.
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX A
Time leak detection
algorithm flowchart
==PAGE:115==
106
A Time leak detection algorithm flowchart
All outgoing places 
analyzed?
Analyze 
currentTransition
Yes
Pop 
currentTransition 
from 
transitionsQueue
Append 
ingoing 
places to 
placesQueue
Analyze random 
not analyzed 
outgoing place
No
Shift 
currentTransition to 
the end of 
transitionsQueue
currentPlace := placesQueue.Front()
All outgoing transitions 
analyzed?
Analyze currentPlace
Pop 
currentPlacefrom 
placesQueue
Append ingoing 
transitions to 
transitionsQueue
Yes
Analyze random 
not analyzed 
outgoing transition
Shift currentPlace to 
the end of 
placesQueue
No
currentTransition := transitionQueue.Front()
Are placesQueue 
and transitionsQueue 
empty?
No
Repeat the same steps 
but starting at the first 
Petri Net place and 
reversing the traverse 
direction (top-down)
Yes
Append ingoing 
transitions to the 
transitionsQueue
Analyze the 
initial Petri 
Net place
Was the net state 
updated?
End analysis
Start
Figure A.1: Time leak detection algorithm flowchart part 1
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX B
Medical Data
Exchange Platform
BPMN model
==PAGE:117==
108
B Medical Data Exchange Platform BPMN model
Data Provider
Retrieve
personal and
sensitive health
data
Anonymize data
Add metadata to
the anonymized
data
Send
anonymized
data with
metadata to the
Marketplace
agreed_tc
Protect
anonymized
data
protected-
anonymized-data
Request for T&C
received
request
Agree on T&C
Send agreed
T&C to DEP
source
personal-data
metadata
health-data
anonymized-data
anonymized-data-
w-metadata
ProtectConf
Data Exchange Marketplace / Platform (DEP)
Health data
received
anonymized-data
Request for T&C
received
Send a request
for T&C to 
Data Provider
request
agreed_tc
T&C received
Send T&C to
Data Consumer
data-request
Request for data
received
Retrieve the
requested
protected file
requested-file-
protected
Send the file to
the Data
Consumer
Add the
metadata to the
catalogue
catalogue
Add the
anonymized
data to the data
collection
old-catalogue
old-data-collection
Send catalogue
to Data
Consumer
data-collection
Separate the
metadata from
the data
protected-
anonymized-data
Remove
protection from
metadata
separated-
metadata
metadata
Data Consumer
Find an
appropriate data
file from the
catalogue
catalogue
request
Send request to
DEP for
agreeing on
T&C
T&C received
agreed-tc
Create a
request for the
data
data-request
Send the data
request to DEP
Requested file
received
requested-file-
protected
Receive
Terms&Conditio
ns
received-tc
req-for-data
Perform
analytics with
the data
Receive
requested file
received-file
Figure B.1: Medical data exchange platform BPMN model
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX C
Loan Application
BPMN model
==PAGE:119==
110
C Loan Application BPMN model
Figure C.1: Original BPMN model of the loan application process
==PAGE:120==
C Loan Application BPMN model
111
Client
Client
Client
Prepare loan
application
Loan
needs to
be requested
Application
submitted
to BestLoans
Rejection
letter received
Approval
letter received
Check approval
letter
Reject offer
Accept offer
Dimbursement
notification received
BestLoans
BestLoans
BestLoans
Loan
application
received
Check
application with
BCR
Check loan
amount
Prepare
insurance offer
Assess
application
Approve
application
Reject
Application
Rejection letter
sent to Client
Approval letter
sent to Client
10 days
Rejection letter
received
Acceptance letter
received
Draw deed with
Notary
Draw insurance
contract
Submit
disbursement
request
Handle
disbursement
request
Loan
disbursed
offer to be rejected
Offer to be accepted
Loan
amount
<= 90%
Application Compliant
Application not compliant
Figure C.2: Simplified BPMN model of the loan application process
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX D
Talent Seek BPMN
model
==PAGE:122==
D Talent Seek BPMN model
113
Talent Seek - Recruitment Manager
Talent Seek - Recruitment Manager
Identify
Position
Confirm
Vacancy
Status
Review
Position
Profile
Role/Profile
Inconsistent?
Request
Profile
Changes
Review Terms
and Conditions
Approve
Terms and
Conditions
Assemble
Selection
Panel
Request
Approval for
Staff
Requisition
Complete
Position
Documentation
Request New
Position
Creation
Position Type?
Develop
Business Case
Client
Client
Yes
No
Revised Profile
Availability Confirmation
Terms and Conditions Approval
Terms and Conditions Approval Request
Acquisition Approval Request
Vacancy Confirmation Request
Vacancy Status Confirmation
Profile Change Request
Existing
New
Position Creation Request
New Position Creation Confirmation
Availability Request
Figure D.1: BPMN model of the Talent Seek recruitment manager process
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX E
Github repository and
web tool links
Links:
Name
Link
Date of access
Github repository
https://github.com/WhereIsMyRum/
Time-leak-vulnerabilities-checker
January 19, 2021
Web tool
https://time-leak-detector.herokuapp.com
January 19, 2021
