==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master´s Thesis
The Eﬀect of Transcript Diversity on
Neoepitope Display in Solid Cancers
Author:
Christian Højte Schouw
s154281
Supervisors:
Lars Rønn Olsen
Kristoﬀer Vitting-Seerup
Internal
External
January 31, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Protein-coding genes have on average 7 diﬀerent transcripts with varying exon structures. This diversity
in transcripts can cause high variability in the CDS of genes which might negatively aﬀect the potential of
cancer immunotherapy. The aim of this thesis was to investigate the diversity of transcript structure and
expression in solid cancers and examining its inﬂuence on neoepitope display. Examination of the variabil-
ity in CDS showed a clear correlation with the mean number of transcripts per gene. The expression of
somatic mutations were found to be signiﬁcantly lower than expected in cancer types with high mutational
load. Expression of HLA binders showed to follow the distribution of somatic mutations. The distribution
of constitutive and variable somatic mutations revealed that cancer types with high mutational load has
more constitutive mutations than expected. This trend was not as signiﬁcant in HLA binders, suggesting
a selective pressure eliminating some of the constitutive HLA binders. To evaluate whether constitutive
HLA binders have better potential in eliciting a protective immune response, a retrospective analysis on
a vaccination cohort should be performed.
Preface
This thesis covers 30 ECTS points and took place over the fall semester of 2020 at DTU. A special thanks
to Associate Professor at DTU, Lars Rønn Olsen, for providing me with thorough guidance and assistance
throughout the project. Also a great thanks to Postdoc at KU, Kristoﬀer Vitting-Seerup, for supporting
and contributing with valuable input.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
The central dogma of molecular biology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Alternative splicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Neoepitope-based immunotherapy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Tumor purity and transcript expression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods
8
2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Adjustment of transcript expression based on tumor purity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Transcript structure metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Prediction of expressed somatic mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Prediction of expressed HLA binders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Classiﬁcation of variants in variable vs constitutive regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results
11
3.1
Adjustment of transcript expression based on tumor purity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Cancer types with high number of tissue-enriched genes have higher total expressed CDS length . . .
12
3.3
Variability in CDS correlates with mean number of transcripts per gene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Cancer types with high mutational load display fewer expressed mutations than expected
. . . . . .
15
3.5
Expression of HLA binders follow the distribution of somatic mutations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Mutations in constitutive regions are overrepresented . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.7
Collection of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Discussion
21
5
Conclusion
23
References
24
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
1.1
The central dogma of molecular biology
The human genome consists of 3 × 109 base pairs of DNA which is distributed over ∼21,000 protein-
coding genes. DNA is made up of nucleotides and the speciﬁc order of these nucleotides functions as
carrier of genetic information1. The central dogma of molecular biology states that "DNA makes RNA
makes protein", describing the ﬂow of genetic information within biological systems2. Figure 1 visualizes
the key aspects of the central dogma where DNA is transcribed into mRNA and mRNA is translated into
protein. Important to the concept is, that the information can only go in one direction; DNA can be used
to create protein but protein can never be used to create DNA2.
Figure 1: The central dogma of molecular biology. DNA is transcribed into mRNA which is translated into
protein. Source: [3]
During transcription, the double stranded DNA is copied onto a one stranded mRNA. The generated
mRNA is transported to the ribosome of the cell where it directs the protein synthesis. In the translation
step, the mRNA sequence is read in triplets or codons which encode speciﬁc amino acids that in the
end form the polypeptide chain. The information exchanged during the protein synthesis is stored in the
genetic code which relates the codons to their particular amino acid1.
1.2
Alternative splicing
The process of DNA transcription into mRNA is not one-to-one, meaning that one gene does not nec-
essarily produce one mRNA. This occurrence is referred to as alternative splicing where one gene can
produce two or more mRNAs that code for diﬀerent proteins, also known as protein isoforms. Besides
from alternative splicing there are a range of other mechanisms leading to transcript diversity, including
alternative transcription initiation and polyadenylation site usage, RNA editing, and trans-splicing, how-
ever, alternative splicing is the most prevalent4. All of these mechanisms inducing transcript diversity
allow us to encode more diﬀerent proteins than we have genes in our DNA, thereby contributing to a
higher proteomic diversity5.
The primary product of DNA transcription is pre-mRNA which needs to be further processed for it to
become mature mRNA. During this process, introns are removed from the pre-mRNA and the remaining
exons are spliced together to obtain mature mRNA. However, the splicing event does not always involve
3
==PAGE:5==
all the exons, meaning that the exons can be assembled in alternative ways. An example is given in
Figure 2, which shows a simpliﬁed case of alternative splicing.
Figure 2: Alternative mRNA splicing. After DNA transcription, pre-mRNA goes through multiple processes
where introns are removed and the ends are modiﬁed. The exons are then spliced together in varying order resulting
in diﬀerent mature mRNAs.
Analyses of the human transcriptome have revealed that protein coding genes on average have 7 diﬀerent
transcripts. Furthermore, evidence suggests that around 95% of multiexon genes express more than one
alternative transcript. However, most protein-coding genes have a major transcript which accounts for
the majority of the gene expression. Minor transcripts are expressed in a considerably lower level than
the major transcripts6.
The regulation of alternative splicing is diﬀerent depending on the cell type, tissue and diﬀerential stage
of a cell. In cancer cells, alternative splicing is known to be dysregulated and alternative splicing events
happen much more frequent compared to normal tissue. As a result, aberrant expression of alternative
transcripts are often seen in tumor cells5. These changes in transcript expression can have functional
impact which might aﬀect tumor progression and response to treatment7.
1.3
Cancer
Cancer is undoubtedly one of the most complex diseases with each case potentially being unique. Until
now, no cancer treatments have shown consistent response rates in patients, exemplifying the diversity of
this disease. Cancer arises when alterations in the DNA escape all the DNA repair mechanisms of the cell
and become somatic mutations. Some of these mutations confer growth advantage on the cancer cells and
progress during positive selection, where the mutations are being passed to the progeny of the mutated cell
during cell division. There are diﬀerent types of genetic alterations such as point mutations, insertions
and deletions, which all change the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA8. Some of these changes are
nonsynonymous meaning that they alter the encoded amino acid which aﬀects the synthesized protein. It
is these small aberrations in the genome that can be detected by the immune system and diﬀerentiate the
4
==PAGE:6==
cancer cells from healthy cells. However, not all mutations can induce an immune response and prediction
of the best candidates remains challenging9.
The advances in high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatics have shifted the focus of cancer research
towards a more genocentric aspect, concentrating on the genetic proﬁles speciﬁc for each cancer and
patient.
These techniques have contributed to the molecular characterization of cancers and ﬁndings
of valuable biomarkers to improve treatment. The progress in cancer research have only increased the
complexity and heterogeneity of cancer, and it is now appreciated that cancers are speciﬁc to each patient9.
Most new cancer treatments adopt this fact and are based on personalized therapies unique to each case.
1.4
Neoepitope-based immunotherapy
Figure 3:
Identiﬁcation
and
ranking
of
neoepitopes. Samples from tumor and normal
tissue go through whole exome sequencing, fol-
lowed by variant calling where somatic mutations
are predicted. Variants are annotated and ﬂank-
ing amino acids are added to generate peptides.
The MHC I binding aﬃnity of each peptide is pre-
dicted for the speciﬁc HLA alleles of the patient.
Expression of the peptides are veriﬁed through
RNA expression of the tumor sample. Finally, the
neoepitopes are ranked based on binding aﬃnity.
Modern cancer treatments such as immunotherapy focus
on stimulating the host’s own immune system to ﬁght the
tumor cells. One method to activate the immune system
is to use tumor-speciﬁc neoepitopes. When somatic muta-
tions occur in the tumor cells, it gives rise to neoepitopes
which can be recognized by the adaptive immune system as
being non-self. In this way, the tumor cells can be diﬀeren-
tiated from the normal cells. However, not all neoepitopes
are able to elicit a protective immune response against the
tumor cells. Great eﬀort is used in trying to predict which
neoepitopes have the highest potential to elicit an immune
response. Most predictions rely on the estimation of the
neoepitopes’ binding aﬃnity to the MHC I molecule10.
Figure 3 shows a schematic presentation of how neoepi-
topes are identiﬁed and ranked. Tumor and normal sam-
ples undergo whole exome sequencing from which somatic
variants are predicted. The variants are annotated accord-
ing to their functional eﬀect and peptides are generated.
Next, the binding aﬃnity of the peptides are predicted
for the speciﬁc HLA alleles of the patient.
Expression
of the peptides are veriﬁed using a cutoﬀvalue such as
transcripts per million (TPM) higher than 1. Finally, the
peptides are ranked based on the binding aﬃnity predic-
tions.
This approach have provided good results in many cases,
but there are a high number of incidents where no or lim-
ited response is seen in patients, even though good neoepitope candidates are identiﬁed. In order to elicit
an immune response, it is crucial that the peptide-HLA complex binds to its cognate T cell receptor
(TCR). While the prediction of HLA binding aﬃnity has very high accuracy, no available methods are
5
==PAGE:7==
able to predict which neoepitopes that will bind a TCR and elicit a protective T cell response. Laboratory
methods such as ELISpot or multimers are sometimes used to validate whether the neoepitope candidates
can actually elicit an immune response10.
Another important criteria for obtaining a protective immune response is clonality of the mutations. All
tumor cells need to harbor a mutation in order to target the entire tumor. Otherwise, a subset of the
tumor cells will survive and the patient will relapse.
Several studies have proposed the mutational load of tumors as a useful predictor of response to im-
munotherapy. This means that the higher number of nonsynonymous somatic mutations present in a
tumor, the higher are the chances of responding to immunotherapy. While this measure has shown great
potential in predicting response in cancer patients, many individuals do not respond to treatment as
expected11.
1.5
Tumor purity and transcript expression
The collection of tumor samples inevitably involves extraction of non-cancerous cells present in the tumor
microenvironment. These cells include immune cells, ﬁbroblasts, endothelial cells and epithelial cells.
When performing genomic analysis on tumor samples, it is relevant to consider how pure the sample is,
i.e. its tumor purity. Tumor purity is a measure of the fraction of tumor cells in the admixture. For a
long time, tumor purity was inferred visually from images, but a range of computational methods have
emerged which uses genomic information to predict the tumor purity. The tumor purity estimates are
based on various genomic data, including gene expression, copy number variation, somatic mutations and
DNA methylation. Predictions based on these measures are somewhat consistent and the sensitivity is
high in most cases12. Tumor purity estimates are of high importance when working with tumor expression
analysis. If a substantial proportion of your sample is non-tumor cells, the expression signatures can be
misleading since a fraction of the expression levels will come from irrelevant cells. Therefore, it is relevant
to account for tumor purity i.e. when performing diﬀerential expression analysis12.
1.6
Hypothesis
The main driver in most neoepitope predictions are the ability of a peptide to bind an HLA molecule.
While this criteria is essential, it is not alone suﬃcient to predict a protective immune response. An
undervalued property of HLA binders is whether the transcript they are located in is actually being
translated and expressed at protein level. When measuring transcript expression of tumor samples, bulk
RNA sequencing is typically used. An arbitrary cutoﬀof TPM > 1 or similar is used as ﬁlter to validate
whether the transcript coding for a given neoepitope is expressed in at least one transcript of a gene. As
previously mentioned, genes have on average 7 transcripts with diﬀerent exon structures, meaning that
the CDS for all transcripts are not identical. Unfortunately, bulk RNA expression only provides a relative
measure of the entire tumor microenvironment and not on single tumor cells. This makes it impossible to
say whether individual transcripts are expressed by all cells in a tumor sample or only a fraction of the
tumor cells.
6
==PAGE:8==
Figure 4 provides an example visualizing the PIFO gene where four diﬀerent transcripts are expressed in a
glioblastoma sample. From this, it is obvious that the exon structure diﬀers between the four transcripts
and that the overlap between them (blue regions) is limited. The red regions show the regions in the gene
that are variable and therefore not present in all of the expressed transcripts. For this speciﬁc sample,
∼87 % of the PIFO gene’s CDS is variable based on the four expressed transcripts.
Figure 4: Example of transcript expression and exon structure of the PIFO gene. Transcript expression
from a TCGA Glioblastoma sample. 4 transcripts of the gene PIFO are expressed (bottom 4 rows, isoform expression
and percentages in brackets). The top row shows all constitutive coding regions (blue) and variable coding regions
(red) - i.e. coding regions not present in all transcripts.
The hypothesis of this project is that if a neoepitope is located in a variable region of a gene, it cannot be
assumed that the neoepitope is expressed by all individual cancer cells. If the neoepitope is not clonally
expressed, only a fraction of tumor cells will be targeted and the patient will relapse. Based on this, it
is assumed that neoepitopes located in constitutive regions of a gene will have higher potential to elicit a
protective immune response that targets all tumor cells. Concurrently, it is hypothesized that the possibly
higher immunogenicity of constitutive neoepitopes might introduce a selective pressure which eliminates
cancer cells with these variants and preserves the ones without. This might introduce an enrichment of
variable HLA binders which is advantageous for the tumor and its chances to escape the immune system.
To evaluate the hypotheses, the transcript structure and expression in solid cancers were examined for
the purpose of studying its impact on somatic mutations and HLA binders across cancer types. Diﬀerent
metrics on the transcript structure were initially computed and compared to demonstrate diﬀerences be-
tween cancer types. The prevalence of expressed mutations and HLA binder were compared to the total
expressed CDS length in order to see if the number expressed were lower than expected. Finally, the
distribution of mutations and HLA binders located in variable and constitutive regions were assessed to
examine if any group was overrepresented.
7
==PAGE:9==
2
Methods
2.1
Data
The data used throughout the thesis originates from the TCGA pan-cancer project13, covering more than
10,000 cancer samples from 33 diﬀerent cancer types. Genomic and clinical data were downloaded from
the UCSC Xena browser14, a public database containing high-quality pre-processed data from TCGA. The
downloaded transcript expression matrix had been mapped to GRCh38 (GENCODE v23) using Kallisto
with TPM as measure.
Only samples from solid tumors (type 01) were used in the analysis, giving a total of 9185 samples
distributed over 31 cancer types. Some samples lacked data for either RNA expression or mutations.
2.2
Adjustment of transcript expression based on tumor purity
The tumor purity for all TCGA samples were predicted using the tool ESTIMATE15, which performs
gene set enrichment analysis on deﬁned gene sets from immune- and stromal cells. These purity estimates
were used to adjust the transcript expression and thereby create tumor samples with higher purity and
a low level of noise. The adjustment was done for each cancer type individually, by performing linear
regression on the expression of each transcript against the tumor purity. The resulting models were then
used to adjust the expression by predicting the expression level of a clean tumor sample (tumor purity
= 1). This value was then added to the residuals of all samples to calculate the new expression. This
calculation was only done for the transcripts which linear regression resulted in a negative slope, meaning
the expression could only be decreased. To validate the adjustment, the expression of immune-speciﬁc
genes were plotted before and after adjustment, to prove that the expression were decreased. The adjusted
transcript expression levels were used in all of the following analyses.
2.3
Transcript structure metrics
A GTF ﬁle from GENCODE v23 was used to collect the genomic coordinates for all transcripts. For each
patient, all transcripts with a TPM higher than 0.5 were extracted.
The total expressed CDS length was found by taking the resulting transcript IDs and combining them
with the genomic coordinates of the transcripts to obtain the ranges that were expressed. The coordinates
were collected in a GRanges object from the GenomicRanges package16 in R. To avoid potential overlaps
between the transcripts, redundant ranges were merged. The length of the expressed ranges were summed
in order to get the total length of expressed CDS for each sample.
To ﬁnd the % variability in CDS, the set of expressed transcripts that constitutes a gene were deﬁned
for all protein-coding genes and collected in a GRanges object. Within these transcript sets, variable and
constitutive regions were extracted by ﬁnding the intersect of all the transcripts. If a region was present
in all transcripts, it was classiﬁed as constitutive, and otherwise classiﬁed as a variable region. Finally,
8
==PAGE:10==
the length of variable regions were summed for each sample. The length of variable CDS was divided by
the total expressed CDS length to obtain a percentage of variability in the CDS.
The mean number of transcripts expressed per gene were found by iterating over all protein-coding genes
and counting how many transcripts that were expressed (TPM > 0.5) and taking the mean for each
patient. Only genes coding for more than one transcript and which had at least one transcript expressed
were included.
2.4
Prediction of expressed somatic mutations
The coordinates of somatic mutations were extracted from Mutect217 calls and collected in a GRanges
object. Some samples lacked data bringing the total number to ∼6000 samples distributed over 20 cancer
types for the remaining analyses. Indels were excluded, leaving only single nucleotide variants (SNVs).
Additionally, only mutations found in the exome were used. To identify which mutations that were located
in an expressed region, the overlap of the mutations’ coordinates and the expressed CDS were found. The
total number of overlaps gave the number of mutations that were expressed for each sample.
The results were visualized as described by Alexandrov et al. (2013)18, showing the prevalence of total
and expressed somatic mutations as mutations per megabase.
To evaluate the association between expressed mutations and total expressed CDS, a Fisher’s exact test
was performed for each sample. Contigency tables were created with the following numbers; expressed mu-
tations, unexpressed mutations, total expressed CDS length and total unexpressed CDS length. One-tailed
Fisher’s exact tests were performed to test whether the ratio of expressed mutations were signiﬁcantly
less than the ratio of unexpressed mutations.
P-values were corrected for multiple testing using the
Benjamini-Hochberg procedure on each cancer type to reduce the false discovery rate.
2.5
Prediction of expressed HLA binders
To determine which mutations that lead to a HLA binders, MuPeXi 1.119 was run on all samples. MuPeXi
annotates the mutations and extracts user deﬁned peptides for which HLA class I binding aﬃnities are
predicted using NetMHCpan 3.020. HLA types speciﬁc for each sample were used and 8-11mers were
used as peptide lengths. From the output, peptides with a percent rank of less than 0.5 were extracted,
together with their genomic coordinates. Expressed binders were found by taking the overlap with the
expressed CDS.
2.6
Classiﬁcation of variants in variable vs constitutive regions
For each expressed mutation and HLA binder, it was assessed whether they were located in a constitutive
or variable region of a gene. Two lists were made containing the genomic coordinates of somatic mutations
and HLA binders for all samples. For each sample, the expressed constitutive regions were found for all
genes. Next, overlaps were found between the constitutive regions and the two lists containing mutations
9
==PAGE:11==
and HLA binders. The number of overlaps were summed, resulting in the number of expressed mutations
and HLA binders located within constitutive regions for each sample. The numbers located within variable
regions were derived from the total number of expressed mutations and HLA binders.
One-tailed Fisher’s exact tests were performed for both mutations and binders on all samples to test
whether the number of constitutive mutations/binders were higher than expected by the constitutive
CDS length. P-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure on
each cancer type to reduce the false discovery rate.
10
==PAGE:12==
3
Results
3.1
Adjustment of transcript expression based on tumor purity
The tumor purity of all samples was estimated to adjust the transcript expression and thereby reduce
signals coming from non-cancerous cells. Figure 5 shows the tumor purity predictions grouped into cancer
types and sorted by the median. The median tumor purity ranges between 0.62 for kidney clear cell
carcinoma and 0.94 for uveal melanoma. The higher end (>0.9) is dominated by "immunologically cold"
cancers which is known to have limited tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes in the tumor microenvironment21.
These cancer types include prostate adenocarcinoma and brain-originating tumors such as adrenocortical
cancer and brain lower grade glioma. The cancer types with lower tumor purity are those with strong
tissue speciﬁc cell dominance. This includes thymoma which has high fractions of lymphocytes, together
with mesothelioma and sarcoma that contain many stromal cells in the connective tissues.
In general, the distribution varies both within and between cancer types with some being more scattered
than others. Most cancer types have outliers in the lower end which could be caused by diﬃculties in
sample acquisition.
Figure 5: Tumor purity predictions of samples from ESTIMATE. Predictions range between 0-1, with high values
indicating pure tumor samples. Results are grouped into cancer types and ordered by the median.
To validate the adjustment of transcript expression based on tumor purity, the expression of the dominant
transcript of CD45 was plotted before and after adjustment. CD45 is mainly expressed by immune cells
which makes it suitable as proof of concept to see if the adjustment works properly. Figure 6 visualizes
the CD45 expression against tumor purity before and after adjustments.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 6: CD45 expression before and after expression adjustment based on tumor purity. Blue dots represent
individual samples and a trend line is shown in red. Y-axis is log scaled.
The expression of CD45 before adjustment shows a trend where higher tumor purity equals lower CD45
expression and vice versa. Looking at the trendline, the intersection at tumor purity = 1 gives a relatively
low CD45 expression. When comparing the two plots, the CD45 expression has clearly been reduced after
the adjustment. A large fraction of samples have decreased to zero, indicating that the adjustment works
suﬃciently. Nonetheless, some samples still have high expression of CD45 which might be a consequence
of bias introduced by cancer type or individual dysregulation of expression in samples. Similar evaluations
were made on other genes that are mainly abundant in immune cells and stromal cells which all showed
the same pattern.
3.2
Cancer types with high number of tissue-enriched genes have higher total ex-
pressed CDS length
After adjustment of transcript expression, the CDS of all samples was investigated. Initially, the total
expressed CDS length was assessed to look for diﬀerences between cancer types. In Figure 7, the total
expressed CDS length for all samples is visualized by cancer type.
The higher end of the spectrum
is dominated by brain-originating tumors (brain lower grade glioma and glioblastoma multiforme) and
tumors in the reproductive organs (ovarian-, testicular- and uterine cancer). The reason for this might be
the high number of tissue-enriched genes expressed in these organs. Especially the brain and testis have
many tissue-speciﬁc genes in addition to the ubiquitously expressed housekeeping genes22. The cancer
types with the lowest total expressed CDS length is uveal melanoma and liver heptacellular carcinoma.
Noticeably, liver tissue also express many tissue-enriched genes22 but still has a rather low total expressed
CDS length.
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 7: Total expressed CDS length of all samples. Results are grouped into cancer types and ordered by the
median.
3.3
Variability in CDS correlates with mean number of transcripts per gene
After having found the total expressed CDS length, the variability in CDS was determined. It was assumed
that a higher total expressed CDS length would result in a higher variability in CDS, since a wide-ranging
transcript expression presumably also gives more variability within genes. The % variability in CDS can
be seen in Figure 8 showing the distribution of each cancer type. As suspected, the distribution of cancer
types is for the most part quite similar to the one with the total expressed CDS length in Figure 7. The
cancer types located in the middle of the spectrum show a high variance and a rather similar distribution.
The median % variability in CDS ranges between ∼55% for uveal melanoma and ∼78% for esophageal
carcinoma. The top seems to be dominated by carcinomas in the epithelial tissues of upper body organs
i.e. the lungs, esophagus and stomach. The cancer types of the female reproductive system (i.e. uterine
carcinosarcoma and ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma) which had rather high total expressed CDS,
have surprisingly low % variability in CDS. This suggests that these cancers may express many genes but
express few transcripts within each gene. To verify this, the mean number of expressed transcripts per
gene were found in all samples, which is shown in Figure 9. As assumed, uterine and ovarian cancers
on average express a lower number of transcripts per gene. Esophageal carcinoma samples express most
transcripts per gene on average, explaining the high % variability in CDS. The mean number of transcripts
expressed per gene therefore correlate well with % variability in CDS.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 8: Percent variability in CDS of all samples. Results are grouped into cancer types and ordered by the
median.
Figure 9: Mean number of transcripts expressed per gene within genes that encode more than one transcript and
where at least one of them are expressed. Results are grouped into cancer types and ordered by the median.
14
==PAGE:16==
3.4
Cancer types with high mutational load display fewer expressed mutations than
expected
To evaluate the importance of whether a mutation lies in a genetic region that is being expressed, the
total number of mutations were compared to the number of expressed mutations. Since the focus of this
thesis is neoepitope-based immunotherapy, only nonsynonymous somatic mutations located in exons were
considered. Figure 10 shows mutation prevalence - total and expressed - for each cancer type.
Focusing on the total number of mutations, the pattern shows much similarity to the results of Alexandrov
et al. (2013)18. The cancer types with the highest number of mutations are skin cutaneous melanoma
together with the two lung carcinomas. Thyroid carcinoma and kidney chromophobe have the lowest
abundance of mutations.
Comparing the total number of mutations with the expressed, a few discrepancies in the order of cancer
types arise. Bladder urothelial carcinoma seems to have a high prevalence of expressed mutations and
surpasses lung adenocarcinoma. Contrarily, colon- and rectum adenocarcinoma appear to express a lower
fraction of mutations, causing them to descend in the spectrum. Aside from these cases, the majority of
cancer types show similar relationships between total and expressed mutations.
Figure 10: Prevalence of total and expressed mutations across cancer types. Only nonsynonymous somatic mu-
tations located in exons are included. Each dot represents a sample and the black lines show the medians of the
cancer types. Red dots are the total number of mutations, blue dots are the number of expressed mutations. The
x-axis is sorted by the median of total mutations. The y-axis (log scaled) shows mutations per megabase.
To evaluate whether the number of expressed mutations correlate with what would be expected of the
total expressed CDS length, one-tailed Fisher’s exact tests were done for all samples. Figure 11 visualizes
the p-values grouped into cancer types. Three cancer types have a median p-value below the signiﬁcance
15
==PAGE:17==
level of 0.05, indicating that many of these samples have less expressed mutations than expected by the
total expressed CDS length. Comparing with Figure 10, these three cancer types have the highest number
of total mutations. These results suggest, that cancer types with high mutational load have signiﬁcantly
less mutations expressed than expected. The reason for this could be that the mutation rate in lowly
expressed genes is higher than for genes with high expression levels23. Interestingly, these cancer types
are known to carry many induced mutations caused by UV-light and tobacco smoke. A cancer type that
does not follow the same trend is bladder urothelial carcinoma, which also has a high number of total
mutations, but is located in the other end of the spectrum and has very few signiﬁcant samples.
8 out of the 20 cancer types have zero signiﬁcant samples, meaning that none of them have fewer expressed
mutations than expected. Most of these cancer types have a rather low number of mutations. Notably,
cancers of the kidney and the female reproductive system show no signiﬁcant samples.
When examining these results in contrast to the total expressed CDS lengths in Figure 7, there is no clear
trend. Skin cutaneous melanoma has a low median total expressed CDS length while lung adenocarcinoma
has a high, and both cancer types have a median p-value below the signiﬁcance level.
However, the
diﬀerences in total expressed CDS length between cancer types are rather small, suggesting that the
number of expressed mutations matter more than the total expressed CDS length.
Figure 11: P-values from one-tailed Fisher’s exact test examining if the number of expressed mutations are less
than expected by the total expressed CDS length. Each dot represents a sample and the blue lines show the median
for each cancer type. The red line shows the signiﬁcance level of 0.05.
16
==PAGE:18==
3.5
Expression of HLA binders follow the distribution of somatic mutations
An equivalent analysis was carried out with HLA binders to examine if the distributions were diﬀerent
compared to the mutations. In Figure 12, the number of total and expressed HLA binders for each cancer
type are shown. The order and distribution of cancer types are very similar to the one with the mutations
in Figure 10. Once again, bladder urothelial carcinoma stand out with a relatively higher number of
expressed HLA binders compared to the number of total binders.
Based on these results, it seems like there is a general relationship between the number of expressed
mutations and number of expressed HLA binders within cancer types.
Figure 12: Prevalence of total and expressed HLA binders. Each dot represents a sample and the black lines show
the medians of the cancer types. Red dots are the total number of HLA binders, blue dots are the number of
expressed HLA binders. The x-axis is sorted by the median of total HLA binders. The y-axis is log-scaled.
As with the mutations, one-tailed Fisher’s exact tests were also done for the HLA binders to examine if
less HLA binders were expressed than expected by the total expressed CDS length. Figure 13 presents
the p-values grouped into cancer types. Here, only two cancer types have a median p-value below the
signiﬁcance level of 0.05; skin cutaneous melanoma and lung squamous cell carcinoma. These cancer types
are also the ones with the highest number of HLA binders. As with the mutations, these results suggest
that cancer types with a high number of HLA binders have signiﬁcantly fewer expressed HLA binders than
expected. In general, the distributions show high similarity to the one with the mutations in Figure 11.
Here, 12 out of 20 cancer types have no signiﬁcant samples.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 13: P-values from one-tailed Fisher’s exact test examining if the number of expressed HLA binders are less
than expected by the total expressed CDS length. Each dot represents a sample and the blue lines show the median
for each cancer type. The red line shows the signiﬁcance level of 0.05.
3.6
Mutations in constitutive regions are overrepresented
For all the expressed mutations and HLA binders, the proportion of constitutive and variable cases were
determined in all samples.
One-tailed Fisher’s exact tests were performed to examine if more muta-
tions/binders were constitutive than expected by the constitutive CDS length.
P-values for the mutations are shown in Figure 14. The majority of cancer types has many signiﬁcant
samples, meaning samples with more constitutive mutations than would be expected by their constitutive
CDS length. The two cancer types lung squamous cell carcinoma and lung adenocarcinoma have a median
p-value below the signiﬁcance level of 0.05. Interestingly, these two cancer types also showed to have fewer
expressed mutations than expected in Figure 10. The remaining cancer types have very scattered p-values
with fewer signiﬁcant samples.
This suggests, that cancer types with high mutational load have fewer expressed mutations than expected
and of these mutations, there are more constitutive mutations than expected.
18
==PAGE:20==
Figure 14: P-values from one-tailed Fisher’s exact test examining if the number of constitutive mutations are higher
than expected by the length of constitutive CDS. Each dot represents a sample and the blue lines show the median
for each group. The red line shows the signiﬁcance level of 0.05.
The same analysis was performed on HLA binders to determine how many samples had more constitutive
binders than expected. Figure 15 shows the p-values grouped into cancer types. Here, fewer cancer types
have signiﬁcant samples and no cancer type has a median p-value below the signiﬁcance level. The reason
for this could be that cancer cells harboring HLA binders located in constitutive regions are under selective
pressure and potentially undergo cancer immunoediting where only the cancer cells without these variants
will escape and progress24.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 15: P-values from one-tailed Fisher’s exact test examining if the number of constitutive binders are higher
than expected by the length of constitutive CDS. Each dot represent a sample and the blue lines show the median
for each group. The red line shows the signiﬁcance level of 0.05.
3.7
Collection of results
To get an overview of all analyses, the results were collected in a heatmap shown in Figure 16. Here, the
medians of the cancer types from all analyses were scaled to visualize where in the spectrum each cancer
type lies.
From row 3-10 in the ﬁgure, it can be seen that the distribution of mutations and HLA binders within can-
cer types does not diﬀer much when looking at the number of total, expressed, constitutive and variable.
The cancer types with the highest number of mutations also have the highest number of binders and so
forth. However, when focusing on the last six rows containing log odds ratios, a few subtle patterns arise.
For example, ﬁve of the six cancer types with the highest number of mutations show a rather low log odds
ratio of expressed mutations and binders. It is only bladder urothelial carcinoma that diﬀerentiates with
a higher log odds ratio, which agrees with the ﬁndings in Figure 11 and Figure 13. As previously stated,
the results indicate that cancer types with high mutational load seem to have fewer expressed mutations
than expected. There is a slight opposite trend in some of the cancer types with lower mutational load
where the log odds ratios of expressed mutations/binders are higher.
Regarding the constitutive and variable mutations/binders, it seems that cancer types with high muta-
tional load has a high log odds ratio of constitutive mutations/binders and a low log odds ratio of variable
mutations/binders. Again, this pattern does not reﬂect in bladder urothelial carcinoma which generally
separates from the other cancer types with high mutational load.
What is common in these analyses is that the expressed CDS length and % variability in CDS seem to
have a very limited inﬂuence on the results. It is possible that the diﬀerences across cancer types are
20
==PAGE:22==
either too small to reﬂect in the outcome or that the variance within cancer types is simply too high.
Figure 16: Summary of all analyses. Heatmap showing scaled medians of the cancer types for the diﬀerent analyses.
Red indicates a high median and blue indicates a low median. The x-axis is sorted based on the total number of
mutations.
4
Discussion
The objective of this thesis was to address the distribution of variable and constitutive variants across
cancer types in order to accept or reject the hypotheses. One of the hypotheses was that an enrichment of
variable HLA binders would occur as a result of selective pressure which would eliminate the possibly more
immunogenic constitutive HLA binders. Based on the results, there was no solid proof that variable HLA
binders were overrepresented compared to constitutive HLA binders. However, there seemed to be a larger
overrepresentation of constitutive mutations compared to constitutive HLA binders, suggesting that there
could potentially be a selective pressure eliminating a portion of the constitutive HLA binders. Looking
at the cancer types, it was found that the majority of cancer types with high mutational load seemed to
have a higher log odds ratio of constitutive mutations/binders while cancer types with lower mutational
load have a higher log odds ratio of variable mutations/binders. That said, the actual number of variable
and constitutive binders are more or less linear with the total number of mutations, meaning that the
cancer types with the highest number of mutations also have the highest number of variable/constitutive
binders and vice versa. Therefore, the eﬀect on neoepitope display might not be more signiﬁcant than
looking at the mutational load.
21
==PAGE:23==
In all of the performed analyses, a certain amount of uncertainty followed. The adjustment of transcript
expression based on tumor purity was implemented after numerous attempts to optimize the method.
Initially, the adjustment was done on all of the TCGA samples combined which provided the best power
but decreased the expression of tissue speciﬁc transcripts signiﬁcantly. For this reason, the adjustment
was performed on each cancer type individually. The decision about only decreasing the expression levels
and not increasing them was caused by the fact that the purpose of the adjustment was to remove signal
coming from the non-cancerous cells and not changing the signal of the cancer cells. So to maintain the
expression signatures of the cancer cells as best as possible, the expression was only decreased. Finally, the
method relied solely on a single tumor purity estimation which could introduce some bias. Optimally, the
tumor purity should be measured or inferred from several prediction tools to reduce the uncertainty. The
adjustment method has room for improvements, but was decided to be adequate for the following analyses.
Throughout the thesis, a cutoﬀof TPM > 0.5 was used to distinguish when a transcript is expressed. The
choice of such cutoﬀs are rather arbitrary in the literature and no value seems to be used consistently.
The cutoﬀof TPM > 0.5 was chosen based on the minimum expression level from the EBI Expression
Atlas25. Another cutoﬀcould be considered, however, the inﬂuence was evaluated to be insigniﬁcant.
Alternatively, a cutoﬀcould be set based on a percentage of a gene’s expression, in example by saying
that a transcript must constitute at least 5% or 10% of the total gene expression. Nonetheless, regulation
of gene expression is a dynamic process and RNA sequencing only provides a snapshot of the speciﬁc
timepoint the sample was processed and thus may not reﬂect the general gene expression in all cases.
The results from all of the analyses were grouped by cancer type to visualize the diﬀerences between
them. In many cases, the variance within cancer types was wide, exemplifying the large heterogeneity
within cancer types. An idea could be to divide cancer types further into subtypes to evaluate the dis-
similarities between subtypes. This could decrease the variance in distributions and contribute to other
ﬁndings.
Other studies have touched on the subject of the eﬀects of isoform switching in cancer therapy. It is
shown that protein isoform switching occurs more frequent in tumor tissue compared to healthy cognate
tissue26 and that these switches impact the sequence of the expressed protein. In a recent study of the
eﬀect on isoform switching on 883 small molecule cancer drugs, targeting 1,434 diﬀerent genes, the authors
found that 76% of these drugs would miss a target isoform if a switch occurred, or induce oﬀ-target eﬀects
in isoforms expressed in normal tissues27. Additionally, a range of studies researching the therapeutic
potential of CAR T cells targeting speciﬁc tumor antigens show that isoform switching induces resistance
to treatment28–30. Together with the results presented here, this indicates that targeting neoepitopes
located in constitutive regions, may reduce the risk of therapy induced target loss.
To evaluate the hypotheses further, additional analyses would have to be carried out. The concepts pre-
sented could be tested retrospectively in one or more vaccination cohorts which had received neoepitope-
based immunotherapy. In this case, the selected neoepitope candidates for each patient would be identiﬁed
as being either variable or constitutive. Next, the clinical outcome of the patients would be compared to
22
==PAGE:24==
the ratio of variable and constitutive neoepitopes to see if the responders potentially had more constitutive
than variable. If available, the expression of transcripts could be monitored before and after treatment to
see if any isoform switching events occurred in transcripts carrying neoepitopes.
In addition, it could be assessed whether the expression patterns seen in bulk RNA-seq are reﬂected on a
single cell level. There might be a chance that all of the tumor cells express the same transcripts, meaning
that there would not be any variable regions at all. However, if diﬀerent tumor cells express diﬀerent
transcripts within the same gene, then the variable mutations would not be clonally expressed and the
patient might relapse. Finally, if the hypothesis is still interesting, clonally expressed neoepitopes and
non-clonally expressed neoepitopes should be tested in mouse models to show which provides the most
protective T cell response.
5
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to investigate the diversity of transcript structure and expression in solid
cancers and examining its inﬂuence on somatic mutations and HLA binders across cancer types.
To
reduce noise in the tumor samples, the transcript expression was adjusted based on the tumor purity
which decreased the expression coming from non-cancerous cells. Regarding the transcript expression, it
was found that cancer types with a high number of tissue-enriched genes have a higher total expressed
CDS length. Brain-originating tumors and cancers of the reproductive organs showed the highest total
expressed CDS length. The analysis of CDS variability showed that carcinomas in the epithelial tissues
of upper body organs have the highest % variability in CDS. The mean number of transcripts expressed
per gene was demonstrated to correlate well with the % variability in CDS.
The relationship between expressed mutations and total expressed CDS length was analysed and suggested
that cancer types with high mutational load have fewer expressed mutations than would be expected. A
similar analysis was done for HLA binders which indicated that the HLA binders follow the distribution
of somatic mutations. Analysis of mutations and HLA binders located in variable and constitutive regions
suggested that constitutive mutations were overrepresented compared to the length of constitutive CDS
in cancer types with high mutational load. In summary, the results indicate that cancer types with high
mutational load have fewer expressed mutations than expected but more constitutive mutations than
expected. These results can neither accept or reject the hypothesis, which should be further tested in a
vaccination cohort to elucidate whether constitutive HLA binders provide better immune response than
variable HLA binders.
23
==PAGE:25==
References
[1]
David Sadava et al. “Life. The Science of biology, Tenth edition”. In: Sinauer, 2014, pp. 284–289.
[2]
Francis Crick. “Central dogma of molecular biology”. In: Nature 227.5258 (1970), pp. 561–563. doi: 10.1038/
227561a0.
[3]
Transcription, Translation and Replication. https://www.atdbio.com/content/14/Transcription-Translation-
and-Replication. [accessed 7-January-2021].
[4]
Elizabeth S. Barrie et al. “mRNA transcript diversity creates new opportunities for pharmacological inter-
vention”. In: Molecular Pharmacology 81.5 (2012), pp. 620–630. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.076604.
[5]
Luke Frankiw, David Baltimore, and Guideng Li. “Alternative mRNA splicing in cancer immunotherapy”.
In: 19.11 (2019), pp. 675–687. doi: 10.1038/s41577-019-0195-7.
[6]
Mar Gonzàlez-Porta et al. “Transcriptome analysis of human tissues and cell lines reveals one dominant
transcript per gene”. In: Genome Biology 14.7 (2013), R70. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-7-r70.
[7]
Juan L. Trincado et al. “The prognostic potential of alternative transcript isoforms across human tumors”.
In: Genome Medicine 8.1 (2016), p. 85. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-0339-3.
[8]
Michael R. Stratton, Peter J. Campbell, and P. Andrew Futreal. The cancer genome. 2009. doi: 10.1038/
nature07943.
[9]
Sajib Chakraborty and Taibur Rahman. “The diﬃculties in cancer treatment.” In: Ecancermedicalscience 6
(2012), ed16. doi: 10.3332/ecancer.2012.ed16.
[10]
Cory A Brennick et al. “Neoepitopes as cancer immunotherapy targets: key challenges and opportunities”.
In: Immunotherapy 9.4 (2017), pp. 361–371. doi: 10.2217/imt-2016-0146.
[11]
T. A. Chan et al. “Development of tumor mutation burden as an immunotherapy biomarker: Utility for the
oncology clinic”. In: 30.1 (2019), pp. 44–56. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdy495.
[12]
Dvir Aran, Marina Sirota, and Atul J. Butte. “Systematic pan-cancer analysis of tumour purity”. In: Nature
Communications 6.1 (2015), pp. 1–12. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9971.
[13]
John N. Weinstein et al. “The cancer genome atlas pan-cancer analysis project”. In: 45.10 (2013), pp. 1113–
1120. doi: 10.1038/ng.2764.
[14]
Mary Goldman et al. “The UCSC Xena platform for public and private cancer genomics data visualization
and interpretation”. In: bioRxiv (2018), p. 326470. doi: 10.1101/326470.
[15]
Kosuke Yoshihara et al. “Inferring tumour purity and stromal and immune cell admixture from expression
data”. In: Nature Communications 4 (2013). doi: 10.1038/ncomms3612.
[16]
Michael Lawrence et al. “Software for Computing and Annotating Genomic Ranges”. In: PLoS Computational
Biology 9.8 (2013). Ed. by Andreas Prlic, e1003118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003118.
[17]
David Benjamin et al. “Calling Somatic SNVs and Indels with Mutect2”. In: (2019), p. 861054. doi: 10.1101/
861054.
[18]
Ludmil B. Alexandrov et al. “Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer”. In: Nature 500.7463
(2013), pp. 415–421. doi: 10.1038/nature12477.
[19]
Anne Mette Bjerregaard et al. “MuPeXI: prediction of neo-epitopes from tumor sequencing data”. In: Cancer
Immunology, Immunotherapy 66.9 (2017), pp. 1123–1130. doi: 10.1007/s00262-017-2001-3.
24
==PAGE:26==
[20]
Morten Nielsen and Massimo Andreatta. “NetMHCpan-3.0; improved prediction of binding to MHC class I
molecules integrating information from multiple receptor and peptide length datasets”. In: Genome Medicine
8.1 (2016), p. 33. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-0288-x.
[21]
Lieke L. van der Woude et al. “Migrating into the Tumor: a Roadmap for T Cells”. In: 3.11 (2017), pp. 797–
808. doi: 10.1016/j.trecan.2017.09.006.
[22]
M. Uhlen et al. “Tissue-based map of the human proteome”. In: Science 347.6220 (2015), pp. 1260419–
1260419. doi: 10.1126/science.1260419.
[23]
Erin D. Pleasance et al. “A comprehensive catalogue of somatic mutations from a human cancer genome”.
In: Nature 463.7278 (2010), pp. 191–196. doi: 10.1038/nature08658.
[24]
Matthew D. Vesely and Robert D. Schreiber. “Cancer immunoediting: Antigens, mechanisms, and implications
to cancer immunotherapy”. In: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1284.1 (2013), pp. 1–5. doi:
10.1111/nyas.12105.
[25]
Irene Papatheodorou et al. “Expression Atlas: Gene and protein expression across multiple studies and or-
ganisms”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46.D1 (2018), pp. D246–D251. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1158.
[26]
Kristoﬀer Vitting-Seerup and Albin Sandelin. “The landscape of isoform switches in human cancers”. In:
Molecular Cancer Research 15.9 (2017), pp. 1206–1220. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-16-0459.
[27]
Yanrong Ji, Rama K. Mishra, and Ramana V. Davuluri. “In silico analysis of alternative splicing on drug-
target gene interactions”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 10.1 (2020), pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-56894-x.
[28]
Jeannette Fischer et al. “CD19 isoforms enabling resistance to CART-19 immunotherapy are expressed in
B-ALL patients at initial diagnosis”. In: Journal of Immunotherapy 40.5 (2017), pp. 187–195. doi: 10.1097/
CJI.0000000000000169.
[29]
Elena Sotillo et al. “Convergence of acquired mutations and alternative splicing of CD19 enables resistance to
CART-19 immunotherapy”. In: Cancer Discovery 5.12 (2015), pp. 1282–1295. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-
15-1020.
[30]
Donald M. O’Rourke et al. “A single dose of peripherally infused EGFRvIII-directed CAR T cells mediates
antigen loss and induces adaptive resistance in patients with recurrent glioblastoma”. In: Science Translational
Medicine 9.399 (2017). doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa0984.
25
