==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Privacy-Preserving Configuration Integrity Verifica-
tion of Container-based Virtual Functions in Cloud-
based Environments
Sebastian Bødstrup Petersen (s190694)
Supervisor: Thanassis Giannetsos, Ph.D.
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this project, current configuration integrity verification schemes for virtual functions are explored
and a new solution is proposed focusing on preserving privacy as much as possible. A TPM is used as
the root of trust to create policies to verify the integrity of virtual functions, as well as creating keys
that can be used to create a proof of the state. A new model is proposed which uses attestation by
proof to remotely verify the integrity of a virtual function without revealing its configurations. This
model relies on the host to be trusted and securely collect configuration measurements that are used
to verify the integrity of virtual functions. Additional methods are discussed that can move trust away
from the host and onto the virtual functions.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master degree in
engineering.
Supervisor: Thanassis Giannetsos, Ph.D.
Kongens Lyngby, February 1, 2021
Sebastian Bødstrup Petersen (s190694)
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Setting the scene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
IMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
ContainerIMA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Container security using a vTPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Docker Integrity Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
CloudVault . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Property-Based Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Problem Statement
15
3.1
Integrity Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Requirements & Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Building Blocks
20
4.1
Trusted Platform Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Model
29
5.1
System Model in Detail
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Analysis
48
6.1
Security Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Evaluation
52
7.1
Time and memory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8
Future Development
56
8.1
Secure configuration measurement collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.2
Control Flow Graph verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
8.3
Inter-trust VF communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.4
Verify all VFs at the same time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.5
Verify multiple VFs at the same time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.6
Swap around NV indexes when recreating the policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
9
Conclusion
61
9.1
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
9.2
Model execution time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A
Implementation Code
63
B
TPM command execution time code
64
C
TPM software dependencies
67
D
TPM command wrapper code
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Cloud computing is becoming an increasingly popular part of software development [Luo+19]. With
cloud computing comes new concepts such as micro services, virtual functions (VF ) and containers.
Containers are an important and hugely popular part of new software systems, which allows the user to
run a program in an isolated environment, such that the container can be deployed in a fast and simple
manner. This provides benefits such as quickly setting up new containers, and makes scaling of systems
easier. They typically provide a small piece of functionality, and can be chained together to create more
complex systems. Their small size also makes it easy to maintain individual containers and their images.
A container based Virtual Function (VF ), can be thought of as a standard unit of software. It
is packaged in a single unit containing all the code and dependencies needed to run it. This makes
them fast and reliable to run on various different environments, without needing to be concerned with
the underlying platform. A popular solution is Docker [Doc], which is a container management system
running on all major operating systems. Docker works by running the docker engine on top of a host OS.
Docker container images, which are simply just the unit of software and dependencies, can be run as
containers. Images depend only on the docker engine to run, so the same image can be used on any host
capable of running the docker engine. This allows developers to focus on functionality, without being
concerned about making their programs compatible with different operating systems and hardware.
Container based virtualization is inherently different from regular virtual machines (VM). The reg-
ular VM makes use of a hypervisor running on the host hardware that is used to emulate an entire OS
and kernel for each VM. On the other hand containers makes use of a container engine such as Docker
running on top of the host Operating System (OS). This means that container share the host OS kernel,
which effectively means several environments are running on the same kernel [HLL16].
As with any new concept in software, new challenges arise regarding security. IT criminality is
ever increasing as our world becomes more connected, and more dependant on software systems. It
is important to ensure that containers are secure and provide the expected functionality while being
protected from malicious tampering. Since containers run in a isolated environment, it can be diﬀicult
for ordinary anti-malware software running on a host, to detect if a container have been compromised,
which makes it necessary to come up with new innovative solutions to protect them.
Coming up with new solutions often involves looking at existing solutions and modifying them to fit
the new requirements. Configuration Integrity Verification (CIV ) is a well known existing method for
detecting compromises in computer systems. CIV is the process of checking the state of a system and
verifying it against some trusted or expected value. There are different ways to do this, one of them
being Binary Based Attestation. Using this method, hash values of important configurations and binary
files are collected to be compared against trusted values. This can be done both locally and remotely.
Verifying a system remotely is also known as Remote Attestation (RA). RA schemes typically require
a host/prover (Prv ) to collect configuration measurements of some system and generating a ’proof’
that the system is in a certain state. A remote verifier (Vrf ) often controls a database with reference
values that can be used to validate the proof. Upon failed validation, the system being validated is said
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Objectives
2
to be compromised.
While CIV is performed in regular embedded systems already, this is not the case for VFs . Since a
VF runs in a isolated environment, the underlying host does not have access to just read configurations
directly as would be the case in a embedded system [BL19]. Traditional static verification is not suﬀi-
cient to protect VFs , as it is possible for a malicious actor to modify configurations or lunch scripts
while the VF is running, which will bypass any integrity checks done during boot-up.
Protecting a container is not just about ensuring that it is not compromised. It is equally important
to preserve privacy of the container and its configuration. If such information is made available to a
malicious actor, it could help them find a way to attack the container. In this sense, preserving privacy
can be seen as the first line of defense. Many organizations are looking into solving this issue. One of
them is the people behind CloudVault [LDG]. They seek to provide Configuration Integrity Verification
(CIV ) of container based virtual functions, while preserving privacy. They make use of a hardware
security device called a Trusted Platform Module (TPM).
A TPM is a security device invented by the Trusted Computing Group. It is a tamper-evident
hardware device that can be used to help secure systems by providing encryption and signing keys,
random number generation, secure storage and more. TPMs are shipped with secure seeds used for key
generation. These seeds are never revealed outside the TPM, allowing the TPM to make signatures
that can’t be faked or forged by a adversary (Adv ). This assumes an Adv within the Dolev-Yao model
[DY83] which says encryption can’t be broken.
Storage on a TPM is mainly used by Platform Configuration Registers (PCR) and Non-Volatile
(NV) indexes. A PCR is a special type of storage that can only be written to using the TPM extend
command which takes some input and concatenates it with the current PCR input and then calculates
the hash digest of this which is added as the new value of the PCR. NV indexes is a more flexible
storage that can be configured in a number of different ways.
TPMs also have a feature called policies. A policy is essentially a list of requirements that have to
be fulfilled in order to satisfy the policy. There are many possible requirements to choose from when
creating a policy, but the most common are checking the contents of either a PCR or NV index against
a specific value. Policies can be used to lock objects such as encryption keys. This is very useful as it
allows the TPM to create a proof that can be used in CIV . A policy can be created that requires a
number of PCR or NV indexes to contain values that correspond to the correct state of a system. If
a key is locked with this policy, then it can only be unlocked if the system is in a correct state, which
then allows the key to be used to create a signature. This signature can then be validated by a remote
verifier [ACG15].
1.2
Objectives
In this section the objectives for this thesis are outlined. They are split in two parts, functional and
non-functional:
1.2.1
Non-Functional
• Understand Trusted Platform Modules (TPM): How do they work, what security can they provide
and within which limitations.
• Understand current work on securing virtual functions: Gain knowledge on what have been done
so far, and what still needs to be done.
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Structure
3
1.2.2
Functional
• Extend the protocols of CloudVault:
– Protocol should support any number of VFs
– Each VF should be able to use any number of configuration measurements.
– Configuration measurements should be kept private at all times.
– Compromising a VF should not reveal sensitive information about any other VF .
• Implement the model: Implement a proof-of-concept in Python using a software TPM.
• Security analysis of the model
• Performance analysis of model
1.3
Structure
This paper is split into 7 chapters, this being the first, that contain the following:
1. Introduction: Introduction to the paper, including objectives and structure of the paper.
2. Related Work: A survey on related work and what I plan to do different compared to others.
3. Problem Statement: Problem statement including model and threat model.
4. Building blocks: This chapter describes the building blocks used by the model.
5. Model: Model to achieve the objectives set in this chapter.
6. Analysis: An analysis on whether I completed my objectives as well as a threat analysis.
7. Evaluation: Evaluation including a discussion on time and memory consumption.
8. Future Development: Discussion on future development to improve the model in various ways.
9. Conclusion: Conclusion.
1.4
Glossary
This glossary lists the most commonly used abbreviations throughout this project.
• Vrf : Verifier
• Prv : Prover
• RoT : Root of Trust
• CoT : Chain of Trust
• CIV : Configuration Integrity Verification
• VF : Virtual Function
• AK : Attestation Key
• EK : Endorsement Key
• TPM: Trusted Platform Module
==PAGE:10==
1.4 Glossary
4
• vTPM: virtual TPM
• sTPM: software TPM
• RA: Remote Attestation
• BBA: Binary Based Attestation
• PBA: Property Based Attestation
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
In this chapter, work related to the project is presented. It will also discuss the idea of Property-Based
attestation as well as implicit and explicit attestation. The chapter will end by presenting the work of
this thesis and how it contributes to the research done on the topic so far.
2.1
Setting the scene
Before diving into the related work, there will be given a high level introduction to some of the terms
and methods being used. The glossary in section 1.4 can be used for a quick overview of the various
abbreviations found throughout this project.
Configuration Integrity Verification (CIV ) schemes are used to determine if some target system
is in a correct, expected, state. A system that fails to successfully pass such a verification is in an
unknown state, meaning it might behave in an unexpected way. In the worst case, this could be the
result of a malicious actor who have compromised the system. The reason for providing CIV of a
system is to provide evidence of the systems state, such that any unexpected state can be acted upon.
It is important to note that a CIV scheme is not responsible for dealing with a compromised system,
but only detecting that it is compromised.
One way of implementing a CIV scheme is using Binary Based Attestation (BBA), which involves
collection of hash digest measurements of important binary and configuration files. These measurements
can be validated against trusted values in a reference database to determine if they are different from
what is expected.
This project is mostly concerned with Remote Attestation (RA). This is different from local attesta-
tion because a remote verifier (Vrf ) is responsible for checking or verifying the state of some system,
instead of doing such a verification locally. One of the advantages of using a remote Vrf , is that one
system can be trusted to verify many different other systems, instead of trusting each individual system
to verify itself. The system being verified by the Vrf is known as the prover (Prv ). As the name
implies, a Prv is tasked with proving that it is in a correct state.
In the context of container based virtual functions (VF ), a Prv might host several different VFs .
When a Vrf wishes to verify the configuration integrity of a VF , it is the job of the Prv to generate
a proof of the state of the VF which the Vrf can then verify to determine if the VF is in a correct
state or not. A common way to generate a proof is to use a Attestation Key (AK ). There are no
strict definitions on how a AK should be implemented, but it is often an encryption key used to make
signatures. The idea is to trust the signatures made by the AK , which acts as the attestation proof.
For this to work, the AK needs to be generated in a secure way such that a Adv can’t manipulate the
keys or the signatures made by it.
Many approaches to create keys securely already exist in the industry, but a common approach when
dealing with attestation is to use a Trusted Platform Module (TPM). A TPM is a secure and trusted
hardware component that is intended to enhance security and privacy. It can generate encryption keys,
as well as provide random number generation and secure storage. A TPM is said to be tamper-evident
[TCG16a], which makes it unfeasible for a Adv to break it. A TPM is shipped with a key called the
Endorsement Key (EK ) which is known only to the manufacturer and the TPM. The EK is known as
a primary key, and can be use to generate secondary keys, such as a AK . The way the AK is generated
==PAGE:12==
2.2 IMA
6
also outputs a proof that the AK was created as a secondary key to the EK . Since the private part of
the EK is never revealed outside the TPM, and it can be proven that a AK was created using the EK
, it can also be proven that the AK was created by the TPM.
Figure 2.1: Overview of attestation using a TPM. The EK is used to generate a AK which is locked
by a Policy. The AK is used to sign a attestation proof.
Another important concept used by TPMs are policies. A TPM policy is essentially a set of con-
ditions that must be true to satisfy the policy. This is useful because a policy can be used to lock an
object such as, for example, an key. If a AK is protected by a policy, then it can only be unlocked if
the policy is satisfied, which means that if the AK signs something, then a Vrf knows that the set of
conditions specified by the policy must be true, and it knows it can trust the key because it was created
using the EK which is known only to the TPM.
This process is one of the ways to create a attestation proof. If a Prv knows the public part of the
EK belonging to a TPM, he can trust that any AK created using the EK belongs to the TPM. If he
knows the conditions to satisfy a policy locking the AK , he can trust that a signature made by the AK
means those conditions must be true. This means a signature by the AK is proof that those conditions
have been met. Now, if the conditions set by the policy is that a VF must be in a correct state, then a
signature made by the AK acts as a attestation proof that the VF can be trusted. Figure 2.1 shows a
high level overview of this, where an EK is used to generate an AK which is locked by a policy. That
AK is used to sign a attestation proof.
A TPM provides two different types of storage: Platform Configuration Registers (PCR) and Non-
Volatile (NV) indexes. PCRs are special registers for storing hash digests. New values are added to a
PCR by concatenating the existing value with a new value and adding the hash digest of this to the
PCR. This process makes them very hard to manipulate, as it is not directly possible to specify the
exact value that will appear in the PCR.
NV indexes on the other hand are more flexible, and can be configured in a number of ways. They
can be setup to emulate a PCR, but they also allow the user to freely write data. Both PCRs and NV
indexes are often used in TPM policies, such that the policy is only satisfied if a correct value is found
in either a PCR or NV index.
The details of creating such a policy is a major part of this project and is explained in great detail
in section 5.1.1.1.
2.2
IMA
Integrity Measurement Architecture (IMA) is a system made by IBM, used to measure the integrity of
a designated platform [Sai+04]. IMA works by measuring the hash digest of files of interest, such as
==PAGE:13==
2.3 ContainerIMA
7
binaries and configuration files, when they are opened or executed. Measurements are stored in a log
file which can be secured by a TPM. IMA can be setup in a number of ways, allowing the user great
control of which items should be measured.
IMA is a subsystem within the Linux kernel.
It is capable of creating and collecting hashes of
files before they are opened, read or executed [Fou]. IMA itself consists of two subsystems: measure
and appraise. The measure subsystem is responsible for collection the hash values and storing them,
while the appraise subsystem is responsible for comparing them to known trusted values. The measure
subsystem collects the following data and stores it in a log:
• The PCR where the hash value is stored (this is only relevant if a TPM is used)
• A template hash which combines the length and values of the file content hash and the path name
of the file
• The template that registered the value
• Hash digest of the file.
• File path
2.3
ContainerIMA
The work of [Luo+19] has a large focus on privacy. Their work primarily consists of extending IMA
to isolate logs per container in a way that ensures that a verifier (Vrf ) can only access the logs of
containers belonging to them. Their model consist of a host/prover (Prv ) with a TPM running one
or more containers. A Vrf owns one or more of these containers. The goal of [Luo+19] is to make a
system such that a verifier cannot learn of the existence of any other containers, except for the ones he
owns. They assume that the host can be trusted using a TPM as the root of trust (RoT ).
They build on top of IMA and extend it by introducing a Namespace Parser. This works by assigning
a namespace to each container and keeping separate logs for each namespace, instead of keeping every
log in the same place as with regular IMA. They also introduce the concept of a Container Platform
Configuration Register (cPCR). Each of the separate logs are stored as a cPCR, which corresponds to
a physical PCR on the host TPM. A cPCR behaves the same way as a TPM PCR but exists in the
host software.
The ContainerIMA solution makes use of a Measurement Agent that hooks into IMA. The Measure-
ment Agent forwards the logs from IMA to the Namespace Parser which finds the correct cPCR to store
the given log/measurement. When a Vrf wishes to receive integrity evidence of a container it sends a
request to the Prv , which finds the relevant measurement and signs it using the TPM. The Vrf can
trust the signature since it came from the TPM and the measurements are protected by physical PCRs
on the TPM.
In order to better preserve privacy, configuration measurements are XORed with cPCR secrets. This
way a malicious actor can’t use the cPCR values if he is able to read them, and a Vrf can’t understand
the values belonging to a VF owned by another Vrf since it does not have access to the cPCR secrets
owned by the other Vrf .
2.4
Container security using a vTPM
[HLL16] proposes to use vTPMs to provide security for containers in cloud environments. They argue
that vTPMs are being used to secure virtual machines in various research material, but the same is not
the case for container based virtualization. This is partly due to the fact that container based virtual-
ization shares the host kernel, while regular virtual machines are running off a hypervisor emulating a
full OS with their own kernel.
==PAGE:14==
2.5 Docker Integrity Verification
8
In order to use vTPMs for containers, they ([HLL16]) define some requirements for what a vTPM
should be able to do:
1. vTPMs must offer the same interface to the software as a hardware based TPM does, that is, the
use of vTPM must be transparent to software.
2. There must exist a strong association between the vTPM and the virtual machine.
3. There must exist a strong association between the vTPM and the trusted computing base.
4. vTPM must be distinguishable from the physical TPMs. This is important because of the poten-
tially different security guarantees associated with the different TPM types.
The first requirement says that any solution that works on a hardware TPM should work on a vTPM
as well without any modification. They consider in requirement 4 that is important to still know which
type of TPM you are using since it is not guaranteed that a vTPM can provide the promise of security
as a hardware TPM.
Two schemes are presented for how vTPMs can be used to secure containers. Both rely on the
host being trusted. The first scheme implements a new Linux kernel module that is used to create
any number of vTPMs all running in the host kernel. Figure 2.2 is taken from [HLL16] and shows a
visualization of both solutions, with the first seen on the left and the second solution on the right. The
first solution is a hardware TPM on the host which is connected to each of the vTPMs in order to
ensure security. A container engine runs on top of the host OS with a number of containers running.
Each container is assigned a vTPM used exclusively by that container.
They make each container
responsible for providing integrity verification of themselves, and furthermore suggest that a container
can also verify the integrity of the underlying host. This of course implies that each container has access
to the configuration of the host.
The second solution seen on the right side of figure 2.2, moves the vTPMs from the OS kernel into
a specially designed container. This container maintains a vTPM manager that emulates a vTPM for
each other container running on the system. This makes implementation and deployment easier, as
everything is run through containers, but argues that it might have security implications, since it would
be easier to manipulate the memory used by a container compared to a module running in the kernel.
Figure 2.2: ’vTPM implemented in a kernel module’ - left & ’ vTPM located in a dedicated container’
- right figures by [HLL16].
2.5
Docker Integrity Verification
”Docker Integrity Verification Engine (DIVE)” is a project that looks specifically at providing remote
attestation for docker containers in a cloud environment [BL19]. They open the discussion by describing
==PAGE:15==
2.5 Docker Integrity Verification
9
how remote attestation is a well known technique that has been used for a long time, but its availability is
very limited for virtual environments, especially lightweight virtualization environments such as docker.
They argue that since virtual environments such as containers are growing in popularity, it is increasingly
important to provide integrity verification of containers.
While a TPM is a very popular tool for
providing integrity attestation, it is not as straight forward to use with virtual machines. The TCG
specifications assumes a 1 to 1 relationship between the TPM and operating system, which makes the
TPM unable to provide authentic evidence to VMs even if a channel is set up that allows them to
communicate with the TPM [BL19].
[BL19] presents a solution for runtime attestation of both docker containers and the underlying host.
DIVE does not focus on privacy or computational correctness, but instead on the integrity of software
running on both the host and container. They propose a solution where containers have a direct link
to the hardware TPM in order to ensure the integrity of services running inside the container. They
claim their solution fulfils the requirement of integrity verification in cloud infrastructures, but that it
does not cover all the possible types of attacks on virtual instances such as containers. A TPM is, for
instance not able to detect manipulation of code or data memory inside a container.
The model presented by [BL19] consists of a host with a hardware TPM. The host is running
one or more containers. The TPM is used to provide remote attestation evidence, and is capable of
identifying which container is compromised, such that only that container needs to be replaced, in
order to prevent the need to reset the whole platform. DIVE consists of three components: The verifier,
the infrastructure manager and the attester. Figure 2.3 is taken from the DIVE article [BL19] and
showcases their architecture.
Figure 2.3: ’DIVE architecture’ model by DIVE [BL19].
The verifier is responsible for collecting measurements from the attester in order to verify them. The
attester is configured with a TPM and uses IMA to collect integrity measurements. As this solution is
aimed at a cloud environment, the attester can be seen as a single compute node. In a realistic scenario,
several attesters would exist, all managed by the same verifier as shown in the architecture figure 2.3.
==PAGE:16==
2.6 CloudVault
10
The infrastructure manager is responsible for creating, starting and stopping containers for users, as
well as keeping track on which node a given container is hosted.
When a user wishes to start the remote attestation process, the infrastructure manager checks the
location of each container that should be verified and sends the list of containers and respective node
to the verifier. The verifier then contacts each relevant node (attester) to collect the IMA measure-
ments stored in the TPM on that attester. The verifier then compares the collected values against a
trusted reference list and forwards the result to the infrastructure manager. With this information, the
infrastructure manager can decide how to act on the result if any compromised container is discovered.
Since this solution aims to provide attestation for both the host and containers, the full IMA log is
sent every time the remote attestation process is run. Because of this, the verifier also has to make sure
to update the reference database correctly. This have to be done every time the host or any container
is updated or patched. A live hotfix would result in a false positive, unless the verifier is made aware
of this and is capable of updating its database accordingly.
2.6
CloudVault
CloudVault, [LDG], leverages the profoundness of Binary Based Attestation (BBA) while keeping the
privacy focus of Property Based Attestation (PBA). They use a TPM as a RoT to provide configuration
integrity attestation of Virtual Functions (VF ), such as Docker Containers.
They make use of asymmetric Attestation Keys created using a TPM which are protected by TPM
policies. This way they ensure that the TPM is in a certain state, such as a PCR having a specific
value, before the key can be used. This enables the Prv to sign a nonce created by the Vrf to prove
that a virtual function is in a correct state.
To manage multiple containers, they make use of Service Graph Chains (SGC) where a Service Graph
(SG) consist of SG = {s1, s2, ..., sn}. Each service chain is compromised of a set of virtual functions
si = {vf1, vf2, ..., vfm}. Each VF is equipped with a vTPM as well as a runtime tracer to record the
state of the container, both during boot-up and runtime. Given the setup using Service Graph Chains,
they have low-level fine-grained tracing capability which allow them to identify individual compromised
VF .
They consider both internal and external attackers. The Adv has both passive and active oracle
access to the vTPM, such that they can monitor commands and responses from the TPM and craft
illicit commands to the vTPM in order to try to manipulate the attestation process.
Figure 2.4 shows their protocol for creating an AK . This process is started by the Vrf that creates
a policy verifying the state of all vPCR. The policy along with the set I covering all 24 PCR is sent to
a VF . The VF then uses a TPM to load the EK and creates the AK as a secondary object locking
it with the policy. The TPM also outputs a creation ticket along with the AK which has information
about the newly created key. Finally, the VF uses the TPM to sign the creation ticket, using the EK
, and sends back the AK as well as a signature to the Vrf . The Vrf checks the signature to know
it came from the TPM and checks the creation ticket to ensure the AK was created with the expected
policy.
The attestation by proof model made by CloudVault is included in figure 2.5. This model consists
of an orchestrator/Vrf and a VF with a trusted component, which could be a TPM. The AK have
already been set up above. The model starts with the Vrf generating a nonce which is sent to the VF
. The VF then uses the trusted component to sign the nonce. This is done by checking the state of the
PCR to ensure the VF is in a correct state.
CloudVault also presents a method for attestation by quote in addition to attestation by proof. The
two are similar yet they still have some differences. In the attestation by proof model, the Vrf only
provides a nonce. If the VF is in a trusted state, it is able to sign the nonce using the TPM and return
the signature to the Vrf for verification. In the attestation by quote, the Vrf sends both a nonce and
a list of PCRs to be attested. The VF creates a quote, which is basically the values of the selected
PCRs, signed by the TPM. These are returned to the Vrf who then verify the values. To sum up, the
==PAGE:17==
2.7 Property-Based Attestation
11
Figure 2.4: ’Create new Attestation Key’ model by CloudVault [LDG].
main difference is that the value verification takes place in the TPM when doing attestation by proof,
and on the Vrf when doing attestation by quote.
CloudVault provides protocols for creating new attestation keys as well as attestation of a single
virtual function at a time.
2.7
Property-Based Attestation
Property-Based Attestation (PBA) is designed to overcome some of the problems that come with Binary-
Based Attestation (BBA). PBA schemes makes use of attestable properties instead of specific binaries.
This has several advantages. Firstly, PBA avoids disclosing host configurations, which could be misused
or exploited to mount attacks. Secondly, since attestation is based on properties, different systems with
different components might be able to prove the same properties, even if they are configured differently.
BBA also requires the verifier to know all possible combinations of trusted values for the platform. This
also makes it easier to handle updates and patches, since the hash of a binary will change even with a
tiny patch [Che+08].
In [Che+06], PBA is described as a more general and flexible solution compared to BBA. When
using PBA the goal is to prove that a platform fulfills certain properties which, loosely speaking, de-
scribes behaviour of the platform related to some requirements that could, for example, be security
requirements such as multi-level security and application isolation.
A property classification system is presented in [NVH10] and [Awa+14].
Both present the idea
of a service based property Ps. This is described as properties that deliver a security service. This
could be a number of different services, but the most important ones are authentication, authorisation,
==PAGE:18==
2.7 Property-Based Attestation
12
Figure 2.5: ’Attestation by proof’ model by CloudVault [LDG].
confidentiality, integrity and non-repudiation. Security properties that are not part of a distinct service
are called generic properties Pg, and includes properties such as integrity verification of binary values.
A service based property is presented as a pyramid split up in 4 levels: Class, Service, Service
Component and Mechanism. Each are described in the following way [NVH10]:
• Class On top of the pyramid is the class. A class is said to be the intent of the security service
it belongs to
• Service On the second level is the security service. This is a service that addresses a security
objective within the security class above.
• Service Component Below the Service are one or more service components. A component is
responsible for providing the service.
• Mechanism At the bottom of the pyramid is the mechanism. A mechanism is used to implement
the service provided by a service component.
It needs an input and an output interface for
accepting inputs and providing outputs respectively.
The pyramid is visualized in figure 2.6 taken from [NVH10]. Using service properties, security policies
(SP) are now introduced. A SP is a list of requirements that a system must meet if some action is to
be performed. An example of this is that an actor can create a SP requiring a confidentiality property
in a host before accepting communication. A SP is defined as SP = (TPC, Ps, T, D) where TCP is a
trusted platform component that satisfies the requested property, Ps is the service property, T is a list
or targets that the policy applies to and finally D is any SP that the current SP depends on. [NVH10]
also provides an example of how a SP can look:
SP1 = (TPC1, Ps1, list, SP2)
SP2 = TPC1, Ps2, none, none)
==PAGE:19==
2.8 Contribution
13
Figure 2.6: ’Property Granularity Pyramid’ model from [NVH10].
In this example we have two security policies, where the first policy SP1, depends on the second security
policy SP2. Both use the same trusted platform component, namely TPC1. SP1 have a list of targets
that is expected to achieve the service property Ps1. They define Ps1 as:
Ps1 =class : service : component : mechanism
class = user data protection
service = data confidentiality
Component = encryption
Mechanism = AES
To describe it a bit informally, the class is concerned with user data protection, it provides this via
the data confidentiality service using the encryption component. The mechanism of encryption is AES.
Other policies could use the same class, service and component, but specify another type of encryption
such as RSA if needed. The service property of the second policy SP1 does not contain a mechanism,
and is defined as:
Ps2 =class : service : component
class = cryptographic support
service = cryptographic key management
Component = cryptographic key generation
2.8
Contribution
The above sections presented some different approaches to provide CIV of VFs . All approaches have
some advantages and disadvantages which will be discussed here to justify why the work of this thesis
is relevant and brings value to the subject.
DIVE [BL19] provides security for both host and VFs and is capable of distinguishing between
compromised and non-compromised VF . However, as they mention themselves, they do not consider
privacy. The project on container security using vTPMs [HLL16], uses virtual TPMs to provide secu-
rity, but they make a number of assumptions. Firstly they require the host to be trusted, but in both of
==PAGE:20==
2.8 Contribution
14
their solution scenarios, they assume the communication between container and vTPM is secure. The
vTPM is not running on the container itself, so this assumption is not trivial to implement. They also
do not touch on how a container is assigned a vTPM and what measures are put in place to ensure that
a malicious container is unable to communicate with the vTPM of another container. ContainerIMA
[Luo+19] attempts to preserve privacy by splitting configuration measurements up for each VF in order
to not reveal configuration details. But they require the exchange of identifiable information for their
model to work.
Finally CloudVault [LDG] provides both privacy and security by using elements of both BBA and
PBA, however, their protocols are only designed to work for a single VF . While it does work and
ensures privacy and security at the same time, it is not realistic in a real life scenario to use only a
single VF . A VF usually only provides a small bit of functionality and many are often chained together
or used in parallel to provide a complete service. Their Service Graph Chains do allow for several
virtual functions, the protocols they provide do not. This project will build on top of their protocols
and extend them in order to allow the use of any number of VFs . Another issue is that the protocols
of CloudVault only uses a single PCR to store configuration measurements. In a real scenario it might
be necessary to store multiple different measurements at the same time. This means that protocols will
be designed to support any number of configuration measurements per VF .
The model will include protocols that provide the following functionality not available in the Cloud-
Vault protocols:
• Protocol for providing attestation proof on any number of VFs running on the same virtual
machine.
• Policy that allows any number of NV/PCR for each VF . Each NV/PCR will also support any
number of different allowed values to reflect different binary states.
• Privacy focused protocol which ensures that:
– Configuration measurements are never revealed to anyone except for the Vrf and Prv .
– Only the Prv knows which VF is being verified.
– A Adv can not learn any information of other VFs on the same host if he compromises a
VF .
• Protocol that can distinguish between compromised and non-compromised VFs .
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Statement
Software engineering is an ever growing art as our world becomes increasingly connected through IT
systems every year. One of the largest, most significant, trends today is cloud and serverless computing.
Containers are a popular concept, especially in the cloud, since they are fast and easy to deploy, allowing
for easy scaling as requests from clients increase or decrease over time. As with anything IT/Software
related it is important to keep a tight security to prevent any malicious actors from gaining access to
sensitive data.
Many attempts have already been made to provide security for containers in cloud environments,
but many seems to forget about privacy when implementing security. A good example is IBMs Integrity
Measurement Architecture (IMA). One of its main features is logging every time a file of interest, such
as an executable, is read or executed. While IMA does this logging perfectly, everything goes in the
same log. This means that everyone who gains access to this log can see everything that has been read
or executed on the given system. This is not preserving privacy and might reveal sensitive data to an
intruder.
This project builds on top of the work of [LDG] by implementing a privacy preserving model for
integrity verification of multiple VFs . This means that the model is not only concerned with detecting
if a malicious actor has tampered with a container, but doing it in a way that reveals as little as possible
about all the VFs running on some host. Even a partially compromised host should only be given the
minimum amount of data necessary to perform attestation of some VF .
3.1
Integrity Verification
The goal of this project is to provide configuration integrity verification (CIV ) of virtual functions
(VFs ). CIV is a way of ensuring that a system such as a VF is in a correct or expected state. It is
important to know that the VF has not been altered in a malicious way since the previous boot-up
or while running. Ensuring the integrity of a VF means that we can trust it to carry out its intended
functionality.
Two different types of integrity verification are considered: boot-up attestation and runtime attes-
tation. As implied by the name, boot-up attestation is concerned with ensuring the VF is in a correct
state during the boot-up sequence and runtime attestation is concerned with ensuring a correct state
during runtime. It is important to note, that due to the nature of software, there is not necessarily only
a single correct state, but multiple different correct ones. Another concern is ensuring that the expected
state is updated accordingly when the VF is updated or patched, as that often involves modifying the
binaries or configuration files of the VF .
Integrity verification can be done in a number of ways, but Binary-based attestation (BBA) is used
in this project. This is a technique where the hash digests of important binary and configuration files
are collected and compared to a known, trusted reference value. This method is eﬀicient because it
requires the digest to exactly match a known trusted value. A tiny change such as a single flipped bit
will completely change the digest making it very diﬀicult for a malicious actor to compromise the system
without being caught. On the other hand this is also a weakness since the verifier (Vrf ) needs to know
all correct values, and update these when the system is patched. If a system is legitimately patched,
then collected hash digests will change from their previous values, but if the Vrf is not updated with
==PAGE:22==
3.2 System Model
16
these new values, he risk identifying the system as compromised when it is actually healthy.
The configuration files of a system are sensitive and should be kept private. An Adv that gets
access to them can potentially use them to engineer an attack to compromise that system. This makes
it important to keep the configurations secure, especially in a remote attestation system where they need
to be communicated between Vrf and Prv . Another requirement is to ensure that the measurements
are collected in a secure manner. If an Adv is able to manipulate them before the Vrf sees them, he
could exchange bad measurements from a compromised system with ’fake’ measurements that the Vrf
will accept.
When implementing runtime attestation, an important issue to consider is the time-of-check to time-
of-use (TOCTOU) problem [Nun+20]. The TOCTOU problem is a type of attack that exploits the fact
that you can’t possibly verify the integrity of a system at all time. Specifically the TOCTOU attack
is about compromising a system between two attestations and restoring the system to a trusted state
after the attack such that it is never detected. Preventing TOCTOU is out of the scope of this project,
but it is important to be aware that it exist.
3.2
System Model
The model consists of a host/prover (Prv ) with a TPM, running one or more Virtual Functions (VFs )
belonging to one or more Verifiers (Vrf ) acting as orchestrators. A VF can only be owned by a single
Vrf , but a Vrf can own multiple VF . A Vrf is responsible for starting and stopping VFs he owns
as well as verify their integrity. The Prv is responsible for providing a attestation proof about a VF
when requested by the Vrf . A Vrf can at any time choose to verify the state of a VF that it owns,
but the Prv should not be able to understand which container is being verified. A visualization of the
model is included in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Model overview.
The model consists of three protocols that together provide Configuration Integrity Verification
(CIV ):
1. Policy creation protocol
2. AK creation protocol
3. CIV of a VF protocol
The first protocol is used to create a TPM policy. The policy is created by the Vrf and is used to
verify the integrity of any VF owned by that Vrf , one at a time. This means there is not one separate
policy per VF , but one large policy that covers all VFs .
The second protocol is used to create an AK . The Vrf initializes this protocol by sending a policy
created by the first protocol to the Prv , which can use it to generate a new key from the EK on the
TPM and locking it with the policy. The public part of the AK is sent back to the Vrf who is able to
validate that it was created correctly.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Requirements & Assumptions
17
The third protocol carries out the actual CIV process. The Vrf initializes this protocol by pro-
viding the Prv with a nonce and information needed to satisfy the policy, but it does not leak actual
information about the VF being verified. If the Prv successfully satisfies the policy, it unlocks the AK
which is used to sign the nonce. The Vrf can validate this signature, in which case the VF is healthy.
As said above, the policy is designed to validate a single VF at a time, meaning the Vrf has to run
this protocol once for each VF it wishes to verify.
The Vrf maintains a database of expected configuration values for each VF it owns. It can use
this to create TPM policies that will run on the Prv TPM in order to verify the integrity of any VF
it owns. As a policy includes all the VFs owned by the Vrf , it is necessary to create a new policy
whenever a VF is removed or added, however if the Vrf is aware of changes to his VFs ahead of time
it can create the new policy in advance.
In order for the Vrf to create a policy, each VF is assigned one or more NV (Non-Volatile) indexes
to store configuration measurements and an id represented as a unique sequence of bits. The policy
is designed such that the NV indexes assigned to a VF must contain a correct value before it can be
satisfied. Because the policy only validates one VF at a time, it is only necessary that the set of NV
indexes assigned to some VF contains correct values, even if all the other NV indexes assigned to all
other VFs does not. Explained in another way, the policy works like a logical OR gate where each input
is the state of a VF , and only one needs to be healthy in order to return true (satisfy the policy). Even
though the policy is designed to only verify one VF at a time, it is designed in such a way that only
the Vrf knows which VF is being verified.
The above model is referred to as the Base model. As a result of limited time, it was necessary to
make the assumption that the Prv is trusted to collect configuration measurements, and that these
measurements can be trusted. Ideally the model should not rely on such assumption. In section 8 about
Future Development, different approaches are discussed on how to move trust away from the Prv , and
how the collection of configuration measurements can be done in a secure manner.
3.3
Requirements & Assumptions
The following requirements have been identified for the model:
R1 A Vrf can initiate the CIV process for a specific VF at any time: At any point in time
it should be possible for a Vrf to initiate the CIV process in order to verify the state of a chosen
VF it owns. The Vrf should receive an attestation proof can be validated to know the state of
the VF .
R2 Policies as well as AK ’s belonging to these policies, can be updated at any time: The
Vrf can at any point generate a new policy and request that the Prv creates a new AK for that
policy.
R3 Configuration measurement must remain private: It should not be possible for an Adv to
gain information about any VF configuration.
R4 Only the Vrf should not know which VF is being verified: During the CIV process, the
Prv or any other actor should not learn which VF is being verified. The Prv is allowed to know
that some VF is being verified, but not which exact one.
R5 Distinguish compromised and non-compromised VFs : The Vrf should be able to distin-
guish compromised and non-compromised VFs . That is, the CIV protocol should return proof
about a specific VF .
R6 An AK can’t be forged: When an AK is created, suﬀicient proof should be included such that
the AK can be trusted, and it is possible to know that it came from a trusted TPM.
==PAGE:24==
3.4 Threat Model
18
R7 Attestation signature can be trusted: The attestation certificate returned by the Prv to the
Vrf can be trusted. It should not be possible to forge a fake certificate.
R8 The CIV process must finish within reasonable time: If the Prv or a VF does not respond
within a set limited time. Failure to respond can be seen as a compromise.
R9 The policy can’t be compromised without detection: It should not be possible for an Adv
to manipulate or change the policy created by a Vrf without this being detected.
R10 A compromised VF should not leak any sensitive information about other VFs : If
an Adv compromises some VF , this should not help him gain useful knowledge on any other VFs
running on the same Prv .
In addition to the requirements, the model takes these assumptions:
A1 The Prv is trusted to collect configuration measurements: Configuration measurements
from a VF are securely placed in the TPM by the Prv .
A2 Configuration measurements can be trusted: Configuration measurements in the TPM is
trusted to be true. Section 8 discusses some approaches on how to achieve this.
A3 The Prv uses a user management system to distinguish different Vrf ’s: The Prv must
maintain a user access control system such that a Vrf can’t access a VF owned by another Vrf
.
A4 The EK is shared in advance: The Vrf knows the public part of the TPM Endorsement Key
(EK ).
A5 The EK can be trusted: The EK can be trusted to belong to the TPM and to not have been
revealed outside the TPM.
In section 5.1.4 a list describes how each requirement is achieved with the model.
3.4
Threat Model
In order to know if the model is secure, it is important to have a well defined threat model with
assumptions on what an Adv can and cannot do. The scope of threats include both external and
internal actors. An external actor is anyone who does not have a defined role in the system model, who
can attempt to attack the model at any point. Internal threats could be users with various level of
access to the host. The Vrf is considered trusted to not breach security of the VFs it manages.
An attack is successful if a malicious actor is capable of compromising a VF in a way that is not
detected by CIV process, or an attack on the CIV process itself such that it returns a false positive.
Privacy is considered to be breached if a malicious actor gains knowledge on the configuration of a VF
.
Availability attacks such as Denial of Service or any other attacks that interrupts service are not
considered, neither are attacks such as TOCTOU, which allows the attacker to change the behaviour of
a program in such a way that binaries stay the same or is otherwise undetectable by a tracer. Attack-
ers are also limited to the Dolev-Yao [DY83] model such that they can’t break cryptology by forging
signatures, reversing hashes or breaking encryption.
Section 6.1 contains a security analysis describing how a Adv is prevented from breaking any of the
requirements from the previous section.
Adv with the following limitations and capabilities are considered:
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Threat Model
19
Adv1 Manipulate communication between Vrf and Prv : An Adv can intercept and manipulate
communication between the Vrf and the Prv .
Adv2 Man-in-the-middle: An Adv can read any message sent between the Prv and the Vrf .
Adv3 TPM oracle access: A Adv have oracle access to issue any command to the TPM and see the
response.
Adv4 The Prv can become partly compromised: A malicious Prv can change any message sent
from the Vrf ...
Adv5 A Vrf is trusted to not reveal sensitive information on the VFs it owns: Scenarios
where a malicious Vrf reveals sensitive information about a VF it owns is not considered. It is
assumed that the Vrf is suﬀiciently secure to be trusted with the VFs it owns.
Adv6 The TOCTOU problem is not considered: As the TOCTOU problem is out of scope for
this project, it is assumed that the tracer installed on each VF is capable of preventing that type
of attack. Methods for how this could be achieved is discussed in [Nun+20].
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4
Building Blocks
4.1
Trusted Platform Module
A Trusted Platform Module (TPM) [ACG15] is a specialised piece of trusted hardware. A TPM pro-
vides a secure cryptographic processor and can be used to generate cryptographic keys, random numbers
and secure storage of sensitive data. In this paper only the TPM 2.0 is considered and not any older
generations such as the TPM 1.2 specification. Whenever a TPM and any features it got is mentioned,
this is specific for the TPM 2.0 and might differ on other TPM versions. A TPM is said to be tamper
evident, which makes it useful as a RoT in a system.
TPMs form the fundamental security of the model presented in this thesis. All of the three protocols
build on top of TPM security concepts, making it important to understand how a TPM provides security
in order to understand how the model presented in this thesis provides security. For each of the following
sections describing parts of how TPM works, a description will be included which explains how this
relates to the model.
4.1.1
Hierarchies
A TPM comes with three hierarchies: The Platform, Storage and Endorsement hierarchy [ACG15]. A
hierarchy is a collection of entities such as permanent objects, primary objects and keys that are all
managed as a group. The permanent objects are also known as the hierarchy handles. Hierarchies
function as trees, with primary objects at the root of the tree. Everything but the permanent hierarchy
handles can be erased from the TPM. Each hierarchy has a seed, also known as the cryptographic root,
which is a very large random number. This number is only used inside the TPM and is never revealed.
The seed is used to generate primary objects in that hierarchy which can, in turn, be used to generate
new objects, such as keys. All this operates in the tree structure, with each object being a node in the
tree that can be used to generate new objects. If a key/object is thought to be compromised, or needs
to be replaced for any other reason, the TPM can simply generate a new primary object. Since the seed
of the hierarchy is never revealed, it is not possible to learn anything about the new primary object,
even if the old one was compromised.
Objects can be both volatile and non-volatile. Since the TPM can be used to generate any number
of primary keys, it would be impractical to store them on the TPM since storage is limited. Instead
it is possible to regenerate a primary key. The same seed and key properties will always result in the
same key. When a TPM loads a key, it regenerates it instead of loading it from storage. This process
also ensures that the key has actually originated from the TPM itself, since it would be impossible for
a malicious used to create a fake key accepted by the TPM due to the seed being secret.
Each of the three hierarchies have independent authorization, and as a result can have different
and separate administration. The following subsections describe each of the three hierarchies and their
intended use cases. In this project, only the Endorsement hierarchy is used, as it is intended for privacy
concerned user applications.
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
21
4.1.1.1
Platform hierarchy
The platform hierarchy is under control of the platform manufacturer. One of the primary uses is to
ensure secure boot up. This hierarchy is unique in that it authorization values are entered by platform
firmware and not humans / user level applications [ACG15]. At reboot the authorization value is reset.
This allows the platform firmware to set its own authorization value and optionally a policy as well.
4.1.1.2
Storage hierarchy
The storage hierarchy is designed for the owner of the platform. Depending on context, this could be
the IT department of a company, or the end user of a home PC. This hierarchy is not meant for privacy
related operations. It can be disabled by the owner if not needed, and will not affect the other hierarchy
if disabled. The policy and authorization value of this hierarchy persists between reboot and is meant
to be set for an extended amount of time, and only changed when necessary.
4.1.1.3
Endorsement hierarchy
The endorsement hierarchy is meant for privacy related operations. Primary keys in this hierarchy
can be both encryption and signing keys. Keys can be correlated back to a single TPM which means
creating and certifying them are privacy preserving.
4.1.2
Keys
Keys play an important role in how a TPM is used to provide security. A TPM can generate both
symmetric and asymmetric keys using a wide range of different encryption algorithms. All keys originate,
directly or indirectly, from one of the hierarchy seeds. As described in the previous section, a hierarchy
functions as a tree, with the hierarchy seed as the cryptographic root. Primary objects or keys can be
generated from the seed, and new keys can be generated from the primary object/key. Figure 4.1 shows
a small example of this with the hierarchy seed on top which is used to generate a primary key, which
is then used to generate two secondary keys.
Hierarchy seeds are never revealed outside a TPM, meaning a key created using this seed can be
proven to belong to a TPM. The model designed in this thesis uses the Endorsement Key (EK ) which
belongs to the Endorsement hierarchy. The private part of this key is known only to the TPM, making
it impossible for an attacker to forge it. Because of this, all signatures and encryptions made using the
EK can be trusted to come from a TPM.
Specifically in this project, the model relies on an Endoresement Key (EK ) and an Attestation Key
(AK ). Since an EK can be trusted to belong to a TPM, this trust also carries over to secondary keys
generated by the EK such as an AK . This can be used together with policies (described below) as a
proof that certain conditions have been met. In fact, signatures made by an AK is how attestation
proofs are generated by the model. Section 5.1.1.2 details how the TPM is used to generate an AK ,
and section 5.1.1.3 details how the AK is used to generate an attestation proof.
4.1.3
Platform Configuration Register
A Platform Configuration Register (PCR) is a type of storage on the TPM. Typically a TPM has 24
PCRs [TCG16a] but this number can vary depending on the manufacturer and system needs. A PCR
is configured to use a hash algorithm, and the length of storage in bits correspond to the output size of
the used hash algorithm. A PCR is always initialized/reset to all 0s of F’s (hex value). There are only
two functions which can be applied to a PCR. It can be reset, or it can be extended. Resetting simply
resets all bits back to either 0s of Fs, while extending a PCR takes the current value and concatenates
a new value specified by the user. This new string is then hashed and the output is set as the new
PCR value. This means that it is not possible to set the bits in a PCR to a specific value, neither is
it feasible to learn the input value since hash functions are one-way. The extend function can formally
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
22
Figure 4.1: Visualization showing the key tree structure in a TPM hierarchy. Here the seed is used
to generate the primary key that has been used to generate both key1 and key2.
be described as PCRi = hash(PCRi||m) where m is the message being extended on the PCR and || is
the concatenation operator between the left and right side.
One of the main uses of PCRs is to provide boot-up attestation of a system [ACG15]. This typically
begins with a piece of software called the Core Root of Trust Measurement (CRTM) which is responsible
for measuring the hash of the next software running on the system and adding it to a PCR using the
extend command. This will often be the BIOS. The BIOS (or any other software that is loaded after
the CRTM) then measures the next software that will run on the system, which could be the Master
Boot Record (MRB). Just as the CRTM, the BIOS calculates the hash and extends it on a PCR. This
continues all the way through the boot-up sequence. This creates a log or history of measurements of
the system boot-up. Since the only way to change a PCR is using the extend command, it is not pos-
sible for a malicious actor to add a fake/desired value into a PCR. This effectively creates a chain of trust
(cot)thatcanbeusedtoverifythatthesystemisinacorrectstate.Sinceeachpieceofsoftwareisresponsibleformeasuringtheh
upthatsoftwareinanincorrectstatewasloaded.Ofcourse, thisalldependsontheCRTMbeingtrusted, astheCRTMitselfis
A typical TPM got the following PCR allocation [ACG15]:
• PCR 0: BIOS
• PCR 1: BIOS Configuration
• PCR 2: Option ROMs
• PCR 3: Option ROM configuration
• PCR 4: MBR
• PCR 5: MBR configuration
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
23
• PCR 6: State transitions and wake events
• PCR 7: Platform manufacturer specific measurements
• PCR 8-15: Static operating system
• PCR 16: Debug
• PCR 23: Application support
A TPM may set aside some amount of PCRs for user applications, but this depends on the system
setup and manufacturer specifications.
4.1.4
NV Index
As described in the previous section, PCRs are great for storing hash values that can’t be changed,
however the number of PCRs are very limited. Fortunately a TPM have another way of storing data,
called NV indexes (Non-Volatile Indexes). A NV Index is basically a data container that can be con-
figured in a number of ways. For this project it was decided to use NV indexes instead of PCRs. In
a real world scenario, it is realistic to assume that a system will host many different VFs , which may
each require several different configuration measurements to be collected. This makes the use of NV
indexes essential as there simply are not enough available PCRs to satisfy this demand. NV indexes are
a central part of the TPM policy designed for this model, which is described in detail in section 5.1.1.1
There are no NV indexes defined by default, which leaves it up to users to define and configure them
for their specific needs. The possible configuration options includes but is not limited to [TCG16b]:
• Size in bytes
• Type: Regular, Extend, Bits
• Authentication: Hierarchy, Password, Policy
• Attributes which provides fined-grained control of the NV index
There are three main types of NV Indexes. The regular type can be freely written to if a user have
the correct authentication. This also includes writing to only some bytes of the index, such as writing
to only the first 2 bytes of a 4 byte long index. A index of the extend type effectively makes the index
function as a PCR. It restricts writing to use the extend method that works the same way as for PCRs,
making it impossible to write a specific value, or change the current one.
NV indexes can be authenticated in a number of ways. They can require the user to have access to
a specific hierarchy, they can require a password or they can require a policy. Authentication can also
be any mix of those.
Since the number of PCRs in a TPM is quite limited, and only a few may be reserved for user
applications, it makes it diﬀicult to rely on them for storage. Instead a NV index can be configured
to act the same way as a PCR, effectively increasing the number of PCRs on the TPM. The TPM
specification [TCG20] states that a TPM must have a minimum of 3834 bytes of NV storage. This
storage size allows for significantly more NV indexes compared to available, non-reserved PCRs. The
size of a NV extend index depends on the hash algorithm used. By default this is the sha256 algorithm,
but any support hash algorithm on the TPM can be used. As the name implies, sha256 has an output
size of 256 bits or 32 bytes, meaning NV extend indexes using that hash algorithm also takes up 32
bytes of storage.
==PAGE:30==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
24
4.1.5
Policy
A TPM policy is a way of protecting objects until certain conditions are met. This could be used to lock
an encryption key and only unlock it if the TPM is in a certain state. Policies are extremely versatile
and can be designed in both simple and very complex ways. The most simple type of policies are called
assertion policies and require a condition to be true in order to be satisfied. This could be requiring
a PCR or NV index to contain a certain value, requiring a password or requiring a NV index to have
been written exactly once. Each of these conditions can be chained together to create complex policies,
requiring any number of conditions to be met in order to be satisfied. This functions in a logical AND
fashion where each input needs to be true. Policies can also make use of logical OR statements, such
that only one of several input conditions needs to be met in order to satisfy the policy. These type of
policies are known as compound policies. For instance it could require that either a password is used
or a PCR have a certain value [TCG16a].
This project uses a nested compound policy as the base of attestation. Section 5.1.1.1 details how
this policy is created. On a high level, the designed policy is used to verify the integrity of any number
of VFs , while being able to distinguish compromised and non-compromised VFs . It relies on storing
configuration measurements collected from various VFs in NV indexes, such that the policy is only
satisfied if the stored values correspond to some trusted value.
Policies are created using TPM commands. The following are available and can be used in any
number and order. The description of each command comes from [TCG16c]:
• PolicySigned: This command includes a signed authorization in a policy. The command ties
the policy to a signing key by including the Name of the signing key in the policyDigest
• PolicySecret: This command includes a secret-based authorization to a policy. The caller proves
knowledge of the secret value using an authorization session using the authValue associated with
authHandle.
• PolicyTicket: This command is similar to PolicySigned except that it takes a ticket instead of a
signed authorization. The ticket represents a validated authorization that had an expiration time
associated with it.
• PolicyOR: This command allows options in authorizations without requiring that the TPM
evaluate all of the options. If a policy may be satisfied by different sets of conditions, the TPM
need only evaluate one set that satisfies the policy. This command will indicate that one of the
required sets of conditions has been satisfied.
• PolicyPCR: This command is used to cause conditional gating of a policy based on PCR.
• PolicyLocality: This command indicates that the authorization will be limited to a specific
locality.
• PolicyNV: This command is used to cause conditional gating of a policy based on the contents
of an NV Index. It is an immediate assertion. The NV index is validated during the PolicyNV
command, not when the session is used for authorization.
• PolicyCommandCode: This command indicates that the authorization will be limited to a
specific command code.
• PolicyPhysicalPresence: This command indicates that physical presence will need to be as-
serted at the time the authorization is performed.
• PolicyCpHash: This command is used to allow a policy to be bound to a specific command and
command parameters.
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
25
• PolicyNameHash: This command allows a policy to be bound to a specific set of TPM entities
without being bound to the parameters of the command.
• PolicyDuplicationSelect: This command allows qualification of duplication to allow duplication
to a selected new parent.
• PolicyAuthorize: This command allows policies to change. If a policy were static, then it would
be diﬀicult to add users to a policy. This command lets a policy authority sign a new policy so
that it may be used in an existing policy.
• PolicyAuthValue: This command allows a policy to be bound to the authorization value of the
authorized entity
• PolicyPassword: This command allows a policy to be bound to the authorization value of the
authorized object.
• PolicyGetDigest: This command returns the current policyDigest of the session. This command
allows the TPM to be used to perform the actions required to pre-compute the authPolicy for an
object.
• PolicyNvWritten: This command allows a policy to be bound to the TPMA_NV_WRITTEN
attributes. This is a deferred assertion.
• PolicyTemplate: This command allows a policy to be bound to a specific creation template.
• PolicyAuthorizeNV: This command provides a capability that is the equivalent of a revocable
policy. With PolicyAuthorize, the authorization ticket never expires, so the authorization may
not be withdrawn. With this command, the approved policy is kept in an NV Index location so
that the policy may be changed as needed to render the old policy unusable.
On a technical level, a policy is simply a hash digest [TCG16b]. When a new condition is added to
the policy, the hash digest of the corresponding policy command and parameters are extended on the
current policy digest in a similar way to the PCR extend command. Since the hashes are calculated
and handled inside the TPM, it is impossible for a malicious user to satisfy the policy without setting
the TPM to the correct state. An important point is that policies are deterministic, meaning the same
policy commands with the same parameters will always return an identical hash digest. In fact, the
TPM relies on this to satisfy policies. In order to satisfy a policy, the user has to provide the same
sequence of policy commands as was used to create the policy, since this is the only way to recreate
the same final hash digest. As a policy is a hash digest, it is not necessary to keep it secret. It is not
feasible for an Adv to reverse a hash value to learn which commands or parameters was used to create
it.
When using the PolicyNV or PolicyPCR command, the index as well as creation attributes in the
case of NV indexes are also included in the policy. This is done to prevent an attacker from defining a
new NV with some other type of authorization and inserting the expected value in that index. Another
interesting note is that the PolicyOR command can at most take 8 different inputs. However they can
be chained, for instance if you have 16 inputs, you can input the first 8 in one PolicyOR command and
the second 8 in another PolicyOR command and finally input these two in a third PolicyOR command.
This effectively allows for unlimited inputs by nesting the PolicyOR commands.
Policies are not only capable of verifying the state of the TPM, but also third-party devices such
as finger-print scanners, smart cards and other biometric devices. This can be used in a compound
policy to create multi-factor authentication schemes, or to require different people to present different
types of authentication to satisfy a policy. [ACG15] have a great visualization showcasing this, which
is included in figure 4.2. This example have 3 actors: Dave, Sally and IT. Dave can authenticate in two
ways using either a password and fingerprint or password and smart card. Sally needs a smart card and
iris scanner while IT needs a duplicate, smart card and PCR 0 to 5 in the TPM to contain the correct
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
26
value. It should also be noted that the password used by Dave in the two different scenarios does not
have to be the same. If needed it could be two different passwords.
4.1.6
Sessions
Sessions are another important TPM concept, mainly used for authorization, but which also have other
purposes. Sessions are either stateless or statefull and can be both encrypted and un-encrypted. There
are 3 types of sessions available for authorization: Password sessions, HMAC sessions and policy ses-
sions. In the model designed in this thesis, sessions are used both to create the policy as described in
section 5.1.1.1, and to provide Configuration Integrity Verification (CIV ) as described in section 5.1.1.3.
Password sessions are the most simple of the 3 available types. In this session a clear text password
is passed to the TPM in order to create a secure channel. This method is only intended for local use,
since doing this remotely risks revealing the password. In this type of session there is not state, so a
password have to be submitted for each command.
HMAC sessions are a little more advanced. This session is similar to the TLS protocol as the caller
and TPM agrees on a password to create a secure channel. This session is statefull, so the password is
agreed on in the beginning and used for the lifetime of the session. Both the caller and the TPM also
makes use of nonces to prevent replay attacks. This is achieved in a number of steps. First the caller
computes a password and sends it to the TPM in encrypted form. The caller does this by calculating
the HMAC and inserting it into the byte stream to the TPM. The TPM can then check if the HMAC
is calculated correctly, and then calculate a HMAC on the response and send back to the caller. The
caller manually calculates the expected HMAC response and compares to the received value from the
TPM. If the two match, the caller knows that the data can be trusted.
Policy sessions are the final type of authorization session. They built on top of HMAC sessions in
order to provide additional security. They are also knows as Enhanced Authorization. I mentioned in
the previous section about policies, that they can be used to lock objects such as keys. This is true, but
a policy alone is not enough to unlock the object. In order to do so a policy session is needed. In this
type of session, the target policy is basically re-created (in order to end up with the same hash value).
The session keeps track of the commands used in order to calculate the different steps of the policy,
Figure 4.2: Compound Policy from [ACG15] - figure 14-5.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
27
thus recreating it. If the policy is satisfied or in other words, recreated successfully, the locked object
is unlocked.
Sessions are not only used for authorization. One other use-case is creating policies. This type of
session is called a trial session. Similar to when a session is used to satisfy a policy, a trial session keeps
track of the commands used when creating a new policy. It should be noted that a policy does not
contain any specific elements from the TPM it is created on, so it is entirely possible to create a policy
on one TPM and use it on another. Technically it is also possible to create a policy manually without
a TPM, but this would be very error prone.
Figure 4.3 shows a visualization of the authorization and session area in a TPM, taken from [ACG15].
As the figure shows, sessions and authorizations are greatly overlapping, which is why some literature
uses the terms interchangeably.
4.1.7
Access Broker and Resource Manager
The TPM Access Broker (TAB) is a system used to control access to the TPM. A system typically only
have a single TPM installed, but multiple processes might be trying to use the TPM at the same time.
To avoid issues, the TAB is responsible for organizing TPM requests from various processes, such that
only one request is processed at a time. The TAB is also responsible for managing ownership of sessions
and objects so only processes that own a session or object can access it [ACG15].
The resource manager (RM) is responsible for managing TPM resources. This is done similar to a
virtual memory manager in a modern OS. A TPM have very limited physical memory, which makes
Figure 4.3: Authorization and session diagram from [ACG15].
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
28
it essential to have a proper resource manager that swaps in sessions, objects and sequences to allow
different commands to be executed on the TPM. When a process request a TPM command to be exe-
cuted, the RM determines which resources is needed to execute the command. It frees up the needed
space on the TPM and loads the resources [ACG15].
Typically the TAB and RM is built together in a single module. There can only be a single TAB/RM
per TPM, but it is possible to share a TAB/RM between multiple TPMs. In such a scenario, it is
important that the TAB/RM is capable of distinguishing between objects belonging to each TPM. It is
not a strict requirement to use a TAB/RM, but it is recommended in systems where multiple processes
might try to access the TPM. A single threaded application does not the TAB/RM layer, but in that
case it have to manually load the correct resources into the TPM before executing a command.
4.1.8
TPM types
There are three main TPM types: Hardware TPM, software TPM (sTPM) and virtual TPM (vTPM)
[MGC18]. The hardware TPM is the most common, and most secure option. As it is physical it can
rely on tamper-evident hardware which makes it more diﬀicult for a malicious actor to break in. On
the other side is the software TPM which is implemented exclusively in software and relies on a Trusted
Execution Environment to stay secure. The virtual TPM exist somewhere in the middle between the
hardware TPM and sTPM. A vTPM is intended to be used with virtual machines. It roots its security
in a hardware TPM on the host, in order to provide more security than a sTPM.
A software TPM does not rely on any specific piece of hardware, making it very easy to install. This
makes it ideal for prototyping application as a demo project can be set up much faster compared to
when a hardware TPM is used. A sTPM is also less ”dangerous” to use, as you don’t risk locking up
the system if boot-up attestation is enabled and some configuration is accidentally changed. A sTPM
emulator is trivial to reset, meaning mistakes during development will not have any significant impact.
Outside of emulating a hardware TPM for prototyping, a sTPM can be implemented in a Trusted Exe-
cution Environment (TEE) to provide similar security compared to a hardware TPM [MGC18]. Since
a sTPM exist only in software, it have to rely on the host device for storage. Some TEEs are configured
with a key, that the sTPM can use to limit which applications have access to its storage. A sTPM
can be implemented in different ways, but it is common to make use existing, well tested cryptographic
libraries such as OpenSSL. Random number generation can make use of different resources available to
the host, such as cpu specific instructions, or methods built into the TEE or OS.
In this project it was not possible to get access to a hardware TPM, meaning the model is tested
and implemented using a software TPM. A sTPM is indented to work the same way as a hardware
TPM meaning the model design should work identical if used on a hardware TPM instead of a sTPM.
Some small details might still need to be considered when moving the model and implementation from
sTPM to hardware TPM, but overall design remains the same.
An important question that remains unanswered is how exactly the EK work on a vTPM, or more
precisely on several vTPM. Do several vTPM with the same hardware TPM root share a EK or is it
unique for each vTPM. According to [VMw] the EK is created by a third-party certificate authority
and is unique, but it is unclear if that is only the case for vTPMs on vmware virtual machines or if
this is the case in general. The reason this question is important to answer is because secondary keys
are created using the EK . This means that if several vTPMs share the same EK , then they can also
create identical secondary keys which could cause a security or privacy issue.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Model
5.1
System Model in Detail
The model developed during this project is described in this chapter. As mentioned in the problem
statement, time ran out before the model could be completely finalized. Because of this it was necessary
to make the assumption that the Prv is trusted to securely collect configuration measurements. In the
following sections the ”base model” is presented which uses this assumption. In section 8 in the chapter
on Future Development, ideas and suggestions are discussed on how the Prv can be trusted to collect
measurements securely, and how this can be done in alternative ways.
It should also be noted that it was not possible to get a physical hardware TPM for testing. Instead
a software TPM by IBM [Gol], and a TSS implementation, as well as, TPM command-line tools by
[Fuc] have been used. Because of this some implementation details might need to be altered to work
on a physical TPM, however the overall structure will remain the same. It was also not possible to
get the chance to investigate how a virtual TPM interacts with a physical TPM, but this issue will be
described in detail later in section 8. All the TPM commands used are prefixed with ’TPM2_’, for
instance ’TPM2_NVDefine’. For the sake of better overview, the prefix part is omitted.
5.1.1
Base Model
The base model consists of two main actors: The prover (Prv ) acting as host and the verifier (Vrf )
acting as an orchestrator. The Vrf owns one or more virtual functions (VF ) running on the Prv ,
which is configured with a TPM to provide Remote Attestation (RA). In order to provide Configuration
Integrity Verification (CIV ), three protocols have been designed, that together make up the model:
1. Policy creation protocol: This protocol is designed to create a TPM policy used to provide
integrity verification of any VFs owned by a Vrf .
2. AK creation protocol: This protocol is designed to create an Attestation Key (AK ) and
locking it with a policy created in the above protocol.
3. CIV protocol: This protocol is designed to carry out the Configuration Integrity Verification
(CIV ) process in order to provide the Vrf with an attestation proof about the state of a VF .
The first protocol creates a complex nested TPM compound policy using two layers of the PolicyOR
structure, that can provide CIV of any VFs owned by the Vrf , one at a time. The Vrf maintains
a database of expected values for each VF it owns. It is also responsible for updating this database
accordingly when a VF is patched or updated. The Vrf uses the reference database to create a policy
which requires storage on the TPM to contain correct configuration measurement values in order to be
satisfied. In addition to requiring the configuration measurements to be correct, each VF is assigned
a unique bit sequence. This bit sequence acts as a VF ID, but it is randomly generated and does not
contain any sensitive information about the VF .
Configuration measurements are collected using a runtime tracer installed on each VF . The tracer
is capable of collecting measurements during both boot-up and runtime. Measurements collected by the
tracer should include statistical information, performance analysis, dynamic kernel or application debug
information, as well as general system audits. Implementing a tracer is out of scope for this project.
==PAGE:36==
5.1 System Model in Detail
30
[LDG] presents two ways such a tracer could work. The first is a binary analyzer that can collect and
compute the hashes of binary data. The second is a kernel-based tracer that can use execution hooks
to monitor code. This option builds on top of IBMs IMA. As described in the IMA section 2.2, this
can be configured in many different ways using IMA policies (not to be confused with TPM policies),
in order to give the user fine-grained control over what is collected.
While IMA does a good job of collecting measurements, it still needs to be modified before it can
be used as a tracer in this project. IMA collects and stores all collected measurements in a single file
which is a breach of privacy, since everyone with access to that file will be able to see the configuration
of everything that the IMA have measured. It would mean that the configurations of all VFs running
on the system would be exposed which is strictly against the requirements of the model.
Figure 5.1: Model steps.
Instead of using PCRs which is the common solution for storing configuration measurements when
doing attestation using a TPM, NV indexes are used. As explained in section 4.1.4 they can be setup
to work the same way as PCRs, but it is possible to have a lot more of them compared to the number
of available PCRs. Each VF will be assigned one or more NV indexes to store the configuration digests.
Depending on the VFs needs, the number of NV indexes will change, but no limit is set for the upper
amount of NV indexes a single VF can use, except for the physical storage capacity of the TPM. In
addition to the NV indexes reserved for each VF , a single NV index is reserved to hold one of the
unique bit sequences assigned to a VF . This will be used in the policy to uniquely identify which VF
is being verified.
The second protocol is used to create an Attestation Key (AK ). An AK is locked by a policy and
is used to provide attestation evidence in the third protocol. When the Vrf has created a new policy,
it needs to request a new AK from the Prv , but it can also request a new AK to replace the one used
by an existing policy. To do this, the Vrf simply provides the Prv with the policy created by the
first protocol. The Prv can then generate a new AK locked by that policy and send it back. This also
includes a creation ticket signed by the TPM Endorsement Key (EK ) that can be used by the Vrf to
validate that the new AK was correctly created.
The third protocol is used to verify the integrity of one VF at a time. To verify a VF , the Vrf
generates a nonce to ensure freshness, and sends it along with the indexes and the unique bit sequence
belonging to that VF . The Prv uses this information to satisfy the policy which unlocks the AK . It
can then sign the nonce and send it back to the Vrf , which can validate the signature. The Vrf is
capable of distinguishing between a compromised and non-compromised VF , so it can take action to
==PAGE:37==
5.1 System Model in Detail
31
only replace a compromised one, and not all.
To preserve privacy, the model is designed to never send the configuration measurements in any
readable form, instead these values are built into the policy which is run on the Prv , meaning the
collected measurements never have to leave the Prv . This has the advantage of making it more diﬀicult
for an Adv to get access to these values, as the Adv would need to compromise either the Prv or Vrf
to see them. A Vrf sends the policy to the Prv to be used in the TPM, but since a policy is a hash
digest, it is not feasible for an Adv to reverse it in order to discover the expected configuration values,
even if the Adv eavesdrop on the communication between Vrf and Prv and captures the policy.
This type of attestation is also known as attestation by proof. It is different from attestation by
quote where the actual configuration hash values would be sent back to the Vrf to be verified. In a
system doing attestation by quote, it is important to ensure that the measurements are properly secured
such that they can’t be manipulated by an Adv .
Figure 5.1 shows a visualization of the different steps taken by the model. The different steps are
described at a high level as:
1. Generate policy: The Vrf generates a policy P based on a database of expected configuration
measurements.
2. Send policy: The Vrf sends the newly created policy P to the Prv , requesting a new AK
based on the policy.
3. Generate AK : The Prv generates a new key AK based on P, such that P has to be satisfied
to unlock it.
4. Send AK : The Prv sends the AK along with a signed creation certificate back to the Vrf .
5. Verify AK : The Vrf verifies the AK , to ensure the expected policy has been used to create it.
6. Send attestation request: When the Vrf wishes to verify the integrity of a VF , it sends a
attestation request to the Prv . The request includes a challenge.
7. Generate proof: The Prv satisfies the policy and unlocks the AK . It then signs the challenge
which acts as a proof.
8. Send proof: The Prv sends the proof back to the Vrf .
9. Verify proof: Finally the Vrf validates the proof. If it is not successfully validated the VF is
detected to be compromised.
The Vrf keeps track of which NV indexes belong to each VF as well as which values are ex-
pected.
This is denoted as V F = {vf1, vf2, ..., vfn}.
Each VF vfi contains a list of information
vfi = (bsq, I, V, state, EKpub, AKpub) where bsq is the unique bit sequence associated with the VF , I is
the set of NV indexes belonging to the VF , V is the set of expected values per NV index, state denoted
if the VF is trusted or not and finally EKpub and AKpub are the public parts of the endorsement and
attestation key respectively. I is defined as I = nv1, nv2, ..., nvm where m is the number of NV indexes.
The set of expected values per NV index is defined as V = v1, v2, ..., vm where m is the number of NV
indexes and each vi is a set of values expected for the NV index nvi. Of course, the number of items in
I and V must be the same, since each item in V is the set of expected values for one of the NV indexes
in I.
==PAGE:38==
5.1 System Model in Detail
32
5.1.1.1
Policy creation
The policy is the base of the CIV process, used to unlock the AK when the TPM is in a specific state
representing a non-compromised VF . The Vrf uses a reference database to create a single large policy
that is capable of verifying any of the VFs it owns. The policy is designed as a compound policy such
that it will be satisfied if any VF is in a correct state. That means it only needs a single VF to be in a
correct state to be satisfied. The reason for this is that the policy is designed to verify a single VF at
a time, but done in a way that does not reveal which VF is being verified.
In order to know if a VF is in a correct state, their configuration measurements (hash digests), are
stored in NV indexes on the Prv TPM. Each VF is assigned a number of NV indexes to store it’s
configuration measurements. Furthermore an extra NV index is reserved to store one of the unique bit
sequences belonging to a VF , which is call the NV bits index. The policy is designed such that it can
only be satisfied if the NV indexes belonging to some VF , all contain a correct value while it is also
true that the NV bits index contains the unique bit sequence belonging to that VF . More specifically,
the policy won’t be satisfied if the NV bits index contains the sequence of one VF , unless the NV
indexes belong to that VF contain correct values, even if the NV indexes of some other VF do contain
correct values.
In addition to assigning one or more NV indexes to each VF , each NV index is also allowed to
have more than one correct value. Due to the nature of binaries, it is possible they can have different
states which will produce different hash digests. This needs to be accounted for, which is why each NV
index is allowed to have several different correct values. In order to do this, the Vrf creates compound
sub-policies for each VF . Each of these sub-policies uses a logical OR structure to allow each NV
index to have multiple correct values. Each sub-policy representing one VF is collected to form the full
policy. As said above, the policy is designed such that it only needs a single VF to be verified in order
to be satisfied. To explain it differently, if a single sub-policy is satisfied, then the full policy is satisfied.
Figure 5.2 shows a visualization of the policy. In the figure, the policy contain three containers/VFs
, which have each been assigned two NV indexes. Each of these containers represents a sub-policy. Also
take note of the single NV bits index. The policy is satisfied by first checking the contents of the NV
bits index and then checking the contents of NV indexes belonging to one of the three VFs . Eg. if
the Vrf wants to verify container 1, then the NV bits index must contain the bit sequence assigned
to container 1 and the NV indexes belonging to container 1 (NV1NV2 on the figure) must contain a
correct value (NV1 = a|NV1 = bNV2 = c|NV2 = d).
Since the policy only requires a single VF to be in a correct state to be satisfied, this only proves
that some VF is in a correct state. In order to understand which VF was verified, it is required to
know which bit sequence was in the NV bits index at attestation time, and which VF this bit sequence
belongs to. Since only the Vrf knows which bit sequence belongs to each VF , it is not possible for
other actors to learn which VF was verified. However, one issue still remains: The TPM is installed on
the Prv and the Vrf does not have access to read the NV bits index, meaning that there needs to be
some way for the Prv to prove which bit sequence was present in the NV bits index during attestation
time, such that the Vrf has proof of which VF was verified. A signature alone is not enough, since
that only proves that some VF was verified.
In order to prove this, the NV bits index is actually split up into two parts. The first part is used
to hold a nonce sent by the Vrf , and the second part is used to hold the unique bit sequence for the
given VF . When the policy is satisfied, the AK is used to sign and certify the contents of the NV bits
index, which is sent back to the Vrf . Since the signature includes both the nonce and bit sequence,
freshness is ensured and the Vrf knows which container was verified. This is described in more detail
in section 5.1.1.3.
Figure 5.3 shows the protocol implementing the policy.
The top part of the protocol which is
surrounded by a dotted box with the label ”one time only” is only run the first time the protocol is run.
==PAGE:39==
5.1 System Model in Detail
33
Figure 5.2: Policy Overview show an example with three VFs .
This simply reserves the NV bits index. The rest of the protocol creates the sub-policy for verifying
a single VF , and is run once for each VF owned by the Vrf . After the protocol has been run for
each VF , a second protocol is run which combines the individual sub policies for each VF in a final
complete policy.
The policy covers all VFs owned by a Vrf , which means it needs to be re-created every time a VF
is removed or added. The Vrf can generate the policy ahead of time if it knows in advance when a VF
is removed or added. A policy does not expire and does not contain any secrets, meaning they can be
stored without security concerns. The Vrf might wish to change the AK , but this does not require
the policy to be remade, in fact since a policy is the hash value of a series of commands, regenerating
it with the same VFs and indexes will create the exact same policy. The policy is used to lock a key,
but as there is no limit to the amount of keys that a policy can lock, the Vrf can simply request to
run the protocol for creating a new AK as detailed in the next section.
Figure 5.4 shows how the structure with multiple NV indexes, which allows multiple correct values,
is designed. In this example three indexes are used. The first (NV 1) has two expected values (’a’ or
’b’), the second (NV 2) has three expected values (’c’, ’d’ or ’e’) and the last (NV 3) has two expected
values (’f’ or ’g’). Starting from the root and traversing the tree to each root will give all possible
combinations. Each of these combinations are then collected as input to a policyOR and represent the
final sub-policy for a VF .
The first container/VF found in figure 5.3 is used to give an example. This VF got 2 NV indexes,
each with 2 expected values.
Container1 in the figure is denoted as vf1 such that vf1 = (bsq =′
0001′, I = {1, 2}, V = {v1 = {a, b}, v2 = {c, d}}, true, EKpub, AKpub).
==PAGE:40==
5.1 System Model in Detail
34
Figure 5.3: Policy creation protocol.
Figure 5.4: Sub-Policy structure. Each level of the tree represents one NV index and each branch
represents a possible value for that NV index..
To create the policy as shown in figure 5.3, all combinations of V are needed. In the example above
this would be d = (′ac′,′ ad′,′ bc′,′ bd′)
When satisfying the policy, the Prv will not find out which VF is being verified, only that one of
them is. It also won’t learn which NV indexes or bit sequence belong to a specific VF , only which
NV indexes and bit sequence belong together. The same goes for any malicious actor who is capable of
eavesdropping on the communication between the Vrf and the Prv . A malicious actor will not learn
anything about the configuration of the VF being verified either, since all the measurements stay in
the TPM and never leave the Prv .
In the following example the series of commands are demonstrated to create the policy designed for
==PAGE:41==
5.1 System Model in Detail
35
a simple VF . Lets use the simple VF from the example above. It needs two NV indexes, 1 and 2. Each
index has two expected values, resulting in 4 different combinations.
Define and write bit sequence to NV bits index
NV Define(index = 0, size = 1)
NV Write(index = 0, data =′ 0001′)
Define and write data to VF NV indexes
NV Define(index = 1, attributes =′ extend′)
NV Define(index = 2, attributes =′ extend′)
NV Extend(index = 1, data =′ a′)
NV Extend(index = 2, data =′ c′)
Create policy by reading contents of NV indexes in sequence
StartAuthSession(type = trial −session)
PolicyNV (index = 0)
PolicyNV (index = 1)
pi = PolicyNV (index = 2)
NVDefine is used to define a new NV index with a specific index number, size or attributes. The size
of an extend type NV index is static and can’t be changed. NVWrite is used to write data to a regular
type NV index, in this case writing the unique bit sequence to the NV bits index. NVExtend is used to
run the extend command on the chosen NV Index that has the extend type. Finally PolicyNV is used
to add the value of a NV index to a policy. This chain of commands is repeated 4 times, once for each
of the 4 combinations. The only difference is the NVExtend commands will write (a, c), (a, d), (b, c)
and (b, d) respectively. The set of output policies will be numbered 1 to 4, P = {p1, p2, p3, p4}. These 4
policies each represent the different set of states the NV indexes can be in to consider the VF healthy.
In order to create the compound policy containing each of these 4 sub policies, the following commands
are used:
Create compound policy by inputting each of the 4 sub policies
StartAuthSession(type = trial −session)
por = PolicyOR(policyList = (p1, p2, p3, p4))
The compound policy for the VF is created by running each of the 4 sub policies through a PolicyOR
command. This set of TPM commands have now created the policy for verifying the integrity of a
single VF . This process is repeated for each VF in the system. Finally each of the policies for each VF
is run though a final PolicyOR to give the complete policy.
5.1.1.2
AK creation
The AK is used to sign a proof used by the Vrf to know whether a VF is compromised or not. It is
essential that the AK can be trusted, as security can not be guaranteed otherwise. In order to create an
AK , the Vrf must first generate a policy. It can then initialize the protocol to create a AK , which can
be seen in figure 5.5. The Vrf initializes the protocol by sending the policy POR to the Prv . The Prv
takes this protocol, and uses it to create an AK , by loading the EK , and generating a new secondary
key using the EK while locking it with the policy. The Create TPM command used to generate the key
==PAGE:42==
5.1 System Model in Detail
36
Figure 5.5: AK creation protocol.
also outputs a creation ticket which contains details about the key, such as which policy was used. The
Prv then calls the CertifyCreation command, which signs the ticket using the EK . Finally it sends the
public part of the AK , the ticket and the ticket signature back to the Vrf . This allows the Vrf to
validate that the key has been correctly created using the expected policy.
The AK is locked to a single policy, but a policy can lock any number of AK . For security purposes,
the AK should only have a limited lifetime, and be replaced periodically. If the policy is updated, the
AK has to be replaced, but in the scenario where a policy stays the same for a long time, the Vrf
should make sure to begin the key creation process after a set amount of time.
Depending on the needs, this can be done after each integrity verification. This would increase
security as an AK would only be used for a single VF , but increase overhead, since a new key has to
be created every time. Unlike the protocol for policy creation and integrity verification, this protocol is
static and always requires the same number of commands, no matter the number of VFs in the system.
These commands are:
Load endorsement key
Load(EK )
Create attestation key using policy
Create(por)
Load AK and certify it’s creation
Load(AK )
CertifyCreation(AK )
==PAGE:43==
5.1 System Model in Detail
37
The load command, as the name implies, is used to load a key into the TPM. The first step is loading
the EK . This key is a primary object and is used as a ’seed’ along other properties to generate a
secondary object, which in this context is the new AK . This is done using the Create command, which
also takes an optional policy as input. This simply means that in order to load the newly created AK
into the TPM for use, the associated policy has to be satisfied first. The final part of the protocol
loads the newly created AK and runs it through the CertifyCreation command. This works by taking
a creation ticket produced by the Create command and signing it with another key. In this case the
creation ticket is signed by the EK . The public part of the AK along with the creation ticket and
signature are sent to the Vrf for approval.
As the EK is used to sign the creation ticket, it is not possible to forge this signature. The creation
ticket includes information about the AK , including the policy used to protect it. The Vrf can compare
the policy he send to ensure it correspond to the used policy. This gives the Vrf definitive proof that
the AK was correctly created.
5.1.1.3
CIV process
A Vrf can at any point initiate the CIV process for a VF it owns. In order to do so, it must first
generate a nonce to ensure freshness and prevent replay attacks. The Vrf sends the nonce along with
the bit sequence and NV indexes belonging to the VF it wishes to verify. Formally a CIV request is
defined as Rciv = (bsq, I, n), where bsq is the unique bit sequence, I is a set of NV indexes and n is a
nonce. When receiving this request, the Prv initiates the CIV protocol which can be seen in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: CIV protocol.
The Prv starts by writing the nonce to the first part of the NV bits index and the bit sequence to
the second part. It then runs the policyNV commands for the NV bits index, and then once for each of
the indexes sent by the Vrf in order. Then it runs the policyOR command once with the sub-policies
denoted by p1, ..., pp in the figure, and one more time to satisfy the outer policy. Assuming the TPM is
in a correct state, the policy should now be satisfied. The Prv now uses the unlocked AK , and signs
==PAGE:44==
5.1 System Model in Detail
38
the content of the NV bits index using it. It can then send this signature back to the Vrf .
The Vrf knows that the AK is only unlocked when the policy is satisfied, so it knows that one of its
VFs is in a correct state. As the signature signs the contents of the NV bits index, it also knows which
VF was verified and that the CIV is fresh (not a replay). Recall that the NV bits index is split up in
two parts, the first holding the nonce and the second holding the unique bit sequence. The Vrf knows
which VF is assigned each bit sequence, so it knows which VF was verified. As the Vrf just generated
the nonce, it knows that the verification happened at some point after the nonce was generated and it
is therefore fresh.
If an Adv captures the signature, she can not make use of it. It only contains the nonce and unique
bit sequence, but because the bit sequence is randomly generated, it can’t be used to identify the VF
it belongs to.
Like with the two previous protocols, the TPM commands needed to carry out the protocol are
described. The same example is used as above with the VF using two NV indexes, each with two
possible correct values. The process starts when the Vrf make a CIV request and provides the Prv
with the set of NV indexes I = {1, 2}, the nonce n and the bit sequence bsq
Firstly the auth session is started
StartAuthSession(type = policy −session)
Then n is written to the first part of the NV bits index, and bsq =′ 0001′ to the second part. The value
is also verified according to the policy
NV Write(index = 0, data = n)
NV Write(index = 0, data =′ 0001′, offset = 1)
PolicyNV (index = 0)
The state of each NV index is checked
PolicyNV (index = 1)
PolicyNV (inde
Now the sub-policy and full policy can be satisfied
PolicyOR(policyList = (p1, p2, p3, p4))
PolicyOR(policyList = (por1
Finally the AK can be loaded and used to certify the contents of the NV bits index
Load(AK )NV Certify(index = 0, AK )
5.1.2
Configuration measurement updates
The NV indexes of the Prv TPM contain various configuration measurements collected from the dif-
ferent VFs . The CIV protocol uses these measurements to verify the integrity of a VF , but the
protocol is not tasked with collecting these measurements. It relies on the measurements being fresh,
as the integrity verification is only able to attest to the latest known measurements. If measurements
are only collected once every hour, and the CIV process is run in between two measurements, then the
verification might be up to 59 minutes old.
Ideally measurements should be collected just before the CIV policy is run, to give the most up to
date verification of a VF . If an Adv is able to compromise the VF after measurements are collected
==PAGE:45==
5.1 System Model in Detail
39
and before the CIV process is run, compromises will not be detected.
It is important to find a good balance between verifying VFs too often or too little. If the CIV
process is run with a lot of time in between and a VF is compromised just after a successful verification,
it might be able to do a lot of damage within the time until the next verification. On the other hand if
attestation is done too often, too many resources will be taken up by security which could impact the
functionality or service provided by the VF .
5.1.3
User Management
The Prv is responsible for maintaining a user management system that prevents a Vrf or Adv from
gaining information on the configuration or existence of a VF owned by another Vrf . Furthermore
the Prv has to ensure that two different Vrf ’s do not use the same NV index, since that can cause
serious problems leading to false negatives. Imagine that two different VFs use the same NV index. If
the configuration measurements of one VF are written to the NV index, but the CIV process for the
other is started, the policy will not be satisfied as it will appear that the VF being verified is not in a
correct state.
To solve this issue the Prv will maintain a list of known Vrf ’s. The list is defined as V RF =
{vrf1, vrf2, ..., vrfn} where n is the number of known Vrf . The Prv also stores some information
about each known Vrf : vrfi = (ib, NV, auth) where ib is the NV bits index assigned to that Vrf
and NV is the complete set of all NV indexes uses by all VFs owned by that Vrf . auth is some sort
of authentication details that the Vrf uses to authenticate itself with the Prv . It is not considered
any further how such authentication should be implemented, or the details of such a system, but any
existing user authentication method can be used.
When the Vrf wants to create a policy, it requests some amount of NV indexes from the Prv .
This is simply done by calling the NVDefine TPM command without the index parameter. The TPM
will automatically find a available index and return it. When the Prv gets an index returned from
the TPM, it forwards it to the Vrf and adds it to the set I belonging to that Vrf . Recall that the
first time the Vrf creates a policy, it also requests an additional NV index that will be used to store
bit sequences. Since this NV bits index is shared by all VFs owned by a Vrf , it is stored in ib. It is
important that the Prv can distinguish the NV bits index from the remaining indexes used by a Vrf
since it needs to write the bit sequence to that index during the CIV process.
If an Adv or malicious Vrf tries to start the CIV process, they will be denied if they are not
associated with the NV indexes they send in the attestation request.
Recall that the Vrf sends
Rciv = (bsq, I, n) in the beginning of the CIV process. Since the Prv maintains the set NV of NV
indexes which belong to the Vrf , it can simply check if I ∈NV = true. If this is not true, that is if
some of the NV indexes in the set I does not exist in the set NV , then the Prv knows that the Vrf is
trying to verify the integrity of a VF using indexes that does not belong to it.
5.1.4
Model summary
The base model consists of 3 different protocols which put together provide configuration integrity veri-
fication (CIV ). The first protocol creates a TPM policy capable of verifying a single VF at a time, out
of any number of VFs owned by a Vrf . It detects whether the VF is compromised or not, allowing the
VF to be replaced if necessary, without impacting any other VF . The second protocol creates a trusted
AK that can created attestation signatures for the Vrf to approve. When it is created, a creation
ticket is also generated which is returned to the Vrf . This is used to ensure the AK is legitimately
created by a trusted TPM using the specified policy. The final protocol carries out the CIV process
itself. It takes a bit sequence, nonce and set of NV indexes as input which is used to satisfy the policy.
==PAGE:46==
5.1 System Model in Detail
40
It returns a signature over the contents of the NV bits index which contains the nonce and bit sequence.
This is returned to the Vrf as a proof that the correct VF were verified.
Figure 5.7 shows a high level state diagram of the TPM. There are two main states that the TPM
can go to: policy session and AK creation. The policy session is used to both create a policy and satisfy
it, so this state is used during both the policy creation protocol and CIV protocol. Creating an AK
is done in the second protocol and allows the TPM to certify the creation of the AK after it has been
created.
Figure 5.7: State Diagram of the TPM. The black labels are TPM commands while the blue corre-
spond to successful or failed policy satisfaction..
The following list goes through the requirements from section 3.3, and explain how each of them
has been achieved:
R1 A Vrf can initiate the CIV process for a specific VF at any time: There are no specific
features of my model providing this requirement, but there is nothing preventing a Vrf from
starting the CIV process at any time he wishes.
R2 Policies and belonging AK can be updated at any time: Since the Vrf is responsible for
creating policies and it controls the reference database used to create policies, it can create new
ones at any time it wishes. When a policy is updated, or it wishes to replace the AK belonging
to an existing policy, it can initiate the AK creation protocol at any time to receive a new one.
R3 Configuration measurement must remain private: Only the Vrf and Prv are able to see
configuration measurements. No configuration measurements are ever communicated between the
two. The Vrf uses a reference database to create the policy, but the policy is simply a hash
digest making it unfeasible to reverse it to discover configuration measurements. On the Prv
==PAGE:47==
5.1 System Model in Detail
41
side, measurements are collected from the tracer installed on each VF and placed in the TPM.
This is only visible to the Prv and not revealed to the outside.
R4 Only the Vrf should not know which VF is being verified: Only the Vrf knows which
unique bit sequence and set of NV indexes is assigned to each VF . The CIV request is defined
as Rciv = (bsq, I, n), but this contains no information about which VF is being verified, only
which bit sequence and set of NV indexes belong together. The returned attestation signature
only contains the bit sequence, but this value is meaningless to anyone but the Vrf .
R5 Distinguish compromised and non-compromised VFs : The Vrf uses the CIV protocol to
verify one VF at a time. The attestation response includes the bit sequence which the Vrf can use
to ensure that the VF it wanted to be verified was actually the one that was verified. Furthermore,
the attestation signature can only be created if the VF is in a correct state, meaning if the Vrf
receives a valid attestation signature, then it knows the respective VF is healthy, otherwise it is
compromised.
R6 An AK can’t be forged: The AK is generated as a secondary TPM object using the EK .
The EK is never revealed outside the TPM making in impossible to forge the AK . A creation
ticket is also generated together with the AK specifying the policy used to lock it. This ticket is
signed with the EK , which makes it impossible to create an AK using the TPM which is locked
by another policy than the one expected.
R7 Attestation signature can be trusted: The attestation signature is created using the AK
, but the AK is only unlocked when the policy is satisfied. Since the AK is trusted, then the
signature is also trusted to come from the TPM. Furthermore the signature contains the nonce
and bit sequence provided by the Vrf . This is a proof of freshness as well as a proof of which
VF was verified.
R8 The CIV process must finish within reasonable time: The evaluation in section 7.1 dis-
cusses execution time of the model.
R9 The policy can’t be compromised without detection: The policy is created by the Vrf
using the reference database owned by that Vrf . If an Adv attempts to manipulate or change
the policy, the Vrf will detect this. When the AK is created, it includes a creation ticket that
specifies which policy was used. This is signed by the EK and sent back to the Vrf . Since the
EK is trusted, so is the signature, which means the Vrf can validate the creation ticket to ensure
the correct policy was used.
R10 A compromised VF should not leak any sensitive information about other VFs : A
compromised VF does not contain any sensitive information on other VFs . It will allow an Adv
to know when the compromised VF is being verified, but it will not allow him to learn which NV
indexes belong to any other VFs , meaning he won’t be able to understand which VF is being
verified during the CIV protocol.
5.1.5
Base model shortcomings and limitations
The base model provides CIV for multiple VFs in a privacy preserving manner, however it relies on
the assumption that the Prv is trusted to securely collect configuration measurements and place them
in the TPM. Ideally this trust should be moved away from the Prv . Assuming the Prv to be trusted
is a diﬀicult task to solve in a production system. Naturally, the more systems are trusted, the more
points of failure exist. If an Adv can compromise a single trusted system such as the Prv , then
security is breached. Moving trust away from the Prv is an important step in reducing the attack
vector of the system, while keeping the same security guarantees. In the current model, a compromised
Prv is able to learn about the configurations of each VF . Furthermore since the Prv is responsible
for placing configuration measurements in the TPM, it could place fake measurements in the TPM to
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Implementation
42
make a compromised VF look healthy. If each VF can be trusted to collect their own configuration
measurements, this issue is solved.
The model itself does not have any limits to the number of NV indexes it can support, but the
physical storage size of the TPM does limit this. The TPM specification [TCG20] states that a TPM
must have a minimum of 3834 bytes of NV storage. A NV index configured as a PCR uses the sha256
hash algorithm as default. This algorithm has a size of 256bit or 32byte. Since an index configured
this way uses the same size as the hash algorithm, each NV index takes up 32 bytes of storage. This
means, that with the minimum storage space a TPM can provide is 3834/32 ≈119 NV extend indexes.
Of course, a bit of storage is also reserved for one NV bits index per Vrf , but these take up only 2
bytes each.
Different solutions to achieve this have been considered. Each of the solutions are detailed in section
8 about future development:
• Let each VF write its own configuration measurements directly to the TPM on the host
• Equip each VF with a vTPM and run the model separately on each VF
5.2
Implementation
This chapter looks into the Implementation of a proof-of-concept (POC) of the model. The implemen-
tation is coded in python using IBMs software TPM [Gol] as well as the Trusted Security Stack (TSS)
and TPM2 Tools implemented by [Fuc]. Due to limited time, and to ease the implementation, TPM
command-line tools are called from python instead of calling the TPM directly from python. Of course,
in a production environment this would not be the ideal approach, but the functionality is exactly the
same which makes it suﬀicient for a proof-of-concept implementation.
5.2.1
Setup
The setup for the POC is done on a VirtualBox VM running the Ubuntu Linux 18.4 OS. The OS is
a basic installation with no additional software installed.
On top of this a software TPM by IBM
[Gol] is installed as well as TSS (Tpm2-tss), a TPM resource manager (Tpm2-abrmd) and TPM tools
(Tpm2-tools) by [Fuc]. The resource manager provides automatic management of the software TPM
resources which allows the user to not focus on loading the correct objects before executing commands
on the TPM, the TPM tools provides command line TPM tools and the TSS installation is required to
run the other two software packages.
The installation of each of these items is detailed in the following sub sections. Before starting the
installation, the dependencies listed in the appendix in section C should be installed first to avoid errors.
5.2.1.1
Software TPM
The IBM software TPM is used to emulate a hardware TPM 2.0. It is open source on sourceforge and
has to be manually built. The following commands can be used to download and build it.
1 $ mkdir ibmtpm && cd ibmtpm
2 $ wget https://sourceforge.net/projects/ibmswtpm2/files/latest/download -O ibmtpm.tar.gz
3 $ tar -zxvf ibmtpm.tar.gz
4 $ cd src
5 $ make -j5
.
After the software TPM has been installed, navigate to the source folder to run it:
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Implementation
43
1 $ cd ../ibmtpm/src/
2 $ ./tpm_server
.
5.2.1.2
Tpm2-tss
The Tpm2-tss software is open source on github. It is the base package needed for the other software
provided by the tpm2-software project. After dependencies have been installed, the following commands
can be used to download the software from github, bootstrap it, configure it and finally install it using
make.
1 $ git clone https://github.com/tpm2-software/tpm2-tss.git
2 $ cd tpm2-tss
3 $ ./bootstrap
4 $ ./configure --prefix=/usr
5 $ make -j5
6 $ sudo make install
.
5.2.1.3
Tpm2-abrmd
The Tpm2-abrmd software is also provided by the tpm2-software project open source on github. The
following commands will install the software. The configuration is set to allow the resource manager to
claim a name on the D-Bus. Additional configuration options can be found on the project github page.
1 $ git clone https://github.com/tpm2-software/tpm2-abrmd.git
2 $ cd tpm2-abrmd
3 $ ./bootstrap
4 $ ./configure --with-dbuspolicydir=/etc/dbus-1/system.d
5 --with-udevrulesdir=/usr/lib/udev/rules.d
6 --with-systemdsystemunitdir=/usr/lib/systemd/system
7 --libdir=/usr/lib64 --prefix=/usr
8 $ make -j5
9 $ sudo make install
.
After the software has been installed, it can be started by running:
1 sudo tpm2-abrmd --allow-root --tcti=mssim --logger=stdout
.
The tcti option specifies that the system is using a TPM simulator / software TPM.
5.2.1.4
Tpm2-tools
Finally the last thing needed to be installed is the Tpm2-tools software. Just like the 2 items above,
this is also provided open source on github by the tpm2-software project. Use the following commands
to install it.
1 $ git clone https://github.com/tpm2-software/tpm2-tools.git
2 $ cd tpm2-tools
3 $ ./bootstrap
4 $ ./configure --prefix=/usr
5 $ make -j5
6 $ sudo make install
.
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Implementation
44
5.2.2
Implementation Details
The implementation is done in python and consists of 4 different scripts carrying out different function-
ality. Each script is described as:
• TPM: This script acts as a wrapper responsible for formatting commands to the TPM correctly.
• VF : This script implements the class that contains that VF data needed by a Vrf to create a
policy.
• Vrf : This script implements the Vrf and is able to create a policy, request a new AK from the
Prv as well as initiate the CIV protocol.
• Prv : This script implements the Prv and is able to create a new AK when requested by the
Vrf as well as carry out the CIV protocol.
• Prototype: This script sets up a small example with a Vrf owning 2 VFs . It includes creating
a policy, creating an AK and verifying the integrity of one of the VFs .
5.2.2.1
TPM Script
This script is responsible for receiving TPM command requests from the other scripts and formatting
them correctly before sending them to the TPM. The code can be found in appendix D.
5.2.2.2
VF Script
This script implements a class that contains all the information about a VF needed to create a policy.
It does not implement the VF itself, nor is it responsible for starting or stopping the VF it belongs to.
This script is quite small and looks like this:
1 import itertools
2
3 class Container:
4
def __init__(self, containerId , valueLst, bitSequence , indexLst):
5
self.id = containerId
6
self.expectedValues = valueLst
7
self.combinations = self.GetCombinations(valueLst)
8
self.bitSequence = bitSequence
9
self.indexLst = indexLst
10
self.containerPolicy = ''
11
12
def GetCombinations(self, lst):
13
result = itertools.product(*lst)
14
return list(result)
.
A VF (called container in the script) has a total of 6 attributes. Recall from section 5.1.1 that a
VF is defined as vfi = (bsq, I, V, state, EKpub, AKpub). The attributes are defined as:
• self.id: This is some VF id. It is not specifically used as part of the protocols, but the Vrf can
use it to keep track of each VF .
• self.expectedValues: This correspond to the set V of expected values. This is a set of expected
values per NV index.
• self.combinations: This is all the combinations of expected values as explained in section 5.1.1.1
and shown in figure 5.4. It is all the combinations of V .
• self.bitSequence: This is the unique bit sequence bsq assigned to this VF .
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Implementation
45
• self.indexLst: This is the set I of NV indexes assigned to this VF .
• self.containerPolicy: This is the name of the sub-policy that will later be created for this VF .
The sub-policy name is kept here to make it easier when collecting all the sub-policies for each
VF into the final complete policy.
5.2.2.3
Vrf Script
This script implements the Vrf . The main functionality is to create a policy from any number of VFs
, each assigned any number of NV indexes. Creating a policy is split between two methods. The first
creates a sub-policy for a single VF , while the second collects them to create the complete policy. The
first method looks like this:
1 def CreateContainerPolicy(self, containerId , bitSequence , bitsIndex, indexLst, valueLst):
2
print('Defining and writing NV bits index..')
3
self.tpm.NVDefine(DEFAULT_AUTH , '', bitsIndex, '-s 4')
4
self.tpm.NVWrite(DEFAULT_AUTH , bitsIndex, bitSequence)
5
cnt = 0
6
numI = len(indexLst)
7
for c in valueLst:
8
print('Define and extend NVs')
9
for i in range(numI):
10
curIndex = indexLst[i]
11
curData
= c[i]
12
self.tpm.NVDefine(DEFAULT_AUTH , DEFAULT_ATTR , curIndex)
13
self.tpm.NVExtend(DEFAULT_AUTH , curData, curIndex)
14
15
print('Create policy..')
16
self.tpm.StartAuthSession()
17
self.tpm.PolicyNV(DEFAULT_AUTH , bitsIndex, '')
18
for i in range(numI):
19
curIndex = indexLst[i]
20
policyName = '-L policy-C{}-{}'.format(containerId , cnt)
21
self.tpm.PolicyNV(DEFAULT_AUTH , curIndex, policyName)
22
self.tpm.NVUndefine(curIndex)
23
cnt+=1
24
self.tpm.FlushContext()
25
self.tpm.NVUndefine(bitsIndex)
26
27
self.tpm.StartAuthSession()
28
policyName = '-L policyOR -{}'.format(containerId)
29
self.tpm.PolicyOR(containerId , policyName, len(valueLst))
30
self.tpm.FlushContext()
.
This method carries out the steps for creating a sub-policy for a single VF . These steps are described
in detail at the end of section 5.1.1.1.
The second method looks like this:
1 def CreateFinalPolicy(self):
2
policyList = ''
3
for c in self.containers:
4
policyList+='{},'.format(c.containerPolicy)
5
policyList = policyList[:-1]
6
command = 'tpm2_policyor -S session.ctx -L policyOR -l sha256:{}'.format(policyList)
7
self.tpm.StartAuthSession()
8
os.system(command)
9
self.tpm.FlushContext()
.
This method is fairly simple. It starts by collecting the sub-policy name from each VF . Then it runs
these through the TPM PolicyOR command to create the final policy. That is all there is to it, and the
policy is now ready to be used.
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Implementation
46
5.2.2.4
Prv Script
This script implements the Prv as is responsible for creating an AK with a given policy and carrying
out the CIV protocol when requested.
The method for creating an AK looks like this:
1 def CreateAK(self, policy):
2
self.tpm.Create(policy)
3
self.tpm.CertifyCreation()
.
The TPM commands used in this method are described in detail in section 5.1.1.2. A new AK is created
with a specific policy, which is then certified by the TPM. The Vrf can validate this key to begin using
it.
The method for carrying out the CIV process looks like this:
1 def SatisfyPolicy(self, container, policyList):
2
print('Satisfying policy')
3
self.tpm.StartAuthSession('--policy-session')
4
print('Define and write NV bits..')
5
self.tpm.NVDefine(DEFAULT_AUTH , '', self.tpm.bitIndex, '-s 4')
6
self.tpm.NVWrite(DEFAULT_AUTH , self.tpm.bitIndex, container.bitSequence)
7
self.tpm.PolicyNV(DEFAULT_AUTH , self.tpm.bitIndex, ''))
8
self.tpm.NVUndefine(self.tpm.bitIndex)
9
print('Define and write NVs')
10
for i in range(len(container.indexLst)):
11
curIndex = container.indexLst[i]
12
curData
= container.expectedValues[i][0]
13
self.tpm.NVDefine(DEFAULT_AUTH , DEFAULT_ATTR , curIndex)
14
self.tpm.NVExtend(DEFAULT_AUTH , curData, curIndex)
15
self.tpm.PolicyNV(DEFAULT_AUTH , curIndex, '')
16
self.tpm.NVUndefine(curIndex)
17
self.tpm.PolicyOR(container.id, '', len(container.combinations))
18
command = 'tpm2_policyor -S session.ctx -l sha256:{}'.format(policyList)
19
os.system(command)
20
self.tpm.Load()
21
self.tpm.NVCertify(self.tpm.bitIndex)
.
The TPM commands used in this method are described in detail in section 5.1.1.3.
5.2.2.5
Prototype Script
The prototype script runs a simple example with two VFs . Each VF is assigned two NV indexes each
with 2 or 3 allowed values per index. The script starts by creating a Prv and a Vrf . It then creates
two VFs (called containers in the script) and adds them to the Vrf . It then creates a policy for those
VFs , requests an AK from the Prv and finally runs the CIV protocol to create an attestation proof.
1 import prover
2 import verifier
3
4 valueLst1 = [[1,2],[3,4,5]]
5 valueLst2 = [[6,7],[8,9]]
6
7 def main():
8
prv = prover.Prv()
9
vrf = verifier.Vrf(prv)
10
11
vrf.AddContainer(valueLst1, '0001', [1,2])
12
vrf.AddContainer(valueLst2, '0010', [3,4])
13
14
vrf.CreatePolicies()
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Implementation
47
15
vrf.RequestAK()
16
vrf.StartCIV()
17
18 if __name__ == "__main__":
19
main()
.
5.2.3
Implementation shortcomings
This implementation is very much a proof-of-concept. It is intended to show that the protocols pre-
sented in the model actually work on a TPM, and not replicate a real scenario. This prototype uses a
single software TPM to run the functionality, used by both the Vrf and Prv . This means there is
no network between the Vrf or Prv , and all communication is just methods from one class calling
methods from another class.
This prototype also doesn’t involve real running containers or other VFs . All data placed in the
NV indexes of the TPM are dummy data to prove that the system works. As such this prototype is
deterministic in that it will always return the same result. As data is hard coded, the same policy is
always created, and it is always successfully satisfied by the Prv .
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6
Analysis
6.1
Security Analysis
The goal of the model is to keep VFs secure by detecting malicious changes, as well as keeping sensi-
tive configurations private. It makes use of the NV indexes of a TPM to securely store configuration
measurements and verify them by comparing them to trusted values using a TPM policy. Inspired by
the security analysis of CloudVault [LDG], a number of ’games’ are made in which an Adv tries to
manipulate parts of the model such that one of the requirements defined in section 3.3 fails. A game
consist of a goal that the Adv wants to achieve, as well as a challenge the Adv must defeat in order to
achieve the goal. The point of these games are to provide different scenarios where an Adv attempts
to break one of the security requirements. A game presents a scenario from the model, such as AK
creation, and explains which items are available in that scenario, which could be the policy provided
by the Vrf during AK creation.
Game 1: Compromise policy
Notation
• p is a policy created by Vrf
• AK is the public part of the key created by p
• Acert is the key creation certificate
• Scert is the signature of Acert
The Game:
• Goal: The Adv returns a key accepted by the
Vrf that he can use without satisfying the policy
• Challenge: The Vrf provides the Adv with a
policy p
• Response:
The Adv responds with the AK
along with Acert and Scert.
• Win Condition: The Adv wins if the returned
AK is created without using the provided policy
p, and the Vrf accepts Acert and Scert as valid.
Figure 6.1: Game 1.
The first game is shown in figure 6.1. In this game the Adv is tasked with compromising the policy
p sent by the Vrf , such that he gets full control over the AK . For this attack to be successful, the Vrf
must accept the AK as a valid key. This game relates to requirements R6 and R9 from section 3.3.
The Adv can attempt to win this game in a number of different ways. First he could replace the
policy sent by the Vrf with policy p′ created by himself. A malicious policy could be designed to always
be satisfied, no matter the state of the VFs . Changing the policy could work, but the Vrf would not
accept the AK as valid. Since the AK is generated together with a creation certificate that includes
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Security Analysis
49
the policy used during creation, the Vrf can compare the used policy to what he expects. If another
policy is used, it knows to not trust the AK .
The Adv could then try to forge the creation certificate such that it says the AK was created using
policy p when it was in-fact created using policy p′. But this is not possible. The creation certificate
is signed by the TPM using the endorsement key (EK ). The private part of this key is never revealed
outside the TPM, making it impossible for the Adv to forge the signature. Recall that an Adv is
limited to the Dolev-Yao model [DY83], meaning an Adv can’t break cryptology.
Game 2: Hide compromised VF
Notation
• bsq is the unique bit sequence for the VF being
verified
• I is the set of NV indexes belonging to the VF
• n is the nonce for this CIV session
• AK key locked by policy p
• Satt the signature resulting from the attestation
process
The Game:
• Goal: The Adv returns a signature Satt making
the Vrf unable to distinguish compromised and
non-compromised VFs .
• Challenge:
The Vrf
provides the Adv with
(bsq, I, n).
• Response: The Adv responds with the signature
Satt
• Win Condition: The Adv wins if the Vrf is
unable to distinguish between compromised and
non-compromised VFs .
Figure 6.2: Game 2.
The second game is shown in figure 6.2. In this game the Adv is tasked with compromising the CIV
process such that the Vrf is unable to distinguish between a compromised and non-compromised VF .
If the Vrf is not able to do this, it is forced to replace all VFs it owns if it suspects that a single one
is compromised, even if all other VFs are healthy. This game relates to requirements R5 from section
3.3. The Adv can attempt to achieve this in several ways:
First the Adv can try to intercept the attestation request provided by the Vrf . He could swap
out the bit sequence bsq or indexes I for other values. This has two possible outcomes. Either the
alternative values happen to work and will correctly satisfy the policy, but the returned attestation
signature Satt will contain different values than expected by the Vrf and would not be accepted as
valid. Or, the other outcome is that the alternative values do not satisfy the policy which results in no
attestation signature. This means that both outcomes leads to the Vrf detecting the VF being verified
as compromised. If the Adv is able to intercept all messages sent to the Prv and swap out value, the
Vrf will believe the relevant VF is compromised each time, but this counts as an availability attack
which is not considered for this project.
The Adv could instead try to replay an old attestation signature. But this would not include the
new nonce created by the Vrf , which will again fail. The attestation request contains a bit sequence
bsq which the Vrf expects to be returned in the attestation signature. If this is not the case, the
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Security Analysis
50
signature will not be accepted. Since the Vrf only verified one VF at a time, it is not possible for
an Adv to make the Vrf unable to distinguish compromised and non-compromised VFs . The worst
he can do is make a healthy VF appear compromised by manipulating the returned attestation signature.
Game 3: Discover VF being verified
Notation
• bsq is the unique bit sequence for the VF being
verified
• I is the set of NV indexes belonging to the VF
• n is the nonce for this CIV session
The Game:
• Goal: The Adv discovers which VF is being ver-
ified
• Challenge:
The Vrf
provides the Adv with
(bsq, I, n).
• Response: N/A
• Win Condition: The Adv wins if he can dis-
cover which VF is being verified by the Vrf
Figure 6.3: Game 3.
The third game is shown in figure 6.3. In this game the Adv is tasked with discovering which VF
is being verified. If the Adv is able to discover which VF belongs to which set of NV indexes I and bit
sequence bsq, he can gain knowledge on the configuration of the VF which can help him attack the VF
. This game relates to requirements R4 from section 3.3.
During the CIV process, the Vrf sends the set of NV indexes belong to the VF being verified I
along with the unique bit sequence bsq. The policy only verifies one of the VFs , so without knowing
which VF is mapped to which bsq it is not possible to know which VF is being verified. One exception
to this is the case where only a single VF exists. In this case there is only a single bsq and a single set
of NV indexes I, which makes it trivial for the Adv to know which VF is being verified. However, as
soon as two or more VFs are introduced, this is no longer possible.
The fourth game is shown in figure 6.4. In this game the Adv has already compromised a VF and
wants to learn useful information about other VFs running on the same Prv . If the Adv is able to gain
sensitive information on other VFs , he can attack them more easily. This game relates to requirements
R10 from section 3.3.
To win this game the Adv can take some different approaches. First he can attempt to listen in
on the CIV process, where the Vrf initiates the protocol by providing (bsq, I, n). For each request
containing a different bsq and I, the Adv will learn that some other VF exists and which bit sequence
bsq belongs to which set of NV indexes I. This is not sensitive information, and does not help the
Adv breach any of the other VFs . Since the Adv has oracle access to the TPM, he can attempt to
read the contents of the NV indexes belonging to a VF . This way he will learn the hash digests of the
configurations belonging to that VF , but it is not feasible for him to reverse the hashes which means
he can’t discover the actual configurations.
Since it is assumed that the configuration measurements are collected securely, it is not possible for
an outside actor, such as a malicious Vrf or man-in-the-middle to discover the configuration of a VF
they do not own.
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Security Analysis
51
Game 4: Discover information on other VFs
Notation
• bsq is the unique bit sequence for the VF being
verified
• I is the set of NV indexes belonging to the VF
• n is the nonce for this CIV session
The Game:
• Goal:
The Adv
discovers useful information
about other VFs after compromising a single VF
.
• Challenge: The Adv have compromised a single
VF .
• Response: N/A
• Win Condition: The Adv wins if he can dis-
cover sensitive information on any other VF run-
ning on the Prv
Figure 6.4: Game 4.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7
Evaluation
7.1
Time and memory
In this section the time usage of the solution is discussed. As with any security it adds some overhead
on top of other execution time. For a security solution to be successful, it is not only important that it
adds security, but also that it does so within reasonable time. Users will not adopt a security solution
if it is too slow, meaning it is critical to perform security checks as fast as possible.
Measurements of the average time taken to execute the different TPM commands have been collected.
Table 7.1 shows these measurements. Since it was not possible to get access to a hardware TPM, All
measurements have been made on a software TPM. Since a PC has been used for the project, execution
time is dependent on the hardware of that PC. This also means that other computers with different
hardware will experience different measurements. Furthermore all tests were run on a virtual machine
running on the Oracle VM VirtualBox software. The VM is a basic Ubuntu 18.4 64 bit installation. The
host hardware uses an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4790k CPU @ 4.0 Ghz, 16GB ram running on Windows
10 education 64 bit version. The VM does not have access to full system resources, only 4 GB ram and
2 of the logical processors on the CPU.
Command
Avg. Time in ms
TPM2_NVDefine
71
TPM2_NVExtend
70
TPM2_NVWrite
84
TPM2_NVUndefine
64
TPM2_CreatePrimary
269
TPM2_Create
205
TPM2_StartAuthSession
71
TPM2_PolicyNV
147
TPM2_PolicyOR
89
TPM2_CertifyCreation
142
TPM2_NVCertify
146
TPM2_Load
46
Table 7.1: Average TPM command time.
All measurements are the average of running the given command once. Measurements have been
collected over one hundred trials with nothing else running in the background. As mentioned above,
the OS is a basic installation. The only additional software running is an IBM software TPM [Gol] and
TPM software tools [Fuc]. Using these measurements, it will calculated how long it takes to complete
the three different stages of the model with an example setup, that is: policy creation, AK creation and
the CIV process. The example shown in figure 5.2 will be used as the example for calculating execution
time.
Described more formally, this example setup consists of a Vrf owning three VFs . The first and
third VF both uses two NV indexes with two possible values for each index each. The second VF uses
two NV indexes as well, but with two possible values for the first index and one for the second index.
A summary of my calculations can be seen in table 7.2, with detailed calculations in the subsections
==PAGE:59==
7.1 Time and memory
53
below. Of course, the numbers reported are dependent on hardware, so faster hardware would decrease
time with slower hardware would increase it.
Command
Avg. Time in ms
Policy creation
7912
AK Creation
439
CIV process
1050
Table 7.2: Protocols execution time measured in ms.
Comparing the results to CloudVault [LDG], executing TPM commands takes significantly longer.
This is likely due to the fact that this project runs the tests on a VM on top of the OS that takes resources,
and the VM only has access to part of the complete system resources. Several of the measurements by
CloudVault shows TPM commands running more than a hundred times faster than the measurements
collected in this project. This of course means that the time taken to execute each of the protocols
would be dramatically faster with CloudVaults measurements plugged in instead of this ones collected
here. Since CloudVault does not use all the same TPM commands as used in this model, it is not
possible to use their measurements to get an exact idea of how fast the protocols would run on their
setup, but it can estimate this by substituting for similar commands. For instance, this model uses
NVExtend and CloudVault uses PCRExtend, and this use PolicyNV while CloudVault uses PolicyPCR.
As these commands are almost identical in functionality, it is fair to assume that their execution times
are also similar.
Command
Avg. Time in ms
Policy creation
≈80
AK Creation
≈14
CIV process
≈11
Table 7.3: Estimated protocol execution time measured in ms using CloudVault TPM command mea-
surements.
7.1.1
Policy creation time
The policy creation is the most complex to calculate, and requires a bit of math. The time taken to
create the subpolicy for a single VF can be calculated as this, where i is the number of NV indexes in
the set of NV indexes I and c is the total number of combinations of possibles values.
Defining and writing NV bits index
tb =TPM2_NV Define = 71
+ TPM2_NV Write = 155
tb = 71 + 84 = 155
Defining and extending NV indexes and create sub policies
tpsub = TPM2_StartAuthSession · i = 71 · i
+ TPM2_NV Define · i = 71 · i
+ TPM2_NV Extend · i = 70 · i
+ TPM2_PolicyNV · i = 147 · i
tpsub = i(71 + 71 + 70 + 147)
==PAGE:60==
7.1 Time and memory
54
Repeated for each combination of possible values
tptotal =tpsub · c = c · i(71 + 71 + 70 + 147)
Collect sub policies and create compound policy
tpor =TPM2_PolicyOR · 1 = 89
Putting it all together for total time to create the sub policy for a single VF
tvf =b + tptotal + tpor = 155 + c · i(71 + 71 + 70 + 147) + 89
tvf =c · i(359) + 244
Now we know how to calculate the time taken to create the sub policy for a single VF . For the first
and third VF i = 2 and c = 4, for the second VF i = 2 and c = 2. This allows the calculation of the
total time:
tvf1 = tvf3 =4 · 2(359) + 244 = 3116
tvf2 =2 · 2(359) + 244 = 1680
ttotal = 3116 · 2 + 1680 = 7912ms
This means it takes a total of 7912ms to create the policy for the example setup.
Of course, this
computation time will increase as the number of VFs increase. Recall that the policy will have to be
recreated every time a VF is removed or added. This is also the case if the expected values for a VF
is updated which could happen if the VF is patched. As a result, the Vrf might have to repeat this
computation time quite often. The Vrf can make attempts to not have this execution time impact any
other actors. In fact, it is possible to prepare a policy in advance before it is used. If the Vrf is able
to learn when VFs are added, removed or updates, it can compute a policy before it is needed.
7.1.2
AK creation time
The AK creation is a lot simpler. This process contains no variables, so the series of commands will be
the same every time.
ttotal = TPM2_Load · 2 + TPM2_Create + TPM2_CertifyCreation
= 46 · 2 + 205 + 142
= 439ms
7.1.3
CIV process time
Finally we can calculate the execution time of the CIV process. It contains some variables, but is not
as complex as for the policy creation:
Start session and Write to NV bits index
tb = TPM2_StartAuthSession = 71
+ TPM2_NV Write · 2 = 168
+ TPM2_PolicyNV = 147
tb = 386
Check state of each index
tnv = TPM2_PolicyNV · i = i147
==PAGE:61==
7.1 Time and memory
55
Check policyOR
tor = TPM2_PolicyOR · 2 = 178
Load AK and sign content of NV bits index
tsign = TPM2_Load = 46
+ TPM2_NV Certify = 146
tsign = 46 + 146 = 192
Total time is
ttotal = tb + tnv + tor + tsign
= 386 + i147 + 178 + 192
ttotal = i147 + 756
That is, the time to finish the CIV protocol is i147 + 756 where i is the total number of NV indexes
for the VF being verified. Taking the same example used above, all VFs uses two NV indexes, so the
time to verify either of them will be the same:
ttotal = 2 · 147 + 756
ttotal = 1050ms
On the project machine, it takes 1050ms to finish the CIV protocol for a VF using two NV indexes. This
number will decrease or increase depending on the number of NV indexes used, but it is significantly
shorter than the time taken to compute the policy.
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 8
Future Development
This chapter discusses additional work that will improve the model and the security it provides.
8.1
Secure configuration measurement collection
Security of the model depends on the configuration measurements being collected and placed in the
TPM in a secure way. In the current model, the Prv is trusted to collect these measurements, but this
is not ideal. If this task can be moved away from the Prv and placed on the VFs instead, it would
allow the Prv to become compromised while still keeping the security guarantees of the model. The
policy is satisfied on the TPM, and the attestation signature is signed by the TPM. This means that
even if the Prv is compromised, it can’t forge a fake signature or manipulate the policy.
In the following sub sections different approaches are considered to solve this issue.
8.1.1
VFs communicate with the host TPM
Depending on the VF implementation it is possible that the VF can communicate directly with hardware
or software running on the host. This makes it possible for a VF to collect configuration measurements
and place them directly in NV indexes on the host TPM. This of course, has some security concerns. If
the communication channel between the VF and the host can be monitored, it is possible for anyone
listing in to gain knowledge on the configuration on the VF thus breaching privacy and security. This
means that the communication between the VF and the TPM should be encrypted in a way that allows
the VF to enter configuration measurements on the TPM without revealing the measurements to the
Prv or any other actor.
This can be done by establishing a HMAC session between the TPM and the VF . As explained
in section 4.1.6, a HMAC session is an encrypted communication channel between the caller and the
TPM. For this to work it needs to be assumed that the Prv can’t listen in on the communication, as
that would allow the Prv to learn the session encryption key.
This project has done experiments using Docker containers running on an Ubuntu Linux virtual
machine. Two main methods have been identified for Docker containers to communicate directly with
the host: the VF uses the host D-BUS or the VF communicates through a named pipelines. It is out
of scope for this project to investigate at what level a host can monitor through these two channels.
8.1.2
Each VF is equipped with a vTPM
Instead of having each VF communicate directly to the host TPM, they can instead each be setup with
a vTPM, similar to the approach of CloudVault. This avoids the need for the VF to communicate
with the Prv .
Using this method, the execution of the CIV protocol is moved from the Prv to
each individual VF . Collecting configuration measurements becomes much simpler, as a VF needs to
collect the measurements from its own tracer and place them in the vTPM. This method is not without
complications though. Since the configuration measurements are now placed on each vTPM local to a
VF , it is no longer possible for the Prv to run the CIV protocol, instead this needs to be done by each
VF .
==PAGE:63==
8.2 Control Flow Graph verification
57
Another implication with this method is trusting the VF to securely and correctly collect its own
configuration measurements. If it is possible for a malicious actor to compromise the VF in a way
that affects its ability to correctly collect the measurements, the CIV process can no longer guarantee
correctness. One way of doing this, or at least make it significantly more diﬀicult for a malicious actor
to affect the measurement collection, is to build it into the VF kernel.
Communication from the Vrf has to either go directly to each VF or through the Prv to the
relevant VF being verified. This is an issue since it is a requirement that the Prv is not allowed to
know which VF is being verified. In the scenario that the Vrf communicates directly to a VF , the
communication needs to be encrypted such that the Prv cannot know that the VF is being verified.
However, this will not work if communication goes through the Prv , since it needs to know which VF
is the destination for the CIV request. This could be solved by having the Prv send the CIV request
to all VFs instead. Each VF can then determine if they are the one being verified by checking the
unique bit sequence.
8.2
Control Flow Graph verification
Control Flow Graphs (CFG) are an alternative way of doing CIV . A CFG is a graph representation of
the control flow or execution of a program during runtime. CFGs can be used in an advanced type of
attestation called Control Flow Attestation (CFA) [Kou+19] [Abe+16]. An advanced Adv can launch
an attack that manipulates the control flow of a program. Such an attack only changes the functionality
of the program but not the binaries. The project model relies on collecting hash values of binaries, such
an attack would not be detected. Control flow attacks can tamper with the memory of a process by
manipulating the stack or heap to divert execution to some malicious gain. State of the art attacks are
able to reuse parts of a legitimate software, such as a return-oriented program, to put it together in a
malicious way. This effectively creates a new malicious program using code snippets from an existing
program [Abe+16]. Since no new code is added, and only memory is manipulated, the binaries of the
program stay the same resulting in a false positive from the presented model.
Figure 8.1 is taken from [Abe+16] and shows an example of how a Adv can attack the control flow of
a program. The example shows how the Adv can overwrite a code pointer that continues the program
flow at a point only meant for authenticated users, even though the Adv was not authenticated. No
malicious code is injected, instead the Adv ’reused’ the legit code that is supposed to execute after
a successful authentication by manipulating memory. Alternatively the Adv might have been able to
manipulate the memory of the program to simply change the value of ’auth’ from false to true. This has
the same effect by directing the program to code it was not meant to execute even though authentication
failed.
8.3
Inter-trust VF communication
Currently, all CIV relies on the Vrf , but it would be useful if a trusted VF that have been verified by
the Vrf could be used to verify the integrity of another VF . That is, after a VF have gone through
the CIV process, it could act as a Vrf itself and provide CIV for any other VF .
For this to work, each VF must know the bit sequence of all the other VFs , but they don’t actually
need to know the expected configuration values of other VFs . If the Vrf have created a correct policy,
then a trusted VF have no need to know the configuration measurements of another VF . Simply be
receiving the signature from completing the CIV process and mapping the bit sequence to another VF
they know that it must be in a correct state. This has the advantage, that even if a trusted VF is later
compromised, the attacker does not learn any valuable information about any other VF . Of course,
this requires the VF to know the current, most recent AK since that is used to validate the attestation
==PAGE:64==
8.4 Verify all VFs at the same time
58
Figure 8.1: ’Abstract view of runtime attacks’ model taken from [Abe+16].
signature.
If the policy is updated, each VF can still verify other VFs as long as the mapping of bit sequence to
VF stays the same and they are updated with the new AK . It is important to ensure that the new AK
is always updated on each trusted VF . A Adv can abuse a trusted VF with a old AK to compromise
the CIV process.
8.4
Verify all VFs at the same time
It is possible, and fairly simple, to change the policy to verify the integrity of all VFs at the same time,
instead of just one. This is not considered future development as it is an active choice to verify one
at a time instead of all. It is still important to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the two
approaches.
Only two changes needs to be made in order to achieve this. First the NV bits index is completely
removed. This index is used to store the unique bit sequence for each VF , and is part of identifying
which VF was verified, but as the policy is being changed to verify them all, this is no longer neces-
sary. The second change is changing the final ’outer’ OR of the model to be an AND instead. I have
visualized these changes. Figure 5.2 shows the original model and figure 8.2 shows the new modified one.
Verifying all VFs at the same time have some advantages. First it reduces overhead, as a single CIV
process will verify everything instead of one CIV process for each VF owned by the Vrf .
Secondly it makes it more diﬀicult for an Adv to breach a VF . In the original model, one VF is
verified at a time. This makes it easier to perform a TOCTOU attack [Nun+20], since there is a certain
amount of time available before the next CIV of a given VF , while the others are being verified. The
more VFs exist in the system, the longer this time frame will be. When everything is verified at the
same time, this is no longer the case.
==PAGE:65==
8.5 Verify multiple VFs at the same time
59
Figure 8.2: Policy changed to verify all VFs at the same time.
The main disadvantage, and the reason the original model was chosen, is that it is no longer possible
to tell which VF are compromised. The modified policy will only be satisfied if a every single VF is
in a correct state. This has the consequence that if a single VF is compromised, every VF have to be
replaced.
8.5
Verify multiple VFs at the same time
Currently it is only possible to verify the integrity of one VF at a time. Looking only at functionality,
this is not an issue, but the more VFs a Vrf owns, the more time is spent to verify the integrity of
all the VFs . The model would be improved if it is possible to verify the integrity of several VFs at a
time. It is important that the ability to distinguish compromised and non-compromised VFs are still
kept, unlike the approach in the previous section where all VFs are verified at the same but, but this
ability is lost.
It would be relatively simple to solve this by brute force. This could work by find each combination of
==PAGE:66==
8.6 Swap around NV indexes when recreating the policy
60
sub-policies put together, such that any combination of healthy VFs will satisfy the policy. For instance,
if we have two VFs , the the policy will be satisfied if either the first VF is healthy, the second VF is
healthy or both are healthy. This becomes an issue as the number of VFs increase. If we have three VFs
(vf1, vf2, vf3 the list of combinations is (vf1), (vf1, vf2), (vf1, vf3), (vf1, vf2, vf3), (vf2), (vf2, vf3), (vf3).
It quickly becomes obvious why brute force is not a good approach, as only three VFs have seven
combinations.
8.6
Swap around NV indexes when recreating the policy
Instead of using the same NV indexes for each VF when creating the policy, the Vrf can instead swap
them around. For instance if a Vrf owns two VFs , each with two NV indexes, a policy might be
created such that the first VF uses NV index 1 and 2, while the second VF uses NV index 3 and 4.
When later recreating the policy, the Vrf could swap the indexes around such that the first VF now
uses NV index 2 and 3, while the second VF uses NV index 1 and 4.
The point of this is to make it harder for an Adv to map which NV indexes belong together. This
will also make it more diﬀicult for the Adv to discover how many different VFs are owned by the Vrf
. If each VF always uses the same set of NV indexes, then the Adv can count each unique attestation
request to estimate how many VFs exist.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this chapter the conclusion of the project is presented.
9.1
Model
This project have designed a model consisting of three different protocols which are capable of providing
Configuration Integrity Verification (CIV ) of cloud-based Virtual Functions (VFs ). The three protocols
can create a TPM policy, create a Attestation Key (AK ) and verify the integrity of a VF respectively.
According to the analysis and tests carried out, the model fulfills the requirements set in section 3.3
when considering a Adversary (Adv ) with the capabilities described in section 3.4.
The model does have some shortcomings. The first and most important is that the Prover (Prv ) is
assumed to be trusted to securely collect configuration measurements from each VF and placing them
in its TPM. This is a somewhat big assumption to take and is not trivial to implement. In section 8, a
number of approaches are discussed that can potentially remove this assumption and more trust away
from the Prv .
Secondly the model only verifies a single VF at a time. This can be an issue as this means the time
between verifications will increase as the number of VFs increase, which have the consequence that a
VF will stay compromised for longer before being detected.
The two main approaches to remove trust away from the Prv is either installing a vTPM on each
VF or allowing each VF to communicate directly with the TPM on the Prv . The first option of
installing a vTPM on each VF can only be realized if each vTPM have a different EK . If there is a
shared EK , it would also be possible to recreate the AK on each VF . This will of course break security,
as it would allow one VF to forge the verification signature of another VF . I don’t know if it is the
case for all implementations, but VMWare [VMw] uses separate EK for each separate vTPM. This is
achieved by trusting a third-party certificate authority to generate an EK .
The second option can only be realized if a VF can communicate with the Prv TPM in a secure
manner that can’t be monitored by the Prv . I don’t have enough knowledge on the subject of Con-
tainer to host communication to give suggestions on how this can be achieved, if it at all can. Gaining
this kind of security would allow each VF to extend its own configuration measurements onto the Prv
TPM, thus avoiding the need for installing vTPMs on each of them. This would likely result in less
overhead, as I believe (without any evidence supporting this claim) communicating with the Prv TPM
is less computationally heavy than simulating a TPM on each VF .
Inter VF verification is another interesting topic that did not make it into this project. This idea
would allow a trusted VF to verify the integrity of another VF . The benefits of doing this is increased
performance, as the Vrf is no longer responsible for every single verification, instead verification’s can
be evenly spread out among the Vrf and all currently trusted VFs . It is necessary with some changes
to my model to support this. A VF needs to know be able to verify the attestation signature in order
to verify the integrity of another VF . This means trusted VFs needs to know the current, most recent,
AK . This brings the problem of finding a secure way for the Vrf to always share the newest AK with
trusted VFs . If this is not done in a secure way, a Adv could manipulate the verification process by
making a trusted VF use an old AK , thus compromising security.
==PAGE:68==
9.2 Model execution time
62
The TOCTOU problem is also not considered in my model.
This is an attack that abuses the
fact that it is not feasible to provide attestation at all time with no break. There needs to be some
time between attestations, otherwise the security overhead would be so large that no resources are left
to provide actual functionality. The TOCTOU attack uses this by compromising a VF in-between
attestations by compromising the VF and bringing it back to a trusted state before the next attestation
takes place. This allows a Adv to compromise a VF without being detected. It is still a research topic
to solve TOCTOU, and very much outside the scope of this project, but it is important to keep in mind.
9.2
Model execution time
In the evaluation section 7.1, the execution time of the different protocols is measured and discussed.
The measurements done in this project is compared to those of CloudVault, and is significantly higher.
This is likely due to a badly optimized test setup, which have added a lot of overhead compared to the
test setup used by CloudVault. The main reason for this, is that the test setup used in this project is
designed only to prove functionality, and not to provide fast results.
The evaluation presents two tables showtime the time taken to execute the three protocols designed in
this project. The first uses the measurements from this project, while the second uses the measurements
done by CloudVault. Of course, since the measurements from CloudVault are significantly faster, the
time taken to execute the protocols with their measurements are also significantly faster than if the
measurements from this project are used.
9.3
Implementation
The implementation is only a proof of concept and requires much more work before it can be considered
ready to use in a production environment. Furthermore proper testing needs to be done to ensure the
security requirements work in a practical implementation, and not only in theory. The implementation
only implements the designed protocols, which means all the surrounding architecture of a full system
needs to be implemented too, before it can be used in a production system. Some of these include, but
is not limited to:
1. Secure collection of configuration measurement: Perhaps the most important. The secure and
privacy preserving collection of configuration measurements. Preferably in a way that does not
require the Prv to be trusted to do this.
2. Configuration measurement reference database: The reference database used by the Vrf needs
to be implemented. There is no strict requirements for how this should be done.
3. Patching and updates: When a VF is patched or updated, the reference database needs to
be updated accordingly.
This should be done in a privacy preserving and secure manner so
configurations are not leaked.
4. User management system: The Prv should run some sort of user management system that can
be used to identify and authenticate various Vrf ’s.
5. VF management: As the Vrf acts as the orchestrator, he should be able to stop or start VFs .
This needs to be supported by the Prv in a secure way, such that other people can’t start or stop
the VF belonging to a Vrf . This also ties in with the user management system.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Implementation Code
code...
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX B
TPM command execution
time code
1 import os
2 import time
3
4 TRIALS = 10
5
6 class Command:
7
def __init__(self, name, method, setUp, cleanUp):
8
self.name = name
9
self.method = method
10
self.setUp = setUp
11
self.cleanUp = cleanUp
12
self.measurements = []
13
14
def RunMethod(self):
15
if self.setUp != None:
16
for s in self.setUp:
17
rs = s()
18
#print(rs)
19
20
start = time.time()
21
m = self.method()
22
end = time.time()
23
24
if self.cleanUp != None:
25
for c in self.cleanUp:
26
rc = c()
27
#print(rc)
28
29
#print(m)
30
31
return end - start
32
33 class Timer:
34
def __init__(self):
35
self.commands = []
36
37
def AddCommand(self, commandName , method, setUp, cleanUp):
38
command = Command(commandName , method, setUp, cleanUp)
39
self.commands.append(command)
40
41
def RunCommands(self):
42
for c in self.commands:
43
print('Running: {}'.format(c.name))
44
for i in range(TRIALS):
45
time = c.RunMethod()
46
c.measurements.append(time)
47
48
def PrintMeasurements(self):
49
print('Time measurements:')
50
for c in self.commands:
==PAGE:71==
B TPM command execution time code
65
51
avg = sum(c.measurements) / len(c.measurements)
52
print('{}: {} - {}'.format(c.name, avg, c.measurements))
53
54 class TPM:
55
def NVDefine(self):
56
command = 'tpm2_nvdefine -C o -a "nt=extend|ownerwrite|ownerread" 0'
57
return os.system(command)
58
59
def NVDefineN(self):
60
command = 'tpm2_nvdefine -C o -s 6 0'
61
return os.system(command)
62
63
def NVExtend(self):
64
command = 'echo -n "abc123" | tpm2_nvextend -C o -i- 0'
65
return os.system(command)
66
67
def NVWrite(self):
68
command = 'echo -n "abc123" | tpm2_nvwrite -C o -i- 0'
69
return os.system(command)
70
71
def NVUndefine(self):
72
command = 'tpm2_nvundefine 0'
73
return os.system(command)
74
75
def CreatePrimary(self):
76
command = 'tpm2_createprimary -C o -c primary.ctx -d create.dig -t ticket'
77
return os.system(command)
78
79
def Create(self):
80
command = 'tpm2_create -C primary.ctx -u key.pub -r key.priv -c key.ctx'
81
return os.system(command)
82
83
def CleanKeys(self):
84
command = 'rm primary.ctx; rm create.dig; rm ticket; rm key.pub; rm key.priv; rm key.
ctx'
85
return os.system(command)
86
87
def CleanCertification(self):
88
command = 'rm attestation; rm sig'
89
return os.system(command)
90
91
def CleanSession(self):
92
command = 'tpm2_flushcontext session.ctx; rm session.ctx'
93
return os.system(command)
94
95
def CleanPolicies(self):
96
command = 'rm policy0; rm policy1; rm policy2; rm policy3'
97
return os.system(command)
98
99
def StartAuthSession(self):
100
command = 'tpm2_startauthsession -S session.ctx'
101
return os.system(command)
102
103
def PolicyNV(self, name=''):
104
command = 'tpm2_nvread -C o 0 | tpm2_policynv -C o -S session.ctx -i- {} 0 eq'.format
(name)
105
return os.system(command)
106
107
def CreatePolicies(self):
108
for i in range(4):
109
self.PolicyNV('-L policy{}'.format(i))
110
111
def PolicyOR(self):
112
command = 'tpm2_policyor -S session.ctx -l sha256:policy0,policy1,policy2,policy3;'
113
return os.system(command)
114
==PAGE:72==
B TPM command execution time code
66
115
def CertifyCreation(self):
116
command = 'tpm2_certifycreation -C key.ctx -c primary.ctx -d create.dig -t ticket -o
sig --attestation attestation -f plain'
117
return os.system(command)
118
119
def Load(self):
120
command = 'tpm2_load -C primary.ctx -u key.pub -r key.priv'
121
return os.system(command)
122
123
def NVCertify(self):
124
command = 'tpm2_nvcertify -C key.ctx -f plain -o sig --attestation attestation 0'
125
return os.system(command)
126
127 def Test():
128
a = 0
129
for i in range(50000):
130
a = i
131
return a
132
133 def main():
134
tpm = TPM()
135
timer = Timer()
136
timer.AddCommand('define', tpm.NVDefine, None, [tpm.NVUndefine])
137
timer.AddCommand('extend', tpm.NVExtend, [tpm.NVDefine], [tpm.NVUndefine])
138
timer.AddCommand('undefine', tpm.NVUndefine, [tpm.NVDefine], None)
139
timer.AddCommand('primary', tpm.CreatePrimary , None, [tpm.CleanKeys])
140
timer.AddCommand('key', tpm.Create, [tpm.CreatePrimary], [tpm.CleanKeys])
141
timer.AddCommand('PolicyNV', tpm.PolicyNV, [tpm.NVDefine,tpm.NVExtend,tpm.
StartAuthSession], [tpm.CleanSession ,tpm.NVUndefine])
142
timer.AddCommand('PolicyOR', tpm.PolicyOR, [tpm.NVDefine,tpm.NVExtend,tpm.
StartAuthSession ,tpm.CreatePolicies], [tpm.NVUndefine,tpm.CleanSession ,tpm.
CleanPolicies])
143
timer.AddCommand('certify', tpm.CertifyCreation , [tpm.CreatePrimary ,tpm.Create], [tpm.
CleanKeys,tpm.CleanCertification])
144
timer.AddCommand('load', tpm.Load, [tpm.CreatePrimary ,tpm.Create], [tpm.CleanKeys])
145
timer.AddCommand('startauth', tpm.StartAuthSession , None, [tpm.CleanSession])
146
timer.AddCommand('write', tpm.NVWrite, [tpm.NVDefineN], [tpm.NVUndefine])
147
timer.AddCommand('cert nv', tpm.NVCertify, [tpm.NVDefineN,tpm.NVWrite,tpm.CreatePrimary ,
tpm.Create,tpm.Load], [tpm.CleanKeys,tpm.CleanCertification ,tpm.NVUndefine])
148
149
timer.RunCommands()
150
timer.PrintMeasurements()
151
152 if __name__ == '__main__':
153
main()
Listing B.1: Execution time calculation code.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX C
TPM software
dependencies
The following list of dependencies is needed to install the software discussed in the implementation
setup section.
• GNU Autoconf (version >= 2019.01.06)
• GNU Automake
• GNU Libtool
• pkg-config
• C compiler
• C Library Development Libraries and Header Files (for pthreads headers)
• ESAPI - TPM2.0 TSS ESAPI library (tss2-esys) and header files
• OpenSSL libcrypto library and header files
• Curl library and header files
• Universally Unique ID library (UUID)
• doxygen
• libcurl development libraries
• glib and gio 2.0 libraries and development files
• libtss2-sys, libtss2-mu and TCTI libraries from https://github.com/tpm2-software/tpm2-tss
The following commands can be used in the terminal to install the dependencies on Ubuntu Linux:
1 $ sudo apt -y update
2 $ sudo apt -y install \
3
autoconf-archive \
4
libcmocka0 \
5
libcmocka-dev \
6
procps \
7
iproute2 \
8
build-essential \
9
git \
10
pkg-config \
11
gcc \
12
libtool \
13
automake \
14
libssl-dev \
15
uthash-dev \
16
autoconf \
==PAGE:74==
C TPM software dependencies
68
17
doxygen \
18
libjson-c-dev \
19
libini-config-dev \
20
libcurl-dev
.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX D
TPM command wrapper
code
1 import os
2
3 class TpmManager:
4
def __init__(self, bitIndex):
5
self.bitIndex = bitIndex
6
7
def NVRead(self, auth, index):
8
command = 'tpm2_nvread {} {}'.format(auth, index)
9
return os.system(command)
10
11
def NVWrite(self, auth, index, data):
12
command = 'echo -n "{}" | tpm2_nvwrite {} -i- {}'.format(data, auth, index)
13
return os.system(command)
14
15
def NVDefine(self, auth, attributes, index, size=''):
16
command = 'tpm2_nvdefine {} {} {} {}'.format(auth, attributes , size, index)
17
return os.system(command)
18
19
def NVUndefine(self, index):
20
command = 'tpm2_nvundefine {}'.format(index)
21
return os.system(command)
22
23
def NVExtend(self, auth, data, index):
24
command = 'echo "{}" | tpm2_nvextend {} -i- {}'.format(data, auth, index)
25
return os.system(command)
26
27
def PolicyNV(self, auth, index, policyName):
28
command = 'tpm2_nvread {} {} | tpm2_policynv {} -S session.ctx -i- {} {} eq'.format(
auth, index, auth, policyName, index)
29
return os.system(command)
30
31
def PolicyOR(self, containerId , policyName, numPolicies):
32
policyString = ''
33
for i in range(numPolicies):
34
policyString+='policy-C{}-{},'.format(containerId , i)
35
policyString = policyString[:-1]
36
command = 'tpm2_policyor -S session.ctx {} -l sha256:{}'.format(policyName ,
policyString)
37
print(command)
38
return os.system(command)
39
40
def StartAuthSession(self, policySession=''):
41
command = 'tpm2_startauthsession -S session.ctx {}'.format(policySession)
42
return os.system(command)
43
44
def FlushContext(self):
45
command = 'tpm2_flushcontext session.ctx; rm session.ctx'
46
return os.system(command)
47
48
def CleanUpPolicies(self, containerId , numPolicies):
==PAGE:76==
D TPM command wrapper code
70
49
for i in range(numPolicies):
50
os.system('rm policy-C{}-{}'.format(containerId , i))
51
52
def Create(self, policy):
53
command = 'tpm2_create -C primary.ctx -c key.ctx -u key.pub -r key.priv {}'.format(
policy)
54
return os.system(command)
55
56
def Load(self):
57
command = 'tpm2_load -C primary.ctx -u key.pub -r key.priv -c key.ctx'
58
return os.system(command)
59
60
def NVCertify(self, bitIndex):
61
command = 'tpm2_nvcertify -C key.ctx -f plain -o signature.bin --attestation
attestation.bin {}'.format(bitIndex)
62
return os.system(command)
Listing D.1: Execution time calculation code.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[Abe+16]
Tigist Abera et al. “C-FLAT: Control-Flow Attestation for Embedded Systems Software.”
In: (2016).
[ACG15]
Will Arthur, Challener, and Kenneth Goldman. A Practical Guide to TPM 2.0: Using the
Trusted Platform Module in the New Age of Security. APress Open, 2015.
[Awa+14]
Abir Awad et al. “Property Based Attestation for a Secure Cloud Monitoring System.” In:
(2014).
[BL19]
Marco De Benedictis and Antonio Lioy. “Integrity verification of Docker containers for a
lightweight cloud environment.” In: (2019).
[Che+06]
Liqun Chen et al. “A Protocol for Property-Based Attestation.” In: (2006).
[Che+08]
Liqun Chen et al. “Property-Based Attestation without a Trusted Third Party.” In: (2008).
[Doc]
Docker. Get Started with Docker. url: https://www.docker.com/. (accessed: 24.01.2021).
[DY83]
DANNY DOLEV and ANDREW c. YAO. “On the Security of Public Key Protocols.” In:
(1983).
[Fou]
Gentoo Foundation. Integrity Measurement Architecture. url: https://wiki.gentoo.org/
wiki/Integrity_Measurement_Architecture. (accessed: 09.01.2021).
[Fuc]
Andreas Fuchs. Linux TPM2 TSS2 Software. url: https://github.com/tpm2-software.
(accessed: 01.01.2021).
[Gol]
Ken Goldman. IBM’s Software TPM 2.0. url: https://sourceforge.net/projects/
ibmswtpm2/. (accessed: 01.01.2021).
[HLL16]
Shohreh Hosseinzadeh, Samuel Laurén, and Ville Leppänen. “Security in Container-based
Virtualization through vTPM.” In: (2016).
[Kou+19]
Nikos Koutroumpouchos et al. “Secure Edge Computing with Lightweight Control-Flow
Property-based Attestation.” In: (2019).
[LDG]
Benjamin Larsen, Heini Bergsson Debes, and Thanassis Giannetsos. “CloudVaults: Integrat-
ing Trust Extensions into System Integrity Verification for Cloud-based Environments.” In:
().
[Luo+19]
Wu Luo et al. “Container-IMA: A privacy-preserving Integrity Measurement Architecture
for Containers.” In: (2019).
[MGC18]
Jose Moreira, Thanassis Giannetsos, and Liqun Chen. “Future Proofing the Connected
World: A QuantumResistant Trusted Platform Module.” In: (2018).
[Nun+20]
Ivan De Oliveira Nunes et al. “On the TOCTOU Problem in Remote Attestation.” In:
(2020).
[NVH10]
Aarthi Nagarajan, Vijay Varadharajan, and Michael Hitchens. “Analysis of Property Based
Attestation in Trusted Platforms.” In: (2010).
[Sai+04]
Reiner Sailer et al. “Design and implementation of a TCG-based integrity measurement
architecture.” In: (2004).
[TCG16a]
TCG. “Trusted Platform Module Library Part 1: Architecture.” In: (2016).
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
72
[TCG16b]
TCG. “Trusted Platform Module Library Part 2: Structures.” In: (2016).
[TCG16c]
TCG. “Trusted Platform Module Library Part 3: Commands.” In: (2016).
[TCG20]
TCG. “TCG PC Client Platform TPM Profile Specification for TPM 2.0.” Version 1.05. In:
(2020).
[VMw]
VMware. VMware vSphere Documentation. url: https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-
vSphere/index.html. (accessed: 07.01.2021).
