==PAGE:1==
Printable and Cell-deformable Bioinks for
Skeletal Muscle Tissue Models
Freja Høier (s153286)
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
1st February 2021
Supervisors:
Johan Ulrik Lind
Ph.D. Carmen Radeke
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Johan Ulrik Lind, for introducing me to the wonders of tissue
engineering together with helping me with enthusiastic guidance theoretically and experimentally.
I would like to thank my Co-supervisor, Ph.D. Carmen Radeke, for helping me with guidance for the
3D printing of bioinks, both practical and theoretically. I would also like to thank her for designing the
ribbon platform, used in this thesis, together with printing the platform itself.
I would like to thank Ph.D. Christian J. Pless for showing me how to prepare the well ink (an ink he has
designed). I would also like to thank him for the preparation of the solutions I need to mix in order to
obtain the well ink.
I would like to thank Ph.D. Selgin D. Cakal for showing me how to culture cells and always be available
if I needed a hand.
Lastly I would like to thank my boyfriend, Lasse Bo Mortensen, for helping me in the guidance of fading
images together, designing ﬁgures, and for being supportive throughout my entire thesis.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Background: Bioprinting is an intriguing emerging tool for creating 3D human tissue models. These 3D
models can be printed as complex constructs closely resembling native tissue, hereby opening possibilities
for personalised medicine.
Purpose: Perform studies on printable and cell-deformable bioinks which can be used in an all-printed
hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility assay together with validating potential materials for the rib-
bons used in the contractility assay.
Method: The validation of the materials was established on rheological studies (ﬂow sweeps, temperature
sweep, and amplitude sweeps), theoretical analysis based on beam deﬂection, and 3D bioprinting of eight
bioinks and one ribbon ink.
Results: A contraction of tissue lines printed with the bioink (5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio.
cells/mL) was observed, and this bioink was therefore optimised and used in the platform. The 2% locust
bean gum/휅-carrageenan + 3% low bloom gelatin was found to be the best option as ribbon material
compared to three other tested hydrogels. Based on the two other results an all-printed hydrogel-based
muscle-tissue contractility platform was achieved and myotubes together with single cells were observed
in the tissue after ten days in diﬀerentiation media.
Conclusion: It was demonstrated that the printed tissue lines compacted, moreover a 3D functional plat-
form created by an automated one-tool manner was produced, showing that it is possible to print an entire
platform. Although further investigations are needed before the all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue
contractility assay can be used for drug development and personalised medicine, we seem to be one step
closer.
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
ECM
Extracellular matrix
MFC
Microﬁbrillated cellulose
PDMS
Polymethylsiloxane
HA
Hyaluronic
Platform
all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility platform
Ribbon platform
all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility platform
mTG
Microbial transglutaminase
LBG
Locust bean gum
휅-carrageenan
Kappa-carrageenan
휅-car
Kappa-carrageenan
LB gelatin
Low bloom (164G) gelatin
HB gelatin
High bloom (300G) gelatin
PBS
Phosphate buﬀered saline
Temp.
Temperature
PS
Polystyrene
HA
Hexyl acetat
BA
Butyl acetat
DMEM
Dulbecoo’s modiﬁed eagle medium
VFR
Volume ﬂow rate
FBS
Fetal bovine serum
P/S
Pencillin/Streptomycin
GM
Growth media (DMEM + 10% FBS + 1% P/S)
HS
Horse serum
DM
Diﬀerentiation media (DMEM + 2% HS + 1% P/S)
DAPI
Dihydrochloride
i
==PAGE:7==
List of Symbols
σ
Stress
Pa
c
Stress constant
Pa
ϵ
Strain
E
Young’s modulus
Pa
γ
Shear strain
h
Height of material
m
l
Length of material
m
τ
Shear stress
Pa
F
Force
N
A
Area
m2
G
Shear modulus
Pa
γ
Shear strain rate
s−1
t
Time
s
η
Viscosity
Pa s
ν
Possion’s ratio
K
Flow consistency index
Pa sn
n
Power law index
τ휽
Shear stress in 휃-direction
Pa
M
Torque
N m
R
Radius of plate
m
γR
Shear rate at R
s−1
Fz
Force in z-direction
N
ω
Angular frequency
rad s−1
τ0
Amplitude of shear stress
Pa
γ0
Amplitude of shear strain
δ
Phase diﬀerence
G’
Storage modulus
Pa
G”
Loss modulus
Pa
G*
Loss modulus
Pa
γO
Oscillation strain
%
δB
Deﬂection of beam
m
I
Moment of inertia
m4
L
Length of beam
m
r
Radius of beam
m
x
Point observed on beam
m
δ풎풂풙
Maximum deﬂection of beam
m
ii
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Introduction
1
1
Project aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Background and Theory
3
2
In Vivo Skeletal Muscle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
In Vitro Striated Muscle Tissue Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
Previous Platform Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
3D Bioprinting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.1
Bioinks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Previous 3D Printed Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Current Ribbon Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Rheology Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6.1
Materials used for Bioinks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.2
Materials used for Ribbon Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Experimental Setup
16
7
Rheometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
8
3D Printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
9
In Vitro C2C12 Culture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
10
Staining and Imaging of Tissues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
11
Project Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Results
25
12
Ribbon Platform Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
12.1
Theoretical Background and Analytical Analysis of Beam Deﬂection
. . . . . .
25
12.2
Rheology Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
12.3
Beam Deﬂection for the Chosen Hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
iii
==PAGE:9==
13
Tissue Line Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
13.1
Rheology Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
13.2
Printed Tissue Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
14
Ribbon Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Discussion
45
15
Ribbon Platform Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
16
Tissue Line Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
16.1
Rheology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
16.2
Printed Tissue Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
17
Ribbon Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
18
Further Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Conclusion
53
Appendices
54
A
Rheology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B
Tissue Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C
Preparation of Samples for 3D Printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
D
G-codes used the 3D Printer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Bibliography
69
iv
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
Human tissue models in vitro are intriguing emerging tools for basic biomedical and pharmaceutical
research that may ultimately redeﬁne the preclinical stages of pharmaceutical drug development. Due
to inherent species diﬀerences, animal studies are limited in their predictability in terms of clinical
outcome of drug and drug candidates whereas engineered human tissue models is an emerging alternative.
The ultimate goal is to accurately predict in vivo safety and eﬃcacy at the earliest stages of drug
development, which would have huge impact on the cost and time required for drug development.
Moreover, engineered tissue models can be purposed to match diﬀerent patient and pathological proﬁles,
opening new possibilities for personalised medicine. However, there is a signiﬁcant inherent challenge
in fabricating engineered tissue models in a robust, scalable and automated manner.
One tool that is appealing in the ﬁeld of three-dimensional (3D) tissue engineering is bioprinting due
to the possibility of generating 3D complex constructs closely resembling native tissue. Bioprinting is
a printing process done by using bioinks that are inks composed of cells and biomaterials. Diﬀerent
biomaterials are able to work as components in these bioinks, as their properties can easily be tuned to
mimic native extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as collagen, cellulose, elastin, and gelatin.
Ideally, these inks should have a shear-thinning behaviour while simultaneously embedding cells at
physiological densities within microenvironments that mimic the native ECM. When a material has a
shear-thinning behaviour it means that the viscosity of the material decreases as deformation of the
material over time increases thus making shear-thinning behaviour an important property of the bioinks
to consider.
A lot of investigations in 3D tissue engineering with bioprinting have already been done, however these
prints have often had cells in low densities ﬁxed inside matrices instead of generating a complex tissue
with physiological cell densities (100mio./mL). This is a critical element with the purpose of making
tissue models that not only look similar to native tissue, but more importantly, acts like the native tissue
as well. To generate tissue of physiological densities one option is to embed the cells in printed matrices
that they are capable of rapidly deforming and compact during culture. In this thesis we aim to explore
this approach. Additionally, we will explore using multimaterial 3D bioprinting to not only print tissues,
but also mechanical supports and housing. Ultimately, this will enable fabrication of complex tissue
models in an automated one-tool manner.
This study focuses on 3D printing models of skeletal muscle. Skeletal muscle is tied to a number severe
congenital and acquired musculoskeletal conditions including diﬀerent kinds of muscular dystrophy and
myositis [1]. Moreover, skeletal muscle plays a central role in the glucose uptake and development of
diabetes mellitus type II, contributing to insulin resistance [2]. Lastly, skeletal muscle tissue based on
immortalised myoblast cell lines, C2C12, serves as a low cost developmental tool to inform later research
on models of cardiac muscle, which is immensely important in preclinical safety studies. In addition
to printing skeletal muscle tissues, we will study means for anchoring these tissues, within all-printed
ﬂexible supports that will ultimately enable studies of contractility and drug induced changes to this key
parameter.
1
Project aims
This project aims for systematically evaluating printable bioinks for generating miniature models of
skeletal muscle together with starting initial studies on an all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue
contractility assay. This will be done by employing mouse skeletal muscle (C2C12) cell line as a cell
model source and mostly hydrogels as materials in the inks and bioinks.
In short the aims of this thesis are:
1
==PAGE:11==
• Performing a theoretical analysis and validating potential materials for an all-printed hydrogel-based
muscle-tissue contractility assay
• Develop bioinks and compare their printable and cell-compaction properties with rheology during
and after printing based on:
a) Microﬁbrillated cellulose (MFC)
b) Gelatin
• Develop procedures for bio-printing C2C12-laden bioinks with ﬁlaments Ø < 1mm
• Compare the extend and speed of cell-driven compaction of the printed ﬁlaments as a function of
ink composition
• Perform initial studies on an all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility assay, as illus-
trated in Figure 1
Figure 1: Simple graphical illustration of the steps in the printing process of the ribbon platform: (1)
The platform is printed with one type of ink. (2) With the same type of ink the ribbons are printed as four
continuous lines crossing the platform in the process. (3) Tissue lines are printed on top of two ribbons
in each of the eight newly created wells. (4) Newly printed tissue lines. (5) Over time the tissue lines
start to compact and this creates a deﬂection on the ribbons which is a key measurement.
2
==PAGE:12==
Background and Theory
2
In Vivo Skeletal Muscle
The muscle tissue can be divided into 3 types of muscle: skeletal, cardiac, and smooth. All three types of
muscle contain contractile actin/myosin ﬁlaments. In skeletal and cardiac muscles the actin and myosin
are organised, whereas smooth muscle does not posses an apparent organisation in actin and myosin. This
organisation is observed as stripes in the muscles hereby giving them the shared name striated muscles
[3]. The diﬀerent muscle types have diﬀerent physiological properties in the body. In short the cardiac
muscles are muscles that can only be found in the heart and is controlled by the autonomic nervous system,
just like smooth muscle. Smooth muscles can be found in, among others, the walls of the blood vessels,
hollow organs and in the skin in relation to hair. Skeletal muscles are the muscles in the musculoskeletal
system, meaning the muscles we use for moving and making conscious movements. In contrast to the
other two muscle types, skeletal muscles are therefore controlled by the somatic nervous system [3].
Figure 2: Overview of components inside the skeletal muscle.
The outermost connective tissue is the epimysium surround-
ing individual fascicles that each are encircled by perimysium.
The fascicle consists of muscle ﬁbers or myoﬁbers that are
surrounded by endomysium. Each fascicle is composed of my-
oﬁbrils. Image from [4]
In this project the focus will be on skele-
tal muscles, since there is an interest in
obtaining the same properties of skele-
tal muscles in vitro as in vivo for dif-
ferent applications, such as drug testing
on conditions aﬀecting skeletal muscle
cells and also serves as convenient mod-
els system for cardiac muscle [5, 6, 7,
8].
An illustration of the skeletal muscle
can be seen in Figure 2.
The illus-
tration shows how the muscle is com-
posed of muscle fascicles, surround by
the epimysium, which is a ﬁbrous tissue
that protects the muscle against friction
from other muscles and bones. A fas-
cicle is a organised bundle of muscle
ﬁbers, which are surrounded by the per-
imysium, which is a connective tissue
that ensures that the muscle ﬁbers are
kept together in these bundles [3].
Muscle ﬁber are surrounded by a con-
nective tissue called the endomysium.
The endomysium ensures an appropriate chemical environment for the cells and overlies the sarcolemma,
which is the cell membrane of the muscle ﬁber. Inside the sarcolemma of the myocyte is the sarcoplasm,
the cytoplasm of the myocyte. This sarcoplasm is composed of myoﬁbrils, but can otherwise be compared
to the cytoplasm of other cells. The Golgi apparatus and mitochondria of the cell can be found near
the nucleus and between the myoﬁbrils, which is diﬀerent compared to other cells. The sarcoplasmic
reticulum of the cell consists of a number of sarcotubuli creating a network around the myoﬁbrils, which
connects to the transverse tubulus (T-tubulus).
The sarcotubuli merges near the T-tubuli creating a
terminal cisterna [3].
The main function of the sarcoplasmic reticulum and T-tubulus is to store and regulate calcium ions (Ca2+)
in order to control the concentration of calcium inside the cell. When an action potential propagate through
the T-tubulus from the ﬁbres surface to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, the sarcoplasmic reticulum release
a concentration of calcium ions to the surrounding sarcoplasmic. The rise of concentration of calcium
3
==PAGE:13==
inside the sarcoplasm induce a contraction of the muscle ﬁber which stops when the calcium ions are
pumped back into the terminal cisterna lumen [3].
Figure 3: Simple illustration of the key
components of a skeletal muscle ﬁber:
actin ﬁlaments and myosin ﬁlaments. The
overlapping nature of these two kinds of
ﬁlaments plays a part in creating the stri-
ated characteristic of a skeletal muscle
which presents itself as a key feature on
an electron microscopic image. From Os-
trovido et al. 2014 [9]
Looking at the myoﬁbrils, these consist mostly of two types
of myoﬁlaments: actin ﬁlament and myosin ﬁlaments. These
ﬁlaments are placed in structural patterns known as sarcom-
ere and can be observed with light microscopy, since the
bands and lines in structure have diﬀerent ways of reﬂecting
light, as observed in Figure 3. The A band is anisotropic due
to its refractive index which is a characteristic of an orderly
crystalline structure making the A band appear dark on a
image. The I band however appears light on the image due
to having an isotropic refractive index, indicating how the
polarised goes through the I band. This diﬀerence in the A
and I band is due to the fact that the A band consist of both
myosin and actin, while the I band only consists of the actin
[9].
The H band, Z and M lines are also illustrated in Figure 3.
Here it can be observed that the H band is only composed
of myosin, and the Z line is composed of alpha-actin, which
binds the actin ﬁlaments with the positive ends to the Z line.
The M line is the middle of the H band and is created by the
proteins myomesin and c-protein.
As earlier mentioned the endomysium is important for the
control of the appropriate chemical environment around the
cells and together with the perimysium and epimysium they
constitute the native extracellular matrix of the skeletal muscle. The endomysium consists mainly of
collagen IV, laminin, and heparin sulphate-containing proteoglycans, which together with the collagen I
found in the epimysium and perimysium, provides a structural integrity and enables tissue mechanotrans-
duction [10, 11]. The interactions between the myocyte and ECM contributes to cellular processes during
normal muscle growth and development [10].
Figure 4: An illustration of diﬀerentiation and fusion of the myoblasts into myotubuli. (i) Growth of
myoblast. (ii) Myoblasts diﬀerentiate into myocytes. (iii) The newly formed myocytes fuses giving rise
to myotubes with multiple nuclei. Figure 1 from Jensen 2019 [12]
Under muscle development and regeneration the muscle ﬁber undergoes diﬀerent phases before ending
as a myocyte. This process is illustrated in Figure 4.
The myoblasts are the earliest stage of a cell destined to become a skeletal muscle cell. A myoblast is
a cell with a single nuclear with no myoﬁbrils, however as it diﬀerentiates the myoblasts start to merge
together forming multiple myotubuli, which have multiple cores placed in the centre of the cell. Further
diﬀerentiation forms an increasing number of myoﬁbrils with displaced peripheral nuclei. Eventually a
4
==PAGE:14==
functional myoﬁber is formed [3]. The process of going from myoblasts to functional myoﬁbers has been
studied in other articles [6, 13, 14], as there is an interest in controlling the properties of the myoﬁbers in
vitro. This process is focus of this project, as there here will be worked with C2C12 cells. These cells are
immortalised myoblasts cells of mice.
3
In Vitro Striated Muscle Tissue Models
Skeletal muscle tissue models together with cardiac tissue models have been investigated in diﬀerent
articles [5, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18].
Diﬀerent approaches for the optimal design of model have been
investigated and one key thing these diﬀerent approaches have in common is the focus on having an
optimal ECM for the tissue growth as it has a huge impact on the outcome of tissue. One way of creating
a tissue in vitro is by making a 2D model where the cells are diﬀerentiating in a hydrogel matrix [13],
while a 3D model could be a tissue between two pillars that more closely resemble native tissue in contrast
to a 2D model [5].
3.1
Previous Platform Designs
Diﬀerent kinds of 3D tissue models have been designed so as to represent the native tissue of skeletal
muscle cells and cardiac cells [15, 17, 18].
Article
Materials
Cell Type
Cell Density
(Cells/mL)
Boudou 2012 [15]
Collagen I & ﬁbronectin
CMT
0.5 · 106
Hansen 2010 [5]
Matrigel, ﬁbrinogen & thrombin
Neontal rat heart
4.1 · 106
Nunes 2013 [16]
Collagen
I,
glucose,
NaHCO3,
NaOH, HEPES & Matrigel
hESC & hiPSC
0.5 · 106
Radisic 2003 [6]
Matrigel & collagen I
C2C12
15·106 & 30·
106
Sakar 2012 [17]
Collagen I & Matrigel
C2C12
400
(cells/well)
Vandenburgh 2008 [19]
Collagen I, Matrigel, ﬁbrinogen &
thrombin
C2C12
8.7 · 105
Zhao 2019 [18]
Collagen
I,
Matrigel,
NaHCO3,
NaOH, deionised H2O & 1xM199
CMS from hiPSC
5.5 · 107
Table 1: Table over a small selection of diﬀerent articles using casting moulds for 3D models comparing
the materials for their ECM, the cell types, and the cell densities.
In general, the above mentioned articles rely on manually casting cells in a precursor hydrogel within a
microfabricated casting mould. Over time the hydrogel is then compacted by the continued contraction of
embedded cells which eventually generates a continuous 3D micro-tissue with physiological cell densities.
Oftentimes, this mould would include both horisontal and vertical pillars serving simultaneously as a
force gauge of tissue contractility and to anchor the tissues. In order to produce the casting moulds a
range of diverse approaches and materials have been utilised, not least cast Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
and more recently, 3D printed polymeric moulds. In the Table 1 is given an overview of articles relying
on casting moulds with an outline of their precursor hydrogels, cell sources and starting densities.
5
==PAGE:15==
As presented in Table 1 a lot of articles have used a mixture of collagen I and Matrigel as their ECM for
the tissue generation in order to resemble the native tissue.
In short, in the ECM collagen I is a natural polymer that exhibits non-extensibility even at high loads as
well as being incompressible [11], while Matrigel has important cell adhering properties due to the fact
that Matrigel is a solubilised basement membrane preparation [20]. In other words, the collagen I gives
the mechanical properties of the ECM and the Matrigel makes sure that the cells adhere to the ECM.
Figure 5: An illustration showing in-
creasing thinning in the central part of
the model from an article investigat-
ing the problems facing 3D models that
uses casting moulds. After seven days
the cell thinning shows itself as neck-
ing in the central part of the tissue line.
Figure 1B from Wang et al. 2013 [21]
Besides the consideration regarding the choice of materials used
for tissue matrix, another factor for some models must be taken
into consideration. Speciﬁcally, the models with free standing
cantilevers and pillars with tissue lines face an important prob-
lem regarding breakage of tissue lines due to too stiﬀpillars
as investigated by Wang et al. 2013 in the article Necking and
failure of constrained 3D microtissues induced by cellular ten-
sion [21]. In this article they showed that the models failed as a
result of a dependency on too stiﬀpillars and an ECM with too
low density. When the stiﬀness of the pillars are too high com-
pared to the density of the tissue ECM, the tissue was observed
to fail by thinning and necking at the centre of the tissue line
or attain a stable, yet signiﬁcantly strained morphology [21].
An illustration on how this could look like is given in Figure
5, which shows the model two, three, and seven days after the
cells have been casted. Over time the aforementioned thinning
becomes progressively more obvious at the centre of the tissue
line, forming clear necking on day 7.
Altogether, the models using casting moulds face a number of
problems that ideally should be minimised in order to resemble
native tissue more accurately. Not only that, but with casting
moulds it becomes diﬃcult to fabricate engineered tissue in an
automated manner.
As earlier mentioned an emerging alter-
native to casting moulds is to create the 3D models using 3D
printing that in principle could be used to fabricate engineered
tissue in an automated manner. Therefore, the focus of the fol-
lowing will be on 3D printing and its opportunities as a method
for printing 3D models of muscle tissue.
4
3D Bioprinting
3D bioprinting is a method in which biological materials are printed as ink with a 3D printer in a
similar fashion as traditional inks are printed with a traditional printer. Numerous diﬀerent methods
for 3D printing bioprinting exist and in general they can be divided into 3 categories: drop-based,
ﬁlament-based and plane-based[22]. Within these categories the methods can be further divided into
subcategories, depending on which driving force the printer uses: thermal, piezoelectric, pneumatic,
piston, and screw driving, just to name some of the driving forces. Pneumatic, piston, and screw driving
force are illustrated in Figure 6.
This project is based on the direct ink printing (DIW) method, which is commonly used. The DIW
method is an extrusion-based method based on extruding materials as microﬁlaments by the use of a
drive force. The drive force can either be pneumatic, piston or screw driving[22, 23].
To clarify, the pneumatic system is based on inducing a constant force on the bioinks with the use of air
pressure. A constant pressure is pushed into the syringe, as illustrated in Figure 6, and by controlling the
6
==PAGE:16==
pressure the ﬂow of the ﬁlaments can be controlled [22]. If the ﬂow gets too high the bioinks is extruded
fast through the needle hereby experiencing a higher shear stress of the material.
Figure 6: Illustration of the three diﬀerent driving
forces in 3D bioprinting. The pneumatic system uses
a constant force on the bioinks from air pressure.
The piston system is a piston pressing down which
creates a pressure that extrudes the bioink. The screw
driving system is a screw that drives the bioink out
when the bioink is introduced via the inlet. Figure 2
from [24].
This will create thicker lines than the size of the
outlet of the nozzle or even a puddle of the material
on the plate. If the ﬂow on the other hand is too
low, no extrusion of the materials will happen at
all. Therefore, it is important to tune the pressure
for each individual bioink, so that neither of the
above problems occur.
The piston driven system is based on pressing a
piston onto the material hereby creating a pressure
inside the syringe that will drive the extrusion of
the material, as seen in Figure 6. Like the pneu-
matic system a too high inner pressure creates a
too high ﬂow that will induce in a too high extru-
sion rate and vice versa. This deposition method
provides generally a more direct control of the de-
position of the bioink than the pneumatic system,
which on the other hand has a risk of experiencing
delayed compressed gas [24].
The last system is the screw driving system. This
system is based on having a screw inside the sy-
ringe while the bioinks are introduced from an
inlet, like illustrated in Figure 6. This method is
good for high viscous materials, as it mechanically
forces the inks to ﬂow, however this mechanical force induces a risk of cell contamination and cell damage,
when printing with cells [22].
Figure 7: Illustration of a computational ﬂuid dy-
namic of a printing setup. (a) Fluid volume model de-
signed in 3D and then reduced to a 2D for the COM-
SOL simulation. (b) Illustration of a straight needle
and conical needle with nozzle size of 413µm in the
COMSOL simulation. Here the red/orange colour
represents high shear stress and the blue colour rep-
resents low shear stress. Figure is ﬁgure 9 from [25].
All in all there is a trade oﬀbetween the three
system that one must consider when choosing any
one of the systems as a driving force for the bioink.
Another important factor to consider is the use of
nozzle size together with the shape of the needle.
These factors have an impact on the magnitude of
the shear stress induced on the bioink as it is ex-
truded. This eﬀect was investigated in the article
Müller et al. 2017 [25]. Here they found that hav-
ing a shear stress in the range of 160Pa or higher
ultimately leads to a lack of cell proliferation in
their material, in contrast to shear stress beneath
160Pa. These shear stresses showed to easily arise
when using a straight needle compared to a coni-
cal needle, as illustrated in Figure 7. This meant
that for the straight needle no cell proliferation was
observed for the two tested nozzle sizes of 150µm
and 300µm, while the conical needle had cell pro-
liferation until the nozzle size around 200µm [25].
This means that for printing with cells, low shear
stresses by means of choosing a conical needle and
a bigger nozzle size than 200µm is preferred when
cell proliferation is taken into consideration.
7
==PAGE:17==
4.1
Bioinks
The one thing the system used for bioprinting has in common is the need for a printable bioink which is
an ink composed of cells and biomaterials used for 3D bioprinting [7, 26, 27]. It is important to consider
the rheological properties of the bioinks when printing because they determine how and if the inks are
printed. If the bioinks do not ﬂow during the printing, then it is not possible to print with the ink. In
other words, the materials must be a liquid or show properties similar to that of a liquid during printing.
Therefore if the materials is not a liquid then the material needs to be shear-thinning, meaning that its
viscosity goes down as the shear rate increases. A more detailed explanation of rheology is presented in
section 5. The rheological properties of the materials are important to consider as it makes it possible to
print with materials that are solid when in rest and starts to ﬂow when enough force is introduced on the
material. One important example of such shear-thinning behaviour is microﬁbrillated cellulose (MFC)
that is a biomaterial explained in detail in subsection 6.1 [28].
Another factor that is important to consider is the biocompability of the bioinks. This means that the
bioinks need to be non-toxic and have cell-adhering properties as well as having mechanical strength to
support the tissue. The properties of the bioinks can be tuned, since biomaterials have diﬀerent properties.
Some biomaterials have good cell-adhering properties, due to peptide sequences that are recognised by
the cells, like collagen and gelatin, while often suﬀering from low mechanical properties. Other materials
like hyaluronic acid (HA) have a stronger mechanical strength, but lack the ability for cells to adhere [26,
28]. This excluding behaviour means that any one of these biomaterials do not possess both properties
fully, which is what some bioinks would be expected to possess. If the intention is to include both the
mechanical strength and the cell-adhesion property, it is necessary to mix biomaterials when creating
a bioink with both the desired properties. However, collagen and gelatin have a good cell-adhering
and suﬃcient mechanical strength for this project and in addition to that the bioink preparation remains
simple.
4.2
Previous 3D Printed Models
3D printed models in previous articles have typically used hydrogels in their bioinks. In hydrogels
polymer chains are arranged in an interlinked hydrophilic mesh with two subgroups; synthetic hydrogels
and natural hydrogels [24, 28, 29]. Polymers with synthetic mesh constitute the synthetic hydrogels
meaning that there is no batch-to-batch variation though they do have a low cell viability [24]. The
natural hydrogels on the other hand are polymers of natural origin like alginate, gelatin, collagen, HA,
and carrageenan. Compared to the synthetic hydrogels the natural hydrogels have high proliferation rates
as well as viability for cells owing to chemical signals in the hydrogels. The natural hydrogels however
exerts a batch-to-batch variation making it complicated to replicate the same results [24].
Article
Materials
Cell Type
Cell Density
(cell/mL)
Chimene 2018 [30]
휅-carrageenan,
GelMA
&
2D
nanosilicates
MC3T3-EI
3.33 · 105
Markstedt 2015 [7]
NFC & alginate
Human chon-
drocytes
9.6
·
105
(cell/plate)
Mestre 2019 [8]
HA, glycerol, gelatin & ﬁbronectin
C2C12
5 · 106
Seyedmahmoud 2019 [31]
GelMA & alginate
C2C12
8 · 106
Table 2: Table presenting an overview of a small selection of diﬀerent articles about models made with
3D bioprinting comparing their use of materials for ECM, cell type, and cell densities.
8
==PAGE:18==
Hydrogels are often chosen in bioprinting which is attributable to multiple desirable properties that
hydrogels possess. From a biological point of view hydrogels provide an excellent candidate in bioprinting
with regards to the embedding of cells and bioactive compounds, seeing as they are able to contribute
an instructive and aqueous 3D habitat that reproduces the native ECM. From a printing perspective an
increase in shear rate causes the polymer chain that hydrogel consists of to reorganise to a stretched
conformation leading to decline in the degree of entanglement and ultimately a decrease in viscosity [24].
This behaviour is also known as shear-thinning and is essential when printing with materials of high
viscosity. Furthermore, hydrogels oﬀer a high degree of stability through the formation of physically or
chemically induced cross-linked polymers as well as being non-toxic to cells. All in all hydrogels provide
an excellent candidate in bioprinting.
Several 3D bioprinted models of both skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle tissue have been made, some
of these are illustrated in Table 2. In the articles presented in this table a variety of diﬀerent materials for
ECM have been used and all have shown printable properties with their bioinks. Sometimes the materials
were mixed together in order to create a bioink with a wider set of rheological properties. For example in
Markstedt et al. 2015 [7] they used nanoﬁbrillated cellulose mixed with alginate. The mixture of these
two showed rheological properties dominated by the nanoﬁbrillated cellulose, which has shear-thinning
properties and the cross-liking properties from the alginate that ensures a stable structure after the printing
[7].
Moreover, in these articles they used 3D bioprinted tissue models more resembling isolated myotubes in
a 3D matrix rather than continuous contractile tissues which would be closer to native skeletal muscle
tissue. Even though the examined tissue did not clearly show continuous contractility they were still able
to measure the contractility as shown in Mestre et el. 2019 [8]. In this study they show as a proof of
principle a fully 3D printed platform with a tissue line surrounding two pillars. From these pillars they
are able to measure the contractility of the cells. However the matrices used for the tissue lines have, in
our opinion, been made too stiﬀleading to a ﬁxation of the cells inside their ECM instead of proliferation.
A key diﬀerence between Mestre et el. 2019 [8] and this project also lies in the kind of beams that
are used. In the aforementioned study they used pillars for the tissue lines to surround, instead we are
planning on using cantilevers in the platform represented as ribbons.
4.3
Current Ribbon Platform
Figure 8: Graphical illustration of the rib-
bon platform. The blue colour represents
the material used for the ribbon and plat-
form, while the red colour represents the
bioink used for the tissue lines.
The ribbon platform designed in this thesis builds, as men-
tioned, on ribbons and the possibility of obtaining and ob-
serving continuous contractility of printed tissue, see Figure
8. In order to obtain proliferation for the cell inside of the
ECM a softer material will be used for the ECM. Like the
rest of the articles we are interested in using hydrogels for
the ribbons platform and ECM, due to their previously ad-
vantages compared to other biomaterials. The design of the
platform will depend on the length and diameter chosen for
the ribbons as well as the speciﬁc hydrogel chosen. A more
detailed description of these choices based on a theoretical
background will be presented later in section 12. All in all
the ﬁnal result is ideally going to be an all-printed hydrogel-
based muscle-tissue contractility platform.
9
==PAGE:19==
5
Rheology Theory
When choosing the materials for the 3D printing it is important to understand how the materials behave
when introduced to a shear. This can be done with the use of rheology. Rheology is the study of
deformation and ﬂow of a material when exposed to external forces. As the external force acts on an area
of the material an internal restoring force rises in the area of the aﬀected material. This force per unit
area is also known as stress, while the deformation of the material is denoted strain.
Figure 9: Illustration of a shear stress, 휏푦푥, inducing
a shear strain, 훿푙
훿푦, in a material. From Roselli et al.
2011 Figure 4.1 [32]
The relationship between the two can be described
by the equation [33, 34, 35, 36]:
휎= 퐶· 휖
(1)
Here, 휎is the stress, C is the stress constant, and
휖is the strain.
For a solid material the stress constant is also
known as the Young’s modulus, E. This con-
stant describes the tensile stiﬀness of the mate-
rial, which quantiﬁes the relationship between the
stress and the strain in the linear elastic region of
a material, as illustrated in equation (1).
The stress can act on the material in diﬀerent di-
rections creating diﬀerent kinds of deformations.
One kind of deformation is the shear deformation, also denoted shear strain. This deformation happens
when the stress acts parallel to the material, also known as shear stress [32]. This kind of deformation
is illustrated in Figure 9 and shows how the shear rate rises due to a shear stress, a stress parallel the
material. The shear strain and shear stress for this situation can therefore be described as:
훾= Δ푙
Δ푦
휏= 퐹
퐴
(2)
Here, the shear strain, 훾, can be found by measuring the change in height, Δ푦, and change in the distance,
Δ푙, while the shear stress is found by the force, F, over the area, A. The relationship between the shear
stress and shear strain can then be described as:
휏= 퐺· 훾
(3)
Here, G is the shear modulus, which is a quantity that can be used to describe the stiﬀness of a material.
This equation is used to describe a elastic solid [32].
If the shear strain is observed to be ﬁnite for the applied shear stress then the material behaves like a
solid. If the the material on the other hand behaves like a ﬂuid, there will be a constant increase in the
shear strain as a function of the shear stress. The increase of shear strain will induce a velocity gradient
over time, denoted shear strain rate. This shear strain rate is included in Newtons law for viscosity, which
describes the relationship between the shear stress and the shear strain rate [35].
¤훾= 훾
푡
휏= 휂¤훾
(4)
¤훾is the shear strain rate, also known as shear rate, t is the time, and 휂is the viscosity, which describes the
resistance of ﬂuid to move when inﬂuenced by a force. This equation is used to describe a viscous ﬂuid.
The shear modulus, G, is also related to the Young’s modulus, E, by the Poisson’s ratio, 휈;
퐸= 2퐺(1 + 휈) ≈퐸= 3퐺
(5)
Poisson’s ratio has a value of 0.5 when a material is incompressible leading to the approximation of the
Young’s modulus being three times higher than the shear modulus.
10
==PAGE:20==
Figure 10:
Illustration of Non-Newtonian
time-independent ﬂuids.
Figure 1 from
Chhabra et al. 2008 [34].
When a viscous ﬂuid is aﬀected by a force it can ﬂow in
diﬀerent ways, since the viscosity varies from material
to material. So depending on how the ﬂuid ﬂows it is
deﬁned as either a Newtonian ﬂuid or a non-Newtonian
ﬂuid. A ﬂuid is called a Newtonian ﬂuid when there is
a linear relationship between the shear stress and shear
rate, meaning the viscosity is a constant [34]. If there
is no linear relationship between the shear stress and
shear rate, the behaviour is called non-Newtonian. This
is however a big portion of the ﬂuids, which is why the
non-Newtonian is divided into the following categories:
time-dependent and time-independent ﬂuids. In each of
these categories there are further subcategories, such as
trixotropy and rheopexy for the time-dependent ﬂuids
and dilatant ﬂuid and pseudo plastic ﬂuid for the time-
independent ﬂuids [34]. The dilatant ﬂuid and pseudo
plastic ﬂuid behaviours are illustrated in Figure 10 to-
gether with the yield-pseudoplastic and Bingham plastic behaviour. The Newtonian behaviour is also
plotted as a reference.
One of the simple models that are used to test if a ﬂuid is a pseudoplastic ﬂuids (shear-thinning), dilatant
(shear-thickening) ﬂuid or a Newtonian ﬂuid is the Power law model [32, 33, 34]. This model assumes
that the relationship between the viscosity and the shear rate is given by:
휂= 퐾¤훾푛
(6)
K is the the ﬂow consistency index and n is the power law index. The behaviour of the ﬂuid can then
be determined from the value of the power law index. If n < 1 the ﬂuid is shear-thinning, if n = 1 it is
Newtonian and if n > 1 it is shear-thickening.
However, this model works only in a limited range, as the model cannot describe the low shear region
and the high shear region, as the viscosity in this model goes to inﬁnity and not a constant as observed
experimentally [33]. Other models like the Cross viscosity, the Carreau viscosity, and Ellis model are
therefore used in these ranges to get a better model for the experimental data [33, 34].
Figure 11: Illustration of a parallel
plate rheometer. 휃represents the 휃-
direction, 휔is the angular frequency,
h is the height of the materials, R
is the radius of the plate, M is the
torque, and F푧is the force in the
z-direction. Figure 5.5.1 from Ma-
cosko et al. 1993 [33]
Looking at the basics of a rheometer there exits two kinds: the
drag-ﬂows rheometer and the pressure-driven ﬂow rheometer [33].
In this project a drag-ﬂow rheometer has been used, more precisely
a parallel plate rheometer, as illustrated in Figure 11. This parallel
plate rheometer is build up by a stationary plate in the bottom
and a rotating plate at the top. When the top plate rotates a shear
stress and shear strain are created in the material, due to the no
slip condition on all of the surfaces [33]. This shear stress and
shear strain can be found by using the equation of motion of the
system given in cylindrical coordinates together with assumptions
such as a steady laminar isothermal ﬂow, negligible body forces,
and velocity only in the 휃-direction [28, 33].
The systems shear stress is given by [33]:
휏휃=
푀
2휋푅3

3 + d ln 푀
d ln ¤훾푅

(7)
휏휃is the shear stress in the 휃-direction, M is the torque, R is the
radius of the plate, and ¤훾푅is the shear strain rate at the radius.
The shear strain and the shear strain rate can be found from the
11
==PAGE:21==
equations (2) and (4), respectively. These equations however does only apply when at the displacement
in one direction, meaning the that the top plate rotates in the same direction the whole time. This creates
a ﬂow in one direction if the material behaves as a ﬂuid and not a solid.
The oscillation mode on the rheometer is another way to use the rheometer. Here the bottom plate is kept
stationary, while the top plate rotates back and forth. These oscillations on the material can be described
by sine waves of the shear stress and shear strain [34, 37]:
휏= 휏0 sin (휔푡+ 훿)
훾= 훾0 sin (휔푡)
(8)
휏0 is amplitude of shear stress wave, 훾0 is the amplitude of the shear strain wave, 휔is the angular
frequency, t is the time, and 훿is the phase diﬀerence between stress and strain.
Figure 12: Illustration of shear stress, 휏, and shear
strain, 훾, as sine waves. Theses sine waves are ob-
served due to the oscillation on the material. Figure
2.30 from Chhabra et al. 2008 [34]
Another way to ﬁnd the shear stress of the system
is by using the storage modulus, 퐺′, and the loss
modulus, 퐺′′, which are the a way to describe
the extent of the elastic behaviour and the extent
of the viscous behaviour, respectively [34]. This
makes it possible to withdraw information about a
material going from a solid phase to a liquid phase
as a function of the shear strain. This is done with
the equations for the storage modulus and the loss
modulus [34, 37]:
퐺′ = 휏0
훾0
cos (훿)
퐺′′ = 휏0
훾0
sin (훿)
(9)
The storage modulus and loss modulus can be
combined into the complex modulus:
퐺∗= 퐺′ + 푖퐺′′
(10)
The complex modulus is also known as the dynamic modulus and is the ratio of stress to strain under
vibratory conditions. When materials are exposed to vibrational conditions they react diﬀerently depend-
ing on the properties of the materials. Purely elastic materials will have the stress and strain in phase, so
the response of one caused by the other is immediate. In purely viscous materials, the strain lags behind
the stress by a 90 degree phase, while viscoelastic materials exhibit behaviour somewhere in the middle
of these two types of material, as illustrated in Figure 12.
A relationship between the shear modulus, G, and the storage modulus can also be found since the shear
stress can be deﬁned as [28]:
휏= 퐺′훾0 sin (휔푡) + 퐺′′훾0 cos (휔푡)
(11)
With the use of equation (3) and equation (8) the relationship is found to be:
퐺= 퐺′ + 퐺′′ tan−1 (휔푡) ≈퐺′
(12)
The storage modulus can be approximated to be equal to the shear modulus when the storage modulus
dominates the system, meaning that the elastic behaviour of the material dominates.
6
Materials
In this section diﬀerent materials for tissue wells, bioinks, and ribbon platforms will be presented with
the intention of providing a clear overview of the materials.
12
==PAGE:22==
6.1
Materials used for Bioinks
The materials used for bioinks must show a high degree of stability by being able to create a cross-linked
polymer at physiological conditions. Not only must the bioinks be show ﬁtting living condition for the
cells, they must also resemble the native ECM. Ideally, the material exhibits cell adhering properties or
the material is able to encompass another material that has cell adhering properties. The bioinks in this
project are based on gelatin and microﬁbrillated cellulose, both combined with Matrigel in all instances
and other materials in most instances in order to encompass the above necessary features.
Collagen
Collagen is one of the main structural proteins in the extracellular matrix accounting for a third of all
proteins in the body and found in in large quantities in muscular tissue as well. It exists in a number
of diﬀerent forms accumulating to approximately 28 diﬀerent forms, type I-III collagen being the most
abundant constituting upwards of 80-90% of all of the collagen in the body. Further, the collagen consists
of amino acids in three polypeptide chains organised in a triple helix.
In the body the collagen is
commonly found in the connective tissue of tissue such as muscle tissue, skin, blood vessels, tendons,
cartilages, bones and more [38]. Collagen I is a ﬁbrillar collagen and is non-extensible even at high loads
together with being incompressible [11].
For the above reasons collagen, particularly type I, has been used a major component of ECM in 3D tissue
engineering with muscle tissue as the focus point [15, 18, 19].
Gelatin
Gelatin is a solid polymer of natural origin derived by denaturation of collagen [39]. Due to its collagen
derived nature gelatin has a similarity to collagen and therefore has a share of the features that collagen
presented, like excellent biocompability and biodegradability [40]. Furthermore, natural derived materials
present an advantage attributable to their inherent biological recognition and a natural derived material
like gelatin has indeed been used for engineering bone, cartilage, and skin [41]. All in all these features
that deﬁnes gelatin underlines the contribution gelatin is able to make in 3D tissue engineering equivalent
to that of collagen.
In this project gelatin is able to oﬀer an alternative to collagen with respect to forming an optimal ECM
for the cells.
Microbial Transglutaminase
Microbial transglutaminase (mTG) is an enzyme, more speciﬁcally a transglutaminase. In greater detail,
transglutaminase catalyses the cross-linking between lysine residue side chains and glutamine residue
side chains forming covalent bonds ultimately producing a network of cross-linking components [42].
In relation to both biotechnology and the food industry, microbial transglutaminase plays a part as a
cross-linking enzyme [43].
The cross-linking ability is an important ability in introducing a network composed of cross-links in the
gelatin, thereby preventing the gelatin from dissolving when heated to 37◦C, which is also the optimal
for living cells to grow.
Microﬁbrillated Cellulose
Figure 13: Structure of Cellulose.
2 D-glucose units are shown linked
by the 훽-1-4-glycosidic bonds. The
illustration is from Wikipedia [44]
Microﬁbrillated cellulose is one subcategory of cellulose, which
is a natural polymer composed of long chains of glucose. The glu-
cose units are bound together by 훽-1-4-glycosidic bonds [39, 45],
as illustrated in Figure 13. The hydroxyl groups in the polysac-
charide chain, which cellulose is composed of, are the reasons for
the creation of both intermolecylar and intramolecular hydrogen
13
==PAGE:23==
bonds. The interactions of these hydroxyl groups lead to a structural rearrangement of the cellulose
chains in parallel organisation into crystallites that compose the building block in the supramolecular
composition of the cellulose ﬁbers as well as ﬁbrils [28, 39].
Cellulose can be extracted from wood, sugar, potato tuber, hemp and ﬂax. The extraction process can
be performed in a multitude of diﬀerent ways with the possibility of creating unique sizes of cellulose
components. In this manner microﬁbrillated cellulose are composed of ﬂexible ﬁbrils with a width of
approximately 10-100nm and a length of 0.5-10µm [46]. In terms of printing abilities the microﬁbrillated
cellulose shows a promising potential as it exhibits both shear-thinning behaviour and biocompability
with living cells, even when mixed with alginate. [7, 47, 48].
We will in these experiments use the MFC known as GrowDex-T kindly donated by UPMBIOMED-
ICALS. GrowDex-T can be used to mimic the ECM and has been shown to support cell growth and
diﬀerentiation [49].
Matrigel
Matrigel is a solubilized basement membrane preparation extracted from the Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm
(EHS) mouse sarcoma. It is rich in the following ECM proteins: laminin (a major component), collagen
IV, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, entactin/nidogen, and a number of growth factors [20].
This produces eﬀective cell adhering properties, which is why many of articles have used Matrigel in
their matrices for tissue generation [6, 15, 18]. For the very same reason this project will use Matrigel.
Xanthan Gum
Xanthan gum is a polysaccharide produced by the bacteria Xanthomonas campestris and is capable of
competing with other natural gums in terms of usefulness as a food additive, as a viscosity increasing agent,
and as a stabiliser keeping components from separating. To produce xanthan gum, aerobic fermentation
by cultures of X. campestris is a key part of the process [50].
In this project it is important to consider xanthan gum’s ability to act as a viscosity increasing agent with
the purpose of increasing the viscosity of the LB gelatin so as to prevent the cells from segmenting and
thereby staying homogeneous in the solution.
6.2
Materials used for Ribbon Platforms
The materials used for ribbon platforms must also show a high degree of stability by being able to create a
cross-linked polymer at physiological conditions by either having a gelling point below 40◦C or being able
to cross-link by a chemical reaction. Furthermore, the ribbon platforms must exert non-toxic properties.
For alginate the desired properties are a bit diﬀerent, which will be described in detail.
Agar
Agar is extracted from red seaweed and it is composed of the two polysaccharides:
agarose and
agaropectin. Agarose being the most abundant component of agar is also the gelling ingredient, while
agaropectin on the other hand is non-gelling. Due to a high melting temperature at 85-95◦C and a lower
gelling temperature at 30-40 ◦C it is possible to work with the gelled agar in physiological conditions
without risking the agar melting. Furthermore, agar is non-toxic to cells and edible [50].
The above described properties of agar makes agar an ideal candidate for hydrogel based ribbon platform
for this project.
Gellan gum
Gellan gum is a water-soluble anionic polysaccharide produced as a fermentation product by the bacterium
14
==PAGE:24==
Sphingomonas elodea. Two forms of gellan gum is achieved: Fully acylated and deacylated form. The
degree of acylation is determining factor in the formation of diﬀerent gel texture and products. As
opposed to xanthan gum, gellan gum shows unique gelling abilities and exerts a high degree of stability,
even at higher temperatures. Depending on the ion concentration and type gellan gum is able to exhibit
gelling temperatures down to 25◦C while still showing a high melting temperature of nearly 100◦C [50].
Like agar, gellan gum holds a potential as a material for ribbon platform that will be explored further
upon in this thesis.
Locust Bean Gum
Locust bean gum (LBG) is a galactomannan polysaccharide from the tree, Ceratonia siliqua, in Mediter-
ranean region and this gum is typically consumed as it is as well as in a variety of food products. Alone
and unaltered the locust bean gum shows weak gelling ability, but when blended with 휅-carrageenan
the locust bean gum exhibits a strong elastic gel owing to the synergistic eﬀects that locust bean gum
possesses with certain material such as agar, gelatin, and 휅-carrageenan. Additionally, locust bean gum
is generally quite stable [50].
A key point to consider is that locust bean gum cannot gel suﬃciently on its own so in order to make
a strong gel we must make use of its synergistic eﬀects with other materials such as 휅-carrageenan.
However, when this is considered locust bean gum provides a stable material for ribbon platform.
휅-Carrageenan
휅-carrageenan is just one type of carrageenan, which is a polysaccharide extracted from red seaweed. Like
the other materials in this section it is non-toxic and edible. In terms of their organisation, 휅-carrageenan
is both large and ﬂexible forming helical structures, but at temperatures of 40-70◦C it forms a stable gel
that melts at temperatures above the gelling point temperature speciﬁc for each 휅-carrageenan depending
on the ion concentration among others [39, 50].
Due to the strong synergistic eﬀects that locust bean gum exerts when used in a solution with 휅-
carrageenan, 휅-carrageenan will only be used in conjunction with locust bean gum so as to strengthen the
gel [28].
Alginate
Alginate is a category of polysaccharides of natural origin produced from brown seaweed in contrast
to the red seaweed that agar and carrageenan is extracted from. In addition to being non-toxic and
edible, alginate shows gelling abilities, but the gelling abilities are besides the point in this project [50].
Compared to the other materials used for ribbon platforms the purpose of alginate in this thesis is quite
distinct and therefore a diﬀerent set of criteria should be used to judge the properties of alginate. Alginate
serve to layer the bottom of the platform as a cell non-adhering surface in order to make the tissue line
ﬂoat in the media in the wells [40].
So, alginate shows the properties needed for a material in order to create a surface with no adhesion for
living cells which is necessary in some experimental setups.
15
==PAGE:25==
Experimental Setup
7
Rheometer
Figure 14: Image of the TA Discov-
ery HR-2 hybrid rheometer used in
this thesis.
The rheometer used in this project is a TA Discovery HR-2 hybrid
rheometer. It is illustrated in Figure 14 where a sample is already
loaded and running as indicated by the plate being covered to
prevent evaporation during the experiments.
The rheometer is
controlled by the program TRIOS, which is installed on a linked
up computer positioned to the left of the rheometer (not displayed
in the image). Additionally, TRIOS was used for the analysis of
the materials after the rheometer had run.
In each experiment diﬀerent properties of the materials were stud-
ied. In the ﬁrst experiment the printing properties of the materials
were tested by running a ﬂow sweep. The ﬂow sweep was per-
formed by increasing the shear rate introduced to the material
which then causes changes in the viscosity, if the viscosity is de-
pendent of the shear rate. From this test the ﬂow properties of the
samples can be determined by comparing the results to the Power
Law model, see equation (6). In this case the experiment was car-
ried out using shear rate range of 0.01-100 1/s at the temperatures
20◦C and 37◦C. These values are also given in Table 3 together
with the parameters used for the other experiments.
Experiment
γO (%)
ω (rad/s)
Temperature (◦C)
¤훾(1/s)
Flow sweep
20 and 37
0.01-100
Temperature sweep
1
6.28
45-15 and 15-45
Amplitude sweep
10−3-100
6.28
37
Table 3: 훾푂is the oscillation strain, 휔is the angular frequency, ¤훾is the shear rate.
The second experiment tested the temperature depended nature of the materials, since some of materials,
like gelatin, is temperature dependent.
This experiment was conducted using a temperature sweep
of decreasing temperature followed by increasing temperature while keeping the oscillation strain and
angular frequency constant in both parts of the experiment. The following parameters were applied:
a constant oscillation strain of 1%, angular frequency of 6.28 rad/s, and temperatures in the range of
15-45◦C and 45-15◦C. These values are presented in Table 3.
The purpose of the third and last experiment is to determine the behaviour of the samples along with
obtaining the linear viscoelastic region for the storage modulus in order to convert the values into stiﬀness
of the materials. In this experiment an amplitude sweep is run by employing a constant angular frequency
while increasing the oscillation strain. In order to meet the above conditions a constant angular frequency
of 6.28 rad/s and increasing oscillation strain of 10−3-100% at the temperature 37◦C were applied as seen
in Table 3.
The above mentioned experiments on the rheometer were carried out on the following ten diﬀerent kinds
of materials, six materials and materials used for tissue lines and ribbons, respectively. Two types of
gelatin was used in the experiments, a gelatin with a gel strength of 164G (Sigma-Aldric, 48723-500G-F,
#BCCC2341) and a gelatin with a gel strength of 300G (Sigma, G2500-100G, #SLCB3384). To make it
16
==PAGE:26==
easier to distinguish between the two gelatin types the gelatin with gel strength 164G will be denoted as
low bloom (LB), while the gelatin with a gel strength of 300G will be denoted as high bloom (HB) in the
remainder of this paper. The ten materials tested on the rheometer is shown in the list below.
(1) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin (Tissue Lines)
(2) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin (Gelled) (Tissue Lines)
(3) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10U/mL mTG (Tissue Lines)
(4) 5% (w/v) HB gelatin + 10U/mL mTG (Tissue Lines)
(5) 0.8% (w/v) GrowDex (Tissue Lines)
(6) 0.3% (v/v) collagen I + 10% (v/v) Matrigel (Tissue Lines)
(7) 4% (w/v) agar (Ribbon Platform)
(8) 2% (w/v) gellan gum (Ribbon Platform)
(9) 2% (w/v) agar + 2% (w/v) gellan gum (Ribbon Platform)
(10) 2% (w/v) LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% (w/v) LB gelatin (Ribbon Platform)
Tissue lines
The ﬁrst of these ten materials being examined is 5% (w/v) LB gelatin. This material was prepared by
adding 0.25g of gelatin in 5mL Phosphate buﬀered saline (PBS) (no calcium, no magnesium, 14190-094,
Gibco) followed by placing it in a 45◦C water bath in order to dissolve the material for around 30min.
The LB gelatin solution was also prepared as a 10% (w/v) solution and mixed with 20U/mL (w/v) mTG
(microbial ACTIVA TI Transglutaminase—1002–1 K, 100U/g) in the ratio 1:1 right before loading the
sample on the rheometer. The 20U/mL (w/v) mTG had been made by mixing 1g mTG (100U/g) with
5mL PBS by manually shaking the sample for approximately 5min until the mTG were dissolved
A 10% (w/v) HB gelatin was prepared and mixed with 20U/mL (w/v) mTG, the same way as the 10%
(w/v) LB gelatin.
The 0.8% (w/v) GrowDex was prepared by adding 1.37g in 1.7mL PBS and mixed 2x4min in the Speed-
Mixer (Hauschild, DAC 150.1 FVZ) at 2500rpm.
The 0.3% (v/v) collagen I (VWR, Corning Life Sciences, 734-1085) and 10% (v/v) Matrigel (VWR,
Corning Discovery Labware II CA, 734-0270) by mixing 200µL Matrigel with 1142µL PBS by pipetting
the sample up and down while the sample is on ice to prevent the Matrigel from polymerising. 658µL
collagen I were hereafter added to the mixture and once again pipetted up and down, still on ice. The
sample was kept on ice until the sample is loaded on the rheometer.
Ribbon Platform
Four diﬀerent hydrogel inks were tested for the use of ribbons in the ribbon platform on the rheometer.
These four inks were prepared as following:
The 2% (w/v) mixture of Locus Bean Gum (Sigma, G0753-500G, #SLBZ4246) and 휅-carrageenan
(Sigma-aldrich,22048-100G-F, #BCBX5072) mixed with a 3% (w/v) LB gelatin solution was prepared
by mixing 0.08g LBG, 0.12g 휅-carrageenan and 0.3g LB gelatin in 10mL PBS and dissolved in boiling
water for 1hour.
The 4% (w/v) agar (Sigma, A1296-100G, #BCBZ9687), 2% (w/v) gellan gum (Specialingredients,
E614036) and the mixture of 2% (w/v) gellan gum and 2% (w/v) agar were all made in a similar way by
dissolving them in boiling water for 1 hour.
17
==PAGE:27==
Gelatin
Gelatin
gelled
Gelatin +
mTG
GrowDex
Collagen
I
Agar
and/or
gellan
gum
LBG/κ-car
+ gelatin
Plate (mm)
40
40
40
20
2
20
20
Height (mm)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Load temp. (◦C)
37
37
37
37
9
70
70
Exp. temp. (◦C)
37
20
37
37
37
37
37
Soak time (min)
0
15
60
0
15
15
15
Table 4: The values used on the rheometer for diﬀerent materials. The diﬀerent columns represent the
materials presented in the list (p.17) (1)-(10): (1) the gelatin, (2) the gelatin gelled, (3) + (4) the gelatin
+ mTG, (5) the GrowDex, (6) the collagen I, (7) + (8) + (9) the agar and/or gellan gum, and (10) the
LBG/휅-car + gelatin. Load temp. = load temperature, Exp. temp. = experimental temperature, Soak
time = the time the experiment is at the experimental temperature before the amplitude sweep is made.
All of the materials used for the rheology test were performed with the same parameters for the experiments
as given in Table 3, however the loading temperatures varied along with the plate size and soak time for
some of the samples. These values are given in Table 4. The soak time in the table refers to the time
the samples were at the experimental temperature before the amplitude sweeps were performed with the
exception of the gelled gelatin, that was cooled down to 15◦C and soaked for 15min before the temperature
was turned up to 20◦C and the amplitude sweep was made.
8
3D Printing
Figure 15: Image of the 3D Discovery by regenHU printer
used in this thesis.
The 3D printer used in this project is a 3D
Discovery by regenHU and is run by the pro-
gram 3D Discovery HMI. An image of this
printer is given in Figure 15. The temper-
ature of the volumetric system is controlled
by Loop L 250 Lauda, which can cool the
syringe down or heat it up depending on the
needed temperature.
The designs of the wells, tissue lines and rib-
bon platforms are programmed made in the
program BioCAD and subsequently loaded
into to the 3D Discovery HMI in order to
be printed.
The program BioCAD works
by converting an drawing into G-code. G-
code is a numerical control programming lan-
guage, which can be used to tell how and
where the 3D printer should print together
with how fast it should deposit the materials etc. Examples of the G-codes used for making the wells,
tissue lines and the ribbon platform can be found in Appendix D.
Depending on whether a pneumatic system or piston system is used the program can use diﬀerent printer
heads as well as being able to print four diﬀerent materials at the same time. Depending on the printed
18
==PAGE:28==
bioink either the pneumatic or the piston system was utilised thus printing the well and the collagen I
with the pneumatic system and the piston system, respectively.
Eight diﬀerent kinds of inks and bioinks have been printed as shown in this following list:
(1) Polystyrene/Kraton-SEBS/Treated glass mixture (Wells)
(2) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Tissue Lines)
(3) 0.8% (v/v) GrowDex + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Tissue Lines)
(4) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 0.25% (w/v) xanthan gum + 10mio. cells/mL (Tissue
Lines)
(5) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 0.2% (w/v) GrowDex + 6mio. cells/mL (Tissue
Lines)
(6) 0.3% (v/v) collagen I + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Tissue Lines)
(7) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Gelled) (Tissue Lines)
(8) 2% (w/v) LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% (w/v) LB gelatin (Ribbon Platform)
Wells
Figure 16: Image of three types of
printed wells used for separating the
tissue lines in a diﬀerent number of
smaller wells thus forming ten smaller
wells in each of the two uppermost
wells, eight smaller wells in each of
the two middle wells, and four smaller
wells in each of the two lowermost
wells.
The ﬁrst ink presented in the list above is the ink used for the
wells for the purpose of preventing the tissue lines to ﬂoat away in
addition to be able to diﬀerentiate between the tissue lines. This
ink consists of a mixture of three components: (2:1) Polystyrene
(PS) 35K in hexyl acetate (HA) (66%), (1:2) Kraton SEBS
in butyl acetate (BA) (33%), and trichlorohexylsiline (2/2v in
tolvene treated hollow glass).
These three components were
pre-made by Ph.D. colleague Christian J. Pless and the precise
protocol for each of these components can be found in Appendix
C.
The preparation of the ink is as follows: 1.2g of PS 35K in HA
was mixed with 2.7g of Kraton SEBS in BA and speedmixed
in the SpeedMixer for 4min at 3500rpm.
It was then taken
out to cool down for 2min before running the mixture again in
the SpeedMixer for 2min. 2.3g of trichlorohexylsiline was then
added to the newly created mixture and speedmixed for 2min at
3500rpm. It was hereafter cooled down with cold water for 3min
before speedmixing it again for 2min at 3500rpm. The mixture
was cooled down with cold water for 3min and then 2g more of
trichlorohexylsiline was added to the mixture. Subsequently the
same procedure was repeated with two round of speedmixing
for 2min at 3500rpm with cooling for 3min in between the two
rounds.
At the end the solution was cooled down for 3min,
before adding it to a 10mL plastic syringe using a spatula in a
gentle manner to prevent bubbles in the syringe.
The ink was printed with the parameters presented in the ﬁrst
column in Table 5 and the designs of the wells are illustrated in Figure 16. Here three kinds of wells are
presented that each have ten, eight or four smaller wells eﬀectively separating the tissue lines in three
types depending on the chosen well.
Since the wells were made with materials containing BA and HA the wells were put in a vacuum oven at
60◦C for two days. After two days the oven was turned oﬀand opened for 10min in order to air out the
19
==PAGE:29==
oven. Afterwards the vacuum was turned on (200kPa) at room temperature (20◦C) for one day, where
the air was changed once or twice during this period. This was done to ensure that all solvents had evap-
orated from the wells. Before the tissue lines, presented in the next section, were printed in the wells, the
wells were put under UV light in an UV Cabinet (Clean View) for 1hour to ensure sterilisation of the wells.
Tissue lines
The next six inks are bioinks presented in the list (p.19) used for tissue line printing during this thesis.
These inks were all printed in three designs: lines, serpents, and circles. A length of either 3mm and
5mm was chosen for each bioink. The length of the circle was measured as its diameter.
The preparation of each of these bioinks for tissue lines were slightly diﬀerent compared to the inks for
wells since these were all handled in a sterile LAF-bench with sterilised materials. All of the equipment
used for the printing processes were sterilised by UV light in a UV Cabinet for 1hour. In the meantime the
printer and the printer fume hood was cleaned thoroughly with 70% ethanol (sigma-aldrich) in order to
sterilise the whole area. After the equipment were sterilised they were moved from the sterile LAF-bench
to the printer fume hood in a sterile box that was sprayed with ethanol before entering the fume hood.
Furthermore, the materials were also all prepared in the sterile LAF-bench and if the components used
for the bioinks were moved out of the bench they were thoroughly packed in sterile Paraﬁlm M in order
to keep them sterile.
Wells
Gelatin
GrowDex
Gelatin
mix
Collagen
I
Gelatin
gelled
LBG/κ-car
+ gelatin
Syringe (mL)
10
1
10
2.5
1
10
2.5
Needle (GA)
25
22
22
22
22
22
27
Temperature (◦C)
25
32
25
37
9
20
70
Feed rate
10
10
5
10
10
10
10
Strand delay
150
200
100
200
100
50
0
Initial height (mm)
0.22
0.22
0.36
0.22
0.2
0.3
0.18
Build height (layers)
14
1
1
1
1
1
2-3
Pressure (kPa)
300
12-25
15-25
Retract dis. (mm)
0.08
0
0
0.1
VFR (µL/s)
0.8
1
1
0.6
Cartridge dia. (mm)
4.61
7.29
4.61
7.29
Table 5: The table shows the printing parameters used for printing the diﬀerent inks. The diﬀerent
columns represent the inks presented in the list (p.19) (1)-(8): (1) the wells, (2) the gelatin, (3) GrowDex,
(4) + (5) the gelatin mix, (6) the collagen I, (7) the gelatin gelled, and (8) the LBG/휅-car + gelatin. retract
dis.: retract distance, VRF: volume ﬂow rate, cartridge dia.: cartridge diameter.
In general all of the bioinks have been made by preparing the components of each bioink by themselves, in
a higher ratio than their ﬁnal ratio in the bioink. This made it possible to prepare each of the components
at their preferred temperature, like dissolving gelatin at 45◦C and preparing a Matrigel solution on ice.
To then obtain the components ﬁnal ratio in the bioink, the components were, in general, mixed together
in the order 1:1. An example on a detailed protocol used for preparing a bioink is the protocol for the 5%
LB gelatin, 10% Matrigel, and 10mio. cells/mL, which is given right below. The protocols for the other
bioinks can be found in Appendix C.
20
==PAGE:30==
The ﬁrst bioink for tissue lines is 5% LB gelatin, 10% Matrigel, and 10mio. cells/mL that was obtained
by preparing a 14% (w/v) LB gelatin solution by adding 0.28g LB gelatin in 2mL Dulbecoo’s modiﬁed
eagle medium (DMEM) (High glucose, pyruvate, 41966-022, Gibco) and dissolved in a 45◦C water bath
for 30min. While the gelatin was dissolving the 26% (v/v) Matrigel was prepared by mixing 130µL
Matrigel with 1370µL DMEM on ice. After the LB gelatin was dissolved, the 14% LB gelatin solution
and 26% Matrigel solution were mixed together 1:1 by pipetting 0.5mL 14% LB gelatin up and adding it
to the 0.5mL 26% Matrigel. These were mixed by pipetting slowly up and down and then put in a 37◦C
water bath for 1hour, while the cells were collected from the cell lab as described in section 9.
250µL cells with a cell density of 40mio. cells/mL were mixed with 750µL of the gelatin/Matrigel
solution by pipetting slowly up and down before the ﬁnal bioink, 5% LB gelatin, 10% Matrigel, and
10mio. cells/mL, was added to a 1mL glass syringe (Hamilton). The tissue lines were then printed with
the parameters given in the second column in Table 5 for all of the three designs and left for gelling for
5min before 10U/mL mTG were added to cross-link for 1hour in an incubator (37◦C, 100% Humidity,
5% CO2). The 10U/mL mTG had been prepared by adding 5g stock mTG in 50mL DMEM, shaking the
sample for 5min. until dissolved and then ﬁltered the sample through 45µm ﬁlter to sterilise.
Like the bioink (5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL), the printing parameters
for the other bioinks are given in Table 5 were the diﬀerent columns represent the inks presented in the
list (p.19) (1)-(8): (2) the gelatin, (3) the GrowDex, (4) + (5) the gelatin mix, (6) the collagen I, and
(7) the gelatin gelled. After the printing process of the tissue lines the materials containing gelatin and
collagen I was set for gelling for 5min. before the media was added. For the gelatin samples contained
the media also 10U/mL mTG and the samples were cross-linked for 1 hour in an incubator (37◦C, 100%
Humidity, 5% CO2).
Ribbon Platform
The next ink is an ink used for the ribbon platform as presented in the list (p. 19). The ribbon platform
consists of a platform and multiple ribbons as seen in 1. The ribbon platform is used for both the ribbon
and the entire platform with the aim of making the printing process easier. The G-code (Appendix D) was
made by Ph.D. Carmen Radeke, who also stood for the preparing of the platform materials and printing
process of the platform itself.
The material for the ribbon platform was prepared in sterile conditions like the tissue lines.
The ink was a 5% (w/v) hydrogel ink consisting of Locus Bean Gum (Sigma, G0753-500G, #SLBZ4246),
휅-carrageenan (Sigma-aldrich), and LB gelatin. This solution was prepared by mixing 0.08g LBG, 0.12g
휅-carrageenan, and 0.3g LB gelatin in 10mL PBS and dissolving the components in boiling water for
1hour. This lead to a ﬁnal ratio of 2% (w/v) mixture of the LBG and 휅-car in the order 40:60 and a 3%
(w/v) LB gelatin ratio in the 5% hydrogel ink.
9
In Vitro C2C12 Culture
How the cells are cultured depends on the type of cells one are working with. In this case, since it is
퐶2퐶12 cells the protocol for cell culturing is based on the Eschenhagen protocol [5].
In short the cells are passed in a culturing ﬂask with growth media. The used growth media (GM) is DMEM
mixed together with 10% Fetal bovine serum (FSB) (F0804, Sigma) and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (P/S).
When the cells have reached a conﬂuency of 60% or above the cells are either passaged or used for printing.
Passage of cells means that the cells are changed to a new ﬂask with fewer cells. This is done by ﬁrst
removing the old media and cleaning the ﬂask with PBS. Then Gibco® Trypsin-EDTA (0.05%), phenol
red (25300-062, Gibco) is added and the cells are put in the incubator for 3-5min. The Gibco® Trypsin-
EDTA gets the cells to detach from the ﬂask, making it easier to remove the cells from the ﬂask. After
3-5min DMEM is added to the ﬂask and the solution is pipetted up and down to prevent the cells from
21
==PAGE:31==
lumping together. The cells are then moved into a new ﬂask with new GM added to the ﬂask or used for
printing.
If the cells are used for printing, they are transferred into a tube and 1mL is taken out to of the total
volume to count the density of cells which is done with a NucleoCounter. When the density is known,
the cells are centrifuged with a Centrifuge (Holm&Halby) for 4-5min with the parameters 500XG, 20◦C,
9acc, 9Dec, and 3000 bucket. This makes it possible to get the desired density of cells at 40mio cells/mL
in total.
When the cells have been printed as tissue lines their media was changed to GM after 1hour of cross-
linking by removing 3/4 of the media and cleaning with PBS two times before GM was added. The
tissue lines were hereafter left for one-two days in growth media. When enough live cells were observed,
often after one day, the media changed to the diﬀerentiation media. The diﬀerential media (DM) is based
on the DHEM mixed with 2% Horse serum (HS) (26050070, Gibco) and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (P/S).
The media, GM and DM, are changed every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday to obtain a good culture for
the cells.
10
Staining and Imaging of Tissues
Brightﬁeld images of the printed tissue lines were captured every time the media was changed by using
a ZIESS Primovert microscope (415510-1101-000) with a 4x plan achromat objective and a mounted
IDS GmbH camera (UI-3240ML). The software uEye Cockpit was used to capture the images. These
images were processed in Inkscape by aligning and overlaying the individual two-three images that were
captured of each line to ensure a full view of the lines. Hereafter a scale bar was added by the use of Fĳi
ImageJ.
Another way to show that the cells were alive in the tissue lines was by ﬁxating and staining the cells.This
was done by ﬁrst washing the tissue lines trice with PBS for 10min then adding 4% Formaldehyde in
PBS for incubation for 30min and lastly washed with PBS trice for 10 min. once more. Hereafter was
0.1% Triton in PBS added and the samples were incubated for 10min, to make the cells permeable. The
Triton was removed and the samples were washed 3x10min with blocking solution (0.5% BSA in PBS)
while being shaken. This was done avoid unwanted adsorption of proteins. The BSA was removed and
300 µL of dihydrochloride (DAPI) (62247, Thermo Scientiﬁc)/Phalloidin-Rhodamin were added (1:100
dilution, 35 µL of each stock in 3.5 mL 0.5% BSA in PBS) to stain the DNA and the actin, respectively.
The samples were wrapped in foil and shaken for 1hour before the samples was washed 3x10min with
blocking solution BSA once more. Hereafter were the samples stored in the fridge still packed in foil to
prevent the the dyes from fading until the images were taken.
The images of the stained samples were taken using Zeiss Observer Z1 microscope with a mounted Zeiss
AxioCam Mrm. The magniﬁcations used for taking the images were 10x, 20x and 40x. The imaging
software used for capturing ﬂuorescence images was AxioVision and the images were treated in the
software Fĳi ImageJ afterwards.
11
Project Overview
The road for obtaining a printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility assay was divided into three
subcategories:
1. We identiﬁed theoretical boundaries for ribbons and validated the potential ribbon materials
22
==PAGE:32==
2. We validated potential tissue precursor by looking into the rheology of potential materials of bioinks
together with printing the bioinks and looking for compaction.
3. We made a fully printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility assay
Each of these subcategories are described below with an explanation of what there will be presented in
the result and discussion part.
Ribbon Platform Materials
Figure 17: Simple graphical illustration of the process of designing the ribbon platform compared to the
ribbons size together with the theory of beam deﬂection for ﬁxed-ﬁxed beams.
To identify the theoretical boundaries for ribbons together with validating potential ribbon materials a
model is needed. This model is made on the theory on beam deﬂection, since there is an interest in
observing the deﬂection of the ribbons.
A theoretical model will be presented based on beam deﬂection together with an analytical demonstration
of the eﬀect of the boundaries chosen for the ribbons. An illustration of the design of the platform together
with the ribbon design and platform is given in Figure 17.
Hereupon some hydrogel materials, more precise agar, gellan gum, mixture of agar and gellan gum, and
a mixture of locust bean Gum, 휅-carrageenan, and LB gelatin will be tested for their mechanical strengths
by the use of the rheometer, as illustrated in Figure 18.
These results will be coupled to the deﬂection of the theoretical beam and a material will be chosen for
later printing of the hydrogel-based platform.
Figure 18: Simple graphical illustration of the rheology. First the diﬀerent samples was prepared. Then
a sample was loaded on to the rheometer, the rheological experiment was run and the end results of the
experiments was given as graphs.
Tissue Lines Materials
The potential tissue precursors was validated by looking into the rheology of the materials to obtain
23
==PAGE:33==
their printing properties together with their materials strength, as illustrated in Figure 18. The validated
materials was eventually printed and compaction of the tissue lines studied, as illustrated in Figure 19
Figure 19: Simple graphical illustration of the printing process of the tissue precursors. First the wells
for the tissue lines were prepared by printing and sterilisation. Then the tissue lines were printed and the
lines were placed in a incubator and overtime compaction of the lines was observed.
Ribbon Platform
From the two other sections one ribbon platform material is chosen and one tissue line material, these
two are combined into a printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility assay. An illustration of this
process is illustrated in Figure 20, with the printing process of the platform, ribbons, and tissues before
an illustration of how the tissue lines compact.
Figure 20: Simple graphical illustration of the printing process of the ribbon platform. The platform,
ribbons and tissue lines were all printed in one go. First the platform, then the ribbons and tissue lines.
The platforms were placed in culture and the ribbons were examined for deﬂections of the ribbons.
24
==PAGE:34==
Results
12
Ribbon Platform Materials
The design of the platform together with the choice of materials will here be presented. This will be
done by ﬁrst explaining the theoretical background for the choices. Then the rheological study based
on the four hydrogels (2% gellan gum, 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin, 2% agar + 2% gellan gum,
and 4% agar) will be presented together with their expected theoretical deﬂections determined from the
theoretical background.
12.1
Theoretical Background and Analytical Analysis of Beam Deﬂection
Figure 21: Simple illustration
of the platform and the forces
acting from the tissue contrac-
tion and when the system is in
equilibrium.
The theoretical background for the design of the materials starts out
from the principle of the design of the ribbons. These are expected
to withhold the continuous contraction from the tissue together with
inducing a counter force to the tissue, when the system is in equilibrium.
In the beginning of the process the ribbons will experience a pulling
force from the cells, as illustrated in the top drawing of Figure 21. After
a while the system reaches equilibrium, as seen in the bottom of Figure
21 and a possible deﬂection of the ribbons will be observed.
The deﬂection of the ribbons can with a simple model be described as a
ﬁxed-ﬁxed beam deﬂection, which is a beam that are ﬁxed in both ends
with a central load [51].
훿퐵= −퐹푥2
48퐸퐼(3퐿−4푥)
0 ≤푥≤퐿/2
훿푚푎푥=
퐹퐿3
192퐸퐼
푥= 퐿/2
(13)
Here, 훿퐷is the deﬂection of the beam, F is the force acting on the beam,
E is the Young’s modulus of the beam, I is the moment of inertia, L is
the length of the beam, x is the point observed on the beam and 훿푚푎푥
is the maximum deﬂection of the beam.
The equation describes one force acting on one beam, however the ribbon platform in this thesis consists
of two ribbons with one acting force on each. In order to solve this problem the ribbon platform is
assumed to be symmetrically mirrored at the midpoint of the tissue line between the cantilevers on Figure
21. This makes the calculations of the ribbon deﬂections easier to manage.
Looking into the choice of the diﬀerent parameters in the design of the ribbons the contraction force of
one tissue line was assumed to be approximately 10µN in total. This assumption is based on other articles
and their observations of active and stationary forces in tissue samples consisting of 퐶2퐶12 cells [17, 10].
Since the tissue surrounds two ribbons, the force is the total force acting on both of these two ribbons
reducing the force to the half of the total force meaning a force of 5µN acts on each ribbon due to the
symmetrical system.
The moment of inertia of the system originates from the structure of the ribbon, which is assumed to be
cylindrical after the printing process, thereby making the moment of inertia:
퐼= 휋푟4
4
(14)
The radius of these ribbons are determined by the size of the used nozzle in an optimised printing process
and there is an interested in keeping this as small as possible, so between 0.05-0.25mm.
25
==PAGE:35==
The length of the ribbons can vary a bit more, but in general there is an interest in obtained a ribbon with
a length lying between 1-5mm.
For the determination of the Young’s modulus the standard values of hydrogels are used, since there
is an interest in using these, as previously mention. The Young’s modulus for the hydrogels has been
observed to be in the range of 10-100kPa [24]. An analytical plot has therefore been made with ﬁve
diﬀerent material stiﬀness (10kPa, 25kPa, 50kPa, 100kPa, and 150kPa) with the deﬂection as a function
of the length based on equation (13). The force was held constant at 5µN and the radius at 0.1mm. The
analytical plot is demonstrated in Figure 22a.
Another analytical plot was also made to demonstrate the importance of the radius of the ribbon based
on the equation (13). In Figure 22b the force was held constant at 5µN, together with a Young’s modulus
at 10kPa.
(a)
(b)
Figure 22: Analytical calculation of the beam experiencing a constant force of 퐹= 5µN from the
tissue lines. The beam deﬂections is examined with the use of equation (13) for diﬀerent beam radii
and Young’s moduli. a) Constant radius 푟= 0.1mm and varying Young’s moduli. b) Constant Young’s
modulus 퐸= 10kPa and varying radii.
The eﬀect of the radius and Young’s modulus of the materials can also be studied by examining the strain
created by the force extended on the ribbon.
휖= 퐹
퐸퐴
(15)
Here, 휖is the strain, F is the force, E is the Young’s modulus and A is the area. The area is assumed to be
a circle (퐴= 휋푟2) since the ribbon has a cylinder shape. Analytical illustrations of the eﬀect of several
Young’s moduli and radii are displayed in Figure 23a and 23b, respectively.
From these graphs it can be observed that the radius of the ribbon have a bigger impact on the strain than
the Young’s modulus, which can also be derived from equation 15.
26
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: Analytical calculation of strain as a function of force. a) Constant radius 푟= 0.1mm and
varying Young’s modulus. b) Constant Young’s modulus 퐸= 10kPa and varying radius.
12.2
Rheology Results
In this section the rheology data for the ribbons that has been investigated is presented together with the
analytical calculation of the deﬂection that the ribbons would be experiencing depending on the chosen
material.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 24: Results of the amplitude sweep (10−3 −100%, 6.28 rad/s37◦C). (a) 2% gellan gum, (b) 2%
LBG/휅-Car + 3% LB gelatin, (c) 2% agar + 2% gellan gum, and (d) 4% agar.
27
==PAGE:37==
The four hydrogels that were tested as potential ribbon materials are displayed in the overview below:
• 2% (w/v) Gellan
• 2% (w/v) Locust bean gum/휅-carrageenan + 3% (w/v) LB gelatin
• 2% (w/v) Agar + 2% (w/v) gellan gum
• 4% (w/v) Agar
The rheology results of the amplitude sweep for the materials are showcased in Figure 24. Figure 24a
shows the 2% gellan gum, Figure 24b the 2% locust beam gum/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB gelatin, Figure
24c the 2% agar + 2% gellan gum, and Figure 24d the 4% agar.
From the four graphs the values of the storage modulus can be obtained from the linear viscoelastic
region, in this case at the oscillation strain of 1%. The linear viscoelastic region shows a region where
the stress is independent of the strain as illustrated in Figure 24a among other ﬁgures.
In order to obtain Young’s modulus from storage modulus two relationships are necessary: the relationship
between the storage modulus and shear modulus, see eq. (12), and the relationship between the shear
modulus and the Young’s modulus, see eq. (5). The values of the measured storage modulus and the
calculated Young’s modulus are shown in Table 6.
Material
Storage modulus
Young’s modulus
2 % Gellan gum
3.7kPa
11.1kPa
2% Locust bean gum/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB gelatin
4.1kPa
12.3kPa
2% Agar + 2% gellan gum
23.2kPa
69.6kPa
4 % Agar
43.3kPa
129.9kPa
Table 6: Measured storage modulus and calculated Young’s modulus for the hydrogels considered for
the ribbons.
In Table 6 the 2% locust bean gum/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB gelatin has been denoted to have a storage
modulus of 4.1kPa. This is not the value obtained from the graph in Figure 24b, which is found to be
3.6kpa. The 4.1kPa is an assumption of what the storage modulus would have been observed to be, if
the rheological experiment had been preformed with the cross-linking agent mTG. This assumption is
established on two things, the value of a 5% LB cross-linked gelatin of 0.4kPa and the standard deviation
of 0.98kPa for the 2% LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB gelatin.
12.3
Beam Deﬂection for the Chosen Hydrogels
The beam deﬂection of the four hydrogels can be found with the use of the equation (13). The rest of the
variables in the equation is kept constant with the values of 푟= 100 휇m and 퐹= 5 휇N. The relationship
between the deﬂection and the ribbon lengths can then be plotted resulting in the graphs pictured in Figure
25.
28
==PAGE:38==
Figure 25: Calculation of the deﬂection of the beam
with a constant force of 퐹= 5µN, a constant radius
of 푟= 0.1mm and the Young’s modulus of each of
the four materials.
From the Figure 25 the deﬂection of the 2% gellan
gum and 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin can be
observed to be much higher than 2% gellan gum
+ 2% agar and the 4% agar.
So the choice of
hydrogel for the platform falls to one of the two,
since the deﬂection must be higher than 0.2mm
to have a better tracking of the deﬂection. The
ﬁnal choice of material was 2% LBG/휅-car + 3%
LB gelatin due to its rheological properties, but
also the easiness of managing the material when
preparing for a printing process. A more detailed
discussion of this will be given in section 15.
13
Tissue Line Materials
The results of the developed bioinks for tissue lines are here presented with their rheological properties
together with their printed tissue lines.
13.1
Rheology Results
Diﬀerent materials used for the tissue lines were tested for their rheological properties:
• 5% LB gelatin
• 5% LB gelatin gelled
• 5% LB gelatin cross-linked
• 5% HB gelatin cross-linked
• 0.3% Collagen I + 10% Matrigel
• 0.8% GrowDex
Flow Sweep and Temperature Sweep
Figure 26: Temperature sweep of 5% LB gelatin
(푇= 15 −45◦C, 휔= 6.28 rad/s and 훾푂= 1%)
The temperature sweep of the 5% LB gelatin
is
illustrated
in
Figure
26
and
shows
the
curve for both the storage modulus and loss
modulus both measured in kPa.
The tem-
perature,
19◦C, at which the storage mod-
ulus increases is assumed to represent the
gelling point of the 5% LB gelatin,
while
the melting point is assumed to lie around
29◦.
This
cannot
be
determined
directly
since no cross-over between the storage mod-
ulus
and
loss
modulus
is
apparent,
which
in
theory
is
when
the
two
points
hap-
pens.
29
==PAGE:39==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 27: Flow sweep and ﬁtted Power Law model for: (a) The 5% LB gelatin in a gelled state (푇= 20◦C
and ¤훾= 100 1/s). (b) Power Law model ﬁtted to the 5% LB gelatin. (c) The 0.8% GrowDex (푇= 37◦C
and ¤훾= 100 1/s). (d) Power Law model for 0.8% GrowDex.
The results for the ﬂow sweep is presented in Fig-
ure 27. Here, the Power Law model is ﬁtted to the data of 5% LB gelatin in a gelled state alongside the
0.8% GrowDex. As a result of this ﬁt the following equations were determined:
푦= 136푥−0.92
푦= 31푥−0.89
(16)
From this, the ﬁrst equation belongs to the 5% LB gelatin with an 푟2 value of 0.99 whereas the second
equation relates to the GrowDex with an 푟2 ﬁt of 0.95.
Amplitude Sweeps
In Figure 28 amplitude sweep for the diﬀerent tissue line materials are presented.
These show the
behaviour of the individual materials when a strain is introduced to the material. A clear diﬀerence
between the samples can be observed as exempliﬁed by comparing the 5% LB cross-linked gelatin
(Figure 28d) with the 0.8% GrowDex (Figure 28e). With the use of this comparison it can be observed
that the storage modulus of the 5% LB gelatin is independent of the strain, meaning it behaves as a
viscoelastic solid material. The 0.8% GrowDex on the other hand experiences two diﬀerent points: a
yield point, which is observed by a decrease in the storage modulus, and a ﬂow point, which is observed
by the crossover point between the G’ and G”. The ﬁrst point illustrates that the material starts to soften,
while the other point illustrates that the material starts to ﬂow.
30
==PAGE:40==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 28: Results of amplitude sweeps (10−3 −100%, 6.28 rad/s37◦C). (a) 5% LB gelatin, (b) 5%
LB gelatin in a gelled state, (c) 5% LB gelatin cross-linked with 10U/mL mTG, (d) 5% HB gelatin
cross-linked with 10U/mL mTG, (e) 0.8% GrowDex, and (f) 0.3% collagen I + 10% Matrigel
The rest of the amplitude sweeps in Figure 28 as follows: Figure 28a is 5% LB gelatin in pure liquid state,
28b is 5% LB gelatin in gelled state, 28d the 5% HB gelatin cross-linked, and 28f the 0.3% collagen I +
10% Matrigel.
31
==PAGE:41==
13.2
Printed Tissue Lines
During this thesis eight experiments with printing tissue lines were carried out. The bioinks for these
eight experiments are displayed alongside their days in the diﬀerentiation media (DM) and cell passage
as an overview in Table 7 with the ﬁrst experiment as number 1, second experiment as number 2 and so
forth.
Number
Materials
Days in DM
Cell passage
Contracted
1
5% LB gelatin
29 days
26
Yes
2
0.8% GrowDex
12 days
32
Not observed
3
5% LB gelatin + 0.25% xanthan gum
24 days
35
Yes
4
5% LB gelatin + 0.2% GrowDex
24 days
35
Yes
5
0.3% Collagen I
13 days
21
Yes
6
5% LB gelatin
0 days
23
Not observed
7
5% LB gelatin
13 days
26
Not observed
8
5% LB gelatin
0 days
28
Not observed
Table 7: An overview over the eight experiments that were carried out in this thesis along with their
diﬀerent materials used for bioinks, days in diﬀerentiation media (DM) and cell passage representing
the number of time the cells had been subcultured before printing the tissue lines. All experiments also
contained 10% Matrigel and a cell density of 10 mio. cells/mL besides the already mentioned materials.
However, experiment 4 only had a cell density of 6 mio. cells/mL.
All experiments contained 10% Matrigel in their bioinks and were performed with a cell density of 10
mio. cells/mL except experiment 4, which only had a cell density of 6 mio. cells/mL due to a lack
of cells. Furthermore, all of the experiments made with gelatin were cross-linked with 10 U/mL mTG
expect experiment 8 which was cross-linked with 1U/mL mTG.
5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
The 5% LB gelatin showed great properties in the rheological experiments and consequently it was chosen
as one of the main components in the ﬁrst created bioink for the ﬁrst tissue lines. The resulting tissue
lines is illustrated in Figure 29.
12 images for each sample are illustrated from the printing day of the tissue lines to the day 29 of having
the samples in diﬀerentiation media. In order the images are: the printing day (Figure 29a), and the
diﬀerentiation days 1, 6, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 22, 25, 27, and 29 (Figure 29b-29l)
32
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Figure 29: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in
culture showing progressive cell-compaction over time. Full cell-compaction is shown at diﬀerentiation
day 25. (a) Printing day. (b) Diﬀerentiation day 1. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 6. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 11.
(e) Diﬀerentiation day 13. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 15. (g) Diﬀerentiation day 18. (h) Diﬀerentiation day
20. (i) Diﬀerentiation day 22. (j) Diﬀerentiation day 25. (k) Diﬀerentiation day 27. (l) Diﬀerentiation
day 29. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
As illustrated in Figure 29, the contraction of the tissue lines happens at diﬀerent paces. A general
tendency of the contraction can be displayed by the measurement of the length of the tissue lines over
time.
This was done by measuring the length of 20 tissue lines every time the diﬀerentiation media was
changed. Mean values and standard deviations of the measurements were calculated and the results of
these calculations are presented in Figure 30a. Here shows the x-axis the diﬀerentiation day and the
y-axis the average length of the tissue lines given in µm.
33
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 30: (a) Mean and standard deviation of the lengths of 20, 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio.
cells/mL, tissue lines. (b) Mean and standard deviation of the lengths of 17 out of 20, 5% LB gelatin +
10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL, tissue lines. The 3 remaining lines where excluded due to fewer cells
which lead to no tissue contraction.
Looking at the results of the tissue contraction in Figure 30a a high standard deviation is observed for
the three last days. This deviation in the result is due to three tissue lines, which did not compact at all,
as shown in Figure 31d for diﬀerentiation day 29. The reason for the non-compaction of the lines can be
found on their printing day, Figure 31a. Here it can be observed that this line had almost no cells inside
the material compared to Figure 29a. Therefore, the cells were observed to proliferate inside the entire
material, see diﬀerentiation day 8 in Figure 31b and day 20 in Figure 31c, while the cells in other lines
started to fuse into myotubes.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 31: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in culture
showing no progressive cell-compaction. (a) Printing day, where less cells were observed compared to
other tissue lines. (b) Diﬀerentiation day 8. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 20. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 29. The
scale bar is 500µm for all images.
34
==PAGE:44==
0.8% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
0.8% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL solution was the next bioink used for tissue line
printing. It behaved shear-thinning during the process, as expected after the rheology tests, and printed
the lines deﬁned in the G-code. Nevertheless, as the growth media was added to the wells the lines started
to disintegrate into smaller pieces, as observed in Figure 32a. These small pieces was observed to ﬂoat
around in the media, making it impossible to witness any cell contractions for the remaining pieces.
(a)
(b)
Figure 32: Brightﬁeld images of a 0.8% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in
culture. It can be observed how the printed lines had disintegrate in both (a) and (b). Scale bar is 500µm.
5% LB Gelatin + 0.25% Xanthan Gum + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
Due to the observed segmentation of cells in the 5% LB gelatin bioink as previously mentioned the next
logical step would be to introduce a material that inhibits cell segmentation for example by increasing the
viscosity of the 5% LB gelatin which is what xanthan gum does. As expected, when adding xanthan gum
to the bioink mixture creating a 5% LB gelatin + 0.25% xanthan gum bioink, no further segmentation of
cells were observed. However, another problem arose. The printed lines did not keep their structure after
they had been cross-linked, as seen in Figure 33. Instead of lines, oval structures was observed which
may have been due to a lack of gelled gelatin hereby making the gelatin melt as the media was added.
The lines were kept in culture until diﬀerentiation day 24, at which point most of the lines had a weak
contraction as seen in Figure 33h. The days illustrated in Figure 33 are: the printing day (Figure 33a),
the growth media to diﬀerentiation media day (Figure 33b), and the diﬀerentiation days 3, 10, 14, 17, 19,
and 24 (Figure 33c-33h).
35
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 33: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 0.25% xanthan gum + 10% Matrigel + 10mio.
cells/mL tissue line in culture showing cell-growth and weak cell-compaction over time. (a) Printing day.
(b) Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 3. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 10. (e)
Diﬀerentiation day 14. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 17. (g) Diﬀerentiation day 19. (h) Diﬀerentiation day 24.
The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
0.2% GrowDex + 5% LB Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 6mio. cells/mL
0.2% GrowDex + 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 6mio. cells/mL solution was tested the same day as
the xanthan gum bioink, as an alternative way of increasing the viscosity of the 5% LB gelatin bioink.
Like the xanthan gum bioink no segmentation of cells was observed during the printing process, however
a big proliferation of cells wandering out of the tissue lines was witnessed on diﬀerentiation day 3 (Figure
36
==PAGE:46==
34c). This created a cell sheet ﬁlling the entire well, making it impossible to obtain a contraction of the
printed tissue without including the cell sheet.
The tissue lines were kept in culture until diﬀerentiation day 24, since some of the lines were observed to
contract both for their cell sheets, but also a bit for the tissue lines themselves. In Figure 34 the culturing
days illustrated are: the printing day (Figure 34a), the growth media to diﬀerentiation media day (Figure
34b), and the diﬀerentiation days 3, 10, 14, 17, 19, and 24 (Figure 34c-34h).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 34: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 0.2% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel + 6mio. cells/mL
tissue line in culture showing cell-growth and weak cell-compaction over time. (a) Printing day. (b)
Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 3. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 10. (e)
Diﬀerentiation day 14. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 17. (g) Diﬀerentiation day 19. (h) Diﬀerentiation day 24.
The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
0.3% Collagen I + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
When looking through articles for ECM used for 3D tissue models, it quickly becomes clear that collagen
I has been used a lot [15, 19, 18]. On the account of this the 0.3% collagen I + 10% Matrigel + 10 mio.
cells/mL bioink was prepared and printed. The printing process of the collagen I bioink went smoothly
and the lines turned out reasonably well (Figure 35a). Despite the good printing process the lines became
37
==PAGE:47==
increasingly less visible and at the same time the cells spread progressively out in the entire well, which
made the model look more like a 2D model than a 3D model.
The collagen I tissue lines were kept in culture until diﬀerentiation day 13, where all "lines" had had an
evident contraction. The culturing days are in Figure 35 illustrated with: the printing day (Figure 35a),
the growth media to diﬀerentiation media day (Figure 35b), and the diﬀerentiation days 1, 4, 6, 8, 11, and
13 (Figure 35c-35h).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 35: Brightﬁeld images of a 0.3% collagen I + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line
in culture showing cell-growth, increasing material disappearance, and cell-compaction over time. (a)
Printing day. (b) Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 1. (d) Diﬀerentiation
day 4. (e) Diﬀerentiation day 6. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 8. (g) Diﬀerentiation day 11. (h) Diﬀerentiation
day 13. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
Figure 36 depicts a well that cells have ﬁlled to the edges. The well in question is from the collagen I
tissue line, but the size of the cell spread is equivalent to the cell spread in the wells of the other bioinks.
38
==PAGE:48==
Figure 36: Brightﬁeld images a well used for the 0.3% collagen I + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL, as
well as the other tissue lines. The cells covered the entire well before they contracted into the spheres as
observed in the image. Scale bar is 500µm.
5% LB Gelled Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
Since problems with the bioinks containing a mixture of either xanthan gum or GrowDex mix with 5%
LB gelatin occurred, another approach was necessary. So as to prevent the cells from segmenting, a
bioink containing 5% LB gelled gelatin was created and tested. First as a dummy as displayed in Figure
37.
Figure 37: The bioink, 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + unknown cell density, was used for printing the
tissue line in a gelled state. A homogeneous distribution of the cells in the tissue line can be observed.
The scale bar is 1mm.
From Figure 37 it can be recognised that the gelled gelatin was possible to print without cell segmentation,
which is depicted by the homogeneous distribution of cells in the printed tissue line. From a segmenting
perspective, this is a key discovery as it leads to a new way of printing gelatin without the risk of cell
segmentation.
As a result of this discovery, the new tissue lines were printed with the bioink 5% LB gelatin + 10%
Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL in a gelled state. The printed tissue lines are illustrated in Figure 38 and
the images in the ﬁgure display the following days: the printing day (Figure 38a), the growth media to
diﬀerentiation media day (Figure 38b) and the diﬀerentiation days 1, 6, 10 and 13 (Figure 38c-38f).
39
==PAGE:49==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 38: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in culture
that had been printed in a gelled state. (a) Printing day. (b) Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium.
(c) Diﬀerentiation day 1. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 6. (e) Diﬀerentiation day 10. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 13.
The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
Figure 39:
Stained image of the 5%
LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio.
cells/mL. DAPI (blue) and Phalloidin-
Rhodamin (green) was used for the stain-
ing, as these dye the DNA and the actin,
respectively. The image was taken with
a 10x magniﬁcation.
The scale bar is
100µm.
The lines were only kept in culture for 13 days, with no
observation of contraction, as these samples were ﬁxated and
stained with DAPI and Phalloidin-Rhodamin. From the two
dyes it was possible to obtain images of the nuclei of the cells
(DAPI) and the myotubes (Phalloidin-Rhodamin), illustrated
in Figure 39 with blue and green colours, respectively. This
is due to the reason of DAPI dyeing the DNA and Phalloidin-
Rhodamin dyeing the actin.
From the stained images it was observed that the cells were
alive during the culturing of the tissue lines and that they had
started to fuse into myotubes.
Alginate layer
A problem through out the thesis was that the printed lines
got stuck on the bottom of the plate. A feature which was not
intended in ﬁrst place. An experiment was on the ground of
this made by printing 4% alginate on the bottom of the wells
and left to dry for one day, before the tissue lines were printed
on top of the alginate. After the tissue lines were printed and
put in culture the alginate layer would melt, leaving the tissue
lines ﬂoating in the media. The results of this experiment are
showcased in Figure 40.
The tissue lines, however, appear to ﬂoat all over the media making it diﬃcult to change the media without
risking tissue loss when taking up the old media. In addition to this dilemma, the tissue lines were curled
up. Consequently, the ability to observe any cell contraction was diminished.
40
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
Figure 40: Brightﬁeld images of 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line printed
on dry alginate. The lines curled up as well as ﬂoating around in the media. The scale bar is 500µm.
14
Ribbon Platform
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 41: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in a 2%
LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin ribbon platform with a ribbon of 3mm length. (a) Printing day. (b) Growth
medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 5. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 7. (e) Diﬀerentiation
day 10. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
The ribbon platform was chosen to consist of the hydrogel mixture 2% LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB
gelatin with 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue lines. These choices of materials
were based on the results of the two previous sections. In short, 2% LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB gelatin
was preferred due to its Young’s modulus meaning it is a relatively soft material enabling the tissue lines
to deform cantilevers made from this exact material. On the other hand, 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel
+ 10mio. cells/mL was chosen by reason of its easy printing without cell segmentation.
The platforms were printed with and without a dry layer of alginate on the bottom as a consequence of
the discovery of the ﬂoating tissue lines that alginate resulted in as mentioned in the previous section.
Platforms without dry alginate
Two experiments with platforms without the alginate were made. One where the ribbons on the platform
41
==PAGE:51==
had a length of 5mm (Figure 42) and one where the ribbons had a length of 3mm (Figure 41). For
both experiments the same nozzle size (27GA) was used, nevertheless the radii of the two platforms are
recognised as being diﬀerent, with a diﬀerence of 0.05mm. The length of the tissue lines was 5mm for
both platforms.
In Figure 41 the platform with ribbons of 3mm length is depicted and the images portray the following:
the printing day (Figure 41a), the growth media to diﬀerentiation media day (Figure 41b), and the diﬀer-
entiation days 5, 7, and 10 (Figure 41c-41e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 42: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in a 2%
LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin ribbon platform with a ribbon of 5mm length. (a) Printing day. (b) Growth
medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 1. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 3. (e) Diﬀerentiation
day 6. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 8. (g) Diﬀerentiation day 10. (h) Diﬀerentiation day 13. The scale bar is
500µm for all images.
In Figure 42 the platform with 5mm long ribbons is illustrated where the images represent: the printing
day (Figure 42a), the growth media to diﬀerentiation media day (Figure 42b), and the diﬀerentiation days
1, 3, 6, 8, 10, and 13 (Figure 42c-42h).
Platforms with Dry Alginate
The platform printed with the dry alginate was made with 3mm long ribbons and 5mm long tissue lines.
42
==PAGE:52==
The result of this platform is presented for two tissue lines, one in Figure 44 that shows uniformity of the
ribbon and one in Figure 43 that is less uniform when compared to the ribbon platform in the previous
ﬁgure. In both cases the tissue lines were not adhered to the bottom of the platform making the tissue lines
free ﬂoating except by their adhesion to the ribbons. This free ﬂoating behaviour is just as expected due
to the use of alginate. In Figure 43 the images illustrate: the printing day (Figure 43a), the growth media
to diﬀerentiation media day (Figure 43b), the diﬀerentiation day 7 (Figure 43c), and the diﬀerentiation
day 10 (Figure 43d).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 43: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in
a 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin ribbon platform with a 3mm long ribbon. For this print a 4% dry
alginate layer was printed before hand. (a) Printing day. (b) Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium.
(c) Diﬀerentiation day 7. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 10. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 44: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in
a 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin ribbon platform with a 3mm long ribbon. For this print a 4% dry
alginate layer was printed before hand. (a) Printing day. (b) Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium.
(c) Diﬀerentiation day 3. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 5. (e) Diﬀerentiation day 7. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 10.
The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
In Figure 44 the images illustrate: the printing day (Figure 44a), the growth media to diﬀerentiation
media day (Figure 44b), and the diﬀerentiation days 3, 5, 7, and 10 (Figure 44c-44f).
43
==PAGE:53==
After the platform has been in diﬀerentiation media for 10 days, the tissue lines were ﬁxated and stained
with DAPI and Phalloidin-Rhodamin. The DAPI dyes DNA meanwhile Phalloidin-Rhodamin dyes actin,
making it possible to observe living cell. From the images in Figure 45 small myotubes are noticeable
together with single cells, as the DNA is represented by the blue colour and the actin by the green.
(a)
(b)
Figure 45: Stained image of the 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL on the 2% LBG/휅-car
+ 3% LB gelatin ribbon platform with a 3mm long ribbon. DAPI (blue) and Phalloidin-Rhodamin (green)
was used for the staining, because these dye the DNA and the actin, respectively. (a) Was taken with a
20x magniﬁcation and the image has a scale-bar on 100µm. (b) Was taken with a 40x magniﬁcation and
the image has a scale-bar on 50µm.
44
==PAGE:54==
Discussion
15
Ribbon Platform Materials
For the theoretical calculations and the choice of the ribbon materials four hydrogels were tested with
an amplitude sweep (10−2 −100%, 6.28 rad/s, 37◦C). This amplitude did not only give a method of
calculating the Young’s modulus for each of the samples, but it could also be used to determine the
behaviour of the materials when introduced to strain. It was observed that all of the hydrogels had a yield
point, see Figure 24. This yield point was observed to be around 1% oscillation strain for the 4% agar
and the 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin, while it was around 2% oscillation strain for the 2% gellan gum
+ 2% agar and 4-7% oscillation strain for the 2% gellan gum. This means that all of the materials started
to soften at low strains, but only the 4% agar was observed to have a ﬂow point around 90% oscillation
strain.
It was also noticed that when combining the gellan gum and agar, the material got a higher yield point
(2%) and ﬂow point (above 100%) than the pure 4% and a higher storage modulus than the 2% pure
gellan gum. Even though this is a desired outcome for the mixture of the hydrogels, the Young’s modulus
was observed to be too high (69.6kPa) compared to the wanted design of the platform, as illustrated in
Figure 25
Therefore, the choice was between the 2% gellan gum and the 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin mixture,
both with similar values of the Young’s modulus, 11.1kPa vs. 12.3kPa. Comparing the behaviour of
their amplitude sweep, the 2% gellan looks to be more stable, however it was much harder to handle.
The 2% gellan gelled much faster than the % LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin mixture, making it diﬃcult to
load the syringe without risking that the gellan gelled during the process and thereby complicating the
printing process signiﬁcantly. For this reason the 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin mixture was chosen as
the ribbon platform material.
16
Tissue Line Materials
16.1
Rheology
The ﬂow sweep was used to test if the materials for the bioinks were shear-thinning, if they had not
already been concluded as being liquid, to ensure printablity. Of the materials used for the bioinks, two
were tested for shear-thinning properties: the 5% LB gelled gelatin and the 0.8% GrowDex. Both of
these were observed to be shear-thinning, as the Power Law model ﬁtted to their data showed a good ﬁt
(Figure 27) together with each of their power law index, n, being below 1. The shear-thinning behaviour
of the GrowDex was expected, since MFC were determined to be shear-thinning in other articles [7, 28].
Temperature Sweep
The temperature sweep was used for ﬁnding the gelling point of the 5% LB gelatin. However, this was
not possible to determine directly, as the G’ was observed to always be higher than the G”, see Figure 26.
Nonetheless, it was possible to observe that the G’ started to rise around 19◦C and rose even further as
the temperature decreased, which means that the gelatin did in fact gel. The same process of thinking is
used when working out the melting point of the gelatin. Here, the storage modulus decreased in strength
until 29◦, marking this as the melting point.
The reason for the lack of any observable cross-over points is that the experiment did not turn out perfectly.
One contributing factor that could aﬀect the quality of experiment is the angular frequency which is the
speed that the rheometer rotates with.
45
==PAGE:55==
Figure 46: Frequency sweep of 5% LB gelatin (푇=
20◦C, 휔= 0.1 −100 rad/s and 훾푂= 1%). Here the
G” is observed to dominate the system at low angular
frequencies.
At low angular frequencies the polymer chains in
the gelatin will have time to detangle leading to
a more liquid behaviour.
This behaviour is il-
lustrated in Figure 46, which shows a frequency
sweep (1%, 0.1-100rad/s, 20◦C) for a 5% LB
gelatin at 20◦. In this experiment the loss mod-
ulus dominates the system until 0.8 rad/s where-
after the storage modulus starts to dominate the
system. The storage modulus starts to dominate in
the higher angular frequencies due to the fact that
the gelatin polymer chains will experience a fast
pull in them, preventing them from unwrapping
from each other hereby leading to a more elastic
behaviour being observed.
The temperature experiment presented in Figure
26 was carried out at an angular frequency of 6.28
rad/s, leading to the conclusion that a lower angu-
lar frequency should have been used. However the
storage modulus was not observed to dominate at other temperatures (See Figure A.1 in Appendix A)
at any angular frequency. Moreover, the raw phase of the rheometer during the temperature sweep was
observed to be higher than 175 (Figure A.2 in Appendix A), meaning that there was a risk of the inertia of
the system dominating the system [52], hereby potentially inducing the storage modulus to seem higher
than it really is for the 5% LB gelatin. Ultimately hindering the ability to determine the gelling point and
melting point of the sample.
Amplitude Sweep
The amplitude sweeps for the materials show the behaviour of the individual materials, as earlier men-
tioned as well as exempliﬁed by the 5% LB cross-linked gelatin (Figure 28d) and the 0.8% GrowDex
(Figure 28e), where the diﬀerences were obvious. 5% LB gelatin was proven to be independent of the
strain, meaning it behaved as a viscoelastic solid material, whereas the 0.8% GrowDex had a yield point
and a ﬂow point.
The amplitudes sweeps were also used for calculating the Young’s modulus from the storage modulus
with the use of the equations (12) and (5). The storage modulus of the materials were in the range
0.01-3kPa, which lead to Young’s modulus in the range of 0.03-9kPa. The highest being the HB gelatin
in a cross-linked state at 37푐푖푟푐C (9kPa) and the lowest being the 5% LB gelatin in a non cross-linked at
37푐푖푟푐C (0.01kPa).
One of the reasons for not choosing the 5% HB gelatin as a material in a bioink was because of its high
Young’s modulus, 9kPa, when an opposite property was in fact desirable, namely a soft material enabling
the cells to compact easier. The 5% LB gelatin with a Young’s modulus around 1.2kPa was for this reason
more appealing as a tissue matrix. The 0.8% GrowDex did have a Young’s modulus similar to the one
of the 5% LB gelatin, while the Young’s modulus of the collagen I was observed to be around 0.03kPa,
hence collagen I is considered a very soft material.
16.2
Printed Tissue Lines
Eight experiments were made for the tissue lines as given in Table 7. All of the designs used for analysis
are of the line design, although all experiments were made for all three designs. The line design choice is
taken on the basis of the fact that the lines contracted faster and ultimately the line design for the ribbon
platforms is preferred. An example on the other two designs, namely serpents and circles, can be found
in Appendix B.
46
==PAGE:56==
All of the bioinks contained 10% Matrigel to ensure good properties, like cell adhesion of the tissue
lines, and additionally Matrigel had been used in a number of reputable articles [5, 6, 15, 18]. On top
of this, most of the bioinks in this thesis also contained the 5% LB gelatin as a consequence of the 0.8%
GrowDex matrix that did not work as intended as illustrated in Figure 32. The tissue lines fabricated
with the 0.8% GrowDex fell apart, fragmented all over the plate, and moreover they did not adhere to
the bottom of the plate. This made it impossible to observe whether the cells would compact the ma-
terial or not. Accordingly, this material was discarded as use for a structural component for the tissue lines.
5% LB Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
The ﬁrst experiment with 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL on the other hand showed
promising results, as observed in Figure 29 (and Figure B.1 in Appendix B). The printed lines looked
promising and after diﬀerentiation day 11 the tissue lines started to contract. This contraction continued
until diﬀerentiation day 25 where almost all lines had contracted. In total had 17 out of 20 the lines con-
tracted from lines into spheres and the reason for non-contracted tissue lines could be found by looking at
the images taken on the printing day. Comparing a contractive tissue line (Figure 29a) to non-contractive
tissue line (Figure 31a), it could be observed that the latter tissue line had less cells compared to the
ﬁrst. This diﬀerence of cells in the tissue lines could be traced back to the problems with the viscosity
of the gelatin, as the cells segmented to the bottom of the syringe, hereby creating a nonhomogeneous
distribution of cells in the bioink.
5% LB Gelatin +0.25% Xanthan Gum/0.2% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
As a result of too low viscosity, a method of producing a 5% LB gelatin with higher viscosity was
needed. Two approaches of increasing the viscosity were tested: one way was by adding xanthan gum
to the gelatin, as xanthan gum works as a viscosity increasing agent and the second way was by adding
GrowDex to the gelatin solution. The results of both of these bioinks are illustrated in Figure 33 and
Figure 34.
For the 5% LB gelatin + 0.25% xanthan gum + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL bioink the tissue lines
have come out somewhat odd in that the lines did not resemble lines, but were more similar to bathtub-like
organisation. The reason for this odd structure may have been due to the fact that the gelatin had not
completely gelled before the media with the mTG was added which consequently lead to a dissolving
of the gelatin before the mTG was able to cross-link the gelatin. The samples were still kept in order
to observe what would happen when the cells started to compact the material, however another problem
arose, in which a larger amount of the cells proliferated outside the tissue lines. Perhaps this problem is
related to the fact that the gelatin had melted and therefore coated the bottom of the well. The cells outside
the tissue line compacted towards the tissue line making it diﬃcult to get an accurate measurement of the
contractility of tissue lines. The interference on the contractility measurement is obvious in Figure 33
especially when compared to the more ideal compaction process of the 5% LB gelatin lines in Figure 29.
Figure 47: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin +
0.2% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel + 6mio. cells/mL
tissue line in culture showing cells all over the well.
Taken at diﬀerentiation day 14.
A similar problem was observed for the 5%
LB gelatin + 0.2% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel
+ 6mio.
cells/mL bioink making the cell
sheeting created in the entire plate contract in-
stead of a contract located to the printed tis-
sue line. In this case the tissue contained fewer
tissue lines resembling bathtubs like the xan-
than samples and instead more tissue lines sim-
ilar to normal tissue lines.
Still some tissue
lines did resemble bathtubs as in (Figure B.3
in Appendix B), further supporting the hypoth-
esis that the bathtub-like structure is in part
a consequence of the gelatin not gelled prop-
47
==PAGE:57==
erly.
This bathtub-like shape of the tissue line was not the only noticeable challenge as some of the cells exerted
a spreading behaviour. The spread of the cells on the bottom plate should not theoretically be possible,
as the bottom plate used has been non-treated in order to inhibit cell from adhering to the bottom plate.
But still, the cells do spread to the bottom plate. In this context, it is important to consider the properties
of gelatin that has cell-adhering properties and it could have coated the bottom plate as it was observed to
dissolve by making the bathtub shape, thus providing the bottom plate with cell-adhering properties for
the cells to spread to. This is one hypothesis that could explain why the cells spread to the bottom plate
as the cell density inside the tissue got too high.
0.3% Collagen I + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
Further, the cell spreading behaviour was also observed for the 0.3% collagen I + 10% Matrigel + 10mio.
cells/mL bioink along with a degradation of the tissue line creating a challenge concerning the measure-
ment of contractility, see Figure 35. Already on diﬀerentiation day 6 it became diﬃcult to distinguish
between the cell sheet created in the well and the actual printed tissue line, as seen in Figure 35f. On
diﬀerentiation day 11 some of the sheet had contracted into a sphere and on diﬀerentiation day 13 the
sheets had further contracted into two spheres, as observed in Figure 36. In these images the size of the
well can also be seen in comparison to the printed tissue lines and it shows how much of a size diﬀerence
there is between the well and the actually printed materials proving a real challenge when trying to
distinguish between how much of the material was actually contracted material in contrast to how much
of the material that was just a layer of non-contracted cells.
5% LB Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (in a Gelled State)
Since the xanthan gum and GrowDex did not work as intended, other ways of increasing the viscosity
of the 5% LB gelatin were needed. One way was to lower the temperature to 28◦during the printing
process, thereby making the gelatin a bit more viscose together with making the gelatin gel faster after it
was printed. This did not work as exempliﬁed by the clear segmentation of the cells, which resulted in
cells being almost the only component printed (Figure B.4 in Appendix B).
Another way of increasing the viscosity of the 5% LB gelatin is by printing with gelled gelatin which was
tested by examining two diﬀerent parameters: whether the cells would stay homogeneous in the solution
and the printability of the gelled gelatin on the printer. The ﬂow sweep results from the rheometer
demonstrates that the gelled gelatin possesses shear-thinning behaviour. All was in order and the solution
was tested on the printer with cells in the solution resulting in no visible segmentation and printed tissue
lines of acceptable degree as seen in Figure 37. Moreover, it was possible to show that the cells are in fact
inside the tissue lines and not just laying on top or in one layer, clearly seen in Figure 37. Successfully a
3D tissue had been printed.
The gelled gelatin mixture was printed as a tissue line experiment, as observed in Figure 38. The images
of these tissue lines are not of the best quality since the quality is interfered by a large number of dead cells
along with inadequate lighting contrast. Both of these factors happened due to decidedly diﬀerent wells
used in this experiment compared to the well from the other experiments that the tissue lines were printed
in. In comparison, these wells are smaller, due to a manufacture error, making it harder to obtain clear
images of the tissue lines as well as cleaning the wells of the old media. The tissue line itself however
was observed to be stable during the process and on day 13 the tissue lines were ﬁxated and stained.
The stained images are observed in Figure 39. The cells were alive as indicated by the blue colour of
DAPI that binds to DNA mainly concentrated in and in relation to the nuclei. Not only were they alive,
they had fused into myotubes as indicated by the green colour of Phalloidin-Rhodamin that binds to actin.
This was an expected result as changes in the tissue lines during the cell culturing were observed with
brightﬁeld images.
48
==PAGE:58==
Alginate Layer
One problem that continuously reoccurred during the experiments was the fact that the lines got stuck to
the bottom of the plate, hereby making multiple anchor points of the material, which may have aﬀected
the contraction speed of the tissue lines. To solve this problem 4% alginate were printed in the bottom
of the wells and left to dry, after which the tissue lines were printed on top. The results of these lines
are given in Figure 40, in which the tissue lines are not stuck on the plate. Instead, the tissue lines
were ﬂoating around in the media, even all the way out to the edges of the well, as seen in Figure 40b,
often being curled up to some degree. These two problems severely diminished the ability to accurately
determined any contraction of the tissue lines. In order to measure contraction it is necessary to manage
the aforementioned problems, which could be done by introducing alginate to the platform design so as
to adhere the tissue lines to the ribbons.
10U/mL vs. 1U/mL mTG
During the experiments all gelatin tissue lines were cross-linked with 10U/mL mTG because mTG in-
duced cross-linking had previously shown desirable results in earlier studies [12, 13]. However, in one
experiment the 5% LB gelatin was cross-linked with 1U/mL mTG, which lead to no visible tissue lines
at all after 1hour of cross-linking. Following this the conclusion was that 1U/mL mTG was not enough
to cross-link the gelatin before it melted.
Comparison of the Bioinks
Comparing the compaction of the tissue lines with their Young’s modulus it can be observed that collagen
I with the lowest Young’s modulus contracted after 11-13 diﬀerentiation days, while the 5% LB gelatin
with the highest Young’s modulus used the longest time with 11-25 diﬀerentiation days. Therefore, it is
likely to assume that a higher Young’s modulus is associated with a longer contraction time probably due
to the increased stiﬀness represented by Young’s modulus that the cells have to work against in order to
contract.
The mixtures of xanthan gum/gelatin and GrowDex/gelatin was observed to have a contraction period in
the diﬀerentiation days 14-24 leading to a similar contraction as the gelatin, which makes sense since the
mixture consist mostly of the gelatin and it is assumed that the rheological behaviour did not alter too
much, when the xanthan gum or GrowDex was added to the gelatin.
The number of days that it took for the tissue lines to contract was longer than expected, maybe due to the
stiﬀness of the matrix material together with the anchoring of the lines to the bottom. This lead to a need
of a more coherent tissue line, which has been shown to happen between 10-20 days in diﬀerentiation
media, while single large myotubes have been observed around day 7[12].
17
Ribbon Platform
The hydrogel ribbon platforms were designed with ribbon lengths of 3mm (Figure 41) and 5mm (Figure
42) with the use of the materials, 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin for the ribbons and 5% LB gelatin
+ 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL for the tissue lines, because these materials had shown the most
promising results with regards to the low Young’s modulus of 2% LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB gelatin
creating a soft material while 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL had easy printability
without cell segmentation as mentioned previously.
Platforms With and Without Alginate
The platforms were tested without a printed alginate (Figure 42) and with (Figure 44) a printed alginate
layer with the aim of examining whether it would ensure that the tissue lines would not adhere to the
bottom plate, as it had done previously in the tissue line experiment. As depicted in Figure 42 the tissue
lines did indeed adhere to the bottom of the plate when an alginate layer had not been printed beforehand
49
==PAGE:59==
and the very opposite was the case when the alginate layer had been printed meaning that the tissue lines
were observed to ﬂoat in the media, only anchored to the their spot by the ribbons, see Figure 44 and 43.
Figure 48: Stained image of the 5% LB gelatin +
10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL on the 2% LBG/휅-
car + 3% LB gelatin ribbon platform with a 3mm
long ribbon. DAPI (blue) and Phalloidin-Rhodamin
(green) was used for the staining, because these dye
the DNA and the actin, respectively. The image was
taken with a 20x magniﬁcation and the image has a
scale-bar on 100µm.
The tissue lines on the platforms were also tested
for live cells by ﬁxating them and staining the tis-
sue lines. This was carried out on both kinds of
samples on diﬀerentiation day 13 and 10.
These number of diﬀerentiation days were chosen
owing to that fact that the tissue lines had started to
contract by this number of diﬀerentiation days in
numerous other experiments quite similar to this
one [15, 21, 12] as well as other experiments in
this very thesis. If a contraction does takes place it
is fair to assume that myotubes have been formed
and therefore the cells proliferate and it is possible
to measure the contractility. Moreover, the amount
of time left for this experiment in the thesis was
limited, and as a consequence it was simply not
possible to expect to culture the cells any further
in order to observe full contraction. In the stained
images the start of the myotube formation together
with single cells can be observed in Figure 48
and Figure (45) where the blue colours represents
the nuclei and the green colour represents actin
cytoskeletal. This further supports that the cells
indeed were alive and proliferating.
The tissue in the stained images can however not be deﬁned as continuous contractile tissue since not
enough cells were observed in the material and similarly not enough myotubes were observed either. The
reason for these observations are most likely due to the fact that the cells were not cultured in a suﬃcient
amount of time to produce actual continuous contractile tissue. As mentioned this was expected as it was
simply not possible to culture the cells for a longer amount of time. Not only that, but the cell density
proved too low as indicated by fewer cells visible than expected, especially clear in the ﬁrst number of
diﬀerentiation days, as illustrated in Figure 44 alongside missing tissue line contraction. The lack of cells
and contraction is more clear in Figure 31 from the ﬁrst experiment performed on the tissue lines.
In order to improve these shortcomings, we are left with two decent options: Increase the number of
cells and/or longer cell culturing. The ﬁrst option means adding a higher number of cells to the solution
from the beginning and reaching a higher number of cells at an earlier diﬀerentiation day provided the
proliferation rate is equivalent to that of the solution with a lower starting number of cells. But a higher
number of total cells are not without its own ﬂaws. More cells in the printing process induce a higher
number of cells getting killed. So an important trade-oﬀbetween number of cells in starting solution and
number of cells killed during the printing process is presented limiting the density of cells used for the
printing process. The second option has already been mentioned a couple of times and includes a longer
cell culturing in the growth media inducing cell proliferation in the printed tissue line.
Ribbon Calculations
In the experiments for the ribbon platform the radii of the platforms were observed to vary slightly. Using
ImageJ to manually measure the radii of the ribbons. The 5mm long ribbon (Figure 42) was measured
to have a radius of 150-200µm, while the 3mm long ribbon (Figure 44) were measure to have a radius
100-150µm. Comparing these results to analytical analysis, a diﬀerence in the deﬂection can be observed
(Figure 22b). This is better illustrated by looking into the theoretical calculations of the deﬂections as a
function of radii instead of the deﬂections as a function of lengths. This illustration is presented in
50
==PAGE:60==
Figure 49: Analytical calculation of the beam expe-
riencing a constant force of 퐹= 5µN from the tissue
lines. The beam deﬂections is examined with the use
of equation (13) with the deﬂection as a function of
the radius for diﬀerent beam lengths and a constant
Young’s modulus of 12.6kPa.
Figure 49 in which a 5mm ribbon, which is a per-
fectly reasonably length, shows an inappropriately
large deﬂection of more than 3mm when the ra-
dius is 0.1mm. This presumed radius is however
probably an understatement. A better estimation
of ribbon radius would be in the range of 0.15-
0.2mm which results in a more appropriate deﬂec-
tion of 0.3-0.7mm. All in all, it can be concluded
that in order to get an appropriate deﬂection of
approximately 0.5mm the radius of a 5mm long
ribbon must be in the range of 0.3-0.7mm while
the radius of a 3mm long ribbon must be in the
range of 0.1-0.13mm for the material in question.
Another factor that can be derived from this is
that the shorter the ribbon is the smaller the range
of appropriate radius is and consequently a more
precise printing method is required.
Speciﬁcally the above conclusions about the de-
ﬂection as a function of radius for certain lengths
is only applicable for one speciﬁc material, namely
2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin. If other materials
are desired one must consider their speciﬁc deﬂections in a similar fashion before fabricating with the
material. For 2% LBG/휅-car + 3% LB gelatin it works as intended as a ribbon platform with ribbon of
3mm length and 0.1mm radius. However, it is too soft for ribbons of length 5mm and radius of 0.1mm,
which is why a stiﬀer material of approximately 30kPa in Young’s modulus is needed in that case (Figure
25).
Comparison to Other Articles
It has proven diﬃcult to ﬁnd other articles with a comparable set of parameters without removing the
focus from the key points of this thesis. However similar designs of the platform have been used in other
articles [15, 18, 19, 53].
In Zhao et al. 2019 [18] they designed a similar platform, as we have been using, however their platform
was designed with self-assembling in mind, by combining their polystyrene chip with their POMac wires
and manually casting the cells in a precursor hydrogel within the assembled biowire chip. The entire
design is near impossible to fabricate in an automated manner, as each part of the biowire chip must be
prepared by themselves. This is one of the reasons why our ribbon platform’s parts is not fabricated in
a similar way. Our platform is based on being able to fabricate engineered tissue models in a robust,
scalable and automated manner, by 3D printing the entire platform in one sitting.
18
Further Investigation
It is important to remember that the all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility assay in
this thesis is still in a proof-of-concept phase and therefore, one should be careful considering it as
anything else. As a proof-of-concept there are still signiﬁcant amounts of consideration in terms of both
potential improvements and further research on both the fabrication and the design of the platform and
its components.
One essential area of research opportunity is the investigation of the contractility of the tissue lines
on the ribbon platform together with validating the deﬂection of the ribbons. In order to achieve this
goal a thorough evaluation of the the obtained experimental deﬂection in comparison to the theoretical
51
==PAGE:61==
deﬂection is key, hereby being able to support the conclusion on whether the assumptions for the theoretical
calculations have been made too simplistic.
Another potential area of research could be to compare the results, both theoretically and experimentally,
of at least two types of ribbon platform materials. By implementing not just one, but a number of
comparative analyses it would be possible to allow a greater understanding of not only the rheological
properties of the materials but also the physical properties of the printed material, ultimately getting
one step closer to identifying the materials that are most advantageous. In order to reach this goal,
particularly two comparisons could prove useful: The ﬁrst comparison would be between rheological
properties belonging to diﬀerent materials for the ribbons while the second comparison would be between
physical properties, especially Young’s modulus, associated with diﬀerent printed material in the ribbon
platform.
Yet another research possibility when considering the ways in which to further the improvements is to
make use of the opportunities that optical tracking possesses. Optical tracking takes advantage of the
abundance of visual information present in the wells by the use of a particles in the ink such as ﬂuorescent
particles or black particles. In doing so, a wealth of opportunities arise, notably enabling a more precise
localisation of the cells, thereby allowing a more accurate measurement of the contractility, ultimately
resulting in better estimations using the contractility compared to the observations using the naked eye.
52
==PAGE:62==
Conclusion
The fundamental background for this thesis is an analysis based on the ﬁxed-ﬁxed beam deﬂection model
as a means of validating fabrication material choices used in an all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue
contractility assay. In order to carry out this central analysis we investigated four diﬀerent hydrogels in
rheological experiments. The analysis validated the choice of 2% LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% LB gelatin
as a hydrogel material and consequently it became the selected ribbon and platform material throughout
this thesis.
The choice of bioink used for tissue lines for the contractility assay was established on rheological studies
(ﬂow sweeps and amplitude sweeps) together with printed tissue precursors. In total eight experiments
were made with printed tissue precursors and from these experiments it could be concluded that the bioink
5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL printed in a gelled state showed the most appropriate
properties in comparison to the rest of the tested bioinks.
As a consequence of the bioink being in a gelled state during the printing process, cell segmentation
was prevented which is a key desired property of the bioink. In contrast some bioink exhibited cell
segmentation behaviour which is a problem speciﬁcally identiﬁed for the non-gelled (5% LB gelatin +
10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL) bioink. Furthermore, this non-gelled bioink showed proper compacting
tissue lines in Figure 29 and Figure 30) as opposed to the other bioinks whose tissue lines were challenging
to observe compacting, due to the diﬃculty of distinguishing between the compaction caused by the tissue
lines and the compaction caused by the cell sheet, see Figure 35.
The extend and speed of the cell-driven properties as a function of the ink composition was compared
with the Young’s modulus obtained from the rheology studies. In this comparison it was concluded that
there seemed to be a correlation between the Young’s modulus and the compaction speed of the cells,
since the material with the lowest Young’s modulus (0.03kPa) showed the fastest compaction of the tissue
lines (13 days in diﬀerentiation media).
At last initial studies on an all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility platform were performed
with the materials chosen from the analytical estimation of the ribbon platform and the tissue line survey. It
was here demonstrated that it is possible to print and obtain a fully functional platform with free standing
tissue lines containing living cells thus concluding that a 3D functional platform can be produced in
an automated one-tool manner. Still there is further investigations and improvements needed before
an all-printed hydrogel-based muscle-tissue contractility assay can be used for drug development and
personalised medicine.
53
==PAGE:63==
Appendices
A
Rheology
Frequency Sweep
Frequency sweeps were made to decide the value used for the angular frequency in the amplitude sweeps
and the temperature sweep. The parameters used for the frequency sweep were a oscillation strain of 1%,
a temperature on either 15◦C, 20◦C, 25◦C or 37◦C and a varying angular frequency of 0.1-100rad/s.
In Figure A.1 the frequency sweep of 5% LB gelatin is illustrated for the four diﬀerent temperatures.
Here it can be observed how the state of the gelatin aﬀects the frequency sweep. For example is the
storage modulus independent of the angular frequency in Figure A.1a, which is the 5% LB gelatin at
15◦C, meaning that the gelatin is in a gelled state.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.1: Rheology for angular frequency (1%, 0.1-100rad/s) of 5% LB gelatin at diﬀerent tempera-
tures. (a) At 15◦C, meaning the gelatin is in a gelled state. (b) At 20◦C, the gelatin is starting to gel. (c)
At 25◦C, the gelatin is a liquid. (d) At 37◦C, where the gelatin is also observed to be liquid.
54
==PAGE:64==
Temperature Sweep with Raw Phase
Figure A.2: Temperature sweep of 5% LB gelatin (푇= 15 −45◦C, 휔= 6.28 rad/s and 훾푂= 1%) with
the results of the raw phase illustrated. When the raw phase is above 175◦there is a risk of the system
inertia dominating the measured signal [52].
55
==PAGE:65==
B
Tissue Lines
5% LB Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Figure B.1: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line in
culture showing progressive cell-compaction over time. (a) Printing day. (b) Diﬀerentiation day 1. (c)
Diﬀerentiation day 6. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 11. (e) Diﬀerentiation day 13. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 15.
(g) Diﬀerentiation day 18. (h) Diﬀerentiation day 20. (i) Diﬀerentiation day 22. (j) Diﬀerentiation day
25. (k) Diﬀerentiation day 27. (l) Diﬀerentiation day 29. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
56
==PAGE:66==
5% LB Gelatin + 0.25% Xanthan Gum + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure B.2: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 0.25% xanthan gum + 10% Matrigel + 10mio.
cells/mL tissue line in culture showing cell-growth and weak cell-compaction over time. (a) Printing day.
(b) Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 3. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 10. (e)
Diﬀerentiation day 14. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 17. (g) Diﬀerentiation day 19. (h) Diﬀerentiation day 24.
The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
57
==PAGE:67==
0.2% GrowDex + 5% LB Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 6mio. cells/mL
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure B.3: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 0.2% GrowDex + 10% Matrigel + 6mio. cells/mL
tissue line in culture showing cell-growth and weak cell-compaction over time. (a) Printing day. (b)
Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 3. (d) Diﬀerentiation day 10. (e)
Diﬀerentiation day 14. (f) Diﬀerentiation day 17. (g) Diﬀerentiation day 19. (h) Diﬀerentiation day 24.
The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
58
==PAGE:68==
5% LB Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Lower Printing Temperature)
(a)
(b)
Figure B.4: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line printed
with a temperature of 28◦C. Problems with cell segmentation lead to no optimal printed tissue lines. (a)
Printing day, a lump of cells is observed as the tissue line. (b) Growth media to diﬀerentiation media day.
The cells are observed to leave the printed tissue line. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
5% LB Gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (1u/g mTG for cross-linking)
(a)
(b)
Figure B.5: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line
cross-linked with 1u/g. Only small hints and glimpsed of tissue lines were observed. Both in (a) and (b).
The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
59
==PAGE:69==
Serpents and Circles
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure B.6: Brightﬁeld images of a 5% LB gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line designed
as a serpent. (a) Printing day. (b) Diﬀerentiation day 8. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 20. (d) Diﬀerentiation
day 29. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure B.7: Brightﬁeld images of a 0.3% collagen + 10% Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL tissue line printed
as a circle. (a) Printing day. (b) Growth medium to diﬀerentiation medium. (c) Diﬀerentiation day 4. (d)
Diﬀerentiation day 8. (e) Diﬀerentiation day 13. The scale bar is 500µm for all images.
60
==PAGE:70==
C
Preparation of Samples for 3D Printing
In this section an overview of the prepared samples for the 3D printing process.
(1) Polystyrene/Kraton-SEBS/Treated glass mixture (Wells)
The three stock solutions used for making the ink for the wells were prepared by Ph.D. Christian J. Pless
by the following procedure:
PS 35K in hexyl acetate (Stock solution):
Polystyrene (331651) from Sigma Aldrich. CAS Number: 9003-53-6
Hexyl Acetate (108154) from Sigma Aldrich. CAS Number: 142-92-7
- Mixed in a 2:1 w/w% ratio (66wt% polystyrene) left stirring for two days at room temperature in closed
glass container with manual mixing every 6-8 hours to obtain a homogeneous solution.
SEBS in Butyl Acetate (33wt%)
SEBS (G1645M Polymer) from KRATON. Identiﬁer K505DDo17U
n-Butyl Acetate (1.09652) from Sigma Aldrich. CAS Number: 123-86-4
- Mixed in a 1:2 w/w% ratio (33wt% SEBS) left stirring overnight at room temperature in closed glass
container.
Trichlorohexylsiline - 2/2v in tolvene treated hollow glass
Glass Spheres (440345) from Sigma Aldrich. CAS Number: 65997-17-3
Trichloro(hexyl)silane (446963) from Sigma Aldrich. CAS Number: 928-65-4
Toluene from VWR. CAS Number: 108-88-3
For 20g treated glass spheres:
- Wash glass spheres in 50mL toluene under stirring for 15min
- Remove Toluene
- Add 50mL of 2/2wt% Trichloro(hexyl)silane in Toluene to the glass sphere.
- Leave stirring overnight in closed glass container
- Filter oﬀthe solution
- Rinse 3 times in toluene followed by 3 times in 96% ethanol
- Dry the treated glass beads in a glass container at 120C for 3 hours – stirring carefully as needed.
- Cool the glass beads.
(1) Preparation of Well ink
After the three solutions had been prepared these could be mixed into the ink used for the well with the
following procedure:
- 1.2 PS + 2.7g Kraton was mixed together in the speed mixer at 3500rpm for 4min + 2min
- 2.3g Trichlorohexylsiline is added to the mixture and speed mixed at 3500rpm for 2x2min (Cooled
down in between)
- 2g Trichlorohexylsiline is added the mixture and speed mixed at 3500rpm for 2x2min (cooled down in
between)
(2) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Tissue Lines)
- 14% LB gelatin: 0.28g LB gelatin in 2mL DMEM
61
==PAGE:71==
- Dissolved in 45C waterbath ( 30min)
- 26% Matrigel: 130µL Matrigel + 370µL DMEM
- Need to be prepared on ice to prevent the Matrigel from gelling
- The Matrigel and gelatin is mixed together 1:1 (7% gelatin + 13% Matrigel)
- Heated in 45C waterbath to make it suitable for the cells
- 10mio cells/mL: 250µL cells (40mio cells/mL) is mixed with 750µL of the gelatin/Matrigel mixture.
- Leading to the concentrations of: 5% gelatin + 10% Matrigel + 10mio cells/mL
- Cross-linked with 10u/mL mTG after printing for 1 hour at 37◦C
(3) 0.8% (v/v) GrowDex + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Tissue Lines)
- 0.3 matrigel + 0.3mL 10xPBS is mixed together on ice
- 2.4mL GrowDex (1%) is added to the mixture
- Speed mixed at 3000rpm for 3min
(4)5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 0.25% (w/v) xanthan gum + 10mio. cells/mL
(Tissue Lines)
- 0.75% xanthan gum: 0.075g in 10mL DMEM
- Dissolved in boiling water for hours the day before
- Reheat on the day in boiling water
- 15% Gelatin: 0.75g in 5mL DMEM
- Dissolved in 45C in waterbath
- 30% matrigel: 450µL in 1050µL DMEM mixed on ice
- The 3 samples are all mixed together 1:1:1 by adding 666µL of each sample.
-300µL cells of 32mio cells/mL are added to the mixture.
- Cross-linked with 10u/mL mTG after printing
(5) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 0.2% (w/v) GrowDex + 6mio. cells/mL
(Tissue Lines)
- 15% Gelatin: 0.75g in 5mL DMEM
- Dissolved in 45C in waterbath
- 30% matrigel: 450µL in 1050µL DMEM mixed on ice
- 0.6% GrowDex: 1.2mL in 800µL DMEM is speedmixed at 2500rpm for 2min.
- The 3 samples are all mixed together 1:1:1 by adding 666µL of each sample.
-200µL cells of 32mio cells/mL are added to the mixture.
- Cross-linked with 10u/mL mTG after printing for 1 hour at 37◦C
(6) 0.3% (v/v) collagen + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Tissue Lines)
- 100µL matrigel is mixed with 371µL 10xPBS on ice
- 329µL collagen is added to the mixture and the solution is mixed by pipetting up and down slowly
- The mixture is kept on ice at all time
- 200µL cells of 50mio cells/mL is added to the mixture still on ice
- Solution added to an 1mL syringe, which has been cooled down
(7) 5% (w/v) LB gelatin + 10% (v/v) Matrigel + 10mio. cells/mL (Gelled) (Tissue Lines)
- 14% Gelatin: 0.28g in 2mL DMEM (GM)
- Dissolved in 45C waterbath ( 30min)
62
==PAGE:72==
- 26% Matrigel: 130µL matrigel + 370µL DMEM (GM)
- Need to be prepared on ice to prevent the matrigel from gelling
- The matrigel and gelatin is mixed together 1:1 (7% gelatin + 13% matrigel)
- Heated in 45C waterbath to make it suitable for the cells
- 10mio cells/mL: 250µL cells (40mio cells/mL) is mixed with 750µL of the gelatin/matrigel mixture.
- Leading to the concentrations of: 5% gelatin + 10% matrigel + 10mio cells/mL
- The sample is shaken up and down for 5min and then added into the fridge for 10min to get a semi-gelled
gelatin to prevent cell segmentation
- Cross-linked with 10u/mL mTG after printing for 1 hour at 37◦C
Another way the gelled sample could be prepared:
- 14% Gelatin: 0.28g in 2mL DMEM (GM)
- Dissolved in 45C waterbath ( 30min)
- 26% Matrigel: 130µL matrigel + 370µL DMEM (GM)
- Need to be prepared on ice to prevent the matrigel from gelling
- The matrigel and gelatin is mixed together 1:1 (7% gelatin + 13% matrigel)
- Heated in 45C waterbath to make it suitable for the cells
- 10mio cells/mL: 250µL cells (40mio cells/mL) is mixed with 750µL of the gelatin/matrigel mixture.
- Leading to the concentrations of: 5% gelatin + 10% matrigel + 10mio cells/mL
- The sample is shaken up and down for 5min and then put on ice for 15min to insure gelation of the sample.
- Cross-linked with 1u/mL mTG for 1 hour at 37◦C (expect platform that had 10u/mL mTG)
(8) 2% (w/v) LBG/휅-carrageenan + 3% (w/v) LB gelatin (Ribbon Platform)
- 0.08g LBG + 0.12g 휅-carrageenan + 0.3g LB gelatin in 10mL PBS
- dissolved in boiling water for 1hour.
63
==PAGE:73==
D
G-codes used the 3D Printer
Example on G-code for the Tissue Lines:
G-code for 10 tissue lines with a length of 5mm.
(Wellplate: 6well)
(Program-Start)
G90 G94
(Start [Well B1])
G54 X-39.120 Y-19.545
(SEQUENTIAL PRINTING)
(OBJECT [Object 01])
(GROUP [Group 04])
(LEVEL [Level 01])
(Beginning [Layer 04])
G76 Z0
M99
M90 P4 D4
M95 P1
G0 X8 Y-2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
F10 G1 X8 Y-7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X4 Y-2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X4 Y-7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X0 Y-2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X0 Y-7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-4 Y-2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X-4 Y-7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-8 Y-2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X-8 Y-7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X8 Y2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X8 Y7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X4 Y2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X4 Y7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X0 Y2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X0 Y7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-4 Y2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X-4 Y7
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-8 Y2
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G1 X-8 Y7
M96
G0 Z3.7
(Ending [Layer 04])
G54 X39.120 Y19.545
(End [Well B1])
(Program-End)
64
==PAGE:74==
Example on G-code for the Tissue Serpents:
G-code for 1 tissue lines with the serpent design and a length of 5mm.
(Wellplate: 6well)
(Program-Start)
G90 G94
(Start [Well A2])
G54 X0.000 Y19.575
(SEQUENTIAL PRINTING)
(OBJECT [Object 01])
(GROUP [Group 04])
(LEVEL [Level 01])
(Beginning [Layer 04])
G76 Z0
M99
M90 P4 D4
M95 P1
G0 X-7.568 Y7.068
G0 Z0.3
M97
M30 P1.8
F10 G1 X-7.671 Y6.996
X-7.773 Y6.925
X-7.872 Y6.854
X-7.967 Y6.783
X-8.056 Y6.712
X-8.138 Y6.641
X-8.211 Y6.57
X-8.275 Y6.499
X-8.326 Y6.428
X-8.365 Y6.358
X-8.389 Y6.288
X-8.398 Y6.218
X-8.389 Y6.148
X-8.365 Y6.078
X-8.326 Y6.009
X-8.275 Y5.939
X-8.211 Y5.87
X-8.138 Y5.801
X-7.967 Y5.663
X-8.056 Y5.732
X-7.872 Y5.594
X-7.773 Y5.525
X-7.671 Y5.456
X-7.464 Y5.319
X-7.568 Y5.388
X-7.362 Y5.25
X-7.263 Y5.18
X-7.168 Y5.111
X-7.079 Y5.042
X-6.997 Y4.973
X-6.924 Y4.904
X-6.861 Y4.834
X-6.809 Y4.765
X-6.77 Y4.696
X-6.746 Y4.627
X-6.738 Y4.558
X-6.746 Y4.488
X-6.77 Y4.419
X-6.809 Y4.35
X-6.86 Y4.281
X-6.924 Y4.212
X-6.997 Y4.142
X-7.079 Y4.073
X-7.168 Y4.004
X-7.263 Y3.935
X-7.362 Y3.866
X-7.464 Y3.797
X-7.568 Y3.728
X-7.671 Y3.658
X-7.773 Y3.589
X-7.872 Y3.52
X-7.967 Y3.451
X-8.056 Y3.382
X-8.138 Y3.313
X-8.211 Y3.243
X-8.275 Y3.174
X-8.326 Y3.105
X-8.365 Y3.036
X-8.389 Y2.967
X-8.398 Y2.898
X-8.389 Y2.828
X-8.365 Y2.759
X-8.326 Y2.69
X-8.275 Y2.621
X-8.211 Y2.552
X-8.138 Y2.483
X-8.056 Y2.413
X-7.967 Y2.344
X-7.872 Y2.275
X-7.773 Y2.206
X-7.671 Y2.137
X-7.568 Y2.068
M96
G0 Z3.8
(Ending [Layer 04])
G54 X0.000 Y-19.575
(End [Well A2])
65
==PAGE:75==
Example on G-code for the Tissue Circles:
This G-code is for 4 circles with a diameter of 3mm.
(Wellplate: 6well)
(Program-Start)
G90 G94
(Start [Well A3])
G54 X39.120 Y19.575
(SEQUENTIAL PRINTING)
(OBJECT [Object 01])
(GROUP [Group 04])
(LEVEL [Level 01])
(Beginning [Layer 04])
G76 Z0
M99
M90 P4 D4
M95 P1
G0 X-6 Y4.5
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
F10 G3 X-6 Y4.5 I-4.5 J4.5
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X3 Y4.5
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G3 X3 Y4.5 I4.5 J4.5
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-6 Y-4.5
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G3 X-6 Y-4.5 I-4.5 J-4.5
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X3 Y-4.5
G0 Z0.2
M97
M30 P1.8
G3 X3 Y-4.5 I4.5 J-4.5
M96
G0 Z3.7
(Ending [Layer 04])
G54 X-39.120 Y-19.575
(End [Well A3])
66
==PAGE:76==
Example on G-code for the Ribbon Platform:
The G-code are here illustrated for all parts, except tissue lines and there is noted with each part of the
code, how much the code represent.
Alginate layer for 1 well
(Wellplate: 6well)
(Program-Start)
G90 G94
(Start [Well A1])
G54 X-39.120 Y19.575
(SEQUENTIAL PRINTING)
(OBJECT [Object 01])
(GROUP [Alginate Layer])
(LEVEL [Level 01])
(Beginning [Alginate Layer])
G76 Z0
M99
M90 P3 D3
M95 P1
G0 X-8.767 Y8.094
G0 Z0.22
M97
F10 G1 X-6.469 Y8.094
X-6.469 Y7.594
X-8.767 Y7.594
X-8.767 Y7.094
X-6.469 Y7.094
X-6.469 Y6.594
X-8.767 Y6.594
X-8.767 Y6.094
X-6.469 Y6.094
X-6.469 Y5.594
X-8.767 Y5.594
X-8.767 Y5.094
X-6.469 Y5.094
X-6.469 Y4.594
X-8.767 Y4.594
X-8.767 Y4.094
X-6.469 Y4.094
X-6.469 Y3.594
X-8.767 Y3.594
X-8.767 Y3.094
X-6.469 Y3.094
X-6.469 Y2.594
X-8.767 Y2.594
X-8.767 Y2.094
X-6.469 Y2.094
X-6.469 Y1.594
X-8.767 Y1.594
M96
G0 Z3.22
(Ending [Alginate Layer])
Holder (all wells) - repeated 3
times
(OBJECT [Object 02])
(GROUP [Holder])
(LEVEL [Level 01])
(Beginning [Holder])
G76 Z0
M90 P2 D2
M95 P2
G0 X-9.096 Y0.045
G0 Z0.24
M97
F7 G1 X10.706 Y0.045
X10.706 Y0.34
X-9.096 Y0.34
X-9.096 Y8.843
X-6.099 Y8.843
X-6.099 Y0.643
X-5.804 Y0.643
X-5.804 Y8.843
X-2.804 Y8.843
X-2.804 Y0.643
X-2.501 Y0.643
X-2.501 Y8.843
X0.502 Y8.843
X0.502 Y0.643
X0.802 Y0.643
X0.802 Y8.839
X3.801 Y8.839
X3.801 Y0.636
X4.101 Y0.636
X4.101 Y8.839
X7.099 Y8.839
X7.099 Y0.636
X7.399 Y0.636
X7.399 Y8.839
X10.398 Y8.839
X10.398 Y0.636
X10.698 Y0.636
X10.698 Y9.133
X-9.404 Y9.133
X-9.404 Y-9.867
X10.692 Y-9.867
X10.692 Y-1.362
X10.392 Y-1.362
X10.392 Y-9.565
X7.394 Y-9.565
X7.394 Y-1.362
X7.094 Y-1.362
X7.094 Y-9.565
X4.095 Y-9.565
X4.095 Y-1.365
X3.795 Y-1.365
X3.795 Y-9.565
X0.797 Y-9.565
X0.797 Y-1.362
X0.497 Y-1.362
X0.497 Y-9.565
X-2.501 Y-9.565
X-2.501 Y-1.362
X-2.801 Y-1.362
X-2.801 Y-9.565
X-5.8 Y-9.565
X-5.8 Y-1.362
X-6.1 Y-1.362
X-6.1 Y-9.565
X-9.098 Y-9.565
X-9.096 Y0.045
X-9.245 Y0.045
X-9.245 Y8.642
X-9.799 Y8.642
M96
G0 Z3.24
G0 X-9.245 Y8.642
G0 Z0.24
M97
G1 X-9.799 Y8.642
M96
G0 Z3.24
G0 X-9.245 Y8.642
G0 Z0.24
M97
G1 X-9.799 Y8.642
X-9.799 Y8.78
M96
67
==PAGE:77==
G0 Z3.24
(Ending [Holder])
Alginate frame for 1 well
(OBJECT [Object 03])
(GROUP [Alginate Frame])
(LEVEL [Level 01])
(Beginning [Alginate Frame])
G76 Z0
M99
M90 P3 D3
M95 P1
G0 X-8.767 Y1.145
G0 Z0.18
M97
F10 G1 X-6.469 Y1.145
X-6.469 Y8.094
X-8.767 Y8.094
X-8.767 Y1.145
M96
G0 Z3.18
(Ending [Alginate Frame])
Ribbon
(OBJECT [Object 04])
(GROUP [Ribbon])
(LEVEL [Level 01])
(Beginning [Ribbon])
G76 Z0
M90 P2 D2
M95 P2
G0 X-9.245 Y8.989
G0 Z0.7
M97
F7 G1 X10.555 Y8.989
X10.555 Y5.987
X-9.245 Y5.987
X-9.245 Y2.989
X10.559 Y2.989
X10.559 Y-4.015
X-9.245 Y-4.015
X-9.245 Y-7.013
X10.555 Y-7.013
X10.555 Y-9.711
X-9.244 Y-9.711
X-9.245 Y8.989
X10.555 Y8.989
X10.555 Y-9.711
X-9.244 Y-9.711
X-9.245 Y8.989
X10.555 Y8.989
X10.555 Y-9.711
X-9.244 Y-9.711
X-9.245 Y8.989
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-9.244 Y-9.711
G0 Z0.7
M97
G1 X-9.245 Y8.989
X-9.245 Y8.214
X-9.479 Y8.989
X-9.938 Y8.989
X-9.938 Y8.558
X-9.64 Y8.558
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-9.938 Y8.558
G0 Z0.7
M97
G1 X-9.64 Y8.558
M96
G0 Z3.7
G0 X-9.938 Y8.989
G0 Z0.7
M97
G1 X-9.938 Y8.558
M96
G0 Z3.7
(Ending [Ribbon])
Then the holder G-code is run
3 times more
G54 X39.120 Y-19.575
(End [Well A1])
68
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[1]
Bo Baslund, Ulla Feldt-Rasmussen, Jens Kastrup and Per Soelberg Sørensen. “Neuromuskulære
Sygdomme”. In: Medicin. 2nd ed. FADL’s Forlag, 2016. Chap. 12.13, pp. 1038–1045. isbn: 987-
87-7749-725-4.
[2]
Abul K. Abbas, Jon C. Aster, James A. Perkins, and Anirban Maitra. “Diabetes Mellitus”. In:
Robbins Basic Pathology. 10th ed. Elsevier Inc., 2018. Chap. 20, pp. 772–783. isbn: 978-0-323-
35317-5.
[3]
Annemarie Brüel, Erik Ilsø Christensen, Jørgen Tranum-Jensen, Klaus Qvortrup, and Finn Geneser.
“Muskelvæv”. In: Genesers Histologi. 1st ed. Munksgaard, 2015. Chap. 13, pp. 287–303. isbn:
978-87-628-0396-1.
[4]
National Cancer Institute U. S. National Institute of Health. Structure of Skeletal Muscle. 2012.
url: https://training.seer.cancer.gov/anatomy/muscular/structure.html (visited
on 09/08/2020).
[5]
Arne Hansen et al. “Development of a Drug Screening Platform Based on Engineered Heart
Tissue”. In: Circulation Research 107.1 (2010), pp. 35–44. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.
211458.
[6]
Milica Radisic et al. “High-density seeding of myocyte cells for cardiac tissue engineering”. In:
Biotechnology and Bioengineering 82.4 (2003), pp. 403–414. doi: 10.1002/bit.10594.
[7]
Kajsa Markstedt et al. “3D bioprinting human chondrocytes with nanocellulose-alginate bioink
for cartilage tissue engineering applications”. In: Biomacromolecules 16.5 (2015), pp. 1489–1496.
doi: 10.1021/acs.biomac.5b00188.
[8]
Rafael Mestre et al. “Force Modulation and Adaptability of 3D-Bioprinted Biological Actua-
tors Based on Skeletal Muscle Tissue”. eng. In: Advanced Materials Technologies 4.2 (2019),
p. 1800631. doi: 10.1002/admt.201800631.
[9]
Serge Ostrovidov et al. “Skeletal muscle tissue engineering: Methods to form skeletal myotubes
and their applications”. und. In: Tissue Engineering - Part B: Reviews 20.5 (2014), pp. 403–436.
doi: 10.1089/ten.teb.2013.0534,10.1089/ten.teb.2013.0534.
[10]
Sara Hinds et al. “The role of extracellular matrix composition in structure and function of
bioengineered skeletal muscle”. In: Biomaterials 32.14 (2011), pp. 3575–3583. doi: 10.1016/j.
biomaterials.2011.01.062.
[11]
Buddy D. Ratner, Allan S. Hoﬀman, Frederick J. Schoen and Jack E. Lemons. “Biology and
Medicine. Some Background Concepts”. In: Biomaterials Science. An Introduction to Materials
in Medicine. 3rd ed. Elsevier Inc., 2013. Chap. II.1, pp. 393–495. isbn: 978-0-12-374626-9.
[12]
Joen Haahr Jensen. “Controlling Muscle Cell Development on Flexible Hydrogels”. MA thesis.
Technical University of Denmark, June 2019.
[13]
Joen H. Jensen et al. “Large-scale spontaneous self-organization and maturation of skeletal muscle
tissues on ultra-compliant gelatin hydrogel substrates”. eng. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 10.1 (2020),
p. 13305. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-69936-6.
69
==PAGE:79==
[14]
Weining Bian and Nenad Bursac. “Engineered skeletal muscle tissue networks with controllable
architecture”. In: Biomaterials 30.7 (2009), pp. 1401–1412. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2008.11.015.
[15]
Thomas Boudou et al. “A microfabricated platform to measure and manipulate the mechanics of
engineered cardiac microtissues”. eng. In: Tissue Engineering - Part a 18.9-10 (2012), pp. 910–
919. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2011.0341.
[16]
Sara S Nunes et al. “Biowire: a platform for maturation of human pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes”. In: Nature Methods 10.8 (2013), pp. 781–7, 781–787. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.
2524.
[17]
Mahmut Selman Sakar et al. “Formation and optogenetic control of engineered 3D skeletal muscle
bioactuators”. eng. In: (2012).
[18]
Yimu Zhao et al. “A Platform for Generation of Chamber-Speciﬁc Cardiac Tissues and Disease
Modeling”. In: Cell 176.4 (2019), 913–927.e18. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.042.
[19]
Herman Vandenburgh et al. “Drug-screeningplatformbasedonthecontractilityoftissue-engineered
muscle”. In: Muscle and Nerve 37.4 (2008), pp. 438–447. doi: 10.1002/mus.20931.
[20]
Corning. Cells behave better on Corning Matrigel matrix—the original, trusted extracellular
matrix (ECM). 2020. url: https://www.corning.com/worldwide/en/products/life-
sciences/products/surfaces/matrigel-matrix.html (visited on 03/23/2020).
[21]
Hailong Wang et al. “Necking and failure of constrained 3D microtissues induced by cellular
tension”. eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
110.52 (2013), pp. 20923–20928. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1313662110.
[22]
Liliang Ouyang. “3D Bioprinting and Bioink: Background”. eng. In: Study on Microextrusion-
based 3d Bioprinting and Bioink Crosslinking Mechanisms (2019), pp. 7–23. doi: 10.1007/978-
981-13-9455-3.
[23]
Rowan P. Rimington et al. “Biocompatible 3D printed polymers via fused deposition modelling
direct C2C12 cellular phenotype in vitro”. In: Lab Chip 17 (17 2017), pp. 2982–2993. doi:
10.1039/C7LC00577F. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C7LC00577F.
[24]
Jos Malda et al. “25th anniversary article: Engineering hydrogels for biofabrication”. In: Advanced
Materials 25.36 (2013), pp. 5011–5028. doi: 10.1002/adma.201302042.
[25]
Michael Müller et al. “Alginate Sulfate–Nanocellulose Bioinks for Cartilage Bioprinting Applica-
tions”. In: Annals of Biomedical Engineering 45.1 (2017), pp. 210–223. issn: 15739686, 00906964.
doi: 10.1007/s10439-016-1704-5.
[26]
N. Ashammakhi et al. “Bioinks and bioprintingtechnologiestomakeheterogeneousandbiomimetic
tissue constructs”. eng. In: Materials Today Bio 1 (2019), p. 100008. doi: 10.1016/j.mtbio.
2019.100008.
[27]
Janarthanan Gopinathan and Insup Noh. “Recent trends in bioinks for 3D printing”. In: Biomaterials
research 22.11 (2018). doi: 10.1186/s40824-018-0122-1.
[28]
Freja Høier. Rheological Methods for Characterisation 3D Printing Bioinks. Tech. rep. Technical
University of Denmark, June 2020.
[29]
Hossein Omidian and Kinam Park. “Introduction to Hydrogels”. In: Biomedical Applications of
Hydrogels Handbook (2010). Ed. by Raphael M. Ottenbrite, Kinam Park, and Teruo Okano, pp. 1–
16. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-5919-5_1,10.1007/978-1-4419-5919-5.
[30]
David Chimene et al. “Nanoengineered Ionic-Covalent Entanglement (NICE) Bioinks for 3D
Bioprinting”. eng. In: Acs Applied Materials and Interfaces 10.12 (2018), pp. 9957–9968. doi:
10.1021/acsami.7b19808.
70
==PAGE:80==
[31]
Rasoul Seyedmahmoud et al. “Three-dimensional bioprinting of functional skeletal muscle tissue
using gelatin methacryloyl-alginate bioinks”. In: Micromachines 10.10 (2019), p. 679. doi: 10.
3390/mi10100679.
[32]
Kenneth R. Diller and Robert J. Roselli. Biotransport : principles and applications. Springer, 2011.
[33]
Macosko Christopher W. Rheology - Principles, Measurements and Applications. John Wiley &
Sons, 1994.
[34]
R. P. Chhabra and J. F. Richardson. Non-newtonian ﬂow and applied rheology. Elsevier Ltd, 2008.
doi: 10.1016/b978-0-7506-8532-0.x0001-7.
[35]
Tasos C. Papanastasiou, Georgios C. Georgiou, and Andreas N. Alexandrou. Viscous ﬂuid ﬂow.
eng. CRC Press, 2000, XV, 418 S (unknown).
[36]
Malvern Instruments Limited. A Basic Introduction to Rheology. 2016.
[37]
Sabu Thomas, C. Sarathchandran, and Nithin Chandran. Rheology of polymer blends and nanocom-
posites: Theory, modelling and applications. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 1–306. doi: 10.1016/c2017-
0-04410-5.
[38]
Annemarie Brüel, Erik Ilsø Christensen, Jørgen Tranum-Jensen, Klaus Qvortrup and Finn Geneser.
“Bindevæv”. In: Genesers Histologi. 1st ed. Munksgaard, 2015. Chap. 8, pp. 205–225. isbn: 978-
87-628-0396-1.
[39]
Sangamesh G. Kumbar, Cato T. Laurencin, and Meng Deng. Natural and Synthetic Biomedical
Polymers. Elsevier Inc., 2014, pp. 1–402. doi: 10.1016/C2011-0-07330-1.
[40]
Buddy D. Ratner, Allan S. Hoﬀman, Frederick J. Schoen and Jack E. Lemons. “Materials Science
and Engineering. Classes of Materials used in Medicine”. In: Biomaterials Science. An Introduction
to Materials in Medicine. 3rd ed. Elsevier Inc., 2013. Chap. I.2, pp. 63–388. isbn: 978-0-12-374626-
9.
[41]
Buddy D. Ratner, Allan S. Hoﬀman, Frederick J. Schoen and Jack E. Lemons. “Biology and
Medicine. Applications of Biomaterials in Functional Tissue Engineering”. In: Biomaterials Sci-
ence. An Introduction to Materials in Medicine. 3rd ed. Elsevier Inc., 2013. Chap. II.6, pp. 1122–
1331. isbn: 978-0-12-374626-9.
[42]
Vibeke Diness Borup. “Hæmostase”. In: Biokemi. 2nd ed. FADL’s Forlag, 2017. Chap. 47, pp. 899–
917. isbn: 978-87-7749-760-5.
[43]
Pavel Strop. “Versatility of Microbial Transglutaminase”. In: Bioconjugate Chemistry 25.5 (2014),
pp. 855–862. issn: 15204812, 10431802. doi: 10.1021/bc500099v.
[44]
NEUROtiker. Cellulose. 2020. url: https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cellulose (visited
on 06/11/2020).
[45]
Dieter Klemm et al. “Nanocelluloses: A New Family of Nature-Based Materials”. In: Angewandte
Chemie International Edition 50.24 (2011), pp. 5438–5466. doi: 10.1002/anie.201001273.
[46]
Tobias Moberg et al. “Rheological properties of nanocellulose suspensions: eﬀects of ﬁbril/particle
dimensions and surface characteristics”. In: Cellulose 24.6 (2017), pp. 2499–2510. doi: 10.1007/
s10570-017-1283-0.
[47]
Héctor Martínez Ávila et al. “3D bioprinting of human chondrocyte-laden nanocellulose hydrogels
for patient-speciﬁc auricular cartilage regeneration”. In: Bioprinting 1-2 (2016), pp. 22–35. doi:
10.1016/j.bprint.2016.08.003.
[48]
Thomas Möller et al. “In Vivo Chondrogenesis in 3D Bioprinted Human Cell-laden Hydrogel
Constructs”. In: Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery - Global Open 5.2 (2017), e1227. doi: 10.
1097/GOX.0000000000001227.
[49]
UPMBIOMEDICALS. GrowDex®- the natural hydrogel for 3D cell culture. 2020. url: https://
www.upmbiomedicals.com/for-life-science/growdex-hydrogels/growdex/ (visited
on 02/01/2021).
71
==PAGE:81==
[50]
A. Nussinovitch. Chapman & Hall, 1997, pp. 1–354. isbn: 978-1-4615-6385-3.
[51]
MechniCalc. Beam Deﬂection Tables. 2020. url: https://mechanicalc.com/reference/
beam-deflection-tables (visited on 09/23/2020).
[52]
TAINSTRUMENTS.COM (TA). Rheology. Theory and Applications. 2019.
[53]
Andrew J. Capel et al. “Scalable 3D Printed Molds for Human Tissue Engineered Skeletal Muscle”.
eng. In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 7 (2019). doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.
00020.
72
