==PAGE:1==
Numerical investigation of the mixing conditions for
oxygen in an industrial bioreactor
Master Thesis
Jonas Thorsager Lassen
DTU Chemical Engineering
February 2021
==PAGE:2==
Assignment formulation
The aim of the project is to investigate the mass transfer of oxygen in an industrial-scale
bioreactor at Chr. Hansen A/S used for bacterial cultivations. A Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) model will be developed, which includes both a one-phase model as
well as a two-phase model. The CFD model will be developed from an existing 3D
sketch of the geometry, which includes the different parts of the bioreactor. The models
will allow for decision making for applying different assumptions and simpliﬁcations.
This include analysis of how these model simpliﬁcations inﬂuence the numerical re-
sults. In particular, different turbulence models and bubble size distributions will be
investigated, among other things. Overall, the models are used to get proper estimations
of important parameters such as mixing time and oxygen distribution. An additional
investigation of the oxygen transfer and uptake will be included. Thus, the effective
oxygen distribution will be visualised to improve the production of bacterial cultures.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (Danish)
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) er blevet en brugbar ressource til undersøgelser
af procesforhold, som kan være svære at måle for industielt udstyr. Dermed kan ﬂuid-
proﬁler blive observeret og brugt til beslutningstagen i forbindelse med procesforbedring.
Formålet med dette speciale har været at lave en CFD model af den industrielle bioreak-
tor fra Chr. Hansen A/S, som bruges til aerobiske kulturer and dermed forudsige iltgra-
dienten heri. Bioreaktoren har et totalvolumen på ca. 70 m3, og et setup bestående af tre
6-blade Rushton turbiner er blevet analyseret. Til dette bruges en stepvis metodik, hvor
blandingstider i bioreaktoren er blevet analyseret først kun med tilstedeværelse af en
væskefase. Senere er en boblende gasfase blevet tilføjet til at bestemme blandingstider
og luftfraktionen i bioreaktoren i dette multifasesystem. Til sidst er iltoverførslen og
-optaget af biomassen inkluderet i modellen for at forudsige den koncentration af opløst
ilt i bioreaktoren ved pseudo-steady state.
Ved at udføre numeriske analyser i CFX og Fluent softwareprogrammerne med brug af
forskellige turbulensmodeller (k-ε, SST og RSM) og rotorindstillinger er blandingstider
med stor spredning bestemt. Blandingstiderne i enfaseundersøgelserne er bestemt til
at være 75.0-142.3 s for 90% homogenitet. Resultaterne viste en lavere blandingstid
for en transient rotor-stator indstilling, hvilket fører til et tydelig anderledes og mere
realistisk ﬂowmønster end frozen rotor indstillingen. En generelt lavere blandingstid er
også blevet observeret for simuleringerne udført i Fluent.
På baggrund af disse resultater er kombinationen med den transiente rotor-stator indstill-
ing og SST turbulensmodellen valgt til brug i efterfølgende analyser i et tofasesystem.
Boblende luft fra luftdysen er blevet tilført og betydningen af denne ekstra fase er blevet
analyseret. Blandingstiderne falder til et niveau på 36-71.5 s afhængigt af den konstante
boblestørrelse og software. I CFX er en analyse udført med variende boblestørrelse ved
hjælp af MUSIG-indstillingen, som fører til en blandingstid på 95.5 s for 90% homogen-
itet. Denne blandingstid er hovedsageligt opnået på grund af fraværet af ﬂooding, som
dermed giver en bedre luftfordeling.
For at bestemme iltgradienten i kulturen ved pseudo-steady state er iltoverførslen fra
gas til væske og iltoptaget af biomassen blevet inkluderet. Her er både konstante og
varierende boblestørrelser undersøgt i kombination med forskellige masseoverførsel-
skoefﬁcienter. Både store overestimater samt store områder i bioreaktoren med iltkon-
centration på 0% væk fra iltdysen er blevet observeret. Overordnet har Fluent vist sig
ii
==PAGE:4==
at være en bedre solver, som har ført til mere realistiske løsninger og bør dermed blive
brugt til efterfølgende analyser af multifasesystemet.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (English)
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has become a great resource for investigating
process condition, which in reality can be difﬁcult to measure for industrial equipment.
Thus, ﬂuid proﬁles can be observed and used for decision making for process improve-
ments.
The aim of this thesis has been to create a CFD model of the Chr. Hansen A/S in-
dustrial bioreactor for aerobic cultivations and to predict the oxygen gradient therein.
The bioreactor has a total volume of approximately 70 m3, and a setup including three
6-blade Rushton turbines has been analysed. Here, a stepwise methodology has been
used where mixing times in the bioreactor has been analysed ﬁrst only in presence of
a liquid phase. Later, a bubbly air ﬂow has been added to determine mixing times and
gas hold-up in this multiphase system. At last, oxygen transfer and uptake by biomass
have been included in the model to predict the pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved
oxygen throughout the bioreactor.
By performing numerical analyses in the CFX and Fluent software packages with differ-
ent turbulence models (k-ε, SST and RSM) and rotor setting, a great variety of mixing
times have been determined. The mixing times determined in the one-phase study are
75.0-142.3 s for 90% homogeneity. The results showed a lower mixing time for a tran-
sient rotor-stator setting, which leads to a signiﬁcantly different and more realistic ﬂow
pattern than the frozen rotor setting. A generally lower mixing time could also be ob-
served for the simulations performed in Fluent.
Based on the results, the combination including transient rotor-stator and SST turbu-
lence model is used for further analysis in a two-phase system. A bubbly airﬂow from
the sparger has been added and the inﬂuence of this additional phase analysed. Mixing
times decrease to range a of 36-71.5 s depending on constant bubble size and soft-
ware. However, a ﬂooding situation has led to doubtful accordance to reality for some
settings. In CFX, an analysis using varying bubble size from the multiple size group
setting (MUSIG) leads to a mixing time of 95.5 s for 90% homogeneity. This mixing
time is mainly caused by the absence of ﬂooding and thus a better gas dispersion.
To determine the oxygen gradient in the cultivation at a pseudo-steady state, the oxygen
transfer from gas to liquid and oxygen uptake of the biomass have been included. Here,
both constant and varying bubble sizes have been analysed in combination with different
mass transfer coefﬁcients. Both, major overpredictions have been observed as well as
large areas of the bioreactor with an oxygen concentration of 0% away from the sparger.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Overall, Fluent has seem to be a better solver leading to more realistic solutions and
should be used in further studies of a multiphase system.
v
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been made with great support and interest from both family, friends
and fellow students. Great thanks for the support to all of these persons, who have
contributed with discussions and started thoughts for possible investigations. A special
thanks to following persons, who have had an important role during the process of this
thesis:
Ulrich Krühne, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
University Supervisor
As the professor introducing me to CFD analysis, Ulrich has been helpful when running
into problems in meshing and simulations. Here, Ulrich has come up with several good
solving opportunities, which has been used to overcome various problems during the
project. Additionally, Ulrich has given valuable feedback on draft hand-ins which has
been used to improve the report and clarify communication to the reader of the report.
Robert Spann, Sr. Research Scientist, Chr. Hansen A/S, Company Supervisor
As my company supervisor, Robert has shown ongoing interest in my results and been
a great support when it comes to discussions and reality check of results. Robert has
have a short response time on questions and feedback on draft hand-ins, which has been
a great pleasure. In addition, Robert has offered his help in virtual meetings and here
given important feedback and possible angles to investigate.
Zoltán Bartók, Student, Technical University of Denmark, Fellow Master Student
Zoltán performed a preliminary study of the bioreactor in one-phase mode. This study
has been a good inspiration when it came to simulation settings and meshing. In addi-
tion, geometries of rotor and stator are performed by Zoltán and he has been helpful to
answer questions regarding the decision in his study to justify the same decision in this
thesis.
Vidar Ahlberger, ANSYS Technical Supporter, EDR&Medeso
Many practical question regarding software problems have been asked to Vidar Ahlberger
during the study. He has been helpful and able solve my technical problems which I have
run into in CFX and FLUENT during the project period
vi
==PAGE:8==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over ﬁve months in the period 01-09-2020 to 01-02-2021
at the Process and Systems Engineering Centre, Department of Chemical Engineer-
ing (PROSYS), at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis contributes
with 30 ECTS in partial fulﬁlment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
M.Sc. Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of ﬂuid dynamics.
Jonas Thorsager Lassen - s153899
Signature
Date
vii
01/02/2021
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Assignment formulation
i
Abstract (Danish)
ii
Abstract (English)
iv
Acknowledgements
vi
Preface
vii
Abbreviations
xii
Nomenclature
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Industrial cultivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Industrial bioreactor from Chr. Hansen A/S
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Aim and baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature review and theory
5
2.1
Turbulence ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Eddy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
k-ε model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Shear Stress Transport (SST) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Reynolds Stress Model (RSM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Algebraic Stress Model (ASM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Mixing time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Two-phase models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Volume of Fluid (VOF) model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
viii
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
2.3.2
Mixture Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Eulerian Multiphase Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Fluid forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Drag force
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Non-drag forces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Turbulence interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Air dispersion and ﬂooding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Population Balance modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7.1
Bubble coalescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7.2
Bubble breakage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
Mass transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Mesh study
23
3.1
Rotor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Stator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
One-phase CFD simulations in CFX
30
4.1
Turbulence models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Rotor modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.1
Frozen rotor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Transient rotor-stator (moving rotor) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Mixing comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Power input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Initial condition analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.6
Compartmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Comparison of CFX and Fluent simulations
43
5.1
Fluent simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.1
Comparison with CFX results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.2
Reynolds Stress Model (RSM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Velocity proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
ix
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
6
Two-phase CFD simulations
53
6.1
Assumptions and simpliﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1.1
Drag coefﬁcient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1.2
Non-drag forces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1.3
Dispersed turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.1.4
Surface tension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.1.5
Bubble diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.1.6
Incompressible ﬂuid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.1.7
Mesh corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.1.8
Air ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Fluent simulations with constant bubble diameter . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2.1
Drag and gas hold-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2.2
Mixing time analysis for 0.01 s time steps . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3
CFX simulations of two-phase system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3.1
Gassed power input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3.2
Multiple size group (MUSIG) analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7
Oxygen uptake and gradient in a cultivation
77
7.1
Multiple size group (MUSIG) analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.1.1
Correlation based mass transfer coefﬁcient
. . . . . . . . . . .
83
Conclusion
87
Future work
89
Bibliography
91
A Mesh study
94
B
One-phase simulations
99
C Two-phase simulations
100
C.1
Time step 0.05 s analysis and ﬂooding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
C.2
Time step analysis for two-phase simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
x
==PAGE:12==
CONTENTS
D Oxygen uptake and gradient in a cultivation
112
D.1
CFX simulations with constant bubble diameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
D.1.1
Correlation based mass transfer coefﬁcient
. . . . . . . . . . . 116
xi
==PAGE:13==
Abbreviations
ASM
Algebraic Stress Model
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
DO
Dissolved Oxygen
EASM
Explicit Algebraric Stress Model
MUSIG
Multiple Size Group
RMS
Root Mean Squared
rpm
Revolutions per minute
RSM
Reynolds Stress Model
SST
Shear Stress Transport
UDF
User-Deﬁned Functions
VOF
Volume of Fluid
xii
==PAGE:14==
Nomenclature
∆ρ
Density difference between phases
∆t
Time step size
∆z
Step size in z direction
ε
Turbulent energy dissipation rate
λ
Diffusion length
D
Mass diffusivity
µ
Dynamic viscosity
µf
Dynamic viscosity of continuous phase
µf,re f
Molecular viscosity of water at 25°C ant 1 bar
µt f
Continuous phase eddy viscosity
µtp
Particle (bubble) induced eddy viscosity
µts
Shear induced eddy viscosity
∇φd
Volume fraction gradient of dispersed phase
∇φf
Volume fraction gradient of continuous phase
ν
Kinematic viscosity
ν f
Kinematic viscosity of continuous phase
ω
Speciﬁc rate of dissipation
φd
Volume fraction of dispersed phase
φ f
Volume fraction of continuous phase
ρ
Density
ρf
Density of continuous phase
xiii
==PAGE:15==
NOMENCLATURE
ρfd
Weighted density of dispersed and continuous phases
σ
Surface tension coefﬁcient
τ
Torque induced by the impeller
a
Bubble surface area per volume
Cµ
Eddy viscosity coefﬁcient
CDrag,cap
Drag coefﬁcient in spherical cap regime
CDrag,cor
Drag coefﬁcient correct for air volume fraction
CDrag,dist
Drag coefﬁcient in distorted regime
CDrag,visc
Drag coefﬁcient in viscous regime
CDrag
Drag coefﬁcient
CTD
User-modiﬁed CEL multiplier for turbulent dispersion force
Cµd
Dispersed eddy viscosity coefﬁcient
Cmom,fd
Momentum transfer coefﬁcient between phases
Cou
Courant number
c
Concentration
c′
t
Normalised concentration
c′
t,i
Normalised concentration at time t for probe i
c0
Initial concentration
ct
Real concentration
c∞
Stable concentration
csat
Saturated concentration
D
Deviation
DO
Dissolved Oxygen
Dc
Deviation of component c
di
Bubble diameter for size group i
dp
Particle diameter (bubble diameter)
dimp
Diameter of the impeller
xiv
==PAGE:16==
NOMENCLATURE
dmax
Maximum bubble diameter
dmin
Minimum bubble diameter
dtank
Diameter of the mixing tank
Eo
Eotvos number
FTD
Turbulent dispersion force
FTD
d
Turbulent dispersion force of dispersed phase
FTD
f
Turbulent dispersion force of continuous phase
Fg
Volumetric gas ﬂow rate
FDrag,fd
Drag force applied by continuous phase on dispersed phase
Flg
Gas ﬂow number
Flg,1
Gas ﬂow number at ﬂooding-loading transition
Flg,2
Gas ﬂow number at loading-complete dispersion transition
Fr
Froude number
g
Gravitational acceleration
H
Combination of parameters used to determine terminal velocity in Grace
drag model
HH
Henry’s law constant
J
Piecewise function used in Grace Drag model
k
Kinetic energy
kH
Henry’s law constant
kL
Mass transfer coefﬁcient
kLa
Oxygen transfer coefﬁcient
Mo
Morton number
N
Number of bubble size groups
nR
Number of revolutions per time unit for impeller
np
Number of probes
P
Volume fraction correction exponent
xv
==PAGE:17==
NOMENCLATURE
P0
Ungassed power input
Pg
Gassed power input
Ps
Power input by stirring
p
Total pressure
pO2
Partial pressure of oxygen
Red
Dispersed Reynolds number
Reimp
Reynolds number for impeller rotation
Sct f
Turbulent Schmidt number of continuous phase
t
Time
U
Velocity
Ud
Velocity of dispersed phase
Uf
Velocity of continuous phase
Ut
Terminal velocity
Uz
Velocity in z direction
xvi
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Industrial cultivation
Bacteria play a vital role in our everyday life when it comes to products in the cate-
gories of food, beverages, medicine and biochemicals. So-called cultivations are used
to run reaction by involving microorganisms such as bacteria. There are many different
bacteria which carry out different bioreactions. One way to categorise bacteria is by
the utilisation of oxygen. A cultivation, which uses oxygen is called aerobic cultiva-
tion while a cultivation which occurs in an oxygen free environment is called anaerobic
cultivation or fermentation.
Industrial cultivations can take place in various kinds of bioreactors where a stirred
tank reactor is the most common. An alternative is solid state cultivation (also called
solid state fermentation). In this system, there is only a minimal use of water and the
bioreactor can be either in trays or a rotating drum and the cell culture grows in a solid
state. In the stirred tank reactor, the bacterial culture grows in a water phase by adding a
substrate. For aerobic cultivation, the main carbon source is usually a sugar, and oxygen
is added through a sparger. In an aerobic bioreactor, the availability of substrate and
oxygen throughout the tank is vital for the growth of bacteria. Sugars are easily soluble,
which makes them bio-available in the bioreactor. However, homogeneous mixing of
the substrate is crucial, especially in fed-batch or continuous cultivation.
Oxygen has a low solubility in water, and the gas-liquid mass transfer is hence crucial
to provide enough oxygen for respiration. When working with oxygen transfer in a
bioreactor, two main challenges occurs: The distribution of gaseous oxygen in the liquid
phase through mixing and the mass transfer from gas to liquid phase.
Mixing is the process used to reach a good distribution of oxygen in the bioreactor. With
good oxygen distribution, the bacteria get improved conditions for growth and produc-
tion of the biomolecule. This means improved utilisation of the bioreactor volume to
secure bacterial growth throughout the whole bioreactor and thus and increase in yield.
The mass transfer has the same aim as the oxygen distribution: To improve productivity
1
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
and yield. Bacteria in a liquid phase are only able to utilise oxygen, which is dissolved
in the liquid. This means that free oxygen bubbles will not be part of the aerobic process
of the bacteria. Thus, it is vital to dissolve the oxygen in the liquid phase, which has
been distributed by the mixing process.
1.2
Industrial bioreactor from Chr. Hansen A/S
The analysis of this thesis will be based on an industrial bioreactor from Chr. Hansen
A/S. This bioreactor is used for producing bacteria in an aerobic cultivation. The biore-
actor consists of following elements in a simpliﬁed manner:
• Vessel.
• Cooling coils (Assumed as 20 ring coils in this study).
• Six bafﬂes.
• Shaft.
• Sparger.
• Three impellers (Assumed as 6-blade Rushton turbines in this study).
The bioreactor is ﬁlled with water until the top of the bafﬂes, which leads to a total
volume of around 70 m3. With such a large tank, mass transfer plays a vital role since
the large scale means that the bioreactor is expected to be far from an ideal mixed
state with no concentration gradients. The bioreactor is aerated with compressed air at
a constant ﬂow rate from holes in the sparger placed at the bottom. In this study, the
cooling coils are assumed to be 20 equally sized ring coils separated by an even distance.
This is an assumption that differs slightly from reality, since the cooling coils in reality
is one complete helical-shaped cooling coil. However, the use of this shape hinders the
use of a rotational periodicity, which can ease the computational power needed to run a
simulation and decrease simulation time.
Figure 1.1 shows the dimensions of the bioreactor and Rushton turbines. The ﬁgures are
shown as 1/3 of the total volume, which is the geometry used for simulations of the ﬁrst
part. In addition, the bioreactor top (freeboard) is not shown but the ﬂat upper boundary
indicates the liquid surface. The reason for this is that the simulations will only be made
in the liquid volume.
2
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
(a) Bioreactor side view
(b) Bioreactor top view
(c) Rotor top view
Figure 1.1: Bioreactor and rotor dimensions visualised without gas volume above liquid
and 1/3 of total volume as used for simulations.
1.3
Aim and baseline
The aim of the thesis is to investigate the dissolved oxygen gradient in an industrial
bioreactor of Chr. Hansen A/S under predeﬁned speciﬁc conditions. Those conditions
were kindly provided by the industrial partner: the bioreactor dimensions are given
(see Figure 1.1); the bioreactor has a temperature of 39°C and is assumed isothermal
and thus heat transfer is not considered in this study; the impeller speed is 130 rpm;
the aeration rate is 45 Nm3/min; An average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient for the whole
bioreactor is kLa = 290 h−1; an overpressure above the liquid of 0.8 bar; a constant
oxygen uptake by the biomass of 4.16
kg
m3h. The condition of interest resembles the
timepoint when we are interested in the oxygen transfer in the bioreactor and want to
understand the local extent of reduced oxygen availability. The aim is to set up a CFD
3
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
model that resembles the situation. To this end, this study will ﬁrst focus on a mixing
time in one-phase simulations, comparing turbulence models, rotor settings as well as
the CFD software. Secondly, two-phase simulations will be set up with both constant
and varying bubble size. The ﬁnal outcome will be a prediction of the mixing time and
the oxygen gradient under the given conditions. Several model parameters and their
effect will be investigated including the comparison of CFX and Fluent.
4
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2
Literature review and theory
The literature review will cover parts of the background, which relates to industrial
mixing and computational ﬂuid dynamics.
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has become a well-known and widely used tool
for the investigation and research of processes within biochemical engineering. The
tool helps to understand the ﬂow patterns of ﬂuids in different situations. This includes
mixing in a stirred-tank reactor, where mechanical forces from the rotating blades affect
ﬂuids.
CFD investigations of mixing can both lead to qualitative as well as quantitative re-
sults. Thus, the tool can help with equipment design and troubleshooting, however still
with limitations when systems get very complex with non-negligible phenomena. Phe-
nomena which make simulations more complex can include turbulent ﬂow, multiphase
systems and changing ﬂuid parameters such as density and viscosity over time, e.g.
when biomass is growing in a bioreactor. These limitations are especially relevant in
relation to the required computational power, when simulations get complex with many
inﬂuencing parameters.
One phenomenon, which can lead to a higher degree of complexity is turbulent ﬂow,
where various empirical models can be used to describe the ﬂow patterns in a mixing
vessel.
2.1
Turbulence ﬂow
Turbulent ﬂow is advantageous when it comes to mixing, because of the formed ed-
dies. An eddy is a ﬂow pattern for turbulent ﬂow and will be explained further in Sec-
tion 2.1.1. Turbulence is a phenomenon that is inﬂuenced by several parameters. Based
on empirical observations, turbulent ﬂow can be classiﬁed by the Reynolds number,
which represents the ratio between inertial forces over viscous forces. For a rotating
mixing process, the Reynolds number for the impeller ﬂow can be determined as de-
5
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
scribed in Eq. (2.1).
Reimp =
ρnRd2
imp
µ
(2.1)
Where
Reimp represents the Reynolds number for the mixing ﬂow,
ρ the ﬂuid density,
nR the number of revolutions per time unit for the impeller,
dimp the diameter of the impeller and
µ the dynamic viscosity.
Turbulent mixing ﬂow is said to be present for Reimp > 5000 but can also occur already
from Reimp > 50 depending on the power number of the impeller (Atiemo-Obeng and
Kresta, 2004).
Turbulent ﬂow is the phenomenon that occurs as an alternative to laminar ﬂow. Laminar
ﬂow is characterised as the phenomenon when ﬂuid particles in stream layers ﬂow in a
direction with same (or very similar) velocity. Thus, mixing between the ﬂuid particles
is minimal. This kind of ﬂow is more simple and speciﬁed empirically to be present at
lower Reynolds number opposite from the numbers given previously for turbulent ﬂow.
Turbulent ﬂow can be described with both a statistical approach as well as a coherent
approach. The statistical approach was given by Taylor and says that "the mechanism
of turbulence is so complex that we cannot formulate a general model on which to base
an analysis unless we restrict the meaning of turbulent motion to an irregular ﬂuctuation
about a mean value" (Brodkey, 1967).
Atiemo-Obeng and Kresta, 2004, gives the following two deﬁnitions of turbulence:
"Turbulence is a state of ﬂuid motion where the velocity ﬂuctuates in time
and in all three directions in space. These ﬂuctuations reﬂect the complex
layering and interactions of large and small structural elements, such as
vortices, sheets, ejections, and sweeps of a variety of shapes and sizes. In
turbulent ﬂows, scalar ﬁelds are rapidly dispersed compared to their laminar
counterparts. At the time of writing, there is no completely acceptable way
to model complex turbulent ﬂow." (Atiemo-Obeng and Kresta, 2004)
"Fully turbulent ﬂow is an asymptotic state at very large Reynolds numbers.
In fully turbulent ﬂow, the velocity ﬂuctuations are so intense that inertial
forces overwhelm viscous forces. At all but the smallest scales of motion,
viscous forces (and molecular diffusivity) become negligible. In fully tur-
bulent ﬂow, drag coefﬁcients (e.g., friction factors and power numbers) and
dimensionless blend times approach constant values. As is also the case in
laminar ﬂow, velocity proﬁles scale exactly with characteristic length and
velocity scales. These conditions allow signiﬁcant simpliﬁcations in mod-
elling and design." (Atiemo-Obeng and Kresta, 2004)
6
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
2.1.1
Eddy
When ﬂow is fully turbulent swirling and rotating local ﬂow patterns will be developed,
so-called eddies. Eddies are three-dimensional and can vary in length and time. They
are unsteady over time even at static ﬂows. In addition, the eddies will interact with
each other, which leads to decrease in size until their kinetic energy is so small that it
will be absorbed by viscous forces of the liquid (Larsson, 2015).
The turbulent eddies transfer momentum in all directions, which improves mixing for
turbulent ﬂow and increases viscosity of the ﬂow. Else than being dependent of parame-
ters related to the Reynolds number, eddies can also be formed based on geometry such
as an obstacle. The obstacle leads to the generation of a void and a swirling pattern.
This is the case when using bafﬂes in a stirred tank. Besides being used for eliminating
formation of a vortex in a continuous stirred tank, the bafﬂes also lead to turbulence and
formation of eddies by working as an obstacle for the ﬂuid. Thus, improved mixing is
obtained.
Turbulence can be described with various models. In the following section, examples
of these models will be presented with literature examples of the use of the models.
2.1.2
k-ε model
One of the most used turbulence models in literature is the k-ε model. The model
is based on two equations, where the ﬁrst equation, k, describes the kinetic energy,
J
kg = m2
s2 , and the second equation, ε, describes the dissipation rate. Because of viscous
forces, turbulent eddies will become smaller, and the kinetic energy will be transformed
to thermal energy. The dissipation rate describes the rate of this conversion from ki-
netic energy to thermal energy with a unit of
J
kg s = m2
s3 . In Jaworski and Zakrzewska,
2002, several modiﬁcations of the standard k-ε model are analysed and compared to the
standard k-ε model. These models include RNG k-ε (ReNormalisation Group), Real-
izable k-ε, Chen-Kim k-ε, Optimized k-ε and the Reynolds stress model (RSM). The
models have been analysed and compared in a stirred-tank reactor with a pitched blade
turbine. Here, the wall jet formed by the turbine has been analysed by using the dif-
ferent models and compared with experimental data. At different distances close to the
wall, parameters such as axial mean velocity, tangential mean velocity and kinetic tur-
bulence energy have been analysed. The models have been compared to experimental
results at different tank heights. The comparison showed that the prediction of the axial
mean velocity is found best for the standard k-ε model and the optimized Chen-Kim k-ε
model but still with some inaccuracy at distances closer to the wall. For the tangential
mean velocity, all models have good predictions with only minor inaccuracies. For the
kinetic turbulence energy, all models generally underpredicted this parameter at all wall
distances. The standard k-ε model had the smallest deviations from the experimental
result without being negligible. The k-ε model in general has its advantages because
of the simplicity of the model. However, especially the lack of predicting anisotropic
7
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
turbulence is a disadvantage and make the results less sufﬁcient in these cases. In cases
where turbulence plays an important role such as mixing, good prediction of turbulent
behaviour is vital and can make the k-ε model insufﬁcient in many cases.
Khopkar et al., 2006, gives an example where the k-ε model has been used for a CFD
simulation in the Fluent software. In this paper, a stirred tank is simulated with a multi-
phase model (a gas and a liquid). One remarkable observation from the analysis is that
the equations of the k-ε model are only solved for the liquid phase. The reason why the
turbulence equations is only solved for the liquid is that the rotation of the impeller lead
to more turbulence than the gas-phase bubbles, which thus can be neglected (Khopkar
et al., 2006). In the article, impeller rotational speeds of 100, 145 and 390 rpm are in-
vestigated. When looking at the Reynolds number, the liquid phase has a larger density
and viscosity than the gas phase, which makes omitting turbulence in the gas phase rea-
sonable. In addition, the gas hold-up is determined within the range of 2.99% to 5.58%
depending on different conditions. This means that turbulence in the liquid phase is
more decisive. At three different operating conditions, the bulk ﬂow characteristics and
mixing were analysed and compared with experimental data. The differences in op-
erating conditions are based on the ﬂow number and the Froude number. The model
is compared to experimental data based on mixing time where good compliance was
shown. To make a comparison based on mixing time is a good and relatable parame-
ter when working with transient simulations. However, this parameter gives an overall
comparison of the system but does not look deeper into the system with respect to ﬂow
and how the mixing is achieved.
Another study, where the k-ε model has been used, is Elqotbi et al., 2013. Here, CFD
simulations are performed for a two-phase stirred bioreactor to produce gluconic acid
from bacteria. The CFD study was combined with biological kinetics to describe the
cell production and gluconic acid production. In this study, the k-ε is applied for both
the gas and liquid phase. The concentration of substrate, dissolved oxygen, gluconic
acid and biomass/cells have been compared with experimental results, a perfect mixing
prediction and a CFD mixing prediction. Perfect mixing assumes that there are no
concentration gradients within a system (when not accounting for temperature and other
parameters). Further critical analysis has not been made about the turbulence model and
the accuracy of this in the study.
Gimbun et al., 2009, uses the realizable k-ε model. The reason for this choice is that
the model is considered better than the standard k-ε for stirred tank ﬂows. It is expected
that it better accounts for strong streamline curvature, vortexes and rotation.
2.1.3
Shear Stress Transport (SST)
The SST turbulence model combines two turbulence models and use the best character-
istics of these models. The combined models include the k-ε model and the k-ω model.
The k-ω model is used near walls, where the ω equation calculates the speciﬁc rate of
dissipation. The reason why the k-ω model can be used near the inner boundary zones
8
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
is that in these regions, the eddy viscosity is signiﬁcantly smaller than the molecular vis-
cosity. Even though the k-ω (neither k-ε) model does not predict asymptotic turbulence
very well, the k-ω model predicts the mean ﬂow and wall friction with good accuracy
(Menter, 1994).
In Singh et al., 2011, different turbulence models are assessed to predict the ﬂow pattern
in a bafﬂed tank, stirred with Rushton turbines. Here, axial and tangential velocities
as well as total kinetic energy of ﬂuctuating motions at the impeller disc have been
compared to experimental data. Overall, the models all predicted the mean velocities
satisfyingly but underpredicted the decrease in radial velocity away from the impeller.
The advantages of the SST model can be seen when analysing the turbulence near the
impeller. The SST model properly predicts the kinetic energy and dissipation at the
zones near the impeller. In general, neither the k-ε nor the SST model are able to
predict the three-dimensional eddies which are formed from the impeller.
2.1.4
Reynolds Stress Model (RSM)
Another turbulence model is the Reynolds Stress Model. This model is based on the
standard k-ε model. The standard k-ε model is an isotropic model and it is known
that turbulence near rotating impellers act anisotropic (Kresta et al., 2016). The RSM
can consider this anisotropy. In Venneker et al., 2002, the model prediction has been
compared with experimental results for a single-phase ﬂow which showed qualitative
compliance but still with potential of improvements. The geometry in this study is a
bafﬂed, aerated, and stirred vessel with a six-blade disc turbine and a ring sparger. In
general, the use of the RSM model lead to mixed results and not necessarily a better pre-
diction. In addition, the RSM model has a higher degree of complexity, which increases
CPU time and memory when used in CFD simulations. In some cases, the complexity
can also lead to difﬁculties in obtaining convergence (Kresta et al., 2016).
2.1.5
Algebraic Stress Model (ASM)
Another anisotropic turbulence model is the Algebraic Stress Model (ASM). In the
study, Feng et al., 2012, turbulent ﬂow is analysed in a bafﬂed stirred tank. Here, sev-
eral turbulence models are compared with experimental data. These turbulence mod-
els include standard k-ε, ASM, RSM and Large Eddy Simulation (LES). ASM is here
found suitable for use in CFD simulations of stirred tanks. An advantage of ASM is
the anisotropy like for RSM, but with reduced computational requirement because of
the algebraic equations that substitute the Reynolds differential equations from RSM
(Feng et al., 2012). However, the ASM does not have the same degree of robustness as
the RSM. This is one reason why the RSM is a more widely used model. This leads
to a further investigation of the explicit algebraic stress model (EASM), which is found
more robust. Overall, the EASM performed sufﬁciently but needs ﬁne grids to predict
the turbulence.
9
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
In the study of Armenante and Chou, 1996, experimental data, a k-ε model and ASM
model are compared for a bafﬂed stirred tank. The comparison was based on the ve-
locities in the three directions and the turbulent kinetic energy. Here, the ASM showed
marginally better agreement with the experimental results than the k-ε model.
2.2
Mixing time
Mixing is previously described as a process to eliminate concentration gradients in the
system. This process does not occur instantly when adding a second component. It takes
time to reach homogeneous distribution, and hence the elimination of concentration
gradients. Complete elimination of concentration gradients is an ideal situation, and
thus we mostly work with a degree of homogeneity or heterogeneity. Ranade et al.,
1991, gives following deﬁnition of the term mixing time:
The “mixing time” is the time measured from the instant of tracer addition
until the vessel contents have reached a speciﬁed degree of homogeneity
(Ranade et al., 1991).
Complete elimination of concentration gradient is then referred as 100% homogeneity.
To determine the degree of homogeneity concentrations of the tracer are normalised
based on Eq. (2.2) (Atiemo-Obeng and Kresta, 2004).
c′
t = ct −c0
c∞−c0
(2.2)
Where
c′
t is the normalised concentration,
ct is the real concentration,
c0 is the initial concentration and
c∞is the stable concentration with no gradient.
Because of ﬂuctuating behaviour of probe concentrations, c∞can be difﬁcult to deter-
mine and must be approximated. This asymptotic concentration can be approximated
as the mean concentrations of the probes when the individual concentrations approach
each other, and a sufﬁcient time has passed.
To ease determining the degree of homogeneity, the normalised concentrations, which
has an exponential behaviour, can be plotted linearly by calculating the logarithmic
squared deviation.
log(D2
c) = log
 (c′
t −1)2
(2.3)
Where
Dc is the deviation of component c.
Based on Eq. (2.3), the logarithmic for 95% homogeneity can be found as log(D2
c)95 =
−2.60 while for 90% homogeneity it can be found as log(D2
c)90 = −2.00.
10
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
One way to approximate the mixing time within a system is to use a number of probes
within the system from the probe data calculating the logarithmic squared deviation,
log(D2), as:
log(D2) = log
 
1
np
np
∑
i=1
(c′
t,i −1)2
!
(2.4)
Where
c′
t,i is the normalised concentration at time t for probe i and
np is the total number of probes.
By setting a target for degree of homogeneity, the mixing time can be determined as
the time where log(D2) crosses the logarithmic squared deviation for the target degree
of homogeneity. In this thesis, the targets in focus will be 90% homogeneity and 95%
homogeneity. Thus, mixing times can be determined when log(D2) crosses -2.60 and
-2.00.
2.3
Two-phase models
When it comes to gas-liquid two-phase modelling, some mathematical equations are
used to describe how the two ﬂuids interact with each other. These models can be found
in CFD software such as Fluent and CFX. The following models are sub-models of the
euler-euler approach, where the ﬂuid properties are functions of time and space for both
the liquid and the gas phase. An alternative approach is the euler-lagrange, where the
bubble particle phase uses a lagrangrian method. The euler-lagrange approach will not
be included in this thesis.
2.3.1
Volume of Fluid (VOF) model
The VOF model is used for two or more ﬂuids, which are immiscible. The immiscible
assumption means that a CFD cell can contain one of following three situations, where
a gas-liquid multiphase is assumed:
• Pure gas.
• Pure liquid.
• Interface between gas and liquid.
The VOF model has its advantages when it comes to tracking the interfaces between
ﬂuids, while it does not account for the interactions between the ﬂuids (Xu et al., 2011).
This means that the VOF model can be used to determine the ﬂow behaviour of bub-
bles. In addition, the distribution of the bubbles and the local mean bubble sizes can be
approximated.
11
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
2.3.2
Mixture Model
The mixture model is another sub-model of the euler-euler approach. This model has
many similarities with the VOF model but differs in following points:
• In the mixture model, it is possible for the ﬂuids to penetrate each other. This
means that the volume fraction of a ﬂuid is possible to have other values than 0 or
1 (but values in between) within a control volume.
• The ﬂuids can move with different velocities
These points increase the complexity of the model but also lead to a more realistic
situation.
2.3.3
Eulerian Multiphase Model
The Eulerian Multiphase Model is used for two or more interpenetrating ﬂuids (Atiemo-
Obeng and Kresta, 2004). The Eulerian Multiphase Model is more complex and has its
advantages in predicting the interactions between the phases. This is due to the individ-
ual sets of momentum and continuity equations of the ﬂuids. Transfer of momentum of
one phase to the other is also included. Different from the two previous described mul-
tiphase models, the Eulerian Multiphase Model is used to describe an inhomogeneous
multiphase system, where the VOF and mixture model describe homogeneous systems.
The Eulerian Multiphase Model can then be used as an extension of the VOF model by
utilising the determined local bubble size distribution (Xu et al., 2011).
2.4
Fluid forces
For multiphase systems, there are various forces to consider when it comes to the inter-
actions of the individual phases. Some of the most relevant forces will in this section be
presented.
2.4.1
Drag force
Drag force can be seen as a resistance for one phase on another. This is the case when
having dispersed bubbles in a liquid phase. Here, different liquids will lead to different
resistance for the dispersed phase and its movement. The drag coefﬁcient contributes to
the drag force between two phases. This drag force applied by the continuous phase f
on the dispersed bubble phase d is described in Eq. (2.5).
FDrag,fd = CDragρ fda|Ud −Uf |(Uf −Ud)
(2.5)
12
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
Where
CDrag is the drag coefﬁcient,
U is velocity of the phase and
ρfd is the weighted density of the phases.
It can then be seen from Eq. (2.5), if the velocity of the continuous phase is larger than
the bubble velocity in a given direction, the drag force will be negative, meaning the
drag force is applied by the bubbles on the water.
In the simulations software packages CFX and Fluent, it is possible to have a varying
drag coefﬁcient described with different expressions.
The most commonly used expression for the drag coefﬁcient for a free surface interface
is published in Shiller and Naumann, 1935. Here, the drag coefﬁcient is depending on
the dispersed Reynolds number. For dispersed Reynolds number smaller than 1000, the
drag coefﬁcient follows the correlation given in Eq. (2.6).
CDrag = 24(1+0.1Re0.687
d
)
Red
(2.6)
However, this drag coefﬁcient correlation does not comply well with gas bubbles in a
liquid phase. The Schiller-Naumann correlation has a decreasing tendency until it gets
constant with a value of 0.44 after a dispersed Reynolds number of 1000 and larger. For
air bubbles in water, this correlation is too simple as it depends on more parameters of
the multiphase system.
A more useful correlation for the drag coefﬁcient in a water/air bubbles multiphase
system is the Grace Drag Model (Clift et al., 1979). This model is, in contrast to the
Schiller and Naumann model, useful for larger dispersed Reynolds number. This is
considered the case for an agitated tank, with constantly applied shear from the im-
peller. The Schiller-Naumann drag coefﬁcient correlation is more applicable for small
dispersed Reynolds number that could be an undisturbed rising of a bubble in a liquid
phase. The Grace Model considers the shape change from a more ellipsoidal shape to a
spherical cap shape. The Grace Model distinguishes between three regimes; the viscous,
the distorted and the spherical cap regime. In the given situation for the bioreactor, the
distorted regime will be near the impellers where the ﬂow is affected the rotations. In
the viscous regime, the drag coefﬁcient is well approximated as stated in Eq. (2.6) and
is applicable for lowr dispersed Reynolds numbers. However, in the distorted regime,
the drag coefﬁcient is affected by the various parameters such as the surface tension
between the phases, viscosity and density of the continuous phase. The drag coefﬁcient
in the distorted regime follows the model:
CDrag,dist = 4
3
gdp
U2t
∆ρ
ρ f
(2.7)
Where
g is the gravitational acceleration,
13
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
dp is the particle diameter,
Ut is the terminal velocity,
∆ρ is the density difference between the phases and
f refers to the continuous phase.
The terminal velocity, which is the stable upwards going velocity of the bubbles, is given
by:
Ut =
µf
ρ f dp
Mo−0.149(J −0.857)
(2.8)
Where
Mo is the Morton number and is calculated as:
Mo =
µ4
f g∆ρ
ρ2
f σ3
(2.9)
Where
σ is the surface tension coefﬁcient and
µf is the dynamic viscosity of the continuous phase.
Moreover, J can is determined from the piecewise equation:
J =
 0.94H0.757
2 < H ≤59.3
3.42H0.441
H > 59.3
Where:
H = 4
3EoMo−0.149
 µf
µf,re f
−0.14
(2.10)
µf,ref = 9.0·10−4 Pas which is the molecular viscosity of water at 25°C and 1 bar.
Eo is the Eotvos number and can be determined as:
Eo = g∆ρd2
p
σ
(2.11)
For the spherical cap regime, the drag coefﬁcient can be approximated as:
CDrag,cap = 8
3
(2.12)
The actual drag coefﬁcient for a single node is then determined as:
CDrag = max(CDrag,visc,min(CDrag,dist,CDrag,cap)
(2.13)
Further correction of the Grace drag model is made based on the bubble/bubble inter-
actions which occur more at larger air volume fraction. This correction follow a power
law:
CDrag,cor = φP
f CDrag
(2.14)
Where
14
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
CDrag,cor is the corrected drag coefﬁcient,
φf is the volume fraction of the continuous phase (water) and
P is the volume fraction correction exponent.
This volume fraction exponent is in general appropriate to have a positive value for
larger bubbles and negative value for smaller bubbles.
2.4.2
Non-drag forces
In addition to the drag force explained in the previous section, there are various non-drag
forces, which inﬂuence the behaviour and ﬂow of a bubble. These additional non-drag
forces work in different directions of the bubble. Figure 2.1 gives an illustration of both
the drag force and various non-drag forces. These non-drag forces include virtual mass
force (b), lift force (c) and turbulent dispersion force (d).
Figure 2.1: Fluid forces inﬂuencing the ﬂow of a bubble including direction of force; (a)
Drag force, (b) Virtual mass force, (c) Lift force, (d) Turbulent dispersion force (Méndez
et al., 2005)
The drag force has already been explained as a force working in the opposite direction
of the relative velocity of the bubble.
When a bubble is accelerated in a liquid phase, the liquid will be pushed aside and
some will actually move with the bubble. The virtual mass force is used to model that
some liquid (a virtual mass) will be accelerated and move with the bubble, while in
realty the whole liquid will be accelerated but with various magnitude. As Figure 2.1
(b) shows, the virtual mass force works in the same direction as the relative acceleration
of the bubble based on inertia of the bubble. The lift force (Figure 2.1 (c)) works in the
perpendicular direction of the relative velocity. This is caused by the pressure difference
on its surface. The lift force is especially relevant for bubble ﬂow in a pipe or column.
15
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
The turbulent dispersion force (Figure 2.1 (d)) is related to the increasing diffusion in
turbulent conditions. This turbulent dispersion force is thus inﬂuencing the radial gas
fraction proﬁle as the lift force. One model for the turbulent dispersion force is described
in Burns et al., 2014, but is also known as the Favre Averaged Drag Model. The model
is described by following equation:
FTD
f
= −FTD
d
= CTDCmom,fd
ν f
Sct f
∇φd
φd
−∇φ f
φ f

(2.15)
Where
FTD is the turbulent dispersion force,
the subscript f refers to the continuous phase,
the subscript d refers to the dispersed phase,
Cmom,fd is the momentum transfer coefﬁcient between the phases,
Sct f is the turbulent Schmidt number of the continuous phase which is assumed 0.9 and
∇φ is the volume fraction gradient of the speciﬁed phase.
For the Favre Averaged Drag Model, the user modiﬁed CEL multiplier, CTD = 1, which
useful for the lower dispersed phase density as previously explained. In addition, it
can be seen from Eq. (2.15) that the force of the dispersed and continuous phase are
opposite which is because the force applied by the continuous phase is received by the
dispersed phase. Users of CFX and Fluent must be aware that the model is referred to
as Favre Averaged Drag Model in CFX and Burns et al. in Fluent (ANSYS Academic
Research, 2020c).
One last non-drag force, which is not visualised in Figure 2.1, is called wall lubrication.
For a gas-liquid multiphase system, the dispersed gas will be pushed away from the wall
because of wall lubrication. This means, that the air will not be exposed to friction from
the wall.
2.5
Turbulence interaction
The use of different turbulence models does not consider the inﬂuence of the dispersed
phase in a multiphase system. Modelling of turbulence interaction then includes the
presence of a dispersed phase and the inﬂuence of this in the modelling of turbulence.
One way to model turbulence interaction is proposed in Sato and Sekoguchi, 1975. The
model assumes that the continuous phase eddy viscosity, µt f , is the sum of the shear
induced eddy viscosity, µts, and the particle (bubble) induced eddy viscosity, µtp.
µt f = µts + µtp
(2.16)
The shear induced eddy viscosity is determined as:
µts = Cµ
k2
ε
(2.17)
16
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
Where
Cµ is the eddy viscosity coefﬁcient which is determined as 0.09 for the k-ε model.
The particle induced eddy viscosity is determined as:
µtp = Cµdρ f φddp|⃗Ud −⃗Uf |
(2.18)
Where
Cµd = 0.6 is the dispersed eddy viscosity coefﬁcient.
As described in Eq. (2.18), the model includes the inﬂuence of the density, volume
fraction, particle diameter and relative velocity between the phases.
2.6
Air dispersion and ﬂooding
Good dispersion of air bubbles in a liquid phase is vital to provide good transfer of
oxygen to microorganisms throughout a vessel. A situation where the air bubbles are
moving along the shaft, is called a ﬂooding situation. This gassing condition can be
affected by parameters such as the volumetric ﬂow of gas and the rotational velocity of
the impeller. This is explained in Figure 2.2 (Doran, 2013).
Figure 2.2: Visualisation of gassing conditions; ﬂooding (a), impeller loading (b) and
complete gas dispersion (c) (Doran, 2013).
If the ﬂow of gas exceeds the ability of a stirrer to disperse the gas by its rotational
velocity, a ﬂooding situation will occur (Figure 2.2 a). However, if either the gas ﬂow
is decreased or the rotational speed increased, a better dispersion of gas will occur.
Here, states referred to as impeller loading and complete gas dispersion are examples of
different degree of gas dispersion.
17
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
Correlations can be used to determine the gassing condition for a given system. Based
on a correlation determined for mixing with Rushton turbines, the ﬂooding-loading tran-
sition can be determined as:
Flg,1 = 30
 dimp
dtank
3.5
Fr
(2.19)
Where
Flg,1 is the gas ﬂow number for the ﬂooding-loading transition,
dtank is the diameter of the tank and
Fr is the Froude number.
The ﬂow number, Flg is the ratio the gas ﬂow rate to the pumping capacity and is
determined as:
Flg =
Fg
nRdimp
(2.20)
Where
Fg is the volumetric gas ﬂow rate.
The Froude number, Fr, is the ratio of inertial over buoyancy forces and is determined
as:
Fr = n2
Rdimp
g
(2.21)
For the loading-complete dispersion transition, a similar correlation as for the ﬂooding-
loading transition is given as Flg,2:
Flg,2 = 0.2
 dimp
dtank
0.5
Fr0.5
(2.22)
2.7
Population Balance modelling
The multiphase models does not account for the situations where bubbles can sepa-
rate/break or merge/coalesce. If these situations are to be implemented in a two-phase
model, discrete equations have to be formulated and included. In this study, only the
Multiple Size Group (MUSIG) setting available in CFX will be used. However, Fluent
also provides the opportunity to include population balance modelling to account the
changing bubble size in a system.
2.7.1
Bubble coalescence
Bubble coalescence is the phenomenon where two or more bubbles are going through a
3-step process to become one coalesced bubble. The three steps are:
1. Bubble approach.
18
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
2. Liquid ﬁlm thinning.
3. Liquid ﬁlm rupture.
In the bubble approach, the bubbles collide and trap a small amount of liquid. This
amount of liquid will then be pushed out and thus thinning the liquid ﬁlm. This contin-
ues until no liquid is trapped between the bubbles and the coalescence is completed by
a liquid ﬁlm rupture. The collisions can occur due to the turbulent ﬂow but also because
of buoyancy where the velocities are different for different bubble sizes. Prince and
Blamch, 1990, provides one useful model to predict the bubble coalescence.
2.7.2
Bubble breakage
Bubble breakage is the phenomenon where one bubble can breakup and become two or
more new and smaller daughter bubbles. This phenomenon can occur due to turbulent
eddies which hit the surface of the mother bubble. The eddies must then have an energy
which is sufﬁcient to deform the bubble surface until the surface collapse. Else than the
energy of the eddy, which is an important parameter, the size of the eddy is important
as well. The eddy has to be smaller than the bubble. This is also the reason why larger
bubbles are more unstable and will break into smaller bubbles. If an eddy is not smaller
than the size of a bubble, the eddy will only have a transportation effects on the bubble.
Luo and Svendsen, 1996, provides one useful model to predict the bubble breakage.
2.8
Mass transfer
Mass transfer is a vital concept when it comes to large-scale chemical and biochemical
productions. Mass transfer is a phenomenon that includes transport of molecules (fx.
ﬂuids) through concepts as diffusion, laminar ﬂow, turbulent ﬂow and convection.
Mixing is part of mass transfer and its aim is to minimise concentration gradients in a
system such as a vessel. If the concentration has severe variations throughout a ves-
sel, it is possible for microorganisms to convert the substrate through an anaerobic
metabolism, which can lead to wrong product and inefﬁcient use of the culture. This is
the case when oxygen is not well mixed in the vessel and known as fermentation.
Mixing is important for a homogeneous distribution of nutrients to reach high cultivation
yields. Many microorganisms can be inhibited by too high sugar concentration, so this
means it is important to spread out the added sugars and keep this concentration at an
optimal level throughout the reactor. The microorganisms can also be product inhibited.
Alcohol producing yeast is an example of this, and mixing of the products is thereby
important to keep microorganism activated in the whole reaction volume.
Stirring is the most common way of mixing ﬂuids and because turbulence leads to better
mixing, the velocity of the stirrer plays an important role. However, increasing velocity
19
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
of a stirrer also comes with some disadvantages especially when working with biological
material. The mechanical power can lead to rupture of microorganisms or the product
of the microorganisms such as proteins/enzymes. Increased velocities also increase the
power input of the stirrer. This is important to take into account, when working on
large-scale reactors where the gain might be minimal compared to extra power input to
increase stirring velocity.
Mixing in a two-phase system is especially relevant in biochemical productions where
microorganisms need an aerobic environment. Here, mixing of gas and liquid has a huge
inﬂuence to the outcome of the product, since oxygen usually is the limiting substrate
for aerobic microorganisms. As previous mentioned, in very simple words, a cultivation
process needs microorganisms, which feed on sugar and oxygen. This cultivation is
going on in a aqueous solution and here D-glucose has a solubility around 460 g/L at
20°C (Alves et al., 2007) while oxygen has a solubility of 7.2 mg/L at 20°C and 1
bar (Engineering Toolbox, 2005). Together with the mass balance of consumption of
oxygen and glucose, this justiﬁes that oxygen is the limiting agent since not only a small
amount of oxygen is needed in the metabolic reaction.
In larger reaction systems, a sparger is often the inlet source of oxygen as it is also seen
in the bioreactor from Chr. Hansen A/S.
Oxygen transfer is described through the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa. In an air-
liquid two-phase system kLa describes the rate which oxygen concentration changes in
time. This can be described by the following equation (Larsson, 2015):
dc
dt = kLa(csat −c)
(2.23)
Where
csat is the saturated concentration of oxygen in the liquid phase and
c is the concentration of oxygen in the liquid.
This saturated concentration is determined when the oxygen concentration in the gas
phase is in equilibrium with the oxygen concentration in the liquid phase. The typical
way to determine this equilibrium concentration is with Henry’s law:
csat = pO2
HH
= pO2 ·kH
(2.24)
Where
kH and HH are the Henry’s law constants with reciprocal units and
pO2 is the partial pressure of oxygen.
As Henry’s law justiﬁes, the saturated concentration of oxygen in water depends on the
partial pressure of oxygen. The Henry’s law constant can vary in unit depending on
reference. Overall, the Henry’s law constant connects the partial pressure of a species
in the gas phase with the concentration of the species in the liquid phase at equilibrium.
When air is added to the bioreactor, 21 vol% oxygen is assumed in dry air as gas phase.
20
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
In cultivation technology and other systems where oxygen is dissolved in an aqueous
phase, e.g. water, the concentration of oxygen is mostly denoted as Dissolved Oxygen,
DO. This term refers to as a relative concentration to the saturation concentration. This
means that DO = 100% at the saturation point.
The oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa, is a combination of two parameters: the mass
transfer coefﬁcient (kL) and the bubble surface area per volume (a). By combining
the two parameters, an average surface area of the bubbles is assumed, which is a strong
simpliﬁcation. This simpliﬁcation can be necessary in many cases because of difﬁculties
in determining a surface area distribution of the bubbles that change in time in real cases.
A known correlation which can be used to approximate the mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL,
is published in Lamont and Scott, 1970:
kL ∝
 ν
D
−1
2 (εν)
1
4
(2.25)
Where
ν is the kinematic viscosity,
D is the diffusivity of gas in the liquid phase and
ε is the turbulent energy dissipation rate.
Eq. (2.25) is named as an Eddy Cell Model and has the simpliﬁcation that it only takes
mass transfer at liquid side of the gas-liquid interface into account. It is fair to neglect
the mass transfer at the gas side of the gas-liquid interface because this mass transfer
is signiﬁcantly larger. The Eddy Cell Model has similarities with Higbie’s penetration
theory (Higbie, 1935):
kL = 2
√
D
√π
ρf ε
µf
1/4
(2.26)
Depending on literature, there are deviations in the proportionality constant used to
model the mass transfer coefﬁcient. Kawase et al., 1992, uses 0.301 as proportionality
constant, which substitutes
2
√π . This changes to the mass transfer coefﬁcient estimation
slightly.
In general, the transfer of oxygen from bulk gas phase to cell interior can be separated
in following steps (Villadsen, 2011):
1. Diffusion of O2 from the bulk gas phase to the gas–liquid interface.
2. Transport across the gas–liquid interface.
3. Diffusion of O2 through a relatively stagnant liquid region adjacent to the gas
bubble, i.e., from the gas–liquid interface to the well-mixed bulk liquid.
4. Transport of dissolved oxygen to the cell, to a clump of cells, or to a pellet of
immobilised cells.
5. Diffusion through the stagnant ﬁlm to the cell surface, into cell aggregates, or into
a support pellet.
21
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY
6. Transport across the cell membrane.
7. Transport of dissolved O2 inside the cell to the intracellular reaction site, e.g., the
mitochondria.
The focus in this thesis will be on the ﬁrst three steps, while the consumption of oxygen
by biomass will be assumed to be instantaneous.
22
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
Mesh study
The complete bioreactor system consists of both a rotating and a stationary domain, also
called rotor and stator. This means that the two domains will be combined in a combined
system. To evaluate meshes of the domains, they will be considered separately, where
the rotating domain will be analysed ﬁrst and the most suitable mesh will be used sub-
sequently with different meshes of the stationary domain to determine the most suitable
mesh of the stationary domain.
To save computational power, the whole bioreactor system has been separated to a third,
and a periodicity around the z-axis has been implemented. This can be done because of
the rotational symmetry of the bioreactor.
Based on experience, a structured mesh is found useful to decrease CPU time and sta-
bility of the simulation. Thus, this thesis only includes analysis of structured meshes,
which have been created in the software ICEM through blocking.
3.1
Rotor
The rotating domain of the bioreactor consists of three identical impellers, which means
that one mesh study can be done for the three rotors. Table 3.1 describes the number of
total elements and total nodes in one rotor for the meshes that are to be analysed.
Table 3.1: Mesh data of one impeller domain for three meshes analysed (Fine, medium,
coarse) including total elements and total number of nodes.
Mesh
Total elements
Total nodes
Rushton mesh Fine
69,012
77,056
Rushton mesh Medium
48,636
54,914
Rushton mesh Coarse
15,893
18,944
To evaluate and compare the meshes, two lines have been created to monitor the veloci-
ties at steady state. In the performed simulations, it is important to evaluate the velocity
23
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. MESH STUDY
in the stationary frame instead of the regular velocity. The reason for this is that the
velocity in the stationary frame uses velocity relatively to the stationary frame while the
regular velocity uses velocity relatively to the local frame. For the rotor, the local frame
moves with a velocity of 130 rpm, which then leads to a misleading interpretation when
looking at velocity relatively to these 130 rpm. The complete settings for the rotor mesh
analysis can be found in Appendix A Table A.1.
The two lines that are used for evaluation of the meshes consists of one vertical line
with height of the rotor domain and one horizontal diagonal line. A visualisation of the
two lines and the point in the rotor domain can be found in Appendix A Figure A.1. For
evaluation, the lines are separated in 100 nodes.
Figure 3.1 shows the velocity proﬁles along the deﬁned vertical and diagonal lines for
the three evaluated meshes (Coarse (green), Medium (blue), Fine (red)) at steady state.
This steady state simulation has been evaluated based on a convergence criteria of the
root mean squared (RMS) residuals to be 10−4 for the momentum, mass, turbulence etc.
(a) Vertical Line
(b) Diagonal Line
Figure 3.1: Velocity along vertical and diagonal lines in the rotor domain for analysed
meshes (red: ﬁne, blue: medium, green: coarse).
As Figure 3.1 shows, there are some minor deviations of the velocity proﬁles for the
different meshes. At the vertical line, the medium and ﬁne mesh have only minor de-
viations. This is also the case for the velocity proﬁle at the diagonal line where the
medium and ﬁne mesh are very similar with one remarkable deviation in the range be-
tween node 60 and 70. This region is near the impeller and close to the outer boundary.
Figure 3.1 (b) shows that the medium and coarse mesh underpredict the oscillating be-
haviour and then overpredict the velocity at the boundary of the impeller. This is often
seen when a mesh is too coarse, that it predicts some mean velocities between the mesh
nodes that do not correspond to the real behaviour.
24
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. MESH STUDY
When taking the deviations from Figure 3.1 into account, the medium mesh is not found
sufﬁcient for further analysis and thus the ﬁne mesh is the chosen as the mesh for further
analysis. Even though the deviation are at a minor scale, it is decided to go on with the
potentially more accurate mesh, which is the ﬁne mesh.
3.2
Stator
To evaluate the meshes in the stationary domain, the chosen ﬁne mesh for the rotor
is combined with the different meshes of the stationary domain. Hereby, the whole
bioreactor system is included in the mesh analysis of the stationary domain.
Table 3.2 shows the total number of elements and nodes for the analysed stator meshes.
In this case, four meshes have been evaluated in the decision making of the mesh for the
further work.
Table 3.2: Mesh data of static domain for four meshes analysed (Extra ﬁne, ﬁne,
medium, coarse) including total elements and total number of nodes.
Mesh
Total elements
Total nodes
Tank mesh Extra Fine
440,172
480,384
Tank mesh Fine
239,738
266,020
Tank mesh Medium
99,500
112,995
Tank mesh Coarse
52,850
62,223
Because the complete system is unable to converge in a steady state simulation, when
both a rotating and a static domain are included, the mesh analysis of the stator is instead
based on transient simulations. This unsteady behaviour is common for stirred tanks
because of ﬂuctuating behaviour.
By adding a tracer at the initial state, the distribution of this tracer over time in the
system will be analysed. This initial condition is deﬁned with a static liquid (velocity
of 0) in the stator domain and moving liquid in the rotor domain with same rotational
velocity as the impeller. This initial condition will be discussed further in Chapter 4.
The tracer is deﬁned as a concentration and is located at the level of the sparger at the
beginning, t = 0. This means that the tracer concentration is deﬁned as 0 under the
sparger, 1000 kg/m3 in the interval from the bottom of the sparger to the top of the
sparger at all radius and 0 above the sparger. The diffusion coefﬁcient of the tracer is
deﬁned as D = 5·10−9m2/s. The inﬂuence of this mass diffusivity is actually negligible
small. The diffusion coefﬁcient of different solutes in water is typically within the range
of 1·10−9m2/s to 5·10−9m2/s. The diffusion length can be determined as:
λ =
√
2Dt
(3.1)
Where
λ is the diffusion length and
25
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. MESH STUDY
t is the time.
From this equation and the deﬁned diffusion coefﬁcient, the diffusion length after 1 hour
can be determined as 6 mm. This means that even though the diffusion coefﬁcient is
deﬁned to be in the upper end of the normal range, the diffusion length is very short
even after a long time interval. Since the bioreactor has a height of almost 7 meter,
mixing based on pure diffusion would require a lot of time. A much shorter mixing
time is expected because of the mixing applied by the rotating impellers and turbulence.
Thus, the inﬂuence of diffusion is expected to be negligible and the accurate diffusion
coefﬁcient will make no change, when it is in the given range.
Based on the previous work done (Bartók, 2020), a time step of 0.05 s has been found
sufﬁcient for the transient analysis of a one-phase system. The complete settings for the
stator mesh analysis can be found in Appendix A Table A.2.
To monitor the concentration of the tracer at different times in the bioreactor, seven
monitor points are deﬁned. The coordinates of the monitor point can be found in Ap-
pendix A Table A.3.
Figure 3.2 visualises the location of the monitor points, which can be seen as yellow
crosses in the bioreactor.
Figure 3.2: Monitor point locations in bioreactor for monitoring tracer concentration to
determine homogeneity and mixing time.
Based on the tracer concentrations monitored at the monitor points at different times, the
mixing time can be estimated from the logarithmic deviation as described in Section 2.2.
To justify the inﬂuence of the mesh for the tracer concentration, the tracer concentra-
tion is shown at the different monitor points for the coarse and the extra ﬁne mesh in
Figure 3.3
26
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. MESH STUDY
(a) Coarse
(b) Extra ﬁne
Figure 3.3: Development of the tracer concentration at the seven monitor points over
time for the coarse and extra ﬁne mesh.
As it can be seen in Figure 3.3, the reﬁnement of the mesh leads to more ﬂuctuating
behaviour of the tracer concentration. In addition, the ﬁnal tracer concentration, after
150 s, is larger for the extra ﬁne mesh, and the ﬁnal concentrations of the monitor points
are closer for the this mesh. Even though the same ﬁnal concentration is expected, a
coarser mesh leads to some numerical error for the used step function. This numerical
difference, based on the mesh, gives different initial conditions of the tracer. Since the
step function uses a lower and upper height of 0.716 m and 0.816 m, respectively, the
use of a ﬁner mesh can lead to nodes located closer to these lower and upper heights.
Since a node either can be deﬁned with or without tracer, the presence of more nodes
within the lower and upper height can lead to larger tracer volume as initial condition.
A view of the initial conditions for the coarse and extra ﬁne mesh can be found in
Appendix A Figure A.2. The development of tracer concentration at the monitor point
in time for the medium and ﬁne mesh can be found in Appendix A Figure A.3. It can
be seen in Figure 3.3 that the monitor points close to the sparger are the ones ﬁrst to
increase in tracer concentration but decreases again when tracer diffuses further out in
the bioreactor.
As explained earlier, the tracer diffusion has an exponential tendency, which makes
it possible to linearise with a logarithmic function. Figure 3.4 shows the logarithmic
squared deviation against time for the different meshes. The intersection lines for 90%
and 95% homogeneity are added as well.
27
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. MESH STUDY
Figure 3.4: Development of logarithmic squared deviation over time based on tracer
concentration for the seven monitor points for the different meshes. Lines of 90% mix
and 95% mix indicate value to reach 90% and 95% homogeneity, respectively.
In Figure 3.4, it can be seen that 90% and even 95% homogeneity is reached within 150 s
for some meshes. The tendency justiﬁes that a coarser mesh leads to longer mixing time.
Both the ﬁne and the extra ﬁne mesh reach a homogeneity of 95% within 150 s based on
the simulation results. However, the ﬂuctuations of the logarithmic squared deviation
curve is observed, and thus inaccuracy must be considered. This numerical issue is
related to the target residual for convergence, which is set to 10−4. If this number was
set even smaller, the ﬂuctuating behaviour would also be less signiﬁcant.
From the logarithmic squared deviation, the mixing times are estimated and a summary
of these mixing times for 90% and 95% homogeneity can be found in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Simulated mixing times for different meshes and CPU time for 150 s simula-
tion (*Results based on linear regression for time interval 20-150 s where mixing time
was not achieved in simulation).
Mesh
90% Mixing Time (s)
95% Mixing Time (s)
CPU time (s)
Extra Fine
113.3
143.6
5.47E+05
Fine
116.5
149.0
3.59E+05
Medium
143.3
181.4*
3.19E+05
Coarse
160.0*
203.4*
3.94E+05
Figure 3.4 showed that 90% and 95% homogeneity were not reached for all meshes as
later pointed out. The missing mixing times have instead been approximated from linear
regression of the linear parts of the curves in Figure 3.4, which in all cases was assumed
as the interval from 20 s to 150 s. It can be remarked that ﬂuctuating behaviour of the
simulations lead to minor deviations of the mixing times.
The mixing time has a tendency to decrease when the mesh reﬁnement is increased. One
reason for this can be the better precision of turbulence and eddies. This has previously
28
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. MESH STUDY
been mentioned as a key parameter for mixing and if the turbulence is underpredicted
because of a coarser mesh, the mixing time will increase.
The difference of mixing time depending on the mesh is found to be signiﬁcant. To
evaluate the inﬂuence of increased reﬁnement of mesh to the mixing time, the mixing
time has been plotted against the numbers of elements in the mesh. This plot can be
found in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Mixing times for 90% and 95% homogeneity at different number of mesh
elements based on results of different meshes.
Figure 3.5 shows that the inﬂuence of increased mesh reﬁnement has a huge inﬂuence
from the coarse mesh to the ﬁne mesh. Oppositely, the inﬂuence is remarkably smaller
when going from the ﬁne to the extra ﬁne mesh. In the interval from ﬁne to extra ﬁne
mesh, the number of elements is increased with 83.6%. This large increase only leads
to a decrease of mixing time for 90% homogeneity of 2.8% and for 95% homogeneity
a decrease of 3.6%. When considering the extra computational power, the ﬁne mesh is
decided to be sufﬁcient for further analysis. A visualisation of the mesh can be found in
Appendix A Figure A.4.
29
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
One-phase CFD simulations in CFX
To further improve the model and analyse the inﬂuence of different model parameters,
the chosen mesh will be used for different model inputs. These inputs include the tur-
bulence model used and the rotor settings.
4.1
Turbulence models
In the mesh study, the k-ε turbulence model was used to describe the turbulence in the
bioreactor. However, in literature this model was not found ideal to describe anisotropic
turbulence, which occur in a stirred tank.
One alternative to the k-ε model is the SST turbulence model. As previous described,
this model includes parameters of the k-ε and k-ω turbulence model.
To predict the anisotropic behaviour of the turbulence, the RSM model was found the
best option based the literature review. CFX has various sub-models of the RSM model.
However, it has not been possible to perform a CFX simulations by using one of the
RSM models. Because of the higher complexity of the model, the software crashes
immediately after ﬁrst time step. Even by changing the time step size to 0.025 s, the
software crashes after a few time steps. Based on comments from different forums,
this is not an uncommon problem for some geometries and meshes. The SST model is
recommended to be used for more complex turbulence systems.
A comparison of the logarithmic deviation for the k-ε and the SST model can be found
in Figure 4.1.
30
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
Figure 4.1: Development of logarithmic squared deviation over time based on tracer
concentration for the seven monitor points for k-ε and SST turbulence models. Lines of
90% mix and 95% mix indicate value to reach 90% and 95% homogeneity, respectively.
A clear difference in mixing time can be seen depending on the used turbulence model
(Figure 4.1). This can be seen on the slope and thus the intersection for the different
turbulence model and the 90% and 95% homogeneity lines. When using the SST model,
the bioreactor does not reach 95% homogeneity within 150 s of mixing. The increased
mixing time when going from using the k-ε model to the SST model is in agreement
with the results performed by Zoltán in a preliminary study for the same bioreactor
(Bartók, 2020).
4.2
Rotor modelling
The interaction between rotor and stator is another factor that can inﬂuence the simu-
lation results. Because of the transient behaviour of the ﬂuid dynamics, the position of
rotor at given time can inﬂuence the result.
4.2.1
Frozen rotor
The simplest way to describe interactions between a rotor and a stator is by using a
frozen rotor model. This model uses a ﬁxed relative position of the rotor, which means
that the model does consider the change of the distance between rotor blade and bafﬂes
over time. This makes the model more suitable in steady state simulations, when looking
at the velocity proﬁle with the rotor in a ﬁxed position. The frozen rotor model saves
computational power. In addition, the frozen rotor model is not able to predict the
interactions between rotor and stator because of the ﬁxed position.
31
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
4.2.2
Transient rotor-stator (moving rotor)
A more computationally costly alternative to the frozen rotor model is the transient
rotor-stator model. This model physically rotates the mesh during simulations and this
means that the interactions between rotor blade and stationary bafﬂes will be included.
The inﬂuence of this model is expected to be remarkable, because of the difference in
the velocity in different bioreactor zones at different times. These differences do not
have the same magnitude for the frozen rotor simulations because the rotor physically
is located at the same position. This also leads to more realistic turbulence description.
The increasing turbulence will thus affect the mixing time. Figure 4.2 shows the log-
arithmic deviation for the previous analysed turbulence models by using both a frozen
rotor model and a transient rotor-stator model (moving rotor).
Figure 4.2: Development of logarithmic squared deviation over time based on tracer
concentration for the seven monitor points for k-ε and SST turbulence model combined
with frozen rotor and moving rotor setting. Lines of 90% mix and 95% mix indicates
value to reach 90% and 95% homogeneity, respectively.
As expected, a clear difference can be seen when using the different rotor models (Fig-
ure 4.2). For both the k-ε and the SST turbulence model, the mixing time decreases
when using the more accurate transient rotor-stator model. The decrease in mixing time
is similar for the different turbulence models, which leads to a lower mixing time for
the k-ε model in combination with the transient rotor-stator model. The SST turbulence
model in combination with the transient rotor-stator model reaches a similar mixing
time as for the k-ε turbulence model in combination with the frozen rotor model. This
is seen on the similar slopes of these two lines.
32
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
4.3
Mixing comparison
An overview of the mixing times for 90% and 95% homogeneity for the different com-
binations of turbulence and rotor models can be found in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Simulated mixing times to reach 90% and 95% homogeneity for different
turbulence and rotor models and CPU times for simulations (*Results based on linear
regression for time interval 20-150 s where mixing time was not achieved in simulation)
(**Result from 1/6 mesh analysis used in Chapter 6).
Turbulence
Rotor Model
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
CPU time (s)
Model
(90%)
(95%)
k-ε
Frozen Rotor
116.5
149.0
3.591E+05
k-ε
Moving Rotor
99.1
121.9
7.285E+05
SST
Frozen Rotor
142.3
179.5*
2.399E+05
SST
Moving Rotor
119.7
150.4*
9.328E+05
**SST
Moving Rotor
121.5
152.7*
1.884E+05
The mixing times are determined as the intersect between the logarithmic deviation and
the 90% and 95% homogeneity lines is clariﬁed (Table 4.1).
As previously explained, the mixing times decrease when using the transient rotor-stator
model instead of frozen rotor model. The relative decrease in mixing time when going
from frozen rotor model to transient rotor-stator model are within a similar range. For
the k-ε model, the decreases in mixing time are 15.0% and 18.2% for 90% and 95%
homogeneity respectively. For the SST model, the decreases in mixing time are 16.2%
for both 90% and 95% homogeneity.
The extra computational power that is required can also quantiﬁed by the CPU time
(Table 4.1). Depending on the computer, this CPU time can be translated to a physical
time to run the simulation. For the k-ε model, going from frozen rotor to moving rotor
model leads to an increase in CPU time of 103%. This increase is 289% for the SST
model. Here, it is remarkable the going from k-ε to SST model for frozen rotor sim-
ulations decreases the CPU time while it increases the CPU time for the moving rotor
simulations.
The difference in mixing time between the different combinations are affected by the
velocity proﬁle. Thus, a qualitative comparison of the combinations will be performed
based on a vertical and horizontal cross-section of the bioreactor. Velocity proﬁles of
the different combination from a horizontal cross-section can be found in Figure 4.3 and
from a vertical cross-section can be found in Figure 4.4.
33
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
(a) k-ε Frozen Rotor
(b) k-ε Moving Rotor
(c) SST Frozen Rotor
(d) SST Moving Rotor
Figure 4.3: Horizontal cross-sectional velocity proﬁle at z = 3 m (middle rotor) at time
step 50 s for combinations of k-ε and SST turbulence model with frozen rotor or moving
rotor.
When observing the horizontal cross-sectional velocity proﬁles from the different com-
binations, the ﬁrst thing to remark is the difference between the frozen rotor and the
moving rotor. The velocity proﬁle of the frozen rotor is shaped after the impeller while
the moving rotor has a more even velocity proﬁle (Figure 4.3). This is as expected be-
cause the physical rotations of the impeller have a smoothing effect on the velocity over
time away from the impeller. The frozen rotor setting also leads to a larger velocity
between the cooling coils and outer tank wall. It is clear in all cases, that the cooling
coils have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the velocity because they brake the natural ﬂow of
the liquid. The bafﬂes also affect this. The visualised cross-sectional plane is located
at the middle of a cooling coil, which means the velocity is expected to be at minimum
34
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
at this point between cooling coil and tank wall. The difference in the velocity proﬁle
for the two analysed turbulence is not as clear. In the area between cooling coils and
tank wall, it is possible to see smaller differences between the turbulence models inde-
pendent of rotor model. The velocity is here slightly more affected by the bafﬂes for
the SST model, where the velocity is lower behind the bafﬂes in the SST model. The
velocity contour plot (Figure 4.3) does not show the direction of the ﬂow. It is known
that the overall direction is in a positive circular direction, but the local ﬂow at wall such
as impeller blades and bafﬂes cannot be seen. Appendix B Figure B.1 shows velocity
vectors of on the horizontal plane for both the frozen rotor setting and the moving rotor
setting combined with the SST turbulence model.
When looking at the velocity proﬁle from the vertical cross-section for the four different
combinations, a clear difference between the frozen rotor simulations and the moving
rotor simulations is seen (Figure 4.4). At the height of the three impellers, a varying
velocity from impeller to tank wall can be seen. A different shape of the overall velocity
proﬁle can be observed. The areas of faster velocity in the frozen rotor simulations are
compact and located close to the impeller while for the moving rotor, the areas of faster
velocity has an extended horizontal shape and continuous throughout to the cooling
coils and bafﬂes.
One difference between the turbulence models can be observed between the middle and
upper impeller. Here, the SST model predicts a minor region with very low velocity
(blue spot), which cannot be observed in similar way for the k-ε simulations. In a
similar way, the area of lower velocity at the bioreactor zone between upper impeller
and liquid surface is more clear in the analysis using the k-ε model. This is especially
visible for the moving rotor setting.
As a concluding remark, it is obvious that the use of a moving rotor model changes
the velocity proﬁle globally, while the change of turbulence model leads to a change in
velocity proﬁle on a more local level. In addition, the moving rotor might represent the
reality situation more precisely than the frozen rotor. By using the moving rotor, the
impellers blades are physically moving which correspond to reality, and thus the chang-
ing interactions between impellers and bafﬂes are considered. The frozen rotor model
is usually used for steady state simulations to represent the inﬂuence of the impeller.
However, since the simulations performed are transient, then the transient rotor-stator
(moving rotor) model gives a better representation of how the impellers lead to rota-
tional velocity in the whole ﬂuid. The agreement with reality is not as clear for the
different turbulence models. Based on complexity, the SST model should be able to
represent the reality more accurate because it combines two different turbulence mod-
els. However, when no data from experiments are available, it is not possible to makes
a ﬁnal conclusion of the turbulence models.
35
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
(a) k-ε Frozen Rotor
(b) k-ε Moving Rotor
(c) SST Frozen Rotor
(d) SST Moving Rotor
Figure 4.4: Vertical cross-sectional velocity proﬁle at x = 0 m at time step 50 s for
combinations of k-ε and SST turbulence model with frozen rotor or moving rotor.
A more technical comparison between the turbulence models could be made by compar-
ing plots of kinetic energy, dissipation rate and eddy frequency for the different models.
However, since no experimental data is available for these parameters, the conclusion
would be similar to the velocity proﬁle analysis, which states that the different turbu-
lence models has an inﬂuence of the velocity and thus the mixing time.
4.4
Power input
The power input to a bioreactor is a crucial factor for the mixing and is based on the
force applied by the impellers of the ﬂuid. This power input by stirring, Ps is determined
36
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
from the equation (Doran, 2013):
Ps = 2πnRτ
(4.1)
Where
τ is the torque induced by the impeller.
This torque is determined as an output variable for CFX for impeller boundary around
the Z-axis, and have to be multiplied by 3 based on the rotational periodicity. In Ta-
ble 4.2, the total power input for the bioreactor for the different turbulence and rotor
settings can be found. The torque is determined at time step 150 s for all cases. There
are minor deviations between the time steps for one case which is caused by the ﬂuctu-
ations in ﬂow patterns for the bioreactor over time.
Table 4.2: Determined power input for different turbulence models (k-ε and SST) and
rotor model (frozen rotor and moving rotor)
Turbulence Model
Rotor Model
Power input (kW)
k-ε
Frozen Rotor
359.7
k-ε
Moving Rotor
382.9
SST
Frozen Rotor
393.6
SST
Moving Rotor
418.9
The turbulence model and the rotor model also affect the power input. This change is
only based on the torque, since this is the only factor that differs between the models.
Overall, the use of an SST model leads to a larger torque compared to the k-ε model, and
the moving rotor leads to a larger torque than the frozen rotor model. The maximum
power input is thus determined for the SST model and moving rotor to be 418.9 kW
while the lower is determined as 359.7 kW for the k-ε model and frozen rotor. For a
system with multiple Rushton turbines with no gassing of the system, the power input
required for each impeller are even if the complete bioreactor is equal to 3 separate
and identical stirred tanks stacked on top of each other (Doran, 2013). This is only
close to the situation for the bioreactor since it has a curve bottom and different distance
between impeller; 2 m from bottom to middle and 1.9 m from middle to top. Thus,
minor differences in power input from each impeller are expected. For the case using a
moving rotor and SST turbulence model, the torque and thereby power input from each
impeller has been determined and the result can be found in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Determined power input for each impeller for moving rotor and SST turbu-
lence model
Impeller
Power input (kW)
Upper
149.3
Middle
142.2
Lower
127.5
37
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
The result shows a smaller power input for the lower impeller and a larger power input
for the upper impeller. This is correlated to the volume of each circulation loop. Here,
the volume of the lower circulation loop is the smallest because of the curved bottom
and the volume of the upper circulation loop is the largest because the volume above the
upper impeller. Referred to the discussion about separate stirred tanks on top of each
other, the volume of the upper imaginary tank is the larger.
4.5
Initial condition analysis
As initial condition for the simulations, the ﬂuid velocities was set to be 0 in all direc-
tions in the stator domain, while the rotor domain was set to be rotating with 130 rpm.
This situation can be visualised as there is an imaginary wall between rotor and stator
domain. The ﬂuid in the rotor domain follows the impeller rotational speed while the
ﬂuid in the stator remains static. At simulation start, the imaginary wall is removed and
mass and momentum transfer between the two domains starts. This leads to rotational
motion of the ﬂuid in the stator domain. The initial situation is seen in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Initial velocity of ﬂuid from top view of rotor and stator domain for SST
turbulence model and moving rotor setting
In reality, it makes more sense to determine the mixing time, when the velocity of the
ﬂuid in the whole bioreactor has reached a more steady velocity proﬁle. When this
situation appears, the tracer can be added to measure the time it takes to reach a certain
38
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
level of homogeneity. From the residuals of the previous numerical analyses, it could be
seen that the bioreactor velocity proﬁle reach a steady level with ﬂuctuations (therefore
not steady state) after about 20 second. Thus, a new mixing time analysis has been made
for the moving rotor and SST model, to see the inﬂuence of the initial condition. In the
new analysis, the tracer is added after 20 seconds, where the velocity proﬁle is a more
steady level.
(a) RMS residual for mass, momentum and tur-
bulence of simulation to visualise when steady
ﬂuctuations reached.
(b) Tracer concentration development at seven
monitor points (named after monitor height)
when added after 20 seconds.
Figure 4.6: RMS residuals for mass, momentum and turbulence and tracer concentration
for moving rotor - SST model with tracer add after 20 seconds.
The later addition of the tracer, where the velocities have reached steady ﬂuctuation only
leads to marginal difference in mixing time with 119.65 s to reach 90% homogeneity
and 149.95 s to reach 95% homogeneity. These minor changes can also be caused solely
by numerical error between the two simulations. This is only a decrease in mixing time
of approximately 0.05% for 90% homogeneity and 0.3% for 95% homogeneity.
4.6
Compartmentation
The main reason, why no signiﬁcant change between the mixing times for the different
initial conditions is observed, is the vertical mixing. The vertical mixing is very limited
when having a setup only with Rushton turbines, which pushes the ﬂuid in a horizontal
direction. This is visualised in Figure 4.7 where the velocity vectors is seen from a
vertical cross-section of the bioreactor.
As Figure 4.7 shows, there is mainly a horizontal ﬂow at the heights of the Rushton
turbines. In the same way, there is mainly a horizontal ﬂow at the heights exactly at the
39
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
Figure 4.7: Velocity vectors from a vertical cross-section of the bioreactor for SST
moving rotor
middle height between two turbines. This means that the mixing is taking place in sepa-
rate levels only with minor mixing between two levels. Thus, most of the tracer will be
recirculated in the same level of height without moving upwards in the bioreactor. This
phenomenon of different levels in the bioreactor can be seen in Figure 4.8 and is referred
as compartmentation of the ﬂuid (Doran, 2013) and the rate of mixing in the bioreactor
is determined by the rate om exchange between these compartments/circulation loops.
In general, the compartments can be observed when looking at the tracer concentrations
at different times (Figure 4.8). It is clear that the vertical mixing is a limiting factor
when having a setup with only Rushton turbines. However, mixing in vertical direc-
tion is seen but with the clear boundaries between circulation loops. To overcome this
problem, it is common to add an up-pumping turbine, which then improves the verti-
cal mixing. Another factor that has an inﬂuence is buoyancy. This is reached, when
another component is added to the system with a different density. This situation will
be analysed in a later chapter, when air constantly bubbling from the sparger is added
and will move upwards because of the lower density and inhomogeneous relation to the
water phase. Thus, when air is moving upwards, water must move downwards to ﬁll the
volume left by the air bubbles. This leads to vertical mixing and will be looked further
into in Chapter 6.
40
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
(a) 10 s after tracer addition
(b) 40 s after tracer addition
(c) 100 s after tracer addition
(d) 140 s after tracer addition
Figure 4.8: Tracer concentration in bioreactor at different times for SST moving rotor
(be aware of different upper limit at legend).
To decrease the mixing time for a one-phase system, the injection height of the tracer
plays a vital role. Here, it can improve the mixing when injecting the trace in an interface
zone between two circulation loops. This means that the tracer will be mixed in a
positive and negative vertical direction. The injection of the tracer has in this analysis
been at the height of the sparger. This is located below the lower impeller, which means
that it is injected into the lower circulation loop. Thus, the tracer will only move between
circulation loops in a positive vertical direction (Figure 4.8).
A better injection height would for this case of three Rushton turbines be at middle
height between lower and middle impeller of middle and upper impeller such the tracer
will move between circulation loops in both a positive and negative direction. Also
41
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. ONE-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS IN CFX
at the height of the middle impeller would be expected to improve the mixing time
signiﬁcantly. This is also discussed in Doran, 2013, where an example is given for a
stirred tank containing two Rushton turbines (Figure 4.9).
Figure 4.9: Mixing time dependence on injection height of tracer (Doran, 2013)
The mixing time of the tracer decreases remarkably, when injection of tracer is posi-
tioned in the region between upper and lower impeller (Figure 4.9). As discussed, this
leads to mixing in both positive and negative vertical direction and thus decreases the
mixing.
It has been shown that the mixing time is highly affected both by the turbulence model
as well as rotor setting. This generally affects the ﬂow patterns and thus also the power
input to the impellers. The great limitation for the mixing with the given design is the
formation of circulation loops, also referred to as compartmentation. What is the reason
for the large mixing times is the mass transfer between circulation loops, which is very
low for a setup of only Rushton turbines. Since no experimental data is available for
the kinetic energy and eddy dissipation, velocity proﬁles and mixing times for this given
setup, no ﬁnal and fair conclusion can be made on simulation setting that gives the result
in better accordance with reality.
42
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5
Comparison of CFX and Fluent
simulations
Ansys provides several software programs for CFD simulations. Previously, the soft-
ware Ansys CFX has been used for the mesh study and comparison of turbulence model
and rotor setting. However, the company Ansys does not implement major updates on
this software anymore and instead focuses on the CFD software Fluent. Based on this
information, a comparison using both software programs will be made. For the com-
parison, the same mesh will be used, which is the mesh found sufﬁcient based on the
results of the mesh study. This mesh includes the ﬁne rotor mesh and ﬁne stator mesh.
There are several differences between the two software packages, which inﬂuence the
way they discretize and numerically solve problems. One of the main differences is
that Fluent is a cell-centered solver while CFX is a node-centered solver. A simple
visualisation of the difference in a mesh grid can be seen in Figure 5.1.
(a) Node-centered (CFX)
(b) Cell-centered (Fluent)
Figure 5.1: Cell-centered and node-centered control volume visualisation in a mesh grid
The blue area in Figure 5.1 symbolises the control volume of the solver, and here it can
be seen that this control volume is located with a node in the center in CFX while nodes
43
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
are the corners in Fluent. This means that the average values of each needed variable for
the simulation are stored in the node in CFX. In Fluent, these variable average values
are stored in the center of the cell. For meshes that are not simple and quadratic as
for the example, this way of solving can lead to notable differences. Else than this
difference between the solver, various different settings are available for the different
software packages and also when in comes to numerical solver settings.
5.1
Fluent simulations
To make a comparison between the CFX and the Fluent software, similar simulations are
performed for the one-phase simulations previously performed in CFX. This means that
the simulations, which will be performed in Fluent will be tracer analyses to determine
the mixing time testing the same settings.
In Fluent, it is not possible to add an addition variable to work as the tracer to be moni-
tored without implementing user-deﬁned functions (UDF’s), which require C program-
ming. Instead, a mix of two ﬂuid will be made. Water is the main ﬂuid as it was for
the CFX simulation. A user-speciﬁed ﬂuid called tracer will be the other, and this ﬂuid
is made from copying water to have same ﬂuid parameters. The ﬂuid in the rotor and
stator domains are then set as being a mixture of these two ﬂuids. To get same initial
conditions, where water covers the whole bioreactor except at the height of the sparger,
the model is initialised with a water fraction of 1. A region is then made which covers
the whole bioreactor radius and is located in the height interval z (m) ∈[0.716,0.816].
This is the same condition as used in the step function for the CFX tracer variable. After
initialising the Fluent simulation with water fraction 1, a patch is made in the deﬁned
region with water fraction 0. Since only water and tracer are the available ﬂuids, the
tracer fraction in the patched region is 1, and thus the right initial condition is set.
Similar simulations have been performed in Fluent to determine the mixing time based
on the same monitor points as for the CFX simulations. The mixing times from Fluent
determined from the logarithmic deviation can be found in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Fluent simulated mixing times for different turbulence models (k-ε and SST)
and rotor setting (frozen rotor and moving rotor).
Turbulence
Rotor Model
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
Model
(90%)
(95%)
k-ε
Frozen Rotor
102.5
126.0
k-ε
Moving Rotor
79.5
101.5
SST
Frozen Rotor
90.0
113.5
SST
Moving Rotor
75.0
96.5
A clear decrease in the mixing times from Fluent compared to CFX can be observed
(Table 5.1). This is general for all cases when CFX and Fluent is compared. Besides
44
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
this Fluent also predicts a faster mixing time for the moving rotor simulations. However,
Fluent predicts a decrease in mixing time when going from the k-ε model to the SST
model, which is opposite from CFX.
5.1.1
Comparison with CFX results
A further look into the results of the CFX and Fluent simulations visualises remarkable
differences in the results.
A collection of the simulated mixing times in both CFX and Fluent can be found in
Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Simulated mixing times for the combinations of different turbulence models
(k-ε and SST) and rotor settings (frozen rotor and moving rotor) performed in CFX and
Fluent software.
It gets clariﬁed that the Fluent simulations have a generally lower mixing time (Fig-
ure 5.2). The same tendency regarding rotor model is observed for Fluent as it was for
CFX. The use of a moving rotor model leads to a clear decrease in mixing time.
The inﬂuence of the turbulence model does not have a huge inﬂuence for the Fluent
simulation when using a moving rotor model. Here, the mixing time only decreases
slightly when going from the k-ε model to the SST model with a relative decrease of
2.5% for 90% homogeneity and 1.5% for 95% homogeneity.
The most remarkable difference between simulations from CFX and Fluent is, that the
mixing time increases when going from a k-ε model to a SST model in CFX while
it decrease in Fluent. This is a surprising result, because the SST model does not have
same tendency to overpredict turbulence in regions of i.e. almost stagnant ﬂow or strong
45
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
acceleration. As previously explained, turbulence increases mixing and thus an overpre-
dicted turbulence will lead to a decrease in mixing time. With the SST model, Fluent
predicts a much lower mixing time than CFX for both a frozen rotor and moving rotor.
Acharya, 2016, states that there are some differences in how CFX and Fluent determined
the ω in the SST model. This combined with differences in some of the default con-
stants and development of turbulent Prandtl number can be the answer to the differences
tendencies for the SST model in CFX and Fluent.
5.1.2
Reynolds Stress Model (RSM)
One indication that the software Fluent undergoes development and is a more advanced
and developed software is that here it was possible to perform a simulation using an
RSM turbulence model without the software crashing.
As for the other turbulence
model, the RSM simulations are performed for both a frozen rotor and a moving ro-
tor.
The mixing time results for the Fluent simulations using an RSM turbulence model is
found in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Fluent simulated mixing times and CPU times for RMS turbulence model
and different rotor settings (frozen rotor and moving rotor).
Turbulence
Rotor Model
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
CPU time (s)
Model
(90%)
(95%)
RSM
Frozen Rotor
94.5
117.5
2.643E+05
RSM
Moving Rotor
84.0
105.5
2.189E+05
The resulting mixing time from simulations using a RSM turbulence model is deter-
mined to be 94.5 and 84 seconds for frozen rotor and moving rotor respectively for 90%
homogeneity and 117.5 and 105.5 seconds for frozen rotor and moving rotor respec-
tively for 95% homogeneity (Table 5.2). These mixing times are within the same range
as for the k-ε and SST model.
It gets clariﬁed that the biggest impact on the mixing time is when going from a frozen
rotor model to a moving rotor model. This transition leads to a clear decrease in mixing
time, which was also seen previously for the CFX simulations. For the cases combined
with a moving rotor model, the mixing times of the RSM model is slightly larger for
both 90% and 95% homogeneity. For the moving rotor model, the lower mixing time
is determined by using the SST model. However, the difference between the lower
values and upper values are very small. A combination of SST model and moving
rotor leads to a mixing time of 79 and 99.5 seconds for 90% and 95% homogeneity
respectively. Oppositely, a combination of RSM model and moving rotor leads to a
mixing time of 84 and 105.5 seconds for 90% and 95% homogeneity respectively. This
means that using the RSM model leads to an increase of the mixing time of 12% for 90%
46
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
homogeneity and 9.3% for 95% homogeneity in comparison of using the SST model,
which gives the lower mixing time. The same conclusion cannot be made for the frozen
rotor simulations. Here, the k-ε model leads to the larger mixing time while the SST
model gives the smaller mixing time, but only slightly smaller than for the RSM model.
5.2
Velocity proﬁles
When looking at the velocity proﬁles from a horizontal and vertical perspective as it
was seen for the CFX simulations, many of the same conclusion can be made as they
were for the CFX simulations. Overall, a mixing time of approximately 80 seconds is
predicted for the studied system to reach 90% homogeneity for all turbulence models in
combination with a moving rotor in Fluent.
Figure 5.3 shows the velocity proﬁles from a horizontal cross-section.
The same difference in shape between frozen rotor simulations and moving rotor sim-
ulations can be seen in the stationary domain as it was seen for the CFX simulations.
The use of a moving rotor model gives a more uniform velocity ﬁeld in the stationary
domain (Figure 5.3). When comparing the Fluent velocity proﬁles from a horizontal
cross-sectional perspective with the ones from CFX, a similar velocity proﬁle can be
observed, where the larger velocity is seen in the space behind the impeller blades (Fig-
ure 4.3). In addition, an increasing velocity can also be observed when moving from the
center to the impeller tip. This makes physically sense, because of the increasing radius
and the constant rotational velocity.
From the horizontal cross-section, the SST model simulation shows a remarkable dif-
ference in combination with the moving rotor model. Here, the wall of the cooling coils
leads to more decreased velocity magnitude. Oppositely, the k-ε and RSM model sim-
ulations shows a more even velocity between rotor and cooling coil. Furthermore, a
larger velocity between cooling coil and tank wall can be observed for the SST moving
rotor simulation. It is not as easy to distinguish clearly between the different turbulence
models when looking from the horizontal cross-section for the frozen rotor simulations.
Some minor differences in the region between cooling coils and tank wall can be seen.
By looking closely at the velocity proﬁles from the Fluent simulation, minor numerical
errors can be observed. This can be observed at the interface between the rotational
periodicities. Here, the interface is not as smooth as it was seen for the CFX simula-
tions. This is especially clear when looking at the frozen rotor model (Figure 5.3). This
numerical error would be possible to minimise by setting a lower residual target than
the 10−4, which is used for the performed simulations.
47
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
(a) k-ε Frozen Rotor
(b) k-ε Moving Rotor
(c) SST Frozen Rotor
(d) SST Moving Rotor
(e) RSM Frozen Rotor
(f) RSM Moving Rotor
Figure 5.3: Fluent horizontal cross-sectional velocity proﬁle at z = 3 m (middle rotor)
at time step 50 s for combinations of k-ε, SST and RSM turbulence model with frozen
rotor or moving rotor.
48
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
When looking at the velocity proﬁle at the vertical cross-section (Figure 5.4), some
of the differences depending on the turbulence models can be pointed out. For the k-
ε moving rotor model, there is a slightly sharper transition between low and higher
velocity just above the lower impeller (clearer blue area). In this region, the shapes of
the velocity proﬁles are different depending on the turbulence model. Another region
where differences can be observed is between the middle and upper impeller. Here, the
SST models leads to lower velocity close to the middle impeller at the cooling coils. In
general, there are larger areas of low velocity for the k-ε simulation (more dark blue).
Comparing the frozen rotor and moving rotor from the vertical plane, it can ﬁrst be seen
that a larger velocity around the sparger can be observed for the frozen rotor simulations
(slightly greener underneath the sparger). Oppositely, the moving rotor simulations have
larger zones of lower velocity (blue areas) than the frozen rotor. This is especially seen
in areas between impellers close to the cooling coils.
One zone, where it is possible to distinguish between the three turbulence models, is the
zone between lower and middle impeller. The velocity magnitudes in the zones are in
general very similar but the contours have a different shape. As previously explained,
the SST simulation has more strict contours with a clear separation of high and low
velocity. Approximations of a curved shapes can also be observed for the k-ε and RSM
simulations but the k-ε simulation shows a lower velocity.
As explained for the analysis in CFX, the turbulence is qualitatively analysed through
the ﬂuid ﬂow. However, the kinetic energy and dissipation rate would be alternative
measures to use to distinguish between the different turbulence model and point out the
differences. However, since no experimental results are available, no further conclusion
could be made based on these parameters. Thus, no analysis of the kinetic energy and
dissipation rate will be made.
When it comes to turbulence model, there was not a major difference between the mix-
ing times for moving rotor models. Based on the complexity of the RSM model, it has
not been found worth the computational power to get the more precise velocity proﬁle.
Only minor differences between velocity proﬁle of the SST and RSM models were seen
and thus it is decided to use the SST turbulence model for future simulations.
49
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
(a) k-ε Frozen Rotor
(b) k-ε Moving Rotor
(c) SST Frozen Rotor
(d) SST Moving Rotor
(e) RSM Frozen Rotor
(f) RSM Moving Rotor
Figure 5.4: Fluent vertical cross-sectional velocity proﬁle at x = 0 m at time step 50 s
for combinations of k-ε, SST and RSM turbulence model with frozen rotor or moving
rotor.
50
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
The difference in velocity can also be analysed in a quantitative way. By looking at a
vertical line in the bioreactor along the z axis, the velocities determined for the different
simulations setups can be compared (Figure 5.5).
(a) Frozen Rotor
(b) Moving Rotor
Figure 5.5: Velocity magnitudes for different software (CFX and Fluent), rotor model
(frozen rotor and moving rotor) and turbulence model (k-ε, SST and RSM) along z axis
(vessel height) at x = 1(m) and y = 0(m).
From the quantitative comparison (Figure 5.5), deviations can be observed between the
frozen rotor and moving rotor simulations. The moving rotor simulations show a larger
velocity at the three peaks. One interesting observation is that only the simulations
performed in Fluent determine a velocity of 0 at the boundaries (tank bottom and liquid
surface). Only the RSM results (black lines) look to have 0 velocity at boundary, but
the k-ε and SST simulation from Fluent (green and purple line) are hidden behind the
black line. This boundary condition should in reality only be present for the tank bottom
boundary, which is a no slip wall (z ≈0(m)) and thus should have a velocity of 0 at the
boundary. The liquid surface (z ≈7(m)) was modelled as a free slip wall and thus would
not be expected to be 0. For the frozen rotor simulations, the CFX SST model shows a
signiﬁcant different velocity proﬁle, which especially is clear in the interval z ∈[2,3].
For the moving rotor simulations, it can be observed the Fluent SST simulation has some
larger velocity peaks in the zones between the impellers. At the height of the impellers
for the moving rotor simulations (the peaks), CFX determines a slightly larger velocity
than Fluent where the CFX k-ε simulation determines the larger velocity (red line).
As previously explained, some elemental differences between the SST turbulence model
are present for CFX and Fluent (Acharya, 2016). Even with differences in some default
constants of the SST model, these constants will not be changed in later analyses, since
the constant giving the most realistic result has not been analysed. Future analyses could
be made adjusting the constants in one solver to ﬁt the default constants of the other.
51
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CFX AND FLUENT SIMULATIONS
Based on the comparison between the CFX and Fluent simulations, clear differences can
be observed when it comes to both mixing time and velocity contours. As previously
explained, a ﬁnal conclusion on the result that is more similar to actual measurement is
not possible to make since no experimental data is available for the bioreactor regarding
ﬂow and ungassed mixing time with a setup only consisting Rushton turbines. Since the
k-ε model has a tendency to overpredict turbulence at boundary layers, it is expected
that the SST model will lead to a result (mixing time and ﬂow pattern) closer to an
experimentally determined value. For this reason, it is also considered a surprising
result that the SST model gives a larger mixing time than the k-ε model when using
Fluent. Since turbulence improves mixing, and the k-ε has a tendency to overpredict
turbulence in certain areas, a faster mixing time would be expected for the k-ε model.
The RSM turbulence model has its advantage that it is able to model the anisotropic
behaviour of the eddies in a stirred vessel. For this reason, the result obtained from this
model would be expected to give a more precise result. However, this turbulence model
is very computational heavy and the literature study also pointed out that this turbulence
model is still not very precise in all cases. Thus, it has been chosen to perform further
work using the SST turbulence model.
In the further analysis, both software packages will be analysed, but the moving rotor
model will be used on future simulations because of the huge inﬂuence on the mixing
time as well as velocity proﬁle. This is a more realistic rotor model but also demand
more computational power. However, the differences between the rotor models are too
big to justify the use of the frozen rotor model.
52
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 6
Two-phase CFD simulations
In the one-phase simulations, a tracer has been added and monitored to determine mix-
ing times. The same procedure will be used in the two-phase simulations to determine
the mixing in the liquid phase. Now, an additional gas phase will be added, which will
be air bubbling out from the sparger. Hereby, the inﬂuence of the added gas phase on
the mixing time in the liquid phase can be evaluated.
Air bubbling through a water phase creates an inhomogeneous two-phase system. This
is different from a multiphase system such as milk, where i.e. fatty acid particles (and
many other components) are dispersed in water to create a homogeneous multiphase
ﬂuid. The dispersed air bubbles in a water phase do not create a similar homogeneous
ﬂuid, and thus the two phases have to be described with an inhomogeneous multiphase
model. From the presentation of two-phase models in Section 2.3, the appropriate model
to use is the Eulerian Multiphase Model.
Previously for the one-phase simulations, the liquid surface at the top of the bioreactor
has been modelled as a free-slip surface. When considering buoyancy, the air will rise
in the bioreactor because of the lower density. One useful boundary condition, which
appears for inhomogeneous multiphase modelling is an outlet called "degassing". This
boundary condition allows the gas phase to exit through the boundary while it holds back
the liquid phase. In addition, the liquid phase has a free-slip condition at this surface.
The condition is recommended for situations like bubble columns without a freeboard
region above the liquid. This is a similar situation simulated for the bioreactor.
6.1
Assumptions and simpliﬁcations
When modelling a two-phase system, there are various parameters and interactions that
can be considered. To simplify the simulation and thus save computational power and
simulation time, various assumption and simpliﬁcations will be used in the coming anal-
yses. The assumptions of the simulations will here be presented.
53
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
6.1.1
Drag coefﬁcient
For the two-phase simulations, the drag coefﬁcient will be modelled by using the Grace
model. For this model, a volume fraction correction exponent has to be entered. It is
recommended to use a positive value for larger bubbles and negative value for smaller
bubbles. Chanson, 2004, distinguish between larger and smaller bubbles at a bubble
diameter of 1 mm. In this analysis, the minimum bubble diameter analysed is 1 mm and
will then be assumed to be categorised as a larger bubble. Here, it is recommended to
use a volume fraction correction exponent in the range P ∈[2;4]. From previous studies,
a volume fraction correction exponent of 4 has given successful results (Lo et al., 2000).
However, in this study a volume fraction correction exponent of 2 will be used, because
this leads to a larger gas hold up, that is more similar to what is seen in practice for the
bioreactor and it tends to lead to better numerical stability during simulations.
6.1.2
Non-drag forces
Else than the drag force, there are a number of non-drag forces that can play a role in
a multiphase system. The virtual mass force has a larger inﬂuence in regions where
the relative acceleration between phases is large. For the bioreactor, this would be the
case close to the air inlet at the sparger. However, this force has been excluded in the
simulation for simplicity since the inﬂuence is assumed be limited mainly to this sparger
region.
For the bioreactor case, the impeller force is considered much larger than the lift force.
Moreover, since the bioreactor only includes Rushton turbines, the impeller force is
perpendicular the relative velocity of the bubble. Thus, the lift force has been assumed
negligible for the bioreactor case.
The turbulence force is assumed to have larger inﬂuence, which is the reason to account
for turbulence dispersion force and not lift force. CFX gives two optional turbulence
dispersion force models; Favre Averaged Drag Model and Lopez de Bertodano model
(ANSYS Academic Research, 2020a). Since the user-modiﬁed CEL multiplier, CTD
can vary a lot from system to system for the Lopez de Bertodano model, it is not recom-
mended to use this model if CTD is not known. The Favre Averaged Drag Model (Burns
et al., 2014) is very useful for systems, where the dispersed phase has a signiﬁcantly
lower density relative to the continuous phase. This is the case for the bioreactor with
air as dispersed phase that has a much lower density.
Instead of adding a wall lubrication model, which in general is more useful for bubble
ﬂow in pipes, the wall slip is made ﬂuid dependent such the air experiences a free slip
wall and the liquid experiences a no-slip wall.
54
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
6.1.3
Dispersed turbulence
For a multiphase system, there are three ways to model the turbulence. The turbulence
can be modelled for the mix of the two phases, it can be modelled only for the contin-
uous phase or it can be modelled for each phase separately. From the previous study,
it was decided to continue the further work by using the SST turbulence model. The
mixture turbulent model is applicable when the density of the two phases are close to
each other. This is not the case for the water-air multiphase, which means the mixture
turbulence model is inappropriate. To have separate turbulence models for each phase is
the more general way to model turbulence for the system, but also more computational
demanding because kinetic energy and eddy dissipation must be determined for each
phase. In addition, this model is more useful when the transfer of turbulence between
the phases plays a vital role for the system. This is not assumed to be the case for the
bioreactor since the air caries less momentum and will then not transfer much turbu-
lence to the water and improve mixing. Instead, the dispersed turbulence model is more
appropriate where a phase-modiﬁed SST model is used for the continuous phase while
the turbulence of the dispersed phase is not determined from transport equations. The
kinetic energy and eddy dissipation for the dispersed phase is determined based on time
and length scales, which is simpler (ANSYS Academic Research, 2020c). The turbu-
lence in the dispersed phase follows the Tchen Theory of dispersion of discrete particles
by homogeneous turbulence (Hinze, 1975). These are less demanding equations than
the transport equation based evaluation. The dispersed turbulence model is applicable
for systems with one clear primary phase and other phases are dispersed dilute. For the
bioreactor, water is the clear primary phase with dispersed air. This supports the use of
the dispersed turbulence model for the bioreactor system.
Turbulence interaction
To account for the inﬂuence of the dispersed ﬂuid, a turbulence interaction model must
be used. Sato and Sekoguchi, 1975, proposed a model to account for the changing mo-
tion of the continuous phase affected by the dispersed phase. This model is applicable
for bubble ﬂows and thus applicable for the bioreactor system.
The decisions for multiphase setup are also supported by the CFX "Chapter 17: Multi-
phase Flow in a Mixing Vessel" tutorial (ANSYS Academic Research, 2020b)
6.1.4
Surface tension
Surface tension is a concept most people have seen when they ﬁll a glass with water and
the level of water exceeds the glass wall. This phenomenon is caused by the surface
tension between water and the surrounding air. Here, the water molecules are more
attracted to each other than the air molecules. Because of hydrogen bonds, water has a
relatively high surface tension. The surface tension is depending on various parameters
55
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
such as temperature and interfacial area between the phases. In this study, the surface
tension coefﬁcient of 0.072 N/m will be used which corresponds to the surface tension
of water against air at 25°C and used in various studies such as Xu et al., 2011.
6.1.5
Bubble diameter
When modelling the inhomogeneous two-phase system with air bubbling through wa-
ter, the Eulerian Multiphase model is depending on the surface area between the phases.
This surface area is inﬂuenced by the shape and size of the bubbles. Here, a simpliﬁ-
cation will be made to describe the air bubbles. They are assumed to have a spherical
shape with a constant diameter. In the later analysis, simulations will be performed with
bubble diameters of 1, 3, 5 and 11 mm.
6.1.6
Incompressible ﬂuid
With a total bioreactor height of almost 7 m, a varying pressure will observed throughout
the reactor volume. This is caused by the hydrostatic pressure. In reality, all compo-
nents are compressible but some are more than others. Liquid water is an example of a
component, which normally is assumed incompressible, because the very small changes
in density even at large pressure differences. On the other side, a gas as air is in real-
ity seen as a compressible gas where the density depends highly on temperature and
pressure. At low pressure, the density of air is usually described with the ideal gas law.
In the bioreactor, a constant temperature of 39°C is assumed. However, because of the
pressure differences in the bioreactor, the density of air would also vary depending on
the location of the air bubble. For simplicity, air will in this study be assumed as an
incompressible ﬂuid. An overpressure above the bioreactor of 0.8 bar is assumed and
the pressure in the bioreactor will then increase with depth. Figure 6.1 visualises the
density of air from the ideal gas law at a temperature of 39°C with varying pressure.
With a top pressure of approximately 1.8 bar and bottom pressure of approximately 2.5
bar because of the hydrostatic pressure with ca. 7 m water height, the density of air
would also vary remarkably. To simplify the model, a constant air density of 2.4 kg/m3
will be assumed for the simulations that correspond to the approximate density at middle
height of the bioreactor. It should be mentioned that this simple pressure analysis did
not include the dynamic pressure, which is a result of the rotating impellers.
56
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
Figure 6.1: Air density as function of pressure at 39°C from ideal gas law
6.1.7
Mesh corrections
Because of the more complex modelling, when using inhomogeneous multiphase mod-
els, it has been decided to decrease the reﬁnement of the mesh to save computational
power and simulation time. Based on some simpliﬁcations made as introduction to this
thesis project, the foot that carries the sparger has been deleted because it is assumed to
have limited inﬂuence on the mixing but larger inﬂuence on the complexity. Because
this foot has been removed, the geometry can be split in 1/6 reactor instead of only 1/3.
This is also possible because of the study including Rushton turbines that also have a 1/6
rotational periodicity. This means a decreasing number of mesh elements to half with-
out compromising the quality. However, because it is recommended to run multiphase
models with double precision (which has not been done in previous simulations) further
decrease of mesh elements has been found necessary to get an acceptable simulation
time. Due to the fact that the three rotor domains have a relatively much ﬁner mesh than
the stationary, it has been decided to decrease the reﬁnement of the rotor domains. This
is also assumed to have a limited inﬂuence on the mixing time, which is monitored in
the stator domain. In Table 6.1 the updated mesh data can be found.
Table 6.1: Mesh data for corrected 1/6 geometry for 2 phase simulations for rotating
domain (all 3 rotors) and static domain. Mesh data includes total number of elements
and nodes.
Mesh
Total elements
Total nodes
3 x Rotor mesh 1/6
30,276
36,552
Stator mesh 1/6
138,351
156,960
In the updated mesh, the number of elements in the three rotor domains corresponds to
almost 22% of the number of elements in the stator domain. However, by looking at the
57
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
volume ratio the three rotors corresponds to 2% of the stator volume. This means that
the rotor is still much ﬁner per volume than the stator regardless of the decrease in mesh
quality. In previous one-phase simulations, the number of elements in the rotor domain
were equal to 86% the number of elements in the stator. The relative volume was of
course also 2% in this case which means that the mesh reﬁnement in the rotor was very
high in the rotor compared to the stator. This analysis is the justiﬁcation, that a decrease
of quality in the rotor domain is acceptable to achieve decreasing simulation time. It
must be clariﬁed, that a comparison between one-phase and two-phase simulations must
consider the different mesh quality.
The mesh used for the two-phase analysis is only marginally coarser than the coarse
mesh from the mesh study. Thus, it is decided to be fair to decrease the precision
of the results a bit, when the computational power can be decreased so heavily. The
computational power needed for a two-phase inhomogeneous model required a lot be-
cause velocities have to be determined for each phase, which require more numerical
calculations. A similar one-phase mixing analysis using a moving rotor and a SST tur-
bulence model has been performed for the new mesh and this resulted in a mixing time
of 121.45 s for 90% homogeneity and 152.7 s for 95% homogeneity. This is an increase
in mixing time of 1.46% and 1.54% for 90% and 95% homogeneity, respectively in
comparison to the results determined with previous used mesh in CFX. This justiﬁes,
that the new corrected mesh is acceptable to use in the coming study. A visualisation of
the mesh used can be found in Appendix C Figure C.1.
6.1.8
Air ﬂow
The bioreactor has a constant air inﬂow from the sparger of 45 Nm3/min. By assuming
21% oxygen and 79% nitrogen in air on a volume basis, this corresponds to a mass
ﬂow of 0.965 kg/s. It is important to notice that these are the numbers for the whole
bioreactor, but the simulations performed are only part of the bioreactor with a rotational
periodicity. Thus, the ﬂow has divided with number of parts in the complete bioreactor
(6 when simulating 1/6 of the complete bioreactor). From the assumed constant airﬂow
at the inlet, the volumetric inﬂow can be determined based on the assumed constant air
density of 2.4 kg/m3. This lead to a volumetric airﬂow of 0.067 m3/s. The bioreactor
consist in reality of 360 sparger holes, which is the inlet of air. These sparger holes
have a diameter of 11 mm. This leads to a inlet surface area of 57.02 cm2 for 1/6 of
the bioreactor. Since the mesh is not ﬁne enough to create holes of this size, the air
inlet is approximated to have same surface area in the simulation based on number of
mesh elements. Based on the area of the mesh elements at the sparger a number of 14
mesh elements is determined to have an area of 54.38 cm2. These 14 mesh elements
are well distributed at the bottom of the sparger to approximate the real downwards
pointing air inﬂow. Thus, the simulated surface area of the air inlet corresponds to 96%
of the actual inlet surface area, which then also leads to minor increase of inlet velocity.
However, this minor difference is considered not to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
58
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
overall velocity ﬁelds and mixing time. The simulations are deﬁned with a velocity inlet
because the numerical solver has been found more stable with this type in comparison
to a mass-ﬂow inlet. Based on the mass ﬂow of air, the deﬁned constant density and the
surface area of the inlet, an inlet velocity of 12.27 m/s has been used in the simulations.
The air-inlet conﬁguration can be seen in Figure 6.2 that visualises the sparger bottom.
Figure 6.2: Sparger bottom with mesh elements (blue) as air inlet.
6.2
Fluent simulations with constant bubble diameter
Different from the one-phase simulation, it is important that the two-phase simulations
are performed from a pseudo-steady-state condition. This is because, the gas hold-up
in the bioreactor will affect the mixing time, so a pseudo-steady gas hold-up has to be
determined. This will be determined by the following procedure:
1. Steady state simulation with frozen rotor until steady gas hold-up and ﬂuctuating
RMS residuals reached because convergence criteria of 10−4 is not reached.
2. Transient simulation with moving rotor setting until steady gas hold-up.
3. Mixing time simulation.
The steady state simulation has been performed for 20,000 iterations, and the result can
be found in Figure 6.3.
59
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
Figure 6.3: Development of gas hold-up for number of iterations in steady state simula-
tion for different bubble sizes
It can be seen that a signiﬁcantly larger gas hold-up is achieved for the small bubbles
with 1 mm diameter. This is related to the drag coefﬁcient determined from the Grace
model as well as the speciﬁc surface area of the bubble. Further explanation of this can
be found in Section 6.2.1. Optimally, the steady state simulation for 1 mm diameter
should have been run with more iteration, but the following transient simulation with
moving rotor will steady the gas hold-up.
First, an analysis using same time step as for the one-phase simulations (0.05 s) has
been performed and can be found in Appendix C Section C.1. This includes mixing
time results and gas hold-up for constant bubble sizes of 1, 3, 5 and 11 mm for this
time step. However, numerical error has been observed for this large time step and thus
other time steps have been analysed for 5 mm bubbles including 0.025 s and 0.01 s. The
results of this analysis have shown that it is more appropriate to use a time step of 0.01 s
for the two-phase simulations. This conclusion is mainly based on the gassing condition,
where the larger time steps have led to a more extreme ﬂooding situation as well as an
analysis of Courant numbers for the different time step cases. This has also inﬂuenced
the gas hold-up, which is found smaller when the extreme ﬂooding is observed because
of bad gas dispersion. The time step analysis can be found in Appendix C Section C.2.
6.2.1
Drag and gas hold-up
Based on the presented steady state results, a correlation between the drag force and the
gas hold-up seems to be present. Since the air bubbles overall are moving upwards in
the bioreactor, the drag force is working in the downwards direction and decrease the
buoyancy velocity of the air bubbles. With a lower upwards going velocity of the air
bubbles, the residence time for a bubble in the bioreactor will increase. With a constant
inﬂow of air, a larger residence time will lead to a larger amount of air present in the
60
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
bioreactor, which means larger gas hold-up. The Grace drag model, which is used to
describe the drag coefﬁcient for different bubble sizes, depends on various parameters
as described in previously presented equations in the literature study. By applying the
parameters for the two phases, the drag coefﬁcient in the viscous, distorted and spherical
cap regimes can be determined based on the bubble diameter. These correlations can be
seen in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Drag coefﬁcient in viscous, distorted and spherical cap regime depending
on bubble diameter
The drag coefﬁcient in the viscous regime was presented as a function of the dispersed
Reynolds number. This corresponds to the Reynolds number for a single bubble, which
is determined as:
Red = ρ fUtdp
µf
(6.1)
Here, the terminal velocity, Ut, is assumed to follow the expression presented for the
Grace drag model. If the volume fraction correction is not considered, the actual drag
coefﬁcient was described in Eq. (2.13) and follow the curve that is found in Figure 6.5
61
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
Figure 6.5: Correlation of drag coefﬁcient for Grace drag model depending on bubble
diameter without accounting for volume fraction correction
It can be seen that the drag coefﬁcient is signiﬁcantly different for the different bubble
diameters, which have been analysed. In addition, the viscous drag coefﬁcient is not
determining the actual drag coefﬁcient and is thus not represented in Figure 6.5 because
this regime is considered for very small bubbles. However, the drag force is not only
depending on the diameter in the drag coefﬁcient term but also in the speciﬁc bubble
surface area per volume, a. When analysing the product of the drag coefﬁcient and the
speciﬁc bubble surface area, the dependency of the bubble diameter for the drag force
can described. Figure 6.6 shows the product of drag coefﬁcient and speciﬁc bubble
surface area as function of the bubble diameter.
Figure 6.6: Product of speciﬁc bubble surface area and drag coefﬁcient from Grace drag
model.
62
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
As previously described, the larger gas hold-up is expected where the drag force is
larger. Based on Figure 6.6, the larger gas hold-up is expected for the 1 mm bubble
diameter, which should be signiﬁcantly larger than for the rest of the analysed bub-
ble diameters. The three other bubble diameters gas hold-ups is expected to be more
close but with larger gas hold-up for 11 mm bubbles and smaller for 3 mm bubbles.
This justiﬁes the relation between the gas hold-ups seen for the different diameter cases
(Figure 6.3).
6.2.2
Mixing time analysis for 0.01 s time steps
To make a comparison for the inﬂuence of the time step for all analysed bubble diame-
ters, the 1, 3 and 11 mm bubble diameter cases has also been performed with a time step
of 0.01 s. The results of these simulations (mixing time and gas hold-up) can be found
in Table 6.2).
Table 6.2: Fluent simulated mixing times and mean gas hold-up over mixing time for
0.01 s time step for varying bubble diameter. *Determined from linear regression.
Mean bubble diameter
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
Gas hold-up (%)
(mm)
(90%)
(95%)
1.0
71.5*
90*
25.3
3.0
57.5*
76*
12.9
5.0
61*
80.5*
13.6
11.0
61.5*
81.5*
14.2
Both the gas hold-up and the mixing times follow the same tendency for different bubble
diameters when going to a time step of 0.01 s (Table 6.2) as seen for the case of 0.05
s time step found in Appendix C Section C.1. The gas hold-up is still larger for the
1 mm case and lower for the 3 mm case. Same tendency can be observed when it
comes to the relation between gas hold-up and mixing time. The case with larger gas
hold-up leads to a larger mixing time and opposite for the case with lower gas hold-up.
Generally, the implementation of a smaller time step has led to a signiﬁcantly larger
mixing time for all cases. However, the change is smaller for the 1 mm case, which had
a remarkably larger gas hold up and mixing time than the other cases for the 0.05 s time
step. The reason for this was the larger drag force for this case, which means a lower
vertical velocity. When the vertical velocity is lower, the Courant number will also
be decreased in this direction. Thus, the decreasing time step will not have the same
impact since the Courant number already is closer to 1 for the 0.05 s case. It must be
considered that all mixing times are determined through linear regression and based on
the mixing for the ﬁrst approximately 20 seconds after tracer injection, which have been
simulated. The reason for the short simulation time is the physical time it takes when
having shorter time steps and some computational heavy settings such as moving rotor
and inhomogeneous multiphase system. In addition, the multiphase system affects the
63
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
mixing such the logarithmic squared deviation as explained for the one-phase simulation
has a more ﬂuctuating tendency. This is visualised in Figure 6.7 and especially clear for
the cases of 3, 5 and 11 mm bubble diameter.
Figure 6.7: Development of logarithmic squared deviation over time based on tracer
concentration for the seven monitor points for two-phase simulations with time step
0.01 s for different constant bubble diameters performed in Fluent.
The mixing of in the liquid phase is very similar for the cases of 3, 5 and 11 mm
bubble diameter. This also means that it is not essential which bubble diameter that
leads to a smaller mixing time, but more interesting to see that the mixing times are
very even which was expected based on the simple drag force calculations based on the
drag coefﬁcient and speciﬁc bubble surface area. It is however important to mentioned
that the smaller time step leads to a larger but most likely also a more realistic mixing
time, the mixing time in general is still lowered compared to the one-phase simulations
without gassing. This is caused by the better vertical mixing since the exchange between
compartments/circulation loops are increased and improved.
6.3
CFX simulations of two-phase system
Similar two-phase simulation with gassing has been performed in CFX to determine
mixing time and gas hold-up from this CFD tool. As for the one-phase simulations,
Fluent and CFX have some remarkable differences in the results. The resulting mixing
times and gas hold-ups for simulation performed in CFX can be found in Table 6.3.
For these simulations, the same procedure has been used where pseudo steady state
simulation for frozen rotor has been performed initially. The result of this simulation
has been used to reach a pseudo steady gas hold-up when changing to a moving rotor
setting. This is then used as initial condition for the mixing time analysis. Since CFX
has shown a faster convergence in each time step, the overall simulation time has also
been much faster. This means that a mixing time analysis of 40 s has been reached.
64
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
Table 6.3: CFX simulated mixing times and mean gas hold-up over mixing time for
0.01 s time step for varying bubble diameter. *Determined from linear regression.
Mean bubble diameter
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
Gas hold-up (%)
(mm)
(90%)
(95%)
1.0
36
44*
27.2
3.0
49.5*
62*
15.2
5.0
38.5
47*
14.4
11.0
47.5*
64.5*
14.8
When looking at the gas hold-up, the exact tendency, which was observed for the Fluent
simulations, cannot be transferred to the CFX results (Table 6.3). The 1 mm case still
has a signiﬁcantly larger gas hold-up than the other cases and marginally larger than
observed from the Fluent simulation, but in the same order of magnitude. However
for the 3, 5 and 11 mm cases, the gas hold-up does not follow the same ranking as
the Fluent simulation and expectations based on drag coefﬁcient and speciﬁc surface
area. For CFX, the 3 mm case shows a marginally larger gas hold-up followed by the
11 mm case and the lower gas hold-up is observed for the 5 mm case. Generally, the
gas hold-ups simulated in CFX are larger than for the Fluent simulations. Overall, the
mixing times simulated by CFX are smaller than those from Fluent. Moreover, another
tendency is observed compared to the results of Fluent. Very surprisingly, the shorter
mixing time is observed for the 1 mm case. This does not comply with the relation
between gas hold-up and mixing time. For CFX, the lower mixing time is determined
as the case with larger gas hold-up which is opposite for the results determined from
Fluent. A reason for this has been found. It appears that the 1 mm case has a ﬂooding
situation already at the beginning of the mixing time study, while it appears later during
the mixing time study for the 3, 5 and 11 mm cases. When this ﬂooding condition is
present from the beginning, the vertical mixing is also better before and thus for a longer
time. This leads to the lower mixing time of the 1 mm case. The ﬂooding situation will
be discussed further later in the chapter. For the 3, 5 and 11 mm cases, the results
comply with the Fluent results meaning that the case with lower gas hold-up has the
lower mixing time. This means that the larger mixing time determined by CFX is for a
bubble diameter of 3 mm. This inconsistency in the relation between gas hold-up and
mixing time can also be seen in the logarithmic squared deviation plot for the different
bubble diameters simulated in CFX (Figure 6.8).
65
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
Figure 6.8: Development of logarithmic squared deviation over time based on tracer
concentration for the seven monitor points for two-phase simulations with time step
0.01 s for different constant bubble diameters performed in CFX.
While the logarithmic squared deviation curves for different bubble sizes was approxi-
mately parallel for the simulations performed in Fluent, this is not the case for the cor-
responding CFX simulations. Here, the linear tendency that was clear in the one-phase
simulations is difﬁcult to see for the two-phase simulations performed in CFX. The ad-
dition of a gas phase and thus considering buoyancy effects is affecting the ’stability’
of the logarithmic squared deviation. Especially, the slope of the 11 mm case changes
notably, and in previous studies, numerical problems are also common for larger bub-
ble sizes (Larsson, 2015). This also means that the determined mixing time based on
linear regression are very uncertain and only an approximation that can vary from real-
ity. However, the ﬁxed bubble size is also an approximation, which is far from reality
which means that even a mixing time not determined by linear regression but a complete
simulation would not necessarily agree with reality.
The results of CFX shows a different gas distribution and impeller handling than the
Fluent simulations. Overall, the Fluent simulations showed a ﬂooding condition above
the lower impeller, which is not the general result of CFX. Here, only the 11 mm case
showed a ﬂooding condition above the lower impeller while the cases of 1, 3 and 5 mm
showed ﬂooding above the middle impeller. Figure 6.9 shows the gas distribution for
the 5 mm and the 11 mm case.
The air distribution for the 1 mm and 3 mm case can be found in Appendix C Fig-
ure C.10 and these cases show similar conditions as for the 5 mm case only with a
signiﬁcantly larger air volume fraction throughout the whole bioreactor for bubble di-
ameters of 1 mm.
66
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
(a) 5 mm
(b) 11 mm
Figure 6.9: Air volume fraction in bioreactor for 5 mm and 11 mm cases simulated in
CFX 20 s after tracer injection.
It must be considered surprising and probably not in accordance with reality that the
lower impeller does not show a ﬂooding situation, but this situation appears at the middle
impeller. The amount of air handled by the lower impeller is larger than the amount for
middle and upper impeller, since the sparger is located just below the lower impeller
and this impeller is the ﬁrst to distribute the air. According to Doran, 2013, the lower
impeller will be ﬂooded if the gas ﬂow rate is too high in relation to the stirrer speed,
but the impellers above will rarely be ﬂooded. This is also the case shown for the Fluent
simulations and the 11 mm diameter for the CFX simulation (Figure 6.9).
Based on the velocity proﬁles using cylindrical coordinates, it is also clear that the
middle impeller is ﬂooded based on the low amount of water present. Figure 6.10 shows
the velocity in each direction in cylindrical coordinates for the stator domain.
When focusing on the middle impeller, it is clear that the radial velocity is different and
lower. In this area, the radial velocity is close to 0 which justiﬁes the ﬂooding, since
the air phase is dominant and the power of the impeller is then not able to overcome the
axial velocity which is signiﬁcantly larger at the middle impeller tip (Figure 6.10 (a)).
In addition, the circumferential velocity is observed to be larger in exactly the region
between middle and upper impeller, which the ﬂooding condition is observed too. This
also correspond to the theory of Doran, 2013, and Figure 2.2, where the movement in
a ﬂooding condition shows a helix-like shape, which mean that the axial velocity and
circumferential velocity are more dominant.
67
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
(a) Axial velocity
(b) Radial velocity
(c) Circumferential velocity
Figure 6.10: Velocity proﬁle in cylindrical coordinates of water phase at time steps of
0.01 s and 5 mm bubble diameter.
Literature which compares the CFD software packages CFX and Fluent is very limited
for multiphase stirred tanks. However, Fletcher et al., 2017, analyses an industrial bub-
ble column by using both software packages and hold the results against experimental
data. Parameters such as local air volume fraction and average upwards liquid velocity
is analysed at different heights of the column. In the regions away from the column
walls, the Fluent simulations have shown a larger upwards velocity than CFX. A similar
analysis has been made for the bioreactor where the upward velocity of the liquid has
been analysed at a tank height of 3.5 m in the radial direction (x). The result of the 1
mm and 5 mm cases can be found in Figure 6.11 and the result of the 3 mm and 11 mm
68
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
cases can be found in Appendix C Figure C.11.
For the simulations performed for the bioreactor, the upwards velocity of the liquid is in
general larger in CFX closer to the shaft (x = 0 m) while the velocity is larger in Fluent
closer to the tank wall. This is also mainly caused by the ﬂooding situation above the
middle impeller in CFX. As seen for the one-phase simulation, CFX does not predict
the no-slip walls well since only Fluent determines a velocity of 0 at the walls at both
the shaft and tank wall. Since there is a signiﬁcant difference from a bubble column
as analysed in Fletcher et al., 2017, and a stirred tank, it is difﬁcult to make conclusion
based on comparison of these different cases. Since the bubble column is not affected by
a rotating impeller, the best comparison between the cases would be closer to the tank
wall, where the inﬂuence of the impeller is at its minimum. There are however clear
differences in upwards velocity based on CFX and Fluent simulations and this explains
the difference in mixing time. Because of the signiﬁcantly larger upwards velocity
extracted from CFX, this explains why the mixing time is also signiﬁcantly lower.
(a) 1 mm
(b) 5 mm
Figure 6.11: Upwards velocity of liquid for Fluent and CFX depending on radial posi-
tion (x) at tank height 3.5 m for bubble sizes of 1 mm and 5 mm
Fletcher et al., 2017, also makes a comparison between CFX and Fluent based on the
local volume fraction of air in the bubble column. The results show a larger air volume
fraction at all points analysed for the CFX results. This also corresponds with the results
for the bioreactor, where larger gas hold-ups have been observed in the results of CFX.
For the bubble column, larger local gas hold-up of 2-3%point has been observed for
all points analysed. This agrees with the results observed for the bioreactor, where the
gas hold-ups for CFX are in the range of 0.6-2.3% larger than corresponding Fluent
simulations.
69
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
6.3.1
Gassed power input
The amount of air handled also affects the power input for the impeller. The power input
for the cases analysing different bubble diameters can be found in Table 6.4 where the
power for each impeller is also noted based on the torque.
Table 6.4: Total power input and impeller separated power input for different bubble
diameters monitored in CFX 20 s after tracer injection.
Bubble diameter
Total Power
Impeller
(mm)
(kW)
Upper (kW)
Middle (kW)
Lower (kW)
1.0
200.1
79.3
64.3
56.4
3.0
208.9
71.1
67.1
70.8
5.0
230.5
88.1
68.3
74.1
11.0
242.4
114.2
71.9
56.3
The total power input is in all cases signiﬁcantly lower than it was for the one-phase
simulations. This is expected since the presence of air decreases the mixture density. In
addition, the presence of air bubbles lead to development of gas-ﬁlled cavities behind
the impeller blades, which decreases the drag force and thus reduces the resistance of
the ﬂuid on the impeller (Doran, 2013). In literature, the gassed power input, Pg, is
often used relatively to the power input without gassing, P0, and is referred to as the
fraction Pg
P0. For the bioreactor under the given conditions, this relative gassed power
input varies from 0.478 −0.579 depending on the bubble size. In the real system, the
measured power draw is within this range though the impeller setup is different. It is
expected to have a smaller power input for the lower impeller since this one handles a
larger amount of air because of the location of the sparger. This is only the case for
the 1 and 11 mm bubble diameters. Oppositely, the larger power input is expected for
the upper impeller since this handles less air because it already well dispersed at this
location. The results of the CFX simulations agree with this theory. The reason, why
the 3 and 5 mm cases has lower power input for the middle impeller is related to the
ﬂooding conditions observed for this impeller. This ﬂooding situation means that the
amount of gas is too large to handle, and a larger gas amount lead to a lower power input
for the given rotational speed. It must also be considered that the difference in power
input for middle and lower impeller for these cases are still at a minor level. Still, it
is questionable how much this condition agrees with reality since it the ﬂooding is not
expected at the middle impeller when the lower impeller manages to disperse the air.
6.3.2
Multiple size group (MUSIG) analysis
In reality, the assumption of a constant bubble diameter throughout the whole bioreactor
is very critical. The assumption has been implemented to decrease the computational
power needed for results. However, it is expected to have a vital inﬂuence and limiting
when comparing to experimental data from reality. CFX has an integrated polydispersed
70
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
setting, which allows to group particle sizes for the dispersed ﬂuid. Here, breakup and
coalescence models can be deﬁned. CFX only has one integrated model for breakup
and one for coalescence. Alternatively, the models can be set as ’none’ or ’user-deﬁned’
which means that the models are based on equation you manually enter. In this study,
the default CFX models will be used, which are Luo and Svendsen (Luo and Svendsen,
1996) for breakup and Prince and Blanch (Prince and Blamch, 1990) for coalescence.
The models will not be presented further, but they are discrete population balance mod-
els, which determines how the number of bubbles and the bubble size develop through
birth and death. The models have several variable and turbulence plays a vital role.
Venneker et al., 2002, uses the same models in a study of population balance modelling
in a aerated stirred vessel performed in Fluent. Else than the breakup and coalescence
models, CFX also need information of the minimum diameter, maximum diameter and
the number of size groups. This number of size groups are the actual sizes, which a
bubble can have. In addition, this size group discretization can be based on equal mass,
equal diameter, geometric mass or be user-deﬁned. To explain the difference in gen-
eral terms, the equal mass leads to more size groups close to the maximum diameter,
the geometric mass lead to more size groups close to the minimum diameter and the
equal diameter gives a uniform distribution between minimum and maximum diameter.
Since it is preferred to have size groups close to the analysed sized of 1, 3, 5 and 11
mm diameters represented in the MUSIG analysis, a setup with six size equal diameter
size groups have been selected with a minimum diameter of 0.1 mm and a maximum
diameter of 12 mm. This lead to diameters in the 6 size groups of:
Table 6.5: Bubble diameter for selected size groups in MUSIG analysis.
Size group, i
1
2
3
4
5
6
Bubble diameter, di (mm)
1.09
3.08
5.06
7.04
9.03
11.01
These bubble diameters determined from each size group is based on the model equation
(ANSYS Academic Research, 2020a):
di = dmin +
dmax −dmin
N

i−1
2

(6.2)
Where
di is the bubble diameter of size group i,
dmin is the minimum bubble diameter,
dmax is the maximum bubble diameter and
N is the total number of size groups.
This means that the bubble size distribution will follow the breakup and coalescence
models but will be separated in these six discrete sizes. The boundary between the size
groups will be the mid-diameter between two size group. Thus, if the population balance
models lead to a bubble size of 4 mm, this bubble will be put partly into size group 2 and
partly into group 3 to conserve mass of air. Hence, it is partly assumed to have a bubble
71
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
diameter of 3.08 mm and drag, velocity etc. will be determined from this discrete bubble
size and other part related to the 5.06 mm bubble size. This discretization decreases
the computational effort since an inﬁnite number of bubble diameter where diameter
dependent parameters should be determined for each bubble diameter leading to an
extreme number of calculations.
The analysis using a MUSIG setup leads to a larger mixing time. This mixing time
was determined as 95.5 s for 90% homogeneity and 122.5 for 95% homogeneity. This
is fairly larger mixing times than determined from previous simulations in both CFX
and Fluent. The gas hold-up has been determined to be 18.3% as an average over the
mixing time analysis. This gas hold-up agrees with the gas hold-up determined from
the individual bubble sizes by being somewhere in between the largest and smallest
determined gas hold-up. In addition, based on the fraction of each size group and the
bubble diameter of each size group, the mean bubble diameter in the bioreactor is found
to be 4.3 mm. The mixing times, gas hold-up and mean bubble diameter for the MUSIG
analysis is also found in Table 6.6
Table 6.6: CFX simulated mean bubble diameter, mixing times and mean gas hold-up
over mixing time for 0.01 s time step for MUSIG analysis. *Determined from linear
regression.
Mean bubble diameter
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
Gas hold-up (%)
(mm)
(90%)
(95%)
4.3
95.5*
122.5*
18.3
When having a mix of different bubble sizes, the ratio of each size group depends very
much on position because of the turbulence at the given position. Since the bubble
breakage and coalescence models are highly dependent on the turbulence parameters,
the bubble size and the fraction of each size group is expected to vary throughout the
bioreactor.
Figure 6.12 shows the size group fraction at a vertical and radial line in the bioreactor.
The vertical line is located at a position 1 meter away from the center of the bioreactor,
while the radial line is located at a height of 4 meters, which is exactly in between the
middle and upper impeller.
72
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
(a) Vertical size group fractions at radius x =
1 m
(b) Radial size group fractions at height z = 4 m
Figure 6.12: Size groups fractions at vertical and radial lines.
For the vertical line, there are some regions, where size group 1 with the smaller bubbles
are very dominant. These regions are at the impeller heights and below the lower im-
peller (Figure 6.12 (a)). In these regions, the turbulence and kinetic energy is very high,
and this leads to breakage of the bubbles such the smallest bubbles will be dominant.
At the impeller heights, the size group 1 fraction is very close to be 1 which mean, that
the presence of other size groups are negligible. In addition, the size group 6, which
contains the larger bubbles is dominant in the regions just below the middle impeller
and above the upper impeller. In these regions, the coalescence effects are dominant
leading to birth of larger bubbles sizes, because the smaller bubbles leave the turbulent
impeller region. The radial line is located in between two impellers. This gives a quite
even distribution of the size groups. The presence of the cooling coils, which works
as an obstacle for the ﬂow, leads to breakage of the bubble. This is the reason why an
increasing fraction for size group 1 can be observed closer the the radial position of 1.5
m (Figure 6.12 (b)). A complete overview of fractions of each size group from a verti-
cal cross-section of the bioreactor can be found in Appendix C Figure C.12. Since the
bubble breakage and coalescence models are highly depending on the kinetic energy
and dissipation rate linked to the turbulence, the used turbulence model will not only
inﬂuence the mixing time as analysed in during the one-phase simulations. It will also
inﬂuence the bubble size and thus the dispersion of bubbles. Thus, it can make sense
to validate turbulence model both based on experimental data of mixing time as well as
gas dispersion and bubble sizes.
For the one-phase simulations, the phenomenon of compartmentation was observed
where the circulation loops made the vertical mixing more difﬁcult and the mass trans-
fer between circulation loop had a major inﬂuence. By adding the air phase and then
consider buoyancy in the model, mass transfer between these circulation loops has im-
73
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
proved. This can already be seen from the lower mixing times, which have been deter-
mined for the two-phase simulations. However, the compartmentation is not eliminated
completely, which Figure 6.13 justiﬁes.
(a) 10 s after tracer addition
(b) 20 s after tracer addition
(c) 30 s after tracer addition
(d) 40 s after tracer addition
Figure 6.13: Tracer concentration in bioreactor at different times for two-phase MUSIG
analysis (be aware of different upper limit at legend).
The compartmentation can still be observed at the height of the impellers, which is the
intersection between circulation loops (Figure 6.13). However, the mass transfer at this
intersection has improved by adding the air phase. This makes the compartmentation
74
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
smoother since larger amount of tracer is transferred from one circulation loop to an-
other. Especially closer to the shaft, the vertical transfer of tracer can be observed.
However, this is not caused by ﬂooding, since this is not the case for the MUSIG analy-
sis. The air distribution for the MUSIG analysis can be found in Figure 6.14.
Figure 6.14: Air volume fraction in bioreactor for MUSIG analysis.
The main reason why no ﬂooding is found present when applying the MUSIG setting
is that the power of the impellers lead to bubble breakage and thus better dispersion of
the bubbles. This is also the reason why a larger air volume fraction is observed at the
height of the three impellers (Figure 6.14). The study has in general shown the great
importance of bubble breakage and coalescence in the bioreactor since the results of
especially CFX with a ﬁxed bubble size show results that are not expected. The ﬂooding
condition at the middle impeller, which occur for the ﬁxed bubble sizes in CFX, does
not seem to correspond to reality. This is based on theoretical considerations because
no data is available for the bioreactor regarding this condition. Simulations performed
in Fluent was only considering a ﬁxed bubble size. Here, it is the lower impeller that
occurs to be ﬂooding. Even though this is an unwanted situation for the bioreactor
when it comes to oxygen transfer, the a ﬂooding condition at the lower impeller is more
realistic and also mentioned in literature. But the ﬂooding situation at the lower impeller
is likely to be avoided if including bubble breakage and coalescence.
When it comes to the mixing times, the ﬂooding situation is a great decreasing factor
since it improves the vertical mixing, which has been observed as a limiting factor. Even
though a low mixing time is preferred, the decrease is based on an unwanted situation.
Flooding is not preferred even though it leads to an improved vertical mixing. This
improvement of the vertical mixing can instead be achieved with addition of an vertical
pumping impeller. The used Rushton turbines only lead to pumping in a horizontal
direction. Even with lack of experimental data from the bioreactor, the results obtained
75
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 6. TWO-PHASE CFD SIMULATIONS
in Fluent are assumed in better accordance with reality. However, the same can be
concluded for the CFX simulation, where a MUSIG setting has been used. In a future
study, where also Fluent will be investigated by using the possible population balance
setting, a result similar to the CFX MUSIG result is expected, where with a dispersion
condition similar to the result of the CFX MUSIG due to the bubble breakage caused
by the impellers. With a setup only containing Rushton turbines, it not found realistic
to achieve mixing times in the range that is observed for the CFX simulations with
constant bubble size. The MUSIG simulation has a signiﬁcantly larger mixing time than
the CFX simulation of constant bubble sizes, and the Fluent simulation investigating
bubble size of 1 mm, also achieves large mixing times both for 0.01 s time step and
especially 0.05 s time step. These mixing times are in the expected range, where it has
decreased in comparison to the one-phase simulation, but still are limited by the low
mass transfer between circulation loops. An actual mixing time for the bioreactor with
Rushton turbines is not available and thus a ﬁnal conclusion on most reasonable result
is not possible. Even though no experimental results are available for the bioreactor
including Rushton turbines, a gas hold-up in the range 12-15% is expected based on
data from the bioreactor with other impeller conﬁgurations. This also means that local
air volume fractions are neither available, and it can thus not be concluded that no
ﬂooding will occur in the bioreactor with the given conditions. However, theory gives a
clear indication that it is most likely that only the lower impeller would be in a ﬂooding
condition if no extreme air-ﬂow/impeller speed relation is used.
76
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 7
Oxygen uptake and gradient in a
cultivation
Previous performed two-phase simulations analysed the mixing in the liquid phase when
air is injected to the bioreactor from the sparger. In these simulations, the solubility of
air in water is not considered. Since air mainly consist of nitrogen and oxygen, these
are the elements, which will be analysed. Even though both oxygen and nitrogen can
be solubilised in water, this analysis will only include the solubility of oxygen in water,
which means the oxygen transfer from gas to liquid phase. The oxygen transfer follow
the equation stated in Eq. (2.23), where the saturated concentration follows Henry’s
law. The Henry’s law constant is dependent on the species as well as temperature. For
this case, the species are assumed to be oxygen and water at a constant temperature of
39°C, which means that the bioreactor is assumed isothermal at this temperature. Based
on a correlation for oxygen in water (National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), 2018), Henry’s law constant depends on temperature as shown in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Henry’s Law constant depending on temperature
With a decreasing Henry’s law constant for increasing temperature, it means that the sol-
ubility of oxygen also decreases when the temperature increases (Figure 7.1). Based on
77
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
this correlation, the Henry’s law constant can be determined for the assumed conditions
in the bioreactor.
This means that at a temperature of 39°C and assuming a density of the water phase
of 997 kg/m3, Henry’s law constant used for the analysis is kH = 1.034 · 10−5 mol
m3Pa ⇔
HH = 96,684.5m3Pa
mol .
In addition, oxygen uptake occurs by the biomass present in the bioreactor liquid. Thus,
the biomass consumes the dissolved oxygen at a given rate. This rate is assumed to be
constant with a value of 4.16 kg O2/(m3h) based on information obtained from the in-
dustrial partner. This means that if oxygen is present at a given point in the liquid phase,
the concentration will decrease with this rate. The combination of oxygen transfer and
oxygen uptake leads to a new equilibrium concentration of diluted oxygen for different
points in the bioreactor.
The analysis considering this oxygen transfer and uptake by the biomass will only be
performed in CFX, since the setup of such simulations are more demanding. This is
caused by applying UDF’s and thus C programming, which has not possible to include
with the time frame of this thesis
7.1
Multiple size group (MUSIG) analysis
Previously, the two-phase simulations have been performed in CFX, where doubtful
results have been observed for the cases of constant bubble size. Analyses including
oxygen transfer and oxygen uptake have also been performed for constant bubble size
and can be found in Appendix D Section D.1. Since the use of a MUSIG setting was
assumed to give a more realistic gas dispersion and mixing time, the focus will include
this setting.
For the complete bioreactor system, an average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient value has
been determined to be kLa = 290 h−1 based on experimental data though another im-
peller design is used in reality. Consistently for this chapter, the mass transfer coefﬁ-
cient, kL, multiplied with the interfacial area per volume between gas and liquid phase,
a, will be referred to as the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa.
Since the CFX software requires the mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL as an input, this pa-
rameter has to be approximated or modelled. For constant bubble size, this is relatively
straightforward. The bioreactor is ﬁlled until the top of the bafﬂes, which is a volume
of approximately 70 m3. Based on the average gas hold-ups determined in CFX for
the two-phase simulations, the total volume of air can be determined. From the bubble
diameters, the volume and surface area of a single bubble can be determined. Thus,
the number of bubbles in the bioreactor can be determined from the total air volume
and the volume of a single bubble. This can lead to the total surface area of the bub-
bles present in the bioreactor, which corresponds to the interface area between the gas
an liquid phase. The interface area per total volume of the phases can be determined
78
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
which is part of the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient symbolised as a, and the described way
of determining this interfacial area per volume is simpliﬁed to the equation:
a = 6φd
dp
(7.1)
Here, the average gas hold-up in the whole bioreactor is used as the volume fraction of
air, which could also be determined in every single node in CFX. By using the average
gas hold-up, a constant mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL, can be determined. This method-
ology has been used in the analysis for constant bubble sizes, which can be found in
Appendix D Section D.1.
It is a clear simpliﬁcation to use constant bubble sizes, and the two-phase analysis for
CFX also showed doubtful results when it comes to ﬂooding for the constant bubble
sizes in CFX. The constant bubble size also affects the oxygen transfer based on the
interfacial area per volume between the gas and liquid phase. By using the same MUSIG
setting as presented in Section 6.3.2, coalescence and bubble breakage is then accounted
for, which will have an inﬂuence on the local interfacial area between the phases. Since
there is no constant bubble size in the bioreactor, a constant mass transfer coefﬁcient for
the MUSIG analysis cannot easily be found as for the constant bubble sizes by using
Eq. (7.1). However, CFX calculates the interfacial area per volume between the phases
in each node, and thus the mass transfer coefﬁcient is determined from as kL = kLa
a ,
where a is a variable determined numerically in each node in CFX and kLa = 290 h−1.
This gives a non-constant mass transfer coefﬁcient in the bioreactor, but oppositely the
oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is exactly 290 h-1 at all points of the bioreactor. Figure
7.2 shows the pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen in the bioreactor when
using the MUSIG setting and the varying mass transfer coefﬁcient.
Figure 7.2: Pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen (%) for MUSIG setting
and oxygen transfer coefﬁcient of exactly kLa = 290 h−1 at all points of the bioreactor.
79
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
As Figure 7.2 shows, that the concentration of dissolved oxygen is at a very low level
in large areas of the bioreactor and very low (below 5%) at the bottom of the bioreac-
tor close to the sparger. The reason for this is the larger uptake in comparison to the
transport of oxygen from the sparger to certain areas as well as the transfer to the liquid
phase. Since the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is determined to be constant for the whole
bioreactor by varying the mass transfer coefﬁcient, the rate of transfer of gas to liquid
phase will then not depend on location. However, since the bottom of the bioreactor is
located closer to the sparger, this region has a shorter transport time of gaseous oxygen.
This is the crucial parameter for this case, where a constant oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is
analysed. Because of the larger transport time of oxygen from the sparger to area further
up in the bioreactor, the biomass consumes the oxygen before new oxygen is transported
from the sparger. This is only the case to a minor extent closer to the sparger, where a
pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen just below 5% is observed. Since the
oxygen transfer rate is not constant, but decreases when the concentration of dissolved
oxygen increases (see Eq. (2.23)), this pseudo-steady concentration will occur when
oxygen uptake and oxygen transfer are in equilibrium, where the oxygen transfer also
depends on the oxygen transport.
Since it is considered a rough assumption, that the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient will be
constant over the whole bioreactor, an alternative procedure will be made. It is as-
sumed that a constant mass transfer coefﬁcient is more realistic maybe with minor devi-
ations, and the interfacial area between the phases is a changing parameter throughout
the bioreactor. Here, it is important to remember that the experimentally determined
oxygen transfer coefﬁcient of 290 h-1 is determined as an average over the whole biore-
actor. This means that it is very certain that some regions will have a larger value and
some will have a lower value. This deviation is in the coming analysis assumed to be
caused by the interfacial area. A constant mass transfer coefﬁcient is then determined
based on a mean bubble size from the MUSIG analysis in Section 6.3.2 as well as the
gas hold-up from this analysis as the mean air volume fraction. Thus, a constant mass
fraction coefﬁcient is determined and present in Table 7.1 by using Eq. (7.1) and the
average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient.
Table 7.1: Phase interface area per volume and mass transfer coefﬁcient for MUSIG
analysis based on an oxygen transfer coefﬁcient of 290 h-1 and previous determined gas
hold-up and average bubble size (from two-phase analysis)
Mean bubble diameter
Interface area per volume, a
Mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL
(mm)
(m-1)
(m/s)
4.3
257.8
3.12E-04
Based on the constant mass transfer coefﬁcient, the concentration of dissolved oxygen
at a pseudo-steady state is determined for the bioreactor. Figure 7.3 shows this concen-
tration of dissolved oxygen from a vertical cross section of the bioreactor.
80
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
Figure 7.3: Pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen (%) for MUSIG and con-
stant mass transfer coefﬁcient of kL = 3.12·10−4 m/s.
As for Figure 7.2, Figure 7.3 shows a similar tendency when it comes to the transport
of oxygen. In the areas closer to the sparger, a generally larger concentration of dis-
solved oxygen is observed. Furthermore, the overall concentration of dissolved oxygen
is also found larger in this case of a constant mass transfer coefﬁcient. However, the
transport time of oxygen from sparger to the very top of the bioreactor is still found
too large to exceed the oxygen uptake rate (Figure 7.3). Thus, a pseudo-steady oxygen
concentration in this region is still close to 0%. Here, the compartmentation has a large
inﬂuence on the long transport time and thus the very low pseudo-steady concentration
of dissolved oxygen at the top of the bioreactor. To reach the very top of the bioreac-
tor, the oxygen has to be transported across more compartments/circulation loops, and
thus a very large transport time is expected and the reason for the low concentration of
dissolved oxygen.
Even though the constant mass transfer coefﬁcient has been determined based on the
average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient and average gas hold-up and bubble size from the
two-phase simulation performed in Section 6.3.2, the average oxygen transfer coefﬁ-
cient from the simulation varies remarkably from the given average. The average oxy-
gen transfer coefﬁcient determined from the simulation is kLa = 578.5 h−1. A plot
showing the kLa dependence on position because of different interfacial area at differ-
ent points of the bioreactor can be found with plot of the interfacial area per volume in
Appendix D Figure D.6.
A corrected mass transfer coefﬁcient as input for the simulation has then been deter-
mined to kL = 1.566 · 10−4 m/s, which has then been used for a corrected simulation
to approach the experimentally determined average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient for the
bioreactor. The resulting pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen and the oxy-
81
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
gen transfer coefﬁcient at different locations of the bioreactor can be found in Figure
7.4.
(a) Dissolved oxygen concentration (%)
(b) Oxygen transfer coefﬁcient (h−1),
average kLa = 302.5 h−1
Figure 7.4: Pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen (%) and oxygen transfer
coefﬁcient for MUSIG using mass transfer coefﬁcient of kL = 1.566·10−4 m/s.
A signiﬁcantly lower concentration of dissolved oxygen is observed from the corrected
simulation, which lowered the constant mass transfer coefﬁcient (Figure 7.4). This was
well expected, and the tendency as previously seen is repeated, where the pseudo-steady
concentration of dissolved oxygen is found larger in the regions of shorter transport
time for the gaseous oxygen from the sparger. Furthermore, the result now shows a
non-negligible concentration of dissolved oxygen just below the height of the upper im-
peller in the region around the cooling coils. The reason for this is the larger oxygen
transfer coefﬁcient (Figure 7.4 (b)) caused by the increased interfacial area and smaller
bubble size. In this region, the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient reaches a local level around
1000 h-1. This larger oxygen transfer overcomes the transport time of gaseous oxygen,
which gives a pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen around 15%. The oppo-
site is the reason why a concentration of dissolved oxygen very close to 0% is observed
in the region just above the lower impeller, slightly away from the shaft. Even though
the transport time to the area is smaller, the same is the case for the oxygen transfer. This
low oxygen transfer is more dominant than the faster transport time, and combined, this
leads to an oxygen uptake that exceeds the oxygen transfer. For this corrected constant
mass transfer coefﬁcient analysis, an average oxygen transfer of kLa = 302.5 h−1 has
been determined. This is still marginally larger than the experimentally determined av-
erage. A third correction iteration of the mass transfer coefﬁcient could be performed to
approach the experimental average more, but this will not be performed in this analysis
since that average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient determined from the simulation is within
82
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
an acceptable range from the experimental value and only exceeds by 4.3%. For this
corrected simulation, a mean bubble diameter of 4.0 mm has been determined, which
also differs slightly from the average bubble diameter of the simulation, which was the
base for determining the constant mass transfer coefﬁcient (Table 7.1).
As the oxygen is transferred from gas to liquid phase in the bioreactor and consumed by
the biomass, the concentration of oxygen in the gas phase must decrease in the upwards
direction of the bioreactor. Figure D.7 found in Appendix D conﬁrms this. Here, the
pressure differences in the bioreactor due to hydrostatic pressure is also shown, as well
as the equilibrium concentration of dissolved oxygen, which is used to determine, the
concentration as a percentage. Because of the different pressure and fraction of oxygen
in the gas phase, the concentration in percent is also different for different locations in
the bioreactor. At the degassing boundary (liquid surface), an average mass fraction of
0.164 which is approximately 30% lower than the inlet mass fraction from the sparger
(0.233, which correspond to 21vol% as present in atmospheric air). This consumption
of oxygen upwards in the bioreactor also decrease the oxygen transfer from gas to liquid
phase in combination with the lower pressure. This is because the partial pressure of
oxygen decreases, which is the driving force of the oxygen transfer.
7.1.1
Correlation based mass transfer coefﬁcient
For the analyses of constant bubble sizes, an alternative correlation to approximate the
mass transfer coefﬁcient has been presented based on Higbie’s penetratinon theory (Ap-
pendix D Section D.1). Here, a correlation using a proportionality constant of √π/2 has
been analysed, while an alternative proportionality constant of 0.301 discussed after-
wards. This correlation using both proportionality constants separately will be analysed
to see if they are applicable, when having a non-constant bubble size.
For the analysis including the MUSIG setting, the correlation-based mass transfer co-
efﬁcient will be analysed too. Here, both proportionality constants will be analysed.
Figure 7.5 shows the pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen in the bioreactor
by using the mass transfer coefﬁcient correlation with the two alternative proportionality
constants.
The use of the correlation to determine the mass transfer coefﬁcient leads to a concen-
tration of dissolved oxygen that overall is signiﬁcantly larger than the results based on
the experimentally determined oxygen transfer coefﬁcient (Figure 7.5). This is also the
conclusion for the analyses of constant bubble sizes. However, the inﬂuence of the dif-
ferent proportionality constant is non-negligible. A decrease in concentration can be
observed at low and wide positions in the bioreactor from approximately 100% to 75%
(red to yellow). Additionally, the inﬂuence at the top of the bioreactor is remarkable,
since the concentration goes from being above 50% to 0%, when decreasing the propor-
tionality constant to 0.301. The use of proportionality constant of 0.301 still leads to a
results with larger concentration of dissolved oxygen than the non-corrected case using
constant mass transfer coefﬁcient (Figure 7.3).
83
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) Proportionality constant √π/2
(b) Proportionality constant 0.301
Figure 7.5: Pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen (%) for MUSIG analysis
using mass transfer coefﬁcient correlation with different proportionality constants.
As explained, the concentration of dissolved oxygen is signiﬁcantly larger when using
the correlation to determine the mass transfer coefﬁcient. This must indicate that the
correlation, as for the constant bubble size, overpredicts the mass transfer coefﬁcients,
which then increase the oxygen transfer. Figure 7.6 shows the oxygen the oxygen trans-
fer coefﬁcient from a vertical cross-section with the average value highlighted.
Based on the average oxygen transfer coefﬁcients, it can be concluded that the use of
the correlation also leads to overprediction of the mass transfer coefﬁcient when using
discrete size groups. The use of proportionality constant of √π/2 leads to an average
oxygen transfer coefﬁcient of kLa = 3746.2 h−1, while the use of 0.301 as proportional-
ity constant results in an average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient of kLa = 954.0 h−1. Both
of these average values exceed the maximum values of 900 h-1 found in literature for a
stirred vessel (Bach et al., 2017). Especially for the case with a proportionality constant
of √π/2, there are areas at height of the impellers and sparger which has a remark-
ably large oxygen transfer coefﬁcient up to 14,400 h-1. This is caused both by the large
interfacial area because of small bubbles as well by the overpredicted mass transfer co-
efﬁcient. Thus, the larger oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is counted for in both in the "kL"
part as well as the "a" part of the kLa. Same extreme oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is not
predicted when decreasing the proportionality constant to 0.301. Here, maximum in
the same area at the impeller and sparger height is about 5000 h-1, which still must be
considered as a large local value. These larger local values also increases the average to
such an extinct that the average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient also must be considered not
in accordance with reality.
84
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) Proportionality constant √π/2,
average kLa = 3746.2 h−1
(b) Proportionality constant 0.301,
average kLa = 954.0 h−1
Figure 7.6: Pseudo-steady oxygen transfer coefﬁcients, kLa, for MUSIG analysis using
mass transfer coefﬁcient correlation with different proportionality constants (Be aware
of logarithmic scale).
Based on both literature as well as the experimental determined average oxygen trans-
fer coefﬁcient of the bioreactor, it is clear that the correlation is not applicable for this
system to give realistic results. For both the analyses of constant as well discrete size
groups of bubble diameter, the Higbie’s penetration theory correlation leads to an over-
predicted mass transfer coefﬁcient.
The determined mass transfer coefﬁcient using the correlation with different propor-
tionality constant at different points in the bioreactor can be found in Appendix D Fig-
ure D.8.
Overall, the analyses of oxygen transfer and uptake in the bioreactor has shown that the
cases, which have the best compliance with reality, when it comes to varying bubble
size and average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient close to the experimental determined aver-
age, will have large regions within the bioreactor where no or very limited amounts of
dissolved oxygen is present. This could be a potential production issue, since it limits
the metabolism processes of the biomass leading to a lower yield. The cases of constant
bubble size all have a tendency to show ﬂooding, which fastens the oxygen transport
along the shaft. Thus pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen is also found
larger closer to the shaft for the results based on the experimentally determined average
oxygen transfer coefﬁcient. Since CFX has been the only used software for the anal-
ysis of oxygen transfer and uptake, the analysis using a MUSIG setting based on the
average kLa must be concluded as the more useful result. However, actual measure-
ments of dissolved oxygen at various position in the bioreactor are not available and
85
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
credibility of the results is thus still doubtful. This means that no real validation can be
made on the model both when it comes to previously determined mixing times as well
as pseudo-steady concentrations of dissolved oxygen.
This thesis has only considered one bioreactor design with constant parameters such is
gas ﬂow and stirring speed. These parameters combined with other impeller design is
worth analysing to dig deeper into design improvements.
86
==PAGE:104==
Conclusion
Throughout this thesis, analyses of mixing times in an industrial bioreactor of approxi-
mately 70 m3 with three Rushton turbine impellers have been performed. This includes
both a pure liquid phase as well as with addition of bubbly air-ﬂow from a sparger. The
one-phase simulations have been performed in both CFX and Fluent with turbulence
models such as k-ε, SST and RSM in combination with both a frozen rotor and tran-
sient rotor-stator setting. This has led to mixing times in the range of 75.0-142.3 s to
reach 90% homogeneity. Generally, Fluent showed shorter mixing times when compar-
ing the two software packages, and the moving rotor gave a signiﬁcantly shorter mixing
time because of the changing velocity proﬁle.
Mixing time analyses have also been performed when adding a bubbly air ﬂow from the
sparger. Based on one-phase simulation results, SST turbulence model and moving rotor
setting have been found the best choice for the multiphase simulations. Small time steps
of 0.01 s had to be used to cover gas dispersion and predict mixing times of 36-71.5 s
based on simulations with ﬁxed air bubble sizes of 1, 3, 5 and 11 mm diameter. The
improved vertical ﬂow after adding the air ﬂow is one major reason for the decrease in
mixing time in comparison to one-phase simulations. Based on the ﬂooding condition
observed for the simulations, it can be concluded that Fluent leads to a more realistic
ﬂow and gas dispersion pattern than CFX.
With the MUSIG setting available in CFX, analysis of mixing time has been made
for discretized bubble size groups. This resulted in a mixing time of 95.5 s for 90%
homogeneity, which is signiﬁcantly larger than for the constant bubble sizes. However,
this can be concluded to be a more realistic mixing time since a ﬂooding condition is
avoided because of the bubble breakage that is now considered leading to better gas
dispersion. The absence of ﬂooding leads to less efﬁcient vertical mixing and thus and
increased mixing time.
Oxygen transfer from gas to liquid phase as well as the oxygen uptake from the biomass
present in the bioreactor is included in further analysis of the bioreactor. Here, pseudo-
steady concentrations of dissolved oxygen in the bioreactor have been analysed in CFX
to describe the oxygen gradient. Varying bubble diameter has been found necessary to
model gas dispersion. Thus, the MUSIG setting including bubble breakage and coales-
cence is found to be vital.
From experiments, the average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient for the bioreactor is known
as approximately kLa = 290 h−1. Results based on this experimental value generally
87
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
showed a low concentration of dissolved oxygen in major parts of the bioreactor, mean-
ing that the oxygen uptake was more dominant than the oxygen transport and transfer
in these zones. An alternative mass transfer coefﬁcient based on Higbie’s penetration
theory showed overpredictions of the oxygen transfer. Because of missing experimental
data, validation of the models is only based on literature.
Overall, the results based on the experimentally determined average oxygen transfer
coefﬁcient show the major problem of the bioreactor. With such a large bioreactor, the
mass transfer and transport of oxygen is not sufﬁcient to cultivation growth with the
given oxygen uptake. Mixing times are generally too large to successfully transport
oxygen throughout the bioreactor to fulﬁl the oxygen demand from the biomass. To be
a productive bioreactor for industrial use, a design with a signiﬁcantly decreased mixing
time must be developed to grow the aerobic biomass to a high yield. Numerically, it has
been found challenging to achieve a good and realistic gas dispersion. Here, bubble
size and time step for transient analysis are critical which have been major sources of
unreliability for the observed results.
88
==PAGE:106==
Future work
Even though this thesis has come across various elements of the analysis of the mixing
and oxygen transfer in the industrial bioreactor from Chr. Hansen A/S, there are several
parts that has led to further curiosity but without the scope and too time consuming for
this investigation. Following list includes possible future investigations in relation to
the bioreactor:
• Inﬂuence of other non-drag forces: In this thesis the forces included in the
multiphase system has been limited to the drag force, turbulent dispersion force
and turbulence transfer. The lift force, virtual mass force and wall lubrication
force would be interesting to include separately and evaluate if they are negligible
as assumed in this study.
• Drag force correction exponent: This study has based all simulations on a vol-
ume fraction correction exponent for Grace Drag Model of 2. Since it is rec-
ommend using a value in range in the range 2-4, it could be an opportunity for
ﬁne-tuning the model to reach gas hold-ups according to experimental determined
values.
• Further investigations using Fluent: In the thesis, the use of Fluent has been
limited to multiphase system with constant bubble size. As the MUSIG setting in
CFX, Fluent provides a population balance model setting that allows varying bub-
ble size and thus includes both bubble breakage and coalescence. In addition, the
oxygen transfer and uptake analysis can be performed in Fluent for comparison
by using UDF (User Deﬁned Functions) programming.
• Investigation of performance improvement in Fluent: Multiphase simulation
in Fluent appeared to be much more time consuming than similar simulation per-
formed in CFX. However, Fluent offers a large variety of solver settings and it
can be a way to performance improve by investigating these settings and how
they inﬂuence the result and computational time.
• Impeller design and process parameters: All analyses in this thesis has been
based on three Rushton turbines with a rotational speed of 130 rpm. In addition,
a gas ﬂow of 45 Nm3/min has been used for all two-phase simulations. The
use of alternative impeller designs for one or more of the impellers would be
89
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 7. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
worth investigating for improvements of mixing. In addition, other gas ﬂow and
rotational speed parameters can be investigated to improve the process. Such
simulations could provide potentials to optimise the industrial bioreactor.
90
==PAGE:108==
Bibliography
Acharya, R. (2016). Investigation of Differences in Ansys Solvers CFX and Fluent.
(June), 1–48.
Alves, L. A., Almeida E Silva, J. B., & Giulietti, M. (2007). Solubility of D-glucose in
water and ethanol/water mixtures. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data,
52(6), 2166–2170. https://doi.org/10.1021/je700177n
ANSYS Academic Research. (2020a). CFX 2020R1 - CFX Solver Theory Guide.
ANSYS Academic Research. (2020b). CFX 2020R1 - CFX Tutorial: Chapter 17: Mul-
tiphase Flow in a Mixing Vessel.
ANSYS Academic Research. (2020c). FLUENT 2020R1 - FLUENT Theory Guide.
Armenante, P. M., & Chou, C.-c. (1996). Velocity Proﬁles in a Bafﬂed Vessel with
Single or Double Pitched-Blade Turbines. 42(1).
Atiemo-Obeng, V. A., & Kresta, S. M. (2004). Handbook of industrial mixing : Science
and practice (E. L. Paul, Ed.). Wiley-Interscience.
Bach, C., Yang, J., Larsson, H., Stocks, S. M., Gernaey, K. V., Albaek, M. O., & Krühne,
U. (2017). Evaluation of mixing and mass transfer in a stirred pilot scale biore-
actor utilizing CFD. Chemical Engineering Science, 171, 19–26. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ces.2017.05.001
Bartók, Z. (2020). Numerical ﬂuid dynamic investigation of a production bioreactor.
Brodkey, R. (1967). The phenomena of ﬂuid motions. Addison-Wesley,
Burns, A. D., Frank, T., Hamill, I., & Shi, J.-m. (2014). The favre averaged drag model
for turbulent dispersion in eulerian multi-phase ﬂows. https://doi.org/10.1.1.
453.2254
Chanson, H. (2004). Introduction to mixing and dispersion in natural waterways. Envi-
ronmental Hydraulics for Open Channel Flows, 37–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/
b978-075066165-2/50035-7
Clift, R., Grace, J., & Weber, M. (1979). Bubbles, drops and particles. International
Journal of Multiphase Flow, 5(5). https://doi.org/10.1016/0301- 9322(79)
90021-1
Doran, P. M. (2013). Chapter 8 - mixing. In P. M. Doran (Ed.), Bioprocess engineer-
ing principles (second edition) (Second Edition, pp. 255–332). Academic Press.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-220851-5.00008-3
Elqotbi, M., Vlaev, S. D., Montastruc, L., & Nikov, I. (2013). CFD modelling of two-
phase stirred bioreaction systems by segregated solution of the Euler-Euler model.
91
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Computers and Chemical Engineering, 48, 113–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compchemeng.2012.08.005
Engineering Toolbox. (2005). Oxygen - Solubility in Fresh Water and Seawater. Re-
trieved, from https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/oxygen-solubility-water-
d%7B%5C_%7D841.html
Feng, X., Cheng, J., Li, X., Yang, C., & Mao, Z.-s. (2012). Numerical simulation of
turbulent ﬂow in a bafﬂed stirred tank with an explicit algebraic stress model.
Chemical Engineering Science, 69(1), 30–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.
2011.09.055
Fletcher, D. F., McClure, D. D., Kavanagh, J. M., & Barton, G. W. (2017). CFD simu-
lation of industrial bubble columns: Numerical challenges and model validation
successes. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 44, 25–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apm.2016.08.033
Gimbun, J., Rielly, C. D., & Nagy, Z. K. (2009). Modelling of mass transfer in gas-
liquid stirred tanks agitated by Rushton turbine and CD-6 impeller: A scale-
up study. Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 87(4), 437–451. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2008.12.017
Higbie, R. (1935). The rate of absorption of a pure gas into a still liquid during short
periods of exposure. Transactions of the American Institute of Chemical Engi-
neers, 31, 365–389.
Hinze, J. O. (1975). Turbulence [New York]. McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.
Jaworski, Z., & Zakrzewska, B. (2002). Modelling of the turbulent wall jet generated by
a pitched blade turbine impeller. 80(November).
Kawase, Y., Halard, B., & Moo-young, M. (1992). Liquid-phase mass-transfer coef-
ﬁcients in bioreactors. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 39(11), 1133–1140.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.260391109
Khopkar, A. R., Kasat, G. R., Pandit, A. B., & Ranade, V. V. (2006). CFD simulation of
mixing in tall gas – liquid stirred vessel : Role of local ﬂow patterns. 61, 2921–
2929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2005.09.023
Kresta, S. M., Etchells, A. W., Dickey, D. S., & Atiemo-Obeng, V. A. (2016). Advances
in industrial mixing : A companion to the handbook of industrial mixing. Wiley.
Lamont, J. C., & Scott, D. S. (1970). An eddy cell model of mass transfer into the
surface of a turbulent liquid. AIChE Journal, 16(4), 513–519. https://doi.org/10.
1002/aic.690160403
Larsson, H. K. (2015). Modelling of Mass Transfer Phenomena in Chemical and Bio-
chemical Reactor Systems using Computational Fluid Dynamics, 227.
Lo, S., Bagatin, R., & Masi, M. (2000). The development of a CFD analysis and design
tool for air-lift reactors. Proceedings of the SAIChE, 2000 Conference.
Luo, H., & Svendsen, H. F. (1996). Theoretical model for drop and bubble breakup in
turbulent dispersions. Aiche Journal, 42(5), 1225–1233. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aic.690420505
Méndez, C. G., Nigro, N., & Cardona, A. (2005). Drag and non-drag force inﬂuences in
numerical simulations of metallurgical ladles. Journal of Materials Processing
92
==PAGE:110==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Technology, 160(3), 296–305. https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
jmatprotec.2004.06.018
Menter, F. R. (1994). Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering
applications. AIAA Journal, 32(8), 1598–1605. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.12149
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). (2018). NIST Chemistry Web-
Book, SRD 69. Retrieved, from https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=
C7782447&Mask=10#Solubility
Prince, M., & Blamch, H. (1990). Bubble coalescence and break-up in air-sparged
bubble-columns. Aiche Journal, 36(10), 1485–1499. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aic.690361004
Ranade, V. V., Bourne, J. R., & Joshi, J. B. (1991). Fluid-mechanics and blending in
agitated tanks. Chemical Engineering Science, 46(8), 1883–1893. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0009-2509(91)80150-W
Sato, Y., & Sekoguchi, K. (1975). Liquid velocity distribution in two-phase bubble ﬂow.
International Journal of Multiphase Flow, 2(1), 79–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0301-9322(75)90030-0
Shiller, L., & Naumann, A. (1935). A drag coefﬁcient correlation. Zeitschrift des Vereins
Deutscher Ingenieure, (77), 318–320.
Singh, H., Fletcher, D. F., & Nijdam, J. J. (2011). An assessment of different turbu-
lence models for predicting ﬂow in a bafﬂed tank stirred with a Rushton turbine.
Chemical Engineering Science, 66(23), 5976–5988. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2011.08.018
Venneker, B. C., Derksen, J. J., & Van den Akker, H. E. (2002). Population balance
modeling of aerated stirred vessels based on CFD. AIChE Journal, 48(4), 673–
685. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690480404
Villadsen, J. (2011). Bioreaction engineering principles, bioreaction engineering prin-
ciples. Springer US.
Xu, Y., Luo, L., & Yuan, J. (2011). CFD simulations to portray the bubble distribution
and the hydrodynamics in an annulus sparged air-lift bioreactor. The Canadian
Journal of Chemical Engineering, 89(April), 360–368. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cjce.20405
93
==PAGE:111==
Appendix A
Mesh study
Table A.1: CFX simulation settings for rotor mesh study
Setting
Value
Analysis type
Steady State
Rotor domain
Material: Water
Domain Motion: Rotating
Buoyancy Model: Non Buoyant
Angular velocity: 130 rev min-1
Rotation axis: Global Z
Turbulence Option: k-Epsilon
Heat Transfer: None
Boundary condition(s)
Rotor top: Opening
Rotor side: Free Slip Wall
Rotor bottom: Opening
Impeller surface: No Slip Wall
Shaft: No Slip Wall
Interface(s)
Side 1: Interface type: Fluid-Fluid
Model: Rotational periodicity
Rotation axis: Z axis
Regions: Sym1 - Sym2
Rotational Periodicity around the Z-axis
Solver Control
Advection Scheme: High Resolution
Turbulence Numerics: First Order
Timescale Control: Auto Timescale
Auto Timescale Factor: 1.0
Redidual Type: RMS
Residual Target: 1E-4
94
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX A. MESH STUDY
Figure A.1: Location of lines for mesh evaluation
Table A.2: CFX simulation settings for stator mesh study
Setting
Value
Analysis type
Transient
Total Time: 150 s
Timesteps: 0.05 s
Stator domain
Material: Water
Domain Motion: Stationary
Buoyancy Model: Non Buoyant
Turbulence Option: k-Epsilon
Heat Transfer: None
Stator Boundary Condition(s)
Liquid Surface: Free Slip Wall
Tank Wall: No Slip Wall
Bottom: No Slip Wall
Bafﬂes: No Slip Wall
Cooling Coils: No Slip Wall
Shaft: No Slip Wall
(Rotating wall around Z-axis with 130 rev min-1)
Rotor domain
Material: Water
Domain Motion: Rotating
Buoyancy Model: Non Buoyant
Angular velocity: 130 rev min-1
95
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX A. MESH STUDY
Rotation axis: Global Z
Turbulence Option: k-Epsilon
Heat Transfer: None
Rotor Boundary condition(s)
Rotor shaft: No Slip Wall
Impeller surface: No Slip Wall
Interfaces 1
Interface type: Fluid-Fluid
Model: Rotational periodicity
Rotation axis: Z axis
Regions: Sym1 - Sym2
Interfaces 2
Interface type: Fluid-Fluid
Model: General Connection
Frame change: Frozen Rotor
Regions: Rotor top, Rotor side, Rotor bottom
Solver Control
Advection Scheme: High Resolution
Turbulence Numerics: First Order
Timescale Control: Auto Timescale
Auto Timescale Factor: 1.0
Redidual Type: RMS
Residual Target: 1E-4
Additional Variables
Name: Tracer
Variable type: Speciﬁc
Units: kg m-3
All Domains
Fluid models
Additional Variable: Tracer
Option: Transport Equation
Kinematic viscosity: 5e-9 m2 s-1
Initialization
Additional Variable: Tracer
Option: Automatic with value
Value: TracerInitial
Expressions
Name: TracerInitial
Deﬁnition: step(z/1[m]-0.716)
*(step(0.816-z/1[m])*1000[kg]/(1[m])ˆ 3
96
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX A. MESH STUDY
(a) Coarse
(b) Extra ﬁne
Figure A.2: Initial conditions for the tracer concentration for the coarse and extra ﬁne
mesh
(a) Medium
(b) Fine
Figure A.3: Development of the tracer concentration at the 7 monitor points over time
for the medium and ﬁne mesh
Monitor Point
x (m)
y (m)
z (m)
MP 1
1
0.3
6.05
MP 2
1
0.3
5
MP 3
1
0.3
4
MP 4
1
0.3
3
MP 5
1
0.3
2.05
MP 6
1
0.3
1.1
MP 7
1
0.3
0.46
Table A.3: Coordinates of the 7 monitor points with origo at center bioreactor bottom
97
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX A. MESH STUDY
(a) External
(b) Internal
(c) Rotor focus
Figure A.4: Visualisation of mesh from external and internal view including rotor focus
98
==PAGE:116==
Appendix B
One-phase simulations
(a) Frozen Rotor
(b) Moving Rotor
Figure B.1: Velocity vectors for frozen rotor and moving rotor setup combined with
SST turbulence model.
99
==PAGE:117==
Appendix C
Two-phase simulations
(a) External
(b) Internal
(c) Rotor focus
Figure C.1: Visualisation of mesh from external and internal view including rotor focus
100
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
C.1
Time step 0.05 s analysis and ﬂooding
Based on the steady state iterations for the two-phase simulations (Figure 6.3), a tran-
sient analysis using a time step of 0.05 s has been performed. 100 seconds of transient
simulation with 0.05 s time step has been performed to steady the gas hold-up for the
moving rotor setting. The development of the gas hold-up over time can be found in
Figure C.2.
Figure C.2: Transient simulation to steady gas hold-up with moving rotor.
It is clear, that it affects the gas hold-up when going from a frozen rotor setting to a
moving rotor setting. A completely steady gas hold-up is not achieved, but ﬂuctuations
are also expected. The resulting gas hold-ups are found sufﬁcient to use as initial condi-
tion for the mixing time analysis. The following mixing time analysis is then performed
for 40 seconds simulated time, where the 1 mm bubble diameter case is the only case,
which does not reach either 90% or 95% homogeneity. Linear regression was then used
to approximate the mixing time for this case as it was seen for the mesh study analysis.
The mixing times can be found in Table C.1.
Table C.1: Fluent simulated mixing times for different bubble size and mean gas hold-
up over mixing time for two-phase modelling and 0.05 s time step, SST model and
moving rotor. *Determined from linear regression
Mean bubble diameter
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
Gas hold-up (%)
(mm)
(90%)
(95%)
1.0
112*
143.5*
24.2
3.0
23.5
31
5.7
5.0
22.5
25
6.4
11.0
25.5
28
7.9
Very similar mixing times are determined for the 3, 5 and 11 mm bubble diameter. In
101
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
addition, it is very clear that the addition of an extra phase (air) in the bioreactor leads
to remarkably lower mixing time. The reason for this is the density difference between
the phases and the buoyancy effects of this. When air is constantly moving upwards
in the bioreactor, the water phase must move downwards as part of the momentum and
mass balance for the ﬁnite elements. Vertical movements improve the mixing because
it dissolves and breaks up the circulation loops/compartments present in the one-phase
simulation as clariﬁed in Figure 4.8. This means that the water phase will have a better
vertical movement in the bioreactor, which was a limitation for the one-phase simula-
tions. The ﬂow patterns for the two-phase system is visualised with vector plots of the
velocity for the 5 mm and 1 mm case (Figure C.3).
(a) 5 mm
(b) 1 mm
Figure C.3: Velocity vectors in liquid phase for 5 mm case and 1 mm case in Fluent for
0.05 s time step, SST model and moving rotor.
For the 5 mm case, there is a signiﬁcantly improved vertical ﬂow that is not separated in
compartments as seen for the one-phase simulations. The vertical ﬂow is also improved
for the 1 mm case in comparison to the one-phase simulation, but not with the same
efﬁciency (Figure C.3). The reason for this is, that the 1 mm bubbles do not have the
same upwards velocity as a consequence of drag force, which also is the reason for
only a minor decrease in mixing in comparison to the one-phase simulation. However,
the lower upwards velocity also means that a larger gas hold-up is present for the 1
mm case. The gas hold-up during the 40 seconds mixing study is in a pseudo-steady
state with minor deviations over time that has been found sufﬁcient. The gas hold-up
development during the mixing time study can be found in Figure C.4.
102
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
Figure C.4: Gas hold-up during mixing time study
The gas hold-up for the different cases is found not completely steady but with small
ﬂuctuations over time (Figure C.4). However, these ﬂuctuations are found sufﬁcient
to approve the pseudo-steady state condition. Even more steady gas hold-up would
require longer simulation time for the previous initialisation simulation for the moving
rotor. This has not been found necessary since it would only have a marginal inﬂuence
on the mixing time study and would be very time consuming.
A signiﬁcantly different gas hold-up has been reached for the 1 mm bubbles in com-
parison to the other cases. This also means, that the 1 mm bubbles are better dispersed
in the liquid phase than the other bubble sizes. This is also seen in Figure C.5, which
shows the air volume fraction in the bioreactor.
103
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
(a) 1 mm
(b) 3 mm
(c) 5 mm
(d) 11 mm
Figure C.5: Air volume fraction for cases of different constant bubble diameter with
0.05 s time step, SST model and moving rotor performed in Fluent.
A much better dispersion of air can be seen for the 1 mm case (Figure C.5), where the 3,
5 and 11 mm bubbles are tending to move more along the shaft, which is not a preferred
situation when it comes to the oxygen transfer into the liquid phase.
Based on the correlations from Doran, 2013, presented in Section 2.6 in combina-
tion with the operating condition of the bioreactor, a Froude number of Fr = 0.62 is
achieved. From this Froude number and the other parameter, the transition points is
determined as Flg,1 = 0.48 and Flg,2 = 0.09. This means that the bioreactor will be
in a ﬂooding condition if the actual ﬂow number is above 0.48, in a impeller loading
condition if the ﬂow number is between 0.09 and 0.48 and in a complete gas disper-
sion condition if the ﬂow number is below 0.09. From Eq. (2.20), the actual ﬂow
104
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
number is determined as 0.16 with the volumetric gas ﬂow at normal conditions. This
means that the bioreactor should be at impeller loading condition based on the corre-
lations. However, these correlations are based on a single-impeller mixing tank. Only
the loading-complete dispersion correlation is affected by the impeller clearance, which
is 1/4 of the liquid height for the correlation. For the bioreactor, this clearance to the
lower impeller is approximately 15% of the liquid height. However, if the correlations
used are still found valid to approximate the gassing condition for the bioreactor, a nu-
merical error must be present for the simulation. As determined previously, there are
correlations between gas hold-up, drag force, and vertical velocity. The bubbles with
larger drag force will have a lower vertical velocity. This is related to the Courant num-
ber, which relates the ﬂuid velocity, the time step used for the numerical simulation and
the distance between two mesh nodes. The Courant number can be determined for all
dimensions, but in this case, it is mainly interesting to look at the vertical Z direction.
The Courant number, Cou in one dimension (Z) can be determined as
Cou = Uz∆t
∆z
(C.1)
Where
Uz is the velocity in the z direction,
∆t is the time step size and
∆z is the step length, which corresponds to the distance between two nodes in the mesh.
When neglecting the curved bottom of the bioreactor, the mesh consists of 169 elements
in the vertical direction. This part has a total length of 6280 mm. For the time step of
0.05 s, a contour plot of the air velocity in the z direction is shown in Figure C.6. This
shows a varying velocity of the air depending on the location in the bioreactor. In the
zone close to the shaft between the lower and upper impeller a velocity of approximately
3 m/s is observed. When considering this information, the Courant number in this zone
can be approximated as Cou = 4.04. Ideally, the Courant number should be 1, which
means that the ﬂuid moves from one node to the next node in exactly the time step size.
A larger Courant number means that the ﬂuid moves further than one node in a time
step, which can lead to error in the numerical result.
105
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
Figure C.6: Upwards velocity of air in z direction for 5 mm bubble diameter for 0.05 s
time step, SST model and moving rotor in Fluent.
One way to overcome this error is by changing the time step size. This analysis will be
performed in following section.
C.2
Time step analysis for two-phase simulations
To reach a Courant number of approximately 1, it would be reasonable to divide the time
step with the previously determined Courant number of approximately 4.04. However,
the decreasing time step will also inﬂuence the velocity and ﬂow. Thus, a time step
analysis will be performed, where simulations using time steps of 0.01 s and 0.025 s
will be performed for comparison. This will be performed only for the 5 mm bubble
diameter. The resulting mixing times and gas hold-up can be found in Table C.2.
Table C.2: Fluent simulated mixing times and mean gas hold-up over mixing time for
5 mm bubble diameter with varying time step, SST model and moving rotor in Fluent.
*Determined from linear regression.
Time step (s)
Mixing Time (s)
Mixing Time (s)
Gas hold-up (%)
(90%)
(95%)
0.01
61*
80.5*
13.6
0.025
25.25
27.75
10.4
0.05
22.5
25
6.4
As indicated, the lower time step leads to a larger gas hold-up and an increasing mixing
time. The relation between gas hold-up and mixing time was expected since it follows
the tendency, which also was found for the different bubble sizes. The larger mixing
time indicate that the air has a decreasing upwards ﬂow when the time step is decreased.
106
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
This decreasing upwards ﬂow must be caused by the Rushton turbines, which induce a
horizontal ﬂow for both the water and air phase. All three time step cases are based on
the same pseudo steady state solution. When changing to the moving rotor and thus a
transient simulation, the different cases need different simulation time to reach a pseudo
steady gas hold-up. A development of the gas hold-up for all three cases over time after
the pseudo steady state simulation with frozen rotor can be found in Figure C.7.
Figure C.7: Development of gas hold-up over time after initial steady state iterations for
5 mm bubble diameter with different time step, SST model and moving rotor.
Based on the time step size, the gas hold-up steadies at different level, and it also re-
quires different transient simulation time to reach the steady gas hold-up. It can also be
seen that the decreasing time steps lead to a steady gas hold-up, which is more similar
to the result of the steady state frozen rotor simulation. As previously seen in for the
one-phase simulation, there is a signiﬁcant difference in the velocity ﬁelds for frozen
rotor and moving rotor. Since the velocity ﬁeld and ﬂow patterns are crucial for the gas
hold-up, a change of the gas hold-up is expected when going from a frozen rotor to a
moving rotor setup. Since the moving rotor leads to a more even velocity proﬁle and
thus a more even radial velocity, a larger gas hold-up would also be expected for this
setup. Oppositely, the frozen rotor leads to a branched velocity proﬁle at the horizontal
plane, which means that the lower velocity between the "branches" will spread the air
bubbles less and thus decrease the gas hold up, since the bubbles then tend to move
more upwards when not affected by the impeller blade force.
With the use of different time steps, the vertical velocity of the gas changes remarkably.
This is also described when analysing the Courant number in the z-direction. The ver-
tical velocity of the air phase for the 0.025 s and 0.01 s time step simulations can be
found in Figure C.8.
107
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
(a) 0.01 s
(b) 0.025 s
(c) 0.05 s (reprinted)
Figure C.8: Velocity of air in z direction for time steps of 0.01 s, 0.025 s and 0.05 s for
5 mm bubble diameter.
It is clear that the time step of the numerical analysis is a very critical parameter (Fig-
ure C.8). The changes in air velocity when going from a time step of 0.05 s to 0.025 is
minor in comparison to the changes for a time step of 0.01 s. The velocity proﬁle in the
z-direction is generally very similar in the area below the middle impeller. However,
major difference can be found in the region above the middle impeller, which especially
gets clear when going to a 0.01 s time step. Below the middle impeller, an area above
the lower impeller with approximately no upwards moving ﬂow can be seen for all three
time step cases. The ﬂow is instead intense at the impeller tip and moves slightly in the
radial direction and upwards from the impeller tip. A similar ﬂow pattern is present
for the middle impeller for both the 0.05 s and 0.025 s time step cases. When having
a time step of 0.01 s, the middle impeller is performing a better dispersion of the air,
108
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
which is clariﬁed by the larger area of approximately 0 velocity. This also gets justiﬁed
when looking at the volume fraction of air in the bioreactor for the different time steps
(Figure C.9).
(a) 0.01 s
(b) 0.025 s
(c) 0.05 s (reprinted)
Figure C.9: Air volume fraction in bioreactor for 5 mm bubble diameter case with time
steps of 0.01 s and 0.025 s and 0.05 s, SST model and moving rotor.
A better dispersion of air is achieved when decreasing the time step to 0.01 s (Fig-
ure C.9). This also relates to the increasing gas hold-up. It is seen that even for the
lowest analysed time step, a ﬂooding looking condition is observed above the lower im-
peller. This means that the air dispersion is less effective than preferred. In addition,
when looking at the upwards going velocity above the upper impeller, this is in general
lower than for other regions of the bioreactor. The dispersion of air is also better in this
region and can be assumed as well dispersed for all time step cases (Figure C.9).
109
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
(a) 1 mm
(b) 3 mm
Figure C.10: Air volume fraction for 1 mm and 3 mm case simulated in CFX with SST
model and moving rotor.
(a) 3 mm
(b) 11 mm
Figure C.11: Upwards velocity of liquid for Fluent and CFX depending on radial posi-
tion at tank height 3.5 m for bubble sizes of 3 mm and 11 mm
110
==PAGE:128==
APPENDIX C. TWO-PHASE SIMULATIONS
(a) Size group 1
(b) Size group 2
(c) Size group 3
(d) Size group 4
(e) Size group 5
(f) Size group 6
Figure C.12: Size group fraction from a vertical cross-section of the bioreactor for all 6
size groups in MUSIG analysis with SST model and moving rotor.
111
==PAGE:129==
Appendix D
Oxygen uptake and gradient in a
cultivation
D.1
CFX simulations with constant bubble diameter
The analyses of constant bubble diameters include both analysis of constant mass trans-
fer coefﬁcients based on the experimentally determined average oxygen transfer and
from Higbie’s penetration theory.
An overview of the surface area per volume, a, the mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL, for the
different bubble diameters at constant oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa, can be found in
Table D.1. These values are determined based on Eq. (7.1), oxygen transfer coefﬁcient
of 290 h−1 and gas hold-up for the complete bioreactor determined in Chapter 6 for
CFX.
Table D.1: Phase interface area per volume and mass transfer coefﬁcient for different
bubble sizes based on an oxygen transfer coefﬁcient of 290 h-1 and previous determined
gas hold-ups for corresponding bubble sizes.
Mean bubble diameter
Interface area per volume, a
Mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL
(mm)
(m-1)
(m/s)
1.0
1632
4.94E-05
3.0
304
2.655E-04
5.0
172.8
3.662E-04
11.0
80.7
9.98E-04
Based on the constant mass transfer coefﬁcients for the different bubble sizes, the dis-
solved oxygen as a percentage of the equilibrium concentration at a given point in the
bioreactor has been determined at a pseudo-steady. This dissolved oxygen concentra-
tion is as previously explained affected both by the oxygen transfer from gas to liquid
phase as well as the constant oxygen uptake by the biomass. Figure D.1 shows the
112
==PAGE:130==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen as a percentage in the bioreactor for
the analysis of different ﬁxed bubble diameters.
(a) 1 mm
(b) 3 mm
(c) 5 mm
(d) 11 mm
Figure D.1: Pseudo-steady concentration (%) of dissolved oxygen in bioreactor for dif-
ferent bubble sizes using constant mass transfer coefﬁcients given in Table D.1
Large areas of the bioreactor is found to have a concentration of dissolved oxygen very
close to 0%. This is the case for all the ﬁxed bubble sizes analysed (Figure D.1). The
reason for this is an uptake rate that is faster than the oxygen transfer rate from gas to liq-
uid phase in these regions of the bioreactor. Especially, the 3 mm and 5 mm cases show
similar pseudo-steady proﬁles of dissolved oxygen in the bioreactor, with difference in
113
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
concentration close to the shaft, where the 5 mm case shows a larger concentration. In
the cases of 5 and 11 mm bubble diameter, it is mainly close to the shaft, where dis-
solved oxygen is monitored. The reason for this is actually that ﬂooding is observed.
This leads to a larger volume fraction of air in this region. Because of the larger air
volume fraction locally, the interfacial area per volume, a, increases, and with a ﬁxed
mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL, the overall oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa, increases in
this region leading to larger oxygen transfer which thus increases the concentration of
dissolved oxygen. What is the most important result of the ﬁxed bubble size cases pre-
sented is the lack of dissolved oxygen in large areas of the bioreactor. When focusing on
the 1 mm case, the air is dispersed better because of the smaller bubbles as seen in the
two-phase simulations. In addition, the interfacial area per volume is larger for a small
bubble, but this is accounted for because of the lower mass transfer coefﬁcient. Never-
theless, since the drag is signiﬁcantly larger for the 1 mm bubbles, the transport time for
the air/oxygen is larger to a certain point, and this means the uptake is too fast for the
transport of oxygen. This is the reason why dissolved oxygen is mainly observed in the
region close to the sparger and above the middle impeller because of the non-expected
ﬂooding at the middle impeller as previously observed.
Since the biomass consumes the oxygen immediately after oxygen has been transferred
from gas to liquid phase, the biomass does not have access to oxygen at all times. Thus,
fermentative instead of respiratory metabolism can occur. This is not wanted because it
decreases the yield due to energy inefﬁcient metabolism. It can lead to production of an
unwanted by-product because of the lack of access to oxygen. This makes it difﬁcult to
believe, that the results obtained agree with reality.
Some of the factors that might lead to the problem can be:
• Constant bubble size
• Underpredicted mass transfer coefﬁcient
• Overpredicted oxygen uptake
By ﬁrst looking at the mass transfer coefﬁcient, this has been determined from an overall
oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa, of 290 h-1, which has been determined experimentally
as an average over the whole bioreactor by the industrial partner. This oxygen transfer
coefﬁcient has been translated to the mass transfer coefﬁcient based on average gas
hold-up and bubble size. Since the air volume fraction differs in different regions of the
bioreactor, the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is not determined as 290 h-1 at all points of
the bioreactor. This is because the air volume fraction affects the interfacial area per
volume between the gas and liquid phase. The actual determined oxygen transfer for
the cases of different bubble size at a pseudo-steady state can be found in Figure D.2.
114
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) 1 mm, average kLa = 270.9 h−1
(b) 3 mm, average kLa = 218.2 h−1
(c) 5 mm, average kLa = 256.6 h−1
(d) 11 mm, average kLa = 196.4 h−1
Figure D.2: Pseudo-steady kLa based on constant mass transfer coefﬁcient (from Ta-
ble D.1 with determined average over whole bioreactor for different bubble sizes.
The oxygen transfer coefﬁcient differs signiﬁcantly depending on position in the biore-
actor (Figure D.2). This is especially the case for the 3, 5 and 11 mm bubble diameter
cases. Since all cases have a constant but different mass transfer coefﬁcient, the devi-
ation in oxygen transfer coefﬁcient must be caused by the interfacial area per volume
between the phases. It is clear that all the cases have a constant bubble diameter at all
position of the bioreactor, and this means that the different in interfacial area is affected
by the local volume fraction of air. The 1 mm case, which previously has been found
115
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
to be the bubble size that is better dispersed in the bioreactor, also shows the smaller
deviations in oxygen transfer coefﬁcient over the whole bioreactor. This is because
the deviations in air volume fraction depending on position is less inﬂuential. Oppo-
sitely, the 3, 5 and 11 mm cases show a larger oxygen transfer coefﬁcient closer to the
shaft, which because of the larger air volume fraction of air. Generally for all cases,
the determined average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is found lower than the experimen-
tally determined average, which the analysis was based on. The reason for this is a
marginally lower gas hold-up because of oxygen now is transferred to the liquid phase,
leading to a lower pseudo-steady gas hold-up. As for the two-phase simulations, a clear
problem is observed for the 3, 5 and 11 mm cases, which is the problem to disperse the
gas. This might be caused by the simpliﬁcation of ﬁxed bubble size, meaning that the
force applied by the impeller does not lead to bubble breakage in thus better dispersion
because of smaller bubble size.
An alternative to the constant mass transfer coefﬁcient is using a correlation-based one.
Here, the Higbie’s penetration theory has been presented (Eq. (2.26)) and this corre-
lation says that the mass transfer coefﬁcient is depending on ﬂuid parameters such as
viscosity, diffusivity and density but also the eddy dissipation, which will differ depend-
ing on position.
D.1.1
Correlation based mass transfer coefﬁcient
When using the Higbie’s penetration theory (Higbie, 1935), both the mass transfer co-
efﬁcient as well as the interfacial area per volume will depend on position in the biore-
actor. The use of the correlation lead to a signiﬁcantly larger concentration of dissolved
oxygen as shown in Figure D.3.
Figure D.3 shows a very diverse concentration of dissolved oxygen at pseudo-steady
state depending on the bubble size, when using the mass transfer coefﬁcient correlation.
For the 1 mm bubbles, concentrations of dissolved oxygen close to 100% at all points of
the bioreactor are observed. Then the overall concentration in the bioreactor decreases
when increasing the bubble size. For the 11 mm bubbles, large regions with no dissolved
oxygen at pseudo-steady state can be seen as for the analyses based on the experimen-
tally determined oxygen transfer coefﬁcient. Generally, when using the correlation, a
larger amount of dissolved oxygen is observed in comparison to previous analysis using
a constant approximated mass transfer coefﬁcient. The only explanation for this can
be that the correlation predicts a larger mass transfer coefﬁcient than the constant ones
determined in previous analysis. In addition, the concentration of dissolved oxygen de-
creases for increasing bubble sizes. This is as expected since the smaller bubble size
leads to a larger interfacial area per volume between gas and liquid phase. Thus, the
oxygen transfer increases.
116
==PAGE:134==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) 1 mm
(b) 3 mm
(c) 5 mm
(d) 11 mm
Figure D.3: Pseudo-steady concentration of dissolved oxygen (%) for different bubble
sizes using correlation based mass transfer coefﬁcients.
In Figure D.4, the oxygen transfer coefﬁcient for the four cases are shown at a vertical
cross-section of the bioreactor.
117
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) 1 mm, average kLa = 8222.7 h−1
(b) 3 mm, average kLa = 1335.4 h−1
(c) 5 mm, average kLa = 876.5 h−1
(d) 11 mm, average kLa = 332.4 h−1
Figure D.4: Pseudo-steady kLa from correlation based mass transfer coefﬁcient with
determined average over whole bioreactor for different bubble sizes (Logarithmic scale
used because of large deviations).
As for the concentration of dissolved oxygen, major differences in oxygen transfer co-
efﬁcients are also observed for the different bubble sizes (Figure D.4). Most notable
is the large oxygen transfer coefﬁcient for the small 1 mm bubbles. Here, a very large
oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is observed all over the bioreactor leading to an average
kLa = 8222.7 h−1. This range is not found realistic when considering both the exper-
imentally determined average of the bioreactor as well as values found in literature,
118
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
which does not exceed 900 h-1. A clear overprediction of the oxygen transfer can then
be concluded for the 1 mm case that means that the pseudo-steady concentration of dis-
solved oxygen also is overpredicted and not in accordance with real concentration. For
larger bubble sizes, the oxygen transfer decreases, but is still found in the upper range
of what is realistic based on literature. Here, the average oxygen transfer coefﬁcient is
determined as kLa = 876.5 h−1 for the 5 mm bubbles. This is still considered a very
high value for literature and notably larger than the experimental determined average
for the bioreactor.
Since the interfacial area per volume between the phases are very identical to values
from the analysis of the constant mass transfer coefﬁcient analysis, the reason for the
very large oxygen transfer must be caused by the correlation predicting a large mass
transfer coefﬁcient. This mass transfer coefﬁcient at different points in the bioreactor
for different bubble sizes can be found in Figure D.5.
(a) 1 mm
(b) 3 mm
(c) 5 mm
(d) 11 mm
Figure D.5: Pseudo-steady kL based on correlation for different bubble sizes.
119
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
What is most notable here is that the correlation generally leads to a mass transfer co-
efﬁcient above 1E-03 m/s at all points of the bioreactor. This a far above the constant
values determined based on kLa = 290 h−1 (Table D.1), and based on this, the correla-
tion can be concluded not to predict the mass transfer coefﬁcient well for the bioreactor
when using a simpliﬁed constant bubble size assumption.
For the complete bioreactor, the correlation leads to an average oxygen transfer coefﬁ-
cient in the range of kLa = 876.5−8822.2 h−1 for the cases of 1, 3 and 5 mm bubbles,
which are the more realistic diameter as average bubble size in the bioreactor. 11 mm
bubbles are realistic to be present in the bioreactor but not expected as a realistic av-
erage bubble size. The oxygen transfer coefﬁcients determined are signiﬁcantly larger
than any values from literature. Bach et al., 2017, combines own results of the oxy-
gen transfer coefﬁcient determined from experiments and simulation and values from
literature, and here no values above kLa = 900 h−1 are observed. Moreover, the average
determined for the bioreactor is determined to be approximately 3 to 30 times larger than
the given experimental value, and remarkably larger than the upper limit of what litera-
ture studies show. However, the kLa average of the 5 mm bubble size is approximately
at the upper limit of values from literature. Even though Bach et al., 2017, uses the
correlation for a pilot plant stirred tank with one impeller with success, the correlation
does not seem to be accurate for the industrial bioreactor with three impellers. Lamont
and Scott, 1970, which developed the Eddy Cell Model, which has a strong relation
to Higbie’s penetration model, is based on turbulent pipe ﬂow. Even with presence of
turbulence in a pipe, it is not expected that this turbulence lead to same magnitude of
eddy dissipation as a stirred tank will because of the impellers. This might be a reason,
why a stirred tank with three impeller overpredicts the mass transfer coefﬁcient when
using a model based on pipe ﬂow. Even though Bach et al., 2017, uses a stirring speed
of 400 rpm, the presence of only one impeller of another design does not lead to same
overprediction of mass transfer coefﬁcient as seen for this case. Though Kawase et al.,
1992, uses a proportionality constant for the correlation of 0.301, which then decreases
the value of the mass transfer coefﬁcient to approximately 1/3, it will still be an overpre-
dicted mass transfer coefﬁcient of approximately 10 in comparison to the given oxygen
transfer coefﬁcient of 290 h-1 for the 1 mm case. Oppositely, the 3 and 5 mm cases
will be within the limit found in literature, and the 5 mm case close to the experimental
determined average. This comes with the assumption that no change in eddy dissipation
at the different points will be observed, which is highly expected.
120
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) Oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa,
average kLa = 578.5 h−1
(b) Interfacial area per volume, a
Figure D.6: Pseudo-steady oxygen transfer coefﬁcient, kLa, for MUSIG and interfacial
area per volume, a, between gas and liquid phase at constant mass transfer coefﬁcient
of kL = 3.12·10−4 m/s.
121
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) O2 mass fraction in air phase
(b) Pressure
(c) Equilibrium concentration of O2 in liquid
phase
Figure D.7: O2 mass fraction in air phase, pressure and equilibrium concentration of O2
in liquid phase from simulation with constant kL = 1.566·10−4 m/s.
122
==PAGE:140==
APPENDIX D. OXYGEN UPTAKE AND GRADIENT IN A CULTIVATION
(a) Proportionality constant √π/2
(b) Proportionality constant 0.301
Figure D.8: Pseudo-steady mass transfer coefﬁcient, kL, for MUSIG using correlation
with different proportionality constants
123
==PAGE:141==
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. +45 45 25 28 22
www.kt.dtu.dk
Chr. Hansen A/S
Bøge Allé 10-12
Post Box 407
2970 Hørsholm
Tlf. +45 45 74 74 74
Fax +45 45 74 88 88
www.chr-hansen.com
