==PAGE:1==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
Master of Science Thesis
Civil Engineering
Christian Carlos Hansen - s190229
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
31 January 2021
==PAGE:2==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Abstract
The scope of this research is to provide overall guidelines for construction automation (CA). Multiple
factors in the conventional construction industry are pointing towards the implementation of automation.
Automation is only made possible by analyzing all involved processes in diﬀerent granularity levels. To
do so, Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN), the ISO 19650, and PMI standards are provided
as background material. An overall introduction to BPMN and Process Modelling Levels are presented,
due to it not being common construction domain knowledge. Only the process relevant topics of the
given standards and the challenges related to them are discussed.
The used methodology to reach
the desired goal is Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM), since this methodology is capable
of producing an artifact that addresses an identiﬁed unsolved problem, while explicitly showing the
processes of creation. On this basis, 3 iterations are performed with diﬀerent granular perspectives of
the process. The produced artifact provides compatible guidelines for CA in 7 granularity levels. The
compatibility between levels means that it is possible to comprehend the entire ﬂow of information by
simply analyzing one speciﬁc task at any level, e.g. the placing of a brick. Lastly, the artifact also
revealed which activities are most and least suited for CA in the current state-of-art.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
1
Introduction
3
1.1
The Need for Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
7
2.1
Process Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Business Process Modeling Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Modeling Levels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
ISO 19650 - Organization & Digitization of Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
ISO 19650-1 - Concepts & Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
ISO 19650-2 - Information Management Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Identiﬁed Gaps and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
PMI - PMBOK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
PMI - Process Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Identiﬁed Gaps and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methodology
21
4
Design and Development
23
4.1
Applying PMBOK into ISO 19650
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Applying Business Process Model Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Automated Construction Process Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Code Development Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Interconnection of Previous Iterations and Coarser Levels Models Development . . . . .
36
4.3.1
BPMN Models for Each Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.2
Development of Coarser Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Demonstration of Artefact
45
5.1
Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Evaluation
47
6.1
Q1: Adaptations on Current Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Q2: Construction Automation Candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Q3: Possibilities of Automation in the Construction Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Communication
49
1
==PAGE:4==
8
Conclusion and Future Work
50
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A Statistic of the Construction Industry
I
B Symbology used in BPMN
IV
C Expanded ISO Activities
VI
D ISO 19650 As-Is BPMN
XI
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The scope of this research is to provide overall guidelines for the implementation of construction
automation (CA). It is suggested to read the entirety of this research in the provided chapter sequence,
to comprehend all used terms and concepts.
Chapter 1 introduces the reader to the motivation for this research study. The status-quo of the
conventional construction industry is discussed and compared to the possibilities CA might bring. Lastly,
3 research questions are proposed based on the provided information.
1.1
The Need for Change
The technological development of the conventional construction industry has been stagnated since
the 1970s. Decreasing productivity, frequent cost and time overruns, and a large number of accidents are
some of the indicators that a change is needed, as shown in the Figures in Appendix A. These factors
are contradictory to the sustainable development practices the world is acquiring, where materials are
considered as scarce and the economic factor plays an utter important role [1] [2] [3] [4].
The implementation and development of new technology in most industries may be described as an
S-shaped curve, where the performance is in function of investment or time. Initially, the progress is
slow, but by reaching a threshold the performance level takes oﬀand grows extremely quick. At the
ﬁnal stage, on the other side of the curve, the progress is diminished again meaning that the technology
has matured and reached its ﬁnal development, allowing the rise of new technologies [5]. The status-quo
of the conventional construction industry is considered to have reached its last maturity stage, whereas
Construction Automation (CA) is in its initial stages. The technological S-Curve for both conventional
and CA is shown in Figure 1.1. As it may be seen in the Figure, the inclusion of automation is likely to
increase signiﬁcantly in the next upcoming years [6].
Automation may be considered as the practice of using technology, programs, robotics or processes
to obtain results with minimum human input [7]. CA could provide a series of improvements to the
unproductive and unsafe construction industry, since the focus of automation research is eﬃciency,
productivity, quality, and autonomous operability [8].
1.1.1
Motivation
1.1.1.1
Productivity & Predictivity
Human labour makes out a major part of the conventional construction force [3].
This type of
labouring is normally analysed in the following ways (KSAO) [9]:
• Knowledge: What do you know?
3
==PAGE:6==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 1.1:
Foster’s (1986) S-curves applied to construction.
BCM = building component manufactur-
ing, LSP=large-scale prefabrication; STCRs=single-task construction robots; ROD=robot-oriented design;
A/ROFs=automated robotic on-site factories; AD=automated deconstruction) [6]
• Skills: What can you do?
• Abilities: What are your capabilities to learn a task?
• Other Characteristics How would you do the task/job?
The level of KSAO is not constant, and is also in function of a set of personal and neurological
events such as stress and arousal, creating an inconsistent workﬂow and productivity. The allostatic
load describes the positive or negative eﬀects the stress has on the performance, as shown in Figure 1.2.
The increasing levels of stress aﬀect the performance positively until a certain threshold, where the
performance starts to decrease by further adding stress levels [10] [11]. The Yerkes-Dodson law makes
use of the same bell curve, though instead plotting the performance in function of arousal [12].
Automation and robotics have already proven in other industries the unlimited capacities and pre-
dictivity, achieved through technological advancements, e.g. 3D-printers, automated aircraft manufac-
turing, shipbuilding, and tunnel boring machines [13].
1.1.1.2
Safety
The construction industry has the highest rate of fatal accidents of all industries, accounting for
approximately 20%. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) deﬁnes the 4 main
causes (”fatal four”) as the following [14] [15]: Falls 33.5% , Struck by object 11.1%, Electrocutions
8.5%, and Caught in or in between an object 5.5%.
The value of human life can not be deﬁned clearly, as e.g. a tool or robot. According to United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) a human life can not be priced. Instead the economic
4
==PAGE:7==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 1.2: Performance in function of stress (allostatic load)
term ”value of statistical life” (VSL) may be used [16]. This value is calculated diﬀerently depending
on governmental agencies and geographical placements. The VSLs for diﬀerent agencies are shown in
Figure 1.3 [17]. It may be observed that no unanimity has been reached. Another estimation is the direct
cost to society. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, states that the cost to society of a fatal
accident is 991, 027$, while the National Safety Council estimates a value of 1.42 million dollars [18].
Independently, as already mentioned, the value of life is near to impossible to quantify. This topic has
recently been on the rise, due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the lock-down of industries, and created a
lot of criticism and controversies [19].
Automation could potentially decrease the number of fatal and non-fatal injuries, by decreasing the
number of craft men on construction sites. Image recognition and monitoring tools may also be used on
construction sites, in order to identify unsafe conditions and behaviors such as sudden soil/structural
deformations, and undesired interactions between humans and objects [20] [21].
Figure 1.3: VSL for diﬀerent countries and government agency [17]
5
==PAGE:8==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
1.2
Research Questions
Alongside new technology, follows new processes and standards [5]. The use of process standardiza-
tion has proven to decrease cost, and improve overall performance. Though, process standardization
is not straightforward in the construction industry. The conventional industry already faces challenges
regarding the compliance of process standardization. Despite the existence of standards for the majority
of the conventional construction processes, only a few are fully implemented and used. This means that
gaps between the proposed standards and processes in reality coexist [22].
These gaps should be diminished in order to maximize the potential of automation and make use
of the advantages the new technology may provide. On this basis, the following research questions are
deﬁned:
Each question is assigned a name (Q1, Q2, and Q3), which will be used in chapter 6
• Q1: What adaptations have to be done on current process models for CA?
• Q2: Are all activities of the construction process candidate for automation?
• Q3: Where are automation possibilities in the construction processes?
6
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Background
In the following sections of chapter 2, the background material is provided. Business Process Model-
ing Notation (BPMN) is introduced to analyze the proposed process models and standards used in the
construction industry, namely the ISO and PMBOK. An introduction to BPMN is initially presented
(section 2.1), due to it not being common domain knowledge. Only the relevant topics of the given stan-
dards and the challenges related to them are discussed (ISO in section 2.2 and PMBOK in section 2.3).
Each section is independent of the other, meaning that no speciﬁc reading sequence has to be followed.
It may be noticed that concepts deﬁned in the initial sections are used in the later ones, and thus it is
suggested (not mandatory) to read this chapter in the provided sequence.
2.1
Process Models
A process is considered as a series of steps and decisions made to achieve an objective. Process
modeling logically links those steps and decisions, creating an overview of current practices. Various
languages/notations have been developed to model processes [23].
The preferred notation used in the construction industry is the Information Delivery Manual (IDM).
It is a simpliﬁed format of the Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN). The IDM was developed
through an ISO standard, namely the ISO 29481-1:2010 “Building information modeling - Information
delivery manual - Part 1: Methodology and format” [24]. The purposes of this standard are to:
• Create a methodology to link construction and required information speciﬁcations
• Map and describe the information processes across the life cycle of construction works
The overall structure and representations are the same for IDM and BPMN, and the conversion
should occur smoothly.
The BPMN library contains additional elements and better availability of
modeling tools and information sources. Thus, the used notations for this research is BPMN.
2.1.1
Business Process Modeling Notation
Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) was developed by experienced process modelers from
the Object Management Group (OMG) [25], having the objective of creating a standardized notation
form, which is capable of addressing a number of issues that were not prior dealt with. The language is
easily understandable and has grown in acceptance amongst industries and communities [26].
The steps and elements used to create a process model are further discussed below. The visualization
of the upcoming BPMN notations marked in italic is shown in Appendix B. The used process modeling
software is Signavio [27].
7
==PAGE:10==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
2.1.1.1
Modeling in BPMN
One of the initial steps when modeling in BPMN is to identify the actors within each process. Each
actor is represented by a pool, where the boundary represents the limits of a company. Multiple pools
have to be deﬁned in the case of multiple companies co-existing within a process. If the activities per-
formed by an actor are unknown, then the pool may be represented by a collapsed pool. Each pool may
be divided into lanes, which represent the sections of a company, i.e. the line of business (LoB) and
project team belonging to the same company X have to be represented in individual lanes [26].
The activities (active action) in each pool have to be deﬁned. An activity may be considered as ei-
ther compound (can be broken down into further activities) or atomic (further breakdown not possible).
The compound activities are divided into collapsed- and expanded sub-processes. The atomic activities
are only deﬁned as tasks [28]. Both compound sub-processes represent the clustering of activities. The
collapsed sub-processes are marked with a +, and indicates hidden information and activities, whereas
the expanded ones, represented with a dashed border, visually illustrate everything within it [29].
The ﬂow and linking of BPMN elements are deﬁned as connections. The connections are typically
divided into sequence ﬂow or message ﬂow. Both make use of directional arrows indicating the ﬂow of
the process. The sequence ﬂow describes the ﬂow of a particular actor, meaning that it is contained in
the pool boundary (not the lane boundary). If a process or set of information extends through multiple
pools, the message ﬂow symbology is applied [29].
An event is considered to be a passive happening, meaning that no active action is performed, and
it has no duration. It can have a start, intermediate, or end state. As the name states, the start event
indicates when an event starts and has only 1 outgoing sequence ﬂow i.e. the initiation of a process. The
end event marks the completion of the process and has only 1 incoming sequence ﬂow. The intermediate
event is related to the passive happening which may occur during a process, e.g. receiving a message,
and has 1 incoming and outcoming sequence ﬂow.
All event types may also manipulate or be aﬀected by messages, though each in a diﬀerent way. The
start message event initiates by receiving a message. The end message event sends a message when
triggered. The intermediate message event is split into catching and throwing events. The intermediate
message catching event acts similarly to the start message event, meaning that it is initiated by receiving
a message. The intermediate message throwing event then acts similarly to the end message event, by
sending a message when triggered. These features become useful when information between pools is
exchanged [29].
An activity has only 1 incoming and outgoing sequence ﬂow, though splitting the ﬂow may become
relevant. BPMN has a speciﬁc way to split the sequence ﬂow through gateways. A gateway is used
when the ﬂow initially diverges, and then again when the ﬂow has converged back.
The most commonly used gateways are the exclusive (XOR), inclusive (OR) and parallel (AND).
The exclusive gateway indicates that only 1 of the possible out- or incoming sequence ﬂows are triggered.
The inclusive indicates that more than 1 sequence can be triggered, and the parallel indicates that all
the diverging/converging ﬂows are triggered [29].
Lastly, the artifacts are used to further describe any aspects of the process. The artifacts may, but
not mandatory, contain an arrow indicating the direction. The text annotation is a commonly used
artifact, which contains a further description of any element.
An example of a simple BPMN model is shown in Figure 2.1. The model contains a pool with 2
lanes. After triggering the start event (Start process), the ﬁrst task is executed (Task 1 containing the
text annotation), which is then followed by a gateway. The used diverging gateway type, in this case,
is the exclusive (XOR), i.e. only 1 of the outgoing sequences are triggered. Three options are available,
namely Task 2, Collapsed sub-process 1, or Task 3. In this example, the second lane (Lane 2) will only
be involved in the process if Task 3 is triggered. After the converging of the sequence ﬂow, the event is
8
==PAGE:11==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
ended (End process).
Figure 2.1: Example of a BPMN model
2.1.2
Modeling Levels
The granularity of a process is of extreme importance when modeling. The expressions of a more
coarse or ﬁne process relates to the level of abstraction. A coarse process is considered at an abstract
level, whereas a ﬁner process would contain more speciﬁc details. The diﬀerent abstraction levels are
also called the diﬀerent levels of process modeling, illustrated in Figure 2.2 as a pyramid [29] [30]. The
presented pyramid contains a total of 7 levels ranging from 0 −6. No standard deﬁnes an exact number
of levels, though a minimum of 3 levels is generally used. A level may be added according to the speciﬁc
case, and therefore it is not uncommon to see authors using diﬀerent numbers of levels [29] [30] [31].
The upper levels provide a coarse (abstract) perspective on the process, whereas the lower ones a more
implementational view.
The diﬀerence between the levels are as follows [29] [30]:
1. Level 0: Overall goal and the value chain are identiﬁed (”What” to produce).
No detailed
processes or activities are presented
2. Level 1: The deﬁnition of the domain for the given process
3. Level 2: The process models are presented at a very abstract level and are considered as landscape.
The idea is to show the main aspects of the given process. In many cases no speciﬁc or recog-
nized modeling notation is used, hence the responsible stakeholders or the diverging/converging
of sequence ﬂows are not explicitly deﬁned. The correct capturing of this level may be considered
as the most important one. It has to be able to show all activities understandably, and the main
diﬀerences between them, though still in an abstract manner
4. Level 3: A ﬁner granular model is developed but still maintains a very abstract view. Each
element here can be derived to further ﬁner process models. The models are still not necessarily
in a recognized modeling notation. The inclusion of additional information and the responsible
9
==PAGE:12==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 2.2: Diﬀerent levels of process modeling [30]
actors are the main diﬀerence between this level and the prior one. The models are considered as
process maps. The sequence ﬂow is still characterized by a simpliﬁed linear progressing behavior
5. Level 4: Details to the process models from Level 3 are added. The inclusion of process notations,
such as the prior discussed BPMN, has to be included here
6. Level 5: Inclusion of technical attributions. The process models at this stage have to explain
”How” to produce, rather than ”What” [31]. The exact steps used to generate the given data are
deﬁned
7. Level 6: Directly related to operational levels, where the remaining technical information and
approaches are deﬁned. All the deﬁned steps and information are executed here. The environ-
ment is changed from theoretical to execution and uses therefor a diﬀerent platform (production
environment) [30]
Levels 5 and 6 are often related to the development/creation of real data. Further analyses of these
levels are relevant when attempting to automate a process. The analyses may also clarify which activi-
ties are more suited for automation and which are not, e.g. during the process of delivering material to
a construction site. Some of the processes, like dispatching the orders, could be considered as suited for
automation, while driving the material to the given site is still not 100% suited (yet) [30].
Each time the process is passed to a new level, it may be prone to changes, since the focus of the
models related to the User role (shown on the previous Figure 2.2) [29]. This creates interdisciplinary
barriers, where the ﬁner granular levels have to interpret and adjust the models accordingly [30]. Thus,
the processes modeled in level 3 could be totally diﬀerent than the ones from level 5. Not only in the
level of detail and notations but also in the overall structure of the processes. Instead of the linear ﬂow
presented in a process map, some activities may occur in parallel to each other and even switch the
execution order on an operational level [29].
10
==PAGE:13==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
2.2
ISO 19650 - Organization & Digitization of Information
The ISO 19650 −1 [32] and −2 [33] from 2018, directs how information should be exchanged and
managed through the life-cycle of an asset. The ﬁrst part deals with the concepts and principles, while
the second part focuses on the processes of the delivery phase.
2.2.1
ISO 19650-1 - Concepts & Principles
The standard has been widely accepted by the industry, by the fact that it states that all produced
information has to be executed in function of the asset management perspective, i.e. the objectives of
the operational phase are identiﬁed in the initial stages of the project [34].
It divides the life cycle of an asset into two phases [32]:
• The delivery phase: Initiates at the pre-design and extends to the commissioning
• The operational phase: Initiates after the commissioning and ends after de-commissioning
The scope of the study is within the delivery phase, hence the documentation related to the op-
erational phase is not deeply discussed. The delivery phase of an asset may occur more than once,
depending on triggering events during operations. Therefore, the need of maintaining the Project In-
formation Model (PIM; Developed during delivery phase) & Asset Information Model (AIM; Developed
during operational phase) are of high importance. These models contain the data for the given phase,
proving eﬃcient when making key decisions.
Three main stakeholders (actors) are considered in the delivery phase, namely the appointing party
(AingP), lead appointed party(LAedP), and the appointed party (AedP). A hierarchy may be observed
among these stakeholders, though a speciﬁc role can not be permanently be attributed to any.
The appointing party is considered the highest in the hierarchy, which in many cases is the client or
project owner. This actor is responsible for delivering the frameworks and requirements for the project.
The appointing party also holds the initial & pre-existing data of the asset. The pre-existing data range
may widely vary, e.g. an old asset undergoing a major maintenance project could possess a large amount
of data in the form of PIM and AIM, whereas a new asset would have very limited data such as site
location and geographical conditions [32].
The lead appointed party (LAedP) is considered in the middle of the hierarchy, which in many cases
are the contractors. They are, alongside their sub-contractors, responsible for producing the informa-
tion. The sub-contractors ,in this case, are then considered as the appointed party (AedP). The amount
of LAedPs and AedPs may vary depending on the project deliverable, i.e. a contractor could have
N sub-contractors as well as none. The clustering of parties for a given deliverable is considered a de-
livery team, and for a speciﬁc task is task team. Figure 2.3 illustrates examples of project teams [32] [33].
Alternatively, a contractor or sub-contractor may also be considered the AingP. In the case where a
CEO or steering group (StG) of the LAedP wishes to implement the ISO within the company, the CEO
or StG itself becomes the AingP. The only important aspect is that the hierarchy order is maintained,
and every stakeholder knows when, how, which direction, and what the information ﬂow is [35].
Figure 2.4 shows this hierarchy. The appointed parties (marked as circles) are responsible for pro-
ducing most of the information. The lead appointed parties (marked as rectangles) then compile all the
received and produced information. The compiled information is further delivered to the appointing
parties, which may cause the triggering of a new key decision (marked as red diamond).
11
==PAGE:14==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 2.3: Project team composition and their relation [33]
2.2.2
ISO 19650-2 - Information Management Process
It is assumed that the deliverables of an asset are executed according to the prior mentioned con-
cepts from Figure 2.4 throughout the delivery phase. The deﬁned activities for the delivery phase of a
project are shown in Figure 2.5. The expanded sub-processes for each activity are shown in Appendix C.
According to the Figure, there are a total of 8 main activities in a project life-cycle. The activities
are clustered within expanded sub-processes, which are related to speciﬁc stages of the project life cycle
and are denominated by a letter (A-F). Therefore, all activities occur within Activities undertaken per
project (B). The Activities undertaken per appointment (C) contains 6 activities and states that every
appointment within the project has to undergo the activities 2−7. Three more expanded sub-processes
are noticed, namely Activities undertaken during the procurement stage (D), Activities undertaken dur-
ing the information planning stage (E), and Activities undertaken during the information production
stage (F). The 2 remaining activities 1 and 8 are only activated once during (B).
12
==PAGE:15==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 2.4: Information ﬂow among stakeholders [32]
All activities and their relevant sub-processes for this research are brieﬂy described below.
The
number in parenthesis is the equivalent activity number from Figure 2.5 and Appendix C.
2.2.2.1
1 - Assessment and need
The 1st. activity is the Assessment and need. The responsible actor is the AingP. The following, but
not limited to, frameworks and information are deﬁned as:
• Project information requirements (PIR) (1.2): The PIR deﬁnes what information is needed
to be produced and gathered throughout the delivery phase
• Standards (1.4): The used standards during the project life cycle
13
==PAGE:16==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 2.5: Information management process during the delivery phase of assets [33]
• The information production methods and procedures (1.5): The deﬁnition of the produc-
tion methods and procedures. It is directly related to the outcome of the PIR
• The common data environment (CDE) (1.8): The CDE is the environment responsible for
interconnecting all data
2.2.2.2
2 - Invitation to tender
The 2nd. activity is the Invitation to tender. The responsible actor is the AingP. The following, but
not limited to, frameworks and information are deﬁned:
• The appointing party’s exchange information requirements (EIR) (2.1): The deﬁnition
of work to be accomplished, including the information standards and production methods that
should be implemented by the delivery team for each appointment. The level of information need
is likewise deﬁned. All these have to comply with the prior activity 1
• Compile invitation to tender (2.4): The relevant information for the appointment is compiled
and sent to the prospective LAedP
2.2.2.3
3 - Tender response
The 3rd. activity is the Tender response. The responsible actor is the prospective delivery team
(LAedP and AedP). The following, but not limited to, information is deﬁned:
• Establish pre-BIM Execution plan (3.2): The delivery team’s approach to meeting the
appointing party’s requirements
• Assess task team capability & capacity (3.3): The LAedP has to check the capability (able
to perform the deliverable) & capacity (complete the deliverable in the required time) of each task
team
• Compile Tender response (3.7): Compiled tender response, including the summary of capa-
bility & capacity (3.4), mobilization plan (3.5), and risk assessment (3.6)
14
==PAGE:17==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
2.2.2.4
4 - Appointment
The 4th. activity is the Appointment. The main responsible actor is the chosen delivery team. The
following, but not limited to, frameworks and information are deﬁned:
• Conﬁrm delivery team’s BIM execution plan (4.1): Assure the alignment of information
within the delivery team
• Establish Task Information Delivery Plan (TIDP) (4.4): Relevant information regarding
the execution of the work, such as estimations and work sequence
• Establish Master Information Delivery Plan (MIDP) (4.5): The MIDP is the compilation
of all TIDP, which replies directly to the AingP’s EIR
2.2.2.5
5 - Mobilization
The 5th. activity is the Mobilization. The main responsible actor is the delivery team. The delivery
team mobilizes and tests the agreed production methods and procedures.
2.2.2.6
6 - Collaborative production of information
The 6th. activity is the Collaborative production of information. The main responsible actor is the
delivery team. At this stage, the asset data are started to be produced, according to the prior deﬁned
plans.
2.2.2.7
7 - Information Model Delivery
The 7th. activity is the Information model delivery. The main responsible actor is the LAedP within
each delivery team. The AingP has a single task in this activity, namely to review and authorize the
information (7.4). A new loop/appointment is initiated if the information is approved, returning the
ﬂow to activity 2. The sequence ﬂow returns to stage 6, if not approved. The approval of the last
appointment sends the sequence ﬂow out of the loop and further to the last activity.
2.2.2.8
8 - Project Close-out
The 8th. and last activity is the Project close-out. The responsible actor is the AingP. The project
information model (PIM) and all generated project data are archived and lessons learned logs are drafted.
2.2.3
Identiﬁed Gaps and Challenges
The current model from the ISO 19650-2 [33] shown in Figure 2.5 has some limitations, due to the
granularity level and applied perspective. It may be deﬁned as a process landscape on level 2 from the
prior process modeling pyramid in Figure 2.2. As discussed previously in section 2.1.2, the change of
granularity may aﬀect the process elements in many ways, leading to the lack of information on ﬁner
granular process levels. It is not possible to identify the responsible stakeholder for each activity, since
no pools (or other representations) are presented on this level. This information is deﬁned in the text,
though the model does not make use of it. The lack of stakeholder representation prevents the full un-
derstanding of the sequence ﬂow including any parallel- and concealed activities. The standard assumes
the perspective of the information ﬂow, meaning that it lacks in describing the additional activities in
the process which are not directly correlated to the production of information.
Lastly, only one loop is shown in the process, though multiple internal loops within and among the
activities exist. Independently, no presented loops return the ﬂow to activity 1, which is contradictory
to the information ﬂow shown in Figure 2.4. This means that independently of what information is
generated, the frameworks created during the ”Assessment & Need” activity are not editable.
15
==PAGE:18==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
2.3
PMI - PMBOK
The scope of the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) [36], developed by the Project
Management Institute (PMI), is to provide guidelines for managing projects. It describes the project
management life cycle and its related processes (equivalent to the delivery phase from the previous
section). The output of the PMBOK is designed to be directly implemented into a project, independently
of its domain. Furthermore, it singularly uses the perspective of the project manager (equivalent to the
AingP from the previous section). The large majority of information from this section is extracted
directly from the PMBOK [36], hence references and citations are only used in the case of additional
sources.
2.3.1
PMI - Process Groups
The suggested activities of the project life cycle are illustrated in Figure 2.6. The rectangular activity
box with bolted letters represents the process groups. The darker dotted lines represent the information
ﬂow between the internal processes, while the lighter ones are related to the ﬂow of external stakehold-
ers. The process groups are considered the 5 main activities for any project.
PMI deﬁnes 10 knowledge areas, namely being the Project: Integration-, Scope-, Time-, Cost-
, Quality-, Human Resource-, Communications-, Risk-, Procurement-, and Stakeholder-Management.
Since the focus of this research is mainly on the implementation and ﬂow of the processes, the Project
Integration Management section is of interest.
The section is responsible for further describing the
activities within each process group, and how to integrate them into a project. The relation between
them is shown in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Project Management Process Group and Project Integration Management Mapping
A brief description of each process group is provided below.
2.3.1.1
Initiating Process Group
The initial step is triggered by an external project initiator or sponsor, providing the initial frame-
works (Project statement of work, business case, agreements). The Initiating Process Group is the ﬁrst
process group to be executed by the project team and aims to develop the Project Charter. The Project
Charter is composed of an initial scope and the identiﬁcation and deﬁnition of internal and external
stakeholders. After registering the involved stakeholders the project is oﬃcially authorized. This initial
step is done to align the expectations of the project sponsor with the project scope, which often leads
to improved customer satisfaction.
16
==PAGE:19==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 2.6: Project processes proposed by the PMI
2.3.1.2
Planning Process Group
The next process group is Planning. The total scope and the course of action are deﬁned during
this process group. Plans for the above-mentioned knowledge areas are likewise developed. The ﬁnal
output of the planning process is the Project Management Plan (PMP), which is a central document
deﬁning a baseline for the project work. Due to the complexity of projects, the PMP may be reviewed
multiple times, according to feedback loops occurring throughout the project life cycle. The review
may lead to signiﬁcant changes in the PMP, providing greater precision regarding schedule, cost, and
resource requirements. The update of the PMP is done through Change Requests (CR). The request is
most frequently triggered during the Executing Process Group and Monitoring and Controlling Process
Group.
17
==PAGE:20==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
2.3.1.3
Executing Process Group
The activities to complete the deﬁned work are executed in this group. According to Table 2.1, the
execution is composed of Directing and Managing Project Work. The key purpose of the activity is to
guarantee a well-managed project.
Results obtained during the execution may reveal unanticipated risks (unknown unknowns [37]) or
changes to the availability of resources and productivity. Further detailed analyses may be required
to estimate the proportion of the issue, and a CR may then be issued. The change may be requested
from internal or external stakeholders. Additional outputs for this process group are related to work
performance data and ﬁnalized deliverables.
2.3.1.4
Monitoring and Controlling Process Group
The process group Monitoring and Controlling Process Group is divided into 2 sub-processes, namely
Monitor and Control Project Work and Perform Integrated Change Control, as it may be seen in previ-
ous Table 2.1.
The project is tracked, reviewed, and directed during the Monitor and Control Project Work, i.e.
the activity gives an overview of the entirety of the project, and is not only limited to a speciﬁc Process
Group. It is triggered at pre-deﬁned milestones, such as regular time intervals, appropriate events, or
other deﬁned conditions.
The Change Requests are reviewed, approved/declined, and managed during Perform Integrated
Change Control. All approved requests are implemented through the Direct and Manage Project Work
activity. It may be noticed that a great number of factors may trigger a CR, as shown in Figure 2.7.
There are typically 3 types of Change Requests:
1. Corrective: Has the purpose of realigning the performing work with PMP
2. Preventive: Has the purpose of assuring future work is aligned with PMP
3. Defect Repair: Has the purpose of modifying a nonconforming asset or asset component
The Change Request may be submitted by both internal and external project stakeholders, but has
to be reviewed before acceptance.
2.3.1.5
Closing Process Group
The last process group is related to the closure of the project or project phase. It veriﬁes that all prior
deﬁned activities are concluded and ready to be closed-out. A series of events may occur at project
close-out, such as client acceptance of the hand-over, post-project reviews assuring the fulﬁllment of
agreements, drafting of lessons learned, and archiving of all relevant project documents.
2.3.2
Identiﬁed Gaps and Challenges
The activities deﬁned in Figure 2.6 from the PMBOK has a ﬁner granularity compared to the one
in Figure 2.5 from the ISO19650-2. This is explicit by the outlining of the actor (internal or external)
and the further description & inclusion of additional data in the model. Hence, it may be considered
as a process map at level 3 from the process pyramid in Figure 2.2. This level is still considered too
abstract for implementation of CA.
The inclusion of the activities Perform Integrated Change Control and Direct and Manage Project
Work enabled respectively the initial project documents to be edited and the proper management of
the project work, during the execution of the asset.
18
==PAGE:21==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 2.7: Perform Integrated Change Control Data Flow Diagram
On the other hand, the PMBOK assumes the perspective of the project manager, limiting the
19
==PAGE:22==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
proposed processes mainly to this stakeholder group.
The remaining external stakeholders are just
brieﬂy described but have no drafted process model.
The PMBOK is capable of eﬃciently providing overall project guidelines. Though, the lack of not
being domain-based may eventually result in missing out on speciﬁc domain-related processes, data, or
even just common practices.
20
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Methodology
The chosen methodology for this research is the Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM).
DSRM is considered to be a problem-solving process, capable of producing an artifact that addresses
an identiﬁed unsolved problem, while explicitly showing the processes of creation. The design has to
be based on prior acknowledged science and data, meaning that solid background information of the
problem domain has to be provided and discussed. Evaluation of the artifact and communication to
the appropriate audience is also of great importance in DSRM, due to the problem-solving nature the
created artifact has [38] [39].
DSRM is developed through 7 steps, in the pre-deﬁned order discussed below:
1. Problem identiﬁcation and motivation (chapter 1): Deﬁne research problem and justify
the value of a solution. The identiﬁed problems for this research are related to the standardization
of processes for the expected technological advancements in construction automation (CA), as
deﬁned in chapter 1
2. Objectives for solution (chapter 2): Deﬁne the objectives of the research, based on the
identiﬁed challenges and gaps from previous acknowledged foundations and methodologies. The
used foundations and methodologies here are deﬁned in chapter 2 as BPMN (section 2.1), ISO
19650 (section 2.2), and PMBOK (section 2.3). The 2 proposed standards, namely the ISO 19650
and PMBOK, relate to the project life cycle and its processes. The diﬀerences between them are
noticed in the domain, granularity, and stakeholder perspective. While the ISO 19650 provides
BIM guidelines with a more abstract view on all actors (AingP, LAedP, AedP), the PMBOK is a
ﬁner granular interdisciplinary guideline with the focus on mainly the project manager (AingP).
Independently, both standards are considered to be an abstracted view of reality and not directly
applicable in lower levels of the process modeling pyramid
3. Design & Development (chapter 4): Creation of the artifact.
The creation is developed
through 3 iterations, namely Applying PMBOK into ISO 19650 (section 4.1), Automated Con-
struction Process Simulation (section 4.2), and Interconnection of Previous Iterations and Coarser
Levels Models Development (section 4.3). The scope of chapter 4 is to illustrate the entire process
of creation, which results in process models in all granularity levels and overall guidelines for CA
4. Demonstration (chapter 5): Demonstrate the created artifact. The demonstration is performed
by testing and extracting information regarding an activity on diﬀerent granularity levels. This is
done by cherry-picking a random activity, independently of the granularity level, and maneuvering
through the diﬀerent process levels
5. Evaluation (chapter 6): Evaluates the performance of the artifact in contrast to proposed
questions from section 1.2
21
==PAGE:24==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
6. Communication (chapter 7): Communicate to the proper audience. The communication is
achieved by sharing this document and the additional bits (such as BPMN models and GH scripts).
The research paper is available through DTU Findit, while the remaining outputs are available
through the Zenodo link: https://zenodo.org/record/4483135#.YBZ2UOhKiUk
7. Conclusion (chapter 8): Concludes the research paper. All provided information and main
results are concluded. The Future Work (section 8.2) is also presented, which links this research
study back to a broader perspective of the CA environment
22
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Design and Development
In the following sections of chapter 4, the creation of the artifact is performed through 3 iterations.
The scope of the iterations is to analyze the processes for CA in diﬀerent granularity levels. The ISO
19650-2 process landscape in Figure 2.5 has to be in a ﬁner degree of granularity, in order to fully
implement and understand which processes are vital for automation. As already discussed in section
2.1.2, the change of granularity levels can modify the whole process. Hence, a thorough understanding
of each activity and the overall process are necessary. The description and output for each iteration are
as follows:
1. First iteration (section 4.1): Applies BPMN and PMBOK concepts on the ISO process land-
scape, in order to increase the level of ﬁneness. The outputs are BPMN models equivalent to level
4 of the prior pyramid in Figure 2.2
2. Second iteration (section 4.2): Assumes an operational perspective, providing guidelines and
speciﬁc aspects to consider for CA. The outputs are Grasshopper (GH) scripts equivalent to level
6 of the prior pyramid in Figure 2.2
3. Third iterations (section 4.3): Interconnects the 2 prior iterations. The outputs are BPMN
models equivalent to level 5 of the prior pyramid in Figure 2.2. Coarser models are then developed
for CA, accordingly to the developed information from all 3 iterations
It is suggested to read the third iteration last, but no speciﬁc order has to be followed on the prior 2
iterations. All the large presented models, such as Figure 4.5, are vectorial meaning that it is possible
to zoom in on it without losing any quality.
4.1
Applying PMBOK into ISO 19650
The scope of the 1st. iteration is to analyze the discussed processes from an abstract point of view,
and attempt to increase the ﬁnesse of current models (i.e. working from the top and downwards on the
pyramid from Figure 2.2). The outputs for this iteration are 2 BPMN models, namely the as-is and
inclusion of PMBOK elements, on level 4 from the prior pyramid in Figure 2.2. The used platform to
draft the presented process models is Signavio since it supports BPMN.
4.1.1
Applying Business Process Model Notation
Certain changes would occur in the process from Figure 2.5 when applying the BPMN modeling
techniques discussed in section 2.1.1. By following the explained approach, the ﬁrst step is to determine
the involved stakeholders in the process. For the simplicity of the models, only two actors are assumed,
namely the Appointing party (AingP) and the delivery team. The delivery team is composed of one
lead appointed party (LAedP) and its N appointed parties (AedPs). The next step is to identify all
23
==PAGE:26==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
activities within the process and the connections between them. For now, the suggested activities from
the ISO are maintained. Both types of connections are used (message and sequence) since the ﬂow
travels between pools.
The process is initiated within the AingP’s pool by a start event labeled Start Project, followed
by the 2 ﬁrst activities. By the end of activity 2 (Send Tender Invitation), a message is sent to the
delivery team. This is done by a throwing intermediate message event, which triggers a start message
event within the delivery team’s pool. The following activities from 3.1 to 7.3 are all performed by the
delivery team. During this period only 2 messages are sent back to the AingP. The ﬁrst message occurs
at the activity Tender Response (3.7), and the second after Submit Information Model for AingP Accept
(7.3). The AingP is responsible for the remaining activities in the process from 7.4 to 8.2. Lastly, the
ﬂow has 3 diverging gateways: 2 of which occurs after reviews and 1 after the end of an appointment.
The proposed as-is ISO-process, modeled in BPMN is presented in Appendix D.
4.1.1.1
Inclusion of Execution Process Group Elements
An issue may be observed in the AingP’s pool when simply applying BPMN concepts to the abstract
model. A set of 3 sequential events is occurring after sending the invitation to tender in 2.4. This means
that the AingP is not performing any activity (active action) in parallel with the delivery team, and
is awaiting a sequence of 3 messages in order to proceed with any activity. The issue is illustrated in
Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Issue regarding sequential series of events
The consecutive sequence of events is occurring during the pre-execution & execution of the project.
At this stage, the ISO process focuses on the actor responsible for producing the information (delivery
team) but leaves aside the other stakeholders (AingP). In comparison, the PMBOK, which only assumes
the perspective of the AingP as prior discussed, states that during this period the Executing Process
Group occurs. Therefore, the Process Group is added to the BPMN model, leading to a reduction of the
number of sequential events to 2. This value is still not optimal, but it may be considered satisfactory
since, in reality, multiple instances of diﬀerent appointments would be occurring simultaneously. Ad-
ditionally, the gap between sending the tender invitation and receiving a tender response should have
relatively short time restrictions compared to the overall process, despite time not being modeled in
BPMN.
The prospective delivery team has to receive feedback from the Tender Response, before establishing
an appointment. The Tender Response needs to be reviewed by the AingP, hence another collapsed
sub-process is observed. The output of the sub-process is a feedback message to the prospective delivery
team. If the received message is positive, the process is allowed to continue and the prospective delivery
team becomes the delivery team, otherwise, the process is ended.
4.1.1.2
Inclusion of Monitoring and Controlling Process Group Elements
The review of produced information (sub-process 7.4) is the next sub-process for the AingP, after the
inclusion of the Execution Process Group (Directing and Managing Project Work). This review may be
24
==PAGE:27==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
considered as the ﬁrst part of the Monitoring and Controlling Process Group, namely the Monitor and
Control Project Work from Table 2.1. The second part (Change Requests) is so far not included in the
model. The request for change can be triggered by multiple activities as previously shown in Figure 2.7.
Independently of the triggering, each CR has still to be individually analyzed.
The decision of
whether the CR are approved or not may also be considered within the review on sub-process 7.4.
Thus, this review is not limited only to the approval of deliverables, but also the approval of CR.
Therefore, the sequence ﬂow after sub-process 7.4 diverges into 4 diﬀerent directions, meaning that
exclusive (XOR) gateways are used. The possible outcomes of the review are as follows:
1. Information & Change Request approved: The executed work is approved but revealed the
need of updating/changing elements from previous activities 1. It may be considered as Preventive
Change Request
2. Information approved; Change Request not needed/approved: The executed work is
approved and no change is needed, i.e. all went as planned
3. Information not approved; Change request approved: Change of conditions which is not
further allowing compliance of executed work and prior deﬁned requirements. It may be considered
as either Corrective or Defect Repair Change Request
4. Information & Change Request not approved: Executed work is not in compliance and no
change is needed
The inclusion of these notations is shown in Figure 4.2. The model has been cut to solely illustrate the
added elements. The expanded sub-process of Review and Change Request is presented in Figure 4.3a
and Figure 4.3b respectively for a better understanding of these activities.
Figure 4.2: Inclusion of Change Requests in the current model
25
==PAGE:28==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.3: Expanded sub-processes for 7.4 Review (a) and Change Requests (b)
4.1.1.3
Inclusion of Other Elements
According to the ISO 19650-1 principles, the Project Information Requirements (PIR) are deﬁned
as one of the ﬁrst collapsed sub-processes (1.2). The PIR are identiﬁed from both the project- and
asset-management perspective [32], which means that information obtained prior to project initiation is
used.
The concept is illustrated on the upper left part of the previous Figure 2.4. This is likewise de-
scribed in the PMBOK, where a project is initiated according to a business case from the project
sponsor/initiator and organizational processes, as shown in Figure 2.6. These activities may be con-
sidered important for the overall process and have to be included in the BPMN model. The project
sponsor is represented by an external collapsed pool, while the asset management team is represented
as a lane within the AingP’s pool.
The asset management team may identify additional/relevant information and requirements during
project development, splitting thereby the sequence ﬂow with a parallel gateway (AND). The parallel
generated information may aﬀect the project and lead to Change Requests.
As deﬁned above, the
project team has to review all Change Requests (sub-process 7.4), hence, the converging of the sequence
ﬂow has to occur before the review. In this case, the converging has to be done by an inclusive gateway
(OR), allowing the Change Requests to be triggered both from an asset- and project-team, and further
supporting the principles from Figure 2.4.
The inclusion of these elements is shown in Figure 4.4.
The model has been cut and edited to
solely illustrate the added elements. The complete BPMN model, including all added elements, for this
iteration, is illustrated in Figure 4.5. The image is vectorial, meaning that it is possible to zoom in for
further analysis.
26
==PAGE:29==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.4: Inclusion of Other Elements in the current model
27
==PAGE:30==
ISO-PMI_2-pools
Appointing Party
Project team
Project team
Project team
Send Tender
Inv
Appointment
What is the
status of info?
Submitted
information
Return to
Produce
Start Project
(Charter)
Model finished?
1) Assessment
& Need
Project Info
Management
Plan (PMP)
2) Invitation
Tender
Directing and Managing
Project Work
8) Project close-
out
End project
Change Request
Info from
Asset + Project
Team
7.4 Review
Review of info +
need of Change
Request
Review of
Tender response
Change Request
Change
Request?
Change
Request?
Preventive CR
Corrective or
Defect Repair CR
Asset management team
Asset management team
Asset management team
Key Decision
What does the Asset need to do? e.g lab,
hospital, bridge etc
Additional
generated info
Scope of
Business
AIR + Business
Case
Project Initiator/Sponsor
Delivery Team
Delivery Team
3) Tender
Response
Initiate Tender
Response
5) Mobilization
6) Collaborative
production of
info
Submit info model
for AingP accept
4) Appointment
Approved?
Information not approved;
Task 7.1-7.3
7) Information
model delivery
2.4) Send tender
Yes
7.3) Submit info model
for AingP accept
3.7) Response
tender
Feedback
No
No
Yes
Asset generated
information
Managing
Produced Info
Complete pre-execution documents
Yes
No
Approved
No
Yes
Not approved
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.5: Proposed BPMN model for 1st. iteration considered on level 4 from the prior pyramid in Figure 2.2
28
==PAGE:31==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
4.2
Automated Construction Process Simulation
The scope of the 2nd. iteration is to simulate to what extend the execution of an asset component
could be automated. The iteration assumes a ﬁne granular perspective (i.e. working from the bottom
and upwards on the pyramid from Figure 2.2) and considers only the necessary steps of the process
models prior discussed.
The outputs on this level are related to the production environment, thus
BPMN models are no longer valid. The used software in this approach is Grasshopper (GH). GH is
a parametric modeling tool and may be used for various types of analysis, including automation and
robotics [40].
4.2.1
Code Development Process
A series of interconnecting GH scripts (in total 3) have been developed. The connection between
them represents the message ﬂow between actors and the end/beginning of an activity. Since GH nor-
mally works ”oﬄine”, the connection between scripts has to be made by using plugins, such as the
Speckle Data Sender and Speckle Data Receiver objects, which allows transferring of information be-
tween GH ﬁles [41]. A unique ID is generated every time a Speckle Sender is used. The Speckle Receiver
may then be connected to a text panel containing this ID, in order to show the sent data. Speckle Data
Senders are very unstable, and frequently need to be changed, therefore the identiﬁcation of each ID is
set as a simple numerical value (1, 2, 3...n).
The following subsections contain information regarding diﬀerent aspects and steps to consider when
developing a parametric script for construction automation.
4.2.1.1
Step 1 - Generating Asset Component
The responsible stakeholder for this step is the AingP, which has to provide the initial information.
A generic script capable of generating an asset or asset component has to be developed. The chosen
asset component for this research has been a rectangular wall with ≤2 rectangular openings, where
each opening may represent a door or a window, leading to a total of 3 sub-components (wall, window,
and door). The number of sub-components may easily be increased by copying parts of the code and
making minor adjustments.
All 3 scripts make use of Groups. A Group represents a speciﬁc function within the code. The
following 5 Groups have been used on each sub-component to develop this step:
1. Creation of a reference point: Allows 3-dimensional movement in x,y, and z-axis. The used
values represent a vector
2. Geometric properties: Width (w), length (l), and height (h). The used units are mm
3. Construction of object: The union of all sub-components by trimming. The wall is considered
the shape, while the opening as cutters.
The Group is also responsible for the 2-dimensional
rotation of the sub-components (3-dimensional rotation is not considered relevant for a wall, but
could be implemented if needed)
4. Additional asset component properties: Material, maximum cost, ambient, and usage. These
properties are not necessary for the creation of the geometry (parametric wall) but are considered
to be important properties regarding a real asset component. Notations such as CCS Molio may
be used in order to align the data between stakeholders. The deﬁnition of these notations are
beyond the scope of this study, and for simplicity, the properties are deﬁned as e.g. Wall and
Concrete
5. Send data: The compilation of relevant data. The data is sent through Speckle Sender objects
as prior described.
Speckle Sender containing geometries tend to be slower and therefore the
information is sent through 2 diﬀerent IDs. The Speckle Sender ID for the additional properties
is 1 and for the geometry 2
29
==PAGE:32==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
To demonstrate the performance of the overall process, 2 walls are considered namely Wall 1 and
Wall 2. The used values and properties for each asset component are shown in Table 4.1. The obtained
geometries using these values are shown in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7, for Wall 1 and 2 respectively.
The Figures show 3 views of the asset component, namely Perspective (left), Top (right-top), Right
(right-bottom). The origin (coordinate (0, 0, 0)) is illustrated by colored axes (red for x, green for y, and
blue for z), and is used for a better comparison between the asset components.
Table 4.1: Asset component properties of Wall 1 and Wall 2. The values have been chosen randomly
Figure 4.6: Wall 1 according to the properties from Table 4.1
It may be noticed that Wall 1 is wider, longer higher, and contains an additional opening compared
to Wall 2. The removal of openings can be done by setting the geometric properties to 1. It is important
to maintain all cutting geometries within the shaping geometry at all times, in order to properly execute
the reaming parts of the scripts.
The data sent via the Speckle Sender from this step are the trimmed geometry and the additional
asset component properties.
4.2.1.2
Step 2 - Response According to Sent Asset Component Information
The responsible stakeholder for this step is the delivery team, which has to respond to the sent in-
formation. The sent data has 3 types of formats, namely text, numbers, and geometry. The performed
analyses (independently of the format) are related to compliance of work and results in the same deﬁni-
tion of Groups. A message is sent independently of the result of the compliance check, stating whether
it was approved or not (coded as a boolean).
30
==PAGE:33==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.7: Wall 2 according to the properties from Table 4.1
The geometry analysis has to verify the edges of the sent asset component since it was pre-deﬁned
in Step 1 that only rectangular shapes should be used. The geometry is approved if only straight lines
are used, and disapproved if non-linear lines are used.
The additional properties (text & numbers) are compared to other pre-deﬁned capacities and capa-
bilities of the delivery team. The capacities and capabilities could be e.g. stored in a database. The
importance of using a recognized and previously agreed on notation, like the mentioned CCS Molio,
becomes relevant at this stage. The compliance check between the received data and the compatibility
of the prospective delivery team contains 4 Groups, and are as follows:
1. Receive & converge data: Receive the data from Speckle ID 1 and 2. The received data are
analyzed according to their type, i.e. text, numbers (Speckle ID 1), and geometry (Speckle ID 2).
The Group is also responsible for any converging of data between platforms
2. Generation of database: The capabilities, capacities, and additional properties of the delivery
team are deﬁned. The used capability and capacity are shown in Table 4.2
3. Compliance check capability and capacity: Compare the delivery team’s capability and
capacity data with the received information. The Group may be divided into 3 sub-groups; 3.a
responsible for analyzing geometries (linear edges), 3.b for text (e.g. wall, concrete), and 3.c for
numbers (e.g. maximum cost)
4. Generate & send message: Generate message as described above; having an approved or
disapproved status (boolean). The used Speckle Sender ID to transmit the information is 3
The obtained results from using the properties deﬁned in Table 4.1 and Table 4.2 are shown in
Figure 4.9a and b, for Wall 1 and Wall 2 respectively. It may be noticed that Wall 1 was approved in
all analyses. Wall 2 was not in compliance and not able to analyze the cost, due to the Light Concrete
material not being supported by the delivery team. Figure 4.9c shows the properties of Wall 3 (shown
on Figure 4.8), which are similar to Wall 2. The diﬀerences between them are the material (Concrete)
and the use of geometries (circular). Despite the material now being supported by the delivery team, the
asset component is still not approved, due to the cost limit and use of non-linear curves. The triggering
of a single disapproved analysis prevents further simulation of the asset component.
31
==PAGE:34==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Table 4.2: Delivery team’s capability and capacity
Figure 4.8: Wall 3 with similar properties of Wall 2. The diﬀerences between them are the material (Concrete)
and the use of geometries (circular)
Figure 4.9: Results of analysis for Wall 1(a) Wall 2(b) and Wall 3(c)
In a real process, multiple prospective delivery teams would have received the tender invitation,
resulting in multiple tender responses. Hence, the AingP would have to review all responses and choose
32
==PAGE:35==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
which delivery team to proceed with. The review of the data could be automated, based on e.g. lowest
cost, initial time estimation, or quality of work. This exchange of information between AingP and the
prospective delivery team has not been modeled, in order to avoid additional usage of the unstable
Speckle ID’s. Instead, if all the data between the actors comply, the process is allowed to continue.
Therefore, only the approved appointment (Wall 1) is considered in the following step.
4.2.1.3
Step 3 - Automated Construction Simulation
The responsible stakeholder for this step is the delivery team. The simulation of the automated
construction is performed by use of robotics. Another GH plugin has to be installed in order to sim-
ulate robots, such as ROBOT COMPONENTS [42]. ROBOT COMPONENTS contains a library of
ABB-robots and is capable of simulating robotic motions and generating ABB-robot supported code
(RAPID). Likewise Speckle, the ROBOT COMPONENTS plug-in is still in development and prone to
unstable behavior when e.g. moving the placement of the robot or using multiple robots. Therefore,
only 1 robot is used and ﬁxed at a speciﬁc point. All geometries are then moved and rotated with
respect to this ﬁxed point.
The script contains in total 7 Groups to fully automate the construction simulation. The Groups
are as follows:
1. Receive & adjust geometries: Receive the approved geometry from Speckle ID 3 and move/rotate
it with respect to the ﬁxed point
2. Placing bricks properties: Deﬁne the brick dimensions and placing patterns. Other properties
regarding e.g. the displacements of half bricks between layers, correct placing orders, and trimming
according to openings are deﬁned here
3. Picking brick properties: Deﬁne the picking bricks according to the previous deﬁned placing
brick properties. This is done to assure the correct usage of geometries and order of picking &
placing. Figure 4.10 shows both the picking (red) & placing (green) bricks in 3 views, namely the
Perspective (left), Top (right-top), and Right (right-bottom). The lack of openings in the picking
bricks (red) results in an oﬀset in the z-axis. The oﬀset on the x and y-axis is related to the
optimization of robot movements and the reach of the arm
4. Tools & robot properties: Deﬁne the robot- and tool-models. The used robot is the ABB
IRB6700-300/2.7, and the used tool is a simple self modeled gripper based on a Robotiq 2F-140
model [43]. The targets and actions are deﬁned, according to the previous Pick & Place Groups.
Furthermore, the robotic movements are also deﬁned, i.e. linear (linear tool movement) or joint
movements (allows non-linear tool movement)
5. Codes & motions: Generate RAPID code and movement path simulation. The movement path
of the robot tool is shown in green in Figure 4.11, in 3 views namely Perspective (left), Top
(right-top), and Back (right-bottom)
6. Simulation of robot placing: Deﬁne placing of the ﬁxed points in order to construct the real
asset component. The ﬁxed points are derivated from the Placing bricks Group, hence analyzed
independently from Groups 3-5. The deﬁned points are shown in green in Figure 4.12, in 3 views
namely Perspective (left), Top (right-top), and Right (right-bottom)
7. Compile & send message: Compile and send information regarding the simulation. The used
Speckle Sender ID to transmit the information is 4
It may be noticed that the reach of the robot is limited. The maximum value for rows and columns
has been iterate to 7 and 20 respectively, thus the need for simulating the placing of the robot (Group 6).
The outputs for this step are the last information related to the execution of the asset component. From
this step, an optimized estimation regarding execution time, generation of RAPID code, and simulated
positions can be deﬁned and sent through a last Speckle Sender.
33
==PAGE:36==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.10: Pick (red) and place (green) of bricks for the entire wall
Figure 4.11: Robot movement path (green) for Wall 1
34
==PAGE:37==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.12: The deﬁned placing of the ﬁxed points (green) in order to construct the real asset component
35
==PAGE:38==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
4.3
Interconnection of Previous Iterations and Coarser Levels
Models Development
The scope of the third and last iteration is to interconnect the previous iterations and develop coarser
level models (map and landscape) based on the gained insights into the involved processes for CA. The
interconnection is achieved through BPMN and makes use of the expanded ISO models as a template
(shown in Appendix C) for each sub-process, i.e. BPMN models linking the described Groups from
section 4.2 to the proposed model from section 4.1. The models are considered to be on level 5 of the
modeling pyramid.
The process map (level 3) is developed by simplifying the BPMN model from the ﬁrst iteration
(level 4). No speciﬁc modeling notation is mandatory, though the responsible stakeholders and main
activities have be to explicit. Thereafter, the process landscape (level 2) is updated accordingly. The
ISO landscape notation is maintained and only the activities and loops are adjusted.
4.3.1
BPMN Models for Each Activity
The activities in the BPMN model from Figure 4.5 can be related to the Groups of the second itera-
tion and the expanded ISO processes in Appendix C. The outputs are considered to be on modeling level
5 from the prior pyramid in Figure 2.2. For this iteration, adaptations regarding clustering or expansion
of the ISO sub-processes are performed if relevant. The clustering is done due to the similarities between
data type outputs and/or simpliﬁcation of the BPMN models. The expansion of sub-processes is related
to the clustering of multiple Groups (from the previous GH steps) within 1 speciﬁc ISO-deﬁned collapsed
sub-process. The collapsed- and expanded sub-processes maintain the ISO nomenclature. The tasks
within the expanded sub-processes are named accordingly to the Groups from the second iteration. All
the sub-processes related to appointing individuals to certain functions are removed since this is the
main scope of automation.
A text annotation is made on each collapsed sub-process. If the sub-process is developed in the GH
scripts, a reference to the naming, step, and Group is provided. If not, a description and suggestions to
the type of outputs are provided instead.
4.3.1.1
Assessment & Need
The proposed model for Assessment & Need, on the process modeling level 5 from the prior pyramid
(Figure 2.2), is shown in Figure 4.13. The activity is responsible for establishing the initial frameworks
and information of the overall asset, which echo throughout the remaining process. None of these activ-
ities are in fact modeled in the GH scripts since the scripts are only related to one speciﬁc appointment.
Though, in reality, the additional asset component properties deﬁned in Step 1 - Group 4 are extracted
directly from here and have to comply. Another example, the deﬁnition of standard notation (CSS
molio) is likewise deﬁned here. Hence, the importance of emphasizing, that all the initial developed
frameworks within the activity are relevant for properly automating the construction process of a real
asset component.
4.3.1.2
Tender Invitation
The proposed model for Tender Invitation, on the process modeling level 5 from the prior pyramid
(Figure 2.2), is shown in Figure 4.14. The activity is responsible for establishing speciﬁc information
regarding the asset component. All the described Groups of Step 1 (section 4.2.1.1) are executed here.
Groups 1-4 occur within the collapsed sub-process 2.1 Establish EIR, therefor an expanded sub-process
representation has been adapted. Group 5 is considered in 2.4 Compile Tender.
An additional clustered activity, composed by namely 2.2 Shared resources and 2.3 Response re-
quirements, are deﬁned in the ISO, but not modeled in any Group. Activity 2.2 is not modeled due to
the simplicity of the asset containing only one component. In reality, an asset could contain a series
36
==PAGE:39==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.13: Proposed model for activity 1 - Assessment & need
of components or properties, creating thereby physical constraints regarding placing and usage of cer-
tain geometries or materials. Activity 2.3 is related to the alignment between the stakeholders, which
is automatically assumed in the coding process. Thus, despite not being modeled, the activities are
considered to be important for properly automating the process.
4.3.1.3
Tender Response
The proposed model for Tender Response, on the process modeling level 5 from the prior pyramid
(Figure 2.2), is shown in Figure 4.15.
The activity is responsible for checking the compatibility of
work and responding to the Tender invitation. All the described Groups of Step 2 (section 4.2.1.2)
are executed here, initiating by Group 1 in the collapsed sub-process 3.2 Establish pre-BIM Execution
plan. The following expanded sub-process 3.3 Assess task team capability & capacity contains the next
2 Groups (Group 2 & 3). After Group 2 has been executed for all data, the sequence ﬂow is split by an
inclusive gateway (AND). The diversion is due to the diﬀerent data types (geometry, text & numbers)
analyzed separately. The sequence ﬂow converges after performing all analyses, ending the expanded
sub-process. If any of the analyses resulted in a disapproved status, the tender response process is
37
==PAGE:40==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
ended, by sending a disapproved message to the AingP. If all analyses are approved, a mobilization- and
risk plan are developed in the clustered sub-process 3.5 and 3.6. The mobilization plan could contain
information regarding how to mobilize the robot and assure the correct placement of the reference points.
The risk plan could in this case inform the instabilities of the used plug-ins. These plans are not modeled
in the GH scripts. Lastly, the approved message is sent back to the AingP, by and end message event.
4.3.1.4
Appointment
The proposed model for Appointment, on the process modeling level 5 from the prior pyramid
(Figure 2.2), is shown in Figure 4.16. The activity is responsible for providing complete pre-execution
documents. All the described Groups of Step 3 (section 4.2.1.3) are executed here. The ﬁrst Group
(Group 1) is performed during 4.1 Conﬁrm delivery team’s BIM-plan. The next 2 collapsed sub-processes
4.2 Establish delivery team’s detailed responsibility matrix and 4.3 Establish LAedP info requirements
deﬁne what information has to be produced (including the level of need), how it is shared, acceptance
criteria, milestones, and the responsible stakeholder. These values are incorporated in the GH script
through the Speckle Sender but are not explicitly part of any other coding Groups. The next collapsed
sub-process 4.4 Establish TIDP is represented as an expanded sub-process, containing the Groups 2 −6
within it. The sequence ﬂow diverges since Group 6 only necessitates the data from Group 2 to simulate
the ﬁxed positions, as discussed prior. The compilation of all TIDP is performed subsequently, resulting
in the MIDP. The compilation allows for further extraction of information regarding the construction,
such as execution time and necessary free space to operate the equipment. The complete set of data is
sent back to the AingP, as complete pre-execution documentation representing Group 7. A review of the
complete pre-execution documentation could be performed by the AingP, resulting in a loop returning
the ﬂow to the feedback message.
4.3.1.5
Remaining Parts of the Process
The latter parts of the process, ranging from activity 5 −8 are not possible to model only theoret-
ically at this level. These activities are related to the real executed work, and thus require execution
data to perform further analysis in this granularity level. Though, automation is not far from a real-
ity for these activities. Tools capable of performing the work (ABB-robots), assuring quality control
(laser-scanning compliance check between as-built and BIM models), and project optimization tools
(project-updates, -planning, and real-time -solution solvers) are already developed, and starting to be
implemented [20] [21]. Overall mobility may be considered as one of the last aspects to be fully auto-
mated (activities 5 and 6). Not only mobilizing the tools to the construction site but also assuring the
correct route planning in the unstructured environment, i.e. all the movements the robot has to perform
(Step 3, Group 6). Improvements are currently being developed, but are still not a reality [44].
Furthermore, process mining is suggested for these activities, in order to obtain the best models.
Process mining makes use of event logs and process models to enhance or develop proposed models.
The event logs contain data from the execution of a real process and have some mandatory attributes to
consider, such as timestamps, naming, and responsible stakeholders. The main criteria for the process
models are to be modeled in a recognized notation and be sound (not contain errors) [45]. Therefore,
no increment of the granularity levels for these models are done, since the prior proposed model in
Figure 4.5 already contains the minimum mandatory requirements.
It could be argued that the BPMN models describing the 7.4 Review and Change Requests in Fig-
ure 4.3 from the ﬁrst iteration are on this granularity level. The issue related to this idea is that the
models do not present any real activity, and are mainly used to illustrate the ﬂow within the activities.
Thus, the same principle of using process mining technique to obtain a reliable model is suggested here.
The Directing and Managing Project Work collapsed sub-process is directly related to the executed
work, and may likewise not be further developed. Tasks related to this collapsed sub-process could be
considered as weekly meetings, ”go, look, see” or other exchanges and gathering of information, assuring
38
==PAGE:41==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
thereby proper execution and updated work documents.
Lastly, the tasks occurring within Additional generated information performed by the Asset manage-
ment team is considered beyond the scope of this research. The activity is of importance for the overall
process but is not analyzed in any greater degree of ﬁneness, due to not being a manageable activity
from the project perspective.
39
==PAGE:42==
2) Invitation Tender
Appointing party
Appointing party
2.1) Establish EIR;
Step 1
Groups 1-4
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Establish EIR
Complete EIR
Group 1
Creation of a
reference points
Geometric
properties
Construction of
object
Additional asset
component
properties
Establish Tender
Invt
Data regarding asset:
surrounding properties (e.g.
floor material), other specific info
not defined in EIR (e.g. max
space [height, width])
Delivery team has to be
aligned/know the
process
Send data;
Step 1
Group 5
Compiled
Tender Inv
2.2) Shared
resources
2.3) Response
requirements
2.4) Compile
tender
Delivery team
Tender Invitation
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.14: Proposed model for activity 2 - Tender Invitation
40
==PAGE:43==
3) Tender Response
Appointing Party
Delivery team
Delivery team
3.3) Assess task team capability & capacity;
Step 2
Group 2-3 (Geometry, Text, & number)
Group 2 (All)
Group 3
(geometry)
Group 3
(text)
Imported
draft
Task team
capability & capacity
Group 3
(numbers)
Generation of
database
Compliance
check capability
and capacity
Compliance
check capability
and capacity
Compliance
check capability
and capacity
Receive & converge data;
Step 2
Group 1 (All)
Generate message
Step 2
Group 4 (All)
Ok?
Initiate
Tender Resp
Approved
message
Send message;
Step 2
Group 4 (All)
Disapproved
message
Documentation
regarding these
topics
3.2) Establish
pre-BIM
Execution plan
3.4) Establish
capability &
capacity
3.5) Mobilization
3.6) Risk plan
3.7) Compile
Tender Resp
No
Tender Resp
Tender Inv
Yes
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.15: Proposed model for activity 3 - Tender response
41
==PAGE:44==
4) Appointment
Lead Appointed Party
Lead Appointed Party
Start
Appointment
-Definition of:
What info to
produce;
How to share ;
Team responsibilities;
Receive & adjust geometries;
Step 3
Group 1
Send agreed
data
Group 7
4.4) Establish task information delivery plan
Step 3
Groups 2-5
Group 2
Adjusted
Geometries
Tools & robot
properties
Group 4
Codes &
motions
Group 5
Simulated
Execution
Group 3
Group 6
Placing bricks
properties
Picking brick
properties
Simulation of
robot placing
Compilation of
data
Feedback status
No appointment
4.1) Confirm
delivery
team's BIM-plan
4.2) Establish delivery team's
detailed responsibility matrix
4.3) Establish LAedP info
requirements
4.5) Establish
master
information
delivery plan
4.6) and 4.7)
Complete
documentation
Appointing Party
Feedback
Complete
pre-execution
doc
Positive
Negative
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.16: Proposed model for activity 4 - Appointment
42
==PAGE:45==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
4.3.2
Development of Coarser Models
Coarse granular models may now be developed, based on all the compiled information. Remembering,
these coarser models have only to illustrate the main activities, no speciﬁc notation is mandatory, and
a mainly forward directing ﬂow is used. A similar notation to BPMN is used for the map, and the ISO
notation is maintained for the landscape.
4.3.2.1
Process Map
Figure 4.17 illustrates the proposed process map (level 3) for CA. It is still possible to see all involved
stakeholders (Project initiator, AingP, and delivery team) and main activities of the process in a more
abstract view. No speciﬁc notation is used, but some of the BPMN concepts (sequence ﬂow, activities,
start/end events) are maintained. The sequence is primarily forward directional, having 2 loops after the
Change Request (CR) activity. The ongoing exchange of information between the AingP and delivery
team is represented by a dashed line with directional arrows.
Figure 4.17: Process map for Construction Automation (CA)
The main diﬀerence between the map and model on level 4 are related to the lacking lane (project- and
asset-team) and gateways (AND, XOR) representations, only 2 events (Start and End, no intermediate
events), and clustering of sub-processes (Review of appointment).
4.3.2.2
Process Landscape
Figure 4.18 illustrates the proposed adaptations to the ISO process landscape (level 2) from Fig-
ure 2.5 for CA. The main diﬀerences between the proposed- and the ISO landscape models are the
additional activity and the clustering of expanded sub-processes.
The additional activity Change Request (CR) allows updating any initial frameworks and settings,
which was not possible according to the prior landscape. Therefore the activity is maintained alongside
the loop returning the ﬂow to activity 2.
The clustering of expanded sub-processes represents the relation between activities in order to auto-
mate the process. The essential sub-processes to assure a proper implementation are the initial stages,
ranging from activity 1 −4, represented by the expanded sub-process GCA. The gathering and com-
pilation of all necessary execution information occur during this period. Expanded sub-process ACA
represents the deﬁnition of frameworks, while BCA represents the compliance check between the 2
stakeholders. The subsequent sub-processes 5 −6 consist of mainly ”executing” the approved Com-
plete pre-execution documentation, sent by the delivery team at the end of the sub-process 4.8 from
Figure 4.16. These activities are clustered together in the expanded sub-process CCA. The information
43
==PAGE:46==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure 4.18: Process landscape for Construction Automation (CA)
generated during the ”executing” stage, have to be reviewed in activity 7, and if needed, applied Change
Request in activity CR, deﬁning the expanded sub-process DCA. The sequence ﬂow may then either
return to activity 2 through ECA, or continue to project close-out on activity 8 (also denoted as FCA).
44
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Demonstration of Artefact
In the following chapter 5, a demonstration of the produced artifact is conducted.
Initially, a
description of the artifact and its limitations are provided.
In this case, the artifact is capable of
providing guidelines for CA in all the proposed granularity process levels. Thereafter, the performance
is tested by cherry-picking a random activity and maneuvering through the diﬀerent process levels.
5.1
Description
The previous iterations did not follow a chronological order, i.e. starting from granular level and in-
creasing the degree of ﬁneness. This was not possible due to the lacking information from an operational
perspective. Figure 5.1 shows the prior discussed modeling pyramid (Figure 2.2), with the inclusion of
the iteration sequence number and description (red). The type of output for each level (blue) and the
granularity deﬁnitions (black) are indicated by arrows. The upper levels 0 and 1 are related to overall
goals and domain respectively. These have no speciﬁc output, other than this research itself.
Figure 5.1: Process architecture pyramid with the inclusion of the iterations
The produced artifact is capable of providing guidelines for CA in diﬀerent degrees of granularity.
45
==PAGE:48==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
It is also compatible with all levels and allows for cherry-picking any activity independently of the
granularity level, and easily maneuver between levels, whether the desired outcome is more granular or
ﬁner, as demonstrated in section 5.2.
5.1.1
Limitations
The limitations of the artifact are related to speciﬁc data outputs (e.g.
mobilization plan) and
construction-related activities (5 −8), though suggestions for further development are provided respec-
tively in the form of text annotations on the relevant sub-processes and the use of process mining
techniques.
5.2
Simulation
The simulation of placing a brick (Step 3 - Group 2 from the second iteration; level 6 on the pyramid)
has been chosen to illustrate the performance of the artifact. Little information regarding the process is
obtained, when simply looking at the Group in the GH script. The type of extractable information here
is related to brick dimensions and placing patterns. By using the developed artifact and linking the script
to the CA process map (Figure 4.17), it is possible to comprehend the entire ﬂow of information, neces-
sary steps, and the responsibilities of each stakeholder, in order to simulate the placing of that particular
brick while providing guidelines on how to automate the process. In this case, the simulation occurs in
the activity 4 Appointment, where the responsible stakeholder is the delivery team, after receiving ap-
proved feedback from the AingP. The approved message is only sent after a sequence of initial analyses,
assuring compliance between the work, expectations, and other user-relevant properties. More granular
information may also be provided by the artifact if needed (abstract process, domain, and overall goals).
Lastly, the implementation of Change Requests allowed any aspect of the project to be updated
accordingly to the received information. A realistic example could be considered as the ”must-have”
changes of asset geometries or -properties, deﬁned by new end-users. If the Change Request is approved,
the necessary information/framework has to be updated accordingly. As already discussed, not updating
these could lead to wrongly speciﬁed Tender invitations, and subsequently Tender responses stating
compliance of work where there is none. Thus, the importance of being able to update any prior data
output.
46
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Evaluation
In the following chapter 6, the 3 proposed research questions deﬁned in section 1.2 are answered. The
answers are mainly based on the results of the third iteration, which is responsible for interconnecting
the 2 prior iterations and develop coarser process models.
The ﬁrst question (Q1) relates to the adaptations and development of current models in function
of CA. Furthermore, the additional added elements and the unique presented process map containing
the entire ﬂow of all stakeholders during the delivery phase of an asset are discussed.
The second
question (Q2) relates to if all activities in the process are suited for automation, which may be answered
negatively for this case. The last question (Q3) examines what activities are the most and least suited
for CA. The most suited were considered activities 3 and 4, and the least suited activities 1, 5, and 6.
6.1
Q1: Adaptations on Current Models
The ﬁrst question (Q1: What adaptations have to be done on current process models for CA?) may
be answered considering the provided models developed during the iterations from chapter 4.
The proposed standards (ISO and PMI) had to be adapted to enable CA. These standards only
provided abstract levels of information, though it was proved necessary to comprehend the ﬁner levels.
The model type and the extractable information changed signiﬁcantly in function of the modeling levels.
This type of multi granular information was not presented in either of the proposed standards. The
produced artifact maintained all the activities from the BIM domain (ISO) and included some from
the project management domain (PMI). The inclusion of these activities proved to be eﬃcient for the
overall process, and the changes it could be subjected to, independently of the level.
It may also be noticed, that analyzing the lower levels of the pyramid in function of CA, aﬀected
the coarser levels. No process map containing the entire ﬂow of information of the project delivery
phase had been presented in any of the given standards. The inclusion of the process map clariﬁed what
needed adjustments the ISO landscape in Figure 2.5 had to undergo. The ISO landscape clustered the
activities according to the project stage, whereas the landscape model developed at the end of the third
iteration in Figure 4.18, clustered the activities according to the relevance of automation. The Change
Request activity CR was also added, resulting in a total of 9 main activities for the delivery phase of
an asset.
6.2
Q2: Construction Automation Candidates
The second question (Q2: Are all activities of the construction process candidate for automation?)
may be answered negatively. The answer is obtained by individually analyzing the proposed activities
on the process landscape in Figure 4.18. The analysis proved that the suited activities for automation
are in function of the deﬁned frameworks from the expanded sub-process ACA in the landscape model,
47
==PAGE:50==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
and naturally the state-of-art of the available technology. The unstructured environment related to
construction limits the possibilities of fully CA signiﬁcantly.
6.3
Q3: Possibilities of Automation in the Construction Pro-
cess
The third question (Q3: Where are automation possibilities in the construction processes?) may be
answered by analyzing the models on levels 5, developed during the third iteration on section 4.3.1.
This level is responsible for linking the operational data to the standards and enabled the individual
analysis of all activities.
The possibilities, according to the produced artifact, for automation are as follows:
1. Activity 1: Considered to be mostly manual, even if re-used frameworks from similar projects are
adopted. This is especially the case for the reference and shared information regarding the speciﬁc
asset, e.g. geographical properties (soil conditions, distances to surrounding assets) or referencing
tools (GPS or similar area mapping deﬁned as part of the production methods)
2. Activity 2:
Considered as semi-automated, since some information is directly deﬁned here
(Groups 1-3) and others are extracted from the prior activities (Group 4)
3. Activity 3: Almost fully automated. The risk- and mobilization plans have to be deﬁned accord-
ing to the prior deﬁned frameworks
4. Activity 4: Almost fully automated. The requirements of the complete pre-execution documen-
tation may vary according to the project
5. Remaining activities: Potential to be semi-automated. The state-of-the-art for CA does not
allow total automation yet, as discussed in section 4.3.1.5
Thus, activities 3 and 4 are considered the most suitable for automation, whereas 1, 5, and 6 the
least suited, considering the status-quo of the technological development in CA.
48
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 7
Communication
In order to further develop the produced artifact, all outputs are shared through the Zenodo link:
https://zenodo.org/record/4483135#.YBZ2UOhKiUk .
As already discussed, the type of output is in function of the levels from the prior modeling pyramid
in Figure 2.2. In total 3 types of outputs (image, BPMN, and Grasshopper) are presented, as shown
in Table 7.1. Furthermore, the Table provides an overview of all the ﬁles, the modeling level, iteration
number, and an individual description of each ﬁle.
Table 7.1: Output ﬁles of this research.
49
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 8
Conclusion and Future Work
8.1
Conclusion
Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) and the proposed 7 leveled modeling pyramid was in-
troduced, in order to get a better understanding of the processes involved in the construction industry.
According to the modeling pyramid, the type of process models and data outputs are in function of the
given level and end-user. The operational (ﬁne granular) levels have to be comprehended in order to
automate a process. The more abstract (coarse granular) levels are used for overall goals and strategies.
The proposed models and standards from the ISO and PMI proved to be on abstract levels. The ISO
19650 provided BIM guidelines (level 2 on the pyramid, deﬁned as process landscape) of the information
ﬂow between all actors (AingP, LAedP, AedP), whereas the PMBOK provided interdisciplinary guide-
lines (level 3, process map) with the focus on mainly the project manager (AingP). Independently, none
were directly applicable for construction automation (CA), due to the lacking information regarding the
ﬁner levels.
For the ﬁrst iteration, a granular perspective was assumed and merged the information from both
standards. The merging of information was possible due to the presented BPMN concept, resulting
in a process model on level 4. For the second iteration, an operational perspective was assumed using
Grasshopper (GH) scripts to generate RAPID code (ABB robots). The scripts considered only the main
elements of the abstract guidelines and made use of robotic for fully automating the process, resulting
in models on level 6. The third and last iteration interconnected the 2 prior iterations (level 5) and
proposed suggestions to the more granular process landscape (level 2) and -map (level 3) for CA, based
on gained insights.
The obtained results were compatible guidelines in all process levels, ranging from very abstract
(level 0 as shown in Figure 5.1) to operational (level 6 discussed in section 4.2). The simulation showed
it was possible to comprehend the entire process and how to automate it, by analyzing a simple oper-
ational task such as the placing of a brick. The limitations of the produced artifact are related to the
execution activities (5-6) and speciﬁc project data, though suggestions are provided if further analysis
of these are considered necessary.
It could then be concluded that the initial pre-execution activities (1 −4) are essential for establish-
ing CA since all initial frameworks are deﬁned and simulated here. The 2 subsequent activities (5 −6)
are considered as ”executing” the Complete pre-execution documentation, which is sent at the end of
activity 4. This lead to the introduction of Change Requests as an individual activity (CR) on all mod-
eling levels, to assure compliance throughout the remaining parts of the project, according to produced
information. The inclusion of Change Requests resulted in having to adapt the review on activity 7.4
to not only the produced information (as deﬁned in the ISO), but also the approval of Change Requests
(as deﬁned in the PMI).
50
==PAGE:53==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Furthermore, the evaluation showed which activities are the most suitable for CA. These were de-
ﬁned as the Tender response (3) and Appointment (4). In both cases, the majority of the sub-processes
proved to support automation at the operational level (6). The least suited were found to be Assessment
and need (1), Mobilization (5), and Collaborative Production of Information (6). The justiﬁcation is
due to the uniqueness and unstructured environment of the construction environment.
8.2
Future Work
This research makes out a minor part of the overall CA environment. It focuses on guidelines and
the necessary aspects to consider if CA has to be proper implemented. If/when succeeded, CA will
deﬁnitely cause a big impact on the manner an asset is executed, and probably revolutionize the entire
construction industry, in a similar way that automation revolutionized the automotive industry.
The approach used in the conventional construction industry, of modeling an asset as a project
containing a set of N objects, has to be discarded in order to implement CA. Instead, the relevant
stakeholders need to visualize the asset as a process, with Y well-deﬁned activities and sub-processes,
capable of constructing the asset. The concept is illustrated in Figure 8.1 below. To do so, the level
of detail for the operational data has to be high, e.g. to the point of deﬁning brick placing sequences
as done in section 4.2. Thereafter, the gap between process models and the operational data has to
be diminished. This could be done by linking the process models to parametric modeling tools such as
Grasshopper. Independently, changes and improvements to the used modeling tools and in the way the
industry executes an asset are already visible, but CA has still a long way to go in order to become a
reality.
Figure 8.1: Adaptations the construction industry has to undergo in order to implement CA
51
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1] B. Flyvbjerg and W. Rothengatter, “Megaprojects and risk: An anatomy of ambition,” Journal of
Public Sector Management, 2003.
[2] B. Flyvbjerg, M. K. S. Holm, and S. L. Buhl, “What causes cost overrun in transport infrastructure
projects?” Transport Reviews, vol. 24, 2004.
[3] C. Eastman, P. Teicholz, R. Sacks, and K. Liston, BIM Handbook - A Guide to Building Information
Modeling for Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers, and Contractors. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2011.
[4] G. Hillier, “Construction products for a sustainable society,” Ironmaking & Steelmaking, vol. 31:6,
2004.
[5] R. N. Foster, Innovation: The attacker’s advantage.
McKinsey & Company, 1986.
[6] T. Bock, “The future of construction automation: Technological disruption and the upcoming
ubiquity of robotics,” Automation in Construction, vol. 59, 2015.
[7] IBM. What is automation? [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.com/topics/automation
[8] E. Guglielmelli and K. Goldberg, “What Is Automation?” IEEE ROBOTICS & AUTOMATION
MAGAZINE, vol. 1, 2014.
[9] I. S. Fulmer and R. E. Ployhart, “Our most important asset”: A multidisciplinarymultilevel review
of human capital valuation for research and practice,” Journal of Management, vol. 40:1, 2014.
[10] B.S. McEwen, “Stress: Homeostasis, rheostasis, reactive scope, allostasis and allostatic load,” Mod-
ule in Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Psychology, vol. 28, 2017.
[11] Wikipedia. Allostatic load. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allostatic load#:∼:
text=Allostatic%20load%20is%20%22the%20wear,McEwen%20and%20Stellar%20in%201993.
[12] Wikipedia. Yerkes-dodson law. [Online]. Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yerkes%E2%
80%93Dodson law
[13] T. Bock and T. Linner, Robot-Oriented Desgin - Design and Management Tools for the Deployment
of Automation and Robotics in Construction.
Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[14] United
States
Department
of
Labor.
Commonly
used
statistics.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bls.gov/charts/census-of-fatal-occupational-injuries/
number-and-rate-of-fatal-work-injuries-by-industry.htm
[15] Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Census of fatal occupational injuries summary,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.bls.gov/news.release/cfoi.nr0.htm
[16] United States Environmental Protection Agency. Mortality risk valuation. [Online]. Available:
https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/mortality-risk-valuation
[17] Wikipedia. Value of life. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value of life
52
==PAGE:55==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
[18] K. Morrison. The roi of safety. [Online]. Available: https://www.safetyandhealthmagazine.com/
articles/print/10414-the-roi-of-safety
[19] K.
Viscusi
and
S.
Gonzalez.
How
government
agencies
determine
the
dollar
value
of
human
life.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.npr.org/2020/04/23/843310123/
how-government-agencies-determine-the-dollar-value-of-human-life?t=1600323805064
[20] J. L. Blanco, S. Fuchs, M. Parsons, and M. J. Ribeirinho”, “Artiﬁcial intelligence: Construction
technology’s next frontier,” 2018.
[21] M. J. Kim, H.-L. Chi, X. Wang, and L. Ding”, “Automation and robotics in construction and civil
engineering,” J Intell Robot Syst, vol. 119, 2020.
[22] A. Aapaoja and H. Haapasalo, “The challenges of standardization of products and processes in
construction,” International Group for Lean Construction Annual Conference, vol. 24, 2014.
[23] S. Baird. What is a process?
[Online]. Available:
https://www.processmodel.com/blog/
what-is-a-process/
[24] European Committee for Standardization, “Building information modelling - information delivery
manual - part 1: Methodology and format,” 2004.
[25] Object
Management
Group.
Business
Process
Model
and
Notation.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bpmn.org/
[26] J. Wix, “Quick Guide Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) ,” IDM Methodology : Process
Mapping, vol. 1, 2007.
[27] Signavio. Signavio. [Online]. Available: https://www.signavio.com/
[28] Visual
Paradigm.
BPMN
Activity
Types
Explained.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.
visual-paradigm.com/guide/bpmn/bpmn-activity-types-explained/
[29] M. Dumas, M. L. Rosa, J. Mendling, and H. A. Reijers, Fundamentals of Business Process Man-
agement.
Springer, 2012.
[30] R. Peisl, “The Process Architect: The Smart Role in Business Process Management,” IBM Redpa-
per, vol. 1, 2012.
[31] D. Weatherhead. How to Present Business Process Models to Stakeholders. [Online]. Available:
https://blog.leonardo.com.au/presenting-business-process-models-to-stakeholders
[32] European Committee for Standardization, “Organization and digitization of information about
buildings and civil engineering works, including building information modelling (BIM) - Information
management using building information modelling - Part 1: Concepts and principles,” 2018.
[33] ——, “Organization and digitization of information about buildings and civil engineering works,
including building information modelling (BIM) - Information management using building infor-
mation modelling - Part 2: Delivery phase of the assets,” 2018.
[34] J. Karlshøj. A standard ensuring better ﬂow of – and access to – information. [Online]. Available:
https://www.planet-tech.dk/bim/iso-19650-information-in-construction/
[35] European Committee for Standardization, “Guidance on how to implement EN ISO 19650-1 and
-2 in Europe,” 2020.
[36] Project Management Institute, A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, 5th ed.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
[37] D. Rumsfeld. Unknown unknowns. [Online]. Available:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
GiPe1OiKQuk
53
==PAGE:56==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
[38] K. Peﬀers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee, “A design science research
methodology for information systems research,” Journal of Management Information Systems,
vol. 24, 2007.
[39] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in information systems research,”
MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, 2004.
[40] Wikipedia. Grasshopper 3d. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grasshopper 3D#:
∼:text=Grasshopper%20is%20a%20visual%20programming,dragging%20components%20onto%
20a%20canvas.
[41] D. Stefanescu and M. Cominetti. Speckle. [Online]. Available: https://speckle.systems/
[42] Eversmann.
Robot
components.
[Online].
Available:
https://robotcomponents.github.io/
RobotComponents-Documentation/
[43] Robotiq.
2F-85
and
2F-140
Grippers.
[Online].
Available:
https://robotiq.com/products/
2f85-140-adaptive-robot-gripper
[44] B. R. Manthaa, M. K. Junga, B. G. de Sotoa, C. C. Menassab, and V. R. Kamatb”, “Generalized
task allocation and route planning for robots with multiple depots in indoor building environments,”
Automation in Construction, vol. 79, 2015.
[45] W. van der Aalst, Process Mining: Data Science in Action.
Springer, 2006, vol. 2.
[46] NACE.
Accidents
at
work
statistics.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php/Accidents at work statistics#Number of accidents
54
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A
Statistic of the Construction
Industry
Figure A.1 shows the comparison of the labor productivity factor in the construction industry and
the labor productivity factor in non-farm industries in a period from 1964-2009 (45 years). The non-farm
industry labor productivity has more than double in the 45-year period, whereas the construction labor
productivity has a decrease of 10% [3].
Figure A.1: Labor productivity factor for the construction and non-farm industry [3]
Table A.1 shows the cost overruns faced in diﬀerent types of large construction scale projects [2].
I
==PAGE:58==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Table A.1: Cost overruns faced in large scale projects
Figure A.2 shows the rate of fatal and non-fatal accidents in Europe during the period of 2017-
2018 [46]. Figure A.3 shows the number of fatal accidents in the USA during 2019 [14]. In both cases,
the construction industry counts for the highest numbers of fatal accidents.
Figure A.2: Rate of fatal and non-fatal accidents in Europe during the period of 2017-2018 [46]
II
==PAGE:59==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure A.3: Number of fatal accidents in the USA during 2019 [14]
III
==PAGE:60==
Appendix B
Symbology used in BPMN
Figure B.1 shows examples of commonly used BPMN notations.
IV
==PAGE:61==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure B.1: a) Collapsed Pool, and Pool containing 2 lanes; b) Task, Collapsed sub-process, and Expanded sub-process; c) Sequence & message ﬂow; d)
Start event, and Start message event; e) Intermediate event, Catching intermediate message event, and Throwing intermediate message event; f) End event, and
End message event; g) Exclusive diverging- and converging-gateway (XOR) ; h) Inclusive diverging- and converging-gateway (OR); i) Parallel diverging- and
converging-gateway (AND); j) Text annotation;
V
==PAGE:62==
Appendix C
Expanded ISO Activities
The following images from Figure C.1 to Figure C.8 illustrates the expanded versions of the collapsed
sub-processes presented in Figure 2.5 [33].
Figure C.1: Information Management Process - Assessment and need
VI
==PAGE:63==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure C.2: Information Management Process - Invitation to Tender
Figure C.3: Information Management Process - Tender Response
VII
==PAGE:64==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure C.4: Information Management Process - Appointment
Figure C.5: Information Management Process - Mobilization
VIII
==PAGE:65==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure C.6: Information Management Process - Collaborative Production of Information
Figure C.7: Information Management Process - Information Model Delivery
IX
==PAGE:66==
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure C.8: Information Management Process - Project Close Out
X
==PAGE:67==
Appendix D
ISO 19650 As-Is BPMN
Figure D.1 illustrates the proposed as-is model, when applying BPMN concepts on the ISO process
landscape provided in chapter 2.
XI
==PAGE:68==
ISO BPMN As-Is
Appointing party (AingP)
Appointing party (AingP)
Appointing party (AingP)
Start project
1.1-1.8
1)
Assessment &
Need
2.1-2.4
2) Invitation
tender
Send Tender
Invitation
7.4
Approved?
Return info
to WIP
Model complete?
End Project
8) Project
close out
8.1-8.2
Received
info
Appointment
Delivery Team
Delivery Team
3.1-3.7
3) Tender
response
Initiate Tender
Response
5.1-5.3
6.2-6.5
7.3) Submit info model
for AingP accept
4.1-4.6
5) Mobilization
6) Collaborative
production of info
Approved?
4) Appointment
6.1
7) Information
model delivery
7.1-7.2
3.7) Response tender
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Automation in Construction;
A Business Process Management Perspective
MSc. Civil Engineering Thesis
Figure D.1: BPMN applied on the as-is ISO 19650 process model
XII
