==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis for the M.Sc. in Biomedical Engineering
Computational Modelling of
Electrophysiological Responses to Speech
in Hearing Impaired Listeners
Name
Stine Bech Petersen
Student ID
S182909
Department
DTU health tech
Email
s182909@student.dtu.dk
Date
February 3, 2021
Main supervisor
Jens Hjortkjær
Co-supervisor
Jonathan Märcher-Rørsted
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my main supervisor, Senior Researcher Jens Hjortkjær, who has been an un-
wavering support and inspiration throughout this project.
Further I would like to thank Jonathan
Märcher-Rørsted for his for his support in his role as co-supervisor. In addition would like to thank Gio-
vanni Di Liberto and Michael Broderick for their collaboration and the inspiration they have provided
for this thesis.
My greatest gratitude befalls my family, who has always provided me with support and guidance,
and without whom I would not be achieving this degree. Tak!
1
==PAGE:3==
Computational Modelling of Electrophysiological Responses to Speech
in Hearing Impaired Listeners
Stine Bech Petersen
Abstract
Background: Based on behavioral studies it has been argued that hearing-impaired listeners rely more
on semantic cues than their normal hearing counterparts for successful speech perception. These claims
remain to be proven in electrophysiological investigations of speech perception and the underlying neural
processes supporting this behavior are therefore not understood.
Recently, computational methods
have emerged to support modelling neural responses to continuous speech which makes it possible to
investigate speech perception in conditions of higher ecological value. Aim of the study: The main goal
of this thesis was therefore to investigate hearing loss-induced changes in the application of semantic
cues for speech processing by means of modelling cortical responses to natural, continuous speech.
Methods: Cortical responses to semantic cues of continuous speech were modelled using temporal
response functions (TRFs) to estimate high-level processing of semantic cues for speech in quiet and
competing speech. Additionally the eﬀects of semantic cues on low-level early auditory encoding of
speech envelopes were modelled in two steps. Initially cortical envelope encodings were estimated using
decoding models, and the accuracy with which these envelopes were encoded was then assessed in a linear
mixed-eﬀect model in terms of possible eﬀects of semantic cues. Conclusion: Neurally-founded evidence
was uncovered which supports the results of behavioral studies which ﬁnd that hearing-impaired listeners
rely more on semantic cues for speech perception, than their normal hearing counterparts. Furthermore
evidence was also found that normal hearing listeners have positive eﬀects of semantic cues on early
auditory encoding of speech envelopes which are not present in hearing-impaired listeners. The results
were discussed in terms of a tendency of high-level cortical responses to semantic cues being present in
conditions of decreased speech signal quality (hearing impairment or competing speakers) and positive
eﬀects of semantic cues on low-level encoding of speech being present in excellent listening conditions
(normal hearing and a single speaker).
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Background & Prior Work
10
2.1
Speech Perception and Semantic Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Behavioral Studies of Semantics in Speech Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Electrophysiological Studies of Semantics in Speech Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Electrophysiological Studies Applying Natural Speech Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Materials & Methods
18
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Dataset - Selective Speech Attention Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.3
Audio Pre-Processing - Envelope Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.4
EEG Pre-Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Computational Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Encoding and Decoding Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Extracting Semantic Features From Speech
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
Modelling Scheme 1 - Semantic Encoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.4
Modelling Scheme 2 - Eﬀect of Semantic Cues on Early Auditory Encoding
. . .
31
4
Results
35
4.1
Modelling Scheme 1 - Semantic Encoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
Semantic Encoder 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Semantic Encoder 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.3
Investigating Eﬀects of Hearing Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Modelling Scheme 2 - Eﬀects of Semantic Cues on Early Auditory Encoding . . . . . . .
41
5
Discussion
45
5.1
Hearing-impaired listeners apply semantic cues diﬀerently than normal hearing listeners
45
5.2
Further investigation is needed on representation of semantic and contextual features of
speech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.1
Acoustic Onset Eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.3
Modelling Choices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Conclusion
50
6.1
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
4
A Appendix
56
A.0.1
Eﬀects of standard deviation thresholded denoising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.0.2
Table of noisy EEG-channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:6==
List of Tables
2.1
Overview of Selected Behavioral Studies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
ANOVAs of behavioral studies - participant groups X context levels . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
The encoding models included in modelling scheme 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1
Linear Mixed Eﬀects Model - Normal Hearing Listeners. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Linear Mixed Eﬀects Model - Hearing Impaired Listeners. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Results from permutations of LMEs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
Simple functional illustration of the ventral stream. Adapted from [1]. . . . . . .
11
3.1
Illustration of the pre-processing pipelines of inspirational studies alongside
the pipeline of this study. Broderick et al 2018 [2], Broderick et al. 2020 [3] Fuglsang
et al. 2020 [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Result of applying low pass ﬁltering (fc = 30Hz) and high pass ﬁltering (fc =
0.5Hz) to the re-referenced data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
width=8cm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Illustration of the eﬀects of the EOG denoising algorithm. EEG-data is shown
in yellow for a frontal and a parietal channel before and after applying the EOG-ﬁlter.
The detected articfacts are shown in blue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Illustration of the computational models applied in the study. The structure of
the study can be divided into two overall computational schemes. Modelling scheme 1
(yellow) is based on training encoding models to predict EEG-responses from semantic
features extracted from speech. The resulting encoding models are then analyzed relative
to the hearing status of the participant. More details in Section 3.2.3. Modelling scheme
2 (blue) is based on training and applying decoding models to predict envelopes of the
speech features and subsequently analyzing if semantic features have an impact on how
well these envelopes are recreated by the model. More details in Section 3.2.4 . . . . . .
24
3.6
Example of semantic features from one of the trials in the experiment. Impulse height
corresponds to the semantic dissimilarity and their temporal occurrence to the onset of
the word.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.7
Organization of the semantic encoding models. For each subjects a model is ﬁtted
in each listening condition. The resulting model are analyzed w. respect to hearing status. 30
3.8
Illustration of modelling scheme 2. Features are extracted for each content word
from 25-125ms post word-onset. The dependent variable which is related to the strength
with which speech envelopes are encoded cortically was computed based on reconstructed
envelopes from decoding models.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1
Semantic encoder 1 - overview & attention eﬀect. (a) topographies of the TRFs
(averaged for all subjects) for the three listening conditions at time intervals determined
from inspection of TRFs. Notice that the colorbar has a diﬀerent scale for the unattended
TRFs. (b) TRFs at channel Pz. Thick lines indicate signiﬁcant negativity of TRF relative
to baseline (top plot) or unit-onset model (bottom plot).
Signiﬁcance determined by
paired permutation t-tests and FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons at a signiﬁcance
level of α = 0.05.
Only samples between the two dotted lines are hypothesis tested
(∼150ms to 500ms). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
==PAGE:8==
LIST OF FIGURES
7
4.2
Semantic encoder 2 - overview. (a) Comparison of TRFs (averaged across subjects) of
regressors from semantic encoder 2 (onsets and semantic dissimilarity) and from semantic
encoder 1 (just semantic dissimilarity) in the single-talker condition. Thick lines indicate
a signiﬁcantly more negative TRF than achieved with the permuted baseline models. (b)
Topographies of the TRF weights (averaged across subjects) for the two regressors of
semantic encoder 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Onset and semantic similarity TRFs from both attended and unattended
speech. Thick lines indicate where the attended TRFs are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
the corresponding unattended TRF (FDR-corrected t-test at α = 0.05).
. . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Semantic encoder 2 - eﬀects of hearing status. (a) Average semantic dissimilarity
TRFs for single-talker and attended data separated for HI and NH listeners. Thick lines
indicate signiﬁcant negativity relative the permuted baseline models. (b) Comparison of
prediction accuracy means within the three diﬀerent listening conditions for NH and HI
subjects. p −values : NH: single-talker: p = 0.0119, attended: p = 1.41 · 10−4. HI:
single-talker: p = 1.70 · 10−5, attended: p = 5.33 · 10−4 (c) Comparison of prediction
accuracy means
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Distributions of LME-models with permuted onset and semantic similarity
features. Distributions shown in yellow and values of the actual model are indicated
with dashed lines. (a) Model ﬁtted for normal hearing subjects. (b) Model ﬁtted for
hearing impaired subjects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Visualization of the tree-way interaction of the NH LME model in relation the
eﬀect of semantic similarity. The y-axis of this illustration gives the size of the eﬀect
which semantic similarity has on envelope reconstruction accuracy. The x-axis is based
on max. and min. values of the z-scored context-amount regressor. Listening condition
is illustrating by colors.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Visualization of the eﬀect of context-amount on envelope reconstruction ac-
curacy for LME model of HI listeners. The y-axis of this illustration gives the size
of the eﬀect which onset-amount has on envelope reconstruction accuracy. The x-axis
shows the categorical regressor listening condition. Semantic similarity has no eﬀect on
the onset-amount eﬀect. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Age-related hearing loss aﬀects a large amount of the older population, and it is estimated that around
one third of people above the age of 60 and half of people above the age 80 suﬀer from some degree of
hearing loss[5]. Age-related hearing loss, also called presbycusis, describes a decline in auditory function
speciﬁcally caused by aging and not solely by the incremental eﬀects of noise and other damaging factors
over a lifetime[6]. It will often emerge as a decreased ability to successfully comprehend speech in the
presence of background noise and it mainly aﬀects the ability to hear high-frequencies[5].
Investigations of word recognition in hearing-impaired subjects have uncovered evidence that the im-
plications of hearing loss extend into the domain of perceptual speech processing where the semantic
meaning of words is processed. Speciﬁcally, these studies have found evidence that hearing-impaired
listeners can overcome some of their diﬃculties of hearing by relying more on contextual cues found in
speech to identify upcoming words[7][8][9][10][11]. Based on these results it has been hypothesized, that
one way in which hearing impaired listeners can compensate for their hearing loss is by using semantic
(or contextual cues) to prepare for, or guess, which word is coming next[8][9]. However, to the authors
knowledge there is no evidence as to whether hearing-impaired listeners show diﬀerent processing of
semantic cues at the neuronal level. This means, that although it has been behaviorally proven that
hearing-impairment can lead to alterations in speech perception, the neural mechanisms underlying these
alterations have not been uncovered. In order to further understand how, and if, hearing-impairment
causes changes to the way in which semantic contents of speech are processed it is necessary to also
investigate these neural processes.
As indicated, speech perception is a process which extends far beyond the initial sensory registration
of sound waves. Complex processes of transforming spectrotemporal features of speech into conceptual
units which can be understood by listeners as words of meaning are continuously studied, and to this
day have not been fully uncovered[12]. It follows from this, that the full nature of hearing loss and its
implications on speech perception are not understood either. This also entails that an electrophysiolog-
ical investigation of semantic processing in hearing-impaired listeners does not trivially translate into
speciﬁc methods.
Traditionally, electrophysiological studies of semantic processing have investigated event-related poten-
tials (ERPs) in which a speciﬁc negative component called the N400 has been found to reﬂect semantic
processing. Speciﬁcally the N400 has been found to occur in response to semantical surprisal, when
words are perceived as surprising given their preceding context[13]. ERPs are achieved through aver-
aging EEG-responses to many similar and short trials to average out noise, which means that stimuli
applied in these studies have to be short and repetitive. Applying this type of stimuli to make inferences
8
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
9
about the ecological perceptions of speech has been problematized as these type of stimuli do not bear
much resemblance to continuous speech[14].
To be able to analyze speech perception in relation to speech bearing closer resemblance to ecologi-
cal conditions advanced methods of computational analysis of electrophysiological measures have been
suggested. These studies use long sequences of natural speech, often the reading of audio books, and
apply regression-based methods to model the neural responses related to speech[15][16]. More recently
these methods have also been successfully applied to the investigation of the semantic aspects of speech
perception in normal hearing listeners[2][17][3], which opens of the possibility also applying these meth-
ods to broaden our understanding how semantic processing changes with hearing loss.
1.1
Problem Statement
Evidence of hearing loss-derived changes to the application of semantic cues for speech recognition has
been repeatedly uncovered in behavioral studies.
But the results of behavioral studies do not oﬀer
insight as to how alterations in neuronal processing might be causing these diﬀerences in the application
of semantic cues. The main objective of this study is therefore to apply computational methods to
investigate the neural aspects of semantic processing in hearing-impaired listeners.
This should be
achieved through applying emerging methods of analysis for natural speech to investigate EEG-responses
of older hearing-impaired listeners and age-matched normal hearing listeners.
The speciﬁc aims of the project are:
• To review literature concerning semantic processing of speech, and to investigate methods for
electrophysiological analysis of natural speech.
• To obtain a method to quantitatively represent semantic cues from Danish speech stimuli.
• To estimate cortical responses to semantic cues in hearing-impaired and normal hearing listeners
through the computation of temporal response functions.
• To investigate the inﬂuence of semantic cues on low-level encoding of acoustic features of speech.
• To investigate diﬀerences in the application of semantic cues in hearing-impaired listeners related
to increased attentional demands caused by an interfering speech stream.
.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Background & Prior Work
Before attempting to understand how semantic aspects of speech perception might change with hearing
loss a basic understanding of the cortical organization related to speech perception is needed. In this
background chapter the initial section will therefore introduce the organization of this system as it has
been described by Hickok & Poeppel (2007)[12].
Upon building this foundation of speech perception and semantic processing an overview will be given
of behavioral studies, which have found that hearing-impairment and/or age has an eﬀect on how these
processes manifest themselves. Following this, the chapter will move on to electrophysiological studies
of semantic processing. In this section, classical studies using the event-related potential (ERP) will be
discussed initially before ending the chapter with a review of studies which have applied computational
modelling to investigate semantic processing of natural speech.
2.1
Speech Perception and Semantic Processing
In linguistics, the concept of word meaning is studied in the ﬁeld of lexical semantics (simply referred
to as semantics from this point) [18]. To facilitate the understanding of a word, a mapping must occur
between the acoustic signal and the semantic meaning of the word, and semantics are therefore a crucial
aspect of speech perception [11].
The neural foundations and organizations which support speech processing have been, and are still,
diﬃcult to characterize. This includes both the process of going from acoustic inputs to perceptual pro-
cessing of meaning as well as the production of speech[12]. Hickok & Poeppel (2007)[12] have proposed
one theory to conceptualize these processes and their cortical organizations in the human brain. They
propose a dual-stream model in which a dorsal stream, which includes the posterior dorsal-most aspect
of the temporal lobe, the parietal operculum and the posterior frontal lobe, is responsible for the speech
development and production. Whereas a ventral stream, which includes structures of the superior and
middle portion of the temporal lobe, is involved in speech perception and comprehension. It is beyond
the scope of this text to engage further in these detailed observations of cortical areas responsible for
speech processing, but the concepts of conceptual and semantic speech perception inherent to the the-
ory of the ventral stream oﬀer valuable insights into concepts related to the aims of this study. The
organizational nature of the diﬀerent cortical areas of the ventral stream illustrate diﬀerent areas, or
levels, of speech perception from which changes related to hearing loss might derive. These levels have
been illustrated in Figure 2.1.
As shown in Figure 2.1, the cortical processing of speech initiates in the auditory cortex where spec-
10
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK
11
Fig. 2.1. Simple functional illustration of the ventral stream. Adapted from [1].
trotemporal analysis resides. The early auditory cortex is where envelopes of speech have been shown
to be encoded, which is also referred to as low-level or acoustic cues of speech. As one ascends by the
ventral stream from this area of processing towards more abstract and perceptual concepts of speech,
the understanding of the cortical localizations and the implications of the processes become vaguer [1].
Beyond the auditory cortex a phonological network associated phoneme processing, which are the small-
est units of sound that may cause a change of meaning in language, is found. One further step in the
ascending direction of the ventral stream leads to areas related to lexical, or lemma, processing which
relates to the grouping of phonemes into words or units of meaning. Finally, the networks associated
with the semantic meaning of the speech are reached. This is a high-level of cortical speech processing
in which the conceptual aspects of speech are processed. The above explanation might indicate a sin-
gle direction of processing from low-level to high-level speech processing, however as indicated by the
directions of the arrows in Figure 2.1, unidirectionality is not assumed [12]. On the contrary top-down
information ﬂows are assumed to be an inherent part of the system[11].
2.2
Behavioral Studies of Semantics in Speech Processing
In this section studies including both hearing-impaired and normal hearing subjects in the analysis of
semantic eﬀects on speech processing will be presented. Through these studies it will be demonstrated,
that there is evidence of hearing acuity-derived eﬀects on the use of semantic cues during speech pro-
cessing. In addition to this, studies investigating the same eﬀects in relation to age are also included
since the participants of this study are all older.
Table 2.1 gives an overview of three interesting studies investigating the eﬀects of hearing impairment
and contextual support. These studies examine the eﬀects of varying contextual support, where high
level of contextual support translates to a high degree of semantic relatedness between words[8][10].
The studies in Table 2.1 all apply cloze probabilities (see info box 2.1) to determine the contextual
support. Overall, these studies point towards a tendency that semantic cues can mitigate diﬀerences
in speech recognition thresholds between normal hearing (NH) and hearing-impaired (HI) subjects. In
other words, hearing impaired listeners derive more beneﬁt from context than their normal hearing
counterparts [8][10][7].
All the studies from Table 2.1 include normal-hearing participants (NH) and hearing-impaired par-
ticipants (HI). Some also include participant groups of diﬀerent ages in which case it clearly stated in
table 2.1. If not, it can be assumed, that the groups are of equivalent ages.
The ﬁrst study in Table 2.1, Benichov et al.
(2012)[7] use a SPIN test to examine eﬀects of con-
textual support and hearing loss on speech recognition. In SPIN tests, participants are presented with
sentences in which the ﬁnal (target) word is masked by multi-talker babble. The subjects are then asked
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK
12
Table 2.1: Overview of Selected Behavioral Studies.
Benichov et al.
(2012)[7]
Lash & Rogers
(2013)[8]
Moradi et al.
(2014)[10]
Method
SPINatest
"SPIN"-inspired
test with gated
onsets instead of
noise masking
"SPIN"-inspired
test with gated
onsets instead of
noise masking
Participants
NHb
Slight-to-mild HIc
Moderate HI
NH
Older, NH
Older, HI
Elderly, NH
Elderly, hearing aid
users
Levels of context
No context
Low context
Medium context
High context
No context
Low context
Medium context
High context
Low context
High
context
a Speech Perception In Noise
b Normal Hearing
c Hearing Impairment
to identify the target word and the SNR is increased until successful target identiﬁcation is achieved.
The SNR which yields correct target word identiﬁcation is the speech recognition threshold [7]. The two
other studies of Table 2.1, Lash & Rogers (2013) [8] and Moradi et al. (2014), [10] apply very similar
tests in which the amount of the target word presented is limited instead of being masked by noise. This
is called onset-gating because the temporal information is gated starting from word onset1. In all three
studies, Cloze probabilities are applied as a measure of contextual support for the target word.
Info Box 2.1: Cloze Probabilities
Cloze probabilities are estimated using the Cloze procedure in which the probability of seeing a
given word in a sentence is deﬁned by the number of individuals asked to complete the sentence
who choose the given word [7].
• No context: The word is FLOOR
• Low context: The cigar burned a hole in the FLOOR
• Medium context: The boys helped Jane wax her FLOOR
• High context: Some of the ashes dropped on the FLOOR
Examples taken from Benichov et al. (2012) [7]. Target word in caps.
Table 2.2 presents selected results from the three studies examined in this section. Speciﬁcally, all three
studies performed mixed-design analyses of variance (ANOVA) on the factors; participant groups ×
context levels. In Benichov et al. (2012) and Moradi et al. (2014) participant groups correspond to
1Onset-gating: given a gate-size of 10ms, the subject will initially hear only the ﬁrst 10ms of the target word. The
amount of the word presented in increased by the gate-size until correct target identiﬁcation.[8]
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK
13
Table 2.2: ANOVAs of behavioral studies - participant groups X context levels
Benichov et al.
(2012)[7]
Lash et al. (2013)[8]
Moradi et al.
(2014)[10]
Group Eﬀect
HIa, signiﬁcant
HI and age,
signiﬁcant
HI, signiﬁcant
Context Level Eﬀect
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Interaction Eﬀect
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcantb
Signiﬁcant
a Hearing Impairment
b Ceases to be signiﬁcant when ANOVA is run without the ’No context’-level.
diﬀerent levels of hearing loss, whereas in Lash et al. (2013) participant group contains both diﬀering
levels of hearing loss and age. Benichov et al. (2012) found that for three groups of participants (varying
degrees of hearing-acuity) the word recognition threshold dropped as context was increased. An ANOVA
showed signiﬁcance for the interaction eﬀect of hearing level and context level leading to the conclusion
that as context increases the negative eﬀects of hearing loss diminish indicating that hearing-impaired
subjects derive more beneﬁt from context than their normal hearing counterparts. Lash et al. (2013)
found the same signiﬁcant interaction although in this study eﬀects of age and hearing acuity were
intertwined. Lash et al. (2013) extended their analysis by adding a 3(group) × 3(context) ANOVA
where they excluded the ’no context’-condition, and found that in this case the interaction eﬀect ceased
to be signiﬁcant and only main eﬀects remained signiﬁcant. This led to the conclusion that it could
not be concluded that any group achieved more beneﬁt from context than another without including
a no context condition.
Moradi et al.
(2013) on the contrary did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant interaction ef-
fect of group (only hearing-status) × context without including a ’no context’-condition indicating that
diﬀerences between normal hearing and hearing-impaired subjects does diminish with increasing context.
One might theorize that the fact that Lash et al.
(2013) were not able to achieve a signiﬁcant in-
teraction eﬀect when not including a no context condition could mean that the Cloze probabilities do
not oﬀer a wide enough range of semantic context to capture such an eﬀect. If this is the case, then this
issue might be mitigated in studies using a continuous measure of context for the words in a text which
would result in a wider range of semantics. Another possibility could be, that it is the age eﬀect included
in Lash et al. (2013), which causes the insigniﬁcant interaction eﬀect. This is supported by the fact,
that Moradi et al. (2014) did see a signiﬁcant interaction eﬀect without including a no context condition.
Interestingly, Benichov et al. (2012) extended their analysis by means of a hierarchical multiple re-
gression analysis for each context level. In these analyses hearing acuity was entered ﬁrst into the model
to account for variance in speech reception thresholds due to this factor ﬁrst. This analysis proved that
hearing acuity had a signiﬁcant impact on speech recognition thresholds in all context conditions except
the highest, indicating that when a high amount of context is available speech reception thresholds are
not dependent on hearing acuity. Any remaining diﬀerences in hearing thresholds between the groups
of diﬀerent hearing acuity in the high context condition was therefore concluded to have been caused by
other factors.
In the hierarchical analysis Benichov et al. (2012)[7] also investigated the eﬀect of age on the speech
recognition thresholds. They found that the eﬀect of age on the speech recognition thresholds was sig-
niﬁcant for all four tested levels of context after correcting for eﬀects of verbal ability, cognitive abilities
and hearing acuity. This means that for the highest context condition, in which hearing acuity ceased to
be signiﬁcant, age was still a signiﬁcant contributor to recognition thresholds. In addition to this, they
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK
14
also found that cognitive abilities are a signiﬁcant factor in all 4 context conditions even after accounting
for the hearing acuity. This age eﬀect is important to keep in mind when investigating ARHL, because
eﬀects of age and hearing loss on speech recognition thresholds might show similar patterns.
Another possible age-related eﬀect on semantic aspects of speech processing was identiﬁed by Rogers &
Wingﬁeld (2015) [9], who concluded that older adults rely more on semantic information than young
adults causing them to misidentify target words. This conclusion was derived from an experiment in
which they presented word-pairs with the second word being the noise-masked target word in diﬀerent
conditions. The conditions included a semantic prime, in which the target word was semantically related
to the ﬁrst word. A semantic lure in which the target word was a word which was phonetically similar
to a semantic associate of the ﬁrst word, but importantly, it was in fact not a semantic associate. And
ﬁnally a neutral prime in which the target word was neither semantically nor phonetically related to the
ﬁrst word. In the neutral condition and the semantic prime condition, the two groups’ performances
were independent of age eﬀects (two-factor ANOVA for age and SNR). In the semantic lure condition
however, age became a signiﬁcant factor and older subjects performed signiﬁcantly worse than young
subjects. In spite of conditions of equal audibility the older adults were signiﬁcantly more likely to
mention the semantic associate of the prime word instead of the actual target word. Indicating, that
older adults were more likely than young adults to rely on semantic information for prediction of target
words.
2.3
Electrophysiological Studies of Semantics in Speech Processing
Electrophysiological studies evaluating semantic aspects of speech processing can provide insights to the
neural mechanisms underlying the results of behavoiral studies. These studies apply methods such as
electroencephalography (EEG) to evaluate brain responses to semantic features of speech stimuli.
The focus of this section is to present methods previously applied in electrophysiological studies of
the eﬀects of semantic cues in speech processing and not exclusively in relation to hearing impairment.
This choice has been made because the number of electrophysiological studies examining both semantic
cues and hearing impairment is very limited.
Electrophysiological studies of the eﬀects of semantic cues on speech processing reached a milestone
in 1980, when Kutas & Hillyard (1980)[19] ﬁrst described the N400 component of the Event-Related
Potential (ERP). A centro-parietal negativity occurring around 400ms after presentation of a sentence
stimulus with an unexpected ﬁnal word. Kutas & Hillyard had their participants read 7-word sentences
ending with either a congruent word or an improbable word and found the N400 component in response
to the improbable words in the ERPs. This response was characterized as a monophasic negativity ap-
pearing at most strongly at centro-parietal sites between 200ms and 600ms [13]. The N400 component
has since been thoroughly studied and today it is acknowledged to be a measure of meaning processing
which generalizes across modalities and extends beyond linguistics to for instance pictures of faces[13].
Importantly, the N400 is clearly distinguishable from the P300 component which Kutas & Hillyard ini-
tially expected to ﬁnd in their 1980 study. The P300 component is typically elicited in Oddball studies
where a stimulus is surprising or diﬀerent from its context such as part of a text presented in a larger
font. However, as the N400 studies have shown, when this diﬀerence is related to meaning processing,
the response is an N400 instead of the P300. In the context of linguistics is has speciﬁcally been excluded
that the N400 response is be evokable by other incongruities in language such as grammatical errors,
morphological errors, or audio volume - it only occurs in response to semantic (meaning) incongruities
[20][13].
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK
15
N400-experiments of semantic language processing traditionally use isolated sentences where the neural
response to the ﬁnal word of the sentence is analyzed. By means of Cloze probabilities the responses
are analyzed relative to the contextual support of the ﬁnal word. The use of isolated sentences means
that this method is not applicable to the analysis of natural/continuous speech, and for this reason
results achieved using the N400 might not always generalize well to natural language [14]. Furthermore,
the N400 deﬁnition might lead to the conclusion that only one kind of surprisal exists in relation the
semantics of speech processing. However, other studies ﬁnd that diﬀerent language aspects can lead to
diﬀerent estimations of surprisal indicating separate processing mechanisms [21]. One example of this
is seen in Broderick et al (2020) [3], who ﬁnd two diﬀerent estimates of surprisal in response to natural
speech; lexical and semantic. These diﬀerent aspects of linguistic surprisal might relate to diﬀerent levels
the cortical speech perception pathway (Figure 2.1) and it is therefore highly relevant to apply natural
speech methods to uncover these eﬀects.
2.3.1
Electrophysiological Studies Applying Natural Speech Stimuli
In order to apply natural continuous speech stimuli instead of isolated sentences one needs an alternative
to the ERP and the N400. The ERP is achieved through averaging a large number of discrete and
repeated trials to improve the SNR enough to ﬁnd the response within the background EEG, which is
not possible for natural stimuli[15]. Within the auditory domain a solution to this problem was suggested
by Lalor et al. 2009[15] who introduced the AESPA (auditory-evoked spread spectrum analysis). AESPA
is a modelling approach in which the transformation from auditory stimuli to EEG-response is described
as an impulse response using:
y(t) = w(τ) ⊛x(t) + noise,
(2.1)
where the impulse response is described by the ﬁlter w(τ). In this scenario x(t) is the auditory stimuli
and y(t) is the neural response. Lalor et al. (2009) found that the AESPA could successfully characterize
an auditory potential with a high SNR in response to continuous auditory stimuli[15]. In short, this
method supplies a method in which neural impulse responses for diﬀerent types of auditory stimuli can
be estimated.
The AESPA is also known under another name; the temporal response function (TRF), which is broader
in the sense that it is not limited to the analysis of auditory stimuli but may also be based on other sen-
sory stimuli. In addition to the TRF, which describes the forward modelling relationship from stimulus
to neural response, the reverse relationship is sometimes also modelled to evaluate neural processing.
The backwards models are often termed encoders and the forwards models are termed encoders[16]. In
this text, backwards models are always referred to as decoders while forward models are referred to as
either encoders or TRFs.
Encoding and decoding models have proved to be eﬀective tools in describing how the brain processes
diﬀerent aspects of speech such as speech envelopes[4][22][17], phonemes[23][24], and spectrograms[17].
Recently, it has also been shown that TRFs can be used to analyze the neural processing of semantic
features of speech in three studies by Broderick et al. (2018, 2019 and 2020) [2][17][3]. In the remaining
part of this section these three studies will be presented to form a foundation for the analysis to be per-
formed in this study. The concept of encoders (TRF) and decoders will be covered in detail in Section
3.2.1
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK
16
In the 2018 study, Broderick et al. [2] ﬁrst illustrated how neural responses similar to the N400 can be
found using TRFs trained to predict EEG responses from semantic features of natural speech stimuli.
They applied the Word2Vec network [25] to retrieve word embeddings for words in the continuous speech
stimuli they applied. Word2Vec is a neural network that learns word associations from large amounts
of text. Based on these word embeddings, Broderick et al. computed a semantic dissimilarity measure
for each content word relative to its sentential context. This measure was computed for speech stimuli
which the subjects listened actively to, speech they were told to ignore and senseless inversed speech.
The authors then trained TRFs to predict EEG-responses for each speech condition. They found that
the TRFs, or neural impulse responses, were signiﬁcantly negative in centro-parietal channel, Pz, at time
lags around 400ms for attended speech and for speech presented in quiet. A corresponding eﬀect was
not found for unattended or reversed speech. These results were used to argue, that semantic processing
of natural speech is reﬂected in the EEG in a manner similar to that described by the N400, and that
the application of TRFs makes it possible to analyze these responses using natural speech stimuli.
In the 2018 study, Broderick et al.[2] were not able to conclude whether the impulse responses in centro-
parietal channels reﬂected the exact same underlying mechanisms as the N400, and in 2020 Broderick et
al.[3] discovered that diﬀerent measures of semantics or contextual support might correspond to diﬀerent
underlying neural processes - giving rise to diﬀerent types of surprisal. In this study, Broderick et al.
applied two separate measures of context as features for the TRFs. One was the semantic dissimilarity
from the 2018 study and the other was a measure of context-based lexical surprisal computed by use
of N-grams. Semantic dissimilarity measures how dissimilar a word is to its context based on neural
network word embeddings, where lexical surprisal simply measures how unlikely the word is to appear
in the given context based on sentences used to train the n-gram models. An example of the diﬀerence
between these two measures is given by Broderick et al. in the unﬁnished sentence "I take my coﬀee with
milk and ...". One might ﬁnish the sentence with word "sugar", but it could also be ﬁnished with "salt"
or "socks". Both semantic dissimilarity and lexical surprisal would give low values of surprisal for the
very probable response "sugar". However, for lexical surprisal "salt" and "socks" would result in equally
high values and for semantic dissimilarity "socks" would be lager than "salt". This is because only the
semantic dissimilarity takes into account the semantic meaning in the words wheres as lexical surprisal
is simply based on co-occurrence. Broderick et al. (2020)[3] hypothesized that the two measures could
be used to dissociate two diﬀerent predictive processes which both contribute to the N400. They found
that context-based lexical features were equally likely capture the EEG-response in younger and older
subjects, but that semantic dissimilarity was signiﬁcantly better at capturing the EEG in younger adults
than older adults. This was interpreted to mean that older adults compared to younger adults are less
likely to use prediction at a semantic level but not at a lexical level. Eﬀectively illustrating that the two
measures are representative of diﬀerent underlying mechanisms of semantic processing and that some
aspects of context-use in speech processing can decline with age.
Another interesting eﬀect of semantics in speech processing was investigated by Broderick et al. in
2019 [17] using natural speech stimuli. In this study semantic features were no longer used as features
for TRF-models, but instead their eﬀect on low-level cortical encoding of acoustic speech features were
studied. Decoding models were trained to recreate speech envelopes from EEG-responses. The accuracy
with which these models could recreate envelopes of speech were taken as measure of the strength with
which the speech envelopes were encoded neurally. Broderick et al. then focused their analysis around
the envelope reconstruction of each content word from their stimuli and applied linear regression models
to estimate the eﬀects of the semantic similarity of a given word on that words envelope reconstruction
accuracy. What they found was that the more similar a word was to its preceding context, the stronger
that word’s envelope was encoded in early auditory processes. This indicates the existence of a feedback
mechanism where high-level cortical areas of semantic processing can aﬀect the encoding of words at
lower levels of processing. Broderick et al. performed this study on younger (19-38 years) normal hearing
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK
17
listeners for speech in quiet.
The studies of Broderick et al.
(2018, 2019, 2020)[2][17][3] illustrate how emerging methods makes
it possible to analyze semantic features of natural speech by use of computational modelling. They
illustrate how aspects of both high-level (N400-related) and low-level (envelopes) speech perception may
be investigated in terms of semantic cues. Compared to the ERP and N400 methods this adds the
advantage of having the analysis performed on stimuli which actually resembles everyday speech [14]
and it opens up possibilities of discovering new features of semantic processing [17]. Furthermore it
should be noted, that while the 2019 study revealed age-related diﬀerences in semantic processing these
diﬀerences might also be related to hearing status between the two groups as older adults often will have
reduced hearing to some degree [6]. Taken as a whole, these studies illustrate the possibility of a new
way of investigating eﬀects of hearing loss in the older population.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Materials & Methods
The overall goal of the analyses in this study was to asses brain responses to semantic or contextual
features of speech signals in the context of hearing impairment. To do so, data from Fuglsang et al.
(2020)[4] was made available. This data consists of EEG measurements collected from normal hearing
and hearing-impaired subjects listening to continuous speech streams in diﬀerent conditions and were
initially collected for their study of competing speech and attention in subjects with sensorineural hear-
ing loss (SNHL). The following data description will therefore bear close resemblance to the description
found their article.
After presenting the data, the computational modelling methods applied for estimating the brain re-
sponses are introduced.
These models all build on earlier implementations of the same models to
investigate semantic processing and are extended to include the aspect of hearing impairment.
3.1
Data
3.1.1
Participants
44 older subjects separated into two age-matched groups based on hearing status participated in the
experiments. The hearing impaired participants, HI (N = 22, 9 females, mean age 66.4 ± 7.0), were
selected to have age-related high-frequency hearing loss. The normal hearing participants, NH (N = 22,
16 females, mean age 63.0 ± 7.1), were selected to have audiometric thresholds within 20 dB of normal
hearing levels (HL) for frequencies ≤2kHz and within 35dB of normal HL for frequencies > 2kHz.
3.1.2
Dataset - Selective Speech Attention Experiment
The data applied for the analysis in this study are based on a selective speech attention experiment. In
this experiment, Fuglsang et al. (2020) [4] collected EEG-recordings of the 44 participants listening to
either two simultaneous speech streams while only paying attention to one of them (two-talker condition)
or to a single speech stream presented in quiet (single-talker condition). The speech streams consisted
of two diﬀerent speakers, one male and one female, reading from two diﬀerent books in danish.
Fuglsang et al. [4] pre-processed the audio in several steps to prepare it for the experiment. Audio
was split into trials of ∼50s duration and prolonged silences between speech were truncated to 450 ms.
It was spatially split at ± 90◦by means of non-individualized head-related transfer functions. Finally the
audio was low-pass ﬁltered at 12kHz and loudness-matched. Loudness-matching was performed to avoid
18
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
19
having systematic diﬀerences in the interfering speech streams, which could potentially have inﬂuenced
the EEG-responses.
In the two-talker condition the attended and unattended speech streams were never the same talker.
The attended speech stream was switched on ∼4s (between 3s and 5s) prior to the unattended speech
stream and the resulting data were therefore truncated at 5s from the onset.
Each participant was presented to 48 trials of ∼50s duration organized in 4 blocks in which 2 blocks
of 12 trials had the male speaker as the target and 2 blocks of 12 trials had the female speaker as the
target. The amount of left-attended and right-attended trials was also balanced within subjects.
The audio was presented at a perceived comfortable level per subject, and for HI listeners it was ampli-
ﬁed by linear gains at the audiometric frequencies following the Cambridge formula[26] with a limitation
of maximum 30dB gain at each frequency. Prior to this ampliﬁcation the stimuli was 65 dB SPL. EEG
from 64 channels was obtained following the 10-20 system using a BioSemi Active-Two system at a sam-
pling rate of fc = 512Hz. Electrooculography (EOG) was measured using to bipolar electrodes placed
above and below the left eye[4].
3.1.3
Audio Pre-Processing - Envelope Extraction
The unampliﬁed audio stimuli were further pre-processed in order to obtain speech envelopes. These
envelopes were extracted for modelling purposes, and were extracted using the same simplistic model of
the peripheral auditory system as implemented by Fuglsang et al. (2020)[4]. In this model, the audio
was ﬁrst collapsed from two channels to one channel via averaging before being low-pass ﬁltered at 6kHz
and down-sampled to 12kHz. A gammatone ﬁlterbank was then applied to model the response of the
basilar membrane within the cochlea. The gammatone ﬁlterbank consisted of 24 bandpass ﬁlters. Each
of the 24 gammatone ﬁlter outputs were then full-wave rectiﬁed before being power-law compressed to
model the compressive properties of the auditory periphery. The 24 envelopes achieved in this manner
were then averaged across the gammatone frequency channels to get the temporal envelope. The enve-
lope was low-pass ﬁltered at 256Hz before being downsampled to 512Hz, and then it was again lowpass
ﬁltered at 30Hz before being downsampled to 64Hz. Conclusively, bandpass ﬁltering between 1 and 9Hz
was performed to achieve the ﬁnal envelope[4].
All ﬁlters were shifted to account for delays, and further ﬁlter details can be found in Fuglsang et
al. (2020)[4].
3.1.4
EEG Pre-Processing
Considerations
The EEG-data pre-processing pipeline designed for this study (see Figure 3.1 last column) follows the
pipelines of Fuglsang et al. [4] and Broderick et al. (2018 and 2020)[2] [3]. The former study was
included because it was designed for the speciﬁc dataset in question and the latter because they form
the basis of the data-analysis methods applied in this study. A summary of these pipelines is therefore
included in Figure 3.1, which shows the pre-processing steps reported by the authors in their respective
articles alongside the ﬁnal pre-processing pipeline for this study.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
20
Fig. 3.1.
Illustration of the pre-processing pipelines of inspirational studies alongside the
pipeline of this study. Broderick et al 2018 [2], Broderick et al. 2020 [3] Fuglsang et al. 2020 [4]
The pre-processing pipelines of the inspirational studies in Figure 3.1 are quite similar to each other with
the main diﬀerences between them occurring in noise reduction beyond band-pass ﬁltering. Broderick
et al. [2][3] apply channel standard deviation (SD) thresholds in both studies to identify noisy chan-
nels, and additionally implement an MCCA-denoising algorithm in the 2020 study [3]. Because MCCA
requires all subjects to have been exposed to the same stimuli this method was not applicable to the
study in question and only SD thresholding was therefore considered. Fuglsang et al. [4] apply a joint
decorrelation EOG-denoising algorithm as the only denoising beyond band-pass ﬁltering.
In this study both the EOG-denoising algorithm and the SD-thresholding were considered. The for-
mer was added to the pipeline after visual channel inspection conﬁrmed the presence of EOG-artifacts
and the eﬀectiveness of the ﬁlter (see section 3.1.4). The latter was tested to try to increase the compa-
rability between this study and the studies of Broderick et al., but was excluded after it was concluded
that it did not improve the SNR of the data. The tested SD thresholding method was implemented as
in Broderick et al. [2][3] where a noisy channel was deﬁned as:
noisy EEG channel =
(
SDchannel > avg. SD of all other channels * 2.5
SDchannel < avg. SD of all other channels / 2.5
The method was tested at two diﬀerent steps of the pre-processing pipeline. Initially, it was placed
before the EOG-denoising in to capture any noisy channels before they could be attenuated by the
EOG-ﬁlter. However, visual inspection showed that at this point, the ﬁlter only detected channels with
EOG-artifacts (or other high amplitude artifacts), which were of higher amplitude than corresponding
artifacts in surrounding channels (see appendix A.0.1 for examples). After interpolation these channels
therefore appeared almost unchanged, with the slight diﬀerence being the amplitude of the artifacts.
Furthermore, the channels marked as noisy by this algorithm were almost exclusively frontal channels
(with high amplitude EOG-artifacts) or temporal channels which were expected to be noisy due to the
choice of mastoid references. It was subsequently tested if the algorithm might have a better eﬀect
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
21
Fig. 3.2. Result of applying low pass ﬁltering (fc = 30Hz) and high pass ﬁltering (fc = 0.5Hz)
to the re-referenced data.
after the EOG-denoising, which was not the case. At this point the algorithm did not detect any noisy
channels and it was therefore not included in the ﬁnal pre-processing pipeline.
Pre-Processing Pipeline Description
Re-referencing
The EEG-data were re-referenced to the average of the mastoid channels (T7 and TP8). The main
issue which may arise with this choice of reference is distortion in temporal channels[27], which are not
of main interest in this study. Furthermore, the comparability of EEG studies is improved when the
same references are used for the analysis[27] and the studies of Broderick et al. [2][3], to which this
study is be compared, are based of EEG referenced to the mastoid channels.
Detrending, resampling and removing power-line interference
Prior to denoising the data, a zero-phase FIR low pass-ﬁlter of order 226 with a cut oﬀ-frequency of 30Hz
was applied to remove power-line interference, while still maintaining enough frequency-information to
be able to detect EOG artifacts. The data were then resampled to 64Hz, before a zero-phase FIR high
pass-ﬁlter of order 212 with a cut oﬀ-frequency of 0.5Hz was applied to detrend the data. Both ﬁlters
have previously been determined to be adequate for the data in question by Fuglsang et al. (2020) [4].
The result of these steps is exempliﬁed in Figure 3.2. This plot shows channel Pz for one trial for one
subject. The detrending eﬀect of the high-pass ﬁlter is clearly visible, and it should also be noted that
the low-pass ﬁlter has removed the largest peaks from the data.
Spherical spline interpolation of noisy channels
During the data collection, Fuglsang et al. (2020)[4], registered channels for each subject which were
contaminated by external noise. Fuglsang et. al (2020) do not report any replacement of these channels.
However, after visual inspection of these channels conﬁrmed that they did in fact appear noisy it was
decided to replace them in this study. A full table of the contaminated channels is included in Appendix
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
22
A.0.2. The main channel of interest, Pz, was only registered to be noisy for three subjects (6,21,34).
The noisy channels were replaced using spherical spline interpolation (Perrin et al. 1989[28]) as imple-
mented in the Fieldtrip toolbox[29]. The interpolation was performed using neighbouring channels as
deﬁned in the Fieldtrip template for Biosemi EEG-collection using 64+2 electrodes. An example of a
noisy channel is shown in Figure 3.3, which shows a noisy channel, P9, for subject 4 in the context of its
neighbouring channels. The noisy P9 has much higher amplitude than its neighbouring channels prior
to the interpolation but closely resemble its closest neighbours afterwards.
Fig. 3.3. The interpolation of a noisy channel. This is P9 for subject 4 and its three nearest neighbours
Removal of EOG-artifacts using a joint decorrelation framework
EOG-artifacts in the data were removed using a joint decorrelation (JD) framework (Cheveigné & Parra
[30]) as implemented by [31]. This framework was also applied to the data in question previously by
Fuglsang et al. (2020)[4]. The eﬀect of this ﬁlter can be seen in Figure 3.4 where the yellow graphs are
the EEG data and the blue graphs illustrate the EOG-artifacts detected by the JD algorithm. In this
ﬁgure, the frontal channel, Fz, clearly contains EOG-artifacts prior to the ﬁltering (topmost plot) and
these are eﬀectively removed by the ﬁlter (second plot from the top) while the channel otherwise appears
unchanged. Furthermore, the centro-parietal channel, Pz, from the same trial shows no EOG-artifacts
before the ﬁltering (third plot from the top) and appear unchanged after being ﬁltered (bottommost
plot). These desirable properties of the EOG-ﬁlter are the reason that the EOG-ﬁlter was included in
the ﬁnal pre-processing pipeline.
JD is a decomposition method which optimizes a set of weights, w, which maps from a sensor space, X,
to a component space, Y, as shown in Eq. 3.1.
ytk =
J
X
j=1
xtjwjk
(3.1)
Because EEG is multi-sensor data each sensor will record a mixture of multiple sources of brain activity
including both the signal of interest and noise. In JD, it is sought to transform the data into components
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
23
Fig. 3.4. Illustration of the eﬀects of the EOG denoising algorithm. EEG-data is shown in yellow
for a frontal and a parietal channel before and after applying the EOG-ﬁlter. The detected articfacts are
shown in blue.
where each represents one source of brain activity in order to separate signal from noise. However, as
the creators of the method, Chevigne & Parra (2014)[30], note themselves this is not possible while
the number of brain activity sources outnumber the number of sensors. Instead, it is sought to ﬁnd a
transformation which results in components that maximize the ratio of power between the ﬁltered signal
and the unﬁltered signal[30]. In this speciﬁc implementation it is sought to ﬁnd the transformation
which maximizes the power ratio between the raw signal and the EOG-artifact-aﬀected segments of the
signal.
The denoising algorithm is initiated by detecting EOG artifacts using default settings from the Fieldtrip
toolbox. EOG artifacts were detected in the two EOG-electrodes and the three frontal electrodes, Fpz,
Fp2 and Fp1. The 5 channels were then band-pass ﬁltered between 2-15Hz (Butterworth, 4th order) and
their Hilbert envelopes were extracted. These envelopes were z-scored and combined in a single channel
which was thresholded at a z-score of 4 and any time points exceeding the threshold were marked as
artifactual.
After detecting the artifacts, covariance matrices were computed for the entire dataset and for a subset
containing only the EOG-artifacts (an EOG-biased covariance matrix). Both matrices were whitened
(to achieve uncorrelated data of unit power) using principal component analysis (PCA), before solving
the generalized eigenvalue problem to achieve the set of eigenvectors which explain the maximum vari-
ance between the artifact-biased covariance and the raw data covariance. A threshold of 80% of the
maximum eigenvalue was used to decide which components should be applied as a ﬁlter to regress out
the EOG-artifacts of the data. A threshold which Wong et al.[31] determined to be conservative, and
which in this speciﬁc implementation also proved eﬀective (cf. Figure 3.4).
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
24
3.2
Computational Modelling
Fig. 3.5. Illustration of the computational models applied in the study. The structure of the study
can be divided into two overall computational schemes. Modelling scheme 1 (yellow) is based on training
encoding models to predict EEG-responses from semantic features extracted from speech. The resulting
encoding models are then analyzed relative to the hearing status of the participant. More details in Section
3.2.3. Modelling scheme 2 (blue) is based on training and applying decoding models to predict envelopes
of the speech features and subsequently analyzing if semantic features have an impact on how well these
envelopes are recreated by the model. More details in Section 3.2.4
To evaluate diﬀerences in the use of semantic cues in speech processing of hearing-impaired and normal
hearing listeners it was desired to apply methods to estimate brain responses to semantic cues extracted
from natural speech stimuli. For this purpose, two computational modelling schemes were applied both
of which are illustrated in Fig. 3.5. Both schemes build on modelling the relationship between selected
speech features and corresponding EEG-responses using models based on regularized linear regression.
These regressions can model stimulus-neural response relationships in both the forward and backward
directions leading to either encoding or decoding models. Encoding models, also known as temporal
response functions (TRF), describe the transformation from a feature space to neural response and de-
coding models attempt to recreate features based on the neural response[16][15].
In modelling scheme 1 (Figure 3.5 right), subject-speciﬁc encoders were trained to predict EEG responses
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
25
from semantic dissimilarity features. The resulting TRFs and model performances were subsequently
analyzed for diﬀerences in the cortical responses captured for hearing-impaired and normal hearing lis-
teners. In this modelling scheme it was expected to ﬁnd possible N400-related responses to the semantic
features.
In modelling scheme 2 (Figure 3.5 left), subject-speciﬁc decoders were trained to predict speech en-
velopes from EEG-responses. Subsequently, these models were applied to recreate speech envelopes for
all content words and the accuracy with which these envelopes were reconstructed was then analyzed
in terms of each word’s semantic similarity to its context in linear-mixed eﬀect (LME) models. This
was done, because it has previously been found, that the low-level cortical encoding of speech features
(envelopes) is inﬂuenced by high-level cortical processing of semantic features [17], and it was desired to
investigate the eﬀect of hearing impairment on this phenomenon.
In this section, encoding and decoding models as well as the extraction of semantic speech features,
which is relevant to both modelling schemes, are presented ﬁrst. Following this, the details of each
modelling scheme and the statistical analysis applied to them will be introduced.
3.2.1
Encoding and Decoding Models
Assuming the simpliﬁcation that the auditory brain is a linear time-invariant system (LTE), linear
regression-based encoding and decoding models can be used to describe the transformations between
sensory stimuli and corresponding neural responses. This gives an estimate of a system impulse response
which can be analyzed in terms of the neural processing for continuous stimuli similar to how we analyze
ERPs in response to averaged isolated stimuli. Assuming the auditory brain to be an LTE system is
a gross over-simpliﬁcation, but it is made viable through non-linearly transforming the speech features
into a feature space prior to performing the analysis. It is then only assumed that there exists a linear
relationship between the transformed input features and the EEG response[16][15]. The linearity as-
sumption means that the models likely reﬂect the activity of a limited set of neural cells and it should
be interpreted as such[15].
The forward relationship described by encoders can be formulated using Equation 3.2, in which the
neural response, ˆr(t, n), is predicted from the stimulus, s(t), using the channel-speciﬁc impulse response
or TRF, w(τ, n). Where n represents the channels and t represents time. τ speciﬁes a range of time-lags
for which the stimulus-response relationship is deﬁned by the model. An encoder therefore results in an
estimate of an impulse response for the stimuli for each channel in the neural response[16][15].
ˆr(t, n) =
X
τ
w(τ, t)s(t −τ)[16]
(3.2)
The reverse relationship described by TRF decoders is described by Equation 3.3, in which the time-
lagged neural response, r(t, n), is used to estimate the stimulus, ˆs(t), through the transformation, w(τ, n).
Decoders apply all the available neural data to predict the stimulus in a multivariate context in contrast
to encoders which describe a univariate relationship between the stimulus and each neural channel.
ˆs(t) =
X
n
X
τ
r(t + τ, n)w(τ, n)[16]
(3.3)
In both cases we can achieve the solution by adopting machine learning terms and transforming Equa-
tions 3.2 and 3.3 to matrix operations:
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
26
ˆY = wX[16],
(3.4)
In Equation 3.4, w is the matrix of the regression weights which we wish to estimate for the analysis,
X is the time-lagged predictor matrix, and ˆY contains the estimate of the true target, Y . Estimating
the TRF can then be approached by means of ordinary least-squares (OLS) estimation, as illustrated in
Equation 3.5.
w = (XT · X)−1(XT · Y )[16]
(3.5)
The speech stimuli in X do not represent a stochastic process, and the columns of X are therefore likely
to be collinear to some extend. This multicollinarity means that the estimation can be ill-conditioned
causing w to suﬀer from high variance, meaning that any small changes in X might inﬂate large changes
in w. The high variance of w also entails that w is likely to overﬁt to the training data (and thereby
any noise present in it) and therefore generalize poorly to unseen data. To overcome these problems a
regularization term can be added to the solution to reduce variance by introducing bias. For TRFs, ridge
regression have been established to be a good regularization technique[16][15] and it is implemented as:
w = (XT X + λI)−1XT Y [16]
(3.6)
Ridge regression weights the diagonal of XT X by introducing the term λI which biases the model
estimate to the diagonal values of the covariance-matrix thereby decreasing model variance. Estimating
a suitable value of λ can be done using cross-validation to estimate the model[16][15].
Implementation and Training of TRFs
The present implementation of this is based on that of Fuglsang et al.,(2020)[4] who made their implemen-
tation available to this study. In this implementation the ridge regression is solved using singular-value
decomposition (SVD).
To solve for w in Equation 3.5, Equation 3.7 is solved by decomposing X using SVD giving X = UDV T
and posing Equation 3.6 as:
w = (XT X + λI)−1XT Y = (D2 + λI)−1DUT Y [4]
(3.7)
The models were trained using two-level cross-validation with a 10-fold outer cross-validation loop and
a 5-fold inner cross-validation loop. Model performance was measured as Pearson’s correlation between
the predicted target, ˆY , and the actual target, Y .
In two-level cross-validation the inner-loop is used to tune hyperparameters, in this case λ, and the
outer loop is used to estimate the model performance given the selected hyperparameter on data un-
known to the model. This results in a nearly unbiased estimate of the model prediction accuracy.
The training was performed to allow diﬀerent values of λ across subjects in both the encoders and
decoder, as well as across EEG-channels in the encoders. 50 logarithmically spaced values of λ between
0.001 and 1000000 were tested in the training.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
27
3.2.2
Extracting Semantic Features From Speech
In order be able to asses the impact of semantic properties of speech on speech perception a means of
extracting semantic cues from speech was necessary. For isolated sentence analysis this is often achieved
using Cloze probabilities as described brieﬂy in the background of the report (Chapter 2). However,
when applying continuous speech stimuli, a method which can asses the semantic properties of all content
words, and not just sentence ﬁnal words, is required. Broderick et al. (2018) approached this problem
by computing a semantic dissimilarity measure based on neural network word embeddings [2]. This
method was adopted for the analyses in this study.
Word Embeddings from Neural Networks
Word embeddings are numerical representations of words which renders them understandable to com-
putational models[25].
In the speciﬁc case of this study, it was desired to obtain quantiﬁable word
representations which retained as much semantic information as possible from the continuous speech
stimuli.
Natural language processing (NLP) neural networks provide one method of obtaining word embed-
dings, and these networks exist pre-trained for many languages. These neural networks are trained to
predict words from their context, or vice versa, but the main goal of this type of model is not to use
them for their predictive properties. Instead the purpose of training them is to create word embeddings
based on large text corpora which can be extracted from the models post-training[25][32][33].
Broderick et al. (2018)[2] obtained their word embeddings from the Word2Vec model[25], and Broderick
et al. (2020)[3] obtained similar embeddings from the network, GloVe[32]. In this study a third neural
network called FastText[33] was employed. FastText was chosen because it is likely the largest available
pre-trained Danish model in terms of training corpora size[22]. In addition to being trained on a rela-
tively large corpus, another beneﬁt of FastText compared to Word2Vec and GloVe, is that FastText can
supply word embeddings for words which were not presented to the network during training. In other
words FastText provides a solution for problems related to Out-Of-Vocabulary (OOV) words[33]. The
FastText implementation used for this study is available through Python’s GenSim implementation[34].
FastText is an extension of Mikolov et al.’s skip-gram trained Word2Vec model[25]. The Word2Vec
model is a single hidden-layer neural network trained by semi-supervised learning. The hidden layer
consists of linear activations making it a quite simple model. For the skip-gram version of Word2Vec,
the network is trained to predict a target word given a context word. A window size is chosen for the
context of the target word, and the model is trained on all target-word pairs in this window. This is
repeated for all words in the training data which, if the data set is large enough, trains the weights
of the single-layer to learn semantic properties of words. These weights are the important part of the
model. Given a model with a hidden layer of dimensionality 300 and a vocabulary of 10.000 words, the
model contains 10.000 weight vectors of length 300, and these are the embeddings or word vectors used
to semantically deﬁne the words. These word vectors follow a principle of linearity, meaning that the
vector for the word ’king’ minus the vector for the word ’man’ plus the vector for the word ’woman’,
will result in a vector which most closely resembles the vector for the word ’queen’, which illustrates the
semantic properties of the embeddings[25].
FastText expands on the above described model by replacing words and word-vectors with a bag of
character n-grams. What this means, is that each word in the corpus is broken down by n-grams, which
are then one-hot-encoded, and the word is then represented as the sum of these one-hot-encoded n-
grams. FastText speciﬁcally represents each word by all of its n-grams for n ≥3 and n ≤6. In addition
to this the word in its entirety is also included in the representation along with special boundary symbols
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
28
for word beginnings and endings [33]. An example of an n-gram break-down of a words is given in Info
Box 2.1.
Info Box 2.1: Representation of a Word in FastText
Full word: where
Boundary symbols: <wh, re>
n-gram, n=3: whe, her, ere
And n-grams for n=4, n=5, n=6
Example taken from [33].
The Semantic Features
The semantic features were computed as semantic dissimilarity features as deﬁned by Broderick et al.
(2018) [2] and as semantic similarity features as deﬁned by Broderick et al. (2020)[3]. The former were
applied in the encoder of modelling scheme 1 while the latter were applied in the LME regression of
modelling scheme 2. The two measures are very similar and will be described together in this section.
For both features each word in the stimuli was represented by a single number representing how seman-
tically dissimilar or similar it was to its preceding sentential context.
Initially, each content word was replaced by its word vector as given by FastText. Then the semantic
dissimilarity was computed as 1 minus Pearson’s correlation between the word and the average of all pre-
ceding word vectors in the sentence. The semantic similarity was calculated as 1 divided by the euclidean
distance between a word’s vector the averaged vectors of all preceding words in the sentence. If a word
was the ﬁrst word in a sentence, the context was instead made up of all words from the previous sentence.
Two diﬀerent sets of the semantic dissimilarity features were computed during the model development
process. For the ﬁrst set semantic dissimilarity was computed for all words in the the speech stimuli,
while the second only included a subset of word clases which were assumed to be more related to con-
tent. These words include nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs and will be termed content word in the
remaning text. It is worth noting, that this of course entails that the context of contents words for
semantic dissimilarity computation also only included other content words in the sentence. Broderick
et al. (2018)[2], (2019)[17], and (2020)[3] only applied content words in their analyses. The semantic
dissimilarity features have a mean value of 0.622±0.158 when including all word classes and 0.631±0.156
for the content words alone. The semantic similarity features have a mean value of 0.901 ± 0.329 and
were only computed using content words.
Info Box 2.2: Computation of Semantic Features
Semantic dissimilarity: 1 minus Pearson’s correlation of the word embedding and the average
word embedding of all preceding words in the sentence
Semantic similarity: 1 divided by the euclidean distance between the word embedding and
average word embedding of all preceding words in the sentence
The semantic dissimilarity features were created to be used as regressors for the encoding models of
modelling scheme 1. Another step was therefore added to complete these features. The semantic dissim-
ilarity value for each content word was inserted into vectors as impulses at the time points corresponding
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
29
to the onset of each word to enable regression relative to the same time points in the EEG-responses.
An example of part of a ﬁnal word dissimilarity vector is shown in Figure 3.6. The topmost plot in this
ﬁgure shows the vector when including all words whereas the bottommost plot only includes the content
words.
Fig. 3.6.
Example of semantic features from one of the trials in the experiment.
Impulse height
corresponds to the semantic dissimilarity and their temporal occurrence to the onset of the word.
3.2.3
Modelling Scheme 1 - Semantic Encoders
In modelling scheme 1 it was desired to model cortical impulse responses as a function of semantic
dissimilarity features with encoder models as described in Section 3.2.1. Upon obtaining these models,
it was desired to analyse the encoder weights (TRFs) at time lags from ∼200 to ∼600ms for signiﬁcant
negativities in order to investigate possible N400-related responses. Furthermore, the model performance
measures, the prediction accuracies, from the cross-validation training were kept for analysis. These
measure the ability of the models to predict unseen data and can be used to asses how well the semantic
features capture variance in the neural response.
Table 3.1: The encoding models included in modelling scheme 1
Semantic Encoder 1
Semantic Encoder 2
Regressor
Semantic
Dissimilarity
Semantic
Dissimilarity
Nuisance Regressor
-
Onsets
Target
EEG-response
EEG-response
Regressor time lags
0-700ms
0-700ms
Two instances of the semantic encoding model were created and an overview of these encoders is shown
in Table 3.1. The ﬁrst, henceforth referred to as semantic encoder 1 (not to be exchanged with modelling
scheme 1), was trained to predict EEG-responses solely on semantic dissimilarity features. The second,
denoted semantic encoder 2, was trained on two regressors to predict the EEG-response; semantic dis-
similarity and onset features. The onset features were created as vectors with impulses at word onsets
with impulse height equal to the average of the semantic dissimilarities in the trial. The onset features
were included as a nuisance regressor to soak up any variance related to acoustic onset responses and
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
30
thereby separate it from the responses related to semantic features. Both models were trained on time
lags from 0-700ms relative to word onsets.
Fig. 3.7. Organization of the semantic encoding models. For each subjects a model is ﬁtted in each
listening condition. The resulting model are analyzed w. respect to hearing status.
Figure 3.7 provides an overview the result-data made available by each semantic encoder model. For
both model types, a model was achieved per subject per listening condition and to examine the eﬀect of
hearing impairment these models were divided into two groups based on hearing status. Within these
groups encoder weights (TRFs) and model performance measures (prediction accuracies) were averaged
across subjects. This enabled the analysis of the eﬀect of hearing-impairment within and across listening
conditions.
Statistical Testing
The models were analyzed for signiﬁcant eﬀects in centro-parietal areas, which were the areas expected
to respond to the semantic properties of speech based on N400 studies[13]. Speciﬁcally the midline
channel, Pz, was chosen as the primary channel of analysis because this channel was used in the studies
of Broderick et al. (2018)[2] and (2020)[3] which form the basis of the models applied in this study.
For both model types in modelling scheme 1, 5 models with permuted semantic dissimilarity features
were computed and averaged to achieve null-models for noise ﬂoor estimation. In semantic encoder 2
only the semantic dissimilarity features were permuted, while the onset-features were kept constant.
The noise ﬂoors were applied to look for time lags in the TRFs which were signiﬁcantly negative in
order to investigate possible N400-related eﬀects, which should be negative relative to the background
EEG[13]. To identify such areas one-sided paired permutation t-tests were performed by comparing
responses of all subjects at all time lags to their respective noise ﬂoors.
The noise ﬂoors were also applied to asses if model prediction accuracies were increased by the true
semantic dissimilarity features. In these cases the average of prediction accuracies from the 10 outer
loops of the cross-validations were analyzed. This was tested using one-sided permutation t-tests to look
for signiﬁcant increases in prediction accuracies of the true models.
Permutation t-tests were applied because the assumptions of normality required for a regular student’s
t-test could not be met in all conditions. Permutations t-tests are signiﬁcance tests in which the distribu-
tion of the test statistic under the null-hypothesis is achieved by computing all possible values of the test
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
31
statistic based on all possible permutations of the test data. The resulting distribution then replaces
the normal-approaching t-distribution which is assumed in a regular t-test. In reality it is often not
possible to compute test statistics for all possible permutations and the null-distribution is instead esti-
mated by a large number of permutations[35]. In this study 500.000 permutations were used for each test.
The multiple comparison problem arose repeatedly in the analysis of the semantic encoders, when
performing hypothesis tests on several time-lags simultaneously. To correct for this issue false discovery
rate (FDR)-correction was applied in all these cases. FDR is the expected proportion of tests in which
the null-hypothesis is incorrectly rejected (type I errors), and when applying FDR-correction the aim is
a low proportion of type I errors. The FDR-correction does so by adjusting the p-values. Where the
original p-values taken at a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05 would result in 5% of the tests giving type I
errors, the adjusted p-values at a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05 mean that 5% of signiﬁcant results will
be type I errors (false discoveries)[36]. All test were performed with a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05.
3.2.4
Modelling Scheme 2 - Eﬀect of Semantic Cues on Early Auditory Encoding
Modelling Scheme 2 was based on a 2nd stage-regression analysis implemented by Broderick et al. (2019)
for the analysis of the eﬀect of semantic context on low-level auditory encoding of speech features. Figure
3.8 provides a detailed overview the analysis. As illustrated this analysis revolved around each content
word uttered in the speech stimuli. Features were extracted for 100ms windows of each content word
from 25ms post word-onset to 125ms post word-onset.
This window was chosen based the analysis
of Broderick et al. (2019)[17] who investigated diﬀerent time windows and found signiﬁcant eﬀects of
semantic similarity in the chosen window.
Fig. 3.8. Illustration of modelling scheme 2. Features are extracted for each content word from 25-
125ms post word-onset. The dependent variable which is related to the strength with which speech envelopes
are encoded cortically was computed based on reconstructed envelopes from decoding models.
Initially decoders were trained as described in Section 3.2.1 to predict estimates of the envelopes of
the speech stimuli based on the EEG-responses they evoked. This resulted in subject-speciﬁc decoders
which integrate information from all 64 EEG channels to predict the speech envelopes. These models
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
32
were then applied to recreate speech envelopes for all trials and the reconstruction accuracy of these
envelopes was then assessed in linear-mixed eﬀect models depending on context-related features and a
set of nuisance regressors related to acoustic onsets. In other words, it was assumed that the envelope
reconstruction accuracy could be used as an estimate how of strongly speech envelopes are encoded
cortically, and then this encoding was assessed in terms of semantic aspects of the speech used to evoke
the envelope response. This modelling scheme can therefore be thought of as a way to investigate how
high-level representations of semantic cues can modulate low-level representations of speech.
Linear Mixed-Eﬀects Modelling
Linear mixed-eﬀects (LME) models are regression models which model both ﬁxed eﬀects and random
eﬀects at the same time. Random eﬀects are sometimes referred to as grouping variables because they
group sets of observations according to the levels of a random categorical regressor. This grouping means
that the random eﬀects can be viewed as an additional error term which accounts for the correlation
within groups of the random regressor[37]. Whether to include a predictor as a random or a ﬁxed eﬀect
depends of the hypothesis being tested. If the variable contains all levels of interest of a regressor,
then modelling it as a ﬁxed eﬀect would make it possible to analyze the eﬀect-diﬀerences at diﬀerent
levels of the regressor. On the other hand if a regressor only contains a subset of the population being
investigated then modelling it as a random eﬀect makes it possible to make inferences about the full
population from which the subset was drawn[38].
An LME model of only ﬁxed eﬀects corresponds to a regular linear regression model as described in its
simplest form by:
y = β0 + β1x + ϵ[37],
(3.8)
in which the eﬀect of the predictor x on the outcome y is modelled. An LME model extends Eq. 3.8 to
give the general LME formula in Eq. 3.9.
y = Xβ + Zb + ϵ[37]
(3.9)
In Eq. 3.10 X is an n-by-p dimensional ﬁxed-eﬀects design matrix of n observations and p ﬁxed pre-
dictors, and β is the p-by-1 dimensional ﬁxed-eﬀects vector. Z is an n-by-q dimensional random-eﬀects
design matrix of n observations and q random predictors, and b is a q-by-1 dimensional random-eﬀects
vector. ϵ is an error term of dimension n-by-1, which explains the within group error[37].
In this study LME models were implemented through MATLAB’s ﬁtlme-function.
Dependent Variable - Envelope Reconstruction Accuracy
Speech envelopes extracted as explained in Section 3.1.3 were applied to train subject-speciﬁc envelope
decoders, which were subsequently applied to recreate the speech envelopes for each trial based the
EEG-responses. Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient between the recreated and the actual speech envelopes
was applied to estimate the envelope reconstruction accuracy, which was used as the outcome variable
in the LME models.
The envelope decoders trained to predict speech envelopes based on EEG were trained as outlined
in Section 3.2.1. They were trained based on EEG-responses to the true speech envelopes which were
extracted using the pipeline described in Section 3.1.3.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
33
Predictor Variables
The eﬀects of two context-related predictor variables were investigated in the LME-model analysis. The
ﬁrst, was the semantic similarity described in Section 3.2.2, which carries information about the semantic
relatedness of each content word relative to its preceding sentential context. The second was a context-
amount feature created to capture possible eﬀects of the time point within a sentence at which a word
was spoken. Because of the way semantic similarity is computed, the semantic similarity of words early
in a sentence is only based on a small amount of other words (low context-amount), whereas for words
late in sentences the semantic similarity is based on a larger amount of words (high context-amount).
Onset-amount was therefore included to investigate if this diﬀerence in word-context had an impact of
the inﬂuence of semantic dissimilarity. It was simple given as the number of words used to compute the
context of the semantic similarity of a given word.
In addition to the two context-related predictors, the listening condition of the trials was also included
as a predictor variable. Only single-talker and attended conditions were included in this analysis. This
was done in order to investigate possible eﬀects of attentional load alongside the semantic eﬀects.
Nuisance Variables
Inspired by Broderick et al. (2019)[17] two nuisance regressors were included to capture acoustic eﬀects
on envelope reconstruction accuracy. Both these features have previously been shown to aﬀect cortical
responses[39][40] and it was therefore desired to account for variance related to these. The ﬁrst was
envelope variability deﬁned as the standard deviation of the envelope in the same interval in which
envelope reconstruction accuracy was assessed. Envelope variability was shown to be signiﬁcant for
envelope reconstruction accuracy by Broderick et al. (2019). The second variable was relative pitch
deﬁned as the averaged standardized pitch of the speaker in the window of assessment. This factor was
also signiﬁcant for envelope reconstruction accuracy in the study by Broderick et al. (2019). Pitch was
extracted using MATLAB’s pitch-function and standardized using z-scoring.
Model Implementation
Eq. 3.10 gives the formula of the speciﬁc LME models trained to predict word envelope reconstruction
accuracy. The third order interaction term, βsem,con,LC, also indicates inclusion of all lower order eﬀects
of semantic similarity (sem), context-amount (con), and listening condition (LC). Each content word of
the speech stimuli (N=3066) was included as an observation for each subject which means that observa-
tions might have grouping eﬀects for subjects. To account for this possible eﬀect subject was included
in the LME models as a random-eﬀect variable. Before training the model all variables were z-scored.
renv = βenvvar · env_var + βpitch · pitch + βsem,con,LC · sem · con · LC + (1|subject)
(3.10)
An LME-model was trained speciﬁcally for each group of listeners resulting in an HI-ﬁtted model and
an NH-ﬁtted model. This was done to investigate if the context-related eﬀects would show diﬀerent
patterns for the two groups of listeners. Hearing status could also have been included as a ﬁxed-eﬀects
variable in the LME model to investigate these diﬀerences, but this might have introduced four-way
interactions which would be diﬃcult to interpret. For this reason the simpler models were chosen for
this exploratory purpose.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS & METHODS
34
Statistical Analysis of the LME-Models
The LME-models were analyzed in terms of their ﬁt, deﬁned by R2, and any coeﬃcients related to
signiﬁcant eﬀects of the context-related predictors or the listening condition. The models were trained on
67452 observations based on the 3066 content words of speech stimuli. This high number of observations
increases the probability of ﬁnding signiﬁcant eﬀects even when these eﬀects are too small to have
practical relevance [41], and for that reason it was decided to create a null-distribution of 1000 LME-
models based on permuted semantic similarity and context-amount features. Any signiﬁcant eﬀects of
the ﬁtted models were only considered to have a practical eﬀects if they exceeded the 95th-percentile of
the corresponding null-distribution eﬀect-size, for positive eﬀects, or if it was below the 5th-percentile
given a negative eﬀect. Furthermore, it was also required for the R2-value of the ﬁtted model to exceed
the 95th-percentile of the null-distribution of R2-values. This correction method was based on a similar
implementation found in [17].
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Modelling Scheme 1 - Semantic Encoders
In this section the general patterns across all subjects occurring in both semantic encoder 1 and 2
are presented through topographic visualizations and analysis of the centro-parietal channel, Pz, to
investigate any responses which might be related to semantic processing.
Recalling that the TRFs
extracted from the encoding models are estimations of the cortical impulse responses to the chosen
features[15], the main focus of interest are any centro-parietal negativities occurring at time lags close to
400ms post-word onset which based on N400 results is the area where semantic processing is theorized
to occur.
4.1.1
Semantic Encoder 1
Figure 4.1 illustrates results of semantic encoder 1 - the encoder trained solely on the semantic dissimi-
larity regressor as in Broderick et. al (2018)[2]. Figure 4.1(a) illustrates TRF weights across the scalp in
selected time windows averaged for all 44 listeners in all three listening conditions. Figure 4.1(b) zooms
in on centro-parietal TRFs at channel Pz in all three listening conditions.
The topographic plots of the TRFs of semantic encoder 1 for the attended and single-talker listen-
ing conditions (Figure 4.1(a) top and middle) show patterns of centro-parietal negativities in the last
time-lag window (350-450ms). This falls in line with the deﬁnition of the N400-component of the ERP
in regards to both timing and scalp location indicating that these TRFs could be capturing semantic
surprisal as measured by the semantic dissimilarity regressor. In Figure 4.1(b)-top it can be seen that
the TRFs at channel Pz of the attended and single-talker conditions are both signiﬁcantly negative
relative to the permuted baseline models as indicated by thick lines (FDR-corrected permutation t-test,
p < 0.05). In other words, the TRFs based on semantic dissimilarity regressors are in fact capturing a
signiﬁcant neural response activity at ∼400ms post-word onset. The same conclusions cannot be made
for the unattended TRF despite there being some central negativity visible in the topographic plot from
350 −450ms (Figure 4.1(a) bottom). This negativity is much smaller in amplitude than for the two
other listening conditions, and as illustrated in Figure 4.1(b)-top, this negativity is not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the baseline at channel Pz (FDR-corrected permutation t-test, α = 0.05). This falls in
line with the conclusions of Broderick et al. (2018)[2] who found that the neural signatures of semantic
dissimilarity were signiﬁcantly more negative for attended speech than for unattended speech indicating
that semantic processing only occurs for attended speech streams.
The topographic plots in Figure 4.1(a) also illustrate centro-parietal negativities from 200 −300ms
in both the single-talker and attended listening conditions. For the attended speech, the negativity ap-
35
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
36
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.1. Semantic encoder 1 - overview & attention eﬀect. (a) topographies of the TRFs (averaged
for all subjects) for the three listening conditions at time intervals determined from inspection of TRFs.
Notice that the colorbar has a diﬀerent scale for the unattended TRFs. (b) TRFs at channel Pz. Thick
lines indicate signiﬁcant negativity of TRF relative to baseline (top plot) or unit-onset model (bottom plot).
Signiﬁcance determined by paired permutation t-tests and FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons at a
signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05. Only samples between the two dotted lines are hypothesis tested (∼150ms to
500ms).
pears to be more widely distributed across the scalp whereas for the single-talker speech this negativity
is more localized to the centro-parietal area. Figure 4.1(b)-top supports this ﬁnding as both listening
conditions have signiﬁcant negativities occurring at these time-lags (FDR-corrected permutation t-tests,
α = 0.05).
Kutus & Federmeier (2011)[13] deﬁned the N400-component of the ERP as a negativity occuring be-
tween 200-600ms post-stimulus. Finding signiﬁcant negativities at time lags of 200-300ms in the TRFs
is therefore not unlikely to still represent some semantic processing. It does however appear that the
200-300ms negativity and the ∼400ms negativity at channel Pz could be two separate peaks, which
might indicate that they represent two diﬀerent underlying neural processes. One feature which might be
correlated with the semantic dissimilarity regressors are acoustic properties related to word onsets. Since
semantic dissimilarity values are always presented to the encoding models at word onsets it seems likely
that such an interference could occur. It has previously been shown that brain-activity is time-locked
to syllable onsets[42] and sentence onsets[43]. It has also previously been shown that sometimes these
simple acoustic features can explain neural responses which had previously been attributed to high-level
linguistic features and their perception processing in other studies[44]. Based on these observations it was
decided to test whether acoustic onset features could be interfering with the TRFs of semantic encoder 1.
Broderick et al.[2] also found negativities in a widespread area from ∼200 to ∼500ms in their TRF
modelled for single-talker speech, and they refuted the possibility that part of the TRF-response was
related to stimulus acoustics, by re-creating the models on time-reversed speech in which they did not
ﬁnd signiﬁcant negativities at any time lags of the TRFs. In this study, the possibility of acoustic onset-
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
37
interference was instead investigated using TRFs regressed speciﬁcally on word-onset vectors. These
vectors were created by setting the semantic dissimilarity equal to 1 for all words in the text corpus.
The resulting unit-onset models are plotted in 4.1(b)-bottom along with the TRFs of semantic encoder
1. The plot shows that the TRFs of unit-onset encoders are almost identical to the TRFs of semantic
encoder 1. As indicated by the lack of thick lines in 4.1(b)-bottom there are no signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between the unit-onset and the semantic dissimilarity models in the range of time lags from ∼150ms to
500ms (FDR-corrected permutation t-test, α = 0.05). This points towards a tendency that the responses
captured by semantic encoder 1 are dominated by word onset eﬀects.
4.1.2
Semantic Encoder 2
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.2.
Semantic encoder 2 - overview.
(a) Comparison of TRFs (averaged across subjects) of
regressors from semantic encoder 2 (onsets and semantic dissimilarity) and from semantic encoder 1 (just
semantic dissimilarity) in the single-talker condition. Thick lines indicate a signiﬁcantly more negative TRF
than achieved with the permuted baseline models. (b) Topographies of the TRF weights (averaged across
subjects) for the two regressors of semantic encoder 2.
In Figure 4.2 results from semantic encoder 2 are illustrated. In this model, the onsets which were found
to drive the TRF responses of semantic encoder 1 were included as a nuissance regressors alongside
the semantic dissimilarity regressor in an attempt to isolate a semantic response from onset responses.
Furthermore, this model was also only trained on the so-called context-words of the speech stimuli. The
main focus of analysis of this model was therefore related to the TRFs of the semantic dissimilarity
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
38
regressor, but the onset regressor-TRFs were also analyzed to be able to observe any diﬀerences in the
information captured by the two features.
In the topographic plots of the single-talker condition (Figure 4.2(b)-top) the centro-parietal negativi-
ties at time lags of ∼220ms and ∼400ms appear to be separated by the two regressors. The ∼220ms
negativity occurs mainly in the onset TRF while the ∼400ms negativity is restricted mostly to the
semantic dissimilarity TRF. Figure 4.2(a)-top shows the same pattern for for channel Pz in which both
the onset-TRF, the semantic similarity TRF and the combined TRF of semantic encoder 1 are plotted.
Importantly, tested against the permuted baseline model the negative peak at ∼450ms of the semantic
similarity TRF was signiﬁcant for the time lags time lags around 400 msec (421.9-453.1ms, indicated
by the thick line). The onset-TRF peak appearing at ∼220ms was not tested for signiﬁcance since
the onset feature consists of vectors of impulses of equal height, which therefore could not be permuted
similarly to what was done for the semantic dissimilarity regressor. These results illustrate that in the
single-talker condition onsets and semantic dissimilarity capture diﬀerent underlying neural processes,
and that they can be separated in the TRF.
In the attended listening condition the separation of the two peaks is not as clear in the topographic
plots (Figure 4.2(b)-bottom), and the centro-parietal negativities at ∼220ms and ∼400ms appear to
both primarily be present in the semantic dissimilarity TRF. Furthermore, when investigating channel
Pz in Figure 4.2(a)-bottom the semantic dissimilarity TRF again has widespread signiﬁcant negativities
across time-lags from around 200ms to 500ms. The onset TRF in this condition still appears to have a
negative peak at ∼200ms, but it is now closely temporally overlapped by a similar peak in the semantic
dissimilarity TRF. This might indicate that in the attended listening condition the semantic dissimilar-
ity TRF is aﬀected by acoustic onset features in a manner similar to that occurring in semantic encoder 1.
Acoustic onset interference in the attended condition could possibly arise from the fact that an in-
terfering unattended speech stream is present in this condition.
The acoustic onset cues from this
unattended speech stream could be the source of the ∼200ms peak in the semantic dissimilarity TRF,
since these onsets are not accounted for in the onset-regressors applied to train the model. Figure 4.3
shows the unattended TRFs along with the attended TRFs for channel Pz and thick lines are used to
indicate where the attended TRFs are signiﬁcantly more negative than their unattended counterparts
(FDR-corrected permutations t-tests). From this plot it can be seen that the early ∼200ms peak of
the attended semantic dissimilarity TRF corresponds well in terms of latency to a corresponding peak
in the unattended onset TRF. This supports the idea, that acoustic cues from the unattended speech
might be inducing noise into the attended semantic dissimilarity TRFs.
Furthermore, the attended
onset TRF is only signiﬁcantly more negative than the unattended onset TRF for a very small range
of time lags around 200ms, whereas the semantic dissimilarity TRF is signiﬁcantly more negative than
its unattended counterpart for a wide range of time-lags (∼190ms-480ms). This might also indicate
that while semantic dissimilarity features of the unattended speech are not being neurally processed, the
acoustic onset features are still actively processed and interfere with the attended speech processing.
It might also be possible that neither semantic dissimilarity nor acoustic cues of the unattended speech
are processed, and that the activity captured by the TRF of unattended speech are simply cues from
the attended speech. Whether attended speech cues aﬀect unattended speech TRFs or the other way
around cannot be concluded from the model at hand. Interpreting results from either model should
therefore be done with caution since onset eﬀects and semantic eﬀects from both speech streams might
be aﬀecting the results.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
39
Fig. 4.3.
Onset and semantic similarity TRFs from both attended and unattended speech.
Thick lines indicate where the attended TRFs are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the corresponding unattended
TRF (FDR-corrected t-test at α = 0.05).
4.1.3
Investigating Eﬀects of Hearing Loss
The eﬀects of hearing status on the semantic encoder weights were only investigated in terms of semantic
encoder 2 under the assumption that the semantic dissimilarity TRF of this model more accurately
captured semantic processing than the regressor of model 1 which might be driven by onset eﬀects. In
the attended listening condition of semantic encoder 2 it was also discovered that acoustic onset cues
might be inducing noise to the semantic dissimilarity TRF. It was decided to still investigate this model
for diﬀerences related to hearing because the analysis might oﬀer valuable insights to diﬀerences between
hearing-impaired and normal hearing listeners related to both onsets and semantic dissimilarity.
Figure 4.4(a) depicts the semantic dissimilarity TRFs for the single-talker and attended listening con-
ditions for normal hearing and hearing-impaired subjects.
In the single-talker condition a negative
peak corresponding to a ∼450ms time lag is signiﬁcant for the HI group but not for the NH group.
Compared to the semantic dissimilarity TRF in Figure 4.2(a) the time range of the HI signiﬁcant nega-
tivity is wider when only including the HI listeners (343.8ms 468.8ms) than when including both groups
(421.9ms-453.1ms, Figure 4.2). This indicates that only the hearing-impaired subjects have a negative
neural response which can be related to semantic processing when listening to only one speaker in quiet.
In the attended condition (where the unattended speech stream might interfere) a larger segment of
time lags corresponding to peaks around time lags of 250ms and 450ms of the HI TRF becomes signif-
icantly more negative than the baseline model and a similar pattern can now also be observed for the
NH group. In the NH group it does however appear that the ﬁrst peak occurs later than it does for the
HI group. The temporal areas of signiﬁcance for the two groups of listeners both overlap both negative
peaks appearing in the semantic dissimilarity TRFs and therefore appear to reﬂect similar underlying
processing mechanisms. The possible interference of acoustic cues from the unattended speech stream
makes it diﬃcult to conclude if these similar processing patterns between the two groups of listeners are
related to processing of semantic cues, acoustic cues or a combination of both. Based on the patterns
of onset and semantic dissimilarity responses of the single-talker data it was however assumed, that the
peaks of the attended TRF corresponding to time lags close to 400ms correspond to semantic processing,
while the peaks close to 200ms correspond to onset-eﬀects. Based on this assumption it appears that
both HI and NH subjects engage in semantic processing in the presence of an interfering speech stream.
Figure 4.4(b) shows comparisons of prediction accuracy means of semantic encoder 2 against the base-
line models. Permutation t-tests of these measures show that in the attended condition, where we saw
widely distributed TRF negativities for both HI and NH, the prediction accuracy is signiﬁcantly better
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
40
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 4.4. Semantic encoder 2 - eﬀects of hearing status. (a) Average semantic dissimilarity TRFs for
single-talker and attended data separated for HI and NH listeners. Thick lines indicate signiﬁcant negativity
relative the permuted baseline models.
(b) Comparison of prediction accuracy means within the three
diﬀerent listening conditions for NH and HI subjects. p −values : NH: single-talker: p = 0.0119, attended:
p = 1.41 · 10−4. HI: single-talker: p = 1.70 · 10−5, attended: p = 5.33 · 10−4 (c) Comparison of prediction
accuracy means
in the full model for both NH (1.41 · 10−5) and HI (5.33 · 10−4) listeners. In the single-talker condition,
the model prediction accuracies are also signiﬁcantly higher than baseline for both groups of listeners
(NH, p = 0.0119. HI, p = 1.70 · 10−5). No signiﬁcant improvement of prediction accuracy was found
in the unattended condition compared to the baseline model. This indicates the the inclusion of the
true semantic dissimilarity features makes the single-talker and attended models predict EEG-responses
signiﬁcantly better but that they have no eﬀect on unattended speech. This might indicate minimal
processing of unattended acoustic and semantic features which makes the attended TRF more reliable
given that possible interference from unattended speech would probably be minimal.
Figure 4.4(c) shows comparisons of model prediction accuracy means between the two groups of listen-
ers within each listening condition. No signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found in the means of the prediction
accuracies of the HI and NH groups in any listening condition indicating that the models of the two
groups of listeners are equally good at predicting the EEG responses based on the onset and semantic
dissimilarity regressors.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
41
4.2
Modelling Scheme 2 - Eﬀects of Semantic Cues on Early Auditory
Encoding
In 2019 Broderick et al.[17] found evidence of a top-down eﬀect in which high-level cortical processing of
semantic aspects of speech feed back to early auditory encoding of acoustic speech features. Speciﬁcally
they discovered that more semantically related words were associated with a better coding of the acoustic
envelope of the speech signal in auditory cortex. This was achieved using envelope trained-decoders to
reconstruct envelopes based on EEG-responses, and subsequently assessing the envelope reconstruction
accuracy in a linear mixed-eﬀect (LME) model including semantic similarity as a regressor.
In this study it was desired to investigate if this eﬀect could be reproduced and if the same pattern
would be apparent for hearing-impaired listeners. The model is this study diﬀers from that of Broderick
et al. (2019) on several parameters. First of all, this study includes both single-talker speech and the
attended part of two-talker speech to be able to investigate potential diﬀerences in top-down processing
depending on attentional load. Furthermore, in this study it was also decided to include a context-
amount regressor to take into account any integrative eﬀects of context related to the sentence length
which might interact with the eﬀect of semantic similarity.
Tables 4.1 and 4.2 show the coeﬃcients ﬁtted in the LME models for the groups of the 22 normal
hearing listeners and the 22 hearing-impaired listeners respectively. As indicated by colored rows in the
tables several of the predictors show signiﬁcant eﬀects (p < 0.05), while the nuisance regressor, envelope
variability is also signiﬁcant. Due to the large sample size (N = 3066 words * 22 listeners) included
in these models, the p-values of the LME models are likely to be small even for very small eﬀect sizes
in the data[41]. Such eﬀects might not be of practical interest, which is why permutations were used
to create baseline models on permuted semantic similarity and context-amount predictors to evaluate
whether the eﬀects of the context-related features had any practical relevance compared to a baseline
before analyzing the coeﬃcients of Tables 4.1 and 4.2 further.
Table 4.1: Linear Mixed Eﬀects Model - Normal Hearing Listeners.
Normal Hearing
β-estimate
SE
t statistic
p-value
context-amount (con)
0.051
0.0096
5.42
5.93 · 10−8
semantic similarity (sem)
0.0017
0.0096
0.18
0.85
listening condition[attended] (LC)
−0.017
0.012
−1.43
0.15
envelope variability
0.087
0.0055
15.68
3.26 · 10−55
pitch
0.00073
0.0055
0.13
0.89
sem : con
0.023
0.0094
2.48
0.013
sem : LC(attended)
0.00013
0.012
0.011
0.99
con : LC(attended)
−0.039
0.012
−3.35
0.00082
sem : con : LC(attended)
−0.029
0.011
−2.56
0.010
The results of the permutation tests are presented in Figure 4.5 in which the distributions of the models
with permuted semantic similarity and context-amount predictors are shown in yellow, and the values
of the actual models are plotted with dashed lines. Recall that an estimate is considered signiﬁcant
if it exceeds to 95th percentile of the distribution or is lower than the 5th percentile, which would
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
42
Table 4.2: Linear Mixed Eﬀects Model - Hearing Impaired Listeners.
Hearing-Impaired
β-estimate
SE
t statistic
p-value
context-amount (con)
0.026
0.01
2.61
0.009
semantic similarity (sem)
0.014
0.0099
1.43
0.15
listening condition[attended] (LC)
0.019
0.012
1.63
0.10
envelope variability
0.070
0.057
12.31
9.51 · 10−35
pitch
−0.0016
0.0057
−0.29
0.77
sem : con
−0.0058
0.0099
−0.59
0.55
sem : LC (attended)
0.018
0.012
−1.50
0.13
con : LC (attended)
−0.026
0.012
−2.14
0.03
sem : con : LC (attended)
−0.0047
0.012
−0.40
0.69
indicate a only 5% probability that the actual coeﬃcient-estimate or ﬁt, R2, comes from the permuted
null-distributions. Table 4.3 shows the computed 95th or 5th percentiles and the actual values of the
ﬁtted models. As indicated by Figure 4.5 and this table both models and their eﬀects are signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from their null-distributions.
Table 4.3: Results from permutations of LMEs
HI-Model
95th or 5th percentile
Actual value
R2
0.0050
0.0051
βcon
0.0165
0.0262
βcon,LC
-0.0205
-0.0261
NH-Model
R2
0.0078
0.0088
βcon
0.0352
0.0519
βsem,con
0.0152
0.0233
βsem,con,LC
0.0187
-0.0289
Upon concluding signiﬁcant eﬀect-sizes of the predictors, Tables 4.1 and 4.2 can be interpreted. Fig-
ure 4.6 illustrates how the eﬀect of semantic similarity on envelope reconstruction accuracy in normal
hearing listeners changes as a function of the amount of context as well as for the two diﬀerent listening
conditions. This is an illustration of the signiﬁcant 3-way interaction of Table 4.1, and the visualization
includes all signiﬁcant coeﬃcients for semantic similarity eﬀects. This 3-way interaction indicates, that
when normal hearing subjects listen to speech in quiet (single-talker) and a high amount of context is
available, then semantic similarity will have a positive eﬀect on the on encoding of speech envelopes. As
context level drops the positive eﬀect of semantic similarity also disappears. Overall this indicates that
normal hearing subjects have stronger low-level envelope encodings when a word is semantically related
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
43
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.5. Distributions of LME-models with permuted onset and semantic similarity features.
Distributions shown in yellow and values of the actual model are indicated with dashed lines. (a) Model
ﬁtted for normal hearing subjects. (b) Model ﬁtted for hearing impaired subjects.
to its context, but only when context-amount is high and when no interfering speech streams are present.
A reversed picture is found in the listening condition where an interfering speech stream is also present
(attended). Here a high amount of context yields a small negative eﬀect of semantic similarity on en-
velope encoding, while a low amount of context yields a small positive eﬀect. However these eﬀects are
much smaller than the ones found in the single-talker condition and the slope of the attended condition
also indicates that the diﬀerences between high and low context are very small. It would therefore
appear that the biggest eﬀect of semantic similarity on speech envelope encoding is found for listening
in quiet.
The positive eﬀect of semantic similarity on speech envelope encoding when listening in quiet and
context is high is not found for the hearing-impaired group. This might indicate that increased low-level
encoding when semantic relatedness is high is a feature of the healthy auditory system which is degraded
in hearing-impaired listeners.
The hearing-impaired group has a small positive eﬀect of the amount of sentence context available
when listening to a single speaker in quiet as illustrated in Figure 4.7. This eﬀect disappears when
an interfering speech stream appears (attended condition). This might indicate some sort of linguistic
processing feedback to early encoding stages, which is not captured by semantic similarity but is re-
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
44
lated to context. It has been found that diﬀerent linguistic surprisals related to speech give diﬀerent
responses[3], and context might be related to a process separate from semantic similarity. Furthermore,
this eﬀect is only present for speech in quiet, which was also the case for the semantic similarity eﬀect for
normal hearing listeners. This indicates that feedback from linguistic processing of speech to low-levels
encoding of speech only occurs in good listening conditions. This is also indicated by the fact that
semantic similarity only has an eﬀect for normal hearing listeners who have better listening conditions
that the hearing impaired listeners.
Fig. 4.6. Visualization of the tree-way in-
teraction of the NH LME model in rela-
tion the eﬀect of semantic similarity. The
y-axis of this illustration gives the size of the ef-
fect which semantic similarity has on envelope
reconstruction accuracy. The x-axis is based on
max. and min. values of the z-scored context-
amount regressor. Listening condition is illus-
trating by colors.
Fig. 4.7.
Visualization of the eﬀect of
context-amount on envelope reconstruc-
tion accuracy for LME model of HI lis-
teners. The y-axis of this illustration gives the
size of the eﬀect which onset-amount has on
envelope reconstruction accuracy.
The x-axis
shows the categorical regressor listening condi-
tion. Semantic similarity has no eﬀect on the
onset-amount eﬀect.
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Hearing-impaired listeners apply semantic cues diﬀerently than
normal hearing listeners
In this study, it was found that hearing-impaired listeners have signiﬁcant cortical responses to seman-
tic surprisal when listening to speech in quiet and when listening to speech in the presence of another
speech stream.
For normal hearing listeners, the cortical response to semantic surprisal for speech
was only found in the presence of another interfering speech stream. Furthermore, it was found that
normal-hearing listeners encode speech envelope representations (low-level) stronger for words which
are semantically similar to their preceding context, but only for speech in quiet and only when a large
amount of sentence context is available. Hearing-impaired listeners did not show this eﬀect of semantic
similarity, instead the amount of sentence context alone showed a positive eﬀect on speech envelope
encoding for speech in quiet.
The cortical response to semantic cues emerged as a late-occurring (∼400ms) centro-parietal negativity,
which in the presence of another speech stream spread from ∼200ms to ∼450ms, while remaining
signiﬁcant only in close proximity of (∼400ms) for speech in quiet. This indicates a relationship with
the N400-component of the ERP, which has previously been found to reﬂect semantic processing [13].
The fact that the cortical activity of semantic processing was not found in the best listening condi-
tion (speech in quiet, NH), but in all other conditions (interfering speech stream, NH and HI + speech
in quiet, HI) might indicate that this aspect of semantic processing is applied only in conditions of re-
duced signal quality. This corresponds well to behavioural studies which show increased positive eﬀects
of context in conditions of decreased signal quality (noise or limited temporal information)[7][8][10] and
increased use of contextual cues by hearing-impaired listeners[7][9]. The results found in this study
therefore might provide a neural explanation for the behavioural eﬀects observed in the cited stud-
ies.
Interestingly, Rogers & Wingﬁeld[9] found evidence that older listeners in general tend to rely
more on semantic cues than younger listeners despite equal listening conditions. The results presented
here point towards older hearing-impaired listeners relying more on high-level semantic cues than their
normal-hearing age-matched counterparts. It could therefore be hypothesized that the eﬀects observed
by Rogers & Wingﬁeld are not solely related to age but perhaps to age-related changes in hearing-acuity.
The positive eﬀect of semantic similarity on low-level acoustic envelope encoding was only found for
normal-hearing listeners and speech in quiet. In other words, it was found in the only condition where
the cortical high-level response of semantic processing was not present. However, hearing-impaired lis-
teners did have a positive eﬀect of context amount on envelope encoding for speech in quiet which
45
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
46
indicates that the application of high-level and low-level eﬀects is not completely separated by whether
and interfering speech stream is present or not.
In summary, based on the two sets of results it might theorized that high-level semantic processes
related to the N400-component are responsible for eﬀects in regard to mitigation of the negative eﬀects
of hearing-loss or reduced signal quality on speech recognition. While semantic support of low-level
speech encoding is an eﬀect only found in excellent listening conditions, and that this eﬀect is impaired
in age-related hearing loss. These main results and their relation to high- and low-level processing of
speech can be understood in several ways and will in the remainder of this section be related to a few
relevant theories of auditory speech perception.
As mentioned, the results of this study point toward diﬀerent patterns of cortical processing of se-
mantic cues depending on whether an interfering speech stream is present or not. In the case of speech
perception tasks in which other speech streams interfere there will be a degradation of the speech recog-
nition performance. This is sometimes referred to as speech-on-speech masking and can be subdivided
into two types of masking. Degradations in SNR related to overlaps of speech signal and speech noise
in time and frequency are referred to as energetic masking (EM), whereas degradations due to other
factors which pose limitations on target recognition are referred to as informational masking (IM) [45].
IM is therefore theorized to induce poor use of low-level information for increasing attentional loads[46]
which corresponds well to the results found for normal hearing listeners of this study in which we only
uncovered evidence of increased speech envelope encoding with high semantic similarity while no inter-
fering speech streams were present. The introduction of the interfering speech stream instead resulted in
a high-level cortical response to semantic cues and a small negative eﬀect of semantic cues on envelope
encoding. This might indicate that the degradation of low-level cues is related to increased high-level
cortical processing of these semantic features. This ﬁts the theory of IM well given that an interfering
speech stream increases the attentional load. The results for hearing-impaired listeners were more am-
biguous in this regard. In this case the small positive eﬀect of context-amount found in the single-talker
condition was joined by a signiﬁcant high-level (N400-related) response as well, which could indicate that
the two processes (high-level and low-level) co-occur. However, this is not necessarily the case since the
results simply reﬂect that both processes occur for hearing-impaired listeners when listening to speech in
quiet – not that they occur at the same time. IM could therefore still be part of explaining the results.
Especially given, that the positive eﬀect of context-amount of envelopes encoding for hearing-impaired
listeners disappear when an interfering speech stream in introduced.
An alternative theory which was found to outperform IM in describing behavioral measures of word
recognition tasks is the reverse hierarchy theory (RHT)[46]. In contrast to IM, RHT ﬁnds that low-level
cues can be utilized both under high and low attentional load, and that what determines if they are ap-
plied is whether the high-level representations are adequate for recognition. In other words, perception
is based on global high-level representations which are very fast, but sometimes crude, and when this
representation is ambiguous a reverse search back to low-level representations can be applied[47]. If we
imagine hearing a set of words, which fall into the same semantical category in high-level representations
which are also similarly sounding, then RHT states that because it in this case is diﬃcult to make an
identiﬁcation based on the high-level representation a reverse search back to low-level representations will
be initiated. That fact that we only ﬁnd semantical or contextual support of low-level encoding in the
absence of interfering speech, initially appear to ﬁt the IM theory better than RHT. However, it might
just be the case that our measures of low-level encoding are not capturing the processes initiated by RHT.
Perhaps simply observing the eﬀect of semantic similarity on envelope encoding is not adequate, since
this measure is ignorant to the high-level organization which might cause recognition ambiguity to occur.
Finally, it should be noted that the origin of the results and theories related to the results of this
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
47
study in what has been presented above all stem from experiments in which non-continuous speech has
been used while this study uses continuous speech. Perhaps the online processing of continuous speech
streams evokes diﬀerent neural processing than what is observed for non-continuous speech making it
diﬃcult to generalize results and theories between the two modalities.
5.2
Further investigation is needed on representation of semantic and
contextual features of speech
In this study two diﬀerent measures of context were applied. Semantic (dis)similarity based on neural
network word embeddings (in TRFs and LME-modelling), which is an advanced method of representing
word co-occurrences, and sentential context amount (only LME-modelling), which is a simple measure of
the amount of context available in the preceding part of the sentence. Evidence was found that the two
represent diﬀerent neural processes that are applied diﬀerently by normal hearing and hearing-impaired
listeners, which indicates that either one analysed alone would not be adequate to describe semantic
processing. Broderick et al. (2020)[3] also found that diﬀerent measures of linguistic surprisal related to
context were applied diﬀerently by young and older listeners. Interestingly they found that the semantic
dissimilarity (surprisal) measure did not result in signiﬁcant negative TRF-responses for older subjects,
when also including a measure of lexical surprisal. In this study we did ﬁnd signiﬁcant negativities
when only investigating semantic dissimilarity, but perhaps if the lexical surprisal measure had also
been included our results would have changed. This underlines the importance of further investigating
the possibilities and eﬀects of diﬀerent measures of contextual processing in order be able to expand on
the analyses applied in this and other studies of natural speech processing related to semantics.
The sentential context amount measure included in this study was included based on a simple as-
sumption that the amount of other (content) words preceding a given word in a sentence might aﬀect
how that word is processed. For hearing-impaired listeners in particular this simple measure proved to
have a positive eﬀect on speech envelope encoding for speech in quiet. For normal-hearing listeners the
context measure appeared to be crucial for the application of semantic similarity in relation to enve-
lope encoding. This could indicate that a better representation of semantic cues might be achieved by
computing a measure which accounts for both the amount of context and the semantic similarity. The
context measure might be related another measure investigated by Lash et al.(2013)[8] called response
entropy. Response entropy is a measure which indicates the strength and number of potential ﬁnal word
responses based on Cloze procedures[8]. One could theorize that when sentential context amount is
low (early in a sentence) response entropy is high because the context is less restraining than near the
end of a sentence. Lash et al.(2013) found that a high response entropy raises the hearing threshold of
hearing-impaired listeners but not young listeners[8]. In this study we found that high sentential context
(I.e. low response entropy – lower number of possible words) was needed for increased envelope encoding
accuracy for both hearing-impaired and normal hearing listeners. This could indicate that the positive
eﬀects observed for context amount on envelope encodings are related to there being a low number of
possible upcoming words, and that this knowledge is taken advantage of in a top-down information ﬂow.
Since the eﬀects of response entropy were only found for older listeners by Lash et al. (2013)[8], it would
be interesting to expand the analysis of this study to include young listeners as well, to see if they might
have a positive eﬀect of semantic similarity without the support of a high amount of sentential context.
This could also explain why Broderick et al. (2019)[2], who used younger subjects, found a signiﬁcant
main eﬀect of semantic similarity on envelope encoding while semantic similarity only showed this eﬀect
when context amount was also high for the older subjects of this study.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
48
5.3
Limitations
5.3.1
Acoustic Onset Eﬀects
The results of the semantic encoder computed in this study based solely on a semantic dissimilarity
regressor proved to be strongly inﬂuenced by acoustic onset-related eﬀects which has also been demon-
strated in other applications of TRFs to describe perceptive processes[44]. By including a nuisance onset
regressor alongside the semantic dissimilarity regressor it was attempted to account for these onset-eﬀects
and to isolate the semantic responses. The results showed that for a single speech stream in quiet the
onset-eﬀects and the semantic eﬀects appeared to be separated into negative peaks occurring around
200ms and 400ms respectively. This separation was not as clear when an interfering speech stream was
also present, which might indicate that onset-eﬀects of the unattended speech stream were captured in
the TRF-model of the attended speech stream. Based on this it was concluded that the TRF-models
achieved on speech streams in the presence of interfering speech streams should be analysed carefully
until further analyses are made on the possible overﬂowing eﬀects from the interfering speech stream.
All results presented in this study should therefore be seen in this light, which indicates the need for
further investigations to conﬁrm the conclusions of this study.
5.3.2
Participants
This study was based solely on older participants to accommodate investigation of hearing-loss related
eﬀects on semantic processing irrespective of age-related eﬀects. However, the normal hearing group
were not able to meet the standard requirements of normal hearing thresholds for frequencies above
2kHz[4]. In this case participants were accepted into the group for a threshold within 30dB of HL. This
means that some eﬀects of hearing-loss might be found in this group as well.
5.3.3
Modelling Choices
Several assumptions lie behind the conclusions drawn from the models of this study. The main assump-
tion is that of linearity between the selected features of speech and corresponding EEG-responses in
the semantic encoders of modelling scheme 1 and the envelope decoders of modelling scheme 1. This
assumption means that although we have successfully estimated some patterns of neural responses to
semantic features, it is important to keep in mind that what we have observed is probably the responses
of subsets of neurons and not the full picture[15].
In the case of modelling scheme 2 it is also important to recall that there is no true estimate of the
cortical encoding of the speech envelopes. The accuracy with which the speech envelopes were encoded
cortically was estimated based on the decoder-derived predictions of envelopes from EEG-responses. The
results of modelling scheme 2 are therefore inevitably tied to the performance of the envelope decoders.
It therefore might have been relevant to further investigate performance of the envelope encoding mod-
els, along with an investigation of possible interference from features correlated with the speech envelope
before applying it in the LME-analysis.
Another limitation regarding modelling scheme 2 is that an LME-model was trained for each of the
two groups of listeners to investigate possible diﬀerences related to hearing loss. It might have been
more appropriate to instead have included hearing status as a ﬁxed-eﬀect in the LME-model. This
would have made inferences regarding hearing-status derived diﬀerences in envelope encoding stronger,
but would also have come at a cost of possible fourth-order interaction eﬀects.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
49
Another important assumption related to the modelling performed in this study is the basis of comput-
ing semantic (dis)similarity. A limitation was made to only model semantic relatedness of each word
based on preceding sentential context. This entails the assumption that the cortical processing of se-
mantic relatedness is also only based on sentential context, which might not be accurate. For instance,
a given word could have a high semantic dissimilarity to its sentential context, but if that same word
was mentioned in the previous sentence it might not actually be semantically dissimilar to the listener.
Further investigations would be needed to conclude if this choice of semantic encoding aﬀect the results
of this study.
In summary, the conclusions about how the use of semantic cues for speech perception changes with
hearing loss should only be interpreted while keeping the above-mentioned limitations in mind. The
results might be viewed as an inspiration for further investigations which could attempt to recreate the
results while eliminating some of the limitations of this study.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this study, neurally-founded evidence was uncovered which supports the results of behavioral studies
which ﬁnd that hearing-impaired listeners rely more on semantic cues for speech perception, than their
normal hearing counterparts. This was ﬁrst of all based on a TRF-based analysis in which neural re-
sponses to semantic features of speech were estimated. This analysis indicated that while normal hearing
listeners only had cortical N400-related responses to semantic dissimilarity in conditions of competing
talkers, hearing-impaired subjects had signiﬁcant cortical responses to semantic dissimilarity for com-
peting talkers and for a single talker in quiet. This indicates a tendency of hearing-impaired listeners to
rely on semantic cues in good listening conditions where normal hearing listeners do not.
It was also found that semantic and contextual cues have positive eﬀects on the encoding of low-level
speech features in certain conditions, and that these eﬀects also diﬀer between normal hearing and
hearing-impaired listeners. Speciﬁcally, it was found that normal hearing listeners have a positive eﬀect
of semantic similarity on early auditory speech envelope encoding, and that this eﬀect was only present
when listening to a single talker in quiet. Additionally this eﬀect was not present for words occurring
early in a sentence but became increasingly larger as more sentence context was introduced. Hearing-
impaired subjects did not show this eﬀect, but instead had a smaller positive eﬀect of the amount of
sentence context on speech envelope encoding in single talker conditions. From this it was concluded,
that in good listening conditions normal hearing subjects are able to use semantic and contextual cues
to strengthen the encoding of speech envelopes, while hearing-impaired listeners only show a weak ten-
dency to apply contextual cues.
The results of the two main analyses overall indicated that some relationship exists between the ap-
plications of semantic cues for high-level and low-level representations in speech perception. This re-
lationship shows a tendency towards high-level processing of semantic cues being related to degraded
listening conditions (competing speech or hearing-impairment), while semantic and contextual support
of low-level encoding of speech envelopes is related to good listening conditions (normal-hearing and
single talker). These results were discussed in terms of the speech perception models; informational
masking and the reverse hierarchy theory. The results of this study agree with views from both these
models, and further investigations related to extending this analysis in terms of conﬁrming or denying
claims of these models would be a natural next step to implement.
50
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
51
6.1
Further Work
The results and conclusions of this study all open new questions and possibilities which could, and
should, be investigated further to make stronger inferences. A list of such possible investigations is
given below.
1. Quantitative representations of semantic properties of speech should be investigated
further to achieve representations that are more true to the nature of the auditory system and the
language being modelled. One should investigate this in terms of the amount of context included
for the computation as well as diﬀerent measures of semantic cues, which might reﬂect diﬀerent
levels of speech perception. In this regard one should consider how diﬀerent memory capabilities
of participants of diﬀerent ages might aﬀect the context window.
2. Participants of diﬀerent ages and hearing acuities should be included in similar analyses
to broaden the understanding of how hearing loss and age aﬀects speech processing and semantic
processing in particular.
3. Extending the LME-modelling of low-level encoding could be done to further investigate
the eﬀects of semantic speech features on low-level encoding of speech in relation to hearing loss.
It should be attempted to create a model which models eﬀects to hearing loss and semantic cues
simultaneously to make stronger inferences about the eﬀect of hearing loss on semantic support of
low-level encodings.
4. Further investigations of the acoustic onset eﬀect of unattended speech should be per-
formed to evaluate whether unattended cues interfere with estimations of neural responses to
attended speech streams. This is relevant in order to strengthen the analysis of this study, but
also in general to broaden the understanding of processing of unattended speech.
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1] G.
Hickok,
“The
Ventral
Speech
Stream
Revisited,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=ShtQVAsfhSQ
[2] M. P. Broderick, A. J. Anderson, G. M. Di Liberto, M. J. Crosse, and E. C. Lalor, “Electrophysiolog-
ical Correlates of Semantic Dissimilarity Reﬂect the Comprehension of Natural, Narrative Speech,”
Current Biology, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 803–809, 2018.
[3] M. Broderick, G. Di Liberto, A. Anderson, A. Rofes, and E. Lalor, “Dissociable electrophysiological
measures of natural language processing reveal diﬀerences in speech comprehension strategy in
healthy ageing,” 2020.
[4] S. A. Fuglsang, J. Märcher-Rørsted, T. Dau, and J. Hjortkjær, “Eﬀects of sensorineural hearing
loss on cortical synchronization to competing speech during selective attention,” Journal of Neuro-
science, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2562–2572, 2020.
[5] M.
Holmelund,
“Hørenedsættelse
hos
ældre
(presbyakusis),”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sundhed.dk/borger/patienthaandbogen/oere-naese-hals/sygdomme/
indre-oere-og-balanceorganer/hoerenedsaettelse-hos-aeldre-presbyakusis/
[6] J. Henry, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research.
New York: Springer, 2013, vol. 52, no. 3.
[7] J. Benichov, L. C. Cox, P. A. Tun, and A. Wingﬁeld, “Word recognition within a linguistic context:
Eﬀects of age, hearing acuity, verbal ability, and cognitive function,” Ear and Hearing, vol. 33,
no. 2, pp. 250–256, 2012.
[8] A. Lash, C. S. Rogers, A. Zoller, and A. Wingﬁeld, “Expectation and entropy in spoken word
recognition: Eﬀects of age and hearing acuity,” Experimental Aging Research, vol. 39, no. 3, pp.
235–253, 2013.
[9] C. S. Rogers and A. Wingﬁeld, “Stimulus-independent semantic bias misdirects word recognition
in older adults,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 138, no. 1, pp. EL26–EL30,
2015.
[10] S. Moradi, B. Lidestam, M. Hällgren, and J. Rönnberg, “Gated auditory speech perception in
elderly hearing aid users and elderly normal-hearing individuals: Eﬀects of hearing impairment and
cognitive capacity,” Trends in Hearing, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2014.
[11] M. K. Pichora-Fuller, “Use of supportive context by younger and older adult listeners: Balancing
bottom-up and top-down information processing,” International Journal of Audiology, vol. 47, no.
SUPPL. 2, 2008.
[12] G. Hickok and D. Poeppel, “The cortical organization of speech processing,” Nature Reviews Neu-
roscience, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 393–402, 2007.
52
==PAGE:54==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[13] M. Kutas and K. D. Federmeier, “Thirty years and counting: Finding meaning in the N400 compo-
nent of the event-related brain potential (ERP),” Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 62, pp. 621–647,
2011.
[14] L. S. Hamilton and A. G. Huth, “The revolution will not be controlled: natural stimuli in speech
neuroscience,” Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 573–582, 2020.
[15] E. C. Lalor, A. J. Power, R. B. Reilly, and J. J. Foxe, “Resolving precise temporal processing
properties of the auditory system using continuous stimuli,” Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 102,
no. 1, pp. 349–359, 2009.
[16] M. J. Crosse, G. M. Di Liberto, A. Bednar, and E. C. Lalor, “The multivariate temporal response
function (mTRF) toolbox: A MATLAB toolbox for relating neural signals to continuous stimuli,”
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 10, no. NOV2016, pp. 1–14, 2016.
[17] M. P. Broderick, A. J. Anderson, and E. C. Lalor, “Semantic Context Enhances the Early Auditory
Encoding of Natural Speech,” The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬃcial journal of the Society for
Neuroscience, vol. 39, no. 38, pp. 7564–7575, 2019.
[18] D. Geeraerts, “Lexical Semantics,” p. 1, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://oxfordre.com/linguistics/
view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.001.0001/acrefore-9780199384655-e-29
[19] M. Kutas and S. A. Hillyard, “Reading senseless sentences: brain potentials reﬂect semantic incon-
gruity,” Science, vol. 207, no. 4427, pp. 203–205, 1980.
[20] A. D. Friederici, E. Pfeifer, and A. Hahne, “Event-related brain potentials during natural speech
processing: eﬀects of semantic, morphological and syntactic violations,” Cognitive Brain Research,
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 183–192, 1993.
[21] C. Brodbeck, A. Presacco, and J. Z. Simon, “Neural source dynamics of brain responses to con-
tinuous stimuli: Speech processing from acoustics to comprehension,” NeuroImage, vol. 172, pp.
162–174, 2018.
[22] F. Nielsen and L. K. Hansen, “Combining embedding methods for a word intrusion task,” 2019,
pp. 237–240. [Online]. Available: http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/pubs/7135-full.html
[23] G. M. Di Liberto, J. A. O’Sullivan, and E. C. Lalor, “Low-frequency cortical entrainment to speech
reﬂects phoneme-level processing,” Current Biology, vol. 25, no. 19, pp. 2457–2465, 2015.
[24] B. Khalighinejad, G. C. da Silva, and N. Mesgarani, “Dynamic encoding of acoustic features in
neural responses to continuous speech,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 2176–2185,
2017.
[25] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in
vector space,” in 1st International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2013 - Workshop
Track Proceedings, 2013, pp. 1–12.
[26] B. C. Moore and B. R. Glasberg, “Use of a Loudness Model For Hearing-Aid Fitting. I. Linear
Hearing Aids,” British Journal of Audiology, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 317–335, 1998.
[27] D. Yao, Y. Qin, S. Hu, L. Dong, M. L. Bringas Vega, and P. A. Valdés Sosa, “Which Reference
Should We Use for EEG and ERP practice?” Brain Topography, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 530–549, 2019.
[28] F. Perrin, J. Pernier, O. Bertrand, and J. Echallier, “Spherical splines for scalp potential and
current-density-mapping,” Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 72, no. 2, pp.
184–187, 1989.
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
54
[29] R. Fries, P. Maris, and J. Schoﬀelen, “FieldTrip: Open Source Software for Advanced Analysis of
MEG, EEG, and Invasive Electrophysiological Data,” Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience,
vol. 2011, pp. 156 869–9, 2011.
[30] A. De Cheveigné and L. C. Parra, “Joint decorrelation, a versatile tool for multichannel data
analysis,” NeuroImage, vol. 98, pp. 487–505, 2014.
[31] D. D. Wong, S. A. Fuglsang, J. Hjortkjær, E. Ceolini, M. Slaney, and A. de Cheveigné, “A compar-
ison of regularization methods in forward and backward models for auditory attention decoding,”
Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 12, pp. 531–547, 2018.
[32] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation,” in
Proceeding of the 2014 Coference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
2014, pp. 1532–1543.
[33] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching Word Vectors with Subword In-
formation,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 5, pp. 135–146,
2017.
[34] R. Rehurek and P. Sojka, “Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora,” Pro-
ceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, no. May 2010, pp.
45–50, 2010.
[35] P. Good, “Permutation, Parametric, and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses,” in Permutation, Para-
metric, and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses, 3rd ed.
Huntington Beach: Springer, 2005, ch. Testing
Hy, pp. 33–63.
[36] Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg, “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerfull
Approach to Multiple Testing,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 289–300,
1995.
[37] J. C. Pinheiro and D. M. Bates, Mixed-Eﬀects Models in S and S-PLUS.
New York: Springer,
2000.
[38] D. Magezi, “Linear Mixed-Eﬀects Models for Within-Particiapnt Psychology Experiments: An
introductory Tutorial and Free, Graphical User Interface (LMMgui),” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 6,
no. 2, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00002/full
[39] Y. Oganian and E. F. Chang, “A speech envelope landmark for syllable encoding in human superior
temporal gyrus,” bioRxiv, vol. 5, no. 11, 2019.
[40] E. S. Teoh, M. S. Cappelloni, and E. C. Lalor, “Prosodic pitch processing is represented in delta-
band EEG and is dissociable from the cortical tracking of other acoustic and phonetic features,”
European Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 3831–3842, 2019.
[41] M. Lin, H. C. Lucas, and G. Shmueli, “Too big to fail: Large samples and the p-value problem,”
Information Systems Research, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 906–917, 2013.
[42] I. Hertrich, S. Dietrich, J. Trouvain, A. Moos, and H. Ackermann, “Magnetic brain activity phase-
locked to the envelope, the syllable onsets, and the fundamental frequency of a perceived speech
signal,” Psychophysiology, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 322–334, 2012.
[43] L. S. Hamilton, E. Edwards, and E. F. Chang, “A Spatial Map of Onset and Sustained Responses to
Speech in the Human Superior Temporal Gyrus,” Current Biology, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 1860–1871,
2018.
==PAGE:56==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
[44] C. Daube, R. A. Ince, and J. Gross, “Simple Acoustic Features Can Explain Phoneme-Based Pre-
dictions of Cortical Responses to Speech,” Current Biology, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1924–1937, 2019.
[45] G. Kidd and H. S. Colburn, “Informational Masking in Speech Recognition,” in The Auditory System
at the cocktail party, 2017, pp. 75–109.
[46] M. Nahum, I. Nelken, and M. Ahissar, “Low-level information and high-level perception: The case
of speech in noise,” PLoS Biology, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 0978–0991, 2008.
[47] I. Nelken and M. Ahissar, “High-Level and Low-level Processing in the Auditory System: The Role
of Primary Auditory Cortex,” 2006.
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.0.1
Eﬀects of standard deviation thresholded denoising
This appendix illustrates the eﬀect of applying the SD-denoising algorithm described in section 3.1.4
to subject 5 before the EOG-denoising algorithm. The ﬁgures illustrate that the SD-denoising at this
point primarily shrinks the amplitude of artifacts, without actually removing the artifacts.
56
==PAGE:58==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
57
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
58
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
59
A.0.2
Table of noisy EEG-channels
Table A.1: EEG-channel which are reported to be contaminated by physical noise by Fuglsang et al.[4]
Subject
Noisy channels
1
POz
2
P2
3
P2, PO4
4
P2, POz, P9
5
-
6
PO4, P4, P2, POz,
Pz, PO3, P1, F1
7
P2, PO4, POz
8
-
9
-
10
-
11
P2
12
PO4
13
-
14
PO4
15
-
16
P2
17
PO4, P2
18
-
19
-
20
-
21
Pz, POz, P2, PO4
22
P2, PO4
23
-
24
P2, PO4
25
P2, PO4
26
P2
27
-
28
Poz, P2, PO4
29
Poz, P2
30
P2
31
P2
32
P2
33
-
34
P2, PO4, P8, P6,
C2, Pz
35
P2, POz,
36
O2, PO4
37
P2, PO4
38
-
39
P2
40
POz
41
P2, PO4
42
-
43
P2
44
P2
