==PAGE:1==
A high-throughput pipeline for
large scale studies of Cas9
activity in Aspergillus niger
Rasmus Hartmann (s154263)
February 3, 2021
Supervisors: Kyle Rothschild-Mancinelli, Katherina
Garcia Vanegas, Fabiano Jares Contesini, Uﬀe Hasbro
Mortensen
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors for giving me the freedom to make this project
my own, but still supporting and guiding me, always giving me competent feedback
and a smile. I would also like to thank the Section for Synthetic Biology as a whole
for always being available for a good academic discussion and for bringing a warm
and welcoming atmosphere to the lab.
I would like to thank DTU’s 2020 iGEM team for sharing their early results
and observations on the eﬀect of surfactants on fungal morphology with us.
Finally, I would to thank my sister Ines Hartmann for helping me tremendously
with the layout of my ﬁgures.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
4
2
Introduction
4
2.1
Context & Main Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Current state of high-throughput genome engineering . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Advantages and disadvantages of automation through robotics
5
2.2.2
Challenges in automated handling of ﬁlamentous fungi
. . .
6
2.3
Designing the perfect sgRNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
The determining factors of a strong sgRNA for Cas9
. . . .
7
2.3.2
The seed region is key in prediction of oﬀ-target eﬀects . . .
9
2.3.3
Current state of predictive algorithms for sgRNA design
. .
9
2.3.4
Tools for automated design of oligonucleotides for CRISPR
experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Experimental strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Construction of an sgRNA expression vector . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Experimental workﬂow for CRISPR-based gene deletions in
A. niger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Speciﬁc aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.1
Development of a tool for CRISPR oligo design
. . . . . . .
13
2.5.2
High-throughput protocol for sgRNA plasmid creation
. . .
13
2.5.3
High-throughput protocol for A. niger transformations . . .
13
2.5.4
Construction of an sgRNA library in A. niger and applica-
tion of the library in a Cas9 lethality assay . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Materials and Methods
13
3.1
TACODe script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Strains, media, plasmids and oligonucleotides . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Plasmid puriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
PCR ampliﬁcation and gel electrophoresis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
TACODe sgRNA expression plasmid construction and DH5-α
transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Fungal microtransformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Cas9 lethality assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results
17
4.1
TACODe - a Tool for Automated CRISPR Oligonucleotide Design .
17
4.1.1
TACODe is successful in eﬃcient generation of sgRNA ex-
pression vector libraries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Microtransformation protocol enables automated transformation of
A. niger in 96-well plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.1
Automation of microtransformations increases their repro-
ducibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Lethality assay shows Cas9 activity with sgRNA library . . .
23
2
==PAGE:4==
5
Discussion
25
5.1
TACODe provides a strong and versatile tool for oﬀ-target free
CRISPR experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
A fungal genome engineering pipeline in 96-well scale enables fast
library creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.1
Fully automated large scale construction of plasmid libraries
27
5.2.2
Automated fungal microtransformations are eﬃcient and re-
producible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.3
Clonal isolation of fungi remains a challenge for HTP set-ups 29
5.2.4
An HTP pipeline for null mutants enables fast library con-
struction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
sgRNA’s targeting active genes are highly active . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Conclusions
31
7
Future perspective
32
7.1
Further development of TACODe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.2
Further development of an HTP pipeline for A. niger mutant gen-
eration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.3
Follow-up experiments regarding the correlation between chromatin
state and Cas9 activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8
Supplementary Information
41
8.1
TACODe example output
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.1.1
Example of raw TACODe output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.1.2
Map of TACODe oligonucleotides for deletion of A. niger
gene NRRL3 00002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.2
TACODe README
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2.1
Script Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2.2
Before Using The Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2.3
Input & Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2.4
Using Default Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.2.5
Customized Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.2.6
Detailed Speciﬁcation Of Each Code Element
. . . . . . . .
45
8.2.7
Citing TACODe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8.2.8
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8.3
TACODe source code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.3.1
TACODe 1.6.0.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.3.2
Check primer gen.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.3.3
ﬁnd spacers.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.3.4
init params.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.3.5
load gﬀ.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.3.6
search params.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.4
TACODe output of oligonucleotide design for sgRNA library . . . .
60
8.5
Microtransformation protocol for A. niger
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.6
Liquid class parameters for microtransformations on ﬂowbot ONE .
67
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Abstract
The worldwide demand for biological solutions is ever-growing, and automated
platforms for strain engineering are the future of biotechnology. However, despite
their industrial relevance, establishment of automated pipelines for engineering
of ﬁlamentous fungi remains a challenge due to their morphological traits. More-
over, high-throughput set-ups require strong genetic tools, and Aspergillus-speciﬁc
knowledge about eﬃcient CRISPR use is needed. Here, a high-throughput pipeline
was established for genetic engineering of ﬁlamentous fungi through CRISPR-
Cas9, consisting of: 1) the experimental design script TACODe (Tool for Auto-
mated CRISPR Oligonucleotide Design), which designs all olignucleotides involved
in CRISPR-based deletion experiments; 2) a reliable guide RNA vector assembly
protocol; 3) an automated protocol for 96-well microtiter plate based transfor-
mation of A. niger. High utility of the pipeline was demonstrated through con-
struction of a 90 plasmid single guide RNA library, which was applied in a Cas9
lethality assay to study spacer eﬃciency. My ﬁndings suggest that Cas9 strongly
prefers actively expressed genes, providing an important insight into why some loci
are more challenging to target than others. TACODe serves as the ﬁrst universally
applicable script to fully handle primer design for CRISPR-based gene deletions.
Combined with our robust high-throughput genome engineering pipeline and new-
found insight in CRISPR spacer design, it allows for fast construction of large A.
niger deletion mutant libraries, propelling fungal research and industry.
2
Introduction
2.1
Context & Main Aim
Filamentous fungi including Aspergilli are highly industrially relevant organisms,
especially for production of enzymes, secondary metabolites and food additives.
Due to the commercial interest, many full genome sequences of Aspergillus strains
have become available, and many gene functions have been predicted or even
validated. Still, in order to utilize the full potential of Aspergilli as cell factories,
a better understanding of the factors involved in host ﬁtness and productivity is
needed [1]. To gain insight into these phenomena and generate production strains
more eﬃciently, large mutant libraries are of great interest. CRISPR technology
has been adapted for use in ﬁlamentous fungi, and protocols for eﬃcient genome
engineering of A. niger have been developed [2]. However, the optimal design
of single guide RNA’s (sgRNA’s) varies from one organism to another, and has
not been speciﬁcally investigated for Aspergilli [3, 4]. In recent years, the use
of robotics and automation equipment has become more common in microbial
research, and a natural next step would be to develop protocols for automated or
semi-automated high-throughput engineering of Aspergilli.
In this project, we developed protocols for high-throughput CRISPR-based
genome engineering of A. niger. The protocols were designed to be carried out in
a 96-well plate format where possible, enabling the use of multichannel pipetting
and robotics. The three phases ”Experimental design”, ”Plasmid construction”
and ”Fungal transformation” were considered. Additionally, I applied the devel-
4
==PAGE:6==
oped protocols in the creation of an sgRNA library to investigate Cas9 protospacer
eﬃciency in A. niger. The cutting eﬃciency of Cas9 with each sgRNA was eval-
uated by measuring transformation eﬃciency in a non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ) deﬁcient strain.
2.2
Current state of high-throughput genome engineering
Biotechnological research and industry are both progressing fast. To meet the
growing demand, the ﬁeld is transitioning to higher throughput experiments,
which is facilitated by automated workﬂows in standardized formats.
Most
biotechnological equipment supports plates in the 96-well format, allowing paral-
lel handling of experiments with volumes below 300 µl. Once standardized formats
are implemented, liquid handling robots can carry out fast and precise pipetting
and colony pickers can pick from plates based on colony size, ﬂuorescence, etc
[5, 6].
Other common robotics elements include plate readers, incubators and
FACS. Individually, these robots can carry out simple tasks, but their true po-
tential is seen when they are combined in a modular approach to automate entire
experimental pipelines.
2.2.1
Advantages and disadvantages of automation through robotics
Table 1: Comparison of some important advantages and disadvantages of
using liquid handling robots [7].
Advantages
Disadvantages
Provides consistent results
High upfront cost
High productivity
Lower ﬂexibility
Does not make human errors
Lack of visual feedback
Programs can be shared online
between users
Setting up of a new protocol is
laborious
Provides safe handling of hazardous
substances
Poor handling of non-homogeneous
samples
Prevents occupational injuries caused
by repetitive tasks
Requires training of operating
personnel
Can read barcodes
Limited to standardized formats
Requires special pipettes for very
small volumes
While the use of robots has some clear advantages, it also comes with certain
disadvantages. Generally, robots are capable of precisely and eﬃciently carrying
out a repeated task, and can relieve humans of repetitive and sometimes even
hazardous procedures [7]. Additionally, robots have the advantage of being able
to learn a new task as fast as a preset program can be downloaded, as long as
someone else has already tested and shared the program. Some can also keep track
of items and save data directly through barcodes, which is especially convenient
5
==PAGE:7==
when very large quantities of experiments are carried out, exempliﬁed by the
Biomolecular Screening Facility of EPFL (Switzerland) [8]. However, due to their
high cost, limited ﬂexibility, and the experience and time needed for setting up
new protocols, acquisition of robotics is not always justiﬁable for non-repetitive
use. Finally, there is still a number of common tasks, that robots can not yet carry
out. For example, liquid handlers struggle with non-homogeneous ﬂuids, as they
might clog up pipette tips or require visual feedback to handle [9]. A summary of
advantages and disadvantages of liquid handling robots is listed in Table 1.
2.2.2
Challenges in automated handling of ﬁlamentous fungi
Figure 1: Feasibility of high-throughput (HTP) protocols in fungal genetic
engineering. The full pipeline for E. coli based assembly of sgRNA expression vec-
tors can be automated. However, plating out and colony picking of fungi can not be
automated due to the airborne spores and thin and widespread colonies.
When considering synthetic biology, several examples of fully automated work-
ﬂows for bacteria and yeasts have been reported, spanning from experimental de-
sign over library generation to screening [9]. As a result, plasmid construction in E.
coli and the liquid-based part of fungal transformations are suited for automated
set-ups, as Kuivanen et al. (2019) have demonstrated [10]. On the other hand,
plating out of transformants, picking of colonies and screening of desired pheno-
types have not yet been automated and remain a laborious process, see Figure 1.
This gap between unicellular organisms and ﬁlamentous fungi can be attributed
to some key challenges:
• The morphology of fungal pellets in liquids medium complicates liquid han-
dling and procedures such as FACS.
• Thin and spread-out colonies on plates complicate colony recognition and
picking or counting.
• Airborne spores interfere with isolation of pure colonies and sterile handling
in general.
• Heterokaryons greatly increase the complexity of clonal isolation.
6
==PAGE:8==
2.3
Designing the perfect sgRNA
CRISPR-systems have since their discovery become one of the most important
tools in molecular biology, with CRISPR-Cas9 being the most widespread in
academia. CRISPR-Cas9 has been adapted to use in A. niger, and can be used
to eﬃciently generate genomic double stranded breaks (DSB’s) for gene editing,
but can also be used as the catalytically inactive mutant dCas9 to silence genes in
an induction-dependent manner, termed CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) [11, 12].
Additionally, methods like CRISPR activation (CRISPRa) and even prime editing
are strong tools all built on the CRISPR-Cas framework [13, 14].
The broad range of applications forms basis for generation of a number of
library styles [15].
Naturally, single knock out strains can be made, both by
insertion of an early stop codon or by deletion of the entire gene. Another option
is to have a pooled CRISPRi library of strains with sgRNA’s targeting every gene
in the organism, induce CRISPR interference under desired conditions, and then
assess the abundance of each spacer by sequencing to identify essential genes in
these conditions [16]. One can also perform tiling screens, where the CRISPR-Cas
system is used to modify individual codons throughout a gene to identify important
regions. To sum up, CRISPR-Cas systems are central in modern molecular biology,
and as a result a large number of reliable sgRNA’s must be designed.
2.3.1
The determining factors of a strong sgRNA for Cas9
Cas9 must be loaded with an RNA-molecule, that guides it to its target site. Most
current applications of Cas9 involve the use of an sgRNA, and the two determining
interactions in Cas9 activity are between the sgRNA and target and between Cas9
and the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM), but a lot of the determining factors
of this interaction are not yet well understood. Perfectly matching spacers and
a consensus PAM do not always result in high nuclease activity, and non-perfect
oﬀ-target matches might even occasionally bind better than the perfect target
[27, 28]. The following is a summary of the two main contributing factors, which
have been reported repeatedly: spacer sequence and chromatin state.
When considering spacer sequence, there are numerous reports of nucleotide
preferences throughout the spacer. It is reported, that a G on position 20 of the
spacer correlates with high Cas9 activity, while a C has the opposite eﬀect, and
similarly, strong spacers are enriched with C’s and deprived of G’s on position
16 [29, 30]. GC content provides a point of controversy. Doench et al. (2014)
found that A’s were enriched on position 9 to 15 in strong spacers, and that
spacers with close to 50% GC content were more active than spacers with higher
or lower GC content, yet Ren et al. (2014) reported that a higher GC content
in the 6 PAM-proximal nucleotides increases activity [29, 31]. Yet again Wong
et al. (2015) found that lower GC content of a spacer, speciﬁcally through an
enrichment of A’s, and lower thermodynamic stability of the spacer-target duplex
correlated with higher Cas9 activity, demonstrating how the experimental data
generation heavily colours the outcome [32]. Finally, it has been suggested that
the sequence CTT on positions 18-20 can base pair with positions 51-53 (AAG)
on the sgRNA, which just like other strong secondary structures can compete
with spacer-target binding, and that 4 or more repetitive bases decrease spacer
7
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2: Determining factors for Cas9 activity. A: Summary of sequence pref-
erences. The seed region is not a speciﬁc sequence preference, but rather the region
where perfect base pairing is most crucial [17, 18, 19, 20]. B: Eﬀect of chromatin state
on Cas9 activity. Heterochromatin has been shown to reduce Cas9 activity, and indi-
vidual nucleosomes have been shown to physically block access of Cas9 to the DNA
[21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26].
8
==PAGE:10==
eﬃciency, especially GGGG motifs [21, 32]. Generally agreed upon preferences are
summarized in Figure 2 A. The PAM for Cas9 has the consensus sequence NGG,
but NAG has also been shown to be active, and it has been observed that CGG
PAM’s are slightly enriched in stronger than average spacers, while TGG PAM’s
appear in weaker spacers [17, 29].
Another layer of complexity is added by the eﬀect of the local chromatin state
at a target site. Heterochromatin has been found to decrease Cas9 activity, con-
sistent with the observation that nucleosomes physically block access of Cas9 to
the DNA, see Figure 2 B [21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. As a result, oﬀ-target activity
is enriched in genes and especially their regulatory elements, such as promoters
and enhancers, which are known to be in euchromatin when active [33, 34]. This
knowledge can be applied to design stronger spacers, and indeed, optimal targeting
for CRISPRi has been identiﬁed at positions -200 to 0 relative to the transcription
start site (TSS) in S. cerevisiae and -50 to +300 in human K562 cells [3, 4]. And
while it is not yet proven whether Cas9 cleavage in general beneﬁts just as much
from promoter-targeting as CRISPRi, the DNA has in an ATAC-seq experiment
by Huang et al. (2019) been shown to be most accessible just upstream of the TSS
in A. niger, with a strong and distinct peak around 100 nt upstream of the TSS,
indicating a consistency in nucleosome position relative to the TSS [35]. Weaker
neighbouring accessibility peaks were also observed about 130-150 nt upstream
and downstream of the main peak, consistent with reported nucleosomal repeats
of 135 nt in active promoters in A. fumigatus [36].
2.3.2
The seed region is key in prediction of oﬀ-target eﬀects
The above mentioned factors are important in controlling Cas9 activity, but it is
in many cases equally important to consider where unwanted Cas9 activity may
occur. As an example, high CRISPR-activity in regulatory elements is not only
beneﬁcial, as it poses the issue that oﬀ-target eﬀects are often located at signiﬁcant
locations. For prediction of oﬀ-target eﬀects, the 12 bp upstream of the PAM,
known as the seed sequence, are of high importance, see Figure 2 A. This sequence
has been reported to be essential in spacer-target interactions, even though the
reported seed length varies from 7 to 14 nt in the literature [17, 18, 19, 20]. Others
reported that single base substitutions in the seed are sometimes accepted, even
though they have a lower impact in the PAM-distal end of a spacer [29]. Even
the copy number of the sgRNA-producing vector has an eﬀect on speciﬁcity [17].
Ultimately, the selection of spacers with a unique seed reduces oﬀ-target eﬀects,
but it is not yet realistic to design entirely oﬀ-target free spacers.
2.3.3
Current state of predictive algorithms for sgRNA design
The extensive list of determining factors complicates manual design of good spac-
ers, especially for the creation of large libraries. To solve this, numerous predictive
models have been made, taking many of the above mentioned factors into account.
The models often diﬀer in what factors they take into account, such as seed length,
seed uniqueness, GC content, thermodynamic interactions and speciﬁc nucleotide
preference, as well as the weight of the individual parameters in scoring. A gen-
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3:
Conceptual overview of the workﬂow in algorithms for spacer
design. Generally, all CRISPR spacer design scripts follow a certain workﬂow. First,
all possible spacers at the desired target site are identiﬁed by searching for PAM’s.
Then the strength of every spacer is calculated as a score, typically by thermodynamic
calculations and weighting of the speciﬁc nucleotide preferences of Cas9. Next, each
spacer has its potential oﬀ-targets identiﬁed and scored in a similar fashion. Finally, a
combined ranking is compelled, or the single best spacer is given as output. It should
be noted, that some algorithms do not consider oﬀ-target eﬀects.
eral overview of their workﬂow is illustrated in Figure 3. Epigenetic factors are
to a larger extent organism speciﬁc, making them very diﬃcult to incorporate in
general models, and they are not included in any models known to me. This is
consistent with the observation that spacer design algorithms are generally strong
tools for predicting spacer strength and oﬀ-targets in the same data set as they
have been trained on, but are not nearly as accurate when used on data from
other experimental set-ups [30, 37]. No models speciﬁcally for use in Aspergilli
are known to me.
2.3.4
Tools for automated design of oligonucleotides for CRISPR ex-
periments
In CRISPR-based gene editing, design of strong sgRNA’s is crucial, but the design
of other oligonucleotides can also be laborious, especially for high-throughput set-
ups. When considering creation of a library of single gene deletion mutants, the
spacer is usually included in a primer for cloning of a vector, a repair template
for deletion must be designed, and a pair of reliable checking primers to verify a
successful deletion must be designed. While individual tools for spacer design and
primer design already exist, a tool that can design all necessary oligonucleotides
with only a target gene as input would be of great use in the design of many
experiments, not only deletion libraries. Only one such tool is known to me, the
10
==PAGE:12==
online tool CRISPR4P, but it only allows designing of primers for a single gene at
a time and is only designed for use in the yeast S. pombe [38]. Additionally, one
cannot change the output in terms of primer sequences, repair template length or
check PCR annealing temperature and product length, and the code behind the
algorithm is not available for customized use. In conclusion, there is still a general
need for tools that take care of the experimental CRISPR design pipeline as a
whole in high-throughput.
2.4
Experimental strategy
2.4.1
Construction of an sgRNA expression vector
Figure 4: Conceptual schematic of the assembly strategy for TACODe based
sgRNA expression vectors. Backbone: The shuttle vector pAC572 is used as a
backbone, and contains replicative elements (AMA1, ori) as well as selection markers
(pyrG, ampR) for A. niger and E. coli, respectively.
BioBlock1: BB1 contains an
A. fumigatus U3 promoter PAf U3 and a tRNA CDS. It is made by PCR with prTA-
CODe1 and prTACODe2, using pAC902 as a template. Bioblock2: BB2 contains an
sgRNA, another tRNA CDS and the A. fumigatus U3 terminator TAf U3. It is made
by PCR of pAC902 with prTACODe3 and a variable spacer-containing primer based
on prTACODeX. Assembly: Cut backbone, BB1 and BB2 are seamlessly joined by
uracil-speciﬁc excision reagent (USER) assembly.
The speciﬁc implementation of CRISPR-Cas9 in this study is based directly
on the ﬁndings of Nødvig et al. (2015 & 2018) [2, 11]. Nødvig et al. demonstrated
eﬃcient genome editing in A. niger with a codon optimized version of SpCas9.
Additionally, they employ a U3 promoter to express a tRNA-sgRNA fusion, which
through native processing of the tRNAs yields functional sgRNAs. In Figure 4 the
assembly strategy for sgRNA expression vectors is outlined. Nødvig et al. used
11
==PAGE:13==
an NHEJ-deﬁcient strain to obtain very high gene editing eﬃciencies with repair
templates. Finally, they showed that each homology region in the repair template
can be as short as 45 nt, enabling the use of 90mer repair templates. This elimi-
nates the need for laborious construction of larger repair templates through PCR,
which has previously been the standard in Aspergilli, and is still used together
with CRISPR [39]. While Nødvig et al. concluded, that a CRISPR-guided cut is
needed at both ends of a gene to delete it, it has later been shown in work with
Cpf1 by Vanegas et al. (2019) that a single DSB is enough for repair with a 90mer
repair template [40].
2.4.2
Experimental workﬂow for CRISPR-based gene deletions in A.
niger
Creation of gene deletion mutants in A. niger contains many steps, but they can
be summed up into the three main phases:
• Experimental design: In the ﬁrst phase, target genes are chosen and
oligonucleotides for sgRNA expression vector assembly, repair templates and
check primers are designed and ordered.
• Plasmid construction: Next, bioblocks are synthesized, and the sgRNA
expression vector is assembled by USER-assembly and cloned into E. coli.
The resulting plasmids are veriﬁed by PCR and puriﬁed.
• Fungal transformation and mutant retrieval: Finally, A. niger pro-
toplasts are made and transformed with the obtained sgRNA vectors and
matching repair templates. The genotype of transformants is tested by PCR,
homokaryons of the desired genotype are stored, and any heterokaryons are
restreaked on Triton X-100 to obtain homokaryons, then checked once more
by PCR.
This experimental workﬂow formed the starting point for the HTP protocols de-
veloped in this project.
2.5
Speciﬁc aims
To accelerate research within ﬁlamentous fungi, this project aimed to streamline
library generation in Aspergilli by development of high-throughput protocols and
automation of the process where possible.
The developed protocols were then
applied to create an sgRNA expression vector library and investigate optimal
design of CRISPR spacers in A. niger. These speciﬁc sub-aims are discussed in
the following:
• Development of a tool for CRISPR oligo design
• High-throughput protocol for sgRNA plasmid creation
• High-throughput protocol for A. niger transformations
• Construction of an sgRNA library for A. niger and application of the library
in a Cas9 lethality assay
12
==PAGE:14==
2.5.1
Development of a tool for CRISPR oligo design
Manual design of all oligonucleotides for genome engineering is time-consuming,
especially for creation of larger libraries. To treat this issue, we aimed to:
• Design a tool that facilitates the design of oligonucleotides needed for
CRISPR-based genome engineering in an automated and sophisticated
manner. It should include sgRNA-containing primers, repair templates and
check primers to verify successful genetic engineering.
• Experimentally verify the quality of the tool.
2.5.2
High-throughput protocol for sgRNA plasmid creation
Taking the existing protocols as a starting point, we aimed to establish an eﬃcient
high-throughput protocol for the full plasmid creation in 96-well microtiter plate
format.
2.5.3
High-throughput protocol for A. niger transformations
Transformation of A. niger involves protoplast generation, many pipetting and
mixing steps and subsequent plating out. Previous protocols of our lab use total
volume of 450 µl of liquids. We aimed to:
• Establish a high-throughput protocol in 96-well format, thereby scaling down
the total volume and enabling high-throughput tools to be used.
• Assess the reliability of the scaled down protocol.
• Implement the protocol on a liquid handling robot for higher reproducibility.
2.5.4
Construction of an sgRNA library in A. niger and application
of the library in a Cas9 lethality assay
In order to gain a better understanding of the determining parameters for Cas9
activity in Aspergillus, we aimed to create an sgRNA library and apply it to test
cutting eﬃciency through Cas9 lethality in NHEJ-deﬁcient A. niger. While as-
saying of the TSS regions of the tested genes would be highly relevant, the TSS
is unknown for many A. niger genes. Instead, the library should cover the region
around the start codon of several genes. The library creation and fungal transfor-
mation should also work as proof of concept for any developed high-throughput
methods. Any gained insight should be applied to the oligonucleotide design tool.
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
TACODe script
The script TACODe (Tool for Automated CRISPR Oligonucleotide Design) was
written in Python v. 3.8.3 and uses the external modules BioPython and Primer3
[41, 42, 43]. TACODe is designed for default use with the A. niger genome NRRL3
13
==PAGE:15==
[44]. The sgRNA primers are designed for use with prTACODe3 as reverse primer
and pAC902 as a template for PCR ampliﬁcation of BB2. A README ﬁle is
available in Supplementary Section 8.2 and code is available in Supplementary
Section 8.3.
3.2
Strains, media, plasmids and oligonucleotides
Strains, plasmids, primers/oligonucletides and media used in this study are shown
in tables 2, 3, 4 and 5.
Table 2: Strains used in this study.
Name
Relevant genotype or phenotype
Reference
Aspergillus niger
NIG96
pyrA1, kusA∆
Nødvig et al. (2018)
[2]
NIG112
pyrA1, kusA∆,
IS-NIG1::DR/PgpdA(2.3kb)-Cas9-
TtrpC(0.7kb)
Germann [45]
Escherichia coli
DH5-α
recA1, endA1
Hanahan (1985) [46]
Table 3: Plasmids used in this study. Relevant species, that the plasmid can propa-
gate in, are shown in parentheses.
Name
Relevant features
Reference
pAC572
pyrG, ampR (E. coli, Aspergilli)
Vanegas et al.
(2019) [40]
pAC902
pAC572 based plasmid expressing an
sgRNA targeting yA in A. nidulans
ﬂanked by tRNA-gly repeats under
control of PAf U3 and TAf U3 and
cas9 under control of Ptef1 and Ttef1.
(E. coli, Aspergilli)
Nødvig et al.
(2018)[2]
pRAHA001
-
pRAHA090
pAC572 based plasmid expressing an
sgRNA ﬂanked by tRNA-gly repeats
under control of PAf U3 and TAf U3.
The individual plasmids express
sgRNAs as deﬁned by the primers
RAHA001-RAHA090, see
Supplementary Section 8.4. (E. coli,
Aspergilli)
This study
14
==PAGE:16==
Table 4: Primers and oligonucleotides used in this study. Individual sequences
of RAHA001-RAHA090 are shown in Supplementary Section 8.4.
Name
Sequence
Reference
prTACODe1
CGTGCGAUGATCACATAGATGCTCGG
Nødvig et al. (2018)[2]
prTACODe2
ATCATCCGUGAATCGAACACGG
Nødvig et al. (2018)[2]
prTACODe3
GGTCTTAAUACCCTGAGAAGATAGATG
Nødvig et al. (2018)[2]
prTACODeX
ACGGATGAUGCA-N(20)-
GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCA
Nødvig et al. (2018)[2]
RAHA001-
RAHA090
ACGGATGAUGCA-N(20)-
GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCA
This study
Table 5: Media used in this study. For solid agar medium, 20 g/l agar (Bacto) was
added to any medium.
Name
Recipe
LBamp
10 g/l tryptone (Bacto), 5 g/l yeast extract (Bacto), 10 g/l
NaCl (pH 7.0), 100 µg/ml ampicillin
TM
342 g/l sucrose, 1x nitrate salt solution, 0.001% thiamine,
1x trace metal solution
MM
10 g/l glucose, 1x nitrate salt solution, 0.001% thiamine, 1x
trace metal solution
YPD
10g/l yeast extract (Bacto), 20 g/l peptone (Bacto), and 20
g/l glucose
DPY
20 g/l glucose, 10 g/l peptone (Bacto), 5 g/l yeast extract
(Bacto), 0.1% KH2PO4, and 0.05% MgSO4·7H2O
3.3
Plasmid puriﬁcation
DH5-α cells with a given plasmid were cultivated O/N in liquid LBamp at 37 ℃,
150 RPM. Plasmids were puriﬁed from 5 ml O/N cultures according to protocol
with a GenElute Plasmid Miniprep Kit [47]. Resulting plasmid concentrations
were measured by a NanoDrop™Lite Spectrophotometer [48].
3.4
PCR ampliﬁcation and gel electrophoresis
PCR ampliﬁcations had a total volume of 50 µl, containing: 28.5 µl H2O; 10 µl
5x CxL buﬀer; 5 µl 4 mM dNTP; 2 µl PCR template; 2 µl 10 µM of each primer,
1 U (0.5 µl) PfuX7 polymerase. The same PCR program was used for all PCR
reactions: 3 min at 98 ℃; 32x(10 s at 98 ℃; 30 s at 58 ℃; 60 s at 72 ℃); 5 min at
72 ℃. For colony PCR of E. coli, individual colonies were picked into 10 µl H2O,
and 2 µl of the suspension was used as template. Gel electrophoresis was carried
out at 100 V in TAE-based 1% agarose gels with 0.5x SYBR Safe.
15
==PAGE:17==
3.5
TACODe sgRNA expression plasmid construction and
DH5-α transformation
TACODe based sgRNA expression plasmids were assembled of cut pAC572 as a
backbone, BB1 and BB2. For the backbone, 100 µl 80 ng/µl pAC572 was digested
with 10 U PacI O/N in 1x CutSmart buﬀer at 37 ℃, then nicked by adding 10
U Nt.BbvCI and incubating for 2 h at 37 ℃. Enzymes were inactivated by 30
min of incubation at 80 ℃. BB1 was made by PCR ampliﬁcation of pAC902 with
prTACODe1 and prTACODe2 as primers, the 545 bp product band was cut out
of an agarose gel and puriﬁed according to protocol with a Zymoclean Gel DNA
Recovery Kit, yielding a ﬁnal concentration of 7.8 ng/µl [49]. BB2 was made by
PCR ampliﬁcation of pAC902 with prTACODe3 and a variable primer based on
prTACODeX as primers. BB2 product was treated with DpnI for 60 min at 37
℃, then DpnI was heat inactivated for 30 min at 80 ℃.
USER assembly reactions contained 4.5 µl H2O, 2 µl BB1, 2 µl BB2, 1 µl
digested pAC572 and 0.5 U (0.5 µl) USER enzyme. The mixture was incubated
for 30 min at 37 ℃, then for 30 min at 18 ℃. Competent DH5-α cells were
transformed with the USER-assembled plasmid by heat shock: freshly thawed
cells and plasmids were mixed and incubated on ice for 15 min, then heat shocked
for 45 s at 42 ℃, and ﬁnally incubated on ice for 5 min. The transformed cells were
plated out on LBamp agar and incubated O/N at 37 ℃. Correct plasmid assembly
was veriﬁed by colony PCR with prTACODe1 and prTACODe3 as primers with
subsequent gel analysis. From correct transformants, plasmids were puriﬁed.
3.6
Fungal microtransformations
Protoplastation was carried out as described in Nielsen et al., (2006), however
protoplasts for the Cas9 lethality screen were cultivated in DPY medium instead
of YPD [50]. 10 µl of 2 −8 · 108 protoplasts/ml were transformed with (unless
speciﬁed) 400 ng plasmid. Protoplasts and plasmid were mixed with 30 µl PCT
buﬀer by pipetting in and out 20 times and the mix was incubated for 10 minutes
at room temperature, after which 50 µl ATB was added and mixed into the rest
by 20x pipetting. Automated microtransformations were carried out on a ﬂowbot
ONE (Flow Robotics, Denmark) [5]. Transformed protoplasts were plated out on
TM agar and incubated for 3-6 days at 30 ℃.
3.7
Cas9 lethality assay
NIG112 protoplasts at 2 · 108 protoplasts/ml were microtransformed with 375
ng/µl plasmid, and growth was evaluated after 6 days. Tiny unhealthy-looking or
dead colonies were ignored, and only healthy colonies were counted. Coeﬃcients
of variance (CV’s) were calculated as:
CV = std.dev·100
mean
P-values between means were calculated with two-sided unpaired students
t-tests.
16
==PAGE:18==
4
Results
I developed the tool TACODe (Tool for Automated CRISPR Oligonucleotide De-
sign) for design of all oligonucleotides needed for CRISPR-Cas9 based single knock-
out mutant strain generation in A. niger. Next, we established high-throughput
methods for sgRNA expression vector assembly and transformations of A. niger. I
applied the developed protocols in the construction of an sgRNA expression vector
library of 90 plasmids and transformed A. niger with said library. In the following,
the individual protocols are described, and after each protocol, it is shown how it
was applied for making the sgRNA vector library and transformations. Finally,
cutting strength of the sgRNA expression vector library was determined in a Cas9
lethality assay in an NHEJ-deﬁcient A. niger strain.
4.1
TACODe - a Tool for Automated CRISPR Oligonu-
cleotide Design
Figure 5: Conceptual representation of the workﬂow for oligo design with
TACODe. A: A schematic representation of the workﬂow from the input GFF ﬁle to
the output CSV ﬁle. First, a primer with an sgRNA with a unique seed is designed
to target around 85 bp upstream of the start codon. Next, a 90mer repair template is
designed to remove the gene and Cas9 target site. Finally, check primers with standard-
ized characteristics are designed for easy PCR-veriﬁcation of a successful deletion. B:
An outline of the relative positions of the oligonucleotides designed by TACODe. The
upstream and downstream repair template regions are joined to form a 90mer repair
template.
The Python-based script TACODe is a user-friendly platform that does not
require coding experience. It takes a GFF ﬁle with genes as input and returns an
sgRNA-containing primer with a unique seed, a repair template, and primers for
a check PCR to verify the desired deletion, see Figure 5. The ultility of TACODe
was veriﬁed in other work in our group, as TACODe-designed oligonucleotides
were successfully applied to obtain 10 cell wall related mutants without any com-
plications, despite visible phenotypes in several of the mutants (data not shown)
[51].
If more than a single spacer is desired for a given gene, a ”skipping length” can
be set to achieve even coverage of a region without getting every single possible
17
==PAGE:19==
spacer from that region. To verify that TACODe identiﬁes all spacers, I used it
to ﬁnd spacers in the range -100 to 0 of the start codon for the A. niger gene
NRRL3 00001. The region contains 15 PAMs across both strands, and TACODe
identiﬁed them all while reporting 3 of them to have non-unique seeds (data not
shown). Default settings are for use in A. niger NRRL3, but TACODe can be
used for any organism and expression vector [44]. An example output ﬁle can be
seen in Supplementary Section 8.1.1, and an example of oligonucleotide sequences
and their actual positions in the gene NRRL3 00002 can be seen in Supplementary
Section 8.1.2.
4.1.1
TACODe is successful in eﬃcient generation of sgRNA expres-
sion vector libraries
Figure 6: Position of protospacer relative to start codon. Map of selected PAM
positions in the 5 genes selected for the sgRNA library.
We wanted to investigate whether the position of a protospacer compared to
the position of the start codon of a gene inﬂuences Cas9 activity. To this end,
I constructed a total of 90 sgRNA expression vectors targeting the following 5
genes:
• An02g14400 (NRRL3 05098, a hypothetical protein involved in morphogen-
esis and enzyme secretion [52])
• An15g00470 (NRRL3 03608, homolog of A. nidulans protein hypA, which is
involved in morphogenesis and enzyme secretion [53])
• argB (NRRL3 00886, a ornithine carbamoyltransferase [54])
• faeA (NRRL3 00007, a feruloyl esterase [55])
• faeB (NRRL3 02931, a ferulyol esterase [56])
18
==PAGE:20==
TACODe was used to ﬁnd spacers ranging from 200 nt upstream of the start
codon to 100 nt downstream of the start codon. TACODe was run with a skipping
length of 7, and of the 93 resulting spacers, 90 were chosen in a way that retained
even coverage of all genes, see Figure 6. The TACODe output ﬁle is shown in
Supplementary Section 8.4.
Figure 7: PCR ampliﬁcation of BB2. Gel veriﬁcation of PCR ampliﬁcation of
BB2 fragments with the primers RAHA001-RAHA090 and prTACODe3 and pAC902
as template. Expected band length: 418 bp. Wells not denoted with a number received
no RAHA primer. The narrow bands close to the actual bands in some wells, such as
well 31, are an artefact created by a pipetting issue.
To investigate, whether the construction of sgRNA expression plasmids would
be feasible and eﬃcient in high-throughput, I performed PCR ampliﬁcation, as-
sembly and transformation in 96-well PCR plates. The plasmid generation proto-
col is based on the USER-cloning strategy shown in Figure 4. The assembly joins
the backbone pAC572, the insert BB1, which contains the promoter PAf U3 and
tRNA CDS, and the insert BB2, which contains the sgRNA, a tRNA CDS and
terminator TAf U3.
To construct the sgRNA expression vector library, a library of 90 BB2 frag-
ments was made with sgRNA-containing primers RAHA001-RAHA090. Correct
product formation was observed for all 90 BB2 fragments in a single 96-well gel,
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 8: Colony PCR of USER transformants. Expected band length: 954
bp.
The negative controls (-) used a pAC572-containing E. coli strain as template,
while the positive control (+) used puriﬁed pAC902. A: Colony PCR of USER trans-
formants RAHA012-RAHA090. Lane 34 was observed to have the wrong size and 51,
52 and 86 had very faint bands. All other wells convincingly showed the desired band
length. Primers used were prTACODe1 and prTACODe3. The negative control (E.
coli with pAC572) also showed a weak band at the correct length, but unlike correct
wells, it also had other bands at incorrect lengths.
There occasionally spilled small
amounts of product into neighbouring wells, like can be seen around 47. B: Colony
PCR of USER transformants RAHA034, RAHA086, RAHA051, RAHA052. All wells
convincingly showed the desired band length. C: Colony PCR of USER transformants
RAHA001-RAHA011. All wells show the positive band along with other bands. How-
ever, the negative control doesn’t show any bands, indicating that the plasmids were
correctly assembled.
20
==PAGE:22==
see Figure 7. Next, linearized pAC572 with USER overhangs was assembled with
BB1 and the BB2 library to construct the plasmids pRAHA001-pRAHA090. The
USER assemblies were split into two groups, RAHA001-RAHA011 and RAHA012-
RAHA090. For RAHA012-RAHA090, a single colony was investigated by colony
PCR for each of the 79 transformants. 95% of these colonies were convincingly
correct, 4% showed faint bands of the correct length, and 1% was of the wrong
size , see Figure 8 A. From each plate that was not convincingly correct, two new
colonies were picked and again analyzed by colony PCR. In this second screening,
all colonies were correct, see Figure 8 B. For each correct transformant, plasmids
were puriﬁed.
The strains RAHA001-RAHA011 were created and harvested in a similar fash-
ion, but the U’s in prTACODe1, prTACODe2 and prTACODe3 were replaced by
T’s by mistake, and as a result, the plasmids were assembled by in vivo assembly
in the E. coli DH5-α cells instead of by USER assembly. The colony PCR can be
seen in Figure 8 C.
4.2
Microtransformation protocol enables automated trans-
formation of A. niger in 96-well plates
Figure 9: Automated and manual microtransformations of A. niger. Micro-
transformations of A. niger NIG96 were carried out with 400 ng of plasmid or no DNA.
Growth was assessed after 4 days of incubation at 30 ℃. pAC572 (10249 bp) contains
pyrG as a selection marker, pAC902 (16702 bp) also expresses Cas9 and an sgRNA
which has no target in A. niger. Number of transformations counted (N), mean and
standard deviation is indicated for each gene. Error bars indicate one standard deviation
(SD).
To facilitate HTP set-ups for genome engineering of A. niger, we developed and
tested a protocol for fungal transformation at microtiter plate scale. The protocol
21
==PAGE:23==
was termed microtransformation, and has a total volume of 100 µl as opposed to
450 µl in regular transformations as described by Nødvig et al. (2015) [11]. An
SOP for microtransformation of A. niger can be seen in Supplementary Section
8.5.
4.2.1
Automation
of
microtransformations
increases
their
repro-
ducibility
To assess, whether microtransformation of A. niger is feasible in a microtiter plate,
I carried out 24 microtransformations of A. niger NIG96 with pAC572, pAC902
and pAC902 with repair template, and 24 without DNA as a control. It should be
noted that the sgRNA expressed by pAC902 has no target in A. niger. All 96 trans-
formations were carried out by hand with a 12-channel pipette in a microtiter plate.
pAC572 transformations gave a mean CFU of 14.46 (SD=7.06, CV=48.86) and
pAC902 gave 9.54 (SD=3.72, CV= 38.97) without and 9.88 (SD=3.05, CV=30.93)
with repair template, while the negative control without DNA only a had single
colony on all 24 plates combined.
Figure 10: Growth of automated microtransformations of A. niger. Micro-
transformation of A. niger NIG96 was performed on a ﬂowbot ONE in a 96-well mi-
crotiter plate with U-shaped wells, here a representative subset of the plates is shown.
Left and center: Microtransformation with 400 ng of pAC572. Right: Microtrans-
formation without DNA. Growth was assessed after 4 days of incubation at 30 ℃.
Next, I set up a program for microtransformations on a ﬂowbot ONE (Flow
Robotics, Denmark [5]), closely mimicking the protocol for manual microtransfor-
mations. To test the new protocol, I conducted 32 microtransformations with and
4 without pAC572, using 10µl of 2.0 · 108 protoplasts/ml. Plating out was done
manually. pAC572 transformations gave 17.44 (SD = 3.44, CV=19.76) colonies
per transformation, showing a lower CV than manual microtransformations, see
Figure 9. A representative subset of the resulting plates is displayed in Figure 10.
22
==PAGE:24==
4.2.2
Lethality assay shows Cas9 activity with sgRNA library
To identify the cutting eﬃciency of the individual sgRNAs in the sgRNA expres-
sion vector library, I transformed the Cas9-expressing strain A. niger NIG112 with
RAHA001-RAHA090 in 5 replicates. More speciﬁcally, 375 ng of plasmid and 10
µl of 6.4 ∗108 protoplasts/ml were used per microtransformation, the experiment
was carried out by hand with a 12-channel pipette, and growth was assessed after
6 days. At least one transformant was observed for every sgRNA targeting faeA
(0.78 CFU, SD=1.25, CV=162) and faeB (1.16 CFU, SD=1.52, CV=132)), with
no apparent preference for any relative distance to the start codon. Only very few
colones appeared for An02g14400 (0.07 CFU, SD=0.33, CV=465), An15g00470
(0.08 CFU, SD=0.35, CV=464) and argB (0.07 CFU, SD=0.29, CV=419). It was
observed that of the total of 8 sgRNA’s that allowed transformants in An02g14400,
An15g00470 and argB, 5 allowed transformants in more than one replicate. The
diﬀerence in cutting eﬃciency along each gene and between the genes is summa-
rized in Figure 11 A and B together with summaries of the positive and negative
control. The negative control transformation with no DNA (0.4 CFU, SD=0.89,
CV=224) had growth on a single plate, giving it a high mean and low value as
a negative control. Transformation with pAC572 (0.8 CFU, SD=1.04, CV=130)
served as a positive control, but showed only low growth. To reduce noise, sgRNA’s
showing growth in at least two replicates were also examined, yet they only showed
the same trends as had already been observed (data not shown).
P-values of two-sided t-test were used to compare the means, see Figure 11 C.
Most notably, An02g14400, An15g00470 and argB were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from each other, but were all diﬀerent from both faeA and faeB with p-values of
<0.0001, and also diﬀered from pAC572 at 0.0005 or lower. faeA and faeB were
diﬀered from each other with a p-value of 0.0065, but were not signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent from the positive control at a 5% conﬁdence level. No mean was signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the negative control. In conclusion, the strongest grouping was ob-
served between An02g14400, An15g00470 and argB with high Cas9 lethality and
faeA and faeB with lower Cas9 lethality.
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 11: Lethality assay of sgRNA expression library in NHEJ-deﬁcient
A. niger NIG112. A. niger NIG112 was transformed with 375 ng of pRAHA001-
pRAHA090 by microtransformation. Growth was assessed after 6 days of incubation
at 30 ℃. A: CFU of transformation with each sgRNA expression vector plotted by the
relative distance to the start codon of the targeted gene. B: Transformation eﬃciency for
each targeted gene. Transformation with no DNA was used as a negative control. The
sgRNA-less plasmid pAC572 was used as a positive control for transformation eﬃciency.
Number of transformations counted (N), mean and standard deviation is indicated for
each gene.
Error bars indicate one standard deviation. C: P-values from two-sided
students t-tests between mean CFU values of sgRNA’s targeting each gene.
24
==PAGE:26==
5
Discussion
To match research in ﬁlamentous fungi with the fast progress in E. coli and yeasts,
we developed HTP protocols for genetic engineering of ﬁlamentous fungi. Speciﬁ-
cally, the tool TACODe was developed to fully automate oligonucleotide design of
CRISPR-based gene deletions, and a reliable HTP pipeline was set up for assem-
bly of sgRNA expression vectors. Additionally, transformation of A. niger was
scaled down to facilitate automated construction of mutant libraries. The resulting
pipeline is shown in Figure 12. To demonstrate the functionality of our pipeline,
it was applied to build an sgRNA expression vector library and investigate Cas9
lethality with 90 sgRNA’s targeting 5 genes. It was observed, that active genes
are cut with high eﬃciency, while design of each individual sgRNA appeared to
be of lower importance.
Figure 12: The three stages of gene deletions in A. niger. Experimental
design: The genes to be deleted are decided upon, and sgRNA primers, repair templates
and check primers are generated for each gene. sgRNA expression vector assembly:
To create the expression plasmids, pAC572, BB1 and BB2 are prepared and joined by
USER assembly, transformed into competent E. coli, and correct assembly is veriﬁed by
PCR. Plasmids are then puriﬁed from O/N cultures of correct transformants. A. niger
mutant retrieval: First, A. niger is transformed with the created sgRNA expression
plasmids. The genotype of individual colonies is then investigated by mycelial PCR
with check primers from TACODe, and correct homokaryotic colonies are restreaked on
MM agar to obtain a pure strain. Heterokaryotic colonies are restreaked on 0.05% (v/v)
Triton X-100 MM agar for easier retrieval of homokaryotic clones. Finally, the genotype
is again veriﬁed by mycelial PCR.
5.1
TACODe provides a strong and versatile tool for oﬀ-
target free CRISPR experiments
TACODe stands in contrast to other spacer design tools, which only consider
spacer design, and not the experimental context. When designing mutant libraries
25
==PAGE:27==
in HTP, TACODe designs all necessary oligonucleotides at once, taking the user
directly from selecting gene targets to having a ready-to-order list of all relevant
primers, making laborious manual design unnecessary. It can be customized for
use in any organism and with any sgRNA expression vector.
To add an extra layer of convenience, oligonucleotides generated by TACODe
are suited for parallel handling of multiple samples, as demonstrated in this
project, where every PCR had the same annealing temperature of 58 ℃. Many
guidelines exist for designing good primers, and using Primer3, I set the following
parameters:
• PCR product length is between 295 and 305
• Annealing temperatures as close to 58 ℃as possible, but always between 56
℃and 60 ℃. The annealing temperature is calculated for CxL buﬀer.
• No primers with hairpin, self dimerization or pair dimerization Tm’s above
45 ℃in CxL buﬀer.
• GC content of primers as close to 50% as possible, but always between 30%
and 70%.
• Primers have a 3’ terminal G or C, but never more than three 3’ terminal
G’s and/or C’s.
• Primers never have more than three of the same nucleotide in a row.
TACODe has a simple and universally applicable spacer design algorithm, that
reduces oﬀ-target eﬀects by using spacers with unique seeds. While a more exten-
sive calculation of spacer eﬃciency could potentially yield stronger spacers, our
results suggest that the gene itself might be the most important factor for Cas9
activity in A. niger, an issue which cannot be solved through spacer design. The
genes faeA and faeB were poorly targeted, and every sgRNA showed growth in
at least one replicate, while most sgRNA’s targeting An02g14400, An15g00470
and argB showed no growth at all. This suggests that no potent oﬀ-targets were
present for the faeA and faeB sgRNA’s, and that unique seeds are enough to avoid
serious oﬀ-target eﬀects. It could be argued that an optimal script would design
spacers targeting just upstream of the TSS, as this region is very accessible in
active genes, and while it might yield stronger spacers, far from all genes have
identiﬁed TSS’s in A. niger [33, 34, 35]. To have a universally applicable and
consistent script, we decided to target 85 bp upstream of the start codon instead,
as it is frequently close to the TSS.
Many other spacer design tools use more complicated scoring systems, Sledzin-
ski et al. recently brought an extensive and up-to-date review and comparison of
the respective advantages and disadvantages of them [37]. These tools are excellent
at predicting Cas9 activity, but mostly for data generated similarly to the data set
used to build said tools, as each tool uses its own scoring algorithm [30, 37]. Only
one other tool known to us, CRISPR4P, designs sgRNA primers, oligonucleotides
and primers for check PCR, but its use is restricted to S. pombe, and it cannot
handle multiple genes at a time [38].
26
==PAGE:28==
The need for CRISPR-mutant libraries is not restricted to single deletion mu-
tants. Through the built-in customization, TACODe can easily be adapted to in-
corporation of multiple sgRNAs in a single vector by changing the sgRNA primer
sequence. Additionally, as it is an open-source script written in Python, one of
the most widespread coding languages in biotechnology, experienced programmers
can adapt the script to almost any CRISPR-based genetic engineering strategy.
For Cas9 studies, it can even ﬁnd all possible spacers associated with a gene, as
demonstrated in this study. And while TACODe must be used through Python,
the script and README have been designed to be convenient for users with no
prior coding experience. In conclusion, TACODe elevates predictive algorithm use
from spacer design to complete oligonucleotide design in HTP.
5.2
A fungal genome engineering pipeline in 96-well scale
enables fast library creation
5.2.1
Fully automated large scale construction of plasmid libraries
To demonstrate that TACODe primers are suited for high-throughput set-ups,
we showed that construction of sgRNA expression vectors can be eﬃciently car-
ried out in 96-well plates. The plasmid assembly contains pAC572 (backbone),
BB1 (U3 promoter and tRNA) and BB2 (sgRNA, tRNA and U3 terminator),
of which only BB2 varies. pAC572 can readily be produced in large quantities,
while higher yields of BB1 are desired than the achieved 7.8 ng/µl. Puriﬁcation
of BB1 is needed, because the primer prTACODe2 has two full matches on the
template pAC902, resulting in multiple bands even at perfect conditions. Instead
of pAC902, one could use previously made BB1 as a template - in that case, pu-
riﬁcation might not even be necessary, greatly increasing the yields. Successful
ampliﬁcation of all 90 BB2 fragments was seen in the ﬁrst try with no subsequent
puriﬁcation needed, as shown in Figure 7. On top of that, all USER assemblies
gave transformants, and between 95% and 99% of them were correct for the ﬁrst
colony picked, as shown in Figure 8. These results demonstrate the reliability of
our assembly protocol, which is key in HTP set-ups.
In an attempt to reduce the amount of competent cells needed, we tried to
use 30 µl instead of 50 µl for our USER transformation, but we found that un-
puriﬁed PCR product inhibits transformation at higher concentrations (data not
shown). If unpuriﬁed BB1 is used, inhibition of transformation might become a
challenge, even at 50 µl. However, we saw high numbers of transformants on every
plate, suggesting that the total volume of USER assembly mix could be reduced
accordingly.
The use of 96-well plates means, that plasmid assembly and transformation
could easily be moved to liquid handling robots, further reducing the workload.
Transformants could even be dispensed onto segmented agar plates, such as a
QTray, which would reduce time spent on plating out, but also enable a colony
picker to sample colonies for colony PCR and inoculation of O/N cultures [57].
Finally, plasmid puriﬁcation could be scaled up through the use of 96-well column
puriﬁcation kits [58].
To summarize, we here present a reliable HTP protocol for TACODe-based
27
==PAGE:29==
sgRNA expression vector assembly, which could be fully automated, as has already
been seen in similar set-ups [9, 59].
5.2.2
Automated fungal microtransformations are eﬃcient and repro-
ducible
To further reduce manual labor and reagent consumption, we developed a down-
scaled protocol for A. niger transformation with a total volume of 100 µl, and
demonstrated that the liquid handling can be reliably carried out in 96-well plates,
similar to what was shown for in vitro assembled ribonucleoprotein complexes by
Kuivanen et al. (2019) [10]. Despite the scaled down volume, suﬃcient growth was
seen from every single microtransformation. Next, I developed an automated pro-
tocol for fungal transformations. While doing so, three main challenges presented
themselves and were dealt with as follows:
• Reduction of dead volume: The pipette cannot pick up liquids deposited
at the side of a well, and as the volumes used in microtransformations are
very small, narrow-bottomed wells are needed to ensure that the liquid ﬁlls
out the entire bottom of the well. I established 96-well microtiter plates with
U-shaped wells as a new component, but V-shaped wells could possibly have
reduced the dead volume even further.
• Better pipetting of small volumes: When transferring very small vol-
umes, the pipette tip must touch the bottom of the well after dispensing to
ensure, that the liquid doesn’t stay on the tip as a droplet. When doing so,
the tip occasionally picks up 0.5 - 1 µl of what was already in the well. To
reduce the signiﬁcance of this volume, I used 6 µl of plasmid diluted in H2O
was used instead of 1.5 - 2 µl of undiluted plasmid.
• Improving mixing with PCT: PCT is a very viscous liquid and requires
very slow pipetting to precisely transfer the desired volumes. However, when
mixing protoplasts and DNA with PCT, proper mixing requires faster pipet-
ting. As a solution, I programmed addition of PCT as two separate pipetting
steps with individual parameters, the custom liquid classes used are listed
in Supplementary Section 8.6.
The automated transformation had a lower CV than manual transformations,
showing that automation can not only substitute but also outperform manual
pipetting.
It is worth considering if further scaling down of microtransformations is pos-
sible without compromising reliable CFU counts.
Even if half the number of
transformants are suﬃcient, half volumes increase the variation introduced during
pipetting and could prove challenging in automation because of the dead volume.
In other work in our group by Rothschild-Mancinelli et al., 2021, it was concluded
that transformant counts in microtransformations scale linearly with the amount
of DNA added up to about 400 ng of plasmid, after which further plasmids appear
to increase the CFU only slightly or not at all [51]. As the current microtrans-
formation protocol uses 400 ng plasmid, further reduction of the relative plasmid
concentration would not be beneﬁcial.
28
==PAGE:30==
5.2.3
Clonal isolation of fungi remains a challenge for HTP set-ups
Some organisms, such as E. coli and some yeasts can be plated out and colony
picked by robots in fully automated pipelines.
However, unlike plating out of
E. coli, ﬁlamentous fungi spread widely on agar, have merging colonies and have
airborne spores, making them unsuited for automated plating out and colony pick-
ing. To bypass this challenge, it is has been observed that agar containing Triton
X-100 or other non-ionic surfactants heavily condenses fungal colony formation
[60, 61, 62, 63, 64]. No irreversible phenotypical eﬀects of Triton X-100 have been
observed in Aspergilli [65]. Unpublished work from our group demonstrates that
the use of 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100 speciﬁcally allows software recognition and
picking of single clones from plating out of a heterogeneous spore suspension. Yet,
transformation of fungi onto 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100 TM agar has not yet been
successful, despite attempts of letting transformants recover before plating out
(work not shown). As a result, plating out after transformation and subsequent
colony picking must still be done by hand.
Even if plating out could be automated, the extremely time-consuming process
of manual spore dissection is still necessary, as heterokaryotic transformants can
form heterogeneous colonies. Data from Rothschild-Mancinelli et al., 2021 suggest,
that spore dissection can be bypassed by restreaking spores from a heterokaryotic
colony on Triton X-100-containing agar, potentially strongly decreasing the man-
ual labor of clonal isolation [51].
5.2.4
An HTP pipeline for null mutants enables fast library construc-
tion
The developed HTP protocols for sgRNA plasmid assembly and transformation
of A. niger in 96-well format, combined with key advances in clonal isolation and
screening of fungi, enable an HTP pipeline for genome engineering. From receiving
the sgRNA primers, 96 veriﬁed mutants can be obtained by one person in 7 days for
initial homokaryons, or 10 days if spores of a heterokaryotic colony must be plated
out again. It should be noted that only 4 or 5 of said days would require manual
work. For comparison, noteworthy libraries include full null mutant libraries for
the yeasts S. cerevisiae and S. pombe, the FGSC Neurospora crassa null mutant
library consisting of 136 96-well plates, and the COFUN Aspergillus fumigatus
null mutant library providing a 5x96-well plate library of transcription factor null
mutants [66, 67, 68, 69]. CRISPRi-libraries are equally relevant, or one could even
build libraries of speciﬁc mutations within a single gene. Our results mean that
large knockout libraries can be reliably created in short amounts of time, allowing
Aspergillus research to become data-driven and consequently enabling the use of
modern analytical tools like machine learning.
5.3
sgRNA’s targeting active genes are highly active
To optimize sgRNA design in A. niger, we set out to investigate possible spatial
diﬀerences in Cas9 activity around the start codon of ﬁve genes, but instead found
a strong diﬀerence in Cas9 activity between the genes. One possible explanation
is the diﬀerential chromatin state of these genes. Null mutants of An15g00470’s
29
==PAGE:31==
homolog in A. nidulans, hypA, have abnormal morphology, and null mutants of
argB are arginine auxotrophs, indicating that both genes are generally expressed
[53, 54, 70]. While the expression activity of An02g14400 is not fully known it is
expected to be generally active, as it shares functional similarities to An15g00470
[52].
On the other hand, faeA and faeB are both involved in degradation of
polysaccharides in plant cell walls, and are known to only be induced by growth
on their speciﬁc substrates [55, 56].
Assuming the predicted expression state
of An15g00470, the three active genes were readily cut by Cas9, while the two
inactive genes were signiﬁcantly less aﬀected by Cas9. Our observation is in good
accordance with numerous previous ﬁndings across organisms, stating that open
chromatin is more accessible to Cas9, increasing Cas9 activity, as is shown in
Figure 2 B [3, 16, 21, 22, 33, 34].
Our Cas9 lethality screen is based on the method TAPE (Test for Assessment of
Protospacer Eﬃciency) ﬁrst implemented by Vanegas et al. (2017), in which Cas9
lethality in an NHEJ-deﬁcient strain is compared with and without repair template
[71]. Previous TAPE ﬁndings have shown several orders of magnitude diﬀerence
in Cas9 lethality between strong and weak sgRNA’s, while Cas9 lethality with a
repair template diﬀers less than twofold between sgRNA’s [2, 71]. To keep our
experiment as simple as possible, it was decided to focus on repair-free lethality.
When targeting inactive genes with our strategy, many of the transformant
colonies might be insensitive to the sgRNA and have an intact target site. A pos-
sible strategy to avoid survival of tolerant colonies is to integrate a selection marker
and then ”pop” it back out after selection, as described by Leynaud-Kieﬀer et al.
(2019) [39]. However, integration of a marker does not take heterokaryons into
account, target-speciﬁc repair templates are laborious to construct, and another
experimental step is included to ”pop” the marker back out again.
No spatial preference for Cas9 was observed in the start-codon region of faeA
and faeB. The TSS of faeA lies only 97 bp upstream of the start codon, but even
around the TSS, no spatial preference is observed [72]. For argB and An15g00470,
the TSS lies more than 100 bp further upstream than the limit of our screened
range, while the TSS’s of An02g14400 and faeB have not been annotated [72].
Due to the low number of transformants with sgRNA’s targeting An02g14400,
An15g00470 and argB, it cannot yet be determined whether spatial preferences
occur around the start codon in active genes. Also, it is worth considering if PAM’s
on both strands should be treated equally with respect to their coordinates, as
Cas9 does not appear to be symmetrically positioned around the PAM [73].
Previous TAPE experiments have focused on active genes, and reported signif-
icant diﬀerences in sgRNA eﬃciency within the same gene, both in S. cerevisiae
and A. niger [2, 71]. Here, we observed close to full lethality in all active genes,
likely because the sensitivity of our experiment was too low. Similarly, any se-
quence speciﬁc parameter tested on our data simply illustrated its distribution
between active and inactive genes. As a result, it was not possible to conﬁrm or
refute any sequence preferences for Cas9. However, out of the eight active gene
sgRNA’s that allowed growth, ﬁve allowed growth on at least two replicates, in-
dicating lower potency of these spacers. This could be further investigated in an
experiment with higher sensitivity to low transformation eﬃciency.
Finally, it is worth considering which biological factors inﬂuence lethality
30
==PAGE:32==
through Cas9 activity. Ideally, lethality would only be aﬀected by Cas9 activity
at the desired target site, but in reality several other factors impact the outcome.
Oﬀ-target eﬀects would increase the observed lethality, and increased DNA repair
might reduce the lethality of Cas9 activity. It is unsure to what degree sequence
or locus speciﬁc diﬀerences in homologous recombination activity (HR) interfere,
as HR hotspots and secondary structures of single stranded DNA ends have been
shown to inﬂuence HR repair rates [74, 75]. Microhomology-mediated end joining
could also occur, sometimes even resulting in small deletions and loss of the Cas9
target, in which case it is also relevant if the gene is essential or not [76, 77]. If
we had used TAPE and compared lethality with and without a repair template,
oﬀ-target eﬀects could have been detected, but repair with a template introduces
a new set of unknown factors, such as distance between the homology regions and
the cutting site or aforementioned locus speciﬁc diﬀerences in repair activity. As
already mentioned, unique seeds appear to have been suﬃcient to avoid strong
oﬀ-target eﬀects in our dataset.
6
Conclusions
Eﬃcient and automated workﬂows for ﬁlamentous fungi are highly desired. To
meet this technological demand, I designed the program TACODe, which reliably
creates all oligonucleotides needed for CRISPR-based oﬀ-target free gene deletions.
We also developed a reliable HTP pipeline for CRISPR-based genetic engineering
of ﬁlamentous fungi. With this pipeline, 96 null mutants can be obtained in a max-
imum of 10 days after receiving the primers. Through eﬃcient generation of large
libraries, extensive screening experiments can be conducted and data-demanding
analysis methods like machine learning can be implemented to study molecular
mechanisms. Through additional studies of sgRNA libraries, further insight in
CRISPR mechanisms could even be used to optimize TACODe, increasing the
robustness of our pipeline even more.
Applying TACODe and the HTP protocols, I designed an sgRNA library of
90 expression plasmids targeting the start codon regions of ﬁve genes in A. niger.
Using a lethality assay in an NHEJ-deﬁcient strain, I observed high Cas9 activity
in the genes argB, An02g1440 and An15g00470, which are expected to be active,
but low activity in the conditionally active genes faeA and faeB. This ﬁnding
coincides with previous observations in other organisms of Cas9 being more active
in euchromatin. This concludes the ﬁrst larger scale study of Cas9 activity in A.
niger, showing that local chromatin state is a key factor in CRISPR-based genome
editing, and that manipulation of the chromatin state could potentially facilitate
genome editing.
The improvements to high-throughput tools for ﬁlamentous fungi presented
here are an important step on the way to unlocking their full potential in indus-
try and to fully understanding them in nature. Fungi already play a prevalent
role in industrial production of bulk chemicals, and better exploitation of their
vast metabolomes will help in sustainable replacement of petrol-based products.
To further match the worldwide demand for environmental action, other biotech-
nological solutions, such as fungal bioremediation or even sustainable foods, are
31
==PAGE:33==
more relevant than ever. Besides, the beneﬁts of new high-throughput tools and
automation platforms are not limited to fungi. By demonstrating automated solu-
tions for organisms with complex morphology, we take part in transitioning from
automation of work in classical model organisms to automation for virtually any
organism. Through advances in both fungal research and automation, our ﬁndings
and protocols aid biotechnology in solving the challenges of the future.
7
Future perspective
7.1
Further development of TACODe
TACODe has been developed to be used by researchers with no prior coding
experience, but still requires a small amount of software downloading and script
handling. In an ideal world, a web-interface with ﬁelds for numeric input, a drag-
and-drop window for GFF input and integrated access to many relevant genomes
could be easy and comfortable to navigate. On the other hand, the script could
also be written as a callable function for more experienced Python users, instead
of input having to be manually entered through prompting.
7.2
Further development of an HTP pipeline for A. niger
mutant generation
Ideally, all steps in the mutant generation pipeline could be reliably automated.
As of now, we have developed consistent and automatable protocols for sgRNA
expression vector assembly as well as the liquid handling in fungal transforma-
tion. And while plating on 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100 agar might replace spore
dissection, more work is needed to automate plating and picking of fungal trans-
formants. A good place to start could be through further work in development of
a liquid recovery phase directly after transformation, that allows transformants to
be plated out on plates with Triton X-100 or another non-ionic surfactant with a
similar eﬀect on morphology.
7.3
Follow-up experiments regarding the correlation be-
tween chromatin state and Cas9 activity
First and foremost, to fully see the reliability of the here developed sgRNA lethality
assay, a repeated experiment with good growth on the positive control and no
growth on the negative control should be carried out. With higher sensitivity of
the assay, it might be possible to investigate sequence speciﬁc preferences, such
as for the PAM, positions 16 and 20 of the spacer or GC content. Next, it would
be highly relevant to examine Cas9 activity around the TSS of some active genes,
as this to our knowledge has not yet been done in ﬁlamentous fungi. Apart from
that, our results give rise to some natural follow-up experiments to answer the
following questions:
• Would induction of inactive genes like faeA and faeB increase Cas9 activity
in them? How much?
32
==PAGE:34==
• Are similar Cas9 activities seen around the start codons of other genes ver-
iﬁed to be in hetero- or euchromatin?
• Is the smaller protein Cpf1 less aﬀected by heterochromatin?
• Can inhibition of certain histone modiﬁers enhance Cas9 eﬃciency, as has
been seen in yeasts [78, 79]? Notably, deletion of laeA in A. niger has been
shown to signiﬁcantly alter accessibility of several thousands of genes, and
it would be interesting to see if a laeA deletion could facilitate the use of
CRISPR systems in general [35].
33
==PAGE:35==
References
[1] Jos´e Arnau, Debbie Yaver, and Carsten M. Hjort.
Strategies and Chal-
lenges for the Development of Industrial Enzymes Using Fungal Cell Factories.
Grand Challenges in Fungal Biotechnology, pages 179–210, 2020.
[2] Christina S. Nodvig, Jakob B. Hoof, Martin E. Kogle, Zoﬁa D. Jarczynska,
Jan Lehmbeck, Dorte K. Klitgaard, and Uﬀe H. Mortensen. Eﬃcient oligo
nucleotide mediated CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing in Aspergilli. Fungal Genetics
and Biology, 115:78–89, 2018.
[3] Justin D. Smith, Sundari Suresh, Ulrich Schlecht, Manhong Wu, Omar
Wagih, Gary Peltz, Ronald W. Davis, Lars M. Steinmetz, Leopold Parts,
and Robert P. St.Onge. Quantitative CRISPR interference screens in yeast
identify chemical-genetic interactions and new rules for guide RNA design.
Genome Biology, 17(1):45, 2016.
[4] Gilbert, Luke A. and Horlbeck, Max A. and Adamson, Britt and Villalta,
Jacqueline E. and Chen, Yuwen and Whitehead, Evan H. and Guimaraes,
Carla and Panning, Barbara and Bassik, Michael C. and Qi, Lei S. and Kamp-
mann, Martin and Weissman, Jonathan S. and Ploegh, Hidde. Genome-scale
crispr-mediated control of gene repression and activation. Cell, 2014.
[5] Flow Robotics: ﬂowbot ONE. https://ﬂow-robotics.com/ﬂowbot-one/. Ac-
cessed: 2021-01-30.
[6] Molecular
Devices:
QPix
-
Colony
picking
in
synthetic
biology.
https://www.moleculardevices.com/sites/default/ﬁles/en/assets/infographics/bpd/colony-
picking-in-synthetic-biology.pdf. Accessed: 2021-02-02.
[7] Laboratory
robotics
uses,
advantages
and
disadvantages.
https://https://www.online-sciences.com/robotics/laboratory-robotics-
uses-advantages-and-disadvantages/. Accessed: 2021-01-13.
[8] Biomolecular
Screening
Facility,
EPFL
(Switzerland).
https://www.epﬂ.ch/research/facilities/biomolecular-screening/.
Accessed:
2021-02-02.
[9] Kyle Rothschild-Mancinelli, Susanne M. Germann, and Mikael R. Andersen.
Bottlenecks and Future Outlooks for High-Throughput Technologies for Fil-
amentous Fungi. Grand Challenges in Fungal Biotechnology, pages 165–178,
2020.
[10] Joosu Kuivanen, Veera Korja, Sami Holmstr¨om, and Peter Richard. Devel-
opment of microtiter plate scale CRISPR/Cas9 transformation method for
Aspergillus niger based on in vitro assembled ribonucleoprotein complexes.
Fungal Biology and Biotechnology, 6(1):3, 2019.
[11] Christina Spuur Nødvig, Jakob Blæsbjerg Nielsen, Martin Engelhard Kogle,
and Uﬀe Hasbro Mortensen. A CRISPR-Cas9 System for Genetic Engineering
of Filamentous Fungi. P L O S One, 10(7):e0133085, 2015.
34
==PAGE:36==
[12] Lei S Qi, Matthew H Larson, Luke A Gilbert, Jennifer A Doudna, Jonathan
S Weissman, Adam P Arkin, and Wendell A Lim. Repurposing CRISPR
as an RNA-guided platform for sequence-speciﬁc control of gene expression.
Cell, 152:1173–1183, 2020.
[13] Pablo Perez-Pinera, D. Dewran Kocak, Christopher M. Vockley, Andrew F.
Adler, Ami M. Kabadi, Lauren R. Polstein, Pratiksha I. Thakore, Kather-
ine A. Glass, David G. Ousterout, Kam W. Leong, Farshid Guilak, Gregory E.
Crawford, Timothy E. Reddy, and Charles A. Gersbach. RNA-guided gene
activation by CRISPR-Cas9-based transcription factors.
Nature Methods,
10(10):973–976, 2013.
[14] Andrew V. Anzalone, Peyton B. Randolph, Jessie R. Davis, Alexander A.
Sousa, Luke W. Koblan, Jonathan M. Levy, Peter J. Chen, Christopher Wil-
son, Gregory A. Newby, Aditya Raguram, and David R. Liu. Search-and-
replace genome editing without double-strand breaks or donor DNA. Nature,
576(7785):149–157, 2019.
[15] Kendell Clement, Jonathan Y. Hsu, Matthew C. Canver, J. Keith Joung,
and Luca Pinello. Technologies and Computational Analysis Strategies for
CRISPR Applications. Molecular Cell, 79(1):11–29, 2020.
[16] Amir Momen-Roknabadi, Panos Oikonomou, Maxwell Zegans, and Saeed
Tavazoie. An inducible CRISPR interference library for genetic interroga-
tion of Saccharomyces cerevisiae biology. Communications Biology, 3(1):723,
2020.
[17] Patrick D. Hsu, David A. Scott, Joshua A. Weinstein, F. Ann Ran, Silvana
Konermann, Vineeta Agarwala, Yinqing Li, Eli J. Fine, Xuebing Wu, Ophir
Shalem, Thomas J. Cradick, Luciano A. Marraﬃni, Gang Bao, and Feng
Zhang. DNA targeting speciﬁcity of RNA-guided Cas9 nucleases. Nature
Biotechnology, 31(9):827–+, 2013.
[18] Ekaterina Semenova, Matthijs M. Jore, Kirill A. Datsenko, Anna Semenova,
Edze R. Westra, Barry Wanner, John van der Oost, Stan J. J. Brouns, and
Konstantin Severinov. Interference by clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeat (CRISPR) RNA is governed by a seed sequence. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
108(25):10098–10103, 2011.
[19] Martin Jinek, Krzysztof Chylinski, Ines Fonfara, Michael Hauer, Jennifer A.
Doudna, and Emmanuelle Charpentier. A Programmable Dual-RNA-Guided
DNA Endonuclease in Adaptive Bacterial Immunity. Science, 337(6096):816–
821, 2012.
[20] Samuel H. Sternberg, Sy Redding, Martin Jinek, Eric C. Greene, and Jen-
nifer A. Doudna. DNA Interrogation by the CRISPR RNA-Guided Endonu-
clease Cas9. Biophysical Journal, 106(2):695a, 2014.
35
==PAGE:37==
[21] Kristopher Torp Jensen, Lasse Fløe, Trine Skov Petersen, Jinrong Huang,
Fengping Xu, Lars Bolund, Yonglun Luo, and Lin Lin. Chromatin accessibil-
ity and guide sequence secondary structure aﬀect CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing
eﬃciency. Febs Letters, 591(13):1892–1901, 2017.
[22] Raj Chari, Prashant Mali, Mark Moosburner, and George M. Church. Unrav-
eling CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering parameters via a library-on-library
approach. Nature Methods, 12(9):823–826, 2015.
[23] Spencer C. Knight, Liangqi Xie, Wulan Deng, Benjamin Guglielmi, Lea B.
Witkowsky, Lana Bosanac, Elisa T. Zhang, Mohamed E. Beheiry, Jean Bap-
tiste Masson, Maxime Dahan, Zhe Liu, Jennifer A. Doudna, and Robert
Tjian. Dynamics of CRISPR-Cas9 genome interrogation in living cells. Sci-
ence, 350(6262):823–826, 2015.
[24] Max A. Horlbeck, Lea B. Witkowsky, Benjamin Guglielmi, Joseph M. Re-
plogle, Luke A. Gilbert, Jacqueline E. Villalta, Sharon E. Torigoe, Robert
Tjian, and Jonathan S. Weissman. Nucleosomes impede cas9 access to DNA
in vivo and in vitro. Elife, 5(2016):e12677, 2016.
[25] R. Stefan Isaac, Fuguo Jiang, Jennifer A. Doudna, Wendell A. Lim, Geeta J.
Narlikar, and Ricardo Almeida. Nucleosome breathing and remodeling con-
strain CRISPR-Cas9 function. Elife, 5(2016):e13450, 2016.
[26] Fuqiang Chen, Xiao Ding, Yongmei Feng, Timothy Seebeck, Yanfang Jiang,
and Gregory D. Davis. Targeted activation of diverse CRISPR-Cas systems
for mammalian genome editing via proximal CRISPR targeting. Nature Com-
munications, 8(1):14958, 2017.
[27] Cem Kuscu, Sevki Arslan, Ritambhara Singh, Jeremy Thorpe, and Mazhar
Adli. Genome-wide analysis reveals characteristics of oﬀ-target sites bound
by the Cas9 endonuclease. Nature Biotechnology, 32(7):677–683, 2014.
[28] Liyang Zhang, H. Tomas Rube, Christopher A. Vakulskas, Mark A. Behlke,
Harmen J. Bussemaker, and Miles A. Pufall. Systematic in vitro proﬁling of
oﬀ-target aﬃnity, cleavage and eﬃciency for CRISPR enzymes. Nucleic Acids
Research, 48(9):5037–5053, 2020.
[29] John G. Doench, Ella Hartenian, Daniel B. Graham, Zuzana Tothova, Mudra
Hegde, Ian Smith, Meagan Sullender, Benjamin L. Ebert, Ramnik J. Xavier,
and David E. Root. Rational design of highly active sgRNAs for CRISPR-
Cas9-mediated gene inactivation. Nature Biotechnology, 32(12):1262–1267,
2014.
[30] Laurence O.W. Wilson, Aidan R. O’Brien, and Denis C. Bauer. The current
state and future of CRISPR-Cas9 gRNA design tools. Frontiers in Pharma-
cology, 9:749, 2018.
[31] Xingjie Ren, Zhihao Yang, Jiang Xu, Jin Sun, Decai Mao, Yanhui Hu, Su-
Juan Yang, Huan-Huan Qiao, Xia Wang, Qun Hu, Patricia Deng, Lu-Ping
36
==PAGE:38==
Liu, Jun-Yuan Ji, Jin Billy Li, and Jian-Quan Ni. Enhanced Speciﬁcity and
Eﬃciency of the CRISPR/Cas9 System with Optimized sgRNA Parameters
in Drosophila. Cell Reports, 9(3):1151–1162, 2014.
[32] Nathan Wong, Weijun Liu, and Xiaowei Wang. WU-CRISPR: Characteristics
of functional guide RNAs for the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Genome Biology,
16(1):218, 2015.
[33] Xuebing Wu, David A. Scott, Andrea J. Kriz, Anthony C. Chiu, Patrick
D. Hsu, Daniel B. Dadon, Albert W. Cheng, Ro E. Trevino, Silvana Kon-
ermann, Sidi Chen, Rudolf Jaenisch, Feng Zhang, and Phillip A. Sharp.
Genome-wide binding of the CRISPR endonuclease Cas9 in mammalian cells.
Nature Biotechnology, 32:670–676, 2014.
[34] Xuebing Wu, Andrea J. Kriz, and Phillip A. Sharp. Target speciﬁcity of the
CRISPR-Cas9 system. Quantitative biology, 2(2):59–70, 2014.
[35] Lianggang Huang, Xuejie Li, Liangbo Dong, Bin Wang, and Li Pan. Proﬁl-
ing of chromatin accessibility across Aspergillus species and identiﬁcation of
transcription factor binding sites in the Aspergillus genome using ﬁlamentous
fungi ATAC-seq. bioRxiv, 2019.
[36] Hiromi Nishida, Takayuki Motoyama, Shogo Yamamoto, Hiroyuki Aburatani,
and Hiroyuki Osada. Genome-wide maps of mono- and di-nucleosomes of
Aspergillus fumigatus. Bioinformatics, 25(18):2295–2297, 2009.
[37] Pawel Sledzinski, Mateusz Nowaczyk, and Marta Olejniczak. Computational
Tools and Resources Supporting CRISPR-Cas Experiments. Cells, 9(5):1288,
2020.
[38] Mar´ıa Rodr´ıguez-L´opez, J¨urg B¨ahler, Cristina Cotobal, Oscar Fern´andez-
S´anchez, Natalia Borbar´an Bravo, Risky Oktriani, Heike Abendroth, Dardan
Uka, Mimoza Hoti, Jin Wang, and Mikel Zaratiegui. A CRISPR/Cas9-based
method and primer design tool for seamless genome editing in ﬁssion yeast.
Wellcome Open Research, 1:19, 2017.
[39] Laure M.C. Leynaud-Kieﬀer, Samuel C. Curran, Irene Kim, Jon K. Mag-
nuson, John M. Gladden, Scott E. Baker, and Blake A. Simmons. A new
approach to Cas9-based genome editing in Aspergillus niger that is precise,
eﬃcient and selectable. Plos One, 14(1):e0210243, 2019.
[40] Katherina Garcia Vanegas, Zoﬁa Dorota Jarczynska, Tomas Strucko, and
Uﬀe Hasbro Mortensen. Cpf1 enables fast and eﬃcient genome editing in
Aspergilli. Fungal Biology and Biotechnology, 6(6):6, 2019.
[41] Guido Van Rossum and Fred L Drake Jr. Python reference manual. Centrum
voor Wiskunde en Informatica Amsterdam, 1995.
[42] Peter J. A. Cock, Tiago Antao, Jeﬀrey T. Chang, Brad A. Chapman, Cymon
J. Cox, Andrew Dalke, Iddo Friedberg, Thomas Hamelryck, and Frank Kauﬀ.
37
==PAGE:39==
Biopython: freely available Python tools for computational molecular biology
and bioinformatics. Bioinformatics, 25:1422–1423, 2009.
[43] Andreas Untergasser, Ioana Cutcutache, Triinu Koressaar, Jian Ye, Brant C.
Faircloth, Maido Remm, and Steven G. Rozen. Primer3-new capabilities and
interfaces. Nucleic Acids Research, 40(15), 2012.
[44] M. V. Aguilar-Pontes, J. Brandl, E. McDonnell, K. Strasser, T.T.M. Nguyen,
R. Riley, S. Mondo, A. Salamov, J.L. Nybo, T.C. Vesth, I.V. Grigoriev,
M.R. Andersen, A. Tsang, and R.P. de Vries. The gold-standard genome
of Aspergillus niger NRRL 3 enables a detailed view of the diversity of sugar
catabolism in fungi. Studies in Mycology, 91(91):61–78, 2018.
[45] A. niger NIG112 was a gift from Germann, S. M., DTU Bioengineering.
[46] JJ Schmidt. DNA Cloning: A Practical Approach Volumes 1 and 2. Bio-
chemical Education, 14(14):91, 1986.
[47] GenElute™Plasmid Miniprep Kit. https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sigma/pln7
Accessed: 2021-01-31.
[48] NanoDrop™Lite Spectrophotometer. https://www.thermoﬁsher.com/order/catalog/product/N
LITE-PR#/ND-LITE-PR. Accessed: 2021-01-31.
[49] Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit. https://www.zymoresearch.com/collections/zymoclean-
gel-dna-recovery-kits/products/zymoclean-gel-dna-recovery-kit.
Accessed:
2021-01-31.
[50] Michael Lynge Nielsen, Ga¨elle Lettier, Jakob Blæsbjerg Nielsen, and
Uﬀe Hasbro Mortensen. Eﬃcient PCR-based gene targeting with a recyclable
marker for Aspergillus nidulans. Fungal Genetics and Biology, 43(1):54–64,
2006.
[51] Kyle Rothschild-Mancinelli.
An integrative approach to high-throughout
CRISPR genetic engineering in Aspergillus niger. PhD thesis, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, 2021.
[52] Min Jin Kwon. Morphogenesis and protein production in Aspergillus niger.
PhD thesis, Leiden University, 2014.
[53] Xianzong Shi, Yu Sha, and Susan Kaminskyj.
Aspergillus nidulans hypA
regulates morphogenesis through the secretion pathway.
Fungal Genetics
and Biology, 41(1):75–88, 2004.
[54] FP Buxton, DI Gwynne, and RW Davies. Transformation of Aspergillus niger
using the argB gene of Aspergillus nidulans. Gene, 37(1-3):207–214, 1985.
[55] Ronald P. De Vries and Jaap Visser.
Regulation of the feruloyl esterase
(faeA) gene from Aspergillus niger. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
65(12):5500–5503, 1999.
38
==PAGE:40==
[56] Ronald P de Vries, Patricia A vanKuyk, Harry C M Kester, and Jaap Visser.
The Aspergillus niger faeB gene encodes a second feruloyl esterase involved
in pectin and xylan degradation and is speciﬁcally induced in the presence of
aromatic compounds. Biochemical Journal, 363(Pt 2):377–386, 2002.
[57] Application Note :
Take advantage of customizable plating patterns for
extra ﬂexibility in sample handling with the QPix 460 automated microbial
colony picker system.
https://www.moleculardevices.com/en/assets/app-
note/bpd/take-advantage-of-customizable-plating-patterns-with-qpix-460-
microbial-colony-picker#gref. Accessed: 2021-01-25.
[58] GenElute™
HP
96
Well
Plasmid
Miniprep
Kit.
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/life-science/molecular-biology/dna-and-
rna-puriﬁcation/genelute-hp-96-well.html. Accessed: 2021-01-25.
[59] Tuval Ben Yehezkel, Shiran Nagar, Danny Mackrants, Zipora Marx, Gre-
gory Linshiz, Uri Shabi, and Ehud Shapiro. Computer-aided high-throughput
cloning of bacteria in liquid medium. Biotechniques, 50(2):124–127, 2011.
[60] Thomas R. Jørgensen, Kristian Fog Nielsen, Mark Arentshorst, JooHae Park,
Cees A. van den Hondel, Jens Christian Frisvad, and Arthur F. Ram. Sub-
merged Conidiation and Product Formation by Aspergillus niger at Low Spe-
ciﬁc Growth Rates Are Aﬀected in Aerial Developmental Mutants. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology, 77(15):5270–5277, 2011.
[61] TM Madelin.
The eﬀect of a surfactant in media for the enumeration,
growth and identiﬁcation of airborne fungi. Journal of Applied Bacteriol-
ogy, 63(1):47–52, 1987.
[62] DM Benson. Improved enumeration of Trichoderma spp on dilution plates
of selective media containing a nonionic surfactant.
Canadian Journal of
Microbiology, 30(9):1193–1195, 1984.
[63] Marta Cortes˜ao, Aram de Haas, Rebecca Unterbusch, Akira Fujimori, Tabea
Sch¨utze, Vera Meyer, and Ralf Moeller. Aspergillus niger Spores Are Highly
Resistant to Space Radiation. Frontiers in Microbiology, 11:560, 2020.
[64] L.R. Beuchat and C.-A. Hwang. ”evaluation of modiﬁed dichloran 18% glyc-
erol (dg18) agar for enumerating fungi in wheat ﬂour: a collaborative study”.
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 29(2):161 – 166, 1996.
[65] Personal communication with Jens Christian Frisvad, DTU Bioengineering.
[66] Guri Giaever and Corey Nislow. The yeast deletion collection: A decade of
functional genomics. Genetics, 197(2):451–465, 2014.
[67] S.
pombe
Deletion
Mutant
Library
from
Bioneer.
https://us.bioneer.com/products/spombe/spombeliterature.aspx. Accessed:
2021-01-25.
39
==PAGE:41==
[68] Neurospora
Functional
Genomics
Project
Strains.
http://www.fgsc.net/NeurosporaGenomeProject/arrayedkoplates.htm.
Accessed: 2021-01-25.
[69] COFUN
-
Aspergillus
fumigatus
gene-wide
knock
out
collection.
https://www.phe-culturecollections.org.uk/products/fungi/cofun-
aspergillus-fumigatus-gene-wide-knock-out-collection.aspx.
Accessed:
2021-01-25.
[70] Michelle Momany, Patrick J. Westfall, and Gretel Abramowsky. Aspergillus
nidulans swo mutants show defects in polarity establishment, polarity main-
tenance and hyphal morphogenesis. Genetics, 151(2):557–567, 1999.
[71] Katherina Garcia Vanegas, Beata Joanna Lehka, and Uﬀe Hasbro Mortensen.
SWITCH: a dynamic CRISPR tool for genome engineering and metabolic
pathway control for cell factory construction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Microbial Cell Factories, 16(25):25, 2017.
[72] AspGD - Aspergillus Database.
http://www.aspergillusgenome.org/.
Ac-
cessed: 2021-01-27.
[73] Hiroshi Nishimasu, Naoshi Dohmae, Ryuichiro Ishitani, Osamu Nureki, Fei
Ran, Patrick Hsu, Silvana M Konermann, Soraya I. Shehata, and Feng Zhang.
Crystal Structure of Cas9 in Complex with Guide RNA and Target DNA.
Cell, 156:935–949, 2014.
[74] GR Smith. Hotspot of homologous recombination. Experientia, 50(3):234–
241, 1994.
[75] E. Biet, J. S. Sun, and M. Dutreix. Conserved sequence preference in DNA
binding among recombination proteins: An eﬀect of ssDNA secondary struc-
ture. Nucleic Acids Research, 27(2):596–600, 1999.
[76] Ja-Hwan Seol, Eun Yong Shim, and Sang Eun Lee. Microhomology-mediated
end joining: Good, bad and ugly. Mutation Research-fundamental and Molec-
ular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis, 809:81–87, 2018.
[77] Chi Zhang, Xiuhua Meng, Xiaolei Wei, and Ling Lu. Highly eﬃcient CRISPR
mutagenesis by microhomology-mediated end joining in Aspergillus fumiga-
tus. Fungal Genetics and Biology, 86:47–57, 2016.
[78] Yuchen Liu, Jinghong Han, Zhicong Chen, Hanwei Wu, Hongsong Dong, and
Guohui Nie. Engineering cell signaling using tunable CRISPR-Cpf1-based
transcription factors. Nature Communications, 8(1):2095, 2017.
[79] Bin Liu, Siwei Chen, Anouk La Rose, Deng Chen, Fangyuan Cao, Martijn
Zwinderman, Dominik Kiemel, Manon A¨ıssi, Frank J. Dekker, and Hidde J.
Haisma. Inhibition of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 enhances
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. Nucleic Acids Research, 48(2):517–532, 2020.
40
==PAGE:42==
8
Supplementary Information
8.1
TACODe example output
8.1.1
Example of raw TACODe output
As TACODe output contains many columns, it has here been split into 4 sections
to show it on one page.
41
==PAGE:43==
8.1.2
Map of TACODe oligonucleotides for deletion of A. niger gene
NRRL3 00002
42
==PAGE:44==
8.2
TACODe README
8.2.1
Script Function
1.1 Overview
TACODe is a Python script designed to automate the design of oligos for CRISPR-
Cas9 experiments: Primers with gRNA sequences, repair templates for deletions
and check primers for subsequent veriﬁcation. The script is designed so that no
prior coding experience is necessary for use.
8.2.2
Before Using The Script
2.1 First time Python users
Python can be downloaded and launched in any way the user prefers. For ﬁrst
time users, using an Interactive Developer Environment (IDE) such as Spyder is
recommended.
2.2 Installing the right modules
To use TACODe, the following Python modules are necessary and can be installed
through Python:
Module
Biopython
Primer3
Install command
pip install biopython
pip install primer3-py
2.3 Downloading the necessary ﬁles:
To run TACODe, the following scripts should all be downloaded to the working
directory:
TACODe 1.6.0.py
init params.py
load gﬀ.py
search params.py
ﬁnd spacers.py
check primer gen.py
8.2.3
Input & Output
3.1 Genome input
The working directory should contain one genome ﬁle containing the combined
sequences of all chromosomes as one sequence. The ﬁle should be a .fasta ﬁle. A
genome ﬁle for A. niger NRRL3 can be downloaded at:
drive.google.com/drive/folders/1LN1ACreewaQOL94v8pfcgj4RdiD c3K7?usp=sharing
3.2 Chromosome input
The working directory should contain a folder ”All chromosomes” with a .fasta ﬁle for
each chromosome. The chromosome name should match the chromosome name in the
GFF ﬁle, and be of the type .fasta. A folder with all chromosomes for A. niger NRRL3
can be downloaded at:
drive.google.com/drive/folders/1LN1ACreewaQOL94v8pfcgj4RdiD c3K7?usp=sharing
3.3 Feature input
The working directory should contain a GFF ﬁle with the features for which oligos
should be generated.
43
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Output
The output ﬁle is a .csv ﬁle containing one row for each gRNA-primer designed. The
columns are:
1: Primer name
2: Primer sequence
3: Spacer sequence
4: Absolute position of the PAM in the chromosome
5: Position of the PAM relative to the feature start
6: GC content of spacer
7: Feature strand
8: Strand of PAM relative to feature
9: Feature name
10: Chromosome
11: Repair template
12: Check primer fw
13: Check primer rev
14: Check primers created with strict parameters (yes/no). ”Yes” indicates good
quality primers.
8.2.4
Using Default Settings
4.1 Organism And gRNA-Primer
The script has default settings for use for Aspergillus niger NRRL3 and designs gRNA-
primers for USER-clonings into the Aspergillus plasmid pAC572.
Repair templates
consist of a 45 nt homology on each side of the feature. gRNA-primes generated contain
a 20 nt gRNA region and have the sequence:
5’ ACGGATGAUGCA-N(20)-GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCA 3’
The niger NRRL3.fasta genome ﬁle can be downloaded from:
drive.google.com/drive/folders/1LN1ACreewaQOL94v8pfcgj4RdiD c3K7?usp=sharing
All individual chromosomes can be downloaded from:
drive.google.com/drive/folders/1LN1ACreewaQOL94v8pfcgj4RdiD c3K7?usp=sharing
4.2 Single Optimized gRNA
The single optimized gRNA option designs one gRNA-primer, repair template and check
primer set for each feature. The ﬁrst found PAM after 85 bp upstream of the feature
start is used.
4.3 Multiple gRNAs Per Feature
Identiﬁes every PAM within a speciﬁed range. This option allows speciﬁcation of the
start and end of the search range, in which PAMs are identiﬁed. The numbers are entered
as integers, and specify a position relative to the feature start, negative numbres being
upstream of the feature start. It also allows setting a ”skipping length”, which after
creation of a gRNA-spacer will ignore any new PAMs within that skipping length. This
is useful to achieve even coverage of gRNAs in a region.
8.2.5
Customized Use
5.1 Organism
Organism can be speciﬁed by providing in an alternative genome .fasta ﬁle in the direc-
tory and by providing an alternative set of chromosome .fasta ﬁles in ”All chromosomes”,
replacing the A. niger NRRL3 ﬁles.
5.2 gRNA-Primer
44
==PAGE:46==
The gRNA-primer is built on a standard structure of:
5’ *spacer primer start* - N(20) - *spacer primer end* 3’
The spacer primer start and end can be customized as desired.
5.3 Repair Template
The length of each homology region in the repair template can be speciﬁed, but the two
homology regions will always have equal lengths. The position of the repair template
for is not customizable, it will always delete from 50 nt further upstream than the start
of the PAM search range (which is 85 for optimized gRNA-primers) to the feature end.
8.2.6
Detailed Speciﬁcation Of Each Code Element
6.1 gRNA Selection And Seed Uniqueness
When a PAM is identiﬁed as either a GG or a CC on the + strand, the corresponding
spacer sequence is stored and the seed region (12 bp directly upstream of NGG) are
checked for their uniqueness in the whole genome.
Spacers with unique PAMs are
stored as gRNA-primers, spacers with non-unique seeds are skipped.
6.2 Repair Template
For 45 bp homology regions, the homology regions are placed 95-50 nt upstream of the
earliest possible position of a PAM and 0-50 nt downstream of the end of the feature. It
will always delete from 50 nt further upstream than the start of the PAM search range
(which is 85 for optimized gRNA-primers) to the feature end.
6.3 Check Primers
Check primers are made with the Primer3 package (see References). They are made to
have a Tm of 58 in CxL buﬀer, give a product between 295 and 305 and generally follow
standard primer design practice. The parameters from primer design are explained in
the Primer3 documentation:
https://primer3.org/manual.html#globalTags. The speciﬁcs used are:
’PRIMER OPT TM’: 58.0,
’PRIMER MIN TM’: 56.0,
’PRIMER MAX TM’: 60.0,
’PRIMER SALT MONOVALENT’: 10.0,
’PRIMER SALT DIVALENT’: 2.0,
’PRIMER DNTP CONC’: 0.4,
’PRIMER DNA CONC’: 50.0,
’PRIMER THERMODYNAMIC OLIGO ALIGNMENT’: 1,
’PRIMER MAX HAIRPIN TH’: 45,
’PRIMER MAX SELF ANY TH’: 45,
’PRIMER PAIR MAX COMPL ANY TH’: 45,
’PRIMER GC CLAMP’: 1,
’PRIMER MAX END GC’: 3,
’PRIMER PICK INTERNAL OLIGO’: 0,
’PRIMER MAX POLY X’: 3,
’PRIMER OPT GC’: 50,
’PRIMER MIN GC’: 30,
’PRIMER MAX GC’: 70,
Should a valid set of primers not be found within these parameters, a second search is
made with similar but less strict parameters, and the check primers will be marked with
a ”no” in the check primer quality column of the output ﬁle.
45
==PAGE:47==
8.2.7
Citing TACODe
For now, please cite: ”An integrative approach to high-throughout CRISPR genetic
engineering in Aspergillus niger”, Kyle Rothschild-Mancinelli, PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2021.
8.2.8
References
pAC572:
https://www.addgene.org/127973/ Cpf1 enables fast and
eﬃcient genome editing in Aspergilli. Vanegas KG, Jarczynska
ZD, Strucko T, Mortensen UH. Fungal Biol Biotechnol. 2019
May 1;6:6. doi: 10.1186/s40694-019-0069-6. eCollection 2019.
10.1186/s40694-019-0069-6 PubMed 31061713
NRRL3
genome:
Aguilar-Pontes MV, Brandl J, McDonnell E, Strasser K,
Nguyen TTM, Riley R, Mondo S, Salamov A, Nybo JL, Vesth
TC, Grigoriev IV, Andersen MR, Tsang A, de Vries RP. The
gold-standard genome of Aspergillus niger NRRL 3 enables a
detailed view of the diversity of sugar catabolism in fungi. Stud
Mycol. 2018 Sep;91:61-78. doi: 10.1016/j.simyco.2018.10.001.
Epub 2018 Oct 7. PMID: 30425417; PMCID: PMC6231085.
BioPython:
Peter J. A. Cock, Tiago Antao, Jeﬀrey T. Chang, Brad A.
Chapman, Cymon J. Cox, Andrew Dalke, Iddo Friedberg,
Thomas Hamelryck, Frank Kauﬀ, Bartek Wilczynski, Michiel J.
L. de Hoon, Biopython: freely available Python tools for
computational molecular biology and bioinformatics,
Bioinformatics, Volume 25, Issue 11, 1 June 2009, Pages
1422–1423, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163
Primer3:
Untergasser, Andreas, et al. ”Primer3—new capabilities and
interfaces.” Nucleic acids research 40.15 (2012): e115-e115. doi:
10.1093/nar/gks596
46
==PAGE:48==
8.3
TACODe source code
8.3.1
TACODe 1.6.0.py
# Importing modules
try:
import numpy as np
from init_params import init_params
from load_gff import load_gff
from find_spacers import find_spacers
from search_params import search_params
except ModuleNotFoundError:
print(’Please ensure that all packages are correctly installed
and that the directory is correctly specified. See the
Readme.txt file for more info.’)
raise SystemExit from None
script_ver = ’TACODe_1.6.0.py’
#Setting experiment name
spacer_name = input(’Please enter an experiment name: ’)
#defining default or specified genome and primer sequence:
[genome, spacer_primer_start, spacer_primer_end, rep_len] =
init_params()
[gff, gff_name] = load_gff()
[search_range_start, search_range_end, skip_len] = search_params()
spacer_table = find_spacers(gff, genome, rep_len,
spacer_primer_start,
spacer_primer_end, spacer_name, gff_name, search_range_start,
search_range_end, skip_len, script_ver)
# Saving result to .txt for opening in Excel
try:
np.savetxt(str(spacer_name + ’.csv’), spacer_table, delimiter
= ’,’, fmt=’%s’)
except PermissionError:
print(’’’Please ensure, that no output file with the same
experiment name is already open, then try again.’’’)
raise SystemExit from None
# Primer table gen summary:
print(’\nOutput saved to directory as "’ + spacer_name +
’.csv".\nScript used: ’ + script_ver)
47
==PAGE:49==
8.3.2
Check primer gen.py
’’’A function based on primer3, that uses a repair template
for CRISPR-based
deletions (insertions are not allowed) to make check primers of
the deletion
site with a PCR product of about 300 bp. If at first no primers
can be made
with the set parameters, another attempt is made with less strict
parameters.’’’
import primer3
import re
def check_primer_gen(rep_temp, genome, rep_len):
# Input: rep template
URT = rep_temp[0: int(len(rep_temp)/2)] # URT Upstream repair
template
DRT = rep_temp[int(len(rep_temp)/2): int(len(rep_temp))]
# DRT Downstream repair template
EURTP = re.compile(’.{200}’ + URT) #extended URT pattern
EDRTP = re.compile(DRT + ’.{200}’) #extended DRT pattern
EURT = EURTP.findall(str(genome.seq)) #extended URT
EURT = EURT[len(EURT)-200:len(EURT)] #cutting it to be 200 bp
EDRT = EDRTP.findall(str(genome.seq)) #extended DRT
EDRT = EDRT[0:200]
check_reg = str(EURT[0]) + str(EDRT[0]) #check primer region
#In case rep temp is long so whole PCR product is not on one
side of the
#the target site. should be changed to cutting down URT and
DRT instead...
if rep_len > 100:
prod_len_low = rep_len*2+205
prod_len_up = rep_len*2+215
else:
prod_len_low = 295
prod_len_up = 305
try:
result = primer3.bindings.designPrimers(
{
’SEQUENCE_TEMPLATE’: check_reg
},
{
# Setting parameters for calculation of TMs and
limits for allowed TMs
’PRIMER_OPT_TM’: 58.0,
’PRIMER_MIN_TM’: 56.0,
’PRIMER_MAX_TM’: 60.0,
’PRIMER_SALT_MONOVALENT’: 10.0, #mM
48
==PAGE:50==
’PRIMER_SALT_DIVALENT’: 2.0, #mM
’PRIMER_DNTP_CONC’: 0.4, #mM
’PRIMER_DNA_CONC’: 50.0, #nM
# Preventing hairpins, self-dimers and dimers
with the other primer in the pair.
# Values are TMs of the structures in Celsius.
’PRIMER_THERMODYNAMIC_OLIGO_ALIGNMENT’: 1,
’PRIMER_MAX_HAIRPIN_TH’: 45,
’PRIMER_MAX_SELF_ANY_TH’: 45,
’PRIMER_PAIR_MAX_COMPL_ANY_TH’: 45,
# Ensuring at least one G or C at the end of each
primer, but not too many
’PRIMER_GC_CLAMP’: 1,
’PRIMER_MAX_END_GC’: 3,
# Preventing picking of internal oligo to save
time
’PRIMER_PICK_INTERNAL_OLIGO’: 0,
# Ensures there are only 3 of the same base in a
row to reduce unspecific binding
’PRIMER_MAX_POLY_X’: 3,
# Setting GC limits
’PRIMER_OPT_GC’: 50,
’PRIMER_MIN_GC’: 30,
’PRIMER_MAX_GC’: 70,
# Setting PCR product length
’PRIMER_PRODUCT_SIZE_RANGE’: [prod_len_low,
prod_len_up],
})
UCP = result[’PRIMER_LEFT_0_SEQUENCE’]
DCP = result[’PRIMER_RIGHT_0_SEQUENCE’]
strict_param = ’yes’
# If first try doesn’t work, here’s another try with
loose parameters
except KeyError:
result = primer3.bindings.designPrimers(
{
’SEQUENCE_TEMPLATE’: check_reg
},
{
# Setting parameters for calculation of TMs and
limits for allowed TMs
’PRIMER_OPT_TM’: 58.0,
’PRIMER_MIN_TM’: 54.0,
’PRIMER_MAX_TM’: 60.0,
’PRIMER_SALT_MONOVALENT’: 10.0, #mM
’PRIMER_SALT_DIVALENT’: 2.0, #mM
’PRIMER_DNTP_CONC’: 0.4, #mM
’PRIMER_DNA_CONC’: 50.0, #nM
# Preventing hairpins, self-dimers and dimers
49
==PAGE:51==
with the other primer in the pair.
# Values are TMs of the structures in Celsius.
’PRIMER_THERMODYNAMIC_OLIGO_ALIGNMENT’: 1,
’PRIMER_MAX_HAIRPIN_TH’: 50,
’PRIMER_MAX_SELF_ANY_TH’: 50,
’PRIMER_PAIR_MAX_COMPL_ANY_TH’: 50,
# Ensuring one g or C at the end of each primer
’PRIMER_GC_CLAMP’: 0,
# Preventing picking of internal oligo to save
time
’PRIMER_PICK_INTERNAL_OLIGO’: 0,
# Setting GC limits
’PRIMER_OPT_GC’: 50,
’PRIMER_MIN_GC’: 25,
’PRIMER_MAX_GC’: 75,
# Defining length of PCR product
’PRIMER_PRODUCT_SIZE_RANGE’: [290,310],
})
UCP = result[’PRIMER_LEFT_0_SEQUENCE’]
DCP = result[’PRIMER_RIGHT_0_SEQUENCE’]
strict_param = ’no’
return [UCP, DCP, strict_param]
50
==PAGE:52==
8.3.3
ﬁnd spacers.py
try:
from Bio.SeqUtils import GC
from Bio import SeqIO
import numpy as np
import re
import time
from check_primer_gen import check_primer_gen
except ModuleNotFoundError:
print(’Please ensure that all packages are correctly
installed and that the directory is correctly specified. See
the Readme.txt file for more info.’)
raise SystemExit
def find_spacers(gff, genome, rep_len, spacer_primer_start,
spacer_primer_end, spacer_name, gff_name, search_range_start,
search_range_end, skip_len, script_ver):
start_time = time.time()
print(’\nGenerating spacer table, this might take a few
seconds per feature. Please be patient...’)
spacer_table_header = np.array([[’Name:’, spacer_name, ’GFF
file:’, gff_name, ’Rel SRS:’, ’-’ + str(search_range_start),
’Rel SRE:’, str(search_range_end), ’Skipping length:’,
str(skip_len), ’Script version:’, script_ver, ’’, ’’, ’’],
[’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’, ’’,
’’],
[’Primer_ID’,’Primer’, ’Spacer’, ’PAM’, ’Position’,
’Relative position’, ’GC%’, ’Feature strand’, ’Relative
strand’, ’Feature info’, ’Chromosome’, ’Repair temp’,
’Check primer fw’, ’Check primer rev’, ’Check primer
good’]])
spacer_table = spacer_table_header
name_count = 0
for i in range(0, len(gff)): # for loop for every annotated
feature
chromo= next(SeqIO.parse(’All_chromosomes/’ +
str(gff[i,0]) + ’.fasta’, "fasta"))
print(’\n’ + str(gff[i,8]))
if str(gff[i,6]) == "+":
abs_SRS = eval(gff[i,3]) - search_range_start+1
abs_SRE = eval(gff[i,3]) + search_range_end+1
rep_temp =
chromo[eval(gff[i,3])-search_range_start-50-rep_len:
eval(gff[i,3])-search_range_start-50].seq +
chromo[eval(gff[i,4]):eval(gff[i,4])+rep_len].seq
CP = check_primer_gen(str(rep_temp), genome, rep_len)
j = abs_SRS
51
==PAGE:53==
while j in range(abs_SRS, abs_SRE): #iterating over
every nt in selected region
#Finding spacers on + strand
if chromo.seq[j:j+2] == ’GG’:
PAM_pos = j-1 # N in NGG in PAM
PAM = chromo.seq[j-1:j+2]
spacer = chromo[j-21:j-1].seq
relstrand = ’coding’
TSS = int(gff[i,3])
relposmultiplier = 1
ext_seed = re.compile(str(spacer[8:20]) +
".GG")
matches = 0
for m in ext_seed.finditer(str(genome.seq +
genome.seq.reverse_complement())):
matches += 1
if matches == 1:
name_count = name_count +1
spacer_info = np.array([[spacer_name +
’_’ + str(name_count),
spacer_primer_start + str(spacer) +
spacer_primer_end, str(spacer), PAM,
PAM_pos, (j-1-TSS)*relposmultiplier,
GC(spacer) , gff[i,6], relstrand,
gff[i,8], str(gff[i,0]), rep_temp, CP[0],
CP[1], CP[2]]], dtype = object )
spacer_table = np.append(spacer_table,
spacer_info, axis = 0)
print(PAM_pos)
j = j + skip_len
else:
print(’non-unique seed:’ + str(PAM_pos))
j= j+1
#Finding spacers on - strand (mostly identical to
above block)
elif chromo.seq[j:j+2] == ’CC’:
PAM_pos = j+3 #N in PAM
PAM = chromo[j:j+3].seq.reverse_complement()
relstrand = ’template’
relposmultiplier = 1
TSS = int(gff[i,3])
spacer =
chromo[j+3:j+23].seq.reverse_complement()
ext_seed = re.compile(str(spacer[8:20]) +
".GG")
matches = 0
for m in ext_seed.finditer(str(genome.seq +
genome.seq.reverse_complement())):
matches += 1
52
==PAGE:54==
if matches == 1:
name_count = name_count +1
spacer_info = np.array([[spacer_name +
’_’ + str(name_count),
spacer_primer_start + str(spacer) +
spacer_primer_end, str(spacer), PAM,
PAM_pos, (j+3-TSS)*relposmultiplier,
GC(spacer) , gff[i,6], relstrand,
gff[i,8], str(gff[i,0]), rep_temp, CP[0],
CP[1], CP[2]]], dtype = object )
spacer_table = np.append(spacer_table,
spacer_info, axis = 0)
print(PAM_pos)
j = j + skip_len
else:
print(’non-unique seed:’ + str(PAM_pos))
j= j+1
else:
j = j+1
# Almost identical, but for neg strand features
elif gff[i,6] == "-":
abs_SRS = eval(gff[i,4]) + search_range_start+1
abs_SRE = eval(gff[i,4]) - search_range_end+1
rep_temp =
chromo[eval(gff[i,3])-rep_len:eval(gff[i,3])].seq +
chromo[eval(gff[i,4])+search_range_start+50:eval(gff
[i,4])+search_range_start +50+rep_len].seq
CP = check_primer_gen(str(rep_temp), genome, rep_len)
j = abs_SRS
while j in range(abs_SRE, abs_SRS +1): #iterating
over every nt in selected region
#Finding spacers on + strand
if chromo.seq[j:j+2] == ’GG’:
PAM_pos = j-1 # N in NGG in PAM
PAM = chromo.seq[j-1:j+2]
spacer = chromo[j-21:j-1].seq
relstrand = ’template’
relposmultiplier = -1
TSS = eval(gff[i,4])
ext_seed = re.compile(str(spacer[8:20]) +
".GG")
matches = 0
for m in ext_seed.finditer(str(genome.seq +
genome.seq.reverse_complement())):
matches += 1
if matches == 1:
name_count = name_count +1
spacer_info = np.array([[spacer_name +
’_’ + str(name_count),
53
==PAGE:55==
spacer_primer_start + str(spacer) +
spacer_primer_end, str(spacer), PAM,
PAM_pos, (j-1-TSS)*relposmultiplier,
GC(spacer) , gff[i,6], relstrand,
gff[i,8], str(gff[i,0]), rep_temp, CP[0],
CP[1], CP[2]]], dtype = object )
spacer_table = np.append(spacer_table,
spacer_info, axis = 0)
print(PAM_pos)
j = j - skip_len
else:
print(’non-unique seed:’ + str(PAM_pos))
j= j-1
#Finding spacers on - strand (mostly identical to
above block)
elif chromo.seq[j:j+2] == ’CC’:
PAM_pos = j+3 #N in PAM
PAM = chromo[j:j+3].seq.reverse_complement()
relstrand = ’coding’
TSS = eval(gff[i,4])
relposmultiplier = -1
spacer =
chromo[j+3:j+23].seq.reverse_complement()
ext_seed = re.compile(str(spacer[8:20]) +
".GG")
matches = 0
for m in ext_seed.finditer(str(genome.seq +
genome.seq.reverse_complement())):
matches += 1
if matches == 1:
name_count = name_count +1
spacer_info = np.array([[spacer_name +
’_’ + str(name_count),
spacer_primer_start + str(spacer) +
spacer_primer_end, str(spacer), PAM,
PAM_pos, (j+3-TSS)*relposmultiplier,
GC(spacer) , gff[i,6], relstrand,
gff[i,8], str(gff[i,0]), rep_temp, CP[0],
CP[1], CP[2]]], dtype = object )
spacer_table = np.append(spacer_table,
spacer_info, axis = 0)
print(PAM_pos)
j = j - skip_len
else:
print(’non-unique seed:’ + str(PAM_pos))
j = j-1
else:
j = j-1
54
==PAGE:56==
print("Table gen time:\n--- %s seconds ---" % (time.time() -
start_time))
print(’Number of spacers generated:’ +
str(len(spacer_table)-3))
return spacer_table
55
==PAGE:57==
8.3.4
init params.py
’’’std_params function reads in initial parameters for use with
A. niger NRRL3 as organism, pAC902 as PCR template and pAC572 as
backbone’’’
from Bio import SeqIO
def std_params():
genome = SeqIO.read("niger_NRRL3.fasta", ’fasta’)
print(’\nDefault genome and primer sequences have been
chosen.\n’)
return [genome, ’ACGGATGAUGCA’, ’GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCA’, 45]
def alt_params():
# Loading in a .fasta of the entire genome.
g_name = str(input(’Please enter the name of a genome file in
.fasta format in your directory, including ".fasta": ’))
genome = SeqIO.read(g_name, ’fasta’)
spacer_primer_start = input(’Please enter the 5\u2032 end of
spacer-containing primer (everything leading up to the 20 bp
gRNA): ’).upper()
spacer_primer_end = input(’Please enter the 3\u2032 end of
spacer-containing primer (everything after the 20 bp gRNA):
’).upper()
try:
rep_len = int(input(’Please enter the desired length of
the individual homology regions in the repair template:
’))
except ValueError:
print(’Please enter a valid integer.’)
raise SystemExit
print(’\nSpecified genome and primer sequences have been
chosen: \nGenome: ’ + g_name + ’\nPrimer start: ’ +
spacer_primer_start + ’\nPrimer end: ’ + spacer_primer_end +
’\nHomology region length: ’ + str(rep_len))
return [genome, spacer_primer_start, spacer_primer_end,
rep_len]
def init_params():
alt_settings = input(’OPTIONAL: Would you like to define
alternative organism and/or primer settings? If YES, enter
"Y", else just press enter: ’)
if alt_settings.upper() == "Y":
try:
params = alt_params()
except FileNotFoundError:
print(’Please ensure that the directory is correctly
set and a valid .fasta file of the full genome is
available in the directory. If an alternative genome
56
==PAGE:58==
file is specified, also ensure that the entered name
matches the file name.’)
raise SystemExit
else:
try:
params = std_params()
except FileNotFoundError:
print(’Please ensure that the directory is correctly
set and a valid .fasta file of the full genome is
available in the directory. If an alternative genome
file is specified, also ensure that the entered name
matches the file name.’)
raise SystemExit
return params
57
==PAGE:59==
8.3.5
load gﬀ.py
from numpy import loadtxt
def load_gff():
gff_name = input(’Please enter the name of a GFF file (the
file should be located in the current directory): ’)
gff = loadtxt(gff_name, dtype=str, delimiter = "\t")
return [gff, gff_name]
58
==PAGE:60==
8.3.6
search params.py
def search_params():
one = input(’To find one optimized spacer for each feature,
please enter "Y". For custom search options just press enter:
’)
if one.upper() == "Y":
[search_range_start, search_range_end, skip_len] = [85,
100, 200]
print(’\nOne optimized spacer per feature will be
found.’)
else:
try:
search_range_start = -int(input("Relative to the
start codon, where should the search range BEGIN?
Negative values are upstream of the start codon.
Please enter a number: "))
except ValueError:
print(’Please enter a valid integer.’)
raise SystemExit from None
try:
search_range_end = int(input("Relative to the start
codon, where should the search range END? Negative
values are upstream of the start codon. Please enter
a number: "))
except ValueError:
print(’Please enter a valid integer.’)
raise SystemExit from None
skip_true = input(’Would you like to ignore spacers for a
set distance after having found a protospacer? For yes ,
please enter "Y", for no just press enter: ’)
skip_len = 1
if skip_true.upper() == "Y":
try:
skip_len = int(input(’How many nucleotides would
you like to ignore after finding a protospacer?
Please enter a number: ’))
except ValueError:
print(’Please enter a valid integer.’)
raise SystemExit from None
print(’Skipping length was set to ’ + str(skip_len) +
’.’)
else:
print(’No skipping length was set.’)
return [search_range_start, search_range_end, skip_len]
59
==PAGE:61==
8.4
TACODe output of oligonucleotide design for sgRNA
library
This output ﬁle was made with an older version of TACODe and does not contain all
output available from the ﬁnal version of TACODe. For an example oh the ﬁnal output
format, please see supplementary section 8.1.1.
60
==PAGE:62==
61
==PAGE:63==
62
==PAGE:64==
63
==PAGE:65==
64
==PAGE:66==
65
==PAGE:67==
8.5
Microtransformation protocol for A. niger
66
==PAGE:68==
8.6
Liquid class parameters for microtransformations on
ﬂowbot ONE
67
