==PAGE:1==
Condensed liquid protein based lubricants
Master thesis
Andreas Lund
s153236
Supervisor:
Alexander Kai B¨ull
Co-supervisor:
Emil G. P. Stender
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Biological protein based lubricants, as those in the human joints, have been shown to have beter
lubricating properties than even the best man-made materials.
Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) is a phenomenon where protein solutions spontaneously sep-
arate into two-phase system under certain conditions.
By constructing fusion LLPS proteins capable of creating lubrication layers, and working on char-
acterisation methods for these layers and of LLPS in general, the feasibility of creating LLPS based
lubricants has been explored in this project.
Tis involves the use of recombinant protein production, turbidity measurements, sample prepara-
tion automation, phase separation harvesting and characterisation, and quartz crystal microbalance.
==PAGE:3==
Table of contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Lubrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
LLPS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Weting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7
Qartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D)
. . . . . . . . .
8
2
Methods
10
2.1
Expression and puriﬁcation of hydrophobin construct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Protein transformation and expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Protein purication atempt 1 - IMAC protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
Puriﬁcation atempt 1 - HPLC protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.4
Protein purication atempt 2 - SEC protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Turbidity measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Hygroscopic LLPS solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Pipeting robot automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Dense phase harvesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Qartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Fluorescent microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Results
20
3.1
Expression and puriﬁcation of hydrophobin construct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Pipeting robot automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Turbidity measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.1
Lysozyme scatering experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.2
Eﬀects of added hygroscopics on LLPS turbidity behaviour . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Dense phase harvesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Qartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5.1
Lysozyme QCM experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5.2
DDX4N1 QCM experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5.3
QCM modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.6
Fluorescent microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Discussion
50
5
Conclusion
53
6
Perspective
54
==PAGE:4==
7
Appendix
59
7.1
Appendix A - Protein Puriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Appendix B - Pipeting Robot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3
Appendix C - QCM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Reducing friction between moving parts in mechanical systems, like parts of industrial machinery, or
within human joins, is very important to reduce the wear and release of harmful particles. One way
of reducing this friction is by introducing a liquid lubricant between the moving layers. Te lubricant
helps with preventing the surfaces from directly interacting with each other, instead pressuring the
liquid.
In human joints, the synovial ﬂuid is a protein rich liquid which has been shown to have excellent
lubrication properties, with a lower coeﬃcient of friction than even some of the best man made
materials [1]. Lubricin is a surface active protein in the synovial ﬂuid that creates coating layers on
the cartilage, assisting in lowering the direct contact between moving parts.
Some proteins in aqueous solutions are able to split into two-phase systems under the right con-
ditions, in a process known as liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS). In these systems, proteins con-
dense into dense phase droplets with high protein concentration. Tese droplets are surrounded by
a dilute protein phase, with a lower protein concentration than the starting solution. Tese phase
separated solutions ofen have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent mechanical properties from the mixed solu-
tion, and this phase separation is a largely reversible process that can be switched on and oﬀby
changing solution conditions, such as temperature. Tis phenomenon could be utilised to create an
LLPS-based lubricant with tunable material properties, resulting in a dynamic switching of lubrica-
tion ability. Tis could serve as an interesting foothold in understanding LLPS-surface interaction
behaviour, and the idea of lubricants with properties that can dynamically change.
1.2
Project goals
Te goal of this project was to characterise the lubricating properties of phase separation liquid pro-
tein systems. Tis involves developing protocols for creating and characterising binding lubrication
layers based on LLPS, as well as expressing and purifying proteins for this purpose.
Te work of this project can be split into 2 main focus areas.
In the ﬁrst focus area, a protein construct was to be made through recombinant protein production
for this concept. Tese proteins would be made up of an LLPS body and a surface binding tail. Tis
would entail transformation of a purchased plasmid into competent cells, expression, and ﬁnally pu-
rifying the protein. When the protein had been produced, this process was to be optimised for high
yields. If it was possible to purify reasonable amounts of protein, the plan was to test the weting
ability of these constructs, by ﬁrst testing the ability of the binding protein to form self-assembling
monolayers on a surface, and then measuring if it was still possible to form these layers for the
tail and body fusion construct. Te phase separation protein Ddx4 N1 was to be used for this, in a
construct with the hydrophobin DewA, that is able to form self-assembling rodlet monolayers on
1
==PAGE:6==
a surface. Finally, if it was possible to wet surfaces with the protein construct, friction of a weted
surface was to be tested. It was to be tested whether phase separation could be induced in the pro-
tein while it was coated on a surface, and whether the friction could be controlled by switching the
phase separation.
Te second focus of the project was to explore the properties of LLPS phase behaviour in a more gen-
eral manner. Te basis for the research would be in experimenting on creating surface-LLPS layers,
and experimenting on creating and testing related LLPS behaviours and protocols. Several parts of
the project required exploring more fundamental concepts, such as condensed protein surface wet-
ting. Model LLPS proteins that were easier to work with such as lysozyme were to be used for this
purpose. As the project went on it became apparent how much basic characterisation was needed
to be able to be able to work on these novel concepts. Tis realisation, combined with the lack of
progress in the production of the protein construct, meant that this part grew in scope compared to
the original project concept.
1.3
Methodology
Te methods for protein production were well explored standard systems, with expression done in
E.coli cells, and puriﬁcation done through reverse IMAC and chromatography.
Te methods for characterisation of LLPS system has been extensively discussed. However, LLPS
systems have mostly been explored as bulk solutions, with limited amount of research exploring
surface interactions of such systems, which are essential for the feasibility of this project, and one
cannot ignore the LLPS-surface interactions. Some work has been done to reduce the surface in-
teraction of LLPS solutions [2], but not much has been done in the properties of surface/droplet
interactions. Figure 1 shows an overview of experimental methods used.
Lysozyme has been widely used as a model LLPS system, and is much more readily available than a
Ddx4 N1 protein construct. Lysozyme phase separates at large protein concentrations and therefore
lends itself well for basic characterisation of LLPS systems, especially when characterising some
novel methods. Te large working protein concentrations of lysozyme LLPS will lead to larger
signals during measurements, compared to Ddx4 N1.
Te use of turbidity (’haziness’), by the measurement of solution backscatering of an LLPS system,
has previously been used as a supporting experimental method for characterising the onset condi-
tions of phase separation. In this project it was used as a more systematic tool for characterising
cloud point, reversibility, and aggregation of such systems. Tis was done using a NanoTemper
Prometheus system, which made it possible to screen a larger amount of samples concurrently, us-
ing a repeated temperature cycling for deﬁning cloud point and reversibility under varying protein
and salt concentrations. Especially understanding the reversibility of these phase separations was
of interest in the project.
Te deﬁnitions of the phase separation conditions, and the measurement methods for these are
currently mostly qualitative and at times vague in their deﬁnition, as well as a slow and tedious
2
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1: Overview of main experimental methods used in the project. 1) Protein puriﬁcation
2) QCM-D 3) Turbidity measurements 4) LLPS Dense phase harvesting
process. By improving turbidity measurement protocols, it would be possible to increase the repro-
ducibility and speed of basic LLPS characterisation for select systems.
For any protein solution to work as a lubricant, it was also necessary to consider the solution drying
out, losing its lubricating properties. Tis is especially a concern for this project, as a condensed
protein surface layer with low water contents has a risk of drying out. One idea of mediating this
concern was to add a hygroscopic to the solution, such as glycerol or PEG. Hygroscopics help with
water retention, and thus makes the solution less likely to dry out. However, the presence of crowd-
ing elements in the solution can change the LLPS behaviour of the protein in complicated ways, so
the addition of hygroscopics on the phase behaviour was also characterised.
Tere were several exploratory LLPS experiments planned that would need a large amount of dif-
ferently mixed samples. In atempts to automate the preparation of these samples, an Opentrons
OT-2 Liquid Handler pipeting robot was used. For some of the larger series, such as the lysozyme
LLPS turbidity measurements, automating the process of preparing the samples could save time and
increase reproducibility.
It was explored to what degree it was possible to physically ’harvest’ the dense and dilute phase
of a phase separated protein system, and to what degree this corresponded to theoretical values.
By spliting the phases on a macroscopic level, it would eliminate concerns of limited surface wet-
ting under phase separation conditions, do to the interfacing surface tensions between dense and
dilute phase. It is relatively common to isolate the dilute phase of an LLPS system for measurement
3
==PAGE:8==
samples [3] [4] [5], but less commonly used in atempting to fully split the phases.
Te ability of LLPS systems to interact with, and wet surfaces, was explored mainly by using the
quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D) method. QCM-D is a method that can detect
resonance frequencies and energy dissipation of a quartz crystal in a liquid environment, and from
this can detect the deposition of mass on the sensor surface. QCM-D as a method for examining LLPS
is largely unexplored, but it was used in this project as it presented several interesting possibilities
for characterisation of the surface interactions of LLPS systems, especially how the formed dense
droplets deposit on surfaces.
1.4
Lubrication
Fluid lubrication can be divided into diﬀerent regimes depending on the properties of the lubrication
layers compared to the characteristic lengths of the system, such as the roughness of the surface [1]:
In hydrodynamic lubrication the lubrication layer is signiﬁcantly than the surface roughness. Tis
means that the load can be considered to be evenly distributed on the peaks and grooves of the
surface.
In surface lubrication the sliding surfaces are so close together that they are at time in contact with
each other.
Te mixed lubrication regime exists in between the other regimes, with a thin layer of lubrication
that is thick enough to be slightly larger than the surface roughness, eliminating direct contact be-
tween the moving surfaces. When entering this regime, the friction coeﬃcient drops drastically.
Te friction between two lubricated surfaces can be modelled by a Stribeck curve, that relates a
lubricant parameter with the friction coeﬃcient, where the lubrication parameter C is deﬁned as:
C = η · V
P
(1)
Where η is the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid, V is the ﬂuid velocity/entrainment speed, and P is the
pressure.
Te Stribeck curve thus deﬁnes the lubrication regime.
In the synovial ﬂuid, lubricin is a semi ﬂexible structure that can graf to surfaces, and thus create
a protective lubricating layer between the moving cartilage surfaces. Te ﬂexible nature of lubricin
served as the inspiration for the structure of the protein constructs.
Without the presence of lubricin, the friction in the boundary regime will be very high from the
interfacing surface’s roughness.
Te total protein concentration in the synovial ﬂuid are in the range of 10-30 mg/ml [6]. Te protein
concentration in LLPS solutions vary, but the protein concentrations in highly concentration LLPS
liquids like lysozyme are in the same order of magnitude, with the dense phase droplets being sig-
niﬁcantly higher in concentration. Tis makes the concentrations of LLPS relevant in the context of
lubrication.
4
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2: General Stribeck curve relating friction coeﬃcient to the lubrication parameter. Te
friction initially decrease in the mixed lubrication regime and then increases again gradually
in the hydrodynamic regime
1.5
LLPS
Protein solutions that have undergone phase separation will split into two distinct phases: dense
droplets in dilute solution. A phase separation diagram for LLPS solutions can ofen be constructed
as a binodal line, where the point of phase separation is known as the cloud point. Te dense droplets
are ofen liquid like and spherical, and the droplet formation is ofen reversible. One can interpret
several general rules regarding LLPS systems from the binodal, regarding both concentrations and
volume fractions of the system.
If the temperature, pH etc. are constant, the concentrations of the dilute and dense phases are
constant even with a change in starting concentration, and only the volume fractions will change.
Te concentrations are then at each side of the binodal line.
LLPS systems are thermodynamically driven. Te system will phase separate under conditions
where this is energetically favourable. It has been suggested that the ability to phase separate may
be a universal property of proteins.[5] Whether a system phase separates will depend on a lot of
factors, such as temperature, pH, salt concentration, as well as crowding elements in the solution.
Tis means that even a slight change in the conditions of such a system can have a pronounced
eﬀect on the system state.
How diﬀerent phase separating proteins are aﬀected by changes in conditions also varies, which
makes general modelling of LLPS very diﬃcult. Some proteins phase separate at low temperatures,
while others phase separate at high temperatures, for example. [7]
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 3: LLPS binodal. Along a horizontal line of constant temperature, the concentration of
the separated phases will be the same, with the volume fraction of the phases varying depending
on the starting concentration. Beyond the middle of the binodal in starting concentration, the
dense phase will start to dominate the solution.
Te mechanical properties of LLPS system can vary signiﬁcantly. Te dense liquid droplets can vary
from being liquid-like, to being gel-like, to even solid structures. Tis will depend on the protein
structure and on the conditions of phase separation. In the context of lubrication, the viscoelastic
properties of protein solutions is highly dependent on the protein concentration [8]. By inducing
phase separation in a lubricating LLPS protein layer, the viscosity of the solution will change. By
changing the solution conditions, the viscosity of LLPS dense droplets has been shown to be highly
tunable [4]
A phase diagram for LLPS can be constructed by systematically varying diﬀerent factors such as
temperature and salt concentration, and through microscopy, one can observe the appearance of
dense protein droplets. Phase diagrams for diﬀerent LLPS proteins will therefore vary in appearance,
dependent on the mechanism of phase separation. Te proteins that were used in the experiment
can be described by a binodal line separating the mixed and demixed phases, with droplets forming
at a lower critical solution temperature (LCST).
By going deeper into the binodal, the demixed phase separated solution can go from being composed
of spherical droplets into spinodal decomposition, where the system spontaneously demixes in a
manner that is fundamentally diﬀerent to the growth of droplets [5]. When forming droplets, there is
an energy barrier that must be overcome. In the region immediately before the droplet formation, the
system exists in a meta-stable state where the droplet formation is thermodynamically favourable,
6
==PAGE:11==
but do not form due to the energy barrier. When entering the spinodal region, the energy barrier to
form droplets goes to 0, and the 1-phase system becomes thermodynamically unstable and demixes
rapidly without nucleation.
Figure 4: LLPS binodal indicating the point of phase separation at various temperatures and
concentrations, given constant pH, etc. (1) Above the binodal, the solution will exist in a sin-
gle phase . Te phase separation is split into a (2) binodal, where dense protein droplets are
suspended in dilute protein solution, and a (3) spinodal, where the solution spontaneously de-
mixes via spinodal decomposition.
Te total amount of protein in the system is preserved during phase separation, which means that
by knowing the concentrations of the phases, the volume fractions fL and fD of each of the phases
can be calculated. Tis is done with the lever rule:
fD = c – cL
cD – cL
⇐⇒fL = cD – c
cD – cL
(2)
Where c is the starting concentration cD is the dense phase concentration, and cL is the light phase
concentration.
Research into phase separating proteins has shown that phase separation is important to both the
formation of membraneless organelles in cells, as well as being linked to the research of several
diseases related to aggregation of proteins, such as ALS and other neurological diseases. [9] Tere
is thus a great desire for beter understanding of LLPS behaviour.
7
==PAGE:12==
1.6
Wetting
Te concept of weting ability is an important parameter in the context of creating a lubricating
layer between surfaces, especially in the context of LLPS, as the multiple solution phases makes the
weting non-trivial.
Young equation’s can be used to calculate the shape of a droplet on a solid surface while surrounded
by a gas [10]:
γSG = γSL + γLG · cos(Θ)
(3)
Which relates the 3 surface tensions, γ, between the solid, liquid and gas interfaces, with the droplet
angle to the surface Θ (where 0° is perfect weting and 180 is a perfectly spherical, non weting
droplet).
Figure 5: Diﬀerent degrees of droplet weting. Te higher the contact angle, the lower the
weting.
Tis relation extends to solid/liquid/liquid systems while the liquids are immiscible, as there is no
inherent diﬀerence between the liquid interfacing with the gas, compared to the liquid interfacing
with another liquid in this context. In phase separated protein solutions the 2 phases are by deﬁnition
immiscible. From Young’s equation, it can in theory by predicted how the dense phase is going to
coat a surface in a phase separated system. If the contact angle is very high for the dense droplets
on the surface, the weting of the surface will be low, thus not giving a proper lubricating layer of
protein on the surface.
1.7
Qartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D)
Qartz crystal microbalance (QCM) is an experimental method that measures the resonance fre-
quency of a quartz crystal [11] [12] [13].
Qartz crystals show piezoelectric properties, which means that they atain an electric potential with
mechanical stress. Te inverse piezoelectric eﬀect is when a piezoelectric material will mechanically
deform as a response to an electric ﬁeld. A quartz crystal can be manipulated to resonate at a very
ﬁnely tuned frequency this way. Te quartz crystal for QCM is an AT cut crystal, which will result in
shear deformation of the crystal. By changing the mass of the crystal, the system properties change
with it, which means that the resonance frequency changes. Te mass of the resonating system will
change as material is deposited on the crystal surface.
8
==PAGE:13==
Tis is the fundamental working mechanism of a QCM. By continuously measuring the frequency
change, the change in mass that is adhered to the system can be measured. A QCM can allow one
to pump a liquid onto a quartz sensor to measure the development of a surface ﬁlm on the crystal.
Qartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D) also measures the energy dissi-
pation of the quartz crystal system. Tis can be thought of as a damping factor of the oscillating
system. Te inclusion of dissipation monitoring allows for the measurement of mechanical prop-
erties that are not measurable in a simple QCM, such as the viscoelastic properties of the adhered
material.
As a result of QCM being an acoustic method that measures resonances, multiple resonance fre-
quencies will exist. Tese are known as harmonics. Te ﬁrst harmonic will be determined by the
material properties of the crystal, and the resulting overtones will be integer multiples of the fun-
damental. In QCM, only odd harmonics are able to be created, as the deformation is created by an
electric ﬁeld between the electrodes. Tis means that the 1st, 3rd, 5th etc. harmonic frequencies can
be monitored in the QCM, as well as the energy dissipation at each harmonic.
Figure 6: Principle of QCM. Electrodes sit on top of the quartz crystal, and induce a shear defor-
mation via the piezoelectric eﬀect. Te formation of a weting layer will change the parameters
of the system and change the resonant frequency of the system. Proportions of elements are
greatly exaggerated.
Te simplest way to model the adhesion to the surface is through the use of the Saurbrey equation,
which is used to calculate the adhered mass of thin ﬁlms:
δm = –Cδf
n
(4)
Where the change of mass, m is related to the mass sensitivity constant, C, the change in frequency
f, and the harmonic number n. Te mass sensitivity constant is a material factor of the quartz crystal,
which will depend on the active surface area of the crystal, its shear modulus, and its density.
One of the main uses of measuring overtones of the frequency signal in the QCM is to validate
whether the Saurbrey equation applies to the measured system. For systems where the Saurbrey
equation applies, each of the frequency signals should be the same with a change of adhered mass
when adjusted for the harmonic number. If the ﬁlm is not rigid, it will result in the overtones having
diﬀerent values, as well as there being a signiﬁcant dissipation. In that case other viscoelastic models
are needed to analyse the system. Te diﬀerent measured overtones are also used for viscoelastic
9
==PAGE:14==
modelling as it gives more parameters that are necessary for modelling.
In this project QCM was used as a method for LLPS characterisation as it displayed several interest-
ing characterisation opportunities for probing the physical properties of LLPS condensates. Several
diﬀerent methods for measuring the physical properties of LLPS have previously been demonstrated.
Methods such as AFM and micro-rheology using beads embedded in dense phase droplets have been
used [4]. For measuring surface tension and surface weting of condensates, measuring surface con-
tact angles of droplet has been demonstrated. [14] Tese methods focus on the properties of singular
droplets, while QCM could possibly be used to characterise whole systems.
2
Methods
2.1
Expression and puriﬁcation of hydrophobin construct
2.1.1
Protein transformation and expression
A primary project goal was to design fusion proteins with the body of a intrinsically disordered
protein (IDP) capable of LLPS, and the tail able to bind to a surface.
Recombinant protein production is a method for the creation of a protein that involves the use of a
living organism to produce the protein.
Ddx4 N1 is an IDP that has been shown to be capable of phase separation.
DewA is a hydrophobin protein. Tese proteins are known for their ability to form hydrophobic
coatings on surfaces. A subclass of these hydrophobins, such as DewA, are known to form ordered
monolayers called rodlet layers by the means of self-assembly, and these layers are very stable. [15]
Te full structure of the plasmids that were bought for the project were:
Ub TEV DDx DewA
Ub TEV DewA DDx
Ub TEV DewA
Where Ub is ubiquitin and TEV is a tobacco etch virus recognition site. All of these plasmids were
N-terminus extended with a His-Tag which was used for puriﬁcation by reverse IMAC. TEV allows
for the cleavage of the protein post refolding.
Tese plasmids were transformed into competent host cells for expression of the protein. E.coli cells
were chosen for the protein production, as they are easy to work with, and strains of E.coli have
been engineered for protein production, as well as being very well understood systems which make
them the ideal candidate for producing new proteins [16] [17].
Plasmids for transformation were bought from GenScript, and were transformed into competent
E.coli De3 bl21 and E.coli De3 DH5α cells. Tis was done by adding 2 µl of plasmid into thawed
tubes of E.coli cells of either 100 µl (bl21) or 25 µl (DH5α), engineered for resistance to kanamycin
antibiotic resistance. Tis was lef 10 minutes on ice, then 4x cell volume of Lb broth medium was
added to the cell culture. Tis was then centrifuged for 1 hour. Te cultures were spread onto Lb agar
10
==PAGE:15==
plates containing 50 µg/ml of kanamycin antibiotic for killing unwanted contaminant organisms, and
lef to incubate overnight at 37 °C.
Afer incubating, one colony of grown culture was added to 10 ml of lb broth, which was again set to
incubate under centrifugation overnight at 180 RPM, 37 °C. Only the bl21 strain cultures were used
for protein expression, while the DH5alpha strain was saved for potential later use.
Te next day, the 10 ml culture was added to 1 L broth, containing 50 µg/ml kanamycin, again to kill
of any unwanted organisms. Te 1L culture was incubated at 160 RPM 37 °C until it had reached an
optical density (OD) at 600 nm of between 0.6 and 0.8. Afer the desired OD was reached, 0.5 mM
IPTG was added to the culture to induce the expression of protein.
Te cultures were harvested the next day through centrifugation at 7000 g, 4C, 20 minutes. At this
point the supernatant could be removed and the cell pellet could be scooped out and frozen for
protein puriﬁcation at a later point.
From the cell pellet, the next step in the process is protein puriﬁcation, which is the step of extracting
and isolating the protein from all other elements in the cell, including other proteins.
2.1.2
Protein purication attempt 1 - IMAC protocol
Te ﬁrst protein that was chosen to be puriﬁed was the isolated DewA hydrophobin construct,
without the Ddx4 N1 construct atached. If the hydrophobin construct could be successfully pu-
riﬁed in acceptable quantities, the next step would be to test the protein’s ability to form ordered
rodlet monolayers. Tis would serve as the basis for the forming the weting layers of the combined
hydrophobin-IDP construct.
Te method used for puriﬁcation revolved around the use of reverse Immobilised Metal Ion Chro-
matography (reverse IMAC), through the use of the atached His-tag to the protein structure. Te
His-tag is an amino acid motif, that consists of several histidine amino acids in sequence. Under
certain conditions, the His-tag has a high aﬃnity for certain metal ions. By binding the protein
containing the His-tag, it could be removed from the protein pellet solution.
Two slightly diﬀerent protocols were used for the puriﬁcation of the construct. Te diﬀerence was
in the refolding buﬀer solution, where two diﬀerent solutions were tried for optimal yields.
Te buﬀer solutions used for the puriﬁcation were:
Guanidine denaturation buﬀer: 6 M guanidine, 20 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium dihydrogen phosphate
4.8 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 8.0.
Wash buﬀer: 8M urea, 20mM Tris, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 4.8 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 6.5.
Elution buﬀer: 8 M urea, 20 mM Tris, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 4.8 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 4.0.
Acetate refolding buﬀer: 50 mM sodium acetate, 5 mM reduced glutathione (GSH), 0.5–1 mM oxi-
dised glutathione (GSSG), pH 4.2
11
==PAGE:16==
MES/Tris refolding buﬀer: 10 mM MES, 10 mM Tris, 5 GSH, 0.5–1 mM GSSG, pH 6.5–8.0.
Cleavage buﬀer: 50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, pH 8.0, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA.
Puriﬁcation buﬀer: 50 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, pH 8.0.
Buﬀers were made by dissolving weighed elements into milliQ ultra-pure water, then the pH was ad-
justed with either HCl or NaOH, and ﬁnally the buﬀers were ﬁltered before use. Beta-mercaptoethanol,
DTT and EDTA were added immediately before use.
At each step in the process, a small amount of solution is removed for analysis to ensure the presence
of the protein and the eﬀect of each step.
Te bacterial pellet from 1l of culture was dissolved and stirred in 30 ml denaturation buﬀer. Ten
the dissolved solution was centrifuged for 45 min at 30000 g to remove insoluble material, and the
supernatant was transferred to a new tube.
Te denaturation buﬀer will break the cell wall through lysis, thus giving access to the cell interior.
Clean Ni-NTA agarose beads were prepared in a column. 2.5 ml of beads were used for a pellet from
1 L of culture. Te beads were washed with ultra-pure water, to remove the storage solution, and
then equilibrated with 3 column volumes of denaturation buﬀer.
Te beads were then incubated for approx. 45 minutes with the supernatant from the cell culture
under gentle agitation.
Te solution containing the beads was washed with 2.5 column volumes of wash buﬀer. Tis process
was repeated 3 times. As the protein should now be bound to the Ni-NTA agarose, this step will
then remove any unbound protein from the solution.
Te protein construct was then eluted from the beads by running 1 column volume of elution buﬀer
through the column 8 times. Each fraction is sampled for analysis. By the elution buﬀer having a
lower pH than the wash buﬀer, the protein is removed. Te His-tag on the protein has a much higher
binding aﬃnity to the beads at around 8 pH, and will lose its binding capability when exposed to
the elution buﬀer.
Te fractions are stored at 4 °C until the next step is started the subsequent day.
Te diﬀerent fractions of the process were analysed by SDS-page gel electrophoresis. Te proteins
in the fractions are stained by coomassie blue. In the gel, the diﬀerent proteins in the solutions
are separated by size where they can be compared to a Mark-12 protein standard. Te sizes of the
proteins to be puriﬁed are known from the protein sequence. Afer identifying that the correct
fractions contained bands in the size of the protein, these fractions were further analysed using
Maldi-TOF mass spectrometry, which measures the masses of the samples to a much more accurate
degree than SDS-page to conﬁrm the speciﬁc protein in the sample.
As the cell has now been denatured and most other proteins have been removed from the solution,
the protein can be refolded. Te eluted fractions were ﬁrst pooled together. As refolding was at-
tempted using 2 diﬀerent refolding buﬀers, the solution was split equally between the 2 protocols.
Te protein solution is then dialysed in dialysis tubing against the respective buﬀer. For solution
12
==PAGE:17==
from 1 L of culture ( approx. 25 ml), 1 L of refolding buﬀer is needed. Te dialysis was done in 2
steps, where it was ﬁrst dialysed for 8 h against half of the buﬀer, and then the tubing is moved to
fresh buﬀer to be dialysed for another 12-18 h. Te solution was stirred continuously on a magnetic
stirrer.
Afer the refolding was ﬁnished, the cleavage and removal of the His-tag can be started. Because of
the inclusion of the TEV in the protein construct, the His-tag can be removed using a TEV-protease.
Te dialysis tubing containing the protein solution was transferred into 1L of cleavage buﬀer, and
dialysed for 30 minutes. Te TEV-protease was then added to the tubing, dialysing for another 6
hours. Fractions of solution before and afer cleavage were kept for analysis.
300 mM NaCl and 10 mM imidazole were added to the solution, and it was then again added to a col-
umn containing cleaned Ni-NTA agarose beads, that have been equilibrated with 3 column volumes
of puriﬁcation buﬀer. Te bead are again incubated with the protein solution for 30 minutes under
gentle agitation. As the His-tag has now been cleaved from the solution, it can be separated from
the hydrophobin by binding it to the beads via IMAC. Te ﬂowthrough of unbound hydrophobin
was then collected. Te beads were cleaned with puriﬁcation buﬀer twice at 1 column volume to
remove the His-tag, collecting samples of each runthrough for analysis. Finally the column was
washed with elution buﬀer 7 times and stored in a 20% ethanol solution.
Te solution was concentrated in a centrifugal concentrator with a centrifugal ﬁlter.
2.1.3
Puriﬁcation attempt 1 - HPLC protocol
Two diﬀerent chromatography methods were used in isolating the protein from other elements post
IMAC protocol. Te ﬁrst method at this step that was atempted was reverse phase HPLC (high-
performance liquid chromatography). HPLC is a method which is used for separating components
in a solvent by their polarity. In a reverse phase system, hydrophilic materials pass through the
system ﬁrst.
Since the hydrophobin is so inherently hydrophobic, it was expected to pass through the system at
a very late stage. Initially, a full runthrough of the ﬁrst volume fraction to be puriﬁed was done, to
be sure that a full spectrum of peaks was collected for analysis of when the hydrophobin would pass
through the system. All of the peaks were collected for another SDS-page for both of the refolding
methods. Te collected peaks were vacuum concentrated to remove the HPLC solvent solution.
As the hydrophobin protein doesn’t contain any tryptophan or tyrosine, the normal protein concen-
tration assay of using photospectrometry at 280 nm could not be used, and instead a Bradford assay
[18] was performed. Tese amino acids have a high absorbance at this wavelength, and without
them present this method is not appropriate for protein concentration assays of the hydrophobin.
Te Bradford assay consists of using an absorbance shif of the Coommassie brilliant blue g250
dye. Te presence of protein forms a dye-protein complex that changes the maximum absorbance
wavelength to 595 nm, which means that by using spectrophotometry at that wavelength, the con-
centration of protein can be found. To do the Bradford assay, a standard curve of protein absorption
was made using bovine serum albumin (BSA). Te standard curve was made by dissolving dried BSA
to concentrations of 10-100 µg/l. In this range, the absorption can be modelled as linear, and from
13
==PAGE:18==
this linear regression the protein concentration can be determined.
Dried BSA from Sigma-Aldrich was weighed and dissolved in ultra-pure water, to the maximum
required concentration, and then diluted to each speciﬁcation.
2.1.4
Protein purication attempt 2 - SEC protocol
Another atempt at expression and puriﬁcation of the hydrophobin construct was made. Te results
from the previous atempt indicated the most promising results by using the MES/TRIS refolding
buﬀer method, which was repeated. Instead of using HPLC for the ﬁnal puriﬁcation step, Size Ex-
clusion Chromatography (SEC) was atempted instead.
Puriﬁcation was done in 300 mM ammonium acetate. Afer the diﬀerent fractions of the SEC had
been obtained, the solutions were freeze dried to remove the buﬀer. Terefore a buﬀer was chosen
that would evaporate under freeze drying.
Te full run-through of the SEC was recorded with all the peaks being collected for analysis. As the
hydrophobin is a small protein in size, it is expected to exit the system late.
2.2
Turbidity measurements
As droplets form in LLPS systems, the two-phase nature of the system means that the droplets can
scater light, making the solution turbid/hazy. Using turbidity measurements as a method for veri-
fying that a solution has phase separated is relatively well described in the literature, but there are
inherent problems with using turbidity measurements as a primary characterising method for phase
separation that are limiting its use [5]. Te turbidity of a solution is not only aﬀected by the presence
of protein droplets, but also by other microstructures such as protein aggregates, protein crystals, or
any number of impurities that would have entered the system. Tis means that turbidity measure-
ments have been mostly limited to measuring the onset of phase separation, which is marked by a
sudden spike in turbidity. Te actual values of scatering in the system have been largely ignored,
as it is not really possible to understand the system state from only a turbidity measurement.
However, as the LLPS system is reversible, the scatering eﬀects that are not related to the phase
separation can be excluded by comparing the scatering signal of a phase separated solution to a non
phase separated solution. By cycling the temperature of a sample repeatedly, the turbidity signal as
a result of the formation of droplets can be measured. Te repeated cycling results in being able to
measure the reversibility of the droplets that are formed, which helps indicate whether the turbidity
is a results of droplets or if something else has formed.
Te turbidity was measured by static light scatering (SLS), using a NanoTemper Prometheus NT.48,
which can measure the back-scatering of the solution in capillaries.
SLS measures the returning signal of measurement laser to assess the amount of light that is deﬂected
by particles in the solution. Te size resolution of 12.5 nm for the SLS in the Prometheus requires that
the particles are of a signiﬁcant size, and will thus not measure very small structures in the solution.
Lysozyme is used as the model system due to the large volume fraction of droplets that form in
highly concentrated lysozyme LLPS solutions. Tis makes the scatering larger for phase separated
14
==PAGE:19==
lysozyme than many other proteins. Lysozyme stock was bought freeze dried from MP medicals.
Solutions of lysozyme were made from weighing lysozyme, and then dissolving lysozyme in 50 mM
HCl. Na-Acetate/Acetic acid buﬀer was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 100 mM, for maintaining
a constant pH of 4.5, which is important for LLPS. With so many parameters that impact LLPS,
the pH was kept constant at 4.5 throughout all experiments. Freeze dried protein still contains a
signiﬁcant amount of water, so the protein stock concentration was veriﬁed on a dilution of 1/200
with spectrophotometry using a Nanodrop lite, with an extinction coeﬃcient for lysozyme of 2.64.
Te protein concentration can be found using Lambert-Beers law:
A = ε · l · C
(5)
Where A is the measured absorption, l is the absorption path length, ε is the extinction coeﬃcient,
and C is the concentration. Te path length of the Nanodrop is 1 cm.
Pipeting of lysozyme solutions was either done by hand using a micropipete, or for the larger mea-
surement series using an Opentron pipeting robot. To characterise the reversibility of the system
at various conditions, a protein concentration series was made for lysozyme with protein concen-
tration from 20-150 mg/ml, containing 7% salt. NaCl was the salt used for all lysozyme samples to
induce phase separation. Te Nanotemper Prometheus is ideal for the turbidity measurements, as
it allowed for a high throughput of 48 channels in parallel measuring on capillaries of approx. 10
µl per sample. However, even though the Prometheus has temperature cycling capabilities, it is pri-
marily made for protein stability assays, and cannot go below 15 °C. Tis limits the LLPS solutions
that are possible to measure with lysozyme, as lysozyme phase separates below 15 °C under many
conditions [19]. Terefore, it is not possible to do large screens for conditions lower than approx.
7% salt, if a full concentration range is wanted.
Te solutions were mixed while heated when necessary out of concern of phase separation at room
temperature. Tere is a concern with extracting volumes of already phase separated solutions, espe-
cially when extraction small volumes of liquid, as the protein concentration of the extracted volume
is going to be uncertain. Te solution is therefore loaded while mixed and can then phase separate
freely within the capillary.
Te solutions were loaded into standard Nanotemper Prometheus compatible capillaries. Te capil-
laries can be loaded manually by dipping them in the solution, through the capillary eﬀect.
Te capillaries were sealed with sealant paste to eliminate evaporation issues, and then loaded into
the NanoDSF which is pre-heated to 60 C. Some early experiments started at 40 °C. Te temperature
was cycled repeatedly from 60 °C to 15 °C. None of the solutions that were worked on were expected
to be in a phase separated condition anywhere near 60 °C.
Te repeated temperature cycling was done at a rapid temperature change of approx 6 °C per minute.
To examine how gradual the turbidity change with temperature was, another experiment was con-
ducted with a much slower temperature ramp of 1 °C/min, from 15-60 °C dissolving the droplets,
and a subsequent cooldown of the solution to compare the signals.
15
==PAGE:20==
2.2.1
Hygroscopic LLPS solutions
Te addition of the hygroscopics glycerol and PEG to lysozyme solutions were also tested.
A diluted glycerol and PEG3000 stock was made for mixing. Te glycerol stock was made to 15 v/v%
concentration, and the PEG stock was made to 15 w/v% concentration from freeze dried PEG3000.
In general the shif in cloud point will be within a few degrees for reasonable additions of hygro-
scopic, in the range of a 1-5 % added, therefore it should still be possible to phase separate a solution
containing hygroscopics.
Te turbidity measurement of hygroscopic containing lysozyme solutions were measured under cy-
cling temperatures in the Prometheus as with the basic lysozyme solutions. PEG3000 and glycerol
were added to diﬀerent concentration series of lysozyme, containing between 1-5% of each of the
hygroscopics. Addition of crowding elements have been shown to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the nucleation
rate of lysozyme crystals [20]. Because of the increased concern of irreversible gelation and aggrega-
tion of protein with the addition of crowders, the protein concentration and salt concentration were
aimed to be kept lower than pure protein assays to minimise these eﬀects, and therefore limited to
70 mg/ml. Te salt concentration was kept at either 5% or 7% salt. With the concern of aggregation,
the salt was intended to be kept at a minimum viable in the Prometheus, but there were concerns of
no phase separation occurring at 5%, so some experiments were done at 7% salt.
2.3
Pipetting robot automation
For increasing the speed and reproducibility of large protein solution series, time was spend to
develop a script for the Opentrons OT-2 liquid handler. Te Opentrons automatic pipeting system
requires programming the robot via the Opentrons API in python. Tis allows for a customisable
setup for pipeting.
A general script for the preparation of lysozyme solutions was writen and optimised for the use in
preparing a sample series for use in the Prometheus nanoDSF containing up to 48 samples (Appendix
B).
Te script was constructed so that there was the possibility of reusing tips when appropriate. Tis
would both save on materials, as well as signiﬁcantly lowering the pipeting time, as the most time
consuming part of the automation was the selection of tips and the ejection of used tips. Te script
was designed to automatically exchange tip size when needed, and follow a pipeting order that used
the least amount of tips.
Several elements were considered in script design when working with LLPS solutions, that at times
have non-trivial changes in material properties, and undergoes extreme changes in behaviour when
exposed to slightly changed environmental changes:
Since the robot allows for the use of several diﬀerent containers of stock solution, as well as several
diﬀerent containers for the mixed solution, optimisation of the protocol was needed. A lysozyme
series containing various concentrations of protein and added hygroscopic (PEG3000 and glycerol),
and a combination of the these was atempted. Te solutions were mixed in an Opentrons compatible
96 well plate with a ﬂat botom. Te script was set up so that it was possible to set the well plate
16
==PAGE:21==
on a heating element. When there was a concern of phase separation at room temperature ruining
the sample mixing, the plate was heated to either 40 or 50 C dependent on the solution. If the
solutions are not properly mixed, it could pose a problem regarding aggregation because of the local
environment at the ejection site having a higher protein concentration, shifing the local solution
conditions in an undesirable manner.
When using a robot for pipeting, it is important to correctly set the depth at which the pipeting
tip penetrates the solution to be aspirated. Not going deep enough into the solution can lead to
volume errors, and going too deep into the solution can lead to droplets sticking to the side of the
tip, which will increase the actual transferred volume. Mixed solutions volumes were manually
tested for accuracy using a micropipete. Te stock solutions were pipeted from a 2 ml eppendorf
tube, as to be able to have a standardised height of the stock for pipeting at a given starting volume.
Tis pipeting height was then adjusted automatically throughout the pipeting as the volume of
stock decreased.
Te robot was set up as to be able to mix the solutions once any of the elements had been added
by the addition of a mixing parameter in the component class. Te robot pipetes and aspirates the
solutions a number of times to mix it.
Finally, one must consider the viscosities of the solutions that are being mixed. Tis project dealt
with potentially extremely viscous solutions, such as glycerol and high concentration lysozyme
stocks. If phase separated, the solutions could also have a spontaneous change in viscosity hindering
proper pipeting. While glycerol and PEG solutions could be diluted prior to pipeting, there is a limit
to how much each diﬀerent added solution could be diluted from a practical standpoint. As there
needed to both be added NaCl in aqueous solution, as well as buﬀer, and working with potentially
very large protein concentrations, would lead to there being a maximum values that could be added
of each element and a maximum to the dilution of the stocks.
2.4
Dense phase harvesting
One concern regarding weting of surfaces with protein dense phase was if it was at all possible
to have protein dense phase wet a surface while in dilute phase. Whether this is possible or not
will depend on the surface tensions and interfaces between the diﬀerent components in a phase
separated solution and the surface, as previously described by Young’s equation.
If the dense phase of a given LLPS solution could be macroscopically ’split’ from its dilute phase,
that would eliminate the need for weting a surface with dense phase while in solution. One could
instead simply pre-separate the 2 phases and then coat the surface directly with the dense phase.
Tis would of course eliminate the phase switching mechanism as was conceptualised but served as
an alternative LLPS coating method.
For lysozyme, the binodals at several diﬀerent solution conditions are extensively described [19]. It
was desirable in this project to explore the feasibility of ’harvesting’ the dense phase of a lysozyme
solution, and to what degree this was comparable to the theoretical values of the binodal, for the
concentrations of the phases as well as the volume fractions that were able to be harvested.
A common approach to measuring the concentrations of a given separated system revolves around
17
==PAGE:22==
inducing phase separation in a solution, where the solution is centrifuged to transfer the dense
droplets to the botom of the container. Te dilute phase concentration of the solution can then
be measured [21]. Reports of using this centrifugation method for actually harvesting the dense
phase is much more limited. Te dense phase droplets should be able to fuse into 1 large droplet
of dense phase in theory, thus spliting the system into 2 with a boundary in between them if split
under the right conditions. However, the concept is similar, and there have been previous atempts
to harvest dense phase lysozyme, with some reported success [22]. Tis reported method also used
centrifugation as basis of the spliting.
Most LLPS systems do not lend themselves well to easily estimating the volume fractions of a phase
separated system by this harvesting concept. Tis is simply because of the required amounts of pro-
tein needed to get a signiﬁcant volume of dense phase to get any macroscopic separation. However,
this is another advantage of lysozyme phase separating at high concentrations. Te volume frac-
tion of LLPS lysozyme will be high. Tis means that lysozyme lends itself very well for harvesting
atempts.
Te only impact of the starting protein concentration at a given temperature, pH etc., will be on
the volume fraction of the separated phases, and will not impact the concentration of the phases.
So to have a reasonable volume of dense phase protein to be classiﬁed as ’harvestable’, the starting
protein concentration will have to be high.
Diﬀerent salt concentrations were used for harvesting experiments, as well as the addition of PEG
to some solution. Te starting protein concentration was 100 mg/ml for all samples. Te harvesting
was atempted using both 3% and 7% NaCl. Tere were concerns of aggregation in the case of high
salt contents, and concerns of droplet re-dissolving in the case of the solution having a cloud point
much below room temperature, so both cases were tried. PEG was added in some atempts to harvest
the solution, to compare the responses. If it was possible to have a beter yield with PEG added, it
could minimise the risk of subsequent drying of the same.
Te centrifugation speed that has been reported in literature for spliting the phases varies. Tere
has been reported successful spliting of the phases using both slow centrifugation for extended time
(2000-4000 rpm, 2-3h), and at much larger speeds for shorter times [4] [21]. Several centrifugation
speeds were atempted.
Lysozyme solutions were prepared in the same manner as for the turbidity experiments. For solu-
tions that phase separated at or above room above room temperature, they were mixed in a heating
element to ensure even mixing in the system prior to induced phase separation.
Te solutions were then quenched in an Eppendorf centrifuge with cooling capabilities while being
centrifuged. Te temperature at which the solutions are quenched to maters greatly, as it will aﬀect
the concentration of the phases.
Solution concentrations post centrifugation were measured using spectrophotometry, afer being be-
ing diluted 200 times in ultrapure water. Volume fractions were estimated manually by micropipete.
18
==PAGE:23==
2.5
Qartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring
QCM experiments were conducted for both lysozyme and Ddx4 N1. Te initial exploratory experi-
ments were done using lysozyme.
A temperature change was made to induce phase separation in the QCM, as is the easiest and most
reliable to change for the system, and was chosen for all QCM experiments. Tis allowed for the
solution parameters in the sensor chamber to be constant in the system. Tis means that it was not
necessary to have a ﬂow through the system at any point afer the initial ﬁlling of the chamber.
A Qsense Pro QCM-D was used for all QCM experiments.
Te QCM chips were initially cleaned in a plasma cleaner, and with ethanol and milliQ water prior
to each use. Te QCM was ﬁrst washed and equilibrated with buﬀer solution until it had reached an
acceptable baseline, with a minimal shif in frequency and dissipation over time. Ten the lysozyme
sample was loaded by rinsing the chamber with 200 µl ( 10 chamber volumes of solution), and again
equilibrated to obtain a steady baseline value.
For the ﬁrst experiments, the temperature was dropped rapidly below the cloud point, and then
rapidly back to the starting temperature, however this proved problematic during analysis, and a
more gradual ramp was used instead. Te system was cooled down by steps of 1 °C, monitoring
that the frequency shif was levelling out at each step, until the system had reached a temperature
below the cloud point. Ten the system was observed for much longer once phase separation had
occurred to see the system response, to allow for droplet formation, and for droplets to accumulate
on the QCM surface. Afer the minimal temperature had been reached, the temperature was again
increased back to the starting temperature, to examine the temperature dependent reversibility of
the system. Tis was also done in increments to observe the reverse response.
Initial experiments were conducted on 2 diﬀerent kind of Biolin Scientiﬁc Qsense sensors: A gold
coated chip and a silicon dioxide coated chip. Subsequent experiments were conducted on a mix of
used and new gold coated chips.
For each experiment, both a solution with 0% salt and a solution containing only buﬀer were tested
concurrently in the QCM as control samples. Neither of these solutions were expected to phase
separate.
Te initial experiments used a lysozyme solution with 7% salt, 100 mg/ml protein, which meant that
the were intended to phase separate at room temperature. Tis was done to have results that would
be comparable to those from the nanoDSF measurements. However, given the QCM setup that was
available, it became apparent that that it would be too cumbersome to work with a solution that
was phase separated at room temperature, as there was no way of heating the solution in the QCM
prior to injection onto the chip.
A solution of 40 mg/ml lysozyme, 7% salt was then chosen instead. Tis solution was expected to
phase separate at around 18 °C.
Te salt concentration was eventually lowered to 5%, because of concerns of starting temperatures
being too close to the cloud point using a 7% salt solution.
Te Ddx4 experiments were similar in concept as those using lysozyme, to get an idea of how a
temperature dependent QCM signal of an LLPS system with lower concentration would look like.
19
==PAGE:24==
Ddx4 has a much lower necessary protein concentration, and can phase separate at 50 µM under the
right conditions, at a temperature that can be reached in the QCM.
A 500 µM Ddx4, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM Tcep stock solution that had previously been puriﬁed by the
Protein Biophysics research group was diluted to 50 µM Ddx4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM Tcep solution in
a 20 mM Tris-HCl solution. NaCl inhibits phase separation of Ddx4, so a control solution containing
300 mM NaCl was also made. Te QCM experiment was run as previously, pre-equilibrating the
sensor with pure buﬀer, and then the chamber was ﬁlled with protein solution. Protein solution
was pumped through the system at 20 µl/min for 5 minutes. Ten the temperature was gradually
lowered. Te Ddx4 solution was chosen as to have an expected cloud point at around 16-17 °C, to
make sure that it would not phase separate at room temperature, as with lysozyme. Te temperature
was decreased from 22 °C to 10 °C gradually, and back to 22 °C.
2.6
Fluorescent microscopy
Due to the inherent challenges of analysing LLPS through turbidity measurements, and because of
the observations from the atempts at dense phase harvesting, harvested dense phase lysozyme solu-
tions were also atempted to be examined under brightﬁeld microscopy and ﬂuorescent microscopy.
Te starting concentrations for the solution for this microscopy were 100 mg/ml, 7% NaCl.
Microscopy was also done a normal concentration lysozyme LLPS solution. A lysozyme solution
containing 70 mg/ml, 7 % NaCl, 30 µM ﬂuroscein dye, was mixed and kept at above phase separating
temperature (approx. 25°C), and spread onto a microscopy slide. Here it was lef for a few minutes
to cool to room temperature, where it would phase separate. Ten it was measured under both
brightﬁeld and ﬂuorescence microscopy, where the signals could then be compared. An increase in
ﬂuorescence should then correspond to a higher protein concentration.
3
Results
3.1
Expression and puriﬁcation of hydrophobin construct
Te results of the atempted protein production of the DewA protein were mixed. Overall, the
protein was shown to be present throught the puriﬁcation steps, but the yields were low. Analysis
of the diﬀerent steps of the puriﬁcation process of the hydrophobin was done primarily by SDS-page
(see Appendix A for all puriﬁcation data). Runthrough elution fractions from the reverse-IMAC
showed that there was a large band of protein at the right size, with the size of the uncleaved DewA
construct being 22.83 kDa. Tis size should be close to the level of the 5th level on the protein
standard ladder.
Afer the two diﬀerent cleavage protocols, the fractions were again analysed. Tis showed that
post-cleavage, there was a signiﬁcantly larger band at a smaller size. Te size of the cleaved protein
should be 11.42 kDa. Tis showed initial good results for that the puriﬁcation protocol had worked,
and the cleaved solution was to be validated by mass spectrometry.
20
==PAGE:25==
MALDI-Tof mass spectrometry was done for solutions expected to contain the hydrophobin per
SDS-page.
Pre-HPLC, but post cleavage, mass spectrometries showed a large peak at 10.58 kDa, as well as 22.75
kDa. Te ﬁrst peak is signiﬁcantly smaller in size than the real size of the cleaved DewA, but as the
values from 2 diﬀerent samples are so similar between samples, they are likely to be the same protein.
Tere were issues with the calibration sample in this experiment, which lead to higher uncertainties
of the result for this run.
Te larger peak at 22.75 kDa indicates the uncleaved protein, and clearly shows that the acetate
refolding buﬀer protocol had not cleaved the protein as much as the MES/Tris protocol, which was
the main factor in deciding to only do the one protocol in the second puriﬁcation atempt.
Te DewA sized peak being smaller was a bit of a concern, as it would indicate some degree of
breakage of the protein or another error in the process, or it could be related to measurement errors.
Despite this, it was chosen that the puriﬁcation should continue.
Te HPLC proﬁle looked similar between the two samples, and the signiﬁcant sized peaks were sam-
pled for analysis by SDS-page. Tere was a deﬁnite overlap in signal between both solution, which
would indicate that the protein was present in the solution. Te SDS-page for the diﬀerent collected
peaks showed that there was a protein of the right size at the peaks with the same runthrough time
in the HPLC. Tese peaks were run through MALDI-TOF to conﬁrm this (Appendix A). Te mass
spectrometry showed that the protein was there, however the signal strength was very low. Te
peaks 131 for the acetate solution and 159 for the MES/Tris solution showed the presence of the
protein, however the values of the peaks were very small. Terefore, the amount of protein was to
be validated by Bradford assay.
Te Bradford assay of the ﬁnal HPLC puriﬁed fractions yielded a good BSA standard curve.
Te absorbance of the hydrophobin sample gave a value of 0,035 for the Acetate buﬀer 131 peak, and
0.048 for the MES/tris 159 peak. Tis gave a ﬁnal value of 1.89 and 2.59 µg/vial (at a sample volume
of 200 µl/run). Tis yielded a total amount of protein puriﬁed was approx. 27 µg.
Tis is an extremely low amount of protein. Te Bradford reagent used for the assay has a lower
limit to the concentration that can accurately be measured do to its concentration. Another standard
curve was made with protein concentrations in the range of 0.1-5 mg/ml, to both validate the method
used and to compare the results for the solutions using this curve. A linear regression of the extended
data points shows that the relation between the concentration and the optical density are still highly
linear, and is suitable for the lower concentrations measured.
Overall, the yield was deemed much to low to work with, and the puriﬁcation protocol needed
optimisation. It appeared that the problem was with HPLC, so a new atempt at puriﬁcation was
done using SEC.
For the second puriﬁcation atempt, there were a lot of issues with geting usable gels for the so-
lution. Gels were run for the post-cleavage fractions but did not show any bands that would seem
to correlate with the protein’s size (gel pictures not shown). Te SEC-puriﬁcation needed to begin
immediately afer cleavage and IMAC, meaning that there was no time to do MALDI-TOF analysis
beforehand, due to logistics with the machine. Te initial SEC run was to be used for analysis and
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 7: Bradford assay standard curve. Te optical density at 595 nm is highly linearly related
to the concentration of protein
veriﬁcation of the successful puriﬁcation.
Te results of the SEC puriﬁcations were unfortunately very lacking. Te ﬁrst analysis of the peaks
did not reveal any band that would reasonably correlate with the hydrophobin, and was thus not
suﬃcient in verifying the protein. Te puriﬁer was ﬁrst set to run through 1 column volume in 120
minutes, and the peaks were only collected up to this point, as all material that does not interact
with the column should have been ﬁltered through the system at this time. However, the system
actually showed a signiﬁcant peak afer the 120 minute run which was only discovered at the sec-
ond runthrough of the SEC. Tis might indicate that this was the location of the protein. Another
full peak collection with more of the solution was thus made, extending the collection until afer
the full runthrough time was actually up, and the new peaks were again analysed with SDS-page.
Unfortunately, this gel did not show any signiﬁcant bands at either.
However, since there was such a high peak in the SEC, the peaks were still freeze dried to atempt to
remove the solvent from the protein to do further analysis. Te solutions (Appendix A) were frozen
and subsequently freeze dried. However, the freeze drying was not successful in removing all of the
solvent, and there was still an amount of solvent present. Tis could be because of the peaks selected
for freeze drying exiting the SEC so late, possibly overlapping with other small solvents, that could
have interfered with the freeze drying process working completely, instead leaving a small amount
of concentrated liquid remaining.
As a result of the freeze drying being unsuccessful, the peaks containing the remaining solvent were
again frozen in the -80 °C freezer for another atempt later in the process, while other parts of the
project regarding work on model proteins were started. However, as this work proved to be more
extensive than immediately intended, there ended up being no more time to work further on the
hydrophobin construct. Te project was centred on the LLPS lubricant coating and it was estimated
22
==PAGE:27==
that there would be no point in only working further on the hydrophobin if the hydrophobin/IDP
construct could not also be worked on. Te peaks were thus not further worked on or analysed.
3.2
Pipetting robot automation
Te robot script was used primarily for making lysozyme solutions containing varying peg and/or
glycerol and protein concentrations. Te robot clearly was able to aspirate and eject all the diﬀerent
solutions. Some mixed solutions made by the robot using the custom script were manually veriﬁed
for their volume by pipeting from the well plate.
15 wt/v% PEG3000 and 15 v/v% glycerol stocks were used with no recognised issues due to viscosity.
Because of the issues regarding temperature limits in the Prometheus system, it was hard to gauge
whether many PEG and glycerol solutions had all been mixed properly, because of the convolution
of the limited data points for comparison and whether or not the robot worked correctly.
While heating of the well plate for mixed samples helps with reducing premature phase separation,
there will be a concern of strong heating of solutions that are in the process of mixing. Te mixing
process for a 48 sample script takes approx. 50 minutes with the current script setup, and by leaving
small amounts of water and buﬀer on a heating plate for this long will possibly lead to evaporation
concerns.
Afer the initial series, the use of the robot was limited, but it had been shown to work in principle
with a script setup for easy automation in the future. When used for a 48 solution series, the amount
of time saved mixing samples was very signiﬁcant.
3.3
Turbidity measurements
3.3.1
Lysozyme scattering experiments
Te backscatering experiments showed great promise in characterising the sudden change in scat-
tering due to LLPS related turbidity. Te signals showed to be be largely reversible under tem-
perature cycling, with a large and sudden shif in scatering at a small shif in temperature, which
indicates a phase separation at this temperature.
Some solutions reached the maximum measurable scatering of 500 mAu while phase separated,
however, all of the solutions were below the limit while the solution was mixed. Terefore there is
still data that can be interpreted from these solutions, such as the baseline change with cycles, as
well as the cloud point.
In a perfectly reversible LLPS system the turbidity should return to a baseline that doesn’t vary with
each cycle, however, there is a clear increase in baseline signal at 60 °C, which indicates that there
is some amount of irreversibility in the system, possibly as a result of a protein aggregation in the
system, or droplets that have solidiﬁed in an irreversible manner.
However, there is a clear correlation between the baseline level of turbidity and the protein concen-
tration. Te baseline is deﬁned as the scatering during the ﬁnal measurement point at the maximum
temperature. At this temperature, all droplets are most likely to be diﬀused.
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 8: Scatering data of concentration series of lysozyme solution as a result of LLPS driven
turbidity change. As the temperature is lowered, a sharp increase in turbidity can be seen. Te
derivative of the scatering can be used to analyse the cloud point.
Figure 9: Increase in baseline turbidity of lysozyme concentration series at 60 °C with repeated
temperature cycling across the cloud point. Te baseline scatering is strongly related to the
protein concentration.
24
==PAGE:29==
If the data is adjusted for the baseline level at the beginning of the experiment, the reversibility loss
of the signals are much closer between diﬀerent concentrations, with no obvious patern relating it
to the solution concentration.
Figure 10: Baseline turbidity increase with temperature cycling adjusted for starting scatering
values.
Traditionally, the cloud point of LLPS solutions has been quantiﬁed using microscopy, where the
condition of the solution are slowly changed, either by changing the temperature or adding addi-
tional solvents to the examined solution, at which point the mixture is manually looked at for the
formation of dense droplets. Turbidity measurements are widely regarded as a supplemental tool in
determining the cloud point of LLPS, by measuring the onset of scatering, to be used in conjunction
with microscopy.
A challenge in interpreting the turbidity data is the vague, and at times inconsistent, deﬁnition of
the cloud point in LLPS literature. As LLPS is a thermodynamic process, it is deﬁned as a single
point at which phase separation occurs, but the turbidity as a result of gradual droplet formation is
a more gradual process.
One method is using the inﬂection point of the scatering, during the droplet formation/cooldown
stage.
Te inﬂection point of a smooth curve is the point at which the curvature changes sign. By ploting
the ﬁrst derivative of the turbidity data, the inﬂection point can be visualised as the peak. Tis can
be used to plot the cloud point of the diﬀerent solutions [23].
Tere have been other deﬁnitions of the LLPS cloud point as a result of turbidity measurements.
Ofen the change in turbidity is so rapid, that it is simply estimated by a small change in temperature
25
==PAGE:30==
Figure 11: Interpretation of the scatering data. (1) Te baseline scatering is taken as the ﬁnal
value at the highest temperature. (2) Te cloud point is the maximum of the derivative. A 7%
salt lysozyme solution will have a higher cloud point than a 5% solution
Figure 12: Cloud point temperature of lysozyme solution at diﬀerent protein concentrations.
Te cloud is deﬁned as the inﬂection point of the turbidity of the solution under a downwards
temperature ramp for 7% salt solutions.
26
==PAGE:31==
performed in steps, at which the turbidity increases rapidly at a step, which is the deﬁned as a cloud
point [24] [25]. By deﬁning it as the inﬂection point, the phase separation is interpreted as the point
of the fastest growth of the droplet formation. Tis yields a cloud point temperature that is slightly
higher than by the formation of ﬁrst droplet.
As the repeated temperature cycling is shown to aﬀect the reversibility of the system, one should
examine if this will aﬀect the cloud point of the solution, as given by this deﬁnition. With the
irreversible change in the system, it would be reasonable to predict that the presence of nucleated
sites that have not dissolved would enhance further nucleation, making droplet formation easier.
Figure 13: Change of cloud point temperature of lysozyme solutions afer repeated temperature
cycling, by the inﬂection point of the turbidity. Afer 10 cycles, all cloud points stay within 1
degree.
However, it does not appear is if change in baseline aﬀects the cloud point signiﬁcantly. Te repeated
temperature cycling can be seen to have a very low impact on the cloud point temperature, which
remains nearly constant throughout 10 cycles, even for samples that experience a baseline scatering
increase of over 30%.
Tis means that using the turbidity measurements as a way of characterising the cloud point of the
solution looks to be consistent no mater the starting conditions of the solution, with regards to any
previous phase separation in the system. Tis minimises the concern for phase separation occurring
during handling and mixing of samples.
While the cloud point was consistent throughout cycling, the inﬂection point in the temperature
increase, and in the temperature decrease, were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. Te inter-cycle upwards
inﬂection point was however also consistent.
Because of the fast temperature ramp during the cycling of 6 °C/min, a much slower temperature
27
==PAGE:32==
ramp was made to examine how gradual the turbidity was, to see how it compares to the fast ramps,
and to beter compare the response for the temperature ramp upwards and downwards. If the tem-
perature ramp was so fast as to not allow enough time for droplet formation, it could possibly skew
the results.
Figure 14: Turbidity of phase separating lysozyme solution during slow temperature change.
Te turbidity of the solution changes gradually, and where the turbidity speed peaks at diﬀerent
temperatures depending on the direction of the temperature ramp. Te brieﬂy discontinuous
heating and cooling experiments are stitched together for ease of viewing.
Te resulting turbidity data shows that the turbidity is indeed very gradual. Interestingly, the cloud
point is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for the upwards and downwards temperature ramps in this case as
well. Te droplets dissolve at a higher temperature than where they form.
Te eﬀect is much stronger at lower concentrations than at higher concentrations, but even at very
high protein concentrations there is still a several degree diﬀerence.
With the cloud point temperature being so diﬀerent up vs. down, it is important to discuss how to
best deﬁne the cloud point. Almost all literature deﬁnes the cloud point by the temperature at the
formation of droplets, whether it be by turbidity, microscopy etc., therefore it would make litle sense
to redeﬁne this without good reason. However, that deﬁnition does not work adequately with the
data that has been shown here. One way to explain the diﬀerence in temperatures is by considering
the LLPS system as being a nucleated process with an energy barrier, and the mixed solution being
in a meta-stable state right before droplet formation. Te energy barrier to form the droplets will
be higher than for the dissolving of the same droplets. Te growth of droplets by the means of
nucleation is a deﬁning factor for LLPS in the binodal region, and this nucleation is directly linked
28
==PAGE:33==
Figure 15: Diﬀerence in cloud point temperature for lysozyme solutions for slow upwards and
downwards temperature ramps, as taken from the turbidity of the solution.
to the concept of metastability.
Considering this explanation for these results, it would make more sense to deﬁne the upwards ramp
as the ’true’ cloud point, and the downwards ramps temperature as a shif from this due to an energy
barrier.
Another interesting observation is the derivative of the turbidity having two peaks for the dissolving
of the droplets for all solutions. For determining the cloud point, the largest peak, which always
appeared at the lowest temperature, is chosen. Tis could be viewed as the droplets ﬁrst overcoming
the energy barrier to form, showing an initially high increase in turbidity, followed by a second spike
in growth later on.
3.3.2
Eﬀects of added hygroscopics on LLPS turbidity behaviour
Research into the eﬀect of hygroscopics to lysozyme and BSA LLPS solutions has previously been
reported [26] [20] [21]. Te eﬀect of adding these hygroscopics on the cloud point of the solution,
and whether it lowers it or raises it depends both on the concentration of added hygroscopic, the
protein solution and in the case of PEG also is strongly dependent on the molecular weight of the
PEG. Te eﬀect of the addition of hygroscopics such as glycerol and polyethylene glycol (PEG) on
LLPS protein solutions were examined in the Prometheus via turbidity measurements.
For measuring the eﬀect of adding hygroscopics to lysozyme solutions, experiments using the Prometheus
for cloud point and aggregation measurements were limited in scope because of the 15 °C lower
temperature limit. With the addition of the larger amount of crowders into the system the solution
risked having it’s cloud point shifed to below the measurable limit. Due to concern of aggregation
and gelation of protein, the protein concentration was kept between 40 and 70 mg/ml, while the salt
29
==PAGE:34==
concentration was kept at 5% for the initial experiments.
Glycerol and PEG levels were added both individually and in combination between 1-5%.
Due to the limiting factors of the experiment, many of the solutions, especially those containing
large amount of crowders, showed litle to no sign of reversibility under a temperature ramp. Tis
means that it was not possible to determine a cloud point for many of these solutions. Whether the
lack of reversible signal was do to non-reversible aggregation, or a cloud point under the measurable
limit was not apparent.
Figure 16: Addition of select hygroscopics to lysozyme solutions shows inability to phase sep-
arate, measured by the turbidity. Solutions with added PEG show an initially high scatering,
but becomes almost non-reversible afer a single cycle. Even in this case, the baseline scatering
increases with each cycle.
However, there were solutions that showed an initially large scatering during the ﬁrst cooling,
which was not repeating during the next cycle. Tis would indicate that there could be reversibility
concerns with the addition of hygroscopic to the solution. It could be a result of initially undissolved
material in the sample, but this was not seen in any samples that did not contain hygroscopics, as
can be seen in ﬁgure 11.
Some solutions showed a very small, but still distinct turbidity signal. Again ploting the scatering
baselines of the solutions afer each cycle, the scatering showed to be increasing in the same manner
as for fully phase separating solutions.
30
==PAGE:35==
Figure 17: Eﬀect of added glycerol and PEG3000 to lysozyme solutions on cloud point temper-
ature at 5% salt. Solutions mixed by pipeting robot. Only solutions that showed signiﬁcant
turbidity response with temperature change are ploted.
Figure 18: Some lysozyme solutions with added hygroscopic showed an initially high scater-
ing at low temperatures, indicating LLPS. However, this was not a reversible process and the
solution was not able to reform the droplets under temperature cycling.
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 19: Baseline scatering changes with temperature cycling for hygroscopic containing
lysozyme solutions. Even for solutions that show litle to no phase separation, there is still an
increase in the baseline scatering of the solution during temperature cycling.
3.4
Dense phase harvesting
Te results of harvesting dense phase of a lysozyme solution were mixed. Te solutions would
generally separate into two visibly distinct phases, with a clear liquid phase on top, and a much
more gel/solid like material at the botom, which was opaquely white. Te concentration of the top
phase was measured with a spectrophotometer, and the volume of the top phase was removed and
estimated using a micropipete.
Table HarvestTable shows results of the most successful atempts to harvest dense phase under
diﬀerent conditions, compared to theoretical values for the corresponding conditions from previous
binodal data under similar conditions[19] [20]. Not all solution and quenching conditions had data
available for comparison. Many more atempts were unsuccessful because of inability to measure
the dense phase, as it would ofen not liquefy under any treatment and was not able to be extracted,
possibly do to irreversible gelation because of extreme solution conditions.
cL(mg/ml)
cD(mg/ml)
VL(%)
VD(%)
Conditions
Expected cL(mg/ml)
Expected cD(mg/ml)
59
-
73
27
3% salt, 100 mg/ml, 3C, 40 min, 3000 rcf
50
420
48
221
77
23
3% salt, 100 mg/ml, 3C, 15 min, 16900 rcf
50
420
29
235
69
31
3% salt, 100 mg/ml, 3C, 3% PEG3000, 30 min, 16900 rcf
40
N/A
49
237
75
25
3% salt, 100 mg/ml, 3C, 3% PEG3000, 30 min, 16900 rcf,
40
N/A
15
221
66
33
7% salt, 100mg/ml, 8C, 30 min, 16900 rcf
N/A
N/A
Table 1: Results of atempts to harvest macroscopic amounts of dense phase protein. Te dilute
phase concentration resembles the theoretical values, while the dense phase concentration is
signiﬁcantly lower.
Te light phase was very cooperative in pipeting and measuring, and consistently measured to
values that were close to the theoretical values of the lysozyme LLPS binodal.
32
==PAGE:37==
Te dense phase consistently showed a lower concentration than what would be expected. Tis
combined with the turbidity of the system could indicate that what is visible as a ’dense’ phase
might not be entirely made up of a dense phase droplet, but itself be a concentrated droplet system
in dilute solution, much higher than it would be for a non centrifuged system. Had this been pure
dense phase protein, the droplets should coalesce into a single dense phase droplet, which should
by deﬁnition not be turbid, as it is a single phase system. Comparatively the stock solutions of
lysozyme that were made for dilution series had similarly high concentration of protein, at approx.
300 mg/ml. Tese would appear entirely diﬀerently as a semi-transparent yellow liquid.
Figure 20: Proposed behaviour as a result of dense phase lysozyme LLPS harvesting. Te so-
lution splits into 2 distinct phases, where the light phase (1) has a protein concentration close
to the theoretical value, and the semi-dense phase (2), where the concentration is signiﬁcantly
lower than the theoretical value, but still higher than the starting concentration, surrounded by
dilute solution with the same concentration as the light phase. Tis could be a result of an in-
creased packing of dense droplets that do not fuse as expected. Te lower protein concentration
is then counteracted by the volume fraction being increased.
Te volume fractions of the two phases support this same theory, as the dense phase system had a
much higher than expected volume fraction, with the dilute phase fraction being similarly lower.
Calculating the total protein content in the system from the volume fractions and the concentrations:
Ctotal = cL · fL + cD · fD
(6)
Yielded slightly lower values of protein in the system than at the start. Tis could be do to several
factors, such as protein ending up stuck outside the system as a result of sticking to the tube wall.
Overall the protein concentration in the ﬁnal solution was in the range of 80-90%. Te measurement
of the volume fractions carries a signiﬁcant uncertainty as well. Because of the proposed behaviour
as explained in ﬁgure 20, extracting the two phases exactly by fraction is diﬃcult.
Interestingly, a lysozyme solution with 7% salt under these conditions with such signiﬁcant quench-
33
==PAGE:38==
ing lies outside of the binodal boundary when compared to theoretical binodal values, because the
dilute phase concentration should be lower than 0 at this point. Tis would indicate that droplets are
forming during quenching, until the system reaches a maximum possible separation. Tis solution
also appeared opaque as the other atempts.
Te speed of centrifugation did not show signiﬁcantly diﬀerent results.
3.5
Qartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring
3.5.1
Lysozyme QCM experiments
Te QCM signal change generally showed to be cooperative with temperature changes, giving re-
sults that showed a decrease in resonance frequency with decrease in temperature, and an increase
in dissipation with a decrease in temperature. Tis was consistently the case for buﬀer controls and
protein controls. However, for lysozyme phase separating solutions, the results were much more
unusual in appearance.
Te ﬁrst QCM experiments were conducted on lysozyme at 100 mg/ml, 7% salt. Under these solution
conditions, it was expected that there would be a very strong signal shif, and phase that it would
phase separate at 26-27 °C. Generally, all nodes were able to be measured, but the 11th node was
not for this ﬁrst experiment, and since the experiment was not repeated under these conditions this
node was not measured.
Figure 21: Lysozyme LLPS droplet formation in 100 mg/ml solution, 7% NaCl. Te signal shif
was so large that some nodes were lost and could not be recovered, but showed that determining
a cloud point was possible using this method by changing solution conditions. Te loss of signal
results in discontinuous jumps in the signal.
Te ﬁrst harmonic of the QCM signal is disregarded, as it has been shown to be relatively uncertain
in its measurements compared to other nodes, and is more inﬂuenced by external factors. [27]
34
==PAGE:39==
Te results of this experiment clearly showed phase separation, characterised by the incredibly large,
sudden shif of frequency signal in the cloud point region. Te signal shif was so large for the 100
mg/ml solution, that the frequency signal was entirely lost for several nodes. Either frequency or
dissipation signal can be lost, if the change in signal is large enough. Te large shif in signal occurred
around the expected cloud point at 26 °C.
Te diﬀerent harmonics of the system are ploted normalised to the 1st harmonic for easier compar-
ison of the signals.
By comparing the change in frequency between lysozyme and buﬀer control solutions, it is not
reasonable to explain these value diﬀerences solely by a change in bulk properties of the solution,
indicating a phase separation in the system that adheres to the surface. Tis was further supported
by the change in signal being so close to the cloud point.
Te loss of signal during large frequency shifs is a result of the QCM only scanning for resonance
frequencies in a given interval, as the scanning time will increase with the number of frequencies
to measure, and the shifs fell outside the measured spectrum. Te QCM is generally designed to
measure frequency changes that are much smaller than what is seen in this system, so it is normally
not an issue.
Te loss of signal was not ideal, so the experiment was repeated with a lower concentration of
protein. Previous experiments using a concentration of 40 mg/ml were the lowest working concen-
tration that had been shown to phase separate consistently, so this was chosen as the new concen-
tration. Te salt concentration was maintained at 7%.
Initially, the temperature ramp was kept the same, however, it proved to not be ideal to lower the
temperature by a preset condition.
Figure 22: Lysozyme QCM data for 40 mg/ml, 7% salt. Te pre-programmed temperature shif
proved to be diﬃcult to properly control, but showed a sudden signal spike indicating LLPS.
Several nodes were lost during the temperature ramp due to the rapid descent below the cloud
point.
35
==PAGE:40==
By doing this while not knowing the exact behaviour of the system, it was diﬃcult to observe the
eﬀect of the droplet formation on the system, as it was convoluted with the eﬀect of the contin-
uous temperature shif. Using this ramp, the system was not allowed to equilibriate at any given
temperature. Tis meant that the formation of droplets became very strong, as the quenching could
potentially reach temperatures much below the cloud point. Terefore, the temperature was lowered
gradually in subsequent experiments, giving the solution time to setle, and allowing the droplets to
deposit on the surface.
Te salt concentration was also lowered to 5%. It was most consistent for the experiment to start at
room temperature, and the 7% salt solution at 40 mg/ml being expected to phase separate at around
17-18 °C. It would be an improvement to work at lower salt concentrations, to have a longer pre-
phase separation signal, allowing a larger temperature gap.
For 40 mg/ml, the signal is similar to that of 100 mg/ml in behaviour. Te signal was not lost during
the phase separation unlike the previous experiment.
To measure the impact of the surface on phase separation, the QCM experiments were initially
conducted on both gold (Au) and silicon dioxide (SiO2) coated sensors. Te gold chips generally
behaved closer to expected (ﬁgure 23), with a clear temperature and phase separation response. Te
same experiment on the SiO2 sensor showed a very erradic and unpredicable response (ﬁgure 24).
Te response for protein and buﬀer controls on SiO2 sensors were very similar to those of the gold
sensors (ﬁgure 26 and 27, SiO2 controls not shown). Tus, afer the initial optimisations of param-
eters were made, and a reasonable response was achieved for gold sensors, it was decided to only
work further on gold chips.
Tis would indicate that the surface of the sensor signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the phase separation of
lysozyme.
Te frequency signal still showed a characteristic change around the cloud point temperature with
a sharp decrease in resonance frequency around the cloud point. Te signal took much longer to
equilibrate at this temperature, possibly do to the droplets needing longer time to form, than for the
bulk solution conditions to change. Te temperature was not decreased further afer the inducing
of phase separation, because of concerns of signal loss as was seen in the 100 mg/ml solution.
Once the temperature was increased back to the starting levels above the cloud point, the frequency
signal was approximately reversible. Tere was a small drif in the signal during the very long
experiments, as can be seen from the minor diﬀerence in start and ending signal for the buﬀer
controls. Tis signal is 2 orders of magnitude smaller than those of the phase separating solutions,
and is thus negligible.
Te dissipation signal showed a rather strange signal, in that it lacks the reversibility of the fre-
quency, and seemed to steadily increase independently of the temperature. Te dissipation is ex-
pected to be reversible as seen in the control samples, as it is expected to be dependent on the same
parameters as the frequency signal. Once the temperature is high enough for the dense protein
droplets to dissolve into solution, the dissipation signal is expected to lower back down, as a reverse
of what is seen in the frequency signal. Tis decoupling of the frequency signal and the dissipation
36
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: QCM-D signal for 40 mg/ml lysozyme, 5% salt solution. a) Te frequency shifs
suddenly with a small change in temperature, indicative of LLPS, but is reversible with temper-
ature. b) Te dissipation increased to very large values with a decrease in temperature, in an
irreversible manner. (Te initial drop in frequency is a result of the injection of sample solution)
37
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
Figure 24: QCM-D frequency signal for 40 mg/ml lysozyme, 5% salt solution measured on an
SiO2 chip. Te signals show a poor temperature response, as well as rapid jumps and loss of
signal. Te SiO2 chip was not used for further experiments, instead focusing on gold chips.
38
==PAGE:43==
signal is not easily explainable by any current theory of how ﬁlms deposit on QCM surfaces, and is
quite strange in the context of how LLPS systems function as well. Te SiO2 sensors also showed
this dissipation response, despite the strange frequency response. Tis would indicate some sort of
complicated result of a complicated surface layer that arises from the deposition of dense droplets
on the sensor surface in some uneven and convoluted manner.
Figure 25: Example of possible LLPS dense droplet formation on QCM sensor surface. Te
uneven surface properties and many interacting interfaces between dilute and dense phases
can lead to frequency and dissipation signals that are hard to interpret. Te heights of the
layers are greatly exaggerated.
Te buﬀer and protein control solutions behaved much closer to expected, with F and D responses
very close to the expected behaviour, with inverse F and D, and strong temperature responses.
Te protein control showed that the strange response in the LLPS solution was a clear result of the
droplet formation.
To verify that the steady increase in dissipation signal under these conditions was not a result of any
experimental errors, the experiment was repeated in triplicate on gold chips. Previous experiments
had been run on used QCM gold chips. To verify that these results were not a cause of some unpre-
dictable change in the sensor surface with previous use, the repeated experiment was run on a mix
of used and new chips (Appendix C). All chips showed data that was consistent with the previous
experiment, however with signiﬁcant variation in the absolute values of the signal shif, and with
some of the signal nodes being lost for some of the sensors.
Tis reaﬃrms the idea that the chip surface is inﬂuencing the formation of LLPS droplets, as there is
a large diﬀerence in signal even between chips that have been loaded from the same starting solution
and undergone the same temperature shif.
Te buﬀer follows the expected signal change as a function of temperature for both dissipation and
frequency. Te buﬀer solution is a much simpler system than the lysozyme LLPS system, and gives
an idea of how a more traditional liquid system would look. Te frequency of the system decreases
with temperature, while the dissipation similarly increases.
Seeing as the dissipation signal was not reversible under temperature changes, another experiment
was performed were the QCM sensor was ﬂushed with buﬀer afer droplet formation, to see if this
39
==PAGE:44==
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: QCM-D buﬀer control on gold sensor. a) Frequency and b) Dissipation signals to
both be highly reversible and much smaller in value than for the phase separating lysozyme
solution.
40
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
Figure 27: QCM-D lysozyme protein control, 40 mg/ml, 0% salt, on gold sensor. a) Frequency
signal b) Dissipation signal. Te solution does not phase separate because of a lack of salt, and
thus shows results more similar to those of the buﬀer solution
41
==PAGE:46==
could reverse the signal. A 40 mg/ml, 5% salt solution was loaded as in previous experiments onto
two sensors, and then cooled to below cloud point. 1 sensor was washed for 5 minutes at a rate of 50
µl/min with buﬀer, and the other sensor was reverted to the original temperature ﬁrst, then washed
at the same rate. Both f and d signals showed to be reversible in both cases, but the frequency signal
returned to normal for the cold ﬂushed system faster than the dissipation signal. For the warm
washed system, both F and D signals returned very slowly to their baseline values, (although in this
case, the F signal had already returned to near baseline values before ﬂushing).
(a)
(b)
Figure 28: Cold ﬂushing of QCM-D LLPS system. 40 mg/ml, 5% NaCl. Lysozyme is allowed to
phase separate on sensor surface, and is then washed while under the cloud point at t = 42 min.
Te frequency returns to a baseline level quickly, but the dissipation signal returns slowly.
What this could indicate is that there is still some amount of material stuck to the sensor, however,
that would not explain the discrepancy between temperature reversibility of the F and D signals.
42
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: Warm ﬂushing of QCM-D LLPS system. 40 mg/ml, 5% NaCl. Lysozyme is allowed to
phase separate on sensor surface, and is then heated back up to the starting temperature above
the cloud point, before being ﬂushed at t = 100 min. Both F and D signals return slowly towards
baseline.
43
==PAGE:48==
In the case that there was a viscous droplet layer that had gelated irreversibly on the surface, this
should likely have been reﬂected in the f signal.
When sensors were removed from the QCM without ﬂushing or cleaning the system, but afer re-
heating to starting temperatures, droplets had visually accumulated on the sensor surface.
Figure 30: Droplets accumulating on QCM sensor surface
3.5.2
DDX4N1 QCM experiments
As the working concentrations of lysozyme necessary for LLPS were so high, and were shown to im-
pact the usability of the QCM as an analytical tool in a rather convoluted manner, QCM experiments
were also done using the inherently disordered protein construct Ddx4N1.
Ddx4 did not exhibit an immediately apparent change in signal around the cloud point as was seen
for the lysozyme solution, instead the frequency shif is much more gradual.
However, there is still a clear diﬀerence in signal amplitude between the phase separating and non-
phase separating solutions, where the phase separating solution showed a frequency shif that was
approx. 7 times larger than both the protein and buﬀer controls. Te buﬀer control and protein
control signals were very similar. Te same was true for the dissipation signal.
44
==PAGE:49==
(a)
(b)
Figure 31: QCM-D Ddx4 N1 signal at 50 µ M, 100 mM NaCl. While there was no immediately
apparant droplet formation at any temperature, the large shifs could indicate LLPS.
45
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
Figure 32: QCM-D Ddx4 N1 signal at 50 µ M, 300 mM NaCl. At this salt concentration, the Ddx4
does not phase separate, and the resulting responses are closer to those of the buﬀer control.
46
==PAGE:51==
Such a large comparative shif in signal, as a result of the small change in salt, likely cannot be
explained simply by the change in bulk solution, and is a possible indicator of phase separation in
the system.
(a)
(b)
Figure 33: QCM-D buﬀer control for Ddx4 experiments. Te much lower frequency and dissi-
pation responses than for Ddx4 could indicate phase separation in that solution.
Comparing the lysozyme and Ddx4 signals, the way the phase separation signals look are distinctly
diﬀerent. One possible explanation for the Ddx4 gradual signal is that something about the system
has already induced phase separation in the Ddx4 system, despite it being loaded at higher than the
expected cloud point value. If this was the case, the further decrease of temperature would simply
further grow the droplets in the system in a more gradual manner and there wouldn’t be a sudden
spike in signal.
47
==PAGE:52==
3.5.3
QCM modelling
Atempts were made to model the Ddx4 QCM results, using the Qsense Qtools data handling sof-
ware. Te sofware atempts to ﬁt a viscoelatic model to the acquired data, and thus tries to estimate
various parameters, such as an adsorbed surface layer thickness, the viscosity of the ﬂuid and the
adsorbed layer, and how these change during the course of the experiment.
Te modelling was done with reference bulk parameters of 1000 kg/m3, 1 · 10–3 mPa · s, which are
approximately the conditions of water at 20 °C.
While the modelling worked in principle, it became apparent that the manner in which the ex-
periment was conducted was not particularly well suited for modelling using a well deﬁned QCM
viscoelastic model, particularly because of the transient temperature ramp during the experiment,
which is an unusual application of the QCM technology. Te temperature in QCM is normally kept
constant do to the sensitivity of the measurements. Te main problem in having a ﬂuctuating tem-
perature is that it will change the properties of the bulk liquid, such as the viscosity and density.
Tis convolutes which parts of the measurements are as a result of the changes in the surface of the
QCM, and which are as a result of the changes in bulk properties.
Figure 34: Results of Ddx4 QCM modelling. Atempted modelling of viscosity of surface layer
on QCM chip for diﬀerent solutions under a temperature shif. Te buﬀer and protein controls
do not change signiﬁcantly as a result of the temperature, indicating that no layer forms on the
surface, while the protein sample shows a strong decrease in viscosity. Te stepwise, transient
nature of the temperature ramp leads to a discontinuous signal.
Tus, the modelling shows erratic jumps for the viscosity. Te modelled viscosity of the surface
layer is still higher for the phase separated solution than for control samples, but the large jumps
48
==PAGE:53==
are clearly a result of a sudden temperature shif in the sample.
It was also atempted to model the adsorbed layer thickness in the diﬀerent solutions (appendix C),
but the results were in the tens of nanometer scale and erratic, which made litle sense. Tis showed
further that improvement on experimental method was needed.
3.6
Fluorescent microscopy
It was atempted to perform microscopy of the harvested dense phase of the lysozyme split system
using the previously established protocol. However, as previously described, the dense phase was
not possible to isolate from the dilute mixture entirely. Tis made the solution gel-like unless it
was heated up to much above the cloud point of the solution from which it was harvested. When
trying to spread it unto the glass slide for microscopy, it would immediately gelate. Tis made it
very diﬃcult to get any microscopy of this phase. Tis was already predicted to be a possibility,
and was the reason for exploring the addition of hygroscopic elements to the solution. Lysozyme
was shown to still be able to phase separate even with the addition of signiﬁcant amount of added
hygroscopics, as well as still being harvesting in the dense phase with the addition of these. Te
microscopy with added hygroscopics was not done due to time constraints.
In addition to the atempts to visualise harvested dense phase, the general lysozyme solution was
also visualised under the microscope, at room temperature. Te solution was supposed to phase
separate, and it was possible to visualise the droplets forming from the bright ﬂuorescent response
in several areas, indicating a high protein concentration consistent with protein droplets.
Figure 35: Fluorescent microscopy of lysozyme solution at 70 mg/ml and 7% NaCl. Blue areas
indicate a large concentration of protein with added ﬂuorescein.
However, the time for optimisation of the microscopy protocol was very limited. Te main results
of the microscopy was simply a conﬁrmation of the formation of droplets in the system that had
been worked on, and not some other unexplained phenomenon.
49
==PAGE:54==
4
Discussion
Overall, the scope of the project proved to be signiﬁcantly more expansive than initially expected,
and showed to be ambitious in the goals, minding to the available time frame. Tis meant that the
experimentation and work ended up being split between many diﬀerent concepts, where some of
them showed to require extensive work.
Te puriﬁcation of the hydrophobin construct proved to be a diﬃcult task. Te hydrophobin both
being so small, and containing no tryptophan and no tyrosine, made it cumbersome to purify the
protein as well as quantifying it.
Results from SDS-page, MALDI-TOF, HPLC, and SEC consistently showed the presence of the pro-
tein throughout the protocol, but with the total yield being very low in the end. Te main problem
probably being with the ﬁnal HPLC, as indicative of the pre and post HPLC gels and MALDI-TOF
showing much lower signals at this step.
Te idea to ﬁrst analyse the formation of rodlet layers of the pure hydrophobin, before purifying
the fusion construct proved to be very time consuming, instead of atempting to purify the full
construct immediately. Doing this might have mitigated some of the puriﬁcation problems, but may
have made subsequent analysis more diﬃcult, especially in the context of later experiments showing
the diﬃculty of characterising LLPS coatings.
It was always expected that there was a need for optimisation of the puriﬁcation and expression
protocol, and that this process would be time consuming, however, it proved to be too problematic to
keep the primary focus only on the puriﬁcation within the scope and time frame of this experiment.
Tis project proved to be based on a concept that required a large amount of basic characterisation
of LLPS surface interactions. Te limited amount of work that has gone into characterising how
phase separation is aﬀect by surfaces made it so that there was litle to pre-existing knowledge to
expand on, with regards to creating surface binding layers of LLPS protein. Tis, combined with the
lacking success of the protein puriﬁcation, resulted in a signiﬁcant shif in focus of the project.
Te use of lysozyme as a model protein for LLPS has been shown to be reasonable for some applica-
tions, while less reasonable for others. Te main diﬃculty in working with lysozyme is the extreme
protein concentrations needed to induce LLPS, along with either high salt concentrations or low
cloud point temperatures. Tis results in very extreme properties of the phase separated system,
with high volumes of condensed phase in liquid. Te dense phase droplets will have a very high vis-
cosity and will have a diﬃcult time to fuse, which is an expected property of LLPS, and something
that is a key element in achieving surface weting for lubrication properties. If the droplets won’t
fuse when phase separated near a surface, it could compromise the surface covering.
On the contrary, lysozyme worked well as a model protein for using LLPS solution turbidity as
a measure of droplet formation, precisely because of the extreme amount of dense droplets that
form. Te hysteresis of the system during repeated formation and dissolving of droplets was well
quantiﬁed using lysozyme. While lysozyme undergoes phase separation under much more extreme
conditions than many proteins that have been researched, especially those relevant for intra-cellular
50
==PAGE:55==
mechanisms, it is still very relevant in the context of creating protein based lubricants. Te protein
concentrations that are being worked with are relevant when comparing to other protein lubricant
systems like synovial ﬂuid.
Harvesting of lysozyme dense phase was shown to be a non-trivial process, and was likely im-
pacted by the diﬃculty of the droplets to be able to fuse. Isolating a concentrated protein solution
by the means of phase separation was shown to be possible, but not to the extent of the theoretical
values. When going deeply into the binodal by addition of more salt into the solutions, to a point
where there should no longer be possible phase separation, it was still possible to obtain measurably
diﬀerent phases.
As the system will be split macroscopically, the mechanism of remixing while heating is also going
to be skewed compared to previous experiments. It was clear when performing the experiment
that the remixing of phases was signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult for a split solution than a normal two-
phase solution. Tis means that there will possibly be a lot of hysteresis in the system, and that by
quenching and then reheating to room temperature, the measured values of the system will reﬂect
an intermediate between these temperatures in a way that is very convoluted. To mitigate this, one
could work at solutions that are only going to be quenched to room temperature when possible, or
work in a colder ambient environment during measurements.
A way of improving the harvesting results could be to either atempt to work at lower salt concen-
trations, or to centrifuge at higher higher velocities.
Te reported successful spliting of lysozyme was done in solutions containing no salt [22], at similar
centrifugation speeds as was atempted in this project. Te main diﬃculty of working with LLPS
with no salt is the cloud point being at a much lower temperature.
With the concentration of the dense phase droplets being so high, another idea is that if the solution
is centrifuged at higher speeds, the droplets would be able to fuse. Te viscosity of the solution
is so high that it is possible that while the droplets can be moved to the botom of the solution at
the atempted centrifugation speeds, these speeds may not allow the droplets to properly fuse. Te
previously reported successful phase spliting reports that the droplets will fuse given enough time,
on the scale of several of several days. However, the concern in leting the solution setle for this
time period is the gelation and aggregation of the sample. Solutions that were lef for days were
experienced to sediment at the tubing botom, Even when not supposed to phase separate at room
temperature. Tis makes it unfeasible to just leave high concentrations lysozyme solutions to let
the droplets fuse automatically, especially when containing signiﬁcant salt. Tis process of droplet
fusing could possibly be increased by ultracentrifugation.
Te idea of using the turbidity as a measuring parameter, combined with the temperature cycling,
proved to be a method that showed great promise, and to some degree eliminated several of the
concerns there were around turbidity LLPS measurements. Te greatest of these concerns was that
the turbidity being a result of many diﬀerent factors, and not just the droplet formation, but due to
the largely reversible nature of LLPS, these could then be accounted for and excluded during tem-
51
==PAGE:56==
perature cycling. Te decrease in reversibility was clearly visible during these cycles, and showed
some of the things to consider when working on phase switching of LLPS based lubricants. Interest-
ingly, the cloud point temperature as deﬁned by the scatering inﬂection point was almost constant
during these cyclings. Tat being said, turbidity is still by no means a perfect indicator of LLPS for-
mation, due to the previously described concerns of not being able to properly determine the turbid
elements’ size, shape and mechanical properties.
While using 5% salt in the hygroscopic experiments possibly helped limit irreversibility, the fact
that so many solutions failed to phase separate entirely means that it would be a good idea to also
atempt the same experiments with higher salt concentrations to more cooperative samples.
It has become clear throughout this project, that the various and at times ambiguous deﬁnitions of
phase separation, especially that of the cloud point, are making it more diﬃcult to be methodical in
characterising phase separation conditions for various proteins. Te turbidity experiments showed
that it is not always possible to explain LLPS as simply a thermodynamic process. Te idea that an
energy barrier can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the formation of droplets is in contrast to the concept of a
simple binodal phase diagram being able to properly explain the system. Te diﬀerence in mecha-
nisms for droplet formation and dissolving cannot be ignored in this discussion. Tere is still much
of a discussion to be had as to how to deﬁne the cloud point in a more systematic manner, as there
is still a large discrepancy in reported phase separation results.
Using lysozyme to show phase separation in a QCM has been to be possible, as there was a sharp
signal change around the cloud point temperature. However, the extreme and complicated condi-
tions of the resulting phase separated liquid proved to make modelling of the system and prediction
of the properties very diﬃcult. Te complete discoupling of the f and D signal makes it extremely
diﬃcult to give meaningful analysis on the formed weting layers. Tis phenomenon is quite unique,
and is not well explained by any simple viscoelastic modelling. Not only are the F and D signals de-
coupled, but also only one of them seems to responds to changes to temperature changes. Te fact
that visible droplets are accumulated on a surface, which has already shown a return to a close-to-
baseline resonant frequency, is quite strange. It would seem that this formation of droplets on the
sensor surface might somehow connect the sensor to the bulk liquid, greatly increasing the energy
dissipation, in a manner that doesn’t actually closely adhere the mass of droplets on the surface,
changing the frequency. Tis is highly unusual behaviour.
It has been shown that the surface material of the QCM chip greatly aﬀects the degree of LLPS.
Te phase separation response is much more limited for a SiO2 sensor than for a gold sensor. Te
exact cause of this behaviour is still up for discussion, but as lysozyme binds diﬀerently to diﬀerent
QCM sensors, varying by solution condition[28], it is possible that some amount of protein had been
bound to the SiO2 sensor before phase separation, in a manner where it would not be available for
droplet formation, preventing phase separation.
Te discoupling of how fast the signals return to baseline when the system is ﬂushed with buﬀer is
another strange observation. It would appear that while the surface on one hand returns to baseline
immediately, there is something lingering in the system aﬀecting the dissipation. Tis could perhaps
52
==PAGE:57==
be droplets being removed from the surface, but still somehow lingering in the system for a while
even afer the system is supposedly ﬂushed through. More experiments or modelling could be done
to further try and explain this behaviour.
Ddx4 N1 showed to alleviate some of the more problematic elements of using lysozyme in the QCM
experiments by having working LLPS conditions that were much less extreme. Te experiment
lacked the distinct change in QCM response that was visible in lysozyme, possibly due to the lower
working concentrations. Te response was closer to the expected behaviour, with opposite responses
of the F and D signals.
Te fact that there was no clear phase separation response visible, compared to the lysozyme solu-
tion, means that it would probably be a good idea to not start experiment so close to the cloud point,
as with lysozyme. Tis could test the idea that the phase separation had somehow already been
induced in the sample prior to injection. Te large frequency response shows that there is deﬁnitely
some LLPS related behaviour happening.
Modelling of Ddx4 QCM experiments was unfortunately complicated by the measurement method.
An reﬁnement of the protocol could very well make it possible to model the phase separation more
accurately using the QCM.
Overall, with more development, the use of QCM for LLPS measurements could be a strong sup-
plementary method as it was shown to reveal very interesting material properties of dense phase
droplet coatings.
With more time, it would have been ideal to incorporate more traditional brightﬁeld/ﬂuorescent
microscopy for veriﬁcation of phase separation of droplet formation, especially in lysozyme solu-
tions. Tis would alleviate some of the more ambiguous elements of the turbidity measurements.
Te microscopy currently done in this project only serves as a veriﬁcation that phase separation
happens in the solution, and further possible analysis from the data is limited. More eﬀort in this
would assist in understanding some of the elements that are obfuscated in turbidity measurements,
like droplet size and distribution.
5
Conclusion
Te idea of creating protein based lubricating layers based on liquid-liquid phase separation has
been explored. Te expression and puriﬁcation of the DewA hydrophobin through recombinant
protein production was atempted for the creation of surface binding protein layers, which in a
fusion construct were to be used together with phase separating proteins for surface coating. Te
protein was puriﬁed through reverse IMAC, HPLC and SEC to limited success. While the protein
was puriﬁed in principle, the yields were very small, and there were several hurdles in achieving
good results for the protocol.
Working to create lubricating layers of liquid-liquid phase separating proteins was an ambitious
project, that showed both a lot of interesting results, and revealed a lot of challenges in successfully
carrying out this concept.
53
==PAGE:58==
Several ways of characterising the properties of phase separation proteins have been explored in
the context of using them for surface coating lubricants. Using the model protein lysozyme, the
reversibility of LLPS proteins under cyclical conditions was tested. Te use of solution turbidity as
a primary characteristic of the phase separation was explored, and showed that this could be used
as an indicator of the reversibility of LLPS systems under diﬀerent solution conditions. Tis method
was also used as a method for characterising the droplet formation temperature, or cloud point of the
solutions and the hysteresis of these systems. Te eﬀect of the addition of anti-drying hygroscopics
to lysozyme solutions was also tested with this method, and was shown to have a generally negative
eﬀect on the reversibility of phase separation.
Te mixing of protein solutions with the addition of crowding elements was automated using a
pipeting robot, for the beneﬁt of higher throughput screening of LLPS solutions.
Te possibility of separating macroscopic amounts of dense phase LLPS solution from dilute protein
solution was explored. It was explored as to how much dense phase protein could be harvested
through this method, and how it compared to the theoretical values of the system. It was shown
that for lysozyme it was diﬃcult to extract a pure dense phase solution by the atempted methods,
and that the phases could only be partially split by centrifugation.
Te formation of dense liquid droplet surface layers was tested using quartz crystal microbalance
for both lysozyme and the phase separating protein Ddx4 N1. Under a temperature shif, it was
shown that phase separating lysozyme solutions exhibited strange properties, with a largely decou-
pled frequency shif and energy dissipation. revealing a very complicated system with interesting
possibilities for further research. Ddx4 worked beter a model system, but reﬁnement of protocols
for LLPS-QCM characterisation is still needed.
To further atempt to create LLPS lubricants, this thesis shows that there are both pitfalls to avoid,
but also some results that show that this concept might be possible to consider working on in the
future.
6
Perspective
Tere are many avenues to explore further as a result of the work in this project.
Atempting to improve harvesting dense phase protein could be interesting, and might be possible
for lysozyme by working at higher centrifugation speeds or colder temperatures.
Te results of the QCM lysozyme LLPS solution with the strangely decoupled F and D signals is a
very interesting thing to explore further, as it is a signal that is both reproducible and is not easily ex-
plained by any currently used viscoelatic models for QCM analysis. Te atempted modelling of the
Ddx system shows that there are potential improvements in conducting the LLPS QCM experiments,
by not varying the temperature during the experimental run.
An alternative to this would be to load an LLPS sample at a temperature above the cloud point,
onto a QCM sensor at below the cloud, having the solution phase separate immediately on the
sensor, watching the response. It was shown especially from the lysozyme experiment that the
formation of a layer on the QCM surface was a gradual process, which should still be visible with this
54
==PAGE:59==
experimental change. Tis experiment could be conducted at a series of diﬀerent temperatures for
a full analysis of the droplet formation. Te downside of this method would be the much increased
use of protein, as many more chambers would need to be ﬁlled, by conducting a separate experiment
for each temperature. Issues with this would be that the mechanism of phase separation under a
ﬂow in the chamber is possibly diﬃcult to model, and might have unforeseen side eﬀects, such as
droplets adhering to the surface while solution is still being ﬂushed into the chamber etc.
It would be interesting to further explore the eﬀects of diﬀerent surface coverings in the QCM and
the eﬀect it has on LLPS. To test the possibility of an SiO2 surface adsorbing lysozyme prior to LLPS,
one could load a pre-phase separated solution and monitor the response.
Whether LLPS layers are going to function as lubricants still remains to be seen and is an obvious
path for further exploration.
55
==PAGE:60==
Acknowledgements
Tank you to my supervisor Alexander B¨ull and my co-supervisor Emil Stender for assistance and
guidance throughout this project. Tank you to everyone else who has assisted in any way through
this project, especially the DTU Protein Biophysics group that has oﬀered great help throughout.
Tank you to the rest of the PCET section at DTU as well as friends and family who have been there
throughout.
References
[1] Jay GD, Waller KA. ”Te biology of lubricin: near frictionless joint motion.” Matrix Biol. 2014
Oct;39:17-24. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2014.08.008. Epub 2014 Aug 27. PMID: 25172828.
[2] Alberti, Simon et al. “A User’s Guide for Phase Separation Assays with Puriﬁed Proteins.” Journal
of molecular biology vol. 430,23 (2018): 4806-4820. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2018.06.038
[3] Wang J, Choi JM, Holehouse AS, Lee HO, Zhang X, Jahnel M, Maharana S, Lemaitre R, Pozni-
akovsky A, Drechsel D, Poser I, Pappu RV, Alberti S, Hyman AA. ”A Molecular Grammar Govern-
ing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of Prion-like RNA Binding Proteins.” Cell. 2018 Jul
26;174(3):688-699.e16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.006. Epub 2018 Jun 28. PMID: 29961577; PMCID:
PMC6063760.
[4] Elbaum-Garﬁnkle, Shana et al. “Te disordered P granule protein LAF-1 drives phase separa-
tion into droplets with tunable viscosity and dynamics.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America vol. 112,23 (2015): 7189-94. doi:10.1073/pnas.1504822112
[5] Alberti S, Gladfelter A, Mitag T. ”Considerations and Challenges in Studying Liquid-
Liquid Phase Separation and Biomolecular Condensates.” Cell. 2019 Jan 24;176(3):419-434. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2018.12.035. PMID: 30682370; PMCID: PMC6445271.
[6] Bennike, Tue et al. “A normative study of the synovial ﬂuid proteome from healthy porcine knee
joints.” Journal of proteome research vol. 13,10 (2014): 4377-87. doi:10.1021/pr500587x
[7] Dignon, Gregory L et al. “Temperature-Controlled Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of Disordered
Proteins.” ACS central science vol. 5,5 (2019): 821-830. doi:10.1021/acscentsci.9b00102
[8] von B¨ulow, S¨oren et al. “Dynamic cluster formation determines viscosity and diﬀusion in dense
protein solutions.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica vol. 116,20 (2019): 9843-9852. doi:10.1073/pnas.1817564116
[9] Murakami, Tetsuro et al. “ALS/FTD Mutation-Induced Phase Transition of FUS Liquid Droplets
and Reversible Hydrogels into Irreversible Hydrogels Impairs RNP Granule Function.” Neuron
vol. 88,4 (2015): 678-90. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.030
[10] Makkonen, Lasse. “Young’s equation revisited.” Journal of physics. Condensed mater : an In-
stitute of Physics journal vol. 28,13 (2016): 135001. doi:10.1088/0953-8984/28/13/135001
56
==PAGE:61==
[11] Tonda-Turo, Chiara et al. “Qartz Crystal Microbalance With Dissipation Monitoring: A Pow-
erful Method to Predict the in vivo Behavior of Bioengineered Surfaces.” Frontiers in bioengi-
neering and biotechnology vol. 6 158. 30 Oct. 2018, doi:10.3389/fioe.2018.00158
[12] Cui, M., Wang, X., An, B., Zhang, C., Gui, X., Li, K., Li, Y., Ge, P., Zhang, J., Liu,
C.,
Zhong, C. (2019). ”Exploiting mammalian low-complexity domains for liquid-liquid
phase separation-driven underwater adhesive coatings.” Science advances, 5(8), eaax3155.
htps://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax3155
[13] Fries, M.R., Stopper, D., Skoda, M.W.A. et al. ”Enhanced protein adsorption upon bulk phase
separation.” Sci Rep 10, 10349 (2020). htps://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-66562-0
[14] Mitrea,
D.M.,
Cika,
J.A.,
Stanley,
C.B. et al. ”Self-interaction of NPM1 modulates
multiple mechanisms of liquid–liquid phase separation.” Nat Commun 9,
842 (2018).
htps://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03255-3
[15] Dempsey, G P, and R E Beever. “Electron microscopy of the rodlet layer of Neurospora crassa
conidia.” Journal of bacteriology vol. 140,3 (1979): 1050-62. doi:10.1128/JB.140.3.1050-1062.1979
[16] Lee, Pat S, and Kelvin H Lee. “Escherichia coli–a model system that beneﬁts from and con-
tributes to the evolution of proteomics.” Biotechnology and bioengineering vol. 84,7 (2003): 801-
14. doi:10.1002/bit.10848
[17] Rosano, Germ´an L, and Eduardo A Ceccarelli. “Recombinant protein expression in Es-
cherichia coli: advances and challenges.” Frontiers in microbiology vol. 5 172. 17 Apr. 2014,
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2014.00172
[18] Bradford, M M. “A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities
of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding.” Analytical biochemistry vol. 72 (1976):
248-54. doi:10.1006/abio.1976.9999
[19] Muschol, M., Rosenberger, F. ”Liquid–liquid phase separation in supersaturated lysozyme so-
lutions and associated precipitate formation/crystallization.”
Te Journal of Chemical Physics 107:6, 1953-1962
[20] Galkin, Oleg
Vekilov, Peter. (2000). ”Control of protein crystal nucleation around the
metastable liquid-liquid phase boundary.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 97. 6277-81. 10.1073/pnas.110000497.
[21] Wang Y, Annunziata O. ”Comparison between protein-polyethylene glycol (PEG) interactions
and the eﬀect of PEG on protein-protein interactions using the liquid-liquid phase transition.” J
Phys Chem B. 2007 Feb 8;111(5):1222-30. doi: 10.1021/jp065608u. PMID: 17266278.
[22] Victor G. Taratuta, Andreas. Holschbach, George M. Turston, Daniel. Blankschtein, and
George B. Benedek (1990) ”Liquid-liquid phase separation of aqueous lysozyme solutions:
57
==PAGE:62==
eﬀects of pH and salt identity” Te Journal of Physical Chemistry 94 (5), 2140-2144 doi:
10.1021/j100368a074
[23] Yang, Y., Jones, H. B., Dao, T. P.,
Casta˜neda, C. A. (2019). ”Single Amino Acid Sub-
stitutions in Stickers, but Not Spacers, Substantially Alter UBQLN2 Phase Transitions and
Dense Phase Material Properties.” Te journal of physical chemistry. B, 123(17), 3618–3629.
htps://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.9b01024
[24] Luo, Haibin Lee, Nacole Wang, Xiangyang Li, Yuling Schmelzer, Albert Hunter, Alan Pabst,
Timothy Wang, William. (2017). ”Liquid-liquid Phase Separation Causes High Turbidity and Pres-
sure during Low pH Elution Process in Protein A Chromatography.” Journal of Chromatography
A. 1488. 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.01.067.
[25] Amiram, M., Qiroz, F. G., Callahan, D. J., Chilkoti, A. (2011). ”A highly parallel method for
synthesizing DNA repeats enables the discovery of ’smart’ protein polymers.” Nature materials,
10(2), 141–148. htps://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2942
[26] Annunziata, Onofrio et al. “Eﬀect of polyethylene glycol on the liquid-liquid phase transition
in aqueous protein solutions.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America vol. 99,22 (2002): 14165-70. doi:10.1073/pnas.212507199
[27] Mechler, Adam et al. “Speciﬁc and selective peptide-membrane interactions revealed
using
quartz
crystal
microbalance.”
Biophysical
journal
vol.
93,11
(2007):
3907-16.
doi:10.1529/biophysj.107.116525
[28] Nezu, Takashi et al. “Eﬀect of pH and addition of salt on the adsorption behavior of lysozyme
on gold, silica, and titania surfaces observed by quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation
monitoring.” Dental materials journal vol. 27,4 (2008): 573-80. doi:10.4012/dmj.27.573
[29] Ceballos AV, McDonald CJ, Elbaum-Garﬁnkle S. ”Methods and Strategies to Qantify Phase
Separation of Disordered Proteins.” Methods Enzymol. 2018;611:31-50.
doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2018.09.037.
[30] Feric, Marina et al. “Coexisting Liquid Phases Underlie Nucleolar Subcompartments.” Cell vol.
165,7 (2016): 1686-1697. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.04.047
[31] Mocny, Piotr Klok, Harm-Anton. (2016). ”Tribology of surface-grafed polymer brushes.” Mol.
Syst. Des. Eng.. 1. 10.1039/C5ME00010F.
[32] Zhang H, Elbaum-Garﬁnkle S, Langdon EM, Taylor N, Occhipinti P, Bridges AA, Brang-
wynne CP, Gladfelter AS. ”RNA Controls PolyQ Protein Phase Transitions.” Mol Cell. 2015 Oct
15;60(2):220-30. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.09.017.
58
==PAGE:63==
7
Appendix
7.1
Appendix A - Protein Puriﬁcation
Figure 36: Pre-cleavage SDS-page showing eluted solution sample containing protein of right size.
59
==PAGE:64==
Figure 37: Pre and post cleavage SDS-page showing an increase in protein in the range of the cleaved
protein’s size.
Figure 38: Pre-HPLC MaldiTof mass spectrometry.
60
==PAGE:65==
Figure 39: MaldiTof Mes/Tris
Figure 40: Acetate post HPLC Gel. Numbers indicate peak number with hydrophobin size band
61
==PAGE:66==
Figure 41: Mes/Tris post HPLC GEL. Numbers indicate peak number with hydrophobin size band
62
==PAGE:67==
(a)
(b)
Figure 42: HPLC puriﬁcation run. Numbers indicate peak number - time(min) a) Acetate refolding buﬀer solution. Peak 131 of interest. b) MES/tris
refolding buﬀer. Peak 159 of interest
63
==PAGE:68==
Figure 43: MaldiTof acetate refolding buﬀer solution A131 post HPLC
Figure 44: MaldiTof Mes/Tris refolding buﬀer solution M159 post HPLC
64
==PAGE:69==
Figure 45: Size exclusion chromatography of DewA hydrophobin puriﬁcation.
7.2
Appendix B - Pipetting Robot
Tis appendix shows the full script for an example run of the pipeting Opentrons robot, for mixing
of hygroscopic solutions.
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
”””
Created on Tue Oct
6 14:45:55 2020
@author: s153236
from opentrons import protocolapi
65
==PAGE:70==
import pandas as pd
import numpy
# metadata
from io import StringIO
data = StringIO(”””
wellnmb,nacl,water,buffer,protein,glycerol,peg
A1,10,37.62,6,6.38,0,0
”””)
df = pd.readcsv(data, sep=”,”)
metadata = –
’protocolName’: ’multi-sample multi-well pipetting program’,
’author’: ’Andreas Lund’,
’description’: ’Script for pipetting many samples using several different
components’,
’apiLevel’: ’2.2’
class component():
def
i n i t (self, name, loc, volume, mixing = False, conc=1, speed=1,
vial = ’epp2ml’):
self.name = name
self.location = loc
self.concentration = conc
self.volume = volume
self.vial = vial
self.pipettingspeed = speed #change for viscous solutions
self.height = self.liquidlevel() # measurements for a 2 ml eppy
self.mixing = mixing #If True, will mix the sample up and down at
the target
def checkvolume(self, vol):
if self.volume - vol ¡ 10:
print(”””Volume of –0
is too low. At least 10
L
required to
remain in tube. This
operation leaves –1
L
and was refused”””.
format(self.name,vol - self.volume))
return False
else:
return True
66
==PAGE:71==
def liquidlevel(self):
if self.volume¡=500:
height = 2
elif self.volume¿500 and self.volume¡=750:
height = 5
elif self.volume¿750 and self.volume¡=1000:
height = 8
elif self.volume¿1000 and self.volume¡=1250:
height = 11
elif self.volume¿1250 and self.volume¡1500:
height = 15
else:
height = 20
return height
def removevolume(self, vol):
if self.checkvolume(vol):
self.volume -= vol
self.height = self.liquidlevel()
def setvolume(self, vol):
self.volume = vol
self.height = self.liquidlevel()
def run(protocol: protocolapi.ProtocolContext):
# labware
tiprack1 = protocol.loadlabware(’opentrons96tiprack300ul’, ’5’)
tiprack2 = protocol.loadlabware(’opentrons96tiprack300ul’, ’8’)
tiprack3 = protocol.loadlabware(’opentrons96tiprack10ul’, ’6’)
tiprack4 = protocol.loadlabware(’opentrons96tiprack10ul’, ’9’)
#plate = protocol.loadlabware(’corning96wellplate360ulflat’, ’2’)
samples = protocol.loadlabware(’opentrons24aluminumblocknest2mlsnapcap
’,’2’)
# modules
#tcmod = protocol.loadmodule(’thermocycler’)
#platetc = tcmod.loadlabware(’nest96wellplate100ulpcrfullskirt’)
tempmod = protocol.loadmodule(’temperature module’, ’1’)
plate = tempmod.loadlabware(’nest96wellplate200ulflat’)
# pipettes
leftpipette = protocol.loadinstrument(
’p50single’, ’left’, tipracks=[tiprack1,tiprack2])
rightpipette = protocol.loadinstrument(
67
==PAGE:72==
’p10single’, ’right’, tipracks=[tiprack3,tiprack4])
#tempmod.waitfortemperature()
def volsplit(vol):
if vol¡=50:
vols = [vol]
elif vol¿50:
dec = vol//50
uni = vol%50
vols = [50 for n in range(int(dec)-1)]+[(50+uni)/2]*2
return vols
def pipchoice(vols):
if vols¡=10:
pipette = rightpipette
else:
pipette = leftpipette
return pipette
def pipetting(component, vol, target):
if vol¿0:
vols = volsplit(vol)
pipette = pipchoice(vols)
if component.checkvolume(sum(vols)):
component.removevolume(vol)
if len(vols) == 1:
pipette.pickuptip()
pipette.aspirate(vols[0], component.location.bottom(
component.height),
rate=component.pipettingspeed)
pipette.dispense(vols[0], target,
rate=component.pipettingspeed)
pipette.blowout()
pipette.droptip()
else:
pipette.pickuptip()
for i in vols:
pipette.aspirate(i, component.location.bottom(component.
height),
rate=component.pipettingspeed)
pipette.dispense(i, target, rate=component.
pipettingspeed)
pipette.blowout()
68
==PAGE:73==
pipette.droptip()
component.volume = component.volume - sum(vols)
#This function accepts a dataframe for both the volume,
#and a dataframe for the corresponding target by index, as a list of strings
#component.name must match the name of the dataframe column name
def pipettingmultiple(component, vol, target):
#loads and combines list of volumes and their corresponding target,
#then sorts them from lowest to highest volume
pipettingOrder = []
pipettingList = pd.concat([vol,target], axis = 1)
pipettingList = pipettingList.sortvalues(by = component.name)
pipettingList = pipettingList.tonumpy()
#loads pipette
pipetteNew = pipchoice(pipettingList[0,0])
pipette = pipchoice(pipettingList[0,0])
pipette.pickuptip()
#pipetting loop
for i in range(len(pipettingList)):
if pipettingList[i,0]¿0:
pipetteNew = pipchoice(pipettingList[i,0])
#Checks if a larger pipette is needed
if pipette is not pipetteNew:
pipette.droptip()
pipette = pipchoice(pipettingList[i,0])
pipette.pickuptip()
if
pipettingList[i,0]¿0:
pipette.aspirate(pipettingList[i,0], component.location.
bottom(component.
height),
rate=component.pipettingspeed)
pipette.dispense(pipettingList[i,0], plate[pipettingList[i,1
]],
rate=component.pipettingspeed)
pipette.blowout()
pipettingOrder.append(pipettingList[i,1])
69
==PAGE:74==
#Mixes the sample in the well if needed
if component.mixing == True:
pipette.mix(4,pipettingList[i,0],plate[pipettingList[i,1
]])
pipette.blowout()
if i¡len(pipettingList)-1:
pipette.droptip()
pipette.pickuptip()
#pipettePrevious = pipchoice(pipettingList[i,0])
pipette.droptip()
# Actual pipetting
water = component(’water’, volume=2000, speed = 1, loc=samples[’A1’])
buffer = component(’buffer’, volume=2000, speed = 1, loc=samples[’A2’])
nacl = component(’nacl’, volume=2000, speed = 1, loc=samples[’A3’])
peg = component(’peg’, volume=2000, speed = 1, loc=samples[’A4’])
glycerol = component(’glycerol’, volume=2000, speed = 1, loc=samples[’A5’])
protein = component(’protein’, volume=600, speed = 1, loc=samples[’A6’],
mixing = True)
tempmod.settemperature(15)
pipettingmultiple(water, df[’water’], df[’wellnmb’])
pipettingmultiple(buffer, df[’buffer’], df[’wellnmb’])
pipettingmultiple(nacl, df[’nacl’],
df[’wellnmb’])
pipettingmultiple(peg, df[’peg’],
df[’wellnmb’])
pipettingmultiple(glycerol, df[’glycerol’],
df[’wellnmb’])
tempmod.settemperature(40)
pipettingmultiple(protein, df[’protein’], df[’wellnmb’])
70
==PAGE:75==
7.3
Appendix C - QCM
Figure 46: Atempted modelling of QCM Ddx4 deposited layer thickness.
71
==PAGE:76==
(a)
(b)
Figure 47: Buﬀer QCM control for lysozyme experiments on SiO2 sensor. Adjusted for drif it
is similar to the gold sensor
72
==PAGE:77==
(a)
(b)
Figure 48: New Au sensor QCM experiments shows large signal shifs and subsequent signal
loss
73
