==PAGE:1==
Implicit Learning and Dynamic
Epistemic Logic
Theis Kierkegaard Hauge
s154438
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis, we use dynamic epistemic logic to model implicit learning meth-
ods. First, an overview of the various memory systems, in cognitive psychology,
and their interconnections are presented.
Hereafter, we discuss the diﬀerent
implicit learning methods: skill learning, priming, classical and operant con-
ditioning, habituation, and sensitisation. Following this, we give an introduc-
tion to dynamic epistemic logic needed to model the diﬀerent implicit learning
methods. This introduction includes: a basic modal language, possible world
models, plausibility models, and temporal plausibility models. These are then
made dynamic through public announcements, lexicographical upgrades, and
elite upgrades. Hereafter, we discuss the modelling of implicit learning using
dynamic epistemic logic. First, we model the memory modalities as agents. We
then use propositions to represent stimuli, both external and internal, which,
through implicit learning, are associated with each other. This association is
then modelled using plausibility relations assigned to the memory agents, which
believes the association plausible. Temporal relations are used to model the
passing of a ﬁxed time interval between a past experienced stimulus to the re-
sponse occurring in the present. As it turns out, the implicit learning methods,
from a psychological point of view, are similar in nature. They establish asso-
ciations between stimuli and change our behaviour based on these associations.
As these learning methods are modelled in epistemic logic, we ﬁnd that they,
also in epistemic logic, share many similarities. Among others the sets of agents
and the epistemic models used. The greatest dissimilarity between them is the
sets of propositions, which are varying, depending on the external stimulus and
the internal stimuli it is being associated with.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The work has been supervised by assoc.
prof. Nina Gierasimczuk from DTU compute.
This thesis was handed in 3rd of February 2021.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deep and sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Nina
Gierasimczuk, for her help and guidance. In particular, I would like to thank her
for helping creating this thesis, where we got to explore the peculiar combination
of cognitive psychology and dynamic epistemic logic, and for encouraging me
to ﬁnd new paths where logic can be applied. I have learned so much working
together with her, both on an academical and personal level.
I am very thankful to Marcus Pagh for inspiring the subject of this thesis, and
for his help ﬁnding out how petty I actually am.
I would also like to thank Victoria Feldvoss Christiani for sharing her psycho-
logical knowledge with me, and allowing me to ask a magnitude of questions
about the memory and implicit learning.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Introduction
1
Cognitive Psychology
7
2.1
Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Working Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Long-term Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.2.1
Declarative memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.2.2
Non-declarative memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Nervous System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Limbic system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Associative Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.1
Skill Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.1.1
Adaption skill learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.1.2
Sequence skill learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.2
Priming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.3
Conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.3.1
Classical Conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.3.2
Operant Conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.5
Non-associative Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.5.1
Habituation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.5.2
Sensitisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
Epistemic logic
41
3.1
Epistemic logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.1.1
Basic Modal Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.1.2
Possible World Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.1.3
Plausibility Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.1.4
Temporal plausibility model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.2
Dynamic Epistemic Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.2.1
Public Announcements Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.2.1.1
Successful and Unsuccessful Announcements . .
50
3.2.2
Dynamic Plausibility Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.2.3
Dynamic Temporal Plausibility Models . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
53
4.1
Memory and Epistemic Logic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.1
Agents in the memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.2
Models in the Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2
Public Announcements in the Nervous System . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.1
Successful vs. Unsuccessful Announcement . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3
Learning in Epistemic Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.4
Associative Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4.1
Skill Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4.2
Priming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.4.3
Classical Conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.4.4
Operant Conditioning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.5
Non-associative Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.5.1
Habituation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.5.2
Sensitisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Conclusion and Further Work
91
5.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.2
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Appendices
99
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
Blinking— a natural reﬂex protecting our eyes from dust and lubricating them.
We do not notice when we blink. Or now we do. We always do. Our memory has,
implicitly, learned that no relevant information can be extracted from blinking.
The memory will, therefore, keep the perception of blinking away from our
awareness.
It still enters and is stored in the memory.
Likewise, talking to
another person, our memory stops us from noticing the other persons blinking.
If the other person started blinking twice in quick succession, we would still
not notice. This unawareness of the double blink can be used to establish an
association between the blinking and a subsequent triggered natural response.
This response, for example, could be asking to elaborate on the topic you are
talking about. If this has occurred a suﬃcient amount of times, you are no
longer needed to be asked to elaborate. Simple seeing the other person blinking
twice would trigger you to elaborate further.
This is known as implicit learning, one of the main areas of research within
cognitive psychology, that, within recent years, has become increasingly popular.
The increased popularity is caused by a new approach to traditional cognitive
psychology, namely, the probabilistic phenomenon, Bayesian learning.
“In science, progress is possible. In fact, if one believes in Bayes’
theorem, scientiﬁc progress is inevitable as predictions are made and
as beliefs are tested and reﬁned.” — Nate Silver [35]
Using Bayes’ theorem and Bayesian learning previous experiments are recreated,
tested, and reﬁned with a Bayesian approach. Allowing a more quantitative
approach to an otherwise qualitative ﬁeld.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
Before the Bayesian approaches, implicit learning was documented through
qualitative experiments. Amnesic patients and animals were tested in special
environments, designed to observe and test implicit knowledge and learning.
Through these experiments, cognitive models and implicit learning methods
were proposed, sometimes based on a single experiment on a single test subject
[44]. These models and learning methods are now being recreated and reﬁned
by Bayesian learning [14, 27, 40]. Another approach to learning is the more
philosophical ﬁeld, epistemic logic. Epistemic logic oﬀers a qualitative approach
to learning and the process of knowledge change. Through logical frameworks,
epistemic logic models the knowledge of agents [16].
Knowledge is obtained
through learning, where, learning is a dynamic process, thereby, making ob-
taining knowledge a dynamic process. To accommodate this, the logic is made
dynamic [7]. Using the AGM postulates [1, 18] epistemic is made dynamic by
including beliefs and belief revision. Thereby, being able to expand, contract,
and revise a set of beliefs. By weakening the notion of knowledge, to beliefs
of knowledge, it allows the logic to more freely express knowledge and how we
obtain it. A third approach to learning is formal learning theory.
“Formal learning theory is the mathematical embodiment of a nor-
mative epistemology.
It deals with the question of how an agent
should use observations about her environment to arrive at correct
and informative conclusions.” — Oliver Schulte [34]
The mathematical embodiment of formal learning theory makes it perfect for
learning within computer science ﬁelds like artiﬁcial intelligence and machine
learning. Thereby, enabling computers and robots to learn like humans. Formal
learning theory can then be combined with dynamic epistemic logic [6], by
providing a general framework that can interpret belief revision policies as formal
learning methods. This allows us to bridge the process of knowledge change
in epistemic logic with formal learning theory, enabling a new way of seeing
knowledge and learning.
The question remains, how the connections relate to the cognitive reality of hu-
mans, and in particular to implicit learning. What is common for the discussed
learning methods, is their approach to knowledge and learning. They all argue
that knowledge is obtained through revisions, announcements, or observations.
In cognitive psychology, knowledge is deﬁned as either explicit or implicit. Ex-
plicit knowledge is the knowledge, that we are aware of knowing. The knowledge
we actively can obtain through revisions, announcements, and observations.
The opposite is implicit knowledge.
Implicit knowledge is automatically ob-
tained knowledge, which, by establishing associations, creates the foundation
of our implicit behaviour. This knowledge is not obtained through revisions,
==PAGE:13==
3
announcements, or active observations, like explicit knowledge, but rather by
implicitly established associations, that is yet to be modelled.
Cognitive psychology has a long history of researching implicit learning. Through
experiments, implicit learning methods have been uncovered. In this thesis, we
will explore the implicit learning methods and how they can be modelled in
epistemic logic.
Pavlov and his experiment with his dogs is one of the most well known psy-
chological experiments, in which, Pavlov discovered classical conditioning [11].
Classical conditioning is when an external stimulus is associated with an internal
stimulus that triggers a natural response. In Pavlov’s experiment, the external
stimulus was the sound of a bell, which the dogs associated with food, as Pavlov
rang the bell every time the dogs were presented with food. The dog’s natural
response to seeing food is salivation. Therefore, the dogs would start salivating
when hearing the sound of the bell. This experiment was soon followed by B.F.
Skinner experimenting on rats [36]. The rats were presented with a lever. If
they pressed the lever, food would drop down to them, thereby, reinforcing the
behaviour of pressing the lever. This became known as operant conditioning,
where, a behaviour is reinforced with either a reward or punishment. Skinner
found that the rats were more prone to exhibit positively reinforced behaviour,
compared to negatively reinforced behaviour. This was later tested on humans
where similar results were found. Later, an umbrella term for these kinds of
implicit learning methods was introduced: associative learning. As the name
suggests, associative learning creates associations between stimuli.
In classi-
cal conditioning, a conditioned stimulus is associated with an unconditioned
stimulus. In operant conditioning, the behaviour is associated with an emotion
triggered by a reinforcer. This leaves only the two last associative learning meth-
ods: skill learning and priming. Skill learning is the association between skill
and the performance of that skill. Skills like walking, playing the piano or ten-
nis. Through implicit learning, skills are obtained, maintained, and improved.
Finally, the last associative learning method is priming. Priming is the exposure
to a stimulus, which increases the probability of a speciﬁcally associated stimu-
lus as a later response. The association can be between two or more semantics,
people and emotions, or between smells and the urge for speciﬁc behaviour.
The opposite to associative learning is non-associative learning. Non-associative
learning inﬂuences how external stimuli are perceived. Most external stimuli
are ignored by the memory, to help us better focus on the stimuli that matters.
For example, when there is a clock in the room but after a while the ticking
“disappears”. This is the memory ignoring the external stimulus, the ticking of
the clock, and it is known as habituation. Then, if the clock is mentioned, the
ticking of the clock can be “heard” again. This is dishabituation, the negation of
habituation. Habituation, being one of two non-associative learning methods,
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
teaches the memory to ignore stimuli. The other method is sensitisation, which
makes the memory perceive subsequent stimuli more strongly.
Sensitisation
usually occurs as a response to a strong external stimulus, like a bomb. This
sends the memory into a state of alarm, where subsequent stimuli are perceived
exaggerated in-order to react more strongly to them.
Common for all implicit learning methods is, that they occur in the memory,
more speciﬁcally the non-declarative memory. As it turns out, a crucial aspect
of implicit learning is the involvement of various kinds of memory, and their
interconnections, both to each other, but also to the nervous system. The mem-
ory is divided into two: the working memory and the long-term memory. The
long-term memory is further divided into: the declarative memory and the non-
declarative memory. The working memory is our awareness. It is the gate to the
long-term memory, where we perceive and actualise visual, spatial, and auditory
inputs, and movements. Habituation and sensitisation are mainly aﬀecting the
working memory, as it is here we perceive external stimuli. All information in
the working memory is transmitted to the declarative memory in the long-term
memory. The declarative memory is also known as the explicit memory, as it is
the memory that we have access to. Semantic information and knowledge are
stored here, together with all our past experiences. This information, together
with information from the nervous system, is what establishes the associations
in associative learning. These associations are established in the non-declarative
memory or the implicit memory. All knowledge that we cannot explicitly recall
is stored here.
Other key systems in implicit learning is the nervous and limbic system. The
nervous system transmits signals from our body to the memory, and from the
memory to the body. This is how all external stimuli are sent to the working
memory, and how orders about movement, from the memory, are executed in
the body. The limbic system is a subsystem of the nervous system and is in
charge of our emotions. We choose to model the memory modalities as agents
that share knowledge and are simultaneously updated throughout the learning
process. As it turns out, the semantics of modal epistemic logic lends itself to
the analysis of those interactions. The diﬀerent implicit learning methods can,
with the help of epistemic logic, be modelled in a more qualitative framework
than the cognitive. Thereby, allowing an approach to obtain implicit knowledge
in the epistemic framework.
The ﬁndings of this thesis are of a conceptional nature, and in particular, they
shed light on the diﬀerences between various types of implicit learning, that
are often seen as very similar. The associative learning methods are all centred
around establishing associations between stimuli, but dissimilar in the types of
stimuli. Whereas, the non-associative learning methods are all centred around
perception of stimuli, but varies in how they aﬀect the perception and when.
==PAGE:15==
5
The non-associative epistemic models reﬂect this dissimilarity in the nature of
the propositions.
This thesis has ﬁve chapters: introduction, cognitive psychology, epistemic logic,
implicit learning and dynamic epistemic logic, and a conclusion. In the chap-
ter cognitive psychology, we will ﬁrst discuss the memory (Section 2.1) and its
diﬀerent systems: working memory (Section 2.1.1) and the long-term memory
(Section 2.1.2). This is followed by a short presentation of the nervous and the
limbic system in Section 2.2. With the memory and the nervous system pre-
sented, the diﬀerent implicit learning methods can be discussed. Starting with
the associative learning methods in Section 2.4. Associative learning consist of
the following learning methods: skill learning (Section 2.4.1), priming (Section
2.4.2), classical conditioning (Section 2.4.3.1), and operant conditioning (Sec-
tion 2.4.3.2). Finishing the cognitive psychology chapter are the non-associative
learning methods: habituation (Section 2.5.1) and sensitisation (Section 2.5.2).
Then, in the chapter about epistemic logic, we will discuss epistemic logic. First,
epistemic logic is presented, in Section 3.1, followed by the expansion of epis-
temic logic into dynamic epistemic logic in Section 3.2. The following epistemic
logic is discussed: possible world models (Section 3.1.2), made dynamic with
public announcements (Section 3.2.1), plausibility models (Section 3.1.3), to-
gether with lexicographical and elite upgrades (Section 3.2.2), and temporal
plausibility models (Section 3.1.4), likewise, made dynamic with lexicographi-
cal upgrades. Hereafter, follows a chapter where each of the implicit learning
methods are modelled in dynamic epistemic logic. Before the modelling can be
discussed a short discussion, in Section 4.1, about the diﬀerent memory systems
as epistemic agents are necessary. This is followed by, a short discussion, in
Section 4.2, about successful and unsuccessful announcements in the nervous
system. In Section 4.3 we will discuss the implicit learning methods modelled in
epistemic logic. Following the order from cognitive psychology, Section 4.4 dis-
cusses the associative learning methods: skill learning (Section 4.4.1), priming
(Section 4.4.2), classical conditioning (Section 4.4.3), and operant conditioning
(Section 4.4.4). Lastly, in Section 4.5, are the two non-associative learning meth-
ods, habituation (Section 4.5.1), and sensitisation (Section 4.5.2), modelled in
dynamic epistemic logic. Finally, in Chapter 4.5.2, the conclusion and further
work are presented.
==PAGE:16==
6
Cognitive Psychology
==PAGE:17==
Cognitive Psychology
Cognitive psychology explores how we humans learn and perceive the world.
From the Oxford Dictionary, cognition is “the process by which knowledge and
understanding are developed in the mind”1, whereas psychology is deﬁned as “the
scientiﬁc study of the mind and how it inﬂuences behaviour".2 Combining these
two deﬁnitions gives us cognitive psychology—the scientiﬁc study of the process
by which knowledge and understanding are developed in the mind. This Chapter
will focus on the theories of how we remember and learn implicitly. First, we will
present a model of memory. In Section 2.1.1 we will focus on working memory,
and then we will move on to long-term memory, divided into the declarative
(Section 2.1.2.1) and the non-declarative memory (Section 2.1.2.2). In Section
2.3 will discuss various kinds of learning: associative (Section 2.4) and non-
associative learning (Section 2.5).
2.1
Memory
In 1983 Fodor [17] suggested that human memory consists of modules, which can
be seen as computational devices. These modules have to satisfy the following
properties:
• domain speciﬁcity;
• informational encapsulation;
1https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/us/deﬁnition/english/cognition
2https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/us/deﬁnition/english/psychology?q=psychology
==PAGE:18==
8
Cognitive Psychology
• shallow output.
Domain speciﬁcity is limiting the information the modules can accept and pro-
cess to a speciﬁc domain. Thereby allowing the modules to handle only domain
speciﬁc information. Informational encapsulation dictates that the information
in the modules cannot be accessed at will. Neither by us or the other modules.
That means that we cannot access the content or operations that are going on in
the diﬀerent modules, except through the shallow output. The shallow output is
the connection between the modules. Through the shallow output, information
becomes available to us and other modules. The output that comes from the
modules has no other meaning except the value it is assigned by the module.
Building upon Fodor’s theory, Moscovitch proposed to divide the human mem-
ory into four components or modules [26]:
• working memory;
• episodic memory;
• semantic memory;
• non-declarative memory.
These modules are categorised into two overall components of the memory: the
working memory and the long-term memory.3
The long-term memory is di-
vided into two parts: the declarative (explicit) memory and the non-declarative
(implicit) memory.
Below we will present the above-mentioned components:
Section 2.1.1 will focus on the working memory and Section 2.1.2 will give an
overview of the long-term memory (declarative in Section 2.1.2.1, further divided
into episodic and semantic, and non-declarative in Section 2.1.2.2).
2.1.1
Working Memory
Initially, the memory was split into short-term- and long-term memory, but later
the short-term memory was replaced by a multi-component model of working
memory, ﬁrst with the work by Atkinson and Shiﬃn [2], which was reworked
by Baddeley and Hitch [3], and later just by Baddeley [4, 5], and let us quote:
3Earlier the working memory was known as the short-term memory, but with Moscovitch
model the short-term memory was overridden by the working memory.[15]
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Memory
9
“Working memory refers to the system or systems that are assumed to be neces-
sary to keep things in mind while performing complex tasks such as reasoning,
comprehension, and learning.”
The working memory should be seen as a limited capacity multi-component gate
to the long-term memory, which “provides temporary storage and manipulation
of the information necessary for such complex cognitive tasks as language com-
prehension, learning, and reasoning” [3]. Just as Moscovitch’s modality of the
memory the components should be seen as domain speciﬁc, informational encap-
sulated and with a shallow output. The crucial component is the novel episodic
buﬀer, which plays a central role in the model of memory [4], we will describe it
in more detail later. Apart from the episodic buﬀer, the working memory consist
of three other components: the central executive, the visuo-spatial sketch-pad,
and the phonological loop. The central executive controls our attention span
and is connected to the visuo-spatial sketch-pad, the episodic buﬀer, and the
phonological loop. The episodic buﬀer is also connected to the visuo-spatial
sketch-pad and the phonological loop.
Furthermore, the components of working memory allow connections to their
corresponding parts of the long-term memory. In particular, the episodic buﬀer
is connected to the episodic long-term memory (which is explained in greater
detail in Section 2.1.2). The visuo-spatial sketch-pad can communicate with the
visual semantics in the long-term memory, and ﬁnally, the phonological loop
is connected to the language centre in the long-term memory.
The working
memory, together with the connections between the diﬀerent components can
be seen in Figure 2.1.
The Central Executive
The Central Executive component is the attention-
controlling system with no storage capacity of its own. This system is responsible
for keeping our focus on a particular event. Furthermore, its role is moving
information from the storage (either in the visuo-spatial sketch-pad or in the
phonological loop) to the episodic buﬀer allowing awareness of multi-module
dependent information.
The Visuo-spatial Sketch-pad
The visuo-spatial sketch-pad is in control of
our inner visualisation and our spatial awareness. Recently, it has been proposed
that the visuo-spatial sketch-pad also contains a kinaesthetic component, which
allows us to move [4]. This component of the working memory allows us to
visualise images, hand-eye coordination, and see shapes and colours. Together
with the long-term memory, this component of the working memory is also
responsible for recognising patterns and faces, perform mathematical operations,
==PAGE:20==
10
Cognitive Psychology
Visuo-spatial 
sketch-pad
Episodic buffer
Phonological loop
Executive central
Visual Semantic
memory
Episodic memory
Language 
Working memory
Declarative memory
Figure 2.1: Figure of the multi-component model of working memory.
and in general, understand what we see. As is the case with all the components
in the working memory, the storage space here is very limited. The visuo-spatial
sketch-pad storage is very limited. A connection to the long-term memory is
therefore needed for obtaining any visuo-spatial information. The visuo-spatial
sketch-pad is therefore connected to the visual parts of the semantic memory.
The long-term memory and semantic memory will be discussed shortly.
The Phonological Loop
This component in the working memory is in charge
of our inner voice. It is the one that allows reading “aloud” in one’s head, through
so-called subvocalization or inner speech. The phonological loop has two func-
tions: the ﬁrst function, keeping auditory information in the phonological store
by using subvocalization. This allows us to keep remembering up to a limited
number of words.
Depending on the words meaning, length, connectedness,
and familiarity, one can remember what is equivalent to what can be said out
loud in 2 seconds [3]. The second function of this system allows us to read and
understand words, thereby making the phonological loop necessary to acquire
vocabularies in both our native tongue and in other languages. As can be seen
in Figure 2.1 the phonological loop is directly connected to the language centre
in the semantic memory. This will be explored in greater detail later.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Memory
11
The Episodic Buﬀer
The last component of the working memory is the
episodic buﬀer. It was introduced in 2000 by Baddeley [4] as a way to explain
how the components could interact together, and how one could be aware of
what is going on in the working memory. The episodic buﬀer is temporary stor-
age where the other components of the working memory can interact through
participation in a multi-modal code—the information exchanged through the
shallow output. Here, the visuo-spatial sketch-pad can communicate with the
phonological loop to combine visuo-spatial and auditory information into a con-
scious idea of what it is, that you are looking at, at any given moment. The
central executive is in charge of making you aware of the information coming
out of the episodic buﬀer.
For example, when looking at Michelangelo’s statue of David, the central exec-
utive would keep the focus on the statue, the visuo-spartial sketch-pad would
make an inner visualisation of David, and the phonological loop would name it
David. This information would then all come together and made available to
the awareness by the episodic buﬀer.
The episodic buﬀer has a very limited capacity, so any storage here is temporary
and needs to be transferred to the episodic long-term memory for us to remember
David at a later point. This transfer is also done through the episodic buﬀer.
Furthermore, the episodic buﬀer can also reﬂect, manipulate, and modify the
information it has obtained from the components or the long-term memory.
2.1.2
Long-term Memory
In 1972, Tulving [42] proposed a model for the declarative part of the long-term
memory, where the information is actively declared and later retrieved to the
conscious level. The declarative memory is also known as the explicit memory.
Later, in 1988, Squire and Zola [38] proposed to enrich the model of the long-
term memory by the non-declarative memory, where unconscious information
is stored. It is also known as the implicit or procedural memory. The resulting
model, which is largely accepted by the cognitive psychological world, can be
seen in Figure 2.2.
2.1.2.1
Declarative memory
Tulving proposed, that the declarative memory is split into two information
processing systems: the semantic and the episodic memory. These systems both
use cognitive and perceptual systems to selectively receive and store information.
==PAGE:22==
12
Cognitive Psychology
Long-Term Memory
Declarative Memory
Non-Declarative
Memory
Semantic
Episodic
Skill Learning
Priming
Conditioning
Non-Associative
Learning
Figure 2.2: Modiﬁed version of Squire and Zolas model of the long-term mem-
ory [37]
The selectivity is in place for the two systems to retain various aspects of the
information received. We will return to this soon. The other major functionality
of these systems is to transmit the information stored in them, to other systems
responsible for behaviour and awareness. The two memory systems are also
believed to be responsible for translating the information into code, the other
systems can understand.
They diﬀer in that they are domain speciﬁc, that is, they only retain informa-
tion speciﬁc to their domain. Their references diﬀer in that the episodic memory
only has autobiographical references, or references relating to oneself, and the
semantic only cognitive references, or the references relating to facts and seman-
tics. Finally, they diﬀer in how they retrieve information and their vulnerability
to interference.
Episodic memory
This information system has all our autobiographical in-
formation stored. William James described an autobiographical reference as:
“Memory requires more then mere dating of the fact in the past. It must be
dated in my past” [21]. Autobiographical information can be seen as our ex-
periences. For the episodic memory to keep track of our experiences, when we
experience an event it is marked with a temporal stamp. This is done so that
we can have a sense of time in our mind; we can relate the experience to other
experiences which allows the episodic memory to have a retrieval cue. All based
on the temporal stamps. The temporal stamps come from the semantic memory.
When information is recorded into the episodic memory, it has to be recorded
directly into it, as the episodic memory cannot create information on its own.
This is caused by the episodic memory not having any inferential reasoning or
generalisation. That is, the episodic memory cannot create information but only
store already available information.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Memory
13
Information retrieval is done with the use of the temporal stamp if the informa-
tion of the experience exists in the memory. The memory cannot retrieve any
information, that has not previously been recorded into the episodic memory.
Furthermore, the episodic memory is susceptible to interference from other in-
puts. It is not certain how this can occur, but it has been theorised, that an
experience is never forgotten, just transformed as a consequence of interference
with the temporal coding of stored events. Since our experiences always con-
tains a temporal stamp, and we can only retrieve them if the temporal stamp is
suﬃciently accurately speciﬁed by the retrieval cue, then interference with tem-
poral coding may render the experience inaccessible, or at least more diﬃcult
to retrieve. This could be caused by a wrong encoding of the experience or a
later experience changing the temporal stamp, before it has entered the storage,
thereby causing it to be related to the wrong experience.
Finally, the episodic memory can also organise or reorganise information. That
is, it can take past experiences and change the memory trace of them, purely
based on the inﬂuence of the presence of other traces that have been placed in
the episodic memory. A memory trace is any memory that has been stored in
the brain. This could be based on manipulation or information received at the
present about the past, that changes the memory of the past: the experience
itself or the temporal stamp connected to it. As a result, it will be remembered
diﬀerently, or at a time, that is diﬀerent from when it occurs. As described,
the episodic memory’s job is to remember our experiences, but without the
extraction of information from them, we would never learn from them. This is
the job of the semantic memory.
Semantic memory
In this system, all our thoughts and perceptions are
stored on a long-term basis: concepts, relations, quantities, events, facts, propo-
sitions, and so on. When obtaining a new piece of semantic information, it is
logged into an existing cognitive structure—the semantic memory will always
have some cognitive reference to log information into. When an input signal
is given to the semantic memory, a referent with the signiﬁed meaning is re-
turned. That is, if the input signal is “Pythagoras theorem” then “a2 + b2 = c2”
is returned. An important part of the semantic memory is, that information
can either be recorded piece by piece or indirectly. Piece by piece will hap-
pen when you learn Pythagoras theorem for the ﬁrst time, then the theorem
will be stored in the semantic memory, under nested cognitive structure4. The
theorem will be experienced as an episodic event, for instance, as sitting in a
classroom and learning about Pythagoras theorem. From the episodic memory,
the semantic memory will isolate the theorem itself and log it in the memory
4Not much is know about these cognitive structures, other then they are most likely nested
within each other, which will be described in greater detail later.
==PAGE:24==
14
Cognitive Psychology
as Pythagoras theorem. Through semantic encoding of an item, in the episodic
memory, the information is extracted. So, when seeing Pythagoras theorem for
the ﬁrst time, the semantic memory encodes it into a cognitive structure with
the inﬂuence of what is already in the semantic memory. The inﬂuence could
be from what is already known about mathematical theorems. For the indirect
insertion of information, the semantic memory itself deduces information from
other pieces of information. This is known as inductive inference [40, 45]5. Just
as the Pythagoras theorem was recorded from an episodic event, retrieval will
happen in the same way. An episodic event is logged in the episodic memory,
and when Pythagoras theorem is called, the semantic memory will then respond
with “a2 +b2 = c2”. This can similarly also happen for information in the seman-
tic memory that is not directly learned. That is the use of inductive interference,
generalisation, application of rules and formulas, and possibly the use of other
algorithms. They are all important methods for the semantic memory and the
utilisation of the information stored in the semantic memory. It is important
to note that retrieval of information from the semantic memory will not cause
any change in the memory. That is, remembering the Pythagoras theorem will
not change the theorem. If it is wrong, it is caused by interference of the mem-
ory, or by the erasure of information, not the remembering of the information.
Interference and erasure in the semantic memory are not well understood. It is
assumed that the information in the semantic memory is encoded into cognitive
structures, using multi-modal structures (input signal being an episodic event,
the output being information from the semantic memory). This embeddedness
into the structures is assumed to protect the stored information from interferes
with other inputs or even from erasure. Finally, it is assumed, that the semantic
memory can be organised by creating a grouping of items in the memory, which
share a common semantic relation, between the corresponding concepts of the
items.
2.1.2.2
Non-declarative memory
As previously described, the long-term memory consists of two memory centres:
the declarative (explicit) and the non-declarative (implicit). The declarative
memory can be seen as everything we consciously remember, facts, and experi-
ences, the non-declarative is everything our “body” remembers, that we cannot
explicitly recall. An example could be everything our body needs to “know”
to ride a bike, brush our teeth, or paint a painting. So basically, everything
one can do, but cannot explain how to do. This duality of the memory has
been hypothesised since the late 1800s, but it was not documented until 1988
by Squire and Zola [38]. This paper on the non-declarative memory was mainly
5Within epistemic logic this is known as modus ponens
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Memory
15
based on amnesia patients. Amnesia patients have an impaired declarative mem-
ory, but intact non-declarative memory, allowing the psychologist to study the
distinctions between declarative and non-declarative memory. Squire and Zola
proposed a model of the long-term memory consisting of Tulvings declarative
memory and the procedural non-declarative memory.
An important part of the non-declarative memory is its collection of learning
abilities, all of which can acquire information implicitly They are split into two
categories: associative and non-associative learning. The ﬁrst of the associative
learning abilities are skill learning. When ﬁrst learning to ride a bike, one most
often fails the ﬁrst couple of tries, until the non-declarative memory has learned,
and remembered how to ride a bike. This is commonly known as skill learning.
It is also known as motor learning or procedural learning.
The information
about riding a bike is only available through the performance of riding the bike
and can therefore only be accessed by performance. It can be explained, that
one should just pedal the bike and stay upright to ride the bike, but one will
not get very far with those instructions if it is the ﬁrst time they ride a bike.
We will discuss skill learning in Section 2.4.1.
As it can be seen in Figure 2.2, the non-declarative memory consists of more
learning abilities than just skill learning. Another being priming, which is as-
sociating an external action or stimulus, like riding the bike, with an increased
probability of a speciﬁc response, like the feeling happy. Later, when thinking
about going for a bike ride, it will, with increased probability make one happy. In
Section 2.4.2 we discuss diﬀerent kinds of priming, and how the non-declarative
memory uses priming.
The last of the associative learning abilities is conditioning. Conditioning is
increasing the probability of performing a certain behaviour. This is split into
two categories: classical and operant. Classical conditioning is when a condi-
tioning stimulus is generating a response by pairing a neutral stimulus with a
conditioned stimulus. Meaning, that when the conditioned stimulus happens,
a response based on the neutral stimulus is triggered. We will discuss this in
Section 2.4.3.1.
Operant conditioning is reinforcing behaviour by the use of
a positive or negative reinforcer. Thereby, leading to an increased probability
of that behaviour being performed. In Section 2.4.3.2 operant conditioning is
discussed in greater detail.
Finally, the non-declarative memory contains non-associative learning abilities,
which is how the memory can either ignore or become more aware of our sur-
roundings. We will further discuss this in Section 2.5.
==PAGE:26==
16
Cognitive Psychology
2.2
Nervous System
The nervous system is a collection of nerves transmitting signals through the
body. These signals are responsible for movement, reﬂexes, brain activity, and
sending information from our senses to the brain. Here, the signal is translated
into awareness of the surroundings. The nervous system is divided into two main
systems: the central nervous system, located in the brain and spinal cord, and
the peripheral nervous system, i.e., all the nerves connecting the central nervous
system to the rest of the body. These two systems consist of two diﬀerent nerve
ﬁbres: sensory nerve ﬁbres and motor nerve ﬁbres.
The sensory nerve ﬁbres transmit signals from receptors in the skin and or-
gans, through the peripheral nervous system, to the central nervous system—
transmitting signals from the senses to the memory. As the central nervous
system receives these signals, it can trigger motor nerve ﬁbres to carry signals
to eﬀector terminals. Eﬀector terminals are located in muscles and glands, and
when receiving a given signal they will produce a speciﬁc response. This re-
sponse can be a movement or other functionalities of the body. A subsystem
of the motor nerve ﬁbres is the autonomic nerve ﬁbres. Their main purpose
is to transmit signals to regulate automatic reﬂexes in the iris of the eye and
the smooth muscles, which include: the heart, and glands. Further, a subset of
these: blood vessels, lungs, stomach, colon, bladder, and other organs relating
to the nervous system. The nerve ﬁbres are used implicitly—it is not something
one is aware of. The heart is pumping blood, the lungs are breathing, the eyelids
are blinking, etc., without awareness. These reﬂexes are divided into two cate-
gories: inherited and learned reﬂexes. Inherited reﬂex is, for example, tapping
the knee and the central nervous system triggering an automatic response forc-
ing the leg to kick. This is caused by a directly linked motor autonomic nerve
in the spinal cord, which forms the knee-kicking reﬂex. Reﬂexes can also be
learned by continuous repetition of voluntary actions, starting as a signal from
the memory and performed through the peripheral nervous system, e.g., with
enough practice, catching a ball ﬂying towards you can become a learned reﬂex.
This is only possible through repetitive training, so that, specialised autonomic
nerve ﬁbres are created in the spinal cord’s nervous system, thereby bypassing
higher nerve centres, like the memory, and creating a learned reﬂex. These are
also known as conditional reﬂexes.
In Figure 2.3, a model of the cognitive relations between the working mem-
ory, declarative memory, and the nervous system is shown. Here, the nervous
system is connected with the visuo-spatial sketch-pad in the working memory.
As described earlier, the visuo-spatial sketch-pad is in control of our spatial
awareness and kinaesthetic abilities—when the nervous system is transmitting
signals about the activation of muscles, producing movement, the visuo-spatial
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Nervous System
17
Visuo-spatial 
sketch-pad
Episodic buffer
Phonological loop
Executive central
Visual Semantic
memory
Episodic memory
Language 
Nervous system
Limbic system
Working memory
Declarative memory
Nerves
Figure 2.3: Model of the connection between the nervous system, limbic sys-
tem, and the working memory.
sketch-pad will become aware of this. Likewise, if we decide to perform an ac-
tion of movement, the visuo-spatial sketch-pad transmits a signal to the nervous
system. Following, the transmission the action of movement is performed. It is
unknown how the two systems transmit signals to each other, but it is presumed,
there is some connection between the two. This unknown connection is shown
in the Figure as unidirectional from the nervous system to the visuo-spatial
sketch-pad. Finally, in Figure 2.3 a bidirectional connection exists between the
nervous system and the limbic system. The limbic system is a subsystem of the
nervous system—all signals from the limbic system are transmitted through the
nervous system. The limbic system is presented in the next section.
2.2.1
Limbic system
As proposed by Phelps and Anderson [28], the limbic system is in charge of our
emotional memory and responses—how to interpret and react to emotions. It
is also where the brain “experiences” memories and triggers emotional responses
to the memories. Some emotions are more strongly experienced, like fear and
arousal. This is caused by the survival instinct urging us to survive when those
strongly experienced emotions are present. If a dangerous stimulus occurs, the
limbic system responds with strong fear, triggering the nervous system to react
accordingly. Fear is one of our basic emotions, together with: happiness, sad-
ness, disgust, anger, and surprise. All other emotions are a combination of these
==PAGE:28==
18
Cognitive Psychology
[30]. These are all triggered in diﬀerent areas of the limbic system. Further, the
episodic memory relies on the emotional memory to remember the memories
connected to experiences stored in the episodic memory.
2.3
Learning
In the next two sections learning in the non-declarative memory will be dis-
cussed, ﬁrst, associative learning, and then non-associative learning. The scope
of this thesis is limited to implicit learning—all learning occurring in the non-
declarative memory6. The non-declarative memory learns from external stim-
ulus, which, as deﬁned as American Psychological Association7 is ”any agent,
event, or situation—internal or external—that elicits a response from an organ-
ism”. External stimulus is any outside event evoking organs or tissue to transmit
signals through the nervous system. Most often the signals will be transmitted
to the memory in the brain, where the organism becomes aware of the signals,
and thereby the events occurring. An internal stimulus is any stimulus evoking
an internal response from the nervous system.
2.4
Associative Learning
Associative learning is a learning process, in which a stimulus is associated with
another stimulus. The stimulus could be internal, external, a new response,
or a new behaviour 8. The stimulus could be, for instance, a tennis ball ﬂying
towards you or smelling the scent of lemon. Their corresponding responses would
be to hit the ball with a tennis racket or start cleaning. These stimuli, with an
associated response, will teach us how to play tennis or for us to start cleaning.
In this section, these two types of learning will be presented: skill learning,
e.g., how to play tennis, is discussed in Section 2.4.1. Hereafter, priming, e.g.,
starting to clean upon smelling a lemon scent, is discussed in Section 2.4.2. This
is followed by two conditioning learning methods: classical conditioning (Section
2.4.3.1) and operant conditioning(Section 2.4.3.2). As examples we explore how
external stimuli can aﬀect our blinking pattern or reinforcing the usage of candy
machines.
6As opposed to semantic learning in the semantic memory
7https://dictionary.apa.org/stimulus
8https://www.britannica.com/topic/associative-learning
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Associative Learning
19
2.4.1
Skill Learning
Krakauer et al. [24] present the general concept of skill learning and the two
main approaches to skill learning: adaption skill learning and sequence skill
learning. Both will be discussed later in this section. Skill learning is how the
body implicitly learns, how to react without thinking. Basic skills like walking
or biking, using gross motor skills, and using the ﬁne motor skills to perform
delicate tasks like painting, playing the piano, or simply holding a knife, are
learned through skill learning. Some skills require a combination of both gross
and ﬁne motor skills, e.g., playing tennis.
Example 2.1 (The new tennis player) Alice has never played tennis
before but wants to learn how to play. So, Alice signs up for tennis practice. To
begin with, Alice cannot hit the ball to the other side of the court, it is always
out. She keeps practising, and soon, she is able to aim the ball correctly, so it
stays within the court.
In Example 2.1, Alice uses her gross motor skills to run from one end of the
court to the other, while using her ﬁne motor skills to angle the tennis racket
correctly for hitting the ball over the net. Practising to accomplish a motor
skill, like aiming the ball correctly, is skill learning. Skill learning is consisting
of three components:
1. goal selection;
2. action selection;
3. action execution.
When Alice sees the ball ﬂying towards her, she needs to run to get in reach
of the ball. Likewise, the racket needs to be angled right for hitting the ball.
Here, running and moving to a speciﬁc location and aiming the racket is the
goal for the new tennis player—the goal selection. It is worth mentioning that,
while Alice selects goals, she is also disregarding a variety of other possible goals.
Now, the non-declarative memory is ready for action selection. Here, a series of
movements, that can achieve the selected goal(s) are chosen. The actions could
be to run to the other side of the court or aim the racket at a certain angle.
After the actions are selected, they are executed.
These three tasks are the basis for performing a skill. When at least one of
the three skill learning components are practised, the non-declarative memory
is storing the information and logs it in an embedded storage. This storage, and
==PAGE:30==
20
Cognitive Psychology
the information within, is only accessible when performing the skill. Skill learn-
ing was ﬁrst introduced by Helmholtz [43] in the late 19th-century. Helmholtz
conducted an experiment with prism goggles that shifted the test subjects’ vi-
sion, which made the task of walking more complicated. Here, through skill
learning, the subjects slowly adapted to the shifted vision resulting in normalised
walking.
Skill learning is divided into two categories: skill acquisition and skill mainte-
nance. Skill acquisition is the process of quickly identify a series of goals, which
can be achieved through movement when presented with a given task. This
is followed by action selection, based on sensory stimulus and/or the current
state of the environment. The last element is executing the chosen action. Skill
maintenance is the ability to maintain the performance levels of existing skills
under changing conditions. Skill acquisition is the process of learning the skill,
whereas, skill maintenance is keeping a skill at a certain level. Since the focus
of this thesis is implicit learning we will only be focusing on skill acquisition.
Within skill learning there are two paradigms for skill acquisition: adaption skill
learning and sequence skill learning.
2.4.1.1
Adaption skill learning
Adaption skill learning is adjusting how an action is executed to maintain per-
formance, in response to a change in the environment or the body. The non-
declarative memory for action selection either chooses a well-practised action,
that is diﬀerent from the current action, or modiﬁes how the current action is
executed. A subset of actions can also be changed. This allows for adaption to
the current situation, which is all done to minimise the errors in the particular
skill. This adaption is a continuous process stretched over time. An error will
not disappear after a single practice, but it will diminish over time. That is, the
probability of the error occurring is minimised with practice.
During skill acquisition, the new tennis player knows, that the goal is to hit the
ball to the other side of the court, but whenever they hit the ball it ﬂies out of the
court. This error must be diminished for Alice to play tennis. In adaption skill
learning, during the action selection step, the non-declarative memory chooses a
diﬀerent set of actions to minimise the error. Thereby, in the action execution,
a new set of actions are performed to adapt away from the error of not hitting
the other side of the court with the ball. The adaption is based on many trials
and diﬀerent action selections.
Adaption skill acquisition is acquiring the skill on an explicit level and thereafter
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Associative Learning
21
transferring it to the implicit memory through performance. Here, the adaption
skill learning occurs.
Furthermore, errors and adapting away from them can be interfered by other
errors and/or adaptions.
This can cause two diﬀerent kinds of interference:
anterograde interference or retrograde interference. Anterograde interference is
the minimising of the adaption of an error, caused by the disturbance of another
error, e.g., the tennis player, from Example 2.1, is adapting away from hitting
the ball out of the court. This adaption is disturbed by clumsy footwork, leading
to an anterograde interference of hitting the ball by erroneous footwork—Alice
is practising hitting the ball to the other side of the court. That is, they are
adapting away from the error of not being able to hit it to the other side.
Then, as Alice is a bit clumsy, another error is introduced, clumsy footwork.
This new error is interfering with the adaption to the error not hitting the ball
to the other side of the court.
The new tennis player must therefore adapt
away from the error of the footwork before they can practice hitting the ball
on the other side of the court. The other interference is retrograde interference.
Retrograde interference is when adapting to an error that interferes with a
previous adaptation. That is, it increases the probability of performing the old
error again. For Alice, this could be after she has learned to hit the ball to the
right side of the court. Now, the ball comes from the centre of the court and
Alice has to return it. While adapting to the error of not aiming the ball towards
the centre of the court, the adaption to not hitting it to the right disappears.
2.4.1.2
Sequence skill learning
The other paradigm within skill learning is sequential skill learning. In sequen-
tial skill learning, skills are a set of actions, which are organised into a particular
temporal order to achieve a given task. The set of actions can either be a group
of movements or a series of events within just a single movement. These events
have to be continuous and overlapping to form an action. The new tennis player
hitting the ball is a set of actions containing, among others, retracting the arm,
aiming the racket, the arm going forward, the wrist-twisting to hit the ball, and
then preparing the arm for the next hit. Each of these movements could be di-
vided into their own sets of actions, acquired through sequential skill learning.
The main focus of sequence skill learning is action selection, where a correct
order of actions is chosen. In the above example, the order is pretty easy, but
when dividing each action into smaller actions this becomes harder and needs
practice. Twisting the wrist can be done in multiple diﬀerent ways, leading to
an optimisation of the action selection. This optimisation is achieved through
practice.
==PAGE:32==
22
Cognitive Psychology
When a set of actions is practised enough, they are grouped and become a
single action—a neural representation that, surrounds the activity associated
with the set of actions groups the actions together. Now, the non-declarative
memory only has selected this new action to perform the sequence, this is causing
the sequence to be performed faster than if the non-declarative memory would
select each action individually. Each group action can consist of between 3 and
7 actions, depending on the length of each action [24].
After the set of actions is grouped, they can start being triggered when a rele-
vant stimulus is present. This is known as the serial reaction time task. Now,
whenever a ball is ﬂying towards Alice, the “hit the ball” grouped action, will
be triggered implicitly by the non-declarative memory. This causes the player
to automatically try to hit the ball with the movements of the grouped action.
Connection to the memory
As discussed in Section 2.1.2.2, skill learning
occurs, and are stored in the non-declarative memory. Hereafter, the skill is only
accessible through the performance of that skill. When performing the skill, the
non-declarative memory transmits signals to the nervous system, about the set
of actions needed to be performed. The nervous system transmits these signals
to the relevant muscle groups. As the muscle groups perform the set of actions,
new signals are transmitted from the muscles to visuo-spatial sketch-pad in the
working memory. Furthermore, the non-declarative memory is also receiving this
transmission of signals. Here, we become aware of the actions performed. This
information about the performance is transferred through the episodic buﬀer, to
the episodic memory. Now, the experience stored in the declarative memory can
become available to the non-declarative memory. Using the information from
the nervous system and the episodic memory, the non-declarative memory can
store and optimise the performance through skill learning. This can be seen in
Figure 2.4.
It is discussed how much is learned implicitly or if some skills are learned explic-
itly. Recent research suggests that skill acquisition has to be learned explicitly
before it is stored in the non-declarative memory. Further, explicitly learned
skills learned faster than the implicitly learned skills [22].
2.4.2
Priming
Hsu and Schütt [20] describe priming as follows:
“Priming is the implicit memory eﬀect in which exposure to a stim-
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Associative Learning
23
Visuo-spatial 
sketch-pad
Episodic buffer
Phonological loop
Executive central
Visual Semantic
memory
Episodic memory
Language 
Nervous system
Limbic system
Working memory
Declarative memory
Nerves
Skill learning
Non-declarative memory
Figure 2.4: Cognitive model of the memory and the nervous system showing
the transmission of signals occurring during skill learning.
==PAGE:34==
24
Cognitive Psychology
ulus inﬂuences response to a later stimulus. It can occur following
perceptual, semantic, or conceptual stimulus repetition.”
Breaking the deﬁnition down, priming is implicit—it occurs in the non-declarative
memory. It pairs a prime, any event or stimulus that can prime or trigger sub-
sequent actions, with subsequent stimulus or events. We will call the triggered
response the target. This section on priming is based on the work of Christina
Bermeitinger [10].
Let us consider the word “candy”. When the working memory reads this word,
a response from the declarative memory is triggered. This response could be
about candy in general, your favourite kind of candy, or the experience of the
last time you had candy.
After being exposed to this word, next time you
are in a store you would be more likely to see and buy candy. At some point,
having read the word “candy” multiple times, if asked to quickly name something
edible, the candy would probably be one ﬁrst thing that the declarative memory
would propose as a suggestion.
If you are asked to ﬁll in the blanks in the
following word: “__ND_”, you would with high probability say “candy” and
not “windy” or “hands”. This renders priming, as an increase in the probability
of the declarative memory returning the target. An equal decrease of probability
will occur if the prime disappears, if enough time has elapsed, or if a new prime is
introduced. If you now see the weather forecast and the meteorologist describes
the weather tomorrow as windy, "windy" becomes the new prime, and thereby
the probability that you think about “windy” when you see “__ND_”, increases.
Let us consider another example of priming, where the word “candy” is a prime
for your favourite candy, for instance, marshmallows. “Marshmallows” is now a
target for the prime “candy”. This is caused by priming pairing the word “candy”
and “marshmallow” together, creating an association between them, which in-
creases the probability of thinking about marshmallows when the word “candy”
is registered in the declarative memory. The priming of words is known as se-
mantic priming, which primes a word with a target word or group of words,
thereby increasing the probability of the declarative memory returning the tar-
get. Semantic priming can help speed up basic learning processes and reading
speed. An example is any terminology within ﬁelds of science. Each word and
expression within that ﬁeld is the prime and the target. Within the ﬁeld of
priming, the prime “priming” also becomes the target together with other terms
like “target”, “stimulus”, “cognitive psychology”, and “non-declarative memory”.
After, the priming associations are complete hearing the word “prime”, the non-
declarative memory increases the probability of the declarative memory return-
ing the target terms to the phonological loop. Another example is increasing
the reading speed with semantic priming. Reading a text the prime word is
associated with the text that is read, the probability of seeing it again is in-
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Associative Learning
25
creased. The more the prime is read, the bigger the increase. When the prime
is seen again the declarative memory assumes it is the prime without reading
it. Thereby, increasing the reading speed as the whole world does not need to
be read.
There are other kinds of priming, besides semantic priming: construct priming,
behaviour priming, positive priming, perceptual priming, etc. common for all is
exposure to a prime, increases the probability of the associated target. Here, we
will further discuss two other kinds of priming: construct priming and behaviour
priming. Construct priming inﬂuences the perception of another person. The
feelings one has towards another person can be shifted towards a more positive
or a more negative perception of them. If the other person performs an action
that aﬀects one positively (the prime) then the idea of that person becomes
more positive (the target). It could also be rumours about the person or just
a bad ﬁrst impression. Behaviour priming aﬀects the behaviour of the primed
person. Studies have shown that listing a series of words associated with old
age can increase the probability of a person walking slower, thereby aﬀecting
the behaviour of that person.
Other studies have found that subliminal priming (using an implicit prime) only
works if the primed subject is already motivated by the target or there is some
valence for it. If a subject has been subliminally primed with the word “candy”,
and presented with a choice between candy and chocolate, they would only
choose candy if they already wanted candy [10].
Connection to the memory and other systems
Subliminal priming sug-
gests that the primer has to enter the storage of the episodic memory to increase
the probability of the target. So when the target is presented this is also stored
in the episodic memory, but the connection between the primer and target is
only stored in the non-declarative memory.
Initially, that is.
With enough
repetition, the association could also be stored in the explicit memory. The
connections can be seen in Figure 2.5. Depending on the kind of priming dif-
ferent systems are activated. Semantic priming relies on the phonological loop
and the language centre in the semantic memory to both perceive the prime and
return the target. When the priming has been established the prime will en-
ter the episodic memory, this will trigger the association in the non-declarative
memory. The non-declarative memory will then increase the probability of the
target in the language centre, which will return the most probable response to
the phonological loop. This response will most likely be the target. For con-
struct priming, the limbic system and the episodic memory are involved. Using
information from the episodic memory about a person and triggered emotion
as experiences with that person enters the episodic memory the non-declarative
==PAGE:36==
26
Cognitive Psychology
Visuo-spatial 
sketch-pad
Episodic buffer
Phonological loop
Executive central
Visual Semantic
memory
Episodic memory
Language 
Nervous system
Limbic system
Working memory
Declarative memory
Nerves
Priming
Non-declarative memory
Figure 2.5: Visualisation of priming and the connections to the declarative
and working memory and the nervous and limbic system.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Associative Learning
27
memory creates an association between person and emotions. Thereby priming
the idea of that person. Behaviour priming is activating the nervous system,
working memory, semantic memory, and the episodic memory. When a prime
triggering behaviour priming enters the working memory, and thereby, also the
declarative memory, the non-declarative memory signals to the nervous system
to change the behaviour. This change is based on the target of the prime.
2.4.3
Conditioning
The American Psychological Association deﬁne conditioning as “a process in
which a stimulus is repeatedly paired with an imagined or anticipated response
or behaviour”.9
We distinguish two kinds of conditioning: an external stimulus is associated
with an internal stimulus (classical conditioning), or an internal stimulus is as-
sociated with an anticipated external response (operant conditioning). Classical
conditioning was discovered by Ivan Pavlov in 1897 [11]. He introduced an ex-
ternal stimulus, the sound of a bell, with an internal stimulus, his dogs salivating
as a natural response to seeing food. With enough repetition, the dogs started
salivating whenever they heard the sounds of the bell. Operant conditioning was
discovered by Burrhus Frederic Skinner in 1935 [36]. He found that an antici-
pated external response can aﬀect an internal stimulus. Using rats he reinforced
the behaviour of pulling a lever—the internal stimulus, by rewarding the rats
with food—the external response.
Furthermore, the two diﬀerent types of conditioning can both be seen as rein-
forced learning. Reinforced learning teaches a behaviour by rewarding or pun-
ishing it according to well-deﬁned rules. A reinforcer could be positive (reward),
negative (punishment), or neutral. In this section, the two diﬀerent approaches
to conditioning are discussed. First Pavlov’s classical conditioning, then Skin-
ner’s operant conditioning.
2.4.3.1
Classical Conditioning
Classical conditioning was discovered by Ivan Pavlov who noticed his dogs would
start salivating when they heard the housekeeper approaching the kitchen. The
dogs had associated the sound of the housekeeper with food, and whenever
the food saw food, they started to salivate. This gave Pavlov the idea that
would later be classical conditioning. Classical conditioning associates a natural
9https://dictionary.apa.org/cognitive-conditioning
==PAGE:38==
28
Cognitive Psychology
reﬂex with an unrelated stimulus. Causing a natural reﬂex to trigger whenever
the unrelated stimulus occurs [31].
Pavlov used four stimuli to establish an
association:
unconditioned response;
unconditioned stimulus;
conditioned stimulus;
conditioned response.
Where the unconditioned response (UR) is the natural response (i.e. the saliva-
tion) to the unconditioned stimulus (US). The US is the natural trigger of the
UR (i.e. the food). The conditioned stimulus (CS) is the replacement of the US
(i.e. the sound of the bell). When conditioned the conditioned response (CR) is
triggered by the CS (i.e. the salivation). After the dogs had been conditioned
the CS would now trigger the conditioned response, salivation. The conditioned
association can be acquired through a series of CS-US training trials. Hereafter,
the association is established—the conditioning is successful. Then if the CS is
removed the conditioning will gradually disappear. This is know as extinction.
At a later time, the conditioning can be reintroduced with retrieval cues, as
the CS-US association is already stored in our non-declarative memory. The
retrieval cues are the CS. This depends on the strength of conditioning.
In Pavlov’s experiment both the UR and the CR were salvation, other exper-
iments these diﬀer. In an experiment done by John B. Watson [44], an infant
named Albert was presented a rat. The boy showed no signs of fear towards
the rat. Later Albert was presented the rat again, this time while loud noises
were made to scare Albert. After several repetitions of this, Albert now became
scared of the rat when he saw it, even though no noise was made. The initial
UR of the rat was no fear. After the conditioning the CR was fear. That is the
opposite of the UR.
Clark and Squire[13] presents two diﬀerent approaches to classical conditioning:
Delay conditioning and trace conditioning. These two are the most common
classical conditioning approaches.
Delay conditioning activates the CS, then
after a short delay, but before the CS is deactivated, the US is triggered. In
trace conditioning, the CS is deactivated before the US is triggered—a memory
trace of the CS has to be established for successful conditioning. Later Ploog
[29] proposed two additional: backward conditioning and temporal conditioning.
Backward conditioning the CS is presented after the US, thereby triggering a
US free period. The temporal conditioning of the CS is a ﬁxed time interval.
Thereby, triggering the UR at a ﬁxed time interval, rather than after a sound
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Associative Learning
29
CS
US
Figure 2.6: Example of delay conditioning. First the CS is present. Shortly
after the US is triggered. Both the CS and the US stops simulta-
neously.
or some other stimulus.
Lastly, simultaneous conditioning was proposed by
Mahoney and Ayress [25]. In simultaneous conditioning, the CS and the US
are activated and ended simultaneously. The last three approaches, backward,
temporal, and simultaneous conditioning diﬀers in their temporal aspect.
Delay Conditioning
In delay conditioning, the CS is activated and before
it is deactivated the US is triggered. In Pavlov’s experiment delay conditioning
will ring the bell. Then while the bell is still ringing the food is presented to the
dogs. Another example is Clark and Squires [13] experiment with the eye-blink
response. This experiment was designed to test the conditioning of mammals,
including humans. In the eye-blink response, a tone is sounded (the CS). Shortly
after a soft blow of air is shot (the UR) towards the iris causing it to blink (UR).
After the blink, the tone stops. In Figure 2.6 an example of delay conditioning
can be seen. The top green line is the CS, the lower red one is the US. After the
association between the tone and blink has been established whenever the tone
is activated the subject blinks. If the CS-US trials continue the conditioning can
become a reﬂex. When the tone is sounded the nervous system will transmit the
signals from the ears hearing the tone to the memory. Here the non-declarative
memory signals, through the nervous system, to the eyes to blink. If this occurs
frequently enough over a long period the nervous system will create autonomic
nerve ﬁbres, omitting the memory, that will signal to the eyes to blink every time
the tone is heard. Reﬂexes cannot be extinct. Creating reﬂexes is equivalent to
all the diﬀerent approaches to classical conditioning.
Connection to the memory
Delay conditioning only occurs in the non-
declarative memory.
The non-declarative memory will make the associating
between the CS and the US, based on signals transmitted to the non-declarative
memory by the nervous system. When the CS is transmitted to the memory,
the non-declarative will transmit signals triggering the CR back to the nervous
==PAGE:40==
30
Cognitive Psychology
Visuo-spatial 
sketch-pad
Episodic buffer
Phonological loop
Executive central
Visual Semantic
memory
Episodic memory
Language 
Nervous system
Limbic system
Working memory
Declarative memory
Nerves
Classical 
Conditioning
Non-declarative memory
Temporal sense
Figure 2.7: Visualisation of the connection to the other memories and nerves
needed for classical conditioning
system.
The connections can be seen in Figure 2.7.
The Figure shows the
systems active in delay conditioning for the eye-blink response experiment. In
the eye-blink response experiment, the sound of the tone transmits signals from
the ears to the working memory and non-declarative memory. The signals are
further transmitted from the working memory to the episodic memory. The
same occurs for the signals created by the blow of air triggering a blink in the
eye. Based on the information the non-declarative memory gets from the nervous
system and the episodic memory the association is created. When the tone is
heard the non-declarative memory transmits signals to the nervous system to
blink. The temporal sense is added as the non-declarative memory knows that
the blink is triggered after the tone is heard at a speciﬁc time. If an emotional
response was triggered the non-declarative memory would transmit signals to
the limbic system. This is the case for Albert and the rat. After the conditioning
has occurred, whenever Albert sees a rat, the non-declarative memory signals
to the limbic system to trigger the emotion fear.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Associative Learning
31
CS
US
Figure 2.8: Example of trace conditioning. For eye-blink response trace con-
ditioning, the tone will sound, after the tone has stopped the blow
of air will be released.
Trace Conditioning
In trace conditioning, the CS leaves a memory trace
before the US is triggered—the CS has to start and ﬁnish, a short time interval
has to pass, then can the US be triggered.
This can be seen in Figure 2.8.
In the ﬁgure, the green line represents the CS, the red the US. The memory
trace has to be stored in the declarative memory before the US is triggered.
That is, the subject has to be aware of the conditioning, for trace conditioning
to be successful.
In the example of the eye-blink response, the tone sounds
stops and hereafter is the eye forced to blink. With enough CS-US training, the
conditioning can become a reﬂex.
Connection to the memory
For trace conditioning to leave a lasting trace
in the memory, there has to be a functioning declarative memory where the CS
will be stored. The CS is transmitted to the declarative memory, through the
working memory, by the nervous system. See Figure 2.7 for a graphical repre-
sentation. As the US is triggered the nervous system will transmit the signals to
both the declarative and the non-declarative memory. After enough trials, the
association is created in the non-declarative memory. If the trials continue trace
conditioning can create autonomic nerve ﬁbres and thereby create new reﬂexes
based on the conditioning. If the UR is emotional the non-declarative memory
will signal to the limbic system rather than the nervous system.
Backward Conditioning
Backward conditioning the US is followed by the
CS, not preceded. A model of this can be seen in Figure 2.9. The eﬀects of
backward conditioning have been discussed by Hall [19] and Chang, Blaisdell,
and Miller [12]. Both papers argued that backward conditioning works as an
inhibition of the US— after the US has been performed and the CS is presented
follows a US free period. An example could be running in a race. In races, the
sound of a whistle initiates the race. Associating the whistle with running is
delay conditioning. If a whistle sounds as the runner stops running and starts
==PAGE:42==
32
Cognitive Psychology
CS
US
US
Figure 2.9: Example of backward conditioning. After the US the CS is present,
signalling a US-free time interval. After the time interval the US
can happen again.
US
US
US
CS
CS
CS
Figure 2.10: Temporal conditioning where the CS is a ﬁxed time interval—
after a certain ﬁxed interval the US happens.
walking, it is backward conditioning. If this association is established, then the
runner has learned that the sound of the whistle means a running free period.
Similar associations with emotions can be made.
Connection to the memory
The cognitive systems active in backward con-
ditioning is the same as for delay conditioning.
Temporal Conditioning
In Temporal conditioning the CS is a ﬁxed time
interval.
It can be seen in Figure 2.10.
Here the green line signify the CS,
with ﬁxed time interval. After a the ﬁxed interval the US is trigger (the red
line). This will repeat until the conditioning is extinct. The eye-blink response
temporal conditioning would remove the sound of the bell and just let the blow
of air be released with a ﬁxed time interval. After the conditioning is successful,
the non-declarative memory will signal to the nervous system to blink when the
interval has passed.
Connection to the memory
With the modiﬁcation of the CS to be tem-
poral, a connection to the temporal sense to be established. Little is known
about this connection.
Recent studies in neuroscience [23] have shown that
the brain has a temporal sense, but not where it is located compared to the
==PAGE:43==
2.4 Associative Learning
33
CS
US
Figure 2.11: Example of simultaneous conditioning. Here the CS and the US
commence and terminate at the same time.
memory. Therefore, we will show the temporal sense as a separate area that is
connected to the non-declarative memory. In the temporal eye-blink response
example the eye would be triggered to blink. This enters the working memory
and episodic memory through the nervous system. Likewise, the nervous system
transmits the signals of the blink to the non-declarative memory. This repeats.
The non-declarative memory associates the blink with a ﬁxed temporal inter-
val determined by the temporal sense. If the conditioning is successful and the
blink is no longer forced, the non-declarative memory will signal to the nervous
system to blink after the ﬁxed interval has passed. This repeats until extinction.
Simultaneous conditioning
Simultaneous conditioning is when the CS and
the US occur simultaneously. As proposed by Mahoney and Ayress [25] this
will increase the initial conditioning before a conditioned response is established
to the CS. An example can be seen in Figure 2.11. In the ﬁgure, it can be
seen that both the CS and US commence and terminates simultaneously. They
argue further, the less time elapses between the CS and the US the stronger the
conditioning will be— backward and delay conditioning are equally strong. The
increased strength of the conditioning in simultaneous conditioning is caused by
the non-declarative memory easily can make the association if the CS and US
occur simultaneously. For the eye-blink response experiment, the tone and blow
of air would be activated simultaneously. With the advancement of technology
this has become easy to achieve in a lab environment, but less so in the real
world. Temporal conditioning can also be expanded to trigger emotions, but
this is diﬃcult to achieve.
Connection to the memory
Just as backward conditioning the connection
to the memory works just as in delay conditioning.
That is the association
occurs in the non-declarative memory based on the signals from the nervous
system and the temporal sense. After the ﬁxed time interval has passed the
non-declarative memory signals the nervous system to perform the CR. The
==PAGE:44==
34
Cognitive Psychology
overall diﬀerence here is the temporal diﬀerence which would not lead to a
change in which systems are activated.
2.4.3.2
Operant Conditioning
Operant conditioning is behaviour reinforced by external stimuli— an internal
stimulus triggers an external, often anticipated response. This could be pulling
a lever to get food or gossiping, whereas, the food or gossip is a reinforcer. A
reinforcer is a reward or consequence of actions, which results in reinforcing
that behaviour. Staddon and Ceruttiis [39] presented two major approaches to
operant conditioning: interval timing and choice.
Before we discuss operant conditioning an example is presented, which will be
used throughout the thesis.
Example 2.2 (The candy machine) In a mall, next to a kiosk, a single
red candy machine stands. The machine is ﬁlled to the brim with candy. Once
a coin is inserted into one of them, candy will be dropped, falling down a slide,
down to the bottom of the machine. With a soft thump, the candy is ready to be
collected.
Interval timing delivers the reinforcer after a time interval after the behaviour
has been performed. An example is the candy machine from the above. The
candy machine is modiﬁed so after inserting a coin a ﬁxed time interval elapses
before the candy is delivered and can be eaten. The candy is the reinforcer for
inserting a coin. Here the reinforcer is positive, it can also be negative or neutral.
A positive reinforcer increases the probability of the behaviour being performed
again. A negative reinforcer decreases that probability. The ﬁxed time interval
is an important factor as it increases the emotion the reinforcer triggers through
anticipation. It also allows the memory to trigger the reinforced emotion before
the reinforcer is triggered. For the candy machine, the non-declarative memory,
after the conditioning is successful, associates inserting a coin with happiness. So
as the coin is inserted the non-declarative memory signals to the limbic system
to trigger happiness. It can also be a variable time interval, which will lead to
weaker conditioning. Once this behaviour is conditioned, the reinforcer will be
expected. If at some point the candy machine runs out of candy, the behaviour
of inserting a coin will stop. Now new conditioning will occur with a negative
reinforcer. That is no candy after inserting a coin. Thereby, forcing relearning
the behaviour now based on a negative reinforcer. Subsequent relearning will
be slower than the original conditioning.
==PAGE:45==
2.4 Associative Learning
35
The other approach is choice operant conditioning. Two or more diﬀerent choices
are given. Selecting between the choices is the behaviour and the outcome of
the choice is the reinforcer. After two or more choices have been attempted the
choice with the best outcome will be preferred. A choice leading to a consequent
reinforcer is preferred over a better reinforcer that has a chance to fail. Resuming
the example of the candy machine. For choice operant conditioning there are
now two machines. The ﬁrst machine, M1 gives one piece of candy and the
other machine, M2, gives two pieces. After having tried both of M1 and M2,
the non-declarative memory would choose M2, as M2 has the better reinforcer.
At a later point, if the conditioned would return to the candy machines, they
would still choose M2 over M1. At a later time, M2 is modiﬁed so that it gives
3 pieces of candy but only with a 50% chance. Studies have shown that most
people would choose M1, as it is the safe choice. That is if the subjects know
that chances beforehand, otherwise they would have to go through the process
of learning the chances before they end up with a preference for M1.
Connection to the memory
Operant conditioning is behaviour driven. Be-
haviour is decided in the working memory, which transmits signals to the nervous
system about the decision. The nervous system transmits the signals to all rel-
evant muscles and organs which return the signals to the working memory and
the non-declarative memory. The working memory transfer this information to
the episodic memory which stores in the storage. If a reinforcer is triggered
by the behaviour the limbic system is signalled to trigger a relevant emotion.
Both the working memory and the non-declarative memory is aware of the emo-
tion. Since the working memory is aware, then so is the declarative memory.
Based on the behaviour and emotion the non-declarative memory associates
the two. If it was a positive reinforcer the non-declarative memory increases
the probability of the behaviour being performed again, if negative the proba-
bility is decreased. After successful conditioning when decided to perform the
behaviour the non-declarative memory signals to the limbic system to trigger
the associated emotion. A Figure of all activated systems and the connection
relevant for operant conditioning can be seen in Figure 2.12 All red connections
signify the active systems and where information is transport to and from.
For operant conditioning using interval timing, a temporal sense is needed. The
temporal sense is discussed in greater detail in Section 2.4.3.1. After the be-
haviour is performed the temporal sense is used by the non-declarative memory
to determine that the reinforcer gets delivered. If more time passes than the
ﬁxed time interval and the reinforcer is not delivered, the conditioning is weak-
ened. If it is delivered the conditioning is strengthened.
For choice conditioning, the choice is decided in the working memory. The de-
==PAGE:46==
36
Cognitive Psychology
Visuo-spatial 
sketch-pad
Episodic buffer
Phonological loop
Executive central
Visual Semantic
memory
Episodic memory
Language 
Nervous system
Limbic system
Working memory
Declarative memory
Nerves
Operant
conditioning
Non-declarative memory
Temporal sense
Figure 2.12: A cognitive model of the memory and nervous system showcasing
the cognitive systems needed for operant conditioning.
==PAGE:47==
2.5 Non-associative Learning
37
cision, together with previous decisions and reinforcer is stored in the episodic
memory, where the non-declarative memory can make an association and in-
crease the probability of the best choice being chosen to perform next time.
2.5
Non-associative Learning
Associative learning is pairing a stimulus to a behaviour or vice versa. Non-
associative learning is responding to a single stimulus. There is not much know
about non-associative learning as it is an automatic learning process, just help-
ing the memory control the response to external stimuli. Non-associative learn-
ing is separated into two: Habituation an decrease in response to stimuli and
sensitisation an increase in response to stimuli. Furthermore, there is dishabit-
uation, which is recovering from habituation and sensitisation. This section will
describe each of the non-associative learning methods.
2.5.1
Habituation
In 1966 Thompson and Spencer proposed a series of behavioural characteristics,
that were later expanded by Groves and Thompson in 1970 and then again in
2009, where Rankin [32] and others reviewed habituation in hope that it would
lead to further research of habituation. Rankin and the others revised the char-
acteristics and proposed a new characteristic. A subset of these characteristics
of habituation and dishabituation is presented below.
Habituation is decreasing the behavioural response to stimuli, which results
from repeated stimulation. This stimulation cannot involve sensory adaption
or sensory fatigue— It is the repetitive nature of the stimulus which ensures a
decreased response. Habituation is not stimuli being ignored from tiredness or
defects in any sensory organ.
Habituation only occurs on stimuli that have entered the awareness. This in-
cludes external stimuli like the ticking of a clock, but also internal stimuli like
actions of movement and emotions. An example is the ticking of a clock. The
clock has a very repetitive nature making it perfect for habituation. Habitua-
tion occurs automatically in the non-declarative memory, we are therefore not
aware of this process. The longer and more repetitive the clock has entered
the awareness the stronger the habituation is and the less it is perceived by the
memory. It is noteworthy that the nervous system will still transmit signals to
the memory about the external stimuli, the memory is habituated to not per-
==PAGE:48==
38
Cognitive Psychology
ceive them. If stronger stimuli are presented it will result in dishabituation—
the external stimuli are perceived again. If the ticking of a clock has been ha-
bituated, dishabituation can occur by looking at the clock or if one’s attention
is directed towards the clock.
Thompson, Spencer, and Groves proposed 9 characteristics for habituation and
dishabituation. Here a subset of the revised characteristics presented.
1) Given a stimulus that elicits a response, repeated applications of the stim-
ulus will result in decreased, with some parameter, response. This can
both be exponential or linear decreasing.
2) Spontaneous recovery happens if the stimulus is withheld after successful
habituation. That is if the stimuli are weakened over a given period, the
habituation will be recovered.
4) If the frequency of a stimulus is increased the eﬀect of habituation and
spontaneous recovery is equally increased.
7) Habituation of a stimulus should not be confused with stimuli generali-
sation or classical conditioning of a stimulus. A stimulus could be condi-
tioned into being disregarded, this is not habituation, but classical condi-
tioning.
8) Dishabituation occurs when another stimulus is presented that results in
a recovery of the habituation. This new stimulus is usually stronger than
the stimulus that is habituated.
9) Repeated dishabituation can lead to habituation of the dishabituation.
10) Protocols of stimulus repetition may result in longer-lasting habituation.
This long-term habituation can last hours, days, or weeks.
An interesting aspect of the characteristics is number 7 and 10.
Number 7
diﬀerentiates habituation from classical conditioning, and especially how disha-
bituation occurs. If the response to a stimulus has decreased because of habitu-
ation, dishabituation will reverse the eﬀects of habituation, but if the response is
decreased because of classical conditioning, dishabituation will not have any ef-
fect. Classical conditioning is discussed in Section 2.4.3.1. The other interesting
characteristics are number 10, the long-term habituation. This characteristic
proposed that through repetitive stimuli protocols, habituation becomes more
easily obtained, and hereafter, achieved as long-term.
This would then also
increase the diﬃculty of dishabituation.
==PAGE:49==
2.5 Non-associative Learning
39
Visuo-spatial 
sketch-pad
Episodic buffer
Phonological loop
Executive central
Visual Semantic
memory
Episodic memory
Language 
Nervous system
Limbic system
Working memory
Declarative memory
Nerves
Habituation/
Sensitisation
Non-declarative memory
Figure 2.13: A cognitive model of the system and connections needed for ha-
bituation and sensitisation
In skill learning performing a skill repeatedly can be habituated— The perfor-
mance of the individual actions of movement is not perceived. Through repeated
practise, the tennis player is no longer perceiving the movements needed for hit-
ting the ball. This is caused by habituation.
Connection to the memory
A cognitive model of the system and connec-
tions needed for habituation can be seen in Figure 2.13. Here the nervous sys-
tem transmits signals of stimuli to the working memory and the non-declarative
memory. The working memory transmits these signals to the relevant systems
in the declarative memory. This is repeated until the non-declarative memory
==PAGE:50==
40
Epistemic logic
has habituated the stimuli. This habituation is signalled, through the seman-
tic memory to the working memory. Here all signals, from the nervous system,
transmitting the habituated stimulus are ignored. Since it is ignored in the work-
ing memory, the habituated stimulus is not transferred to the episodic memory,
and can thereby not be recalled at a later time. It is similar to the habituation
of an emotion. For dishabituation, the non-declarative memory signals, again
through the declarative memory, that the stimuli should be perceived again.
2.5.2
Sensitisation
Just as habituation is the decrease in the response of a given stimulus, sensiti-
sation is the increase. Thompson [41] describes ”Sensitization is deﬁned as an
increase in response as a result of (usually strong) stimulation.” Sensitization
is used by the memory as a survival tool. If a strong stimulation occurs the
memory goes into alarm mode, here all subsequent responses have an increased
probability of being perceived more intensely. An example could be if a bomb
went oﬀ. To increase the probability of surviving the memory perceives the
movement of rubble, any sounds, and danger signals increased. This continues
until a dishabituation of the sensitisation occurs where the perception level is
down to a normal level. Habituation of sensitisation can also occur. If the bomb
would explode repeatedly, a decreased response would follow.
Connection to the memory
Sensitisation is the opposite of habituation
but uses the same systems as habituation. The cognitive model can be seen in
Figure 2.13. The nervous system transmits signals about the strong stimulus to
the working memory and the non-declarative memory. The declarative memory
through the working memory. Since a strong stimulus has been perceived the
non-declarative memory is signalling to the working memory that all subsequent
stimuli have to be perceived strongly. The working memory will now perceive
all stimuli more strongly which will be transferred to the declarative memory.
==PAGE:51==
Epistemic logic
3.1
Epistemic logic
In this section, the logic needed to model implicit learning in the memory is
discussed. First, a basic modal language is deﬁned. Hereafter, three formalism,
interpreting the basic modal language, are presented: possible world, plausibility
models, and temporal plausibility models. The possible world model interprets
the modal language to argue about the possible world that is considered possi-
ble. The plausibility model expands the possible world with belief, such that,
worlds can be argued to be more plausible than others. Lastly, temporal plau-
sibility models expand the plausibility model with a temporal relation, making
it possible to argue about the knowledge of the past.
Implicit learning is dynamic, so to best model it, dynamic epistemic logic is
needed.
Therefore, will the three formalism be made dynamic: the possible
world model with public announcements, the plausibility models, and temporal
plausibility models with lexicographical and elite upgrades.
The following section on epistemic logic and dynamic epistemic logic is based
on the work of Baltag and Renne [8].
3.1.1
Basic Modal Language
The basic modal language is a basic framework used to reason about logic and
knowledge. It combines propositions with operators to form formulas. Both of
==PAGE:52==
42
Epistemic logic
which can be used to describe truths and knowledge. Furthermore, the frame-
work uses agents to argue about knowledge and, more speciﬁcally, agent’s knowl-
edge. Agents are anything that can store knowledge and can infer new knowledge
based on the knowledge already known. This could be a human, computer, or
our diﬀerent memory systems. A set of agents is denoted A. Agents have it-
erated knowledge. Iterated knowledge is that they know what they know, and
they know that they know what they know, etc. This is more easily described
using the basic modal language.
Definition 3.1 Given a non-empty set P of propositional letters and a non-
empty set of agents A, a basic modal language can be deﬁned as follows:
ϕ ∶∶= p ∣¬ϕ ∣ϕ ∧ϕ ∣Kaϕ
Where p ∈P and a ∈A.
Where ¬ is negation, ∧is logical conjunction, and Kaϕ signiﬁes that agent a
knows the proposition ϕ. This can be iterated over such that KaKaϕ, that is
agent a knows that agent a knows ϕ and so on. In this language, standard
abbreviations for propositional logic is used:
• disjunction: ϕ ∨ψ ≡¬(¬ϕ ∧¬ψ);
• implication: ϕ →ψ ≡¬ϕ ∨ψ;
• biconditionals: ϕ ↔ψ ≡(ϕ →ψ) ∧(ψ →ϕ).
3.1.2
Possible World Model
Possible world models, or Kripke models, is an interpretation of the modal
language in epistemic logic. Possible world models allows a modelling of agents
uncertainty about which of a series of possible world are actual true.
Definition 3.2 Given a non-empty set of propositions P and a non-empty
set of agents A a possible world models is deﬁned as follows:
M = (W,{Ra}a∈A,V )
Where
• W is a non-empty set of possible world;
==PAGE:53==
3.1 Epistemic logic
43
(1,2)
(1)
(1,2)
(1,2)
(1,2)
Figure 3.14: M,s. A simple Kripke structure with two agents and two propo-
sitions.
• {Ra}a∈A is a function assigning each agent a ∈A a binary accessibility
relation Ra indicating the worlds wRav agent a considers possible at w;
• V is a valuation function: P →p(W). The set V (p) is a set of worlds at
which p ∈P is true.
A pointed possible world model is a pair M,s where M = (W,{Ra}a∈A,V ) and
s ∈W. The possible world model is K5, meaning all relations in the model is
symmetric, transitive, and reﬂexive.
Example 3.3 As a short example given a set of agents A = {1,2} and a set of
propositions P = {p,q} a pointed possible world model M,s can be seen in Figure
3.14. Worlds are shown as circles. The double circled world is a pointed world.
The valuation function evaluates a proposition or a set of propositions to each
world. These propositions are displayed inside each world. The relations are
shown as arrows between each world. Each arrow has a set of agents showing
which agents the relation is true for. In this example agent 2 knows that p is
true but not if q is true or false, since both world w and world s valuates p to
true, and w →2 s and s →2 w. The same is true for agent 1, but as agent 1
cannot distinguish between world s and t either, agent 1 do not know if either p
or q is true. That is K2(p ∧(q ∨¬q)) ∧K1((p ∨¬p) ∧(q ∨¬q)).
==PAGE:54==
44
Epistemic logic
To model that a given proposition is true in a world the ⊧operator is used. The
left side contains a pointed possible world model and the right side that is true
in the given world. For example:
M,s ⊧p ∧q
In the model M in world s the formula p ∧q is true. To have a fully functional
Kripke model, working for the expanded modal language, the following have to
be deﬁned:
M,w ⊧p iﬀw ∈V (p);
M,w ⊧ϕ ∧ψ iﬀboth M,w ⊧ϕ and M,w ⊧ψ;
M,w ⊧¬ϕ iﬀM,w /⊧ϕ;
M,w ⊧Kaϕ iﬀM,v ⊧ϕ for each v satisfying wRav.
3.1.3
Plausibility Models
Plausibility models take the core principles from possible world models and add
belief. The possible world model is modelling what worlds the agents believe
are the actual world, the plausibility model shows what agents believe to be the
most plausible world. Plausibility is deﬁned through a plausibility relation:
Definition 3.3 Given two worlds w and v and an agent the plausibility
relation is deﬁned as the following:
w ≤a v
Meaning agent a believes w is equally or less plausible than v to be the actual
world. That is v is equally if not more plausible than w. The “smaller” world is
the more plausible world. For worlds of equal plausibility a equi-plausibility re-
lation is used: w ≃a v. For strictly more plausible worlds, the following operator
is used: w >a v. Here v is strictly more plausible than w.
Based on the plausibility relation and the possible world model, a plausibility
model can be constructed:
Definition 3.4 Given a non-empty set of proposition P and a non-empty
set of agents A a plausibility model will consist of the following tuple:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V )
Where W and V is equivalent to Deﬁnition 3.2 and
==PAGE:55==
3.1 Epistemic logic
45
• The function ≥a assigns each agent a ∈A, a binary accessibility relation,
≥a, on W. This relation have to satisfy the plausibility properties which
will be described hereafter.
A pointed plausibility model is a pair M,w consisting of a plausibility model
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V ) and a world w ∈W. The world w is the pointed world—
the actual world.
To deﬁne the plausibility properties connected components are needed.
Definition 3.5 Given a non-empty set of agents A and a plausibility model
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V ) a connected component cca(w) for an agent a ∈A and
world w ∈W is as follows:
cca(w) = {v ∈W ∣w(≥a ∪≤a)∗v}
where w(≥a ∪≤a)v is that either w ≥a v or w ≤a v. The (−)∗is the reﬂexive-
transitive closure. That is, two worlds w,v ∈W only relate if either w = v or
they are connected through transitivity:
w(≥a ∪≤a)w′(≥a ∪≤a)...(≥a ∪≤a)wn(≥a ∪≤a)v
Two worlds w,v are connected components if they are the same world or there
is a sequence of plausibility relations connecting the two.
Having deﬁned connection components, the plausibility properties can now be
deﬁned as the following:
Definition 3.6 Given a non-empty set of agents A the plausibility relation
≥a satisfy the plausibility properties if:
≥a is both reﬂexive and transitive;
≥a is locally connected, that is v ∈cca(w);
≥a is converse well-founded.
where converse well-founded means that there is always a minimal element, that
is more plausible than all other worlds in all subsets of W.
Definition 3.7 To interpret the plausibility model in the basic modal lan-
guage the following is deﬁned:
==PAGE:56==
46
Epistemic logic
(1,2)
(1)
(1,2)
(1,2)
(1,2)
Figure 3.15: (M,s). Example of a plausibility model.
M,w ⊧p iﬀw ∈V (p);
M,w ⊧ϕ ∧ψ iﬀM,w ⊧ϕ and M,w ⊧ψ:
M,w ⊧¬ϕ iﬀM,w /⊧ϕ:
M,w ⊧Kaϕ iﬀM,w ⊧ϕ for each v ∈cca(w).
Example 3.4 As an example a plausibility model can be seen in Figure 3.15.
This model uses the set of propositions P = {p,q} and the set of agents A =
{1,2}. To visually tell the diﬀerence between possible world models and plau-
sibility models the relations are replaced with dashed lines. Everything else is
equivalent. In M,s, W = {w,s,t}, the valuation of each world is either {p,¬q},
{p,q}, or {¬p,q}. The relations function assigns w ≥{1,2} s and s ≥1 t. All
worlds also have reﬂexive relations for all agents. This model shows that agent
2 believes world s to be most plausible whereas agent 1 believes t to be the most
plausible. Furthermore, agent 1 believes that s is more plausible to occur than
w. The actual world occurring in s.
3.1.4
Temporal plausibility model
Temporal plausibility model allows the agents to also consider a temporal aspect
in plausibility models. Learning new information does not change what was
==PAGE:57==
3.1 Epistemic logic
47
believed in the past but rather what is known in the present. To model this
temporal knowledge change, dynamic epistemic temporal logic is used. Bryan
Renne, Joshua Sack, and Audrey Yap [33] presented in 2016 a temporal possible
world model. Based on the possible world model Renne added a temporal rela-
tion. Here, we relax the possible world model with a weaker pre-order relations
function. That is, the relations function is relaxed from an equivalence relation
to a plausibility relation creating the following model:
Definition 3.8 Given a non-empty set of propositions P and a non-empty
set of agents A the temporal plausibility model is deﬁned like the following:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,¢a,V )
Where W and V are as described in Deﬁnition 3.2 and {≥a}a∈A as in Deﬁnition
3.4. The temporal relation is deﬁned as follows:
• ¢ is a function assigning all agents a binary temporal accessibility relation,
w ¢ w′ ∣w,w′ ∈W. This temporal relation, w′ ↝w, specify that the w′
is one temporal tick in the past. The temporal tick is a ﬁxed interval. If
there is no world specifying w to be in the past, it is in the present.
If no temporal relations are assigned the model is atemporal. A pointed temporal
plausibility model is a pair M,w consisting of a temporal plausibility model
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,¢a,V ) and a world w ∈W. The world w is the pointed world,
that is, the actual world occurring.
For the temporal plausibility model to work, the underlying modal language
needs to be expanded, to include temporal modality.
Definition 3.9 Given a non-empty set P of propositional letters and a non-
empty set of agents A, a basic modal language can be deﬁned as follows:
ϕ ∶∶= p ∣¬ϕ ∣ϕ ∧ϕ ∣Kaϕ ∣[Y ]ϕ
Where p ∈P and a ∈A.
Likewise the binary truth relation is expanded to include everything as in Deﬁ-
nition 3.7 and the following:
• M,w ⊧[Y ]ϕ iﬀM,v ⊧ϕ for each v ↝w.
==PAGE:58==
48
Epistemic logic
(1,2)
(1)
(1,2)
(1,2)
(1,2)
(1)
(1,2)
(1,2)
(1,2)
(1,2)
Figure 3.16: M,(s,f). An example of temporal plausibility action model.
Example 3.5 To give a better idea of the temporal plausibility model, an ex-
ample is shown in Figure 3.16. Here, the set of propositions P = {p,q} and
the set of agents A = {1,2} is used. The squiggly arrows are the temporal rela-
tions, signifying that the worlds (w,e),(s,e) and (t,e) is one tick in the past,
and (w,e),(s,f) and (t,f) is in the present. The model shows that in the past
agent 1 believed that (t,e) was most plausible. Agent 2 believed world (s,e) to
be most plausible. Now, in the present, both agents believes that (s,f) is the
most plausible world.
3.2
Dynamic Epistemic Logic
In this section, how to make epistemic logic dynamic. Possible world models
can be made dynamic with public announcement logic, plausibility models, and
temporal plausibility models with lexicographical and elite upgrades. The tem-
poral plausibility models are made dynamic by preserving all temporal relations
while updating the plausibility relations.
This section is based on the work of Alexandru Baltag and Bryan Renne [8].
==PAGE:59==
3.2 Dynamic Epistemic Logic
49
3.2.1
Public Announcements Logic
Public announcements are when some information is announced to a set of
agents. These agents now know the information and that all other agents know
that they know. This is also known by all agents and so on. A public announce-
ment is deﬁned as follows:
[ϕ!]ψ
Where ϕ is the announcement and ψ is a formula, which is true after the an-
nouncement. For public announcements, it is assumed that the source of the
announcement is completely trustworthy and is telling the truth.
This could be [“Plants give oxygen”!]“Plants give oxygen”. Here “plants give
oxygen” is the announcement, and after the announcement has been announced
it is known that plants give oxygen and it is true.
The public announcement logic is an extension of the modal language in the
previous section.
Definition 3.10 Given a set of proposition P and a set of agents A the
modal language can be expanded to include public announcements:
ϕ ∶∶= p ∣¬ϕ ∣ϕ ∧ϕ ∣Kaϕ ∣[ϕ!]ϕ
Where p ∈P and a ∈A.
For possible world models a public announcement, [ϕ!]ψ is true, if whenever ϕ
is true, ψ is true afterwards. That is, after all ¬ϕ worlds have been eliminated,
ψ is true: M,w ⊧[ϕ!]ψ iﬀM,w /⊧ϕ or M[ϕ!],w ⊧ψ. M[ϕ!] is deﬁned as
follows:
M[ϕ!] = (W[ϕ!],{Ra[ϕ!]}a∈A,V [ϕ!])
Where
• W[ϕ] is all the worlds where ϕ is true: for all v ∈W ∣M,v ⊧ϕ;
• the relations function {Ra[ϕ!]}a∈A leaves all relations between the remain-
ing worlds as it was before the public announcement;
• V [ϕ!](p) the valuation function as in Deﬁnition 3.2.
All possible world models updating with the public announcement, are based
on the public announcement closure theorem from [8], thereby, all relations are
reﬂexive, transitive and euclidean.
==PAGE:60==
50
Epistemic logic
3.2.1.1
Successful and Unsuccessful Announcements
Within the world of epistemic logic, public announcements are seen as suc-
cessful, when they have been announced. That is, all agents have heard the
announcement and know it to be true— an announcement [ϕ!]ψ where ϕ is
announced ψ is believed to be true by all agents following the announcement.
Some sentences can make an announcement unsuccessful. The Moore formula
is a perfect example: Given a proposition p and an agent a
p ∧¬Kap
If this formula is announced, that is [p ∧¬Kap!]p ∧¬Kap then p is true and
agent a knows p. This, causing the latter part of the announcement to be false,
thereby, making the whole announcement false. Since the announcement is false
it is regarded as unsuccessful.
Another unsuccessful announcement is if the announcement is not heard, by one
or more agents. Therefore, is the announcement not known to all agents and,
is, therefore, unsuccessful.
3.2.2
Dynamic Plausibility Model
Plausibility models can be made dynamic with upgrades. Upgrades promote
one or more worlds, where, there are propositions in common. Two upgrades
are used in this thesis: lexicographic upgrades and elite upgrades.
Definition 3.11 (Lexicographic Upgrade) Lexicographic upgrade [⇑
ϕ]ψ updates a plausibility model such that all ϕ worlds are the most plausible.
All plausibility relations within the ϕ worlds remain the same. All ¬ϕ worlds
become less plausible than the ϕ worlds. The plausibility relations between all
¬ϕ worlds remain the same as before the upgrade. After the update ψ is true.
Definition 3.12 (Elite Upgrade) Elite upgrade [↑ϕ]ψ ﬁnds the best
ϕ world and makes it the most plausible world for all agents. ψ has to be true
after the update.
All other worlds retain their plausibility relations to each
other.
3.2.3
Dynamic Temporal Plausibility Models
The idea behind temporal plausibility models is to be able to describe the beliefs
of the past compared to the present. Renne, Sack, and Yap [33] use a temporal
==PAGE:61==
51
action model to update the temporal possible world model. Here, as the tem-
poral possible world model is relaxed into a temporal plausibility model, there
are three approaches to updating the model: temporal action models, lexico-
graphical, or elite upgrades. The temporal action model, proposed by Renne,
is upgraded from dynamic epistemic logic. The temporal action model would
update the temporal plausibility model, such that, the present becomes the past
and the believes in the new present is updated according to the announcements
in the action model. Upgrades would update the beliefs in the present, without
making it the past.
If the agents are aware of what they believed in the past, then the appropriate
approach, for updating the temporal plausibility model, is with temporal plau-
sibility action models. That is when agents obtain new believes the old believes
is updated so they are in the past. If the agents do not have a recollection of
what they believed in the past, then updating what they know in the present,
will not transfer to the past, but stay as the present. This is only possible if,
what is believed is kept separate from what is remembered.
Thus, the past
is remembered and shown with temporal relations, but what is known in the
present does not become the past. Thereby, making the past correspond to past
experiences and not believes. Updating the presence of the temporal plausibility
model is done through the lexicographical and elite upgrade.
An example will be presented in the next section where agents, fulﬁlling these
requirements are presented.
==PAGE:62==
52
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
==PAGE:63==
Implicit Learning and Dynamic
Epistemic Logic
In this section, we will discuss how dynamic epistemic logic can be used to model
implicit learning. Epistemic logic explores and models believes and knowledge
of agents. We, therefore, begin by discussing how the memory and the nervous
system can be modelled as epistemic agents. This is followed by, a discussion of
the epistemic models in the memory. That is, which epistemic models is best to
model the diﬀerent implicit learning methods. Implicit learning is the response
to external behaviour. These responses are controlled by the memory and per-
formed by the nervous system. The two systems communicate by transmitting
signals to each other. In epistemic logic communication between agents is done
through announcements, more speciﬁc public announcements. Therefore, will
we discuss how public announcements are used by the memory to communicate
with the nervous system. This is followed by a short discussion on successful
and unsuccessful announcements to the nervous system.
Hereafter, the diﬀerent implicit learning methods, in dynamic epistemic logic, is
explored. Starting with associative learning in Section 4.4, covering skill learning
(Section 4.4.1), priming (Section 4.4.2), and the two conditioning approaches:
classical conditioning (Section 4.4.3) and operant conditioning (Section 4.4.4).
Finally, the two non-associative learning methods, habituation and sensitisation,
is discussed in Section 4.5.
==PAGE:64==
54
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
4.1
Memory and Epistemic Logic
The memory is a highly complex chaotic system, whereas epistemic logic is a
highly structured, sound, and complete framework. In this section, we will dis-
cuss how the memory and the nervous system, can be described using epistemic
logic. First, we will discuss how the systems, both memory, and nervous system,
can be modelled as epistemic agents. This is followed by a discussion about how
the memory can be modelled using the dynamic epistemic models presented in
the previous section. Finally, it is discussed where the models are stored, how
they inﬂuence our behaviour, and how they are updated.
4.1.1
Agents in the memory
Agents in epistemic logic can store knowledge and infer new knowledge based
on the stored knowledge.
As described in Section 2.1, the memory consists of modules with the following
characteristics: domain speciﬁc, informational encapsulated, and has a shallow
output. Each module knows the information that is stored in them. They can
communicate this information through their shallow output.
The Working Memory
The visuo-spatial sketch-pad, in the working mem-
ory, receives signals transmitted by the nervous system. Here, the signals get
transformed into an awareness of the body’s movements. The signals are then
transmitted to the visual semantic memory and/or the episodic buﬀer through
private announcements—only the module transferring information and the mod-
ule receiving information knows about the transferring. If the episodic buﬀer
receives information it is then transferred to the phonological loop or the episodic
memory. The episodic buﬀer can also receive information from the phonological
loop and combine it with the information from the visuo-spatial sketch-pad, be-
fore transferring it to the episodic memory. Both the visuo-spatial sketch-pad
and the phonological loop can store a limited amount of information. Here, in-
formation can be seen as knowledge temporarily stored in each system. Further,
the episodic buﬀer is used for the visuo-spatial sketch-pad and the phonological
loop to interact and work together— information from one system can be com-
bined with information from the other to infer new information. The working
memory can therefore be seen as a single agent W.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Memory and Epistemic Logic
55
The Declarative Memory
With the information stored in the episodic mem-
ory, the semantic memory can now access it. The episodic memory contains
experiences obtained through the working memory. The semantic memory con-
tains information from the working memory and the episodic memory. Since all
information in the working memory gets stored in the episodic memory, then all
information in the semantic memory is a subset of the information in the episodic
memory. Furthermore, the semantic memory is capable of generalisation and
interference of the knowledge in the episodic memory. Thereby, allowing the
declarative memory both to store knowledge and infer new knowledge, based on
the knowledge in the storage. This allows us to see the declarative memory as
an agent. The declarative memory will be deﬁned as agent D.
Non-declarative Memory
The non-declarative memory receives knowledge
from the declarative memory and the nervous system, and stores it as associ-
ations. The nervous system transmits information from all the body’s muscles
and glands to the non-declarative memory. The declarative memory of past ex-
periences and semantic information to the non-declarative memory. That is, the
non-declarative memory obtains knowledge, and from that, infer new knowledge.
The new knowledge is stored in the non-declarative memory, and can, therefore,
be seen as an agent, denoted N.
The working memory, declarative memory, and the non-declarative memory
together will be described as the memory agents.
The nervous system
The nervous system is more primitive. It cannot store
knowledge, and can, therefore, not infer new knowledge. However, it is nec-
essary for the memory to receive information about what is happening in the
body and for the body to receive announcements from the memory. Therefore,
is it necessary for any model, which models implicit learning, to also include the
nervous system as an agent. That is, a primitive agent only capable of trans-
mitting information to the other systems. The nervous system, as a primitive
agent, will be denoted NS.
Similar arguments can be made for the limbic system as a primitive agent.
Therefore, the limbic system will be included in the agents necessary for mod-
elling implicit learning and be denoted LS.
==PAGE:66==
56
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
4.1.2
Models in the Memory
The declarative memory can be modelled, such that, it contains information
about how we should react to external stimuli. In the tradition of epistemic
logic, it could be proposed that the declarative memory is one giant model, but
as described in Section 2.1.2.1, the declarative memory consists of temporally
stamped experiences and nested semantic information.
That is not a single
unit, but a multitude of diﬀerent scenarios depending on what is needed. All of
which can occur simultaneously. So, if the declarative memory needs responses
to diﬀerent external stimuli more than one model is needed. The declarative
memory can therefore be seen as a collection of epistemic models telling the
memory to signal the nervous system how to implicitly behave.
Then, when implicit learning occurs, the non-declarative memory creates as-
sociations based on knowledge from the declarative memory and the nervous
system. These associations update the declarative memory’s behavioural in-
formation, and thereby, the models. These updates are the dynamic epistemic
logic discussed in the previous section. Since the models are describing implicit
responses, then, when models are updated by the non-declarative memory, our
behaviour is, thereby, updated as well. The declarative memory can contain two
diﬀerent types of models: plausibility models and temporal plausibility mod-
els. Both models contain worlds mapped to propositions. These propositions
represent stimuli that are either perceived, triggered, or performed. Both the
temporal plausibility model and the plausibility models describe the most plau-
sible response to external stimuli. That is, the propositions that are mapped to
the most plausible world, according to the memory agents, are performed. The
response is performed by the non-declarative memory signalling to either the
nervous system or the limbic system to perform the response. The diﬀerence is,
that the temporal plausibility relation adds a temporal aspect.
In the previous section, agents who only had a ﬁxed idea of their knowledge
were presented—agents who could not remember past knowledge. An example
is the declarative memory, and therefore, also the rest of the memory, as the
declarative memory is the main storage system for the memory. In the episodic
memory, past experiences are stored. From that storage, the semantic memory
obtains knowledge. This knowledge is not temporally stamped, that is, the se-
mantic memory cannot know what it knew in the past, only what is known now.
The episodic memory, on the other hand, has a recollection of past experiences.
These experiences do not include semantic knowledge.
When a new experi-
ence enters the episodic memory, the semantic memory infers knowledge from it
and updates its existing knowledge. Thereby, overwriting past knowledge, and
the knowledge of the knowledge, with new knowledge (or similar knowledge).
Therefore, what was known in the past are only experiences that can trigger a
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Public Announcements in the Nervous System
57
response, and the present can contain both knowledge and experiences. Mean-
ing, external and internal stimuli. In the temporal plausibility model, this is
modelled by all past worlds only having propositions relating to experiences and
present worlds can have both. Furthermore, updating the present knowledge,
or believes, will not trigger the old knowledge to be in the past, but rather
stay in the present. Enabling updating the temporal plausibility model with
lexicographical and elite upgrades.
4.2
Public Announcements in the Nervous Sys-
tem
As described in Section 4.1, the diﬀerent memory agents and the nervous system
communicate through announcements. In this section, the announcements will
be described in greater detail.
From Section 3.2.1, Public announcements are modelled like so, with a given
formula F:
[F!]F
Here, when an agent in the memory makes a public announcement it is meant
to signal to the nervous system, that some reﬂex, action, or stimuli have to be
triggered. For this section, the limbic system is part of the nervous system, and
there will not be a diﬀerentiation between the two. As in classical conditioning,
see Section 2.4.3.1, in the eye-blink response, when the tone is perceived the non-
declarative memory will make a public announcement to the nervous system that
it should trigger blinking. This is deﬁned as follows:
[B!]NBNS
where B is blink and [F!]N being a formula announced by the non-declarative
memory agent. Hereafter, BNS signiﬁes the nervous system performing a blink.
The subscript being which agents performs the action (or formula) it is sub-
scripted to. That is, the non-declarative agent performs the announcement, and
the nervous system performs the blink. The nature of the public announcement
is that now all agents know the announcement. By announcing to the nervous
system, and the announcement is successful, that is the nervous system performs
the announcement, the working memory will also know. We will then become
aware of the action performed after the announcement. This will then transfer
to the declarative memory. If the announcement is only logged in the episodic
memory, then the semantic memory can deduce the logged announcement, and
thereby also become aware of it. By the nature of the episodic memory, then
it is not possible that the announcement and the performance of it will only
==PAGE:68==
58
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
be logged, and thereby known by the semantic memory. Since it was the non-
declarative memory announcing the original announcement, the agents in the
non-declarative memory will also know. There is one case where the declarative
memory will not know the announcement, making the announcement unsuc-
cessful. That is with a damaged hippocampus, where the declarative memory
is located, or a damaged nervous system.
4.2.1
Successful vs. Unsuccessful Announcement
In epistemic logic, the Moore sentences become untrue as soon as they are an-
nounced — making it an unsuccessful announcement.
Another unsuccessful
announcement is if the announcement is not heard. In cognitive psychology, un-
successful announcements come from a damaged nervous system and/or muscles.
If the nervous system is damaged, that is, it cannot receive transmissions from
the memory, this would be equivalent to the announcement not being heard. If
the muscles were damaged, that is, they cannot perform their functions when
signals are transmitted to them. This is equivalent to the Moore sentences. Af-
ter the announcement of performance to the nervous system, the performance
should be performed. If the muscles cannot perform it, the announcement be-
comes untrue, and therefore, unsuccessful.
For this thesis, all announcements will be regarded as successful— transmit-
ting signals to the nervous system will always result in the performance of the
transmitted signals.
4.3
Learning in Epistemic Logic
As discussed, the systems of the memory, the nervous system, and the limbic
system can all be deﬁned as epistemic agents. Furthermore, plausibility models
and temporal plausibility models can be used to model the memory’s responses
to external stimuli. These models can then be updated through the lexicograph-
ical and elite upgrade to simulate implicit learning. In the next two sections,
each learning implicit learning method is modelled in epistemic logic, and we
discuss how they can be updated to best model the implicit learning process.
Associative learning methods are discussed ﬁrst, that is, skill learning, priming,
classical conditioning, and operant conditioning. Hereafter, the non-associative
learning methods, habituation, and sensitisation are discussed.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Associative Learning
59
4.4
Associative Learning
In this section, we will discuss how associative learning is modelled in dynamic
epistemic logic. Starting with skill learning, which is followed by priming. Fi-
nally, the two conditioning learning methods, classical and operant conditioning
are discussed.
4.4.1
Skill Learning
As described in Section 2.4.1, there are two main paradigms within skill learning:
adaption skill learning and sequence skill learning. In this section, adaption skill
learning is interpreted in dynamic epistemic logic. Sequence skill learning is left
for further work.
Adaption skill learning
As mentioned earlier, adaption skill learning is the
non-declarative memory adapting to the errors occurring in the performance
of a given skill. Here, it is assumed, that a performance without errors is an
optimal performance.
This optimal performance is impossible to achieve on
a human level, but it is nonetheless what we strive for. That is, we have a
conscious idea of the optimal performance of the skill and the errors committed
when performing the skill. Here, an idealised world is assumed where only one
error occurs at the same time. These errors diminish with practice, and will,
therefore, be decreasingly plausible to occur. Revisiting Example 2.1, Alice has
just learned to aim the ball to the other side of the court. After her ﬁrst practise,
she analyses her performance, such that, she is aware of the mistakes she made.
The analysis will automatically be created in the semantic memory based on
the information in the episodic memory about the practice. Alice is now aware
of the errors she made. Through practice and skill learning, the non-declarative
memory will decrease the probability of the errors occurring. To model skill
learning a plausibility model M is used. Given a set of propositions P, and a
set of agents A, the plausibility model is deﬁned as follows:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V )
Where W, {≥a}a∈A and V is as described in Deﬁnition 3.4.
During skill learning, the non-declarative memory performs the goal selection
and action selection. Hereafter, the non-declarative memory announces to the
nervous system to execute the selected actions. After the execution, the working
memory, declarative memory, and non-declarative memory log information of
==PAGE:70==
60
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
this execution and the errors performed.
The set of agents consist of: A =
{W,D,N,NS}. The errors performed are each modelled as a proposition: P =
{error1,error2,...,errorN} where N is the amount of errors.
The valuation
function V (p) returns a single world for each proposition, such that, V (error1) =
{w1},V (error2) = {w2},...,V (errorN) = {wn}. The worlds signiﬁes making the
error of the proposition it is mapped to. Lastly, the valuation function returns
for the negation of all propositions (errors) V (¬error1,¬error2,...,¬errorN) =
{wopt}. This world signiﬁes the optimal performance. Equi-plausible relations
are assigned for all agents for all worlds w1 to wn. wopt is assigned a plausibility
relation for all agents, such that, wopt is less plausible than all other worlds.
The model is pointed towards an arbitrarily chosen “error” world. Any error
cannot be completely erased, just adapted away from—it will always be present
and therefore be true. The optimal performance is not achievable, so it cannot
be the actual world.
The plausibility model created, such that, the declarative memory, and all con-
nected systems, can see what the most plausible error to occur is. Knowing this,
the non-declarative memory can adapt away from the most plausible error when
practising next time. The declarative and working memory also have access to
this information, through analysing the performance of the skill.
A small example over the set of propositions P = {error1,error2,error3} can be
seen in Figure 4.17. For simplicity, there are only three possible errors. Reﬂexive
relations have been omitted for clarity. In this ﬁgure, the initial stage of skill
learning is shown, where, there is an equal plausibility to perform any error.
There is least plausibility to do the optimal performance.
Returning to the
example with the new tennis player, Alice, this model shows her skill before any
adaption is done. When Alice starts practising aiming the ball correctly, she
adapts away from error1. Depending on how long she practise three diﬀerent
cases can occur:
1. error1 is adapted to, such that, the optimal performance and all other
errors are more likely to be performed;
2. error1 is practised, such that, it is less plausible to occur than error2 and
error3, but more plausible than the optimal performance;
3. error1 is practised, but not enough to impact the plausibility relations.
Case 1.:
Alice has practised adapting to error1, such that, the adaption of
error1 is successful. That is, error1 is less plausible than all other worlds in W.
To model this, a lexicographical upgrade of all ¬error1 worlds are performed
[⇑¬error1]¬error1. That is, all ¬error1 worlds becomes more plausible than
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Associative Learning
61
Figure 4.17: An example of the initial plausibility model M,w1 for skill learn-
ing over the set of propositions P = {error1,error2,error3}
w1, while the plausibility relations between the ¬error1 worlds remain the same.
Notice that ¬error1 has to be true after the lexicographical upgrade. This is to
ensure, that the optimal performance is still achievable. The upgraded model
can be seen in Figure 4.18.
Case 2.:
Alice has practised a bit, such that, error1 is now less plausible
than error2 and error3, but more plausible than the optimal performance.
To model this, a lexicographical upgrade of [⇑(¬error1 ∨(error1 ∧error2 ∧
error3))]¬error1. That is, all ¬error1 worlds, and the optimal performance,
is the least plausible. Here, (error1 ∧error2 ∧error3) is used to target wopt,
which valuates to: ¬error1,¬error2,¬error3. This case also covers if error1 is
practised enough, such that, error1 is less plausible than some worlds, but also,
more plausible than others. All the propositions of the more plausible world are
negated and added as a disjunction to what is upgraded.
Case 3.:
In the 3rd case, Alice practises, but not enough to adapt away from
an error, at least, not enough to make it less plausible to occur than other errors.
The plausibility model, therefore, remains the same.
==PAGE:72==
62
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Figure 4.18: M,w1 ⊧[⇑¬error1]¬error1.
A lexicographical upgrade [⇑
¬error1]¬error1 of M,w1.
Interference
Within the adaption paradigm, two kinds of interference can
inﬂuence the adaption of an error: anterograde and retrograde interference.
Anterograde interference being the disturbance of one error, which can minimise
the adaption of another error. For Alice, this was clumsy footwork interfering
with her aim—the interference (clumpy footwork) of the adaption to the error
(aiming poorly) increases the probability of the error (aiming poorly) occurring.
To model this, ﬁrst, ﬁnd the plausibility of the error occurring in comparison to
the other errors, then, subtract the interference and perform the lexicographical
upgrade according to the three cases presented above.
Retrograde interference, that is, while adapting to an error, it interfering with
a previously learned adaption. In Alice’s case, this could be learning to hit the
ball back to the centre of the court. This interferes with her previous adaption
of an error of not hitting it to the right side of the court— she increases the
probability of not being able to hit it to the right side of the court. To model
this, ﬁrst, the model is lexicographically upgraded with the previously learned
error, and its new plausibility, such that, it becomes more plausible. Hereafter,
the model is upgraded with the adaption of the new error. Both upgrades are
done accordingly to the 3 cases above.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Associative Learning
63
4.4.2
Priming
In Section 2.4.2, priming and the diﬀerent types of priming are introduced. In
this section, we will discuss how three of those types of priming is modelled in
epistemic logic and how they diﬀer from each other. The types discussed here
are: semantic priming, construct priming, and behavioural priming. Lastly, a
comparison of the diﬀerent types will be discussed, together with an expansion
to other types of priming.
Priming is the inﬂuence of an external stimulus that increases the probability
of a certain stimulus, as a response to another external stimulus. In semantic
priming, a prime, like the word “candy”, increases the probability of the target.
The target could be the response for completing “__ND_”, such that, it spells
out candy or the response to a question.
As described earlier, there are diﬀerent types of priming: semantic priming,
construct priming, behavioural priming, etc. Here, we will ﬁrst discuss semantic
priming, where after, we will expand to the other types of priming.
Semantic priming is the increase in the probability of thinking of or using, a
speciﬁc word or phrase. As a base case, it is then assumed, that without any
prime to inﬂuence us, all words have an equal probability of being used. To
model this a plausibility model is used. Given a set of propositions P and a set
of agents A, a plausibility model M is deﬁned as follows:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V )
Where W,{≥a}a∈A and V is as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.4.
Priming associates a prime with a target—the non-declarative memory creates
these associations based on information from the declarative memory. Then,
when the prime enters the awareness, through the nervous system, the working
memory transfers the information of the prime to the declarative memory. The
non-declarative memory gets this information directly from the nervous system.
The non-declarative memory stores the association to the target.
The non-
declarative memory will therefore update the declarative memory, such that,
there is an increased probability of the target being used.
Then, when the
working memory needs a response, from the declarative memory, relating to the
prime, the target most plausible is returned. Based on these transactions of
information, the agents needed for semantic priming are A = {W,D,N,NS}.
In semantic priming, the target is a response to an external stimulus, like an
answer to a question or ﬁlling out the blanks to complete a word. To model this,
the set of propositions consists of all words and phrases that can be a response
to that external stimulus and the external stimulus triggering the target.
==PAGE:74==
64
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
The plausibility model M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V ) where
• the set of worlds consists of n worlds, where n is the number of propositions
in P;
• the plausibility relations functions assign all agents equi-plausible relations
between all worlds in W;
• the valuation function V (p), returns one unique world w ∈W for each p ∈
P. That is, each world contains a single proposition from P. Furthermore,
V (response) = W—all worlds are mapped to the external stimulus that
is triggering the response. This is the same for all worlds.
A pointed plausibility model for semantic priming is M,w where M is the plausi-
bility model described above, and the pointed world is any world chosen arbitrar-
ily from W. That is, each world consists of two propositions, one word/phrase,
and the response triggering the word/phrase. The word changes depending on
the previous priming, but the triggering of the response is occurring. Therefore,
can all worlds be the actual world, as the response will be triggered.
When a prime enters the memory, the non-declarative memory will update the
model in the declarative memory, such that, the most plausible response is the
target word. To ensure the external stimuli is still triggering the response, the
external stimulus has to be true after the update. This is done with an elite
upgrade [↑target]externalStimulus.
If there are multiple targets, an elite
upgrade is done ﬁrst with the weakest target, then the second weakest, and so
on, until all targets have been primed. This ensures that the strongest target
is the most plausible, the second strongest is the second most plausible, and so
on.
Semantic Priming
As an example, we revisit the example with the word
“__ND_”. This word can be completed by all words of length 5, with an N and
a D on the third and fourth spots. Depending on the subject’s phonological level,
they could even suggest 4 or 6 letter words. Here, it is assumed that the subject
will only consider 5 letter words, with N and D in the correct positions, that
can complete “__ND_”.
P = {__ND_,Hands,Candy,Windy,Bends,...}.
The ﬁrst element of the propositions is the response triggering the word, the
rest are possible targets. The plausibility model can be seen in Figure 4.19.
All worlds have reﬂexive relations for all agents, these are removed for clarity.
Furthermore, by transitivity, all worlds have equi-plausible relations to all other
worlds. That is, at this stage, all responses to “__ND_” are equally likely to be
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Associative Learning
65
Candy
...
Figure 4.19: M,w1. Plausibility model for the semantic priming of “__ND_”
Candy
...
Figure 4.20: M,w1.
Pointed action model for semantic priming with the
primer "candy"
triggered. The three dots signify the worlds containing the rest of the responses
to “__ND_”
Then, when a prime enters the memory, that is associated with the target
“Candy”, the non-declarative memory will update the plausibility model. This
is done by an elite upgrade with the proposition target [↑candy]__ND_. The
updated model can be seen in Figure 4.20. All worlds have reﬂexive relations
for all agents, these are omitted for clarity. The upgrade has made all worlds
equi-plausible except for w2. Since w2 is now believed to be the most plausible
world it will respond with “Candy” when responding to “__ND_”. Notice that
the model is pointed to world w1, with the propositions Hands and “__ND_”.
This is caused by the initial pointed world was w1, which was true, in that the
external stimulus occurred. In the updated model the response to the external
stimulus is Candy, as this is believed to be the most plausible world. The ac-
tual world is still w1, where the external stimulus is occurring, but the response,
Hands, is not. In semantic priming, the pointed world is the world where the
proposition representing the external stimulus is true. Disregarding any other
propositions in the pointed world, as they are only true after the response has
been performed.
If at a later point, the memory is primed from hearing a weather forecast, then,
an elite upgrade with the word “windy” will be performed.
Hereafter, until
another priming occurs, windy will be the most plausible world as a response
to "__ND_". The second most plausible w2, with candy as a response and so
on.
==PAGE:76==
66
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Candy
Candy
Figure 4.21: Top: M,w1.
Plausibility model for construct priming of an-
other person.
Bottom:
the elite upgrade of M,w1 by [↑
sadness]person, followed by [↑anger]person
Construct Priming
Another example is construct priming, which is the in-
crease in the probability of a certain emotion as a response to seeing a speciﬁc
person. The targets in construct priming is emotions, the limbic system is, there-
fore, added to the set of agents A = {W,D,N,NS,LS}. The set of propositions,
for construct priming, contains all possible emotions that can be triggered by
that speciﬁc person, together with that speciﬁc person, as they are the exter-
nal stimulus triggering the emotional response. Here, a small example is created
with the following set of proposition P = {Person,Happiness,Anger,Sadness,Enjoyment}.
The proposition Person signiﬁes the external stimulus triggering the emotions.
Assuming before any relation is made to a person, no emotion is primed, that is,
all emotions have equal plausibility of being triggered. The model can be seen
in Figure 4.21. All worlds have reﬂexive relations for all agents in A. A negative
relation is created to the speciﬁc person, this could be from hearing negative
gossip about the person, negative emotions are primed. Compared to words
emotions are more interconnected—emotions group together. In this example,
there are two negative emotions, anger and sadness, and two positive, happiness
and enjoyment. If one of the emotions is primed the other would be primed as
well, but with a smaller plausibility of occurring. This can be modelled by mul-
tiple elite upgrades. Starting with, the least plausible of the primed emotion,
going up to the most plausible primed emotion. Returning to the example, if
the gossip primed anger towards the person, sadness would follow. To model,
this ﬁrst [↑sadness]person, followed by [↑anger]person. The resulting model
can be seen at the bottom of Figure 4.21. The most plausible world, believed
by all agents, is w2 with the proposition anger. Now, emotions towards the
speciﬁc person are primed with anger. That is, anger is triggered as a response
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Associative Learning
67
to seeing or hearing about that person. If not anger, then sadness. As sadness
is the second more plausible world. In this example, all other worlds are equi-
plausible. As more and more emotions are primed, fewer and fewer worlds are
equi-plausible.
Behavioural Priming
The main diﬀerence between semantic and construct
priming was the addition of the limbic system agent and the number of upgrades.
Behavioural priming is when the prime triggers a change in behaviour as a
response. An example is walking speed. Listing adjectives describing old age
can aﬀect us to walk slower, whereas describing adjectives connected to children,
aﬀects us to walk faster. For behavioural priming, the non-declarative memory
announces a behaviour to the nervous system, which performs it and reports this
to the working memory and non-declarative memory. The declarative memory
is notiﬁed through the working memory.
Giving the following set of agents
A = {W,D,N,NS}. The set of propositions consist of the responses and the
external stimulus triggering the response. Using the inﬂuenced walk example,
the set of propositions will be P = {walk,slowed,normal,fast}. Here, three
walking speeds are used. As seen in Figure 4.22 two plausibility models are
presented. The top model is the initial model, before priming. The bottom,
after the priming has occurred. All worlds have reﬂexive relations for all agents,
which, are not shown for clarity. In the initial model, before any priming occurs,
the most plausible world is the pointed world w2. When the response to walking
is triggered, that is to start walking, the memory sees that the most plausible
world is w2, and then, proceeds to walk at a normal speed. After the prime
has been introduced, that is, listing adjectives describing old age, the model
is updated with an elite upgrade [↑slowed]walk. The updated model is the
bottom ﬁgure in Figure 4.22. In this model, w1 is the most plausible world, so
when the memory announces to the nervous system to walk, it will be a slowed
walk. Notice here, that w2, normal walking speed, is more plausible than w3,
the fast walking speed.
This is caused by the priming being relative to the
model when primed. That is, if adjectives describing children, the prime would
increase the walking speed to w2. If the description continued, fast walking
speed could be achieved.
Other Types of Priming
Cognitive psychology proposes that the basis for
all priming is the same. A prime increases the probability of a certain response
to an external stimulus which leads to the question, are they modelled the same
in epistemic logic. The three discussed types of priming, semantic, construct,
and behavioural priming is modelled the same. Construct priming adds an extra
agent and have multiple upgrades to achieve priming, but otherwise, uses the
same principles as the other two. Other types of priming include associative
==PAGE:78==
68
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Candy
Candy
Figure 4.22: Top: M,w1, initial plausibility model for behavioural priming
in the inﬂuenced walk example.
Bottom: After priming with
adjectives relating to old age.
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Associative Learning
69
priming, cultural priming, and perceptual priming. Associative priming targets
concepts that are associated with the prime. An example could be the concept
of a ﬁeld of ﬂowers, as the prime, the target a sunﬂower. This increases the
probability of sunﬂower being the response to questions about one’s favourite
ﬂower or what is on the shopping list etc. Cultural priming is a subcategory of
associative priming and increases the probability to respond according to the
primed culture. This can likewise be modelled as the other types of priming.
Similar arguments can be made for perceptual priming. This shows, that the
most popular types of priming, can be modelled using the same approach within
epistemic logic.
That is, it is not certain that all types of priming can be
modelled using the same approach, only the most popular ones.
4.4.3
Classical Conditioning
As described in Section 2.4.3.1, classical conditioning has two main approaches
and three less popular ones. The main: delay and trace conditioning, the less
popular ones: backward, temporal, and simultaneous conditioning. Common
for all the approaches, is that they create an association between an external
stimulus, the conditioned stimulus (CS), and an internal stimulus, the uncondi-
tioned stimulus (UC). Where the internal stimulus is a natural trigger for some
responses, the unconditioned response (UR). After the association has been es-
tablished, the external stimulus can trigger the natural response to the internal
stimulus, without the internal stimulus being present.
The response is now
known as the conditioned response (CR). This section will explore how classical
conditioning can be modelled in dynamic epistemic logic, and how the diﬀerent
conditioning approaches diﬀer in dynamic epistemic logic.
Delay and Trace Conditioning
The main, and most popular, classical con-
ditioning approaches are delay and trace conditioning. In delay conditioning,
only the non-declarative memory is necessary to make the association, whereas
trace conditioning requires a lasting memory trace to be left in the declarative
memory. From here, the non-declarative memory can make an association be-
tween an external stimulus, intercepted by the nervous system, and the memory
trace. For delay, this memory trace is not necessary.
Bayesian studies in delay and trace conditioning have found a strong correlation
between the amount of repetition of the CS-US trials and the strength of the
conditioning—the more conditioning occurs, the higher the plausibility of the
association being created between the CS and the US. This suggests plausibil-
ity models are the best formalism to model delay and trace conditioning. As
described in Section 2.4.3.1, there is a small-time delay between the CS and the
==PAGE:80==
70
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
US. In trace conditioning, it is slightly larger than delay conditioning. Mean-
ing, that after a ﬁxed time interval from perceiving the CS the UR is triggered,
thereby, needing a temporal relation to model the conditioning. A temporal
plausibility model is therefore used to model delay and trace conditioning.
The set of agents A = {W,D,N,NS,LS}. The conditioned stimulus is transmit-
ted from the senses to the working memory and the non-declarative memory, by
the nervous system. From the working memory, the signals are transmitted to
the declarative memory. Based on these signals an association is created, in the
non-declarative memory, to the unconditioned response. The UR is triggered
by the unconditioned stimulus, which either is a reﬂex in the nervous system,
an action from the working memory, or a previously conditioned response. Af-
ter the conditioning is learned in the non-declarative memory, the conditioned
stimulus triggers the conditioned response in the non-declarative memory. The
CR is then performed by the nervous system. If the triggered response is an
emotion, then the non-declarative memory triggers the emotion in the limbic
system. The set of agents is, therefore, A = {W,D,N,NS,LS}.
Before the association is created, the external stimulus can potentially trigger
all internal natural responses.
To model delay and trace conditioning both
the external stimulus and the internal responses, that can be triggered by the
external stimulus, have to be present. Therefore, will the set of propositions
consist of all-natural responses and the external stimulus. Where a proposition
will signify either the external stimulus or the triggering of internal response.
Given a set of propositions P and agents A a temporal plausibility model can
be deﬁned:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,¢,V )
Where M is a temporal plausibility model deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.8. There is a
world for each proposition in P. The valuation function returns one world for
each proposition in P. A temporal relation w ¢ w′ is created between the world
w where w ∈W and V (externalStimulus) = {w}, and all worlds w′ where
w′ ∈W and V (response) = {w′} for all responses in the set of propositions.
Notice here, that a temporal relation is created between the past world, where
the tone is believed, to the present worlds of responses. Notice, that there is a
temporal relation between the external stimulus world to all response worlds.
Renne et al. [33] presented the temporal Kripke models with the property of
persistence of facts. This property deﬁnes, that propositions retain their values
across temporal relations.
Here, this property is disregarded, as knowledge,
in the semantic memory, cannot be temporally stamped—knowledge obtained
in the past, will not be seen as obtained in the past, but the present. Only
experiences are temporally stamped, and can therefore be in the past. Therefore,
can the persistence of facts property not be satisﬁed in temporal plausibility
==PAGE:81==
4.4 Associative Learning
71
models modelling classical conditioning.
Furthermore, the plausibility relations function assigns all agents a ∈A a equi-
plausible relation w ≃a w′ between all worlds, that valuates to responses.
The pointed temporal plausibility model is the pair M,w where M = (W,{≥a
}a∈A,¢,V ) and w ∈W and V (externalStimulus) = {w}. That is, the pointed
world is the world valuated to the external stimulus. For the association, and
therefore the conditioning, to be established, the external stimulus needs to
occur. The pointed world is therefore the external stimulus world. All other
worlds only have a
1
∣P−1∣chance to occur, where ∣P∣is the number of elements
in the set of propositions. Therefore, to respect the deﬁnition of the pointed
world, the external stimulus world is the actual world.
As the association is established, through conditioning, one response world be-
comes more plausible than the others. That is, the other worlds still have a
chance to occur, but it will most likely be the associated response world that will
be triggered. To model this, an elite upgrade [↑response]externalStimulus, of
the triggered response, is performed on all present worlds. Notice here, that the
external stimulus has to be true after the update. It is the external stimulus,
that triggers the response, so without it, the response will not be triggered.
Using the eye-blink response, a small set of propositions can be created, to make
a small example. The example set of propositions P = {blink,drool,breath,tone},
where blink, drool, and breath are responses to the external stimulus tone. In
this experiment, no emotions are triggered, the limbic system is, therefore, not
part of the set of agents A = {W,D,N,NS}. The temporal plausibility model,
models delay and trace conditioning, can be seen in Figure 4.23. All reﬂective
relations, assigned for all agents, on all words, are omitted for clarity. The same
goes for all following ﬁgures in this section.
In this initial model, w1 is the
pointed world, that is, the world occurring. Here, it is the tone sounding. This
model is modelling the tone sounding as a past event, one ﬁxed time interval
in the past. Now, in the present, one of the three responses is triggered by the
US. The US is not directly modelled in the model, but it is the US triggering
the updates of the model. For this initial model, all of the responses could be
triggered with equi-plausibility, as no updates have been performed yet.
As the CS-US trials continue, the association is established. That is, the non-
declarative memory has found a connection between the external stimulus and
the response triggered by the unconditioned stimulus. When the association is
established, hearing the tone will trigger the natural response, whereby, making
the natural response a conditioned response. This conditioned response, has an
increased plausibility of occurring over all other responses.
==PAGE:82==
72
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Tone
Figure 4.23: M,w1, a plausibility model modelling delay and trace condition-
ing.
Continuing with the eye-blink response example, the model, presented above, is
updated with an elite upgrade [↑blink]tone. That is, the present plausibility
relations are updated, such that, blink is the most plausible. Tone has to be true
in the model, for the delay and trace conditioning in the past, for the blink to be
triggered. The updated model can be seen in Figure 4.24. Here, all relations to
w4 has been updated, for all agents, such that, it is now the most plausible world.
The memory still considers all other responses equi-plausible. When the tone is
perceived by the memory, the memory will trigger the response by announcing
to the nervous system, that a blink should occur. The nervous system then
blinks. The announcement will look like the following [Blink!]NBlinkNS. Now,
that the association has been established two scenarios can occur: spontaneous
recovery and the creation of a reﬂex.
Spontaneous recovery is when the conditioning fades. This usually occurs
"spontaneous" as a person goes from being conditioned to not. It usually hap-
pens when the conditioning is not being reinforced, or if too few CS-US tri-
als have been performed. As the association has already been established in
the non-declarative memory, then, after a spontaneous recovery, it is easier to
reestablish the association again. Therefore, even after a spontaneous recovery,
there is still a higher plausibility, that the recovered response is triggered over
the other responses. The model is therefore not updated.
The creation of a reﬂex is if the conditioning is repeated enough, such that,
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Associative Learning
73
Tone
Figure 4.24: Update model of M,w1. An elite upgrade [↑blink]tone has been
used to model the establishment of the association between a
tone sounding and blinking. The tone is one ﬁxed interval in the
past.
==PAGE:84==
74
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Tone
Figure 4.25: A possible world model, modelling the behaviour of a learned
reﬂex in the nervous system. Here, the nervous system cannot see
the diﬀerence between the tone and the blink and will, therefore,
as the tone is heard, blink.
the nervous system creates a reﬂex corresponding to the association. This al-
lows the nervous system to work completely without the memory. The nervous
system consists of nerve ﬁbres transmitting signals between muscles, glands,
and memory. Reﬂexes are a part of the nervous system. The reﬂexes are either
inherited, established from birth, or learned. Learned reﬂexes are nerve ﬁbres
created especially to the speciﬁc reﬂex. That is, the only purpose of this reﬂex
is to trigger the conditioned response, as the conditioned stimulus is perceived.
This can be modelled as a possible world model, where the set of propositions
consist of the external stimulus and the triggered response. The set of agents
only consist of the nervous system.
The possible world model is deﬁned as
follows:
M = (W,{Ra}a∈A,V )
where W,{Ra}a∈A and V are deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.2. The group of worlds
consist of a single world w. V (externalStimulus) = {w} and V (response) =
{w}. A reﬂexive relation for w is assigned to all agents a ∈A. The pointed
possible world model is the pair M,w where M = (W,{Ra}a∈A,V ) and w ∈W.
The pointed world is the only world in W.
In the eye-blink response example, with enough CS-US trails, a reﬂex is created
in the nervous system, triggering a blink as soon as the tone is heard. The
possible world model, modelling this, can be seen in Figure 4.25. This single
world model consists of two propositions: the external stimulus, tone, and the
response, blink. Since this world is the only world, and the actual world, the
nervous system believes it to be true. To make it true, then, when the tone is
heard, the blink has to be performed as well.
==PAGE:85==
4.4 Associative Learning
75
Comparing Delay and Trace Conditioning
In the above paragraph, it was
explored how delay and trace conditioning is modelled in epistemic logic. With a
working declarative memory, there is no diﬀerence in the modelling of these two.
If the declarative memory is damaged, it cannot store new information. If it
cannot store new information, the memory trace required in trace conditioning,
will not occur, and the association will not be established. Delay conditioning
can still occur, as the CS and the US overlap, so no memory trace is required.
Therefore, delay conditioning can also be modelled using the set of agents A =
{W,N,NS}. The declarative memory is removed from the set of agents. The
conditioning will occur as described in the above paragraph. If the declarative
memory is damaged, trace conditioning will not establish an association. The
model can, therefore, not be updated, as no association is established to update
it.
Backward Conditioning
In backward conditioning, the CS comes after the
US, signalling a US and/or UR free period. That is, the plausibility of a response
occurring is diminished.
To model this, the delay/trace conditioning, some
changes are added to the temporal plausibility model. A new group of worlds
is added to W, each world valuated to a negation of a response. The negated
response signiﬁes, that the response is not performed as a consequence of the
conditioned stimulus. A temporal relation, from the external stimulus world to
the negated worlds, is created. Lastly, all agents a ∈A are assigned a plausible
relation w ≤a w′ between all response worlds w and negated response worlds,
w′. That is, the responses are more plausible to trigger than not being triggered
by the conditioned stimulus.
As the association is established, the external stimulus signiﬁes a conditioned
response free period.
To model this, an elite upgrade of the negated condi-
tioned response is performed [↑¬response]externalStimulus. This will make
the negated conditioned response, the most plausible world, in the present.
Thereby, modelling, that the conditioned response will, with more plausibility
than the rest of the responses, not occur. After the US free period is over, an
elite upgrade of the conditioned response is performed. This allows the perfor-
mance of the response again.
Simultaneous Conditioning
As simultaneous conditioning works just as de-
lay conditioning, just with a shorter interval between the start of the conditioned
stimulus and the unconditioned, the epistemic model will be as delay condition-
ing, except the ﬁxed time interval, represented by the temporal relation, is
shorter.
==PAGE:86==
76
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Temporal Conditioning
Temporal conditioning works a bit diﬀerent from
the other classical conditioning, the CS is not an external stimulus, but rather
a ﬁxed time interval.
To model this, the delay/trace temporal plausibility model is modiﬁed, such
that, the world evaluating to the external stimulus is now tautology. That is,
no matter what occurred before the ﬁxed time interval, the conditioned response
will be triggered after the ﬁxed time interval. Everything else, includes updating,
as the association is established, is the delay/trace temporal plausibility model.
Comparing the Models.
As discussed, the diﬀerent approaches of classical
conditioning can be modelled using a temporal plausibility model. With small
changes to the time interval of the temporal relations or the valuations of the
worlds, all approaches, except backward conditioning, are modelled using the
same set of propositions, set of agents, and relations. In backward conditioning,
the amount of worlds is doubled, and the stimulus, the elite upgrade is performed
on, is negated. Besides these smaller changes, backward conditioning can be
modelled as the other approaches.
4.4.4
Operant Conditioning
Operant conditioning increases the plausibility of certain behaviour by either
rewarding or discouraging it through a reinforcer— a behaviour followed by a
reinforcer to trigger a speciﬁc emotion, usually positive or negative. Through
operant conditioning, the behaviour will be associated with that emotion. After
this association has been established, then performing the behaviour subse-
quently triggers the associated emotion. Since operant conditioning increases
the plausibility of a certain behaviour, by triggering the emotion after the be-
haviour is performed, a temporal plausibility model is used. With enough con-
ditioning, the plausibility of the emotion being triggered, is so high, that it
triggers as the behaviour is performed.
Before a temporal plausibility model is deﬁned, the set of agents and proposi-
tions needs to be deﬁned. The set of agents consist of A = {W,D,N,NS,LS}.
The working memory is needed as the behaviour is decided explicitly. Further-
more, the working memory is needed to transfer the experience of the behaviour,
to the declarative memory. The nervous system is needed to perform the be-
haviour. After the behaviour has been performed, the reinforcer is introduced.
This triggers an emotion in the limbic system, which the working memory and
the non-declarative memory is notiﬁed about. The non-declarative memory now
==PAGE:87==
4.4 Associative Learning
77
creates an association between the behaviour performed and the triggered emo-
tion. After the association has been established, the non-declarative memory
will trigger the emotion as the behaviour is being performed.
The set of propositions consists of the behaviour performed together with the
possible emotion, that can be triggered, as a response to the behaviour.
Given P and A, as describedly above, a temporal plausibility model can be
deﬁned as follows:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,¢,V )
where W,{≥a}a∈A,¢ and V is as described in Deﬁnition 3.8. The valuation func-
tion assigns the behaviour proposition to one world wb, each emotion proposition
e ∈P is assigned to a world we, and the set {behaviour, emotion} are assigned
a world wbe for all emotions e ∈P.
A temporal relation wb ↝we between wb and all worlds we. An equi-plausible
relation we ≃a w′
e between all we worlds, where the emotions are diﬀerent, is
assigned to all agents. Likewise, an equi-plausible relation wbe ≃a w′
be between
all wbe worlds, where the emotions in we and w′
e are diﬀerent, is assigned to each
agent. Then, a plausibility relation we ≤a wbe between all we worlds and wbe
worlds, where the emotions in we and wbe are equivalent, for all agents except
the limbic system, the limbic system has an equi-plausible relation between these
worlds.
The pointed world M,wb is a pair consisting of the model and V (behaviour) =
{wb}. When the behaviour is performed, a reinforcer is triggering an emotional
response. The world with the behaviour proposition is the world that occurs,
as no emotional response would be triggered without it.
There are two steps to operant conditioning:the initial step and the conditioned
step.
In the initial step, the association between behaviour and emotion is
created—the emotion is triggered after the behaviour. In the conditioned step,
the behaviour is performed and the emotion is triggered simultaneously. The
two steps update the temporal plausibility model diﬀerently:
• the initial step updates through an elite upgrade [↑emotion∧¬behaviour]behaviour,
where the reinforced emotion is true and the behaviour is false. After the
upgrade, the behaviour still has to be true, as the emotion would not be
triggered otherwise. After the upgrade, the most plausible world is the
reinforced emotion—the non-declarative memory will trigger the emotion,
as a subsequent response to the behaviour;
• the conditioned step, the elite upgrade [↑emotion ∧behaviour]behaviour
==PAGE:88==
78
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
InsertCoin
Happy
Sad
Indifferent
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Happy
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Sad
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Indifferent
{W,D,N,NS}
InsertCoin
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{LS}
{LS}
{LS}
Figure 4.26: M,winsertCoin. Example of an initial model for operant priming,
where the behaviour is inserting a coin into a candy machine.
The conditioning is yet to occur.
ﬁnds the best world, where both the reinforced emotion and the behaviour
is true. Afterward, the behaviour has to evaluate to true as well. When
the operant conditioning has established the association, as the behaviour
is performed, the reinforced emotion is triggered simultaneously.
If another emotion gets triggered by the behaviour, this is now the reinforced
emotion the elite upgrade uses. After the ﬁrst association has been established,
reinforcing behaviour with a new emotion is increasingly diﬃcult.
In Example 2.2, a single candy machine is used to describe operant condition-
ing with a positive reinforcer. The set of propositions, therefore, consist of the
behaviour insertCoin and all possible emotions, that can be triggered by the re-
inforcer, the candy. For this example, a subset of the emotions is chosen to better
show how the model works. These emotion are happy, sad, and indifferent.
Given the set of propositions P = {insertCoin,happy,sad,indifferent} and
the set of agents A = {W,D,N,NS,LS}, the temporal plausibility model can
be constructed. The model can be seen in Figure 4.26. All worlds have reﬂexive
relations for all agents, which are removed for clarity. This is the case for all
future models in operant conditioning. The pointed world is winsertCoin, that
is, the insertCoin behaviour.
This is caused by the actual behaviour being
==PAGE:89==
4.4 Associative Learning
79
InsertCoin
Happy
Sad
Indifferent
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Happy
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Sad
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Indifferent
{W,D,N,NS}
InsertCoin
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{LS}
{LS}
{LS}
Figure 4.27: M1,winsertCoin.
The updated model according to the initial
step—an elite upgrade [↑happy ∧¬insertCoin]insertCoin
performed is inserting a coin into the candy machine. After the coin has been
inserted a piece of candy will drop and go down a slide. This is illustrated with
the temporal relations. The behaviour of inserting a coin into the candy ma-
chine is stored in the episodic memory. After a ﬁxed time interval, the candy
is available and will be eaten, thereby, triggering the reinforcer. When eating
the candy, the limbic system will trigger happiness. Using these two experi-
ences, inserting a coin into the candy machine and feeling happy when eating
the candy, the non-declarative memory creates an association between the two.
This association is the initial step and the model will be updated accordingly.
That is, [↑happy ∧¬insertCoin]insertCoin. The resulting model can be seen
in Figure 4.27. In this new updated model, the most plausible world is whappy,
that is, for all agents, except the limbic system. As the limbic system is only
in control of emotions, and the nervous system is not transmitting signals to it
about behaviour, so the limbic system is only aware of the emotion triggered
in the worlds. Since whappy and wbhappy shares the same emotion, then the
limbic system cannot tell the diﬀerence, and therefore, believes them to be equi-
plausible. This models that, the memory knows, that performing the behaviour
will most likely trigger happiness. By repeating this, the association will be-
come stronger, and thereby, also make the plausibility of feeling happiness after
inserting a coin more likely. As the association becomes strong and stronger,
==PAGE:90==
80
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
InsertCoin
Happy
Sad
Indifferent
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Happy
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Sad
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
InsertCoin 
Indifferent
{W,D,N,NS}
InsertCoin
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{W,D,N,NS,LS}
{LS}
{LS}
{LS}
Figure 4.28: M2,winsertCoin. M1 updated according to the conditioned step
with the elite upgrade [↑happy ∧insertCoin]insertCoin
inserting a coin will immediately trigger happiness. That is, the conditioned
step with the elite upgrade [↑happy ∧insertCoin]insertCoin. The resulting
model can be seen in Figure 4.28.
The non-declarative memory now has associated happiness with the performance
of inserting a coin into the machine—as a coin is inserted into the candy machine
the feeling of happiness is triggered simultaneously with the behaviour. This
behaviour is now positively conditioned.
Choice
Another aspect of operant conditioning is choice. Here, a choice be-
tween two or more behaviours has to be made. Through operant conditioning,
and testing all choice, the best choice is found. Since there are multiple be-
haviours, all behaviours need to be added to the set of propositions. The set
of agents remain the same as before. The temporal plausibility model will be
deﬁned as follows:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,¢,V )
where W,{≥a}a∈A,¢ and V is deﬁned as in Deﬁnition 3.8. For choice operant
conditioning, to accommodate for multiple behaviours, the valuation function
maps all behaviour proposition b ∈P, to diﬀerent worlds wb.
Likewise, all
==PAGE:91==
4.4 Associative Learning
81
emotion propositions e ∈P are mapped to a world we. Then, all combinations
of a single behaviour and a single emotion each is mapped to a world wbe.
Relations are like the above description with added behaviours. All behavioural
worlds are equi-plausible for all agents. The behavioural worlds all have tempo-
ral relations to the single emotion world, signifying the behavioural worlds are
in the past. All single emotion worlds are equi-plausible for all agents. All be-
havioural/emotion worlds, where the emotions are equivalent, are equi-plausible
for all agents. Likewise, all behaviour/emotion worlds, where the behaviour is
equivalent, are equi-plausible for all agents. Finally, all agents are assigned a
plausibility relation between all single emotion worlds and behaviour/emotion
worlds, where the emotions are equivalent, such that, the single emotion world
is believed to be the most plausible. That is, except the limbic system, which
ﬁnds all worlds, where the emotions are equivalent to be equi-plausible.
Before, in the non-choice operant conditioning, the pointed world was the world
with the behavioural proposition.
In choice, there are multiple behavioural
propositions, and therefore, multiple worlds, that can be the pointed world.
Assuming one is chosen arbitrarily, then, that world’s behaviour is the behaviour
being performed. This cannot be changed later, except with a factual change in
propositions. This is not allowed within epistemic logic, but there is no problem
with changing behaviour in cognitive psychology.
A small example is presented before it is discussed further. Continuing the candy
machine example, there are now two candy machines, M1 and M2. M1 gives one
piece of candy, M2 two pieces. Through testing both machines, the behaviour
that gives the most positive emotional value is chosen—the behaviour resulting
in the best reinforcer is chosen. As there are two diﬀerent behaviours, the set of
propositions is concatenated with with the extra behaviour. To keep the example
small, then only two emotions can be triggered: happiness and sadness. Given a
set of propositions P = {insertCoinM1,insertCoinM2,happy,sad} and a set of
agents as before, the temporal plausibility model can be constructed. The model
can be seen in Figure 4.29 All black plausibility relations are assigned to all
agents, the red plausibility relations are relations assigned to the limbic system.
The pointed world is arbitrarily chosen to be winsertM2— the behaviour being
performed is inserting the coin into M2.
To make an optimal choice, both
behaviours have to be tried. With this model, that is impossible, as a factual
change of WinsertM2 would have to occur. To enable choice, then the model
cannot be pointed.
If it is not pointed, then there is a free choice of both
behaviours, which eventual, would lead to the wM2happy world being the most
plausible, as inserting a coin into M2 gives a better emotional response, than
inserting the coin into M1.
Since factual changes are not allowed in epistemic logic, then a complete model
==PAGE:92==
82
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
InsertCoin
InsertCoin
Figure 4.29: Mc,winsertCoinM2. Initial model for choice operant condition-
ing. All black plausibility relations are assigned to all agents, the
red plausibility relations are only relations assigned to the limbic
system.
==PAGE:93==
4.5 Non-associative Learning
83
for choice operant conditioning cannot be created. An alternative would be, that
each behaviour is modelled as a single behaviour operant conditioning model.
Then, for all models, the most plausible behavioural/emotion world is found
and compared with each other. Then the behavioural/emotion world with the
best emotional response will be the choice. This would only work with more
nuanced emotions, than in these examples.
4.5
Non-associative Learning
Non-associative learning is how stimuli are perceived by the memory. Habitua-
tion about how the memory ignores stimuli, sensitisation about how subsequent
stimuli are perceived more strongly. In this section, we will discuss how both
habituation and sensitisation can be modelled in dynamic epistemic logic. Fur-
thermore, we will discuss how non-associative learning is neutralised, through
dishabituation.
4.5.1
Habituation
From Subsection 2.5.1, habituation is when the memory no longer perceives
repetitive stimulus. The stimuli could be from all our senses and could therefore
be everything from hearing a ticking clock, seeing familiar objects, or feeling the
clothes on your skin. The familiar object could be a lamp in the corner of the
living room or the ﬁre alarm in the kitchen. Even repetitive internal stimuli
can be habituated. Breathing, walking, grabbing something, etc. can all be
habituated. Repeated applications of the stimulus will result in a decreased
response. That is, the more a stimulus is repeated, the less it is perceived by
the memory— the probability of it not being perceived is increasing.
To model this in epistemic logic, a plausibility model M is used. This allows
for modelling, of how the non-declarative memory increases or decreases the
plausibility of external stimuli being perceived by the rest of the memory.
For the plausibility model, a set of agents are needed. External stimuli can only
enter the awareness through the nervous system. The nervous system transmits
signals, the external stimuli, to the working memory and the non-declarative
memory. The working memory will then transfer the signals to the declarative
memory.
By repeatedly receiving these signals, the non-declarative memory
increases the probability of them being ignored by the memory. Habituation
will not aﬀect the nervous system. All external stimuli will be transmitted to
==PAGE:94==
84
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
the memory, regardless of them being habituated or not. Since habituation does
not aﬀect the nervous system, then the nervous system will not be included in
the set of agents. The memory system will. A = {W,D,N}.
The set of propositions P contains all stimuli, that the nervous system can
perceive, that can be habituated. With enough repetition, all stimuli can be
habituated. In this model, a proposition signiﬁes the memory perceives that
stimuli. The negation of the proposition is not perceiving it.
Given the set of propositions P and set of agents A as described above habitu-
ation can be modelled like the following plausibility model:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V )
Where W,{≥a}a∈A and V are as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.4.
As the initial model, before habituation occurs, all stimuli are perceived. That
is, the valuation function V returns a single world containing all propositions in
P. It is assumed, that only one stimulus can be habituated at the time. For this
to be modelled, all diﬀerent combination of stimuli, including the negation, has
to in the model. Therefore, is the valuation function returning a single world
for each combination.
That is, there is a group of worlds G1 containing all
the combinations of the external stimuli where one stimulus is negated. Then,
a group of worlds G2 containing all the combinations of the external stimuli,
where two stimuli are negated and so on. Until there is a world Gn,n ∈N where
all stimuli in P are negated. This represents the world, where none of the stimuli
is perceived.
In the initial model, all agents a ∈A are assigned a equi-plausible relation
w ≃a w′ between all worlds sharing a group w ∈Gi and w′ ∈Gi where 1 ≤i ≤n
and w /= w′.
Furthermore, all worlds in each group are less plausible than
all worlds in all groups with fewer stimuli negated. This is, for all agents a
plausibility relation w ≥a w′ where w ∈Gi, w′ ∈Gl for all groups where i > l.
The world with all stimuli true is more plausible than all others.
Similarly,
the world with all stimuli negated is the least plausible. All worlds contain a
reﬂexive relation for all agents in A.
A pointed plausibility model, modelling habituation, consist of a pair M,w,
where M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V ) and the world w ∈W, V (P) = {w}—the pointed
world is the world where all stimuli is being perceived.
As the non-declarative memory habituates a stimulus, that stimulus is no longer
perceived by the memory. To model this, a lexicographical upgrade of all ha-
bituated stimulus negated is performed. Afterward, all stimuli in P have to be
==PAGE:95==
4.5 Non-associative Learning
85
true. If they are not true, then the nervous system would not have transmitted
signals of the stimulus to the memory, and the memory would, therefore, not be
able to habituate the stimulus.
As an example a smaller set of propositions is used:
P = {clock,object,clothes}
Here, clock represents the nervous system hearing the clock ticking and reporting
it to the non-declarative memory and the working memory, from which the
ticking can be transferred to the declarative memory. The proposition object
represents seeing a familiar object, like a lamp, and clothes represent feeling the
clothes on one’s body.
The plausibility model for this example can be seen in Figure 4.30. All relations
are for all the agents in A. All worlds have reﬂexive relations for all agents
in A. These are not shown for the sake of clarity. All green worlds, worlds
belonging to G1, are all equi-plausible for all agents. Likewise, all blue worlds,
worlds belonging to the group G2 are equi-plausible for all agents. The least
plausible world w1 contains all negated proposition, signifying all stimuli being
habituated. The most plausible world w8 is the world, in which, all propositions
in P are perceived.
Feeling all stimuli at once would feel horrible.
Luckily,
the non-declarative memory is quick to habituate, usually weaker, repeated
stimuli. The ticking of a clock is very repetitive, and therefore, easy for the non-
declarative memory to habituate. Habituation is modelled with a lexicographical
upgrade of all the habituated stimuli negated. In this example, all habituated
stimuli is the set {clock}, thereby, upgraded with the following [⇑clock]clock ∧
object ∧clothes. The upgraded model can be seen in Figure 4.31
All relations are for the agents in A, but is omitted for clarity.
The same
goes for reﬂexive relations on each world. This model describes, that with high
plausibility, that the ticking of the clock is not perceived. Updating with the
lexicographical upgrade can be repeated until all stimuli have been habituated
away, and the most plausible world is the one where all stimuli are negated. Mul-
tiple stimuli cannot be habituated simultaneously, but they can be habituated
in quick succession.
Dishabituation
Dishabituation is when we start perceiving habituated stim-
uli again. This usually occurs when an external stimulus makes the habituated
stimuli noticeable, being asked what time it is. This would bring attention to
the clock, thereby, dishabituating the ticking. To model this, the dishabituated
stimulus is removed from the set of habituated stimuli, and a lexicographical
upgrade is done over this set. All stimuli still have to be true after the up-
grade. After the dishabituation of a stimulus, the plausibility relations would
==PAGE:96==
86
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Clock, object,
clothes
Figure 4.30: M,w8.
Plausibility model for before any habituation has oc-
curred. All green worlds are equi-plausible. Likewise, all blue
worlds are equi-plausible. The most plausible world, the pointed
world, is w8, signifying that all stimuli, with high plausibility, is
perceived. Both agents assigned to relations and reﬂexive rela-
tions have not been shown for the sake of clarity. All relations
are for all agents A = {W,D,N}.
==PAGE:97==
4.5 Non-associative Learning
87
Clock, object,
clothes
Figure 4.31: M,w8 updated with [⇑clock]clock ∧object ∧clothes. It can be
seen that, w6 is now believed to be the most plausible world
by all agents. This models that the memory is now, with high
plausibility, ignoring the ticking of the clock.
==PAGE:98==
88
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
favour certain stimuli being habituated again. That is to model, that previous
habituated stimulus is easier to habituate again.
4.5.2
Sensitisation
From Subsection 2.13, sensitisation is an increased reaction in our memory to
subsequent stimuli, after a usually strong stimulus. This could be a loud un-
expected sound, an electric zap, or something similar. That is, the memory
goes from a state of perceiving any new external stimuli at a normal rate, to
perceiving them strongly or in an exaggerated manner. With a strong stimulus,
the probability of perceiving subsequent external stimuli strongly is increased.
It can, therefore, be modelled as a plausibility model.
The nervous system
transmits signals, about any external stimuli, to the memory. That is, to the
non-declarative memory and the working memory. The working memory will
then transmit the signals to the declarative memory. If the transmitted signals
are strong stimuli, triggering sensitisation, the non-declarative memory notiﬁes
the memory that all subsequent external stimuli have to be perceived strongly.
As with habituation, the nervous system is not aﬀected by sensitisation and is
therefore not included in the set of agents A = {W,D,N}.
The set of propositions is the two diﬀerent states the memory can perceive sub-
sequent stimuli as P = {normal,strong}. The proposition “normal” represent
perceiving subsequent external stimuli at a normal rate, the proposition “strong”
at a more strongly rate.
Given these two sets, a plausibility model can be created to model sensitisation:
M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V )
Where W,{≥a}a∈A and V is as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.4.
W contains two worlds. The plausibility relation function assigns a plausibility
relation between them w1 ≤a w2 for all agents a ∈A. Finally, the valuation
functions evaluates V (normal) = {w1} and V (strong) = {w2}.
The pointed model M,w where M = (W,{≥a}a∈A,V ), w ∈W, and V (normal) =
{w}. That is, the pointed world is the world that evaluates to the proposition
“normal”. The nervous system is not aﬀected by sensitisation, and will, therefore,
always transmit all external stimuli to the memory at a normal rate.
When the memory is transmitted, a strong stimuli sensitisation can occur. This
is modelled by an elite upgrade [↑strong]normal. That is, the best strong
==PAGE:99==
4.5 Non-associative Learning
89
Normal stimuli
Normal stimuli
Figure 4.32: Top model: M,w1, a plausibility model modelling the memory
perception of external stimuli before sensitisation has occurred.
Bottom model: Ms,w1, a plausibility model
world is the most plausible. After the update, the proposition normal has to be
true in the model. That is, without the external stimuli being transmitted to
the memory, sensitisation cannot occur.
The plausibility model for sensitisation can be in Figure 4.32.
It is the top
model. Reﬂexive relations are omitted for clarity. Each world contains a reﬂexive
relation for each agent in A.
Here, the plausibilities have been updated such, that now w2 is the world the
agents believe most plausible. Therefore, will the memory agents act accord-
ingly. Now, all subsequent stimuli will most likely be perceived strongly.
With time sensitisation fades—a desensitisation occurs10. That is, a neutral-
10The correct psychological term is dishabituation. Habituation, and thereby also disha-
bituation, was presented before sensitisation. Dishabituation is the neutralisation of modiﬁed
==PAGE:100==
90
Implicit Learning and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
ising of the modiﬁed perception of external stimuli. This is modelled like an
elite upgrade [↑normal]normal, where the most plausible world w ∈W and
V (normal) = {w} is upgraded to be the most plausible for all agents.
perception—the eﬀect of habituation and sensitisation would be neutralised. Since the term
dishabituation seems strongly connected to habituation, and not sensitisation, a new term is
introduced here: desensitisation. Desensitisation will work as a dishabituation of sensitisation.
==PAGE:101==
Conclusion and Further Work
5.1
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to model implicit learning methods in dynamic
epistemic logic, and by doing this, model how implicit learning is obtained.
Furthermore, we chose to model the memory modalities as agents, which al-
lowed us to model the diﬀerent implicit learning methods in epistemic logic. We
showed that the two categories of associative and non-associative implicit learn-
ing methods, shared similarities internally within the categories. All associative
learning methods established associations in the non-declarative memory, which
aﬀected the rest of the memory and our behaviour. The non-associative learn-
ing methods both, diﬀerently, aﬀect the perception of external stimuli. This
was shown in the epistemic models. In associative learning both plausibility
and temporal possibility, models were used. The key aspect of both models
is the plausibility relations which was used to model the increased plausibility
of a certain response being triggered. The temporal relation, in the temporal
plausibility model, was especially used, when a ﬁxed time interval was necessary
for establishing the associations. Furthermore, we found that the establishment
of the associations could be modelled with either lexicographical or elite up-
grades of the models.
Another common factor found was the set of agents.
We found that, except for the limbic system, all associative learning methods
used all memory agents and the nervous system. The biggest diﬀerence in the
modelling of these learning methods was the sets of propositions. Each learning
method needed a unique set of propositions to signify the stimulus triggering a
response and all possible responses that could occur. Similarly, we found that
the non-associative learning method’s main diﬀerence was the propositions and
what they signiﬁed. In habituation, the propositions signiﬁed already perceived
==PAGE:102==
92
Conclusion and Further Work
individual stimuli, whereas, in sensitisation, the propositions signiﬁed how sub-
sequent stimuli should be perceived.
Taking this into consideration, we can conclude that this thesis has successfully
modelled the diﬀerent implicit learning methods.
However, the work of this
thesis could be further expanded into diﬀerent areas.
5.2
Further Work
In this section, we will discuss potential further work and how to expand on the
work already presented in this thesis.
Neuroscience
Within recent years, cognitive psychology and neuroscience
have been working together, to map the diﬀerent areas of the brain—each mem-
ory system can be mapped to a speciﬁc area in the brain. This is made possible
with more and more advanced MRIs, making it possible to detect what areas of
the brain are in control of the diﬀerent memories and learning methods. This
thesis has solely focused on the cognitive approach but could be extended to
neuroscience as well. The memory agents could be expanded or replaced with
brain areas and, hereafter, see if it changes the epistemic models. Furthermore,
this would also allow us to more exact pinpoint the functionality of the memory
system, and, thereby, make the models even more precise about which areas of
the brain are involved in the diﬀerent learning methods.
Neurological Disorders
Some implicit learning methods are not aﬀected
by certain memory systems. For example, delay classical conditioning is not
aﬀected by a damaged declarative memory, whereas, trace conditioning is. It
could, therefore, be interesting to look at how other neurological disorders would
aﬀect the memory agents and epistemic models.
Neurological disorders like
dyslexia, dementia, and Alzheimer, all aﬀect the memory diﬀerently, but how
do they aﬀect implicit learning, and, thereby, also the epistemic models?
Overlapping Learning Methods
This thesis has focused on diﬀerent learn-
ing techniques as separate methods with no overlap. The reality is that overlap
does occur. Skill learning is more often habituated before the action of move-
ments enters the awareness, thereby, changing the agents in the epistemic model
for skill learning [24]. Priming can aﬀect operant conditioning, as the reinforcer
can be primed to a diﬀerent emotional response [10]. Therefore, an expansion
==PAGE:103==
5.3 Related Work
93
to this thesis could be to further investigate how to model these overlaps within
the implicit learning methods.
Sequential Skill Learning
There are two main paradigms within skill learn-
ing: adaption skill learning and sequential skill learning. In this thesis, we found
a model for adaption skill learning, but not for sequential skill learning. Se-
quential skill learning creates dynamic sequences of actions, that, after being
performed, are changed until the perfect sequence is obtained. This is very dif-
ﬁcult to model in epistemic logic but could be modelled in other logic, like the
logic of action. Further work from this thesis could, therefore, be to branch out
to other forms of logic.
5.3
Related Work
Lastly, we will quickly look into the related work within the ﬁeld.
Shakey the Robot
Shakey the Robot was the ﬁrst robot to be able to reason
about its own actions. Using action sequences it could plan a route, push objects
and get to certain goal. Using the same principles sequential skill learning can
be modelled.
Forgetting
In 2019, a paper was published exploring forgetting using belief
management and belief revision [9]. Using the same approach as in this thesis,
they went through all the diﬀerent kinds of forgetting and applied belief revision
on each kind, to get a better, more qualitative understanding of forgetting.
==PAGE:104==
94
Conclusion and Further Work
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1] Carlos E. Alchourrón, Peter Gärdenfors, and David Makinson. On the logic
of theory change: Partial meet contraction and revision functions. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 50, 1985.
[2] R. C. Atkinson and R. M. Shiﬀrin. Human memory: A proposed system and
its control processes. Psychology of Learning and Motivation - Advances in
Research and Theory, 2, 1968.
[3] Alan Baddeley. Working memory alan baddeley. Science, 255, 1992.
[4] Alan Baddeley. The episodic buﬀer: A new component of working memory?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 2000.
[5] Alan Baddeley. Working memory. Current Biology, 20:R136–R140, 2 2010.
[6] Alexandru Baltag, Nina Gierasimczuk, and Sonja Smets. Truth-tracking
by belief revision. Studia Logica, 107, 2019.
[7] Alexandru Baltag and Bryan Renne. Dynamic Epistemic Logic. 2016.
[8] Alexandru Baltag, Aybüke Özgün, and Ana Lucia Vargas Sandoval. Apal
with memory is better. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including sub-
series Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioin-
formatics), 10944 LNCS:106–129, 2018.
[9] Christoph Beierle, Gabriele Kern-Isberner, Kai Sauerwald, Tanja Bock,
and Marco Ragni. Towards a general framework for kinds of forgetting in
common-sense belief management. pages 57–68, 2019.
==PAGE:106==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Christina Bermeitinger. Priming. Exploring Implicit Cognition: Learning,
Memory, and Social Cognitive Processes, 2014.
[11] M. E. Bitterman. Classical conditioning since pavlov. Review of General
Psychology, 10:365–376, 12 2006.
[12] Raymond C. Chang, Aaron P. Blaisdell, and Ralph R. Miller. Backward
conditioning: Mediation by the context. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Animal Behavior Processes, 29, 2003.
[13] Robert E. Clark and Larry R. Squire.
Classical conditioning and brain
systems: The role of awareness. Science, 280, 1998.
[14] Aaron C. Courville, Nathaniel D. Daw, and David S. Touretzky. Bayesian
theories of conditioning in a changing world. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
10:294–300, 7 2006.
[15] Nelson Cowan. What are the diﬀerences between long-term, short-term,
and working memory? Progress in Brain Research, 169:323–338, 2008.
[16] Ronald Fagin, Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram Moses, and Moshe Y. Vardi.
Reasoning about knowledge. Computers
Mathematics with Applications,
31, 1996.
[17] Jerry A. Fodor. The Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psychol-
ogy (Livre numérique Google), volume 1983. 1983.
[18] Peter Gärdenfors. Belief revision: An introduction. Belief Revision, 2009.
[19] John F. Hall. Backward conditioning in pavlovian type studies - reeval-
uation and present status. The Pavlovian Journal of Biological Science :
Oﬃcial Journal of the Pavlovian, 19, 1984.
[20] Nobuaki Hsu and Zacharias Schütt. Psychology of priming. 2012.
[21] William James. The principles of psychology. The American Journal of
Psychology, 3, 1891.
[22] M. Jongbloed-Pereboom, M.W.G. Nijhuis-Van der Sanden, and B. Steen-
bergen. Implicit and explicit motor learning in typically developing chil-
dren: eﬀects of task, age and working memory. Physiotherapy, 101, 5 2015.
[23] Tadeusz W Kononowicz, Warren Meck, and Hedderik van Rijn. Timing and
time perception: A critical review of neural timing signatures before, dur-
ing, and after the to-be-timed interva. Stevens’ Handbook of Experimental
Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience, 3 2017.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[24] John W. Krakauer, Alkis M. Hadjiosif, Jing Xu, Aaron L. Wong, and
Adrian M. Haith. Motor learning. Comprehensive Physiology, 9:613–663,
4 2019.
[25] William J. Mahoney and John J.B. Ayres.
One-trial simultaneous and
backward fear conditioning as reﬂected in conditioned suppression of licking
in rats. Animal Learning Behavior, 4, 1976.
[26] M. Moscovitch. Memory and working-with-memory: A component pro-
cess model based on modules and central systems. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 4, 1992.
[27] Dennis Norris and Sachiko Kinoshita. Perception as evidence accumula-
tion and bayesian inference: Insights from masked priming.
Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 137:434–455, 8 2008.
[28] Elizabeth A. Phelps and Adam K. Anderson. Emotional memory: What
does the amygdala do? Current Biology, 7, 1997.
[29] B. O. Ploog.
Classical conditioning.
Encyclopedia of Human Behavior:
Second Edition, 2012.
[30] Dale Purves, Roberto Cabeza, Scott A. Huettel, Kevin S. LaBar, Michael L.
Platt, and Marty G. Woldorﬀ. Emotion. Principles of Cognitive Neuro-
science, pages 319–359, 2007.
[31] Dale Purves, Roberto Cabeza, Scott A. Huettel, Kevin S. LaBar, Michael L.
Platt, and Marty G. Woldorﬀ. Memory: Varieties and mechanisms. Prin-
ciples of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2:243–278, 2007.
[32] Catharine H. Rankin, Thomas Abrams, Robert J. Barry, Seema Bhatna-
gar, David F. Clayton, John Colombo, Gianluca Coppola, Mark A. Geyer,
David L. Glanzman, Stephen Marsland, Frances K. McSweeney, Donald A.
Wilson, Chun Fang Wu, and Richard F. Thompson. Habituation revis-
ited: An updated and revised description of the behavioral characteristics
of habituation. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 92, 2009.
[33] Bryan Renne, Joshua Sack, and Audrey Yap. Logics of temporal-epistemic
actions. Synthese, 193, 2016.
[34] Oliver Schulte. Formal Learning Theory. 2018.
[35] Nate Silver. The Signal and the Noise: The Art and Science of Prediction.
Penguin, 1st edition, 2013.
[36] B. F. Skinner. Two types of conditioned reﬂex and a pseudo type. The
Journal of General Psychology, 12, 1 1935.
==PAGE:108==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[37] Larry R. Squire and Stuart M. Zola. Structure and function of declarative
and nondeclarative memory systems. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 93, 1996.
[38] Larry R. Squire and Stuart Zola-Morgan.
Memory: brain systems and
behavior. Trends in Neurosciences, 11, 1988.
[39] J. E.R. Staddon and D. T. Cerutti. Operant conditioning. Annual Review
of Psychology, 54, 2003.
[40] Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Thomas L. Griﬃths, and Charles Kemp. Theory-
based bayesian models of inductive learning and reasoning. Trends in Cog-
nitive Sciences, 10:309–318, 7 2006.
[41] R. F. Thompson. Habituation. International Encyclopedia of the Social
Behavioral Sciences: Second Edition, pages 480–483, 3 2015.
[42] Endel Tulving.
Episodic and semantic memory.
In E. Tulving and W.
Donaldson (Eds.), Organization of memory, New York: Academic Press,
pages 381–403, 1972.
[43] Hermann von Helmholtz. Handbuch der physiologischen optik. 1867.
[44] John B. Watson and Rosalie Rayner.
Conditioned emotional reactions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 3, 1920.
[45] Eiling Yee, Michael N. Jones, and Ken McRae. Semantic memory. Stevens’
Handbook of Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience, 2018.
==PAGE:109==
Appendices
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
101
Deadline
To do
Notes
1. September
Thesis start
7. September
Initial read of cognitive psychology (CP)
21. September
Initial read on epistemic logic (EL)
1. October
Project plan hand-in
5. October
Further read on mix of CP and EL & make content of thesis
19. October
Further read on mix of CP and EL & write section of learning/memory
2. November
Write section on conditioning and the diﬀerent forms of conditioning &
Write section on Epistemic logic
16. November
Write section on Public announcement logic (under DEL)
maybe belief revision
30. November
Write section on something i haven’t found out is necessary yet
14. December
Write the Cognitive Epistemic logic section
28. December
Write the CEL section and celebrate Christmas
11. January
Write the CEL section and update other sections to ﬁt.
25. January
Write conclusion, further work, abstract and introduction
1. February
Proof-read
Hand-in deadline
15. February
Be done
Defence deadline
