==PAGE:1==
Biomass Valorisation by
Homogeneous Catalysis
Mathias Børsting
S154126
A thesis presented for the degree of
Master of Science in Engineering in Chemistry
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Denmark
7th of February 2021
Supervisor: Associate Professor Martin Nielsen
Co-Supervisors: Dr. Rosa Maria Padilla Paz
and Ph.D student Sakhitha Koranchalil
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project was written in the fall and winter of 2020 into 2021 at the department
of chemistry at The Technical University of Denmark. This Master’s thesis accounts
for 30 ECTS points. The project supervisor was Associate Professor Martin Nielsen.
This project was written by Mathias Børsting, student ID: S154126.
Mathias Børsting
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master’s thesis describes the experimental work performed for investigations of
base-free homogeneously catalysed hydrogenations of the biomass derived substrate
levulinic(1) acid to γ-valerolactone(3) under mild conditions by Ru-PNP catalysts.
The work pertaining to the synthesis of novel Ru-PNP complexes is also reported.
The experimental work entails investigations of solvent, temperature and pressure
eﬀects. Stability, time factors and activity at low catalytic loading was also investi-
gated.
Scheme 1: Hydrogenation of levulinic acid to γ-using Ru-PNP complexes
The thesis contains relevant information on the conversion of lignocellulosic
biomass to levulinic acid, γ-valerolactone as a green chemical, PNP pincer ligands
and transition metal complexes containing these. The results of the investigation are
presented and discussed in relation to green chemistry. Finally the future prospects
for the system is presented and discussed.
An eﬃcient synthetic route for Ru-PNP complexes with coordinated sulfonate lig-
ands was shown to provide good purity and yields.
The Ru-MACHO family of
catalysts was found to perform very well as a catalyst for selective direct hydro-
genation of levulinic acid to γ-valerolactone under mild conditions and low catalytic
loading. TONs approaching 4000 was achieved by Ru-MACHO-BH. It was found
that the catalysts show good stability and high conversions over at least two con-
secutive reactions. The reaction proceeded with good conversion at a temperature
100 °C and H2 pressures down to 10 bar.
Table 1: Highest TONs obtained by each catalyst in this work
Catalyst
Max TON
Ru-1
2213
Ru-2
3889
Ru-3
1047
Ru-4
2435
Ru-5
2756
Ru-6
1570
Ru-7
1502
ii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Resume
Dette kandidatspeciale beskriver det eksperimentelle arbejde udført i forbindelse
med undersøgelserne af homogent katalyseret hydrogenering af det biomasse aﬂedte
substrat levulinsyre til γ-valerolakton ved milde betingelser med Ru-PNHP katalysatorer.
Arbejdet med syntese af nye Ru-PNP komplekser er ogs˚a beskrevet. Det eksper-
imentelle arbejde indebærer undersøgelser af solvent-, temperatur- og trykeﬀekter.
Stabilitet, tidsfaktorer og aktivitet ved lave katalysator loadings blev ogs˚a undersøgt.
Specialet indeholder ogs˚a relevant information om konvertering af lignocellulosisk
biomasse til levulinsyre, γ-valerolakton som et bæredygtigt kemikalie, PNP pincer
ligander og overgangsmetalkomplekser de indg˚ar i. Resultater fra arbejdet bliver
præsenteret og diskuteret med grøn kemi i øjemed. Fremtidige muligheder for sys-
temet bliver præseneret og diskuteret til sidst.
En eﬀektiv syntesevej for Ru-PNP kompleser med sulfonat ligander viste høj ren-
hed og højt udbytte. Ru-MACHO familien af katalysatorer leverede gode resultater
som katalysator for selektiv hydrogenering af levulinsyre til γ-valerolakton under
milde betingelser og lav katalysator loading. TONs tæt p˚a 4000 blev opn˚aet af Ru-
MACHO-BH. Katalysatorerne udviste god stabilitet og høje udbytter over mindst
to fortløbende reaktioner. Reaktionen forløb med godt udbytte ved lav temperatur
af 100 °C og H2 tryk ned til 10 bar.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Associate professor Martin Nielsen for allowing me to take
part in a this interesting and relevant research project and for the 1-on-1 guidance
meetings and general availability for guidance and help. Experimental and practical
work was performed in collaboration with Postdoc Rosa Maria Padilla Paz who I
would like to thank for the all the help, guidance, discussion and patience. Exper-
imental and practical work was also performed in collaboration with PhD student
Sakhitha Koranchalil who I would also like to thank for her guidance, discussions
and help.
I would also like to extend my thanks to the other Masters students, I have been
studying with since i began my bachelor’s degree, working on their own theses in the
same oﬃce or one down the hall. Their camaraderie helped me through an otherwise
tough year.
Finally I would like to thank my parents, family and friends. Without their support
and encouragement throughout my time studying at DTU.
iv
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
1,4-PDO 1,4-Pentanediol.
4-HVA 4-Hydroxyvaleric Acid.
DCM Dichloromethane.
FA Formic Acid.
FAL Furfural.
GVL γ-Valerolactone.
HMBC Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Coherence.
HMF 4-Hydroxymethyl furfural.
LA Levulinic Acid.
NMR Nuclear Magnetic Resonance.
PTSA p-Toluenesulfonic Acid.
v
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Green chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Biomass as a renewable resource . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2.1
Lignocellulose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.2
Bioreﬁneries for levulinic acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.3
Levulinic acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.4
Furfural . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.5
γ-Valerolactone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Ruthenium PNP pincer complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Pincer complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Phosphine ligands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
Metal-ligand cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.4
Ru-MACHO and similar complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Hydrogenation of levulinic acid and E-factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
State of the art homogeneous catalysts for hydrogenation of levulinic
acid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results and discussion
25
3.1
Synthesis of novel Ru-PNP catalysts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.1
Characterisation of novel catalysts by 1H, 31P, and 13C NMR .
25
3.2
First screening of catalyst activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Formation of 4-hydroxyvaleric acid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
Temperature eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Conversion at short reaction times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Screening of novel Ru-PNP catalyst for hydrogenation of LA . . . . .
32
3.5
Eﬀects of scale up on conversion at long reaction times . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Eﬀects of solvent volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.7
Stability of catalysts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.8
Conversion at low temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.8.1
Eﬀects of H2 pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.8.2
Eﬀects of acidic additives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.9
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Conclusion
40
vi
==PAGE:14==
5
Future perspectives
41
6
Experimental
42
6.1
General information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Synthesis of novel Ru-PNP complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
General experimental procedure for hydrogenation of LA . . . . . . .
44
6.4
Experimental procedure for catalyst stability test
. . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.5
Experimental procedure for catalyst long
term stability test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.6
Experimental procedure for hydrogenation of LA with acidic additives 45
A Catalyst overview
50
B NMR spectra for catalyst characterization
51
C
1H-NMR spectra for quantitative analysis
58
D Comparison of 1H NMR of 1,4-PDO and full conversion reaction
83
E Scope of reactions
84
vii
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
Eﬀective utilisation of biomass is an important part of the transition from a chemical
industry highly dependent on petrochemicals obtained from fossil resources, to a
new green chemical industry. Utilisation of biomass must also include valorisation
of biomass, as useful chemicals derived from biomass will have increased value.
The shift from fossil fuels to biomass feedstock is however slow. Accelerating the
transition is crucial to curb the negative eﬀects on the global climate caused by
emissions from the use of fossil resources[1].
A major problem in the utilisation of biomass is that its composition varies greatly
depending on the source.
Biomass generally also contains highly functionalised
compounds as opposed to chemicals obtained from fossil resources, which generally
do not contain functionalised groups to a large extent. The chemical industry has
over several decades specialised in the functionalisation of petrochemicals. Biomass
valorisation is still in its infancy and a subject ripe for research and exploration.
This project focuses on valorisation of a carbohydrate derived substrate. Polymeric
carbohydrates are highly functionalised and complex molecules. Eﬀective methods
for defunctionalisation are needed to convert them into valuable chemicals. To make
sure these methods are sustainable they need to be energy eﬃcient and benign
in nature.
Some important reactions for the defunctionalisation of biomass are
deoxygenation, dehydration and reductive reactions such as hydrogenation[2].
The lignocellulose derived biochemical levulinic acid can be hydrogenated to form
the very useful chemical γ-valerolactone as shown in ﬁgure 1. In the pursuit of
eﬃcient biomass valorisation reactions, a range of Ru-PNP complexes were tested,
under base free and mild conditions, for activity in the hydrogenation of levulinic
acid. Well known catalysts and novel catalysts with weakly coordinating sulfonate
ligands were synthesised and investigated under diﬀerent conditions. The aim being
discovery of more active catalysts for the hydrogenation.
Figure 1: Conversion of levulinic acid to γ-valerolactone and a generic Ru-PNP
complex
Section 1
Mathias Børsting
1
==PAGE:16==
2
Background
2.1
Green chemistry
Green chemistry, also known as sustainable chemistry, is a blanket term for the
design of chemical processes that reduce or eliminate generation of hazardous chem-
icals.
The concept was developed by Paul Anastas and John Warner in 1998[3]. They
formulated what is known as ”The 12 principles of green chemistry”. The principles
aim to maximize the eﬃciency of chemical processes and minimize hazardous eﬀects
on humans, the climate and the environment. The principles are as follows.
1. Prevention
2. Atom Economy
3. Less Hazardous Chemical Synthesis
4. Designing Safer Chemicals
5. Safer Solvents and Auxiliaries
6. Design for Energy Eﬃciency
7. Use of Renewable Feedstocks
8. Reduce Derivatives
9. Catalysis
10. Design for Degradation
11. Real-time analysis for Pollution Prevention
12. Inherently Safer Chemistry for Accident Prevention
The reaction investigated in this work aims to fulﬁll several of these principles. For
example catalysis, use of renewable feedstock and design for energy eﬃciency.
2.2
Biomass as a renewable resource
Today the global economy relies heavily on fossil resources as a source of energy and
chemicals, and it has continued to rely on fossil fuels since the industrial revolution.
The use of fossil fuels accelerates climate change and sustainable alternatives are
urgently needed to curb the global dependence on fossil fuels[4].
The utilization of biomass as a renewable source for fuels and organic chemicals
solves some of the problems that we are facing by acquiring these products from
fossil sources. Biomass obtained from plant material is inherently renewable as new
crops can be grown to replenish the feedstock[5]. The focus of this project is the
further valorisation of lignocellulosic biomass derived chemicals. The idea behind
2
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:17==
Technical University of Denmark
using lignocellulosic biomass as a feedstock can be explained by comparing it to a
traditional biofuel. Ethanol as the most well known example, is made from crops
producing large amounts of hydrocarbons easily converted to ethanol by fermen-
tation or chemical processes[5]. These crops however are traditionally food crops,
for example corn. Biomass from food crops is known as ﬁrst generation biomass.
Their use leads to an ethical dilemma as this directly competes with food produc-
tion. This can be hard to justify in a world where 26% of the population struggle
with food security[6]. To avoid this a feedstock of second generation biomass can be
utilized instead. Examples of such feedstocks that are less ethically ﬁckle are waste
biomass and fast growing crops that produce large amounts of lignocellulose that is
indigestible by humans, also known as energy crops[7].
2.2.1
Lignocellulose
Figure 2: Lignols found
in lignin macro-
molecules
The biomass available for industrial processes producing
fuels and chemicals mainly takes the form of lignocellu-
lose. The starting material investigated in this work, le-
vulinic acid, can be obtained from lignocellulose through
a process described in section 5. Lignocellulose is a com-
plex matrix consisting of lignin, cellulose and hemicellu-
lose. The exact distribution of these three components
vary, depending on the source of the lignocellulose[8].
The lignin part of lignocellulose is not useful for pro-
duction of levulinic acid. It consists of several diﬀerent
aromatic ring structures linked together in large complex
crosslinked polymeric macromolecules. A large percent-
age consists of phenolic species which makes it a potential
source for sustainable phenolic species. Some examples of
so called lignols are shown in ﬁgure 2. Eﬃcient hydrol-
ysis of lignin is however a diﬃcult discipline, the most
important lignin derived compound being vanillin[9].
Cellulose consists of D-Glucose linked via β(1,4)-glycosidic bonds. It is a straight
chain polymer that takes a very stiﬀcrystalline form as cellulose chains pack very ef-
ﬁciently because of a large number of hydrogen bonds that can form between parallel
chains of cellulose. The structure of cellulose can be seen in ﬁgure 3[8].
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
3
==PAGE:18==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Figure 3: Structure of cellulose including hydrogen bonds
The tight structure and crystalline nature of cellulose makes it quite resistant
to hydrolysis as its high crystallinity makes the functional groups less available for
activation in for example acid hydrolysis.
Figure 4: Examples of sugar monomer
products from hemicellulose hydroly-
sis
Hemicellulose consists of diﬀerent pentoses
and hexoses forming much less ordered
chains than cellulose. Because of this it does
not display the same crystallinity as cellulose
does and is more easily hydrolised. Xylan is
a polymeric hydrocarbon that exist in large
amounts in wooden biomass. The polymer
cosists only of xylose, a pentose. It is there-
fore a resource of interest for reactions re-
liant on pentose rich feedstocks.
In ﬁgure
4 xylose is shown along with other exam-
ples of products from hydrolysis of hemicel-
luloses[10].
2.2.2
Bioreﬁneries for levulinic acid
Valorisation of biomass entails several processes that convert the biomass feedstock
to more useful and therefore valuable chemicals. Eﬀective conversion is often syn-
onymous with catalysis when it comes to chemical processes. For production of
levulinic acid from lignocellulosic biomass the most well developed process at larger
scale is the ’Bioﬁne Process’. It is a bio reﬁnery plant for production of LA from
lignocellulosic biomass. The process was developed by ”BioMetrics.inc” in the 90’s
with support from the US DOE[7]. An early plant in Caserta, italy could process
50 dry tonnes of feedstock per day. The conversion proceeds via homogeneously
catalysed acid hydrolysis of lignocellulose in aqueous media. The process contains
4
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:19==
Technical University of Denmark
several steps to produce LA, formic acid, furfural and a residual char. A general
illustration of the steps and product streams are shown in ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: Schematic representation of the Bioﬁne process
The ﬁrst reactor is designed to allow eﬃcient acid catalysed hydrolysis of the
cellulose. First to monomeric carbohydrates and then to furfuralic species through
several dehydration steps.
The reaction is catalysed by aqueous H2SO4 in low
concentration(1.5-3%). The concentration of the acid depends on the feed as higher
ash content will neutralise the acidic catalyst. Ashes consist of the non ﬂammable
parts of the feed which contain high amounts of metals that can act as bases under
these conditions.
A simpliﬁed mechanism for the formation of the furfuralic species formed via de-
hydration is shown in scheme 2[5]. It is however believed that there are several
mechanisms that occur simultaneously to form the same products[7]. The speciﬁc
conditions used in the reactor are tuned to eﬀectively form the desired product and
avoid as much of the cellulose being incorporated in the humin formed by in side
reactions. Humin formation from the monosaccharide species is a slower reaction
than the hydrolysis and therefore conditions allowing for fast hydrolysis are used.
Anti polymerization agents are also present in the reactors to inhibit formation of
the humins.
Scheme 2: Simpliﬁed mechanism for formation of furfuralic species by dehydration
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
5
==PAGE:20==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
The second reactor is fed directly from the ﬁrst but the reaction conditions are
slightly diﬀerent. In this reactor 4-hydromethylfurfural (HMF) undergoes further
reaction with water. This reaction is also acid catalysed. The HMF is hydrated and
forms an unstable tricarbonyl compound that decomposes to form LA and FA. A
proposed mechanism is shown in ﬁgure 3[11].
Scheme 3: Simpliﬁed mechanism for acid catalysed formation of LA from HMF
FAL and volatile byproducts are removed after the second reactor. The reaction
mixture of humins and LA is fed into a gravity seperator where the LA and other
volatiles are boiled of under reduced pressure leaving a dry char. The produced LA
is of 75% purity and it can be further puriﬁed up to 98% LA. The process yields
70-80% of the theoretical maximum yield for LA, which translates to 50 mass % of
the hexoses present in the feed. 20% of the product mass is FA and the rest is the
insoluble byproducts i.e. humins. For FAL the yield is also 50% by mass of pentoses
in the feed. These numbers have been obtained at pilot plant scale.
Some of the beneﬁts of this process is that it is quite stable and can handle diﬀerent
types of feedstock. Both municipal waste, paper sludge and sewage water has been
used in the process. A major issue remains the formation of humins that lowers the
yield and also makes catalyst recovery more diﬃcult[12].
2.2.3
Levulinic acid
Levulinic acid is an interesting green chemical as it possesses important features
that make it suitable as a building block chemical. As a result the DOE identiﬁed
levulinic acid as one of ten top value added biochemicals in a report from 2004[13].
It was still included as an important candidate in an updated report from 2010[14].
In the report FAL is also considered but it does not make the list. One reason that
levulinic acid is a compound of interest is the process described in the previus section
which eﬃciently forms levulinic acid. It is pointed out that the process still have
6
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:21==
Technical University of Denmark
some challenges that needs to be tackled, mostly regarding eﬃciency and reduction
of side products. A way to obtain higher LA yields is an extra hydrogenation step
for FAL which can form LA. A detailed description of this mechanism is shown in
section 2.2.4.
LA is a keto acid and the fact that it contains two diﬀerent functional groups also
open it up to diﬀerent reactivity and therefore diﬀerent products. Most organic
reactions will proceed at the ketone as it is well established that this is the more
reactive functional group when treated with nucleophilic reactants. Figure 6 shows
diﬀerent important products that can be produced using levulinic acid as a building
block[15].
Figure 6: Value added compounds derived from levulinic acid
This work focuses on the homogeneous catalytic hydrogenation of LA to form
γ-Valerolactone. In section 2.2.5 the chemistry and uses of GVL is reviewed focusing
on its potential as a bulk green chemical and green building block chemical.
2.2.4
Furfural
As discussed in section 2.2.2 furfural(FAL) is produced in signiﬁcant amounts when
lignocellulosic biomass is the feedstock for the process. Pentoses from hydrolysis of
the hemicellulose does not form LA during dehydration reactions but FAL instead.
A way to maximise the LA yield from lignocellulosic feedstock is to hydrogenate the
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
7
==PAGE:22==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
FAL to furfuryl alcohol which can ring open in aqueous acidic conditions to form
levulinic acid. Catalysts for this process is also being investigated[16][17].
FAL is not just interesting for production of LA. It is also a candidate as a
building block chemical in green chemistry. Though it is not rated as highly as for
example LA once again with reference to the US DOE’s 2004 report[13]. For the
aim of this project it is worth describing how FAL can be converted to LA. Furfuryl
alcohol can ring open under aqueous acidic conditions to form LA. A proposed
mechanism is shown in scheme 4. Although it should be noted that the ring opening
likely proceeds through several pathways[18].
Scheme 4: A proposed mechanism for the ring opening reaction of furfuryl alccohol
Obtaining an eﬃcient hydrogenation catalyst for this reaction is an important
step in order to achieve even higher yields of levulinic acid from lignocellulose. In
that instance both cellulose and hemicellulose can be converted to levulinic acid[19].
2.2.5
γ-Valerolactone
γ-Valerolactone is a ﬁve membered lactone with a methyl group situated at the
γ position.
The molecule therefore contains a stereogenic center as both the S-
and R- version exist. γ-valerolactone (GVL) is derived from LA via hydrogenation
to 4-HVA, shown in scheme 5. The 4-HVA quickly undergoes an acid catalysed
intramolecular condensation forming GVL and a molecule of H2O. The high rate
of formation can be attributed to the fact that the product is a 5-membered ring
which contains a very small amount of ring strain, resulting in a stable product.
Furthermore the short distance between the functional groups that partake in the
intramolecular reaction also ensures a fast reaction rate.
The activation energy
barrier can also be used to explain this it is deﬁned as follows:
∆G‡ = ∆H‡ −T∆S‡
(1)
8
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:23==
Technical University of Denmark
The enthalpy of activation ∆H‡ is quite small in this case. As the transition state
is not eﬀected by large amounts of strain. ∆S‡ is dependent on the amount of order
that must be imposed on the molecule in the transition state. As ﬁve membered
rings contain few atoms that need to be ordered the decrease in ∆S‡ is not as
large as it would be for formation of larger rings. According to Baldwin’s rules the
cyclisation reaction is a 5-exo-trig reaction which is a favoured cyclisation reaction
and should proceed readily[20].
Scheme 5: Conversion of LA, through the intermediate 4-HVA, to GVL
The stability of GVL is one of its great strengths in the context of green chemistry.
Investigations of the stability of GVL in a solution of 18O labeled water showed
that no exchange of oxygen occurred over 3 months at room temperature or over
28 days at 65°C. Oxygen scrambling was however observed when catalytic amounts
of hydrochloric acid was added to the solution. It does not form peroxides under
conditions where formation of peroxides have been observed in similar molecules
containing a furan ring[21]. GVL is fully miscible with H2O and the mixture does
not form an azeotrope with water at any ratio[22]. This fact is important because
it means GVL can be separated from water more easily with a lower energy cost
which is a useful property as many catalysed hydrogenations of LA runs in aqueous
medium. Even if it is run neat, a molecule of water is still produced per molecule
of 4-HVA that undergoes ring-closure. As a results there will be water present in
the post reaction solution to some extent. Separation is therefore important and in
this case luckily simpliﬁed by the lack of azeotrope formation and overall stability
of the solution.
At this point it is also relevant to delve a bit deeper into other properties of GVL,
some of which are displayed in table 2 alongside the values for ethanol.
Because of the low vapor pressure and low toxicity GVL is well suited for use
as a solvent, it can for example be used in lignocellulose fragmentation[12] and as
a reaction medium for hydrolysis of cellulosic biomass as well as other reactions
including dehydration of sugars to LA. It also lends itself to safe storage because of
these properties as it is stable and has a high boiling point, ﬂash point and density.
It is safe and eﬃcient to store when compared to other sustainable biomass derived
liquids. A comparison of some key properties of GVL and ethanol is shown in table
2[21]. Another thing to note is the very low toxicity of GVL, the values in table 2
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
9
==PAGE:24==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Table 2: Comparison of important properties of GVL and ethanol[21][23]
EtOH
GVL
Boiling point[°C]
78
207-208
Melting point[°C]
-114
-31
Density[g/mL]
0.789
1.05
Open cup ﬂash point[°C]
14
96
Vapor pressure [kPa](25°C)
7.916
0.65
Energy density[MJ/L]
23.4-26.8
35
LD50 oral, rat[mg·kg−1]
7060
8800
shows that it is less toxic than ethanol even. GVL has a non-oﬀending odour which
can also be beneﬁcial for leak detection.
Large scale storage of GVL could be very useful as GVL retains 97% of the
chemical energy of glucose during conversion making it a suitable candidate as a fuel
additive or fuel precursor[24]. It can also be used as a building block chemical for
further valorisation. As such researchers have developed methods for its conversion
into short chain hydrocarbons, biodiesels, solvents, polymers, butenes and C8-C18
alkanes. Examples of these products is shown in ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: Examples of value added chemicals derived from GVL
Dimethyl adipate and caprolactam are useful in the polymer industry as they can
be used in the production of nylon. Both can be made from methylpentenoates which
are obtained by catalysed simultaneous ring opening and dehydration in methanol.
Rhodium catalysed hydroformylation of methyl 4-pentenoate provides methyl 5-
formyl-valerate which can be converted to caprolactam via reductive amination and
ring closure. The remaining pentenoates do not participate in the hydroformyla-
tion as their double bonds are not in a position to do so. They can however be
recovered and converted via palladium catalysed isomerising methoxycarbonylation
to dimethyl adipate[25].
10
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:25==
Technical University of Denmark
Another derivative of GVL that can be used in polymerisation reactions is α-methyl-
γ-valerolactone. It can be obtained from a gas phase reaction between GVL and
formaldehyde over a Ba/SiO catalyst[26]. α-Methyl-γ-valerolactone has a similar
structure to Methyl 2-methylprop-2-enoate(methyl methacrylate or MMA) which is
used to produce PMMA polymer also known as plexiglass. The polymer of α-methyl-
γ-valerolactone shows some similar properties in polymerization reactions[27].
1,4-Pentanediol can be obtained from GVL by ring opening and hydrogenation which
can be done with several catalytic systems[28][29][30]. 2-Methyl tetrahydrofuran can
then be formed by etherisation of 1,4-pentanediol. Both of these products are useful
in the chemical industry, 2-methyltetrahydrofuran can in addition also be used as a
fuel additive.
C8-alkenes can be made from GVL via deoxyhydrogenation to a mix of butenes and
following condensation producing drop in fuels that can be used in the transportaion
sector[31]. Longer carbon chain alkenes can also be made from GVL. Reductive ring
opening followed by hydrogenation produces valeric acid which can undergo catalytic
ketonization to form 5-nonanone. Deoxyhydrogenation of 5-nonanone produces C9
alkenes. Catalytic isomerization and condensation can produce C18 alkenes. hydro-
genation of these produce gasoline and diesel engine compatible fuels[12]. Platinum
catlysed ring opening, hydrogenation and esteriﬁcation of GVL can provide valeric
esters which are also potentially valuable fuel blenders as they are more energy dense
than many alcohols and posses polarity making them suitable for the application[32].
The properties of GVL as a green solvent is also a growing area of research. This
is especially true for processes related to biomass derived compounds. As such sev-
eral studies have been looking into its usefulness both as a solvent for extraction
of lignin from lignocellulosic biomass, often in a binary solvent system with water,
and as a reaction medium for green chemistry[12]. This includes the use of a binary
solvent system of GVL/water for important reactions in production of LA and as a
result GVL itself. These include hydrolysis of cellulose and production of LA and
HMF. Taking all of this into account and putting in the context of green chemistry
a possible sketch of a bioreﬁnery for convertion of lignocellulosic biomass to GVL
could look like ﬁgure 8.
In ﬁgure 8 optimal utilisation of the feedstock is the goal as extracted lignin
can be used in lignin valorisation it is worth adding an eﬃcient extraction step.
Using a GVL/H2O solvent system could also help prevent humin formation and
formed humins have higher solubility in this solvent system which can be beneﬁcial
for catalyst recovery[12]. Eﬃcient hydrogenation is also an important step at the
end of the process.
Here a catalyst that can both hydrogenate furfural to form
levulinic acid and hydrogenate levulinic acid to form GVL would be advantageous.
The hydrogen source for some of the hydrogenations could be formic acid formed in
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
11
==PAGE:26==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Figure 8: Possible design for bioreﬁnery for GVL production
the conversion of HMF to LA. However as FA is only formed in eqiumolar amounts
to LA from HMF another hydrogen source is be needed for hydrogenation of the
surplus LA which for atom economy and climate reasons could be H2 gas as excess
formation of CO2 can be avoided this way.
12
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:27==
Technical University of Denmark
2.3
Ruthenium PNP pincer complexes
The catalysts investigated in this work are all Ru-PNP complexes. This section
contains relevant information about the properties of these catalysts. Diﬀerent vari-
ations of the pincer ligand and its eﬀect on the chemistry of the catalysts is also
described.
2.3.1
Pincer complexes
The general structure of pincer complexes consists of a transition metal center and
a tridentate ligand coordinating to said center. The ligand coordinates in a ”pincer”
like fashion, hence the name. Figure 9 is a simpliﬁed illustration of the coordination.
In this ﬁgure, Lm are arbitrary ligands bonded to the metal center that are not a
part of the pincer ligand.
Figure 9: General illustration of a pincer ligand coordinating to a transition metal
center
The pioneering work with transition metal pincer complexes was published by
Bernard Shaw in the 70’s[33]. Since then these kinds of complexes have been studied
extensively especially within the last twenty years[34].
Pincer complexes inherently posses some properties that makes them excellent ho-
mogeneous catalysts in a variety of reactions. The tridentate ligand ensures sta-
bility of the complex via the chelate eﬀect. The main driving force being entropic
favourability for polydentate ligands to coordinate as opposed to multiple monoden-
tate ligands[35].
The donor atom (Y) at the center of the atom needs to bind strongly through σ
interactions to stabilize the complex. Whereas the donor atoms (L) at either side is
used in ﬁne tuning reactivity by choice of donor atom and its substituents[35]. In
this regard phosphine’s excellent tunability, described in the following section, make
them excellent donors in pincer ligands.
Another important property of pincer ligands is the eﬀect it has on the geometry of
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
13
==PAGE:28==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
the complex it is a part of. The pincer ligand enforces a meridional geometry on the
complex as opposed to a facial geometry, both are displayed in ﬁgure 10. However
depending on the composition of the pincer ligand this geometry can be more or less
strictly enforced[34]. The ability to adopt both conformations can be important for
reactivity in some systems[36]. The meridional geometry is important in relation
to the catalysts in this project, as it ensures a squarebased pyramidal geometry
upon activation. This conformation of the complex has an empty coordination site
perfectly suited for substrate coordination. The backbone of pincer ligands can also
Figure 10: Meridional and facial conﬁgurations of a pincer ligand
aﬀect the reactivity of the complex as discussed in section 2.3.3. As such more rigid
pincer ligands can be achieved by having double bonds or aromatic systems in it.
Other examples of modiﬁed backbones are PONOP pincer ligands that links the
phosphines to the backbone via an oxygen atom. For PNP pincers some important
examples of backbone fragments are shown in ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: Examples of PNP complex backbone structure
The pyridine containing backbone will be more rigid than the aliphatic back-
bones due to the atoms in the aromatic system being sp2 hybridized. The lone pair
of nitrogen is positioned perpendicular to the π system. It coordinates via a σ type
bonding interaction to Ru. The amine ligand is sp3 hybridized which allows for more
ﬂexibility while the lone pair still participates in σ type bonding to Ru. Deproto-
nation of the amine produces the amide which can assume sp2 hybridization if both
lone pairs participate in the Ru–N bonding via σ and π type interactions. The lone
pair participating in π type bonding can be protonated reforming the amine ligand.
As it is located in a π symmetrical orbital out of the Ru–L plane it is easier to
protonate.
A large variety of donor atoms are used in pincer complexes the most common be-
14
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:29==
Technical University of Denmark
ing C, N, P, O, Si and S. The donor atoms can both be neutral donors such as
phosphines or anionic such as carbanions. The composition of the pincer ligand is
also highly modiﬁable as the donor atoms can be combined in any way that shows
or improves the desired reactivity. In order to quickly describe a pincer complex it
is normal to call it by the metal atom at the center and then by the donor atoms
which coordinate to it. The ligands involved in this work are thus PNP ligands as
the central donor atom is a nitrogen atom and the other donor atoms at the arms
of the ligand are phosphorous. Describing a pincer ligand like this however leaves
out a lot of important information about the complete ligand structure which can
have large eﬀects on the reactivity of the complex[34]. This is seen in the earlier
described diﬀerence between an amine nitrogen donor atom and a pyridine nitrogen
donor atom.
2.3.2
Phosphine ligands
Phosphines are widely used as ligands in homogeneous catalysts. This is due to
phosphines quite unique interactions in a transition metal complex. Phosphines can
participate in a σ type bond with transition metals via its lone pair whilst also
participating in backbonding as shown in ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12: Backbonding interaction in tertiary phosphine
The backbonding in phosphines is a π type interaction where electron donation
from d orbitals of the metal is accepted into the P–R σ∗orbitals.
In ﬁgure 13 the structure of diﬀerent tertiary phosphines are illustrated. The re-
activity of a phosphine is aﬀected by its substituent. The size of the substituents
will have an eﬀect on the cone angle of the phosphine as steric eﬀects will enforce
a larger angle between the substituents. This can be utilized in ligand design. As
an example R-groups can be used to shield empty coordination sites or ensuring a
speciﬁc geometry. The examples in the ﬁgure are arranged such that the cone angle
is decreasing from left to right.
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
15
==PAGE:30==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Figure 13: Diﬀerent tertiary phosphines
As phosphines participate in backbonding via P–R σ∗orbitals it follows that
the substituents can have a large eﬀect on the phosphines properties as σ donors
and π acceptors. Essentially the eﬀect can be described as more electronegative
sustituents facilitate backbonding in phosphines. The reverse is true for σ bonding.
In the ﬁgure the phospines are arranged in order of decreasing π acceptor strength
and therefore in order of increasing σ donor strength from left to right. The two
properties of cone angle and the electronic parameter was ﬁrst described by Tolman
who performed several investigations on diﬀerent substituents eﬀects on phosphines
properties as a ligand[37].
Utilizing these eﬀects it is possible to ﬁne tune phosphines in order to obtain the de-
sired reactivity in a homogeneous catalyst. This is also why many pincer complexes
contain at least one phosphine donor atom.
2.3.3
Metal-ligand cooperation
Participation of the ligand in bond activation reactions is called metal-ligand co-
operation. Metal-ligand cooperation is often observed in pincer ligands. The most
relevant example of this is activation of dihydrogen. Traditionally activation of di-
hydrogen happens at the metal center via oxidative addition leading to a metal
dihydride. With metal-ligand cooperation another mechanism is responsible for the
activation of the dihydrogen. In this instance heterolytic cleavage occurs. The two
mechanisms can be seen in scheme 6.
Scheme 6: H2 bond activation via oxidative addition(a) and heterolytic cleavage(b)
In both cases the H2 coordinates to the metal center via the H–H σ-bond. In
oxidative addition electron rich metal centers can backbond into the H–H σ∗-bond
to such an extent, that the H–H bond is broken and a metal dihydride is formed.
In complexes with strong π acceptors coordinating and thus a more electron poor
metal center heterolytic cleavage is favoured. After coordinating to the metal center
16
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:31==
Technical University of Denmark
the H2 can be deprotonated by a suitable base intra- or intermolecularly, without
changing the formal oxidation state of the metal. For intramolecular deprotonation
a suitable base should be available in the complex. In the case of aliphatic PNP
ligands this would be the amine-amide acting as a proton donor/acceptor. If that
is not the case intermolecular deprotonation can occur instead, if a base is present
in solution[34].
Recent studies have challenged the perception that the amine participates in the
reaction as a proton donor/acceptor. Arguing that it instead participates via strong
hydrogen bonding interactions with oxygen in the substrate. An example is asym-
metric hydrogenation of ketones in Noyori-type molecular catalysts. Noyori catalysts
contains an amine N–H bond close to the metal center which plays an important
part in the catalytic mechanism. A proposed mechanism for ketone hydrogenation
does not include protonation/deprotonation of the amine-amide moeity during the
catalytic cycle[38]. It is proposed that it forms strong hydrogen bonds with oxygen
Figure 14: The chiral Noyori catalyst used in scheme 7
bond in the substrate. The catalyst thus retains the N–H bond throughout the
cycle. A simpliﬁed illustration of the catalytic cycle for the described mechanism
is shown in scheme 7 on the following page. The mechanism described is with a
small amount base additive for catalyst activation but not enough for it to take
part in the mechanism, as another mechanism is proposed for such a system. The
precatalyst this example is based on is shown in ﬁgure 14. The alkoxide maintains
a hydrogen bond to the amine proton throughout the reaction. In the two steps
before decoordination the alkoxide acts as a base to deprotonate the dihydrogen
coordinating to the ruthenium center. The amine is not deprotonated at any point
in this mechanism.
2.3.4
Ru-MACHO and similar complexes
The Ru-MACHO(Ru-1) complex was ﬁrst published in 2012 by Kuriyama et
al.
at the Japanese company Takasago.
In the original publication it was used
in hydrogenation of esters to alcohols[39]. It has since been found to be an active
catalyst in several other hydrogenation, transfer hydrogenation and dehydrogena-
tion reactions[40]. The same is true for the isopropyl version Ru-3. Along with
the investigations into reactivity, several mechanistic studies for reactions of these
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
17
==PAGE:32==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Scheme 7: A catalytic cycle for asymmetric hydrogenation of a ketone by a Noyori
type catalyst
and similar catalysts have also been published[41][42]. Hydrogenation reactions of
utilizing Ru-MACHO are normally base activated. Activation of Ru-1 by KOH
is shown in scheme 8.
Scheme 8: Ru-MACHO activation by KOH
The activated catalyst adopts a squarebased pyramidal geometry with a vacant
coordination site[43]. In direct hydrogenation reactions where H2 at high pressure is
added this species will be in an equilibrium, illustrated in scheme 9. This equilibrium
is between the amide ruthenium hydride form and the amine ruthenium dihydride
form. The hydrogen is activated by intramolecular heterolytic cleavage as described
18
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:33==
Technical University of Denmark
in the previous section[44].
Scheme 9: Interconversion of Ru hydride and dihydride
The presence of protic solvents can assist in the interconversion between the two
forms via hydrogen bonding. Figure 15 is an illustration of how hydrogen bonds
assist by providing a lower energy transition state for protonation of the amide and
deprotonation at the metal center[41].
Figure 15: Water assisting heterolytic cleavage via hydrogen bonds
Reactions relying on this interconversion between the amide and amine proceed
faster in protic solvents such as water and alcohols. It does not form peroxides under
conditions where formation of peroxides have been observed in similar molecules
containing a furan ring.
The amide form also allows for a potential reaction with H2O which is quite
interesting. By formation of a hydrido complex as shown in ﬁgure 10, H2O could
potentially assist the solubility of the complex in water in which it normally possesses
very low solubility[43].
Scheme 10: Formation of hydrido complex by heterolytic cleavage of H2O
A slightly modiﬁed version of Ru-MACHO exists called Ru-MACHO-BH. This
version has a borohydride ligand instead of the chlorido ligand. The Ru-MACHO-
BH ligand has been shown to be thermally activated as opposed to base activated
in a bi-catalytic dehydrogenation reaction[45].
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
19
==PAGE:34==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Sulfonate ligands in Ru-PNP complexes
Sulphonates are weakly coordinating ligands due to their low electron density at the
coordinating oxygen. In Ru-MACHO type complexes they are readily displaced by
coordinating solvents even at room temperature to form ionic complexes with the
sulfonate as a counterion[46]. Exchanging the chlorido ligand in Ru-MACHO with
a sulfonate ligand could potentially lead to a catalyst that is easily activated either
thermally or by solvent exchange.
20
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:35==
Technical University of Denmark
2.4
Hydrogenation of levulinic acid and E-factor
Before diving into the catalysts found in the literature a look at a traditional reduc-
tive hydrogenation used in organic chemistry should be described.
Reduction of the ketone in ketoacids with NaBH4 is the traditional way to form
alcohols from ketones. In a reaction with ketoacids such as LA the reagent is only
a strong enough nuchleophile the attack at the ketone carbon and not the acid
carbon[20]. Using NaBH4 the main product will be GVL. This method however
produces a signiﬁcant amount of waste material. Reducing the ketone by catal-
ysed direct hydrogenation however produces no waste material except water, as the
potential catalyst waste is presumed insigniﬁcant. The reaction is shown in ﬁgure
16.
Figure 16: Traditional reduction of keto acids and reduction via direct hydrogenation
and their E factors
The E-factor is calculated using the formula below
E-factor =
Mass of waste
Mass of product
(2)
Inserting the molecular weights and number of molecules of each pathway provides
the E-factor.
E-factorNaBH4 = 4 · 18.02g · mol−1 + 83.81g · mol−1
4 · 100.12g · mol−1
= 0.39
E-factorcat = 18.02g · mol−1
100.12g · mol−1 = 0.18
The results are E-factors of 0.39 and 0.18 for the classic hydrogenation method
and the catalysed hydrogenation respectively[47]. These numbers are theoretical
and assumes full conversion and equimolar amounts of reactant and substrate. The
E-factor is signiﬁcantly lower for the catalysed reaction than for the traditional
method. Which is why it is a more sustainable method for GVL production from
LA. It should also follow that the E-factor of a reaction is larger if a reaction needs
base additive in large amounts to eﬃciently obtain high conversion, as the additives
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
21
==PAGE:36==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
will lead to a larger mass of waste post reaction. The same is true for transfer
hydrogenation reactions.
2.5
State of the art homogeneous catalysts for hy-
drogenation of levulinic acid
This section contains a short overview of hydrogenation reactions for LA. It does
not include information on transfer hydrogenation reactions. It should be noted
that this is not an exhaustive list of catalysts for hydrogenation of LA, but rather a
collection of interesting systems for perspective and comparison.
The hydrogenation of LA is being investigated by several groups some notable cat-
alysts for the reaction are presented in ﬁgure 17.
Figure 17: State of the art catalysts for direct hydrogenation of LA
Previous ruthenium catalysts investigated for the hydrogenation of LA have
mostly been with complexes containing mono- or bidentate phosphine or nitrogen
containing ligands. The catalysts are often formed in situ by addition of a precat-
alyst and ligand, often in excess[48]. In this system the precatalyst used was the
Ru(III) complex Ru(acac)3 and 10 eq. of the diphosphine ligand DPPB, Cat-1 in
ﬁgure 17. When the reaction was performed at 100 bar H2 pressure and 160 °C with
0.008 mol% catalyst loading (based on Ru(acac)3) it reached full conversion over 0.6
22
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:37==
Technical University of Denmark
hours[49]. The reaction also proceeds at milder conditions although at lower con-
version and rate. The reaction selectively forms GVL. This catalyst proceeds with
no solvent which is a positive, as it can make puriﬁcation of the product less energy
intensive. This is not necessarily the case for this system, as separation of product
and catalyst for recyclability was performed by removing the volatile compounds
at reduced pressures. At larger scales this might not be very a eﬃcient separation
process as GVL has a quite low vapor pressure.
The Ru based Shvo’s catalyst, the monomeric precursor of which is shown in ﬁgure
17 Cat-2, has also been studied for hydrogenation of levulinic acid[50]. A recent
study found that full conversion and selectivity could be achieved by this catalyst
at 120 °C, 50 bar H2 and a catalytic loading of 0.1% in a solvent free reaction. For
direct hydrogenation however the catalyst was not recyclable. The reason for this
is attributed to deactivation of the catalyst by water formed during the reaction.
At the time of writing, iridium based catalysts are the most eﬃcient homogeneous
hydrogenation catalysts for LA. In this category an Ir-PNP complex (ﬁgure 17 3)
shows excellent reactivity in the selective hydrogenation of LA to GVL[51]. TONs
as high as 71000 was obtained with the system. The Ir-PNP complex is a trihy-
dride formed in situ from the precatalyst [Ir(COE)2Cl]2 and addition of 3 eq. of the
PNP ligand. The hydrogenation proceeds with 1.2 eq. base additive. At a catalytic
loading of 0.01%, 50 bar H2 and 100 °C the reaction produces a yield of 96% over
15 h on a 3 mmol scale. The reaction is run in 4 ml ethanol leading to a quite low
concentration of the end product, making seperation at larger scale ineﬃcient.
A relevant Ir catalyst consists of a half sandwich complex with a modiﬁed bipy
ligand containing methoxy groups para to the pyridine nitrogen (ﬁgure 17 4). The
reaction proceeds without additives in aqueous solution at a 5 mmol scale[52]. At
120 degrees, 10 bar H2 and a catalyst loading of 0.01 mol% the reaction reaches
yields of 98% over 4 hours with over 99% selectivity towards GVL. With this sys-
tem a maximum TON of 78000 was obtained which is exceptionally high. As with
the previously described Ir catalyst this system produces GVL in large amounts of
solvent. The reaction proceeds in 5 ml water and 5 mmol LA which is approxi-
mately 0.5 ml. Therefore isolation of the product via distillation could be ineﬃcient
on larger scales although extraction with another phase could still be eﬃcient.
A popular method used for achieving low cost catalysts is to avoid using platinum
group metals and instead opt for 3d metals as for the metal center. An example of
an eﬃcient Fe-PNP catalyst is shown in ﬁgure 17[53]. Using less expensive metals
in catalysis usually means that the loading can be higher however with this catalyst
the reaction proceeds at a low catalysts loading of 0.05% . Hydrogenation with this
catalyst proceeds at 100 °C and 50 bar H2 with methanol as the solvent, though
Section 2
Mathias Børsting
23
==PAGE:38==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
it was also active with water as a solvent. Near full conversion is reached after 2
hours. The highest TON obtained is 23000 (under diﬀerent conditions than stated
here). The reaction however only proceeds in presence of 1 eq. KOH which is an
amount of base that is avoided in other systems. Nonetheless this catalyst provides
very good results as an alternative to platinum group metal catalysts.
24
Mathias Børsting
Section 2
==PAGE:39==
3
Results and discussion
3.1
Synthesis of novel Ru-PNP catalysts
The novel Ru-PNP catalysts containing sulfonate ligands, were all synthesised by the
same method. The starting materials used were Ru-1 or Ru-3 and silver methane-
sulfonate (AgSO3CH3) or silver p-toluenesulfonate (AgSO3C6H4). All operations
were carried out under inert conditions (Ar atmosphere).
In a 20 ml vial Ru-1 or Ru-3 (0.16 mmol) and the corresponding silver salt (0.16-
0.19 mmol) were dissolved in CH2Cl2 and stirred for 1-3 h at room temperature.
Upon observation of precipitated AgCl the reaction was stopped and the solution
was ﬁltered through celite and glass-ﬁber ﬁlter paper, providing a clear, slightly
yellow liquid. The solvent was evaporated in vacuo to provide an oﬀwhite solid.
Scheme 11 shows the general reaction scheme for the reactions performed during this
project. The complexes were characterised by 1H, 13C and 31P NMR. An overview
of the structure of all catalysts used can be found in appendix A.
Scheme 11: General reaction for synthesis of novel RU-PNP complexes
Ru-4 was found to be unstable when dissolved in DCM. A solution of Ru-4
was left for 4 days before the solvent was evaporated.
Precipitation was found
in the reaction after the 4 days had passed. The solution was ﬁltered again and
evaporated. NMR analysis of the product showed high amounts of impurities. The
same decomposition was observed in NMR samples containing Ru-5 that had to be
stored over extended periods of time before NMR could be performed.
3.1.1
Characterisation of novel catalysts by 1H, 31P, and 13C
NMR
The NMR spectra obtained for Ru-5 are not very well deﬁned due to the low
solubility of the complex leading to low concentrations in the sample. The same
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
25
==PAGE:40==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
is observed for Ru-4.
1H NMR spectroscopy of Ru-5 (ﬁgure 18) shows a major
Ru-H hydride peak at -19.03 ppm with a coupling constant of 3J HP(cis)=19Hz. A
small peak at -18.53 ppm indicates that there is another hydride species present,
presumed to be the isomeric trans hydride species.
Figure 18: 1H NMR (600MHz, CD2Cl2, 298 K) of Ru-5
The 31P NMR spectrum of Ru-5(ﬁgure 19) shows a main peak signal at 53.09
ppm and a smaller peak at 54.22 ppm. The major peak shows a coupling constant of
3J HP(cis)=19Hz. Showing the presence of two isomers in the sample. These being
the cis and trans hydride as two hydride peaks were also observed.
Figure 19: Decoupled 31P NMR (243 MHz, CD2Cl2, 298K) of Ru-5
26
Mathias Børsting
Section 3
==PAGE:41==
Technical University of Denmark
The carbonyl peak was determined by HMBC at 205.23 ppm as the signal was
too weak to determine by 13C NMR. The 13C NMR spectrum is shown in ﬁgure 20
Figure 20: Proton decoupled 13C NMR (151 MHz, CD2Cl2, 298K) of Ru-5
Figure 21 shows the 1H NMR spectrum of Ru-6 with a hydride triplet at -
19.90 ppm (t, 3JHP = 18 Hz). The N-H proton shows as a broad peak at 5.8 ppm.
A singlet at 1.96 ppm corresponds to the methyl group present in the p-toluene
sulfonate ligand.
Figure 21: 1H NMR (600MHz, CD2Cl2, 298 K) of Ru-6
The 31P NMR (ﬁgure 22) shows a single peak at 75.34 ppm as expected from a
single product.
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
27
==PAGE:42==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Figure 22: Decoupled 31P NMR (243 MHz, CD2Cl2, 298K) of Ru-6
13C NMR(ﬁgure 23) shows a C––O peak at 206.78 ppm belonging to the carbonyl
ligand in the product.
Figure 23: Proton decoupled 13C NMR (151 MHz, CD2Cl2, 298K) of Ru-6
The NMR spectra of Ru-4 and Ru-7 show similar patterns in the relevant
areas as the ones described above. Full NMR characterisations can be found in the
experimentals section and appendix B.
Attempts to form crystals of the complexes for X-ray diﬀraction experiments
proved unfruitful so far. Upon evaporation of dichloromethane it was found that
the Ru-MACHO based complexes crashed out as a very ﬁne powder at the very
end of evaporation. For the complexes based on Ru-1 the evaporation produced a
very ﬁne dense white powder. For the complexes based on Ru-3 the evaporation
produced a ﬂuﬀy crystalline powder. The crystallinity of these compounds indicates
28
Mathias Børsting
Section 3
==PAGE:43==
Technical University of Denmark
that crystal formation could be possible in future attempts.
3.2
First screening of catalyst activity
To establish whether the well known catalysts Ru-1 and Ru-2 showed the desired
activity for hydrogenation of levulinic acid, benchmark reactions were carried out
under mild conditions. The benchmark reactions were carried out with the well de-
ﬁned and known catalysts Ru-1 and Ru-2. The results are presented in table 3. The
Table 3: Hydrogenation experiments of neat LA[a]
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-1 (0.09)
20
100
18
19
213
2
Ru-2 (0.09)
20
100
18
38
430
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.086 mmol cat. and 9.8 mmol LA. [b] Determined by
1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or a mixture of
2 and 3.
ﬁrst results show that the reaction proceeds with low catalyst loading (0.09 mol%)
and mild conditions, 20 bar H2 and 120 °C. The reaction did not go to completion,
providing conversions of 19% and 38% for Ru-1 and Ru-2 respectively resulting in
relatively low TONs.
As discussed in section 2.3.4 this type of reaction could beneﬁt from a protic sol-
vent being present during reaction. Considering this it was decided to perform the
reaction with water added in equal volume to LA. The results can be seen in table
4.
Table 4: Hydrogenation experiments of LA in H2O[a]
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-1 (0.09)
20
100
18
>97
1107
2
Ru-2 (0.09)
20
100
18
≥99
1123
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.086 mmol cat., 9.8 mmol LA and 1ml H2O. [b] Deter-
mined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or a
mixture of 2 and 3.
Comparing these results with with the results with the results of the previous
reactions in table 3 it clearly shows a full conversion when the reaction proceeds with
water as a solvent all other parameters being equal. The conversion proceeded to
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
29
==PAGE:44==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
almost full conversion for Ru-1 and full conversion for Ru-2. TONs were also more
than doubled just by the addition of water showing that water is very beneﬁcial for
the reaction increasing conversion signiﬁcantly.
3.2.1
Formation of 4-hydroxyvaleric acid
1H-NMR analysis showed small peaks that did not correlate with neither LA or
GVL was observed. At ﬁrst it was suspected that it was 1,4-Pentanediol (1,4-PDO)
that could possibly be formed by catalytic ring opening and hydrogenation of GVL.
As 1,4-PDO was available NMR analysis was run in order to compare with the side
product that was observed. It was found that the peaks of 1,4-PDO did not match
the ones that were present in the post reaction NMR spectra as can be seen in
appendix D. Having ruled out 1,4-PDO other options were evaluated. As described
Scheme 12: Reaction pathway for the hydrogenation omitting formation of 1,4-PDO
in 2.2.5 GVL is very stable in pure water, but can undergo acid catalysed ring
opening and closing reactions in water. As the substrate of this reaction is an acid
and water is present in the sample when GVL has been formed, it is not unlikely
that some ring opening could take place in the reaction mixture. However it was not
possible to obtain pure 4-HVA commercially probably because it is not very stable.
The observed shifts of the side product does however ﬁt well with the theoretical
shifts. The multiplicity of the peaks that can be observed are also what would be
expected from 4-HVA as it was found in the literature[54].
3.2.2
Temperature eﬀects
The temperature dependence was investigated by increasing the temperature of the
reaction from 100 °C to 120 °C. The ﬁrst run was performed in absence of water.
30
Mathias Børsting
Section 3
==PAGE:45==
Technical University of Denmark
Two other catalysts were screened to evaluate their reactivity, Ru-3 and Ir-1. The
results are presented in table 5.
Table 5: Hydrogenation experiments of neat LA at 120°C[a]
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-1 (0.09)
20
120
18
94
1076
2
Ru-2 (0.09)
20
120
18
≥99
1140
3
Ru-3 (0.09)
20
120
18
92
1047
4
Ir-1 (0.09)
20
120
18
6
73
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.086 mmol cat. and 9.8 mmol LA. [b] Determined by
1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or a mixture of 2
and 3.
The results of these reactions show a large increase in conversion for both Ru-1
and Ru-2 obtaining full conversion after 18 hours. Ru-3 show similar albeit slightly
lower yield. Interestingly the iridium based catalyst Ir-1 only produced a modest
yield of 6% after 18 hours. At these conditions TONs are comparable to the reaction
at 100 °C in water described in table 4.
Having obtained these results further investigations were all performed in water.
3.3
Conversion at short reaction times
After observing full conversion over 18 hours at 120 °C the reaction was evaluated
over short periods of time with water as solvent to determine how much the rate of
the reaction was aﬀected by the solvent. Short reactions running for two and three
hours were carried out the results are presented in table 6.
Table 6: Hydrogenation of LA by Ru-1 in water
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-1 (0.09)
20
120
2
60
685
2
Ru-1 (0.09)
20
120
3
67
767
3
Ru-2 (0.09)
20
120
2
84
961
4
Ru-2 (0.09)
20
120
3
91
1036
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.0086 mmol cat., 9.8 mmol LA and 0.5ml H2O. [b] De-
termined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or a
mixture of 2 and 3.
Catalysts Ru-1 and Ru-2 performed quite diﬀerently when the reaction time
was shortened signiﬁcantly. Ru-1 produced good yields in both reactions obtaining
60% yield over 2 hours and 67% over three hours seemingly indicating that the
reaction proceeds rapidly at the start of the reaction. For Ru-2 excellent yields were
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
31
==PAGE:46==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
obtained with 84% yield after 2 hours and 91% after three which is approaching full
conversion. With this catalyst it also seems that the rate of the reaction decrease
signiﬁcantly when approaching full conversion under these conditions.
3.4
Screening of novel Ru-PNP catalyst for hy-
drogenation of LA
Having established that the well known pincer catalysts Ru-1 and Ru-2 do show
reactivity. The novel Ru catalysts were also evaluated for the hydrogenation. These
new catalysts are Ru-4, Ru-5, Ru-6 and Ru-7. They are based the well known
pincer catalysts Ru-1 and Ru-3. The novel catalysts contain the same phosphine
substituents as Ru-1 for Ru-4 and Ru-5, and Ru-3 for Ru-6 and Ru-7. The
chloride ligand has been exchanged for either mesylate or tosylate. The main idea
is that these versions will undergo faster thermal activation as the sulfonate ligands
coordinate very weakly to the metal center making them highly labile. The catalytic
loading was also lowered to 0.05% to make it easier to compare catalyst reactivity as
obtaining near full conversion with all catalysts makes it much harder to determine
any superior reactivity.
The novel ligands Ru-4 and Ru-5 were tested at the 9.8 mmol scale, with the new
loading and Ru-1 for comparison. The results are presented in table 7.
Table 7: Hydrogenation experiments over 4 h of LA in water[a]
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-2 (0.05)
20
120
4
90
1795
2
Ru-4 (0.05)
20
120
4
92
1841
3
Ru-5 (0.05)
20
120
4
91
1817
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.049 mmol cat., 9.8 mmol LA and 0.5ml H2O. [b] De-
termined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or a
mixture of 2 and 3.
Even at approximately half the catalytic loading of previous reactions the yields
for all catalysts were 90% or higher for all catalysts after only 4 hours of reaction
time. Again obtaining higher TONs approaching 2000.
Based on the good results obtained at lower catalyst loading the catalyst loading
was halved once more. The results of this run with Ru-2, Ru-4 and Ru-5 at 0.025
mol% loading are presented in table 8.
32
Mathias Børsting
Section 3
==PAGE:47==
Technical University of Denmark
Table 8: Hydrogenation experiments, 0.025 mol% loading over 4 h LA in water[a]
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-2 (0.025)
20
120
4
41
1628
2
Ru-4 (0.025)
20
120
4
54
2168
3
Ru-5 (0.025)
20
120
4
69
2756
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.00245 mmol cat., 9.8 mmol LA and 0.5ml H2O.
[b]
Determined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or
a mixture of 2 and 3.
The yields were 41%, 54% and 69% for Ru-2, Ru-4 and Ru-5 respectively.
These results show a larger variation in yields than the results presented in table 7.
At this loading it seems that Ru-5 is the most active catalyst obtaining a yield 15%
higher than for Ru-4 which again produce yields almost 15% percent higher than
Ru-2. The novel catalysts show excellent TONs, Ru-5 especially.
To ensure robustness of the reactions the scale was doubled to 19.6 mmol substrate
and according scale up of catalyst and solvent. The screening of Ru-6 and Ru-7
was performed at this larger scale.
The screening with Ru-6 and Ru-7 versions of the catalysts are shown in table
9. Results for Ru-1, Ru-2 Ru-4 and Ru-5 run under the same conditions are
presented for comparison. It should be noted that the concentration of substrate is
lower for these reactions than the amount used in table 7 based on results presented
in section 3.6.
Table 9: Hydrogenation of LA[a] over 4 h in water
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-1 (0.05)
20
120
4
72
1439
2
Ru-2 (0.05)
20
120
4
86
1728
3
Ru-4 (0.05)
20
120
4
71
1425
4
Ru-5 (0.05)
20
120
4
79
1588
5
Ru-6 (0.05)
20
120
4
66
1316
6
Ru-7 (0.05)
20
120
4
56
1115
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.0098 mmol cat., 19.6 mmol LA and 2 mL H2O.
[b]
Determined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or
a mixture of 2 and 3.
The catalysts based on Ru-3 showed the lowest yields under these conditions
as seen in entry 5 and 6 both of them obtaining below 70% conversion.
Ru-2
Performed the best at 86% yield and surprisingly Ru-4 produced a yield of 71%,
1% lower than Ru-1 this is unexpected when compared with the results presented
in table 7. Ru-5 produced a yield of 79% which is lower than the 86% obtained by
Ru-2 again surprising when compared to the results of table 7. It should be noted
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
33
==PAGE:48==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
that in general the yield is lowered for all catalysts at this scale when compared to
the values in table 7. This is not unexpected as the volume of the reaction mixture
has increased signiﬁcantly changing the conditions for the reactions.
3.5
Eﬀects of scale up on conversion at long reac-
tion times
As full conversion was obtained at the smaller scale it was investigated whether full
conversion could be achieved at this scale as well. The results are presented in table
10.
Table 10: Hydrogenation of LA over 18 h in water, 19.6 mmol scale[a]
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-1 (0.05)
20
120
18
≥99
2000
2
Ru-2 (0.05)
20
120
18
≥99
2000
3
Ru-2 (0.025)
20
120
18
>95
3889
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.0049-0.0098 mmol cat., 19.6 mmol LA and 2 mL H2O.
[b] Determined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3
or a mixture of 2 and 3.
Over long reaction times full conversion was achieved at the higher loadings of
Ru-1 and Ru-2. Interestingly Ru-2 achieved near full conversion at low loading
(0.025%). This result also provided the largest TON value of this entire project at
3889.
3.6
Eﬀects of solvent volume
An investigation of the eﬀect of substrate concentration was performed to determine
whether the concentration of aﬀects the rate of conversion. Based on the results
of Ir catalysts shown in section 2.5 it was suspected that the optimal substrate
concentrations could be quite low. However as good yields had already been obtained
at quite high substrate concentrations in early results the investigation was started at
high substrate concentrations. The results of the reactions at diﬀerent concentration
are presented in ﬁgure 24. It shows an optimum at 9.8 mol/L LA for Ru-2, Ru-4
and Ru-5. For Ru-1 it seems that larger amounts of solvent leads to higher yields.
A reaction with a large volume of H2O(concentration of 2.0 mol/L) with Ru-1 was
performed. The results of this reaction showed a reduced yield of 50% and it follows
that an optimal concentration should lie in between 4.9 mol/L and 2.0 mol/L.
34
Mathias Børsting
Section 3
==PAGE:49==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 24: Catalyst performance over 4h at varying volumes of H2O. 120°C, 20 bar
H2, 19.6 mmol LA and 0.05 mol% loading.
3.7
Stability of catalysts
The stability of the catalyst was evaluated by subsequent addition of 19.6 mmol
LA to a fully converted reaction after 18 hours of reaction time. The reaction was
run for an additional 18 hours under the same conditions. This was done for all
Ru-MACHO derived catalysts the results are shown in ﬁgure 11.
Table 11: Subsequent hydrogenation of LA over 18 h in water[a]
Catalyst
1. Conversion
2. Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[%][b]
[%][b]
1
Ru-1 (0.05)
>99
>95
2
Ru-2 (0.05)
>99
>99
3
Ru-4 (0.05)
>99
>95
4
Ru-5 (0.05)
>99
>95
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.0098 mmol cat., 19.6 mmol LA, 2.0 ml H2O, 120 °C and
20 bar H2. [b] Determined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1
to either 3 or a mixture of 2 and 3.
The results show that the Ru-1 based catalysts are all stable over at least two
runs of the hydrogenation reaction. The TONs at full conversion in the ﬁrst con-
version is 2000
The long term stability of Ru-2 when exposed to the atmosphere was also tested.
A sample which had been run with 93% yield1 was exposed to the atmosphere in a
1Reaction conditions: 0.05 mol% cat, 19.8 mmol substrate, 2 mL H2O 100°C, 20 bar H2 and
18h
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
35
==PAGE:50==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
fume hood. After 5 days 19.8 mmol LA was added and the sample was run again
under the same conditions. A conversion of 58% was obtained with a TON of 1260.
This results shows that the catalyst in the post reaction solution is at least somewhat
stable when exposed to atmospheric conditions.
3.8
Conversion at low temperature
In the ﬁrst screening full conversion was observed when the reaction was run overnight
at 120 °C and 20 bar H2 on 9.8 mmol scale using water as the solvent. Further in-
vestigation of conversion at lower temperatures were carried out using Ru-1, Ru-2,
Ru-4 and Ru-5 at 80, 100 and 120 °C. The results are presented in ﬁgure 25. At
this scale the reaction reaches full conversion at 120 °C over night. At 100 °C the
conversion reaches a rather good conversion at around 90% for all candidates. After
this observation a further 20 °C decrease in temperature was tested. This however
did not produce good yields the highest conversion obtained being 25% by Ru-2
signiﬁcantly lower than the yields at higher temperatures.
Figure 25: Conversions at varying temperatures[a]
[a]: Conversion over 18h at 80, 100 and 120°C, 20bar H2, 19.6 mmol LA and 2.0ml H2O
Ru-6 and Ru-7 were also tested at 100 °C. Conversions of respectively 74% and
73% were obtained during for these reactions. This is between 14 and 20% lower
than what was observed for the other catalysts. Thus they were not included in the
rest of the temperature investigations.
3.8.1
Eﬀects of H2 pressure
Having shown that hydrogenation at 20 bar H2 produced satisfying yields. The 19.6
mmol scale reaction was run at half the H2 pressure used for earlier tests. The
36
Mathias Børsting
Section 3
==PAGE:51==
Technical University of Denmark
results are shown in table 12.
Table 12: Hydrogenation of LA at 10 bar H2[a]
Catalyst
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
TON
1
Ru-1 (0.05)
10
120
18
86
1726
2
Ru-2 (0.05)
10
120
18
>95
1918
3
Ru-4 (0.05)
10
120
18
≥95
1891
4
Ru-5 (0.05)
10
120
18
>95
1917
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.0098 mmol cat., 19.6 mmol LA and 2.0ml H2O.
[b]
Determined by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or
a mixture of 2 and 3.
The reaction proceeded with yields comparable to the yields obtained with 20
bar H2 for Ru-2, Ru-4 and Ru-5. Ru-1 however provided yields 10% lower than
the others.
3.8.2
Eﬀects of acidic additives
Levulinic acid is produced by acid catalysis and the hydrogenation of LA proceeds
under mildly acidic conditions. The systems resilience to acidic additives is therefore
of interest as LA might need to be less pure before hydrogenation by these catalysts.
The reaction was therefore tested with the acid additives p-toluenesulfonic acid
PTSA and ammonium hexaﬂuorophosphate. The results are provided in table 13.
Table 13: Hydrogenation of LA with acidic additives[a]
Catalyst
Additive
P H2
T
t
Conversion
Entry
(mol%)
(mol%)
[bar]
[°C]
[h]
[%][b]
1
Ru-4 (0.07)
PTSA (0.4)
20
120
18
90
2
Ru-4 (0.07)
PTSA (1.0)
20
120
18
72
3
Ru-4 (0.07)
NH4PF6 (0.4)
20
120
18
80
4c
Ru-4 (0.05)
PTSA (0.4)
20
120
18
83
5c
Ru-4 (0.05)
-
20
120
18
89
[a] Reaction conditions: 0.0069 mmol cat., 1.0ml LA and 0.5ml H2O. [b] Determined
by 1H-NMR conversion calculated as the conversion of 1 to either 3 or a mixture of
2 and 3. [c] Reaction conditions: 0.0098 mmol cat., 19.6 mmol LA and 2.0ml H2O.
Under these conditions, with no additive, near full conversion is expected by
Ru-4. Hydrogenation does clearly proceed under these conditions. Entry 1,2 and
3 in table 13 shows that this was not the case with both additives. From entry 1
and 2 it seems that larger amounts of acid lowers conversion. In entry 4 and 5 only
a very small drop in conversion was observed between the reaction with PTSA and
the one without.
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
37
==PAGE:52==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
3.9
Discussion
The synthesis of novel Ru-PNP with coordinating sulfonate ligands utilizing silver
salts provided good yields. Unfortunately crystals were not succesfully grown before
the end of this project. As a result the characterisation of the complexes is also still
lacking. Good NMR spectra for the Ru-1 based catalysts still need to be obtained.
The hydrogenation reaction proceeded without base activation even at low temper-
atures and low H2 pressure. This also means that the reaction proceeded under
acidic conditions and even under neat conditions with a carboxylic acid as sub-
strate.
Though the yields were lower.
The reaction shows very high selectivity
towards GVL, though some of the intermediate 4-HVA was consistently observed in
amounts of 1-5% of the full yield (GVL and 4-HVA). This is not a large issue as
4-HVA undergoes condensation to form GVL readily. The observation of interme-
diate post reaction could indicate that the ring closing is not catalyst assisted and
occurs in solution rather than while coordinated to the catalyst. Although it could
also be an eﬀect of the aqueous acidic conditions leading to ring opening.
Performing the reactions in aqueous solution increased the yields signiﬁcantly which
might be attributed to hydrogen bonding interactions that assist in the reaction as
seen with Noyori-type molecular catalysis or beneﬁcial interactions when reforming
the active catalytic species. The results indicate that there is an optimal concentra-
tion of substrate in water. Data for some of the catalysts has not yet been obtained.
However it seems that Ru-2 and Ru-5 performs the best at LA concentrations of
9.8 mol/L. While the optimum for Ru-1 seems to be at a lower LA concentration.
When comparing the catalysts containing phosphines with -Ph substituents with
the catalysts containing phosphines with -iPr substituents the latter category con-
sistently under performed in reactions with equal conditions. Why this is the case is
not quite clear. The only diﬀerence being the phosphine substituents the eﬀect must
be attributed to these. As it is more electron donating it also results in a phosphine
that participates less in backbonding. This could have an eﬀect in the heterolytic
cleavage of H2 as more electron rich metal centers disfavors heterolytic cleavage. In
this case this is of course relative to the phenyl version of the ligand. The lower
yields could also be attributed to solubility of the catalysts. The solubility of Ru-3
has led to low yields in other hydrogenation reactions[16].
At very low catalyst loadings of 0.05% and 0.025% good yields were still obtained.
Reproducibility turned out to be a problem at the lowest loadings. The reaction
was scaled up to ensure robustness and did provide better reproducibility at the cost
of slightly decreased yields. In spite of this the highest TON was obtained at the
larger scale.
The reaction proceeds at low temperatures although lowering the temperature to
38
Mathias Børsting
Section 3
==PAGE:53==
Technical University of Denmark
80°C seems to slow the reaction down signiﬁcantly and a sharp drop in conversion
was observed. Reducing the pressure to 10 bar did not lower yields signiﬁcantly at
long reaction times. An interesting result that should be investigated further.
Section 3
Mathias Børsting
39
==PAGE:54==
4
Conclusion
A collection of Ru-MACHO and Ru-PNPiPr based catalysts with sulfonate ligands
were synthesised successfully and characterised by 1H, 13C and 31P NMR. The novel
catalysts and their well known precursors were investigated for base-free direct hy-
drogenation of the biomass derived substrate levulinic acid. It was found that all
Ru catalysts tested catalysed the reaction with 100% selectivity under mild condi-
tions. The importance of solvent eﬀects from water was established and found to be
pivotal, boosting yields signiﬁcantly when present.
The results showed that the Ru-PNPiPr based complexes performed worse than
their Ru-MACHO based counterparts. This is also apparent from the TON num-
bers in table 14.
Near full conversion was observed at a low catalyst loading of 0.025 mol% over 18
hours by Ru-2 under mild conditions. Reaching the highest TON of this study.
The catalysts performed well at mild temperatures as low as 100°C and at H2 pres-
sures down to 10 bar. The stability was investigated and it was found that the
catalysts were still active post reaction. Furthermore Ru-2 in solution retained re-
activity when exposed to atmospheric conditions over ﬁve days, obtaining a TON
of 1250 in the second conversion.
Acidic additives resulted in reduced yields.
With yields being lower with larger
amounts of acid.
The novel catalysts Ru-4 and Ru-5 were found to be eﬃcient catalysts for the se-
lective base-free hydrogenation of levulinic acid to γ-valerolactone. The well known
catalysts Ru-1 and Ru-2 produce results comparable to those of textbfRu-4 and
Ru-5. Of these four Ru-1 fared the worst in key studies relevant for sustainability.
For Ru-2, Ru-4 and Ru-5 there is not a catalyst that clearly outperformed the
others. Under diﬀerent conditions the catalysts providing the highest yield were
diﬀerent, Ru-2 did however produce the highest TON. Though the results in table
8 showed a better yield from Ru-5.
Table 14: Highest TONs achieved by each catalyst
Catalyst
Max TON
Ru-1
2213
Ru-2
3889
Ru-3
1047
Ru-4
2435
Ru-5
2756
Ru-6
1570
Ru-7
1502
40
Mathias Børsting
Section 4
==PAGE:55==
5
Future perspectives
Though the Ru-MACHO family of catalysts investigated in this work already show
good potential as a part of sustainable production of GVL some imortant studies
need to be done.
First and foremost characterisation of the novel catalysts was only done by NMR.
This is not optimal and further characterisation is in order for example single crystal
x-ray diﬀraction and IR spectroscopy for proper observation of the C––O bond.
Furthermore trace elemental analysis should also be performed to be sure of the
purity of the catalysts and ensure no other metals interfere with the catalysis.
A more in depth study of the conversion over time could be quite useful as the
results in table 6 points to fast conversion at the start of reaction and then a drop
in reactivity. It was also observed that full conversion is not always achieved even
over 18 hours of reaction. A comprehensive study of the reaction over time could
provide valuable insights to the behavior of the system.
It was determined that the reaction proceeds at low temperature and low pressure
independently. However a study of the conversion with the lower value of both of
these parameters was not performed. A study of the conversion under the very mild
conditions of 100°C and 10 bar H2 could prove the system even more sustainable if
good conversion is achieved.
As this reaction proceeds under acidic conditions mechanistic studies of the reaction
is of interest. The reaction usually performs well under basic conditions or at least
by base activation.
Therefore it could provide some very interesting insights if
the mechanism for the reaction was better understood. A more thorough study
of the recyclability of the catalyst would also be useful. The results from table 11
show great promise for the recyclability of the catalysts a further investigation of the
conversion over 5 consecutive reactions on the same catalyst should be performed. As
the reaction has already proven quite eﬃcient at the 20 mmol scale it is tempting to
try and up the scale once more. Many other catalysts for this speciﬁc hydrogenation
are only tested at 5 mmol scale. Showing the catalysts potential for scale up is
important if it is to leave the pages of literature and be included in the chemical
industry in the future. The highest TON was achieved at low loading (0.025%) with
Ru-2 however at this loading Ru-5 also provided some good results on a smaller
scale. A more thorough investigation of the conversion at these low loadings could
further prove this systems sustainable applications . The ability of this system to
hydrogenate FAL could also be of interest as it could possibly catalyse the direct
conversion of FAL to GVL. If this is possible it could be valuable as a catalyst for
the ﬁnal steps in a bioreﬁnery for production of GVL from lignocellulosic biomass.
Section 5
Mathias Børsting
41
==PAGE:56==
6
Experimental
6.1
General information
Chemicals were acquired from commercial vendors unless explicitly described oth-
erwise. LA (≥97% and 99% FG), GVL (99%), FAL (99%), Ru-1, Ru-2, Ru-3
and Ir-1 were obtained commercially and used without further puriﬁcation. H2 gas
(H2O ≤3 ppm, O2 ≤2 ppm) was also obtained commercially. The H2O used was
Milli-Q puriﬁed. All other solvents used were HPLC grade, degassed and stored
under inert conditions with molecular sieves.
1H NMR spectras for quantitative
analysis of hydrogenation reactions were obtained on a Bruker AVANCE 400 MHz
system with a 5mm CryoProbe Prodigy in D2O (98% Deuterium). NMR Data are
reported as: s, singlet; d, doublet; t, triplet; q, quartet; m, multiplet; b, broad peak.
Coupling constants are reported in Hz.
1H NMR, 31P NMR and 13C NMR samples and NMR experiments for characteriza-
tion of novel Ru-PNP catalysts were performed by Dr. Rosa Maria Padilla Paz.
Data for reactions at 0.07 mol% was obtained from Dr. Rosa Maria Padilla Paz.
6.2
Synthesis of novel Ru-PNP complexes
Synthesis of Ru-4
(Ru(H)(SO3C6H4CH3)(CO)(NH[(CH2CH2P(C6H5)2])
Ru-1 (100 mg, 0.16 mmol) was weighed in a 20 ml vial. With minimum light silver
tosylate (55 mg, 0.20 mmol) was added. The vial was wrapped in metal foil. 3
ml DCM was added and the reaction was stirred in the closed container for 3 h at
room temperature. Precipitation of silver chloride was observed upon opening the
reaction vessel. The liquid was ﬁltered through celite and a glass-ﬁber ﬁlter providing
a slightly yellow clear solution. The solvent was evaporated under vacuum yielding
a slightly oﬀwhite powder in almost quantitative yield.
1H NMR (298 K, D2Cl2, 400 MHz, ppm): δ - 19.11 ppm (t, 3JHP = 20 Hz 1H,
Ru-H), 2.29 (s, 3H, SO3C6H4CH3), 2.49 (m, 2H, CH2), 3.01 (m. 6H, CH2), 3.58 (s,
CH2N), 6.09 (m, NH), 6.91-7.76 (m, PC6H5, 24 H). 13C NMR (298 K, CD2Cl2, 101
MHz, ppm):δ 21.5(s, SO3C6H4CH3) 31.9 (t, JCP=12.0 Hz, PCH2), 53.2 (t, JCP=7.0
Hz, NCH2), 129.0 (t, JCP=5.0 Hz, PC6H5), 129.1 (t, JCP=5.0 Hz, PC6H5), 130.6
(CqPh), 132.7 129.1 (t, JCP=6.0 Hz, PC6H5), 133.7 (t, JCP=6.0 Hz, PC6H5), ≈207.0
(b, CO). 31P NMR (298 K, CD2Cl2, 243 MHz, ppm): δ 53.13 (s)
42
Mathias Børsting
Section 6
==PAGE:57==
Technical University of Denmark
Synthesis of Ru-5
(Ru(H)(SO3CH3)(CO)(NH[(CH2CH2P(C6H5)2)
Ru-1 (100 mg, 0.16 mmol) was weighed in a 20 ml vial.
With minimum light
silver mesylate (40.1 mg, 0.20 mmol) was added. The vial was wrapped in metal
foil. 3 ml DCM was added and the reaction was stirred in the closed container
for 3 h at room temperature. Precipitation of silver chloride was observed upon
opening the reaction vessel. The liquid was ﬁltered through celite and a glass-ﬁber
ﬁlter providing a slightly yellow clear solution. The solvent was evaporated under
vacuum yielding a slightly oﬀwhite powder in almost quantitative yield.
1H NMR (298 K, D2Cl2, 600 MHz, ppm): δ - 19.03 ppm (t, 3JHP = 18 Hz 1H,
Ru-H), 2.40 (s, 3H, SO3CH3), 2.53 (m, 2H, CH2), 2.99 (m, CH2), 3.88 (s, CH2N),
6.33 (b, NH), 6.98-7.82 (m, PC6H5, 20 H). 13C NMR (298 K, CD2Cl2, 151 MHz,
ppm):δ 32.1 (b, PCH2), 39.7 (s, SO3CH3), 53.0 (b, NCH2), 129.0-136.9 (m, PC6H5
and NCH2Ph), 205.8 (b, CO). 31P NMR (298 K, CD2Cl2, 243 MHz, ppm): δ 53.13
(s)
Synthesis of Ru-6
Ru(H)(SO3C6H4CH3)(CO)(NH[(CH2CH2P(CH(CH2)2)2]2
Ru-3 (100 mg, 0.21 mmol) was weighed in a 20 ml vial. With minimum light silver
tosylate (55 mg, 0.25 mmol) was added. The vial was wrapped in metal foil. 3
ml DCM was added and the reaction was stirred in the closed container for 3 h at
room temperature. Precipitation of silver chloride was observed upon opening the
reaction vessel. The liquid was ﬁltered through celite and a glass-ﬁber ﬁlter providing
a slightly yellow clear solution. The solvent was evaporated under vacuum yielding
a white ﬂuﬀy crystalline powder in almost quantitative yield.
1H NMR (298 K, C6D6, 600 MHz, ppm): δ -19.90 ppm (t, 3JHP = 18 Hz, 1H,
Ru-H), 0.85(m, 6H, 3JHP = 18 Hz 3JHH= 6.0 Hz, PCH(CH3)2), 1.03 (m, 6H, 3JHP
= 18 Hz 3JHH= 6.0 Hz, PCH(CH3)2), 1.12 (m, 6H, 3JHP = 18 Hz 3JHH= 6.0 Hz,
PCH(CH3)2), 1.54 (m, 6H, 3JHP = 18 Hz 3JHH= 6.0 Hz, PCH(CH3)2), 1.63 (m, 2H,
CH2P), 1.73 (m, 2H, CH2P), 1.86 (m, 2H, PCH(CH3)2), 1.96 (s, 3H, SO3C6H4CH3),
2.29 (m, 2H, CH2N), 2.69 (m, 2H, PCH(CH3)2), 2.85 (m, 2H), 5.80 (m, 1H, NH),
6.88 (d, 2H, 3JHH=6.0 Hz, C6H4), 8.06 (d, 2H, 3JHH=6.0 Hz, C6H4).
13C NMR
(298 K, C6D6, 151 MHz, ppm):δ 17.37 (s, CH3), 19.18 (s, CH3), 20.67 (t, JCP=3.0
Hz, CH3), 21.12 (s, SO3C6H4CH3), 21.28 (t, JCP=3.0 Hz, CH3), 24.33 (t, JCP=3.0
Hz, CH3), 28.28 (t, JCP=10.56 Hz, CH), 29.89 (t, JCP= 9.05 Hz, PCH2), 126.59
(s, CH–Ph), 128.83 (CH–Ph), 139.65 (CqPh), 145.82 (CqPh), 206.78 (b, CO). 31P
NMR (298 K, C6D6, 243 MHz, ppm): δ 75.34 (s)
Section 6
Mathias Børsting
43
==PAGE:58==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Synthesis of Ru-7
Ru(H)(SO3CH3)(CO)(NH[(CH2CH2P(CH(CH2)2)2]2
Ru-3 (100 mg, 0.21 mmol) was weighed in a 20 ml vial.
With minimum light
mesylate (41 mg, 0.20 mmol) was added. The vial was wrapped in metal foil. 3
ml DCM was added and the reaction was stirred in the closed container for 3 h at
room temperature. Precipitation of silver chloride was observed upon opening the
reaction vessel. The liquid was ﬁltered through celite and a glass-ﬁber ﬁlter providing
a slightly yellow clear solution. The solvent was evaporated under vacuum yielding
a white ﬂuﬀy crystalline powder in almost quantitative yield.
1H NMR (298 K,
CD2Cl2, 400 MHz, ppm): δ - 20.07 ppm (t, 3JHP = 20 Hz, 1H, Ru-H), 1.09 (m,
6H, 3JHP = 12 Hz 3JHH= 4.0 Hz, PCH(CH3)2), 1.18 (m, 6H, 3JHP = 16 Hz 3JHH=
8.0 Hz, PCH(CH3)2), 1.29 (m, 6H, 3JHP = 12 Hz 3JHH= 8.0 Hz, PCH(CH3)2), 1.44
(m, 6H, 3JHP = 16 Hz 3JHH= 8.0 Hz, PCH(CH3)2), 2.11 (m, 2H, CH2P), 2.24 (m,
2H, CH2P), 2.24 (m, 2H, PCH(CH3)2), 2.57 (m, 2H, CH2N), 2.60 (s, 3H, SO3CH3),
3.32 (m, 2H, PCH(CH3)2), 5.45 (m, 1H, NH), 13C NMR (298 K, CD2Cl2, 101
MHz, ppm):δ 17.82 (s, CH3), 19.38 (s, CH3), 20.86 (t, JCP=3.0 Hz, CH3), 21.17 (t,
JCP=3.0 Hz, CH3), 24.72 (t, JCP=13.08 Hz, CH), 28.73 (t, JCP=10.06 Hz, CH),
30.24 (t, JCP= 9.06 Hz, PCH2), 126.59 (s, SO3CH3), ≈207. (b, CO). 31P NMR
(298 K, CD2Cl2, 160 MHz, ppm): δ 74.25 (s)
6.3
General experimental procedure for hydro-
genation of LA
Catalyst (0.012-0.1 mol%) was weighed and added to a 20ml vial with a stir bar
under argon atmosphere. The vial was tightly sealed with a PTFE lined lid. LA 98%
(1.0-2.0ml, 9.8-19.6 mmol) was added through the lid with a syringe. After addition
of substrate H2O(0.1-10.0ml) was added through the lid. The samples were placed in
a stainless steel autoclave able to ﬁt 7 samples. Venting needles were stuck through
the lids of the vials and the autoclave was closed tightly. The autoclave was ﬂushed
with 5 bar N2 gas three times and 5 bar H2 gas two times before adjusting the H2
pressure to the desired level. The autoclave was heated to the desired temperature
in 1h-1.5h depending on reaction temperature. Reactions were stopped by cooling
the autoclave to 30 degrees and then depressurising it. Upon opening the samples
were shaken gently and left to allow excess dissolved hydrogen to leave the solution
before NMR samples could be prepared.
44
Mathias Børsting
Section 6
==PAGE:59==
Technical University of Denmark
6.4
Experimental procedure for catalyst stability
test
The same procedure as for hydrogenation of LA was used. After NMR samples
of the reaction had been prepared LA 98% (2.0ml, 19.6mmol) was added to the
vial through the lid and the reaction was pressurised and run as described in the
procedure for hydrogenation of LA.
6.5
Experimental procedure for catalyst long
term stability test
Ru-2 (0.05 mol%) was weighed and added to a 20 ml vial with a stir bar under
argon atmosphere. The vial was tightly sealed with a PTFE lined lid. LA 98%
(2.0ml, 19.6 mmol) was added through the lid with a syringe. After addition of
substrate H2O(2.0 ml) was added through the lid. The samples were placed in a
stainless steel autoclave. Venting needles were stuck through the lids of the vials
and the autoclave was closed tightly. The autoclave was ﬂushed with 5 bar N2 gas
three times and 5 bar H2 gas two times before adjusting the H2 pressure to the
desired level. The autoclave was heated to 100°C over 1h depending on reaction
temperature. Reactions were stopped by cooling the autoclave to 30 degrees and
then depressurising it. Upon opening the samples were shaken gently and left to
allow excess dissolved hydrogen to leave the solution before NMR samples could be
prepared. The sample was left in a fumehood with a hole the size of a venting needle
in the lid for 5 days. LA 98% (2.0ml, 19.6 mmol) was added through the lid with
a syringe an NMR sample was prepared from the sample. The vial was then run
again under the same conditions.
6.6
Experimental procedure for hydrogenation of
LA with acidic additives
Catalyst (0.05 mol%) was weighed and added to a 20 ml vial with a stir bar under
argon atmosphere. The vial was tightly sealed with a PTFE lined lid. LA 98%
(2.0ml, 19.6 mmol) was added through the lid with a syringe. After addition of
substrate PTSA was added quantitatively with H2O(2.0ml) through the lid. The
samples were placed in a stainless steel autoclave able to ﬁt 7 samples. Venting
needles were stuck through the lids of the vials and the autoclave was closed tightly.
The autoclave was ﬂushed with 5 bar N2 gas three times and 5 bar H2 gas two
Section 6
Mathias Børsting
45
==PAGE:60==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
times before adjusting the H2 pressure to 20 bar.
The autoclave was heated to
100°C in 1h. Reactions were stopped by cooling the autoclave to 30 degrees and
then depressurising it. Upon opening the samples were shaken gently and left to
allow excess dissolved hydrogen to leave the solution before NMR samples could be
prepared.
46
Mathias Børsting
Section 6
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
(1)
WMO United in Science 2020; tech. rep.; WMO, 2020, pp 1–20.
(2)
Deuss, P. J.; Barta, K.; De Vries, J. G. Catalysis Science and Technology
2014, 4, 1174–1196.
(3)
Anastas, P.; Warner, J., Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice, 1st ed., 1998,
p 30.
(4)
BP plc. Statistical Review of World Energy 2020; 2020, p 66.
(5)
Sheldon, R. A. Green Chemistry 2014, 16, 950–963.
(6)
United Nations The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020; 2020, p 66.
(7)
Hayes, D. J.; Fitzpatrick, S.; Hayes, M. H. B.; Ross, J. R. H., The Bioﬁne
Process– Production of Levulinic Acid, Furfural, and Formic Acid from Lig-
nocellulosic Feedstocks; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH: Weinheim, Germany, 2006,
pp 139–164.
(8)
Guleria, A.; Kumari, G.; Saravanamurugan, S., Cellulose valorization to po-
tential platform chemicals; Elsevier B.V.: 2019, pp 433–457.
(9)
Elumalai, S.; Arumugam, B.; Kundu, P.; Kumar, S., Phenol derivatives of
lignin monomers for aromatic compounds and cycloalkane fuels; Elsevier B.V.:
2019, pp 459–483.
(10)
da Costa Lopes, A. M.; Morais, A. R. C.;  Lukasik, R. M., Sustainable Catalytic
Strategies for C5-Sugars and Biomass Hemicellulose Conversion Towards Fur-
fural Production, 2017, pp 45–80.
(11)
Horvat, J.; Klai´c, B.; Metelko, B.; ˇSunji´c, V. Tetrahedron Letters 1985, 26,
2111–2114.
(12)
Tang, X.; Sun, Y.; Zeng, X.; Lei, T.; Li, H.; Lin, L. Biomass, Biofuels, Bio-
chemicals: Recent Advances in Development of Platform Chemicals 2019,
199–226.
(13)
Werpy, T.; Petersen, G. Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass: Volume
I – Results of Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis
Gas; tech. rep.; Golden, CO (United States): National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL), 2004, p 76.
(14)
Bozell, J. J.; Petersen, G. R. Green Chemistry 2010, 12, 539.
(15)
Malu, T. J.; Manikandan, K.; Cheralathan, K. K., Levulinic acid-a potential
keto acid for producing biofuels and chemicals; Elsevier B.V.: 2019, pp 171–
197.
Section 6
Mathias Børsting
47
==PAGE:62==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
(16)
Padilla, R.; Koranchalil, S.; Nielsen, M. Green Chemistry 2020, 6767–6772.
(17)
Wang, Y.; Zhao, D.; Rodr´ıguez-Padr´on, D.; Len, C. Catalysts 2019, 9, 796.
(18)
Gonz´alez Maldonado, G. M.; Assary, R. S.; Dumesic, J.; Curtiss, L. A. Energy
& Environmental Science 2012, 5, 6981.
(19)
Dwivedi, A. D.; Gupta, K.; Tyagi, D.; Rai, R. K.; Mobin, S. M.; Singh, S. K.
ChemCatChem 2015, 7, 4050–4058.
(20)
Clayden, J.; Greeves, N.; Warren, S., Organic Chemistry, 2nd ed.; Oxford
University Press: 2011.
(21)
Horv´ath, I. T.; Mehdi, H.; F´abos, V.; Boda, L.; Mika, L. T. Green Chemistry
2008, 10, 238–24.
(22)
Havasi, D.; Mizsey, P.; Mika, L. T. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data
2016, 61, 1502–1508.
(23)
Clauser, N. M.; Gonz´alez, G.; Mendieta, C. M.; Kruyeniski, J.; Area, M. C.;
Vallejos, M. E. Sustainability 2021, Vol. 13, Page 794 2021, 13, 794.
(24)
Dutta, S.; Yu, I. K.; Tsang, D. C.; Ng, Y. H.; Ok, Y. S.; Sherwood, J.; Clark,
J. H. Chemical Engineering Journal 2019, 372, 992–1006.
(25)
Marckwordt, A.; El Ouahabi, F.; Amani, H.; Tin, S.; Kalevaru, N. V.; Kamer,
P. C. J.; Wohlrab, S.; de Vries, J. G. Angewandte Chemie International Edition
2019, 58, 3486–3490.
(26)
Manzer, L. E. Applied Catalysis A: General 2004, 272, 249–256.
(27)
Vobecka, Z.; Wei, C.; Tauer, K.; Esposito, D. Polymer 2015, 74, 262–271.
(28)
Mehdi, H.; F´abos, V.; Tuba, R.; Bodor, A.; Mika, L. T.; Horv´ath, I. T. Topics
in Catalysis 2008, 48, 49–54.
(29)
Al-Shaal, M. G.; Dzierbinski, A.; Palkovits, R. Green Chem. 2014, 16, 1358–
1364.
(30)
Stadler, B. M.; Puylaert, P.; Diekamp, J.; van Heck, R.; Fan, Y.; Spannenberg,
A.; Hinze, S.; de Vries, J. G. Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis 2018, 360, 1151–
1158.
(31)
Bond, J. Q.; Alonso, D. M.; Wang, D.; West, R. M.; Dumesic, J. A. Science
2010, 327, 1110–1114.
(32)
Lange, J.-p.; Price, R.; Ayoub, P. M.; Louis, J.; Petrus, L.; Clarke, L.; Gos-
selink, H. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2010, 49, 4479–4483.
(33)
Errington, R. J.; McDonald, W. S.; Shaw, B. L. J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans.
1982, 13, 1829–1835.
48
Mathias Børsting
Section 6
==PAGE:63==
Technical University of Denmark
(34)
Gunanathan, C.; Milstein, D. Chemical Reviews 2014, 114, 12024–12087.
(35)
Van der Boom, M. E.; Milstein, D. Chemical Reviews 2003, 103, 1759–1792.
(36)
Vogt, M.; Langer, R. European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry 2020, 1–15.
(37)
Tolman, C. A. Chemical Reviews 1977, 77, 313–348.
(38)
Dub, P. A.; Gordon, J. C. Nature Reviews Chemistry 2018, 2, 396–408.
(39)
Kuriyama, W.; Matsumoto, T.; Ogata, O.; Ino, Y.; Aoki, K.; Tanaka, S.;
Ishida, K.; Kobayashi, T.; Sayo, N.; Saito, T. Organic Process Research &
Development 2012, 16, 166–171.
(40)
Piccirilli, L.; Pinheiro, D. L. J.; Nielsen, M. Catalysts 2020, 10, 1–115.
(41)
Yang, X.; Chen, X., Mechanistic insights and computational prediction of base
metal pincer complexes for catalytic hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reac-
tions; Elsevier Inc.: 2018, pp 101–110.
(42)
Gao, H.; Chen, J. Journal of Organometallic Chemistry 2015, 797, 165–170.
(43)
Choi, J. H.; Vald´es, H.; Pingen, D.; Prechtl, M. H. Pincer Compounds: Chem-
istry and Applications 2018, 273–294.
(44)
Dub, P. A.; Ikariya, T. Catalytic reductive transformations of carboxylic and
carbonic acid derivatives using molecular hydrogen, 2012.
(45)
Monney, A.; Barsch, E.; Sponholz, P.; Junge, H.; Ludwig, R.; Beller, M. Chem.
Commun. 2014, 50, 707–709.
(46)
Ramaraj, A.; Nethaji, M.; Jagirdar, B. R. Dalton Transactions 2014, 43,
14625–14635.
(47)
Sheldon, R. A. Green Chemistry 2007, 9, 1273.
(48)
Seretis, A.; Diamantopoulou, P.; Thanou, I.; Tzevelekidis, P.; Fakas, C.; Lilas,
P.; Papadogianakis, G. Frontiers in Chemistry 2020, 8, 22.
(49)
Tukacs, J. M.; Nov´ak, M.; Dib´o, G.; Mika, L. T. Catal. Sci. Technol. 2014,
4, 2908–2912.
(50)
Van Slagmaat, C. A. M. R.; De Wildeman, S. M. A. European Journal of
Inorganic Chemistry 2018, 2018, 694–702.
(51)
Li, W.; Xie, J. H.; Lin, H.; Zhou, Q. L. Green Chemistry 2012, 14, 2388–2390.
(52)
Deng, J.; Wang, Y.; Pan, T.; Xu, Q.; Guo, Q. X.; Fu, Y. ChemSusChem 2013,
6, 1163–1167.
(53)
Yi, Y.; Liu, H.; Xiao, L. P.; Wang, B.; Song, G. ChemSusChem 2018, 11,
1474–1478.
(54)
Chalid, M.; Heeres, H.; Broekhuis, A. Procedia Chemistry 2012, 4, 260–267.
Section
Mathias Børsting
49
==PAGE:64==
A
Catalyst overview
Figure 26: Catalysts investigated in this project
50
Mathias Børsting
Section A
==PAGE:65==
B
NMR spectra for catalyst characteri-
zation
1H NMR of Ru-4 298 K, CD2Cl2, 400 MHz
Section B
Mathias Børsting
51
==PAGE:66==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
31P NMR of Ru-4 298 K, CD2Cl2, 160 MHz
13C NMR of Ru-4 298 K, CD2Cl2, 101 MHz
52
Mathias Børsting
Section B
==PAGE:67==
Technical University of Denmark
1H NMR of Ru-5 298 K, CD2Cl2, 600 MHz
31P NMR of Ru-5 298 K, CD2Cl2, 243 MHz
Section B
Mathias Børsting
53
==PAGE:68==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
13C NMR of Ru-5 298 K, CD2Cl2, 151 MHz
1H NMR of Ru-6 298 K, C6D6, 400 MHz
54
Mathias Børsting
Section B
==PAGE:69==
Technical University of Denmark
31P NMR of Ru-6 298 K, C6D6, 160 MHz
13C NMR of Ru-6 298 K, C6D6, 101 MHz
Section B
Mathias Børsting
55
==PAGE:70==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR of Ru-7 298 K, CD2Cl2, 600 MHz
31P NMR of Ru-7 298 K, CD2Cl2, 243 MHz
56
Mathias Børsting
Section B
==PAGE:71==
Technical University of Denmark
13C NMR of Ru-7 298 K, CD2Cl2, 151 MHz
Section B
Mathias Børsting
57
==PAGE:72==
C
1H-NMR spectra for quantitative anal-
ysis
1H NMR Standards, D2O, 278K, 400MHz
Levulinic acid
1H NMR (298K, D2O, 400MHz, ppm): δ 2.20(s, 3H, CH3), 2.09(q, 3JHH=2 Hz 2H,
(CH2 –CH2–COOH)), 2.85(q, 3JHH=2 Hz 2H,
(–CO–CH2–CH2)) , 4.82 (m, CH, overlaps with solvent peak).
γ-Valerolactone
1H NMR (298K, D2O, 400MHz, ppm): δ 1.41(d, 3JHH=6.25 Hz, 3H, CH3), 1.92 (m, 1H,
CHH), 2.43 (m, 1H, CHH), 2.66 (m, 2H, CH2).
58
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:73==
Technical University of Denmark
Example of yield calculation
Y ield = (3.00/3 + 0.06/3)/(3.00/3 + 0.06/3 + 0.19/2) = 93
Section C
Mathias Børsting
59
==PAGE:74==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 3
Figure 27: Entry 1
Figure 28: Entry 2
60
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:75==
Technical University of Denmark
1H NMR from table 4
Figure 29: Entry 1
Figure 30: Entry 2
Section C
Mathias Børsting
61
==PAGE:76==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 5
Figure 31: Entry 1
Figure 32: Entry 2
Figure 33: Entry 3
62
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:77==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 34: Entry 4
Section C
Mathias Børsting
63
==PAGE:78==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 6
Figure 35: Entry 1
Figure 36: Entry 2
Figure 37: Entry 3
64
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:79==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 38: Entry 4
Section C
Mathias Børsting
65
==PAGE:80==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 7
Figure 39: Entry 1
Figure 40: Entry 2
Figure 41: Entry 3
66
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:81==
Technical University of Denmark
1H NMR from table 8
Figure 42: Entry 1
Figure 43: Entry 2
Figure 44: Entry 3
Section C
Mathias Børsting
67
==PAGE:82==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 9
Figure 45: Entry 1
Figure 46: Entry 2
Figure 47: Entry 3
68
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:83==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 48: Entry 4
Figure 49: Entry 5
Figure 50: Entry 6
Section C
Mathias Børsting
69
==PAGE:84==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 10
Figure 51: Entry 1
Figure 52: Entry 2
Figure 53: Entry 3
70
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:85==
Technical University of Denmark
1H NMR from table 10
Figure 54: Entry 1
Figure 55: Entry 2
Figure 56: Entry 3
Section C
Mathias Børsting
71
==PAGE:86==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from ﬁgure 24
Ru-1
Figure 57: 1 ml water
Figure 58: 2 ml water
Figure 59: 3 ml water
72
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:87==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 60: 4 ml water
Figure 61: 10 ml water
Ru-2
Figure 62: 1 ml water
Section C
Mathias Børsting
73
==PAGE:88==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Figure 63: 2 ml water
Figure 64: 3 ml water
Figure 65: 4 ml water
74
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:89==
Technical University of Denmark
Ru-5
Figure 66: Neat reaction
Figure 67: 1 ml water
Figure 68: 2 ml water
Section C
Mathias Børsting
75
==PAGE:90==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Figure 69: 3 ml water
76
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:91==
Technical University of Denmark
1H NMR from table 11
Ru-1
Figure 70: First conversion
Figure 71: Second conversion
Ru-2
Figure 72: First conversion
Section C
Mathias Børsting
77
==PAGE:92==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Figure 73: Second conversion
Ru-4
Figure 74: First conversion
Figure 75: Second conversion
78
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:93==
Technical University of Denmark
Ru-5
Figure 76: First conversion
Figure 77: Second conversion
Section C
Mathias Børsting
79
==PAGE:94==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 12
Figure 78: Entry 1
Figure 79: Entry 2
Figure 80: Entry 3
80
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:95==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 81: Entry 4
Section C
Mathias Børsting
81
==PAGE:96==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
1H NMR from table 13
Figure 82: Entry 4
Figure 83: Entry 5
82
Mathias Børsting
Section C
==PAGE:97==
D
Comparison of 1H NMR of 1,4-PDO
and full conversion reaction
Figure 84: NMR of 1,4-PDO and the sideproduct in a full conversion reaction
(a) 1H NMR standard of 1,4-pentanediol
(b) 1H NMR standard of crude reaction, full conversion
Section D
Mathias Børsting
83
==PAGE:98==
E
Scope of reactions
Hydrogenation reactions: 9.8 mmol scale
84
Mathias Børsting
Section E
==PAGE:99==
Technical University of Denmark
Hydrogenation reactions: 19.6 mmol scale
Section E
Mathias Børsting
85
==PAGE:100==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Water volume investigation
86
Mathias Børsting
Section E
==PAGE:101==
Technical University of Denmark
Catalyst stability investigation
Section E
Mathias Børsting
87
==PAGE:102==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Hydrogenation temperature dependence expe
riments
88
Mathias Børsting
Section E
==PAGE:103==
Technical University of Denmark
Hydrogenation experiments at 10 bar
Section E
Mathias Børsting
89
==PAGE:104==
Biomass Valorisation by Homogeneous Catalysis
Hydrogenation experiments with acid additives
90
Mathias Børsting
Section E
