==PAGE:1==
Scientiﬁc Computing for Tomographic
Imaging with Model Uncertainties
Frederik Hagsholm Pedersen (s153578)
Technical University of Denmark
Faculty: DTU Compute
Master’s Thesis
Main Supervisor: Associate Professor Martin Skovgaard Andersen
Co-supervisor: Senior Researcher Jakob Sauer Jørgensen
February 8, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
X-ray computed tomography (CT) is a non-invasive method for visualizing the internal structure of ob-
jects using projection measurements of X-ray absorption. X-ray CT is used in many diﬀerent scientiﬁc
ﬁelds with the most well known being medical imaging, where it provides an invaluable tool for e.g.
scanning for the presence of malevolent tumors or detecting internal bleeding. X-ray CT also plays a
prominent role in material science, where it can be used to analyze the micro-structure of diﬀerent ma-
terials.
Popular reconstruction methods in X-ray CT are based on idealized models and assumptions that may
not be valid in practice. A common source of model error in X-ray CT is misalignment in the projection
geometry, where the location of e.g. the detector, the center of rotation or the X-ray source is riddled with
uncertainty. This may lead to situations, where the projection geometry in the reconstruction model does
not match the actual projection geometry used in the data-acquisition process. A failure to address this
mismatch during reconstruction results in considerable reconstruction artifacts, which severely decrease
the scientiﬁc or diagnostic value of the reconstruction. Hence having tools to address misalignments in
the projection geometry is of vital importance in X-ray CT.
In this thesis we present two reﬁned reconstruction methods, which explicitly take uncertainty in the
projection geometry into account. Both methods are based on a Bayesian treatment of the X-ray CT
problem, and they determine the reconstruction and the projection geometry jointly. The ﬁrst method
revolves around sampling an ensemble of probable reconstructions and projection geometries from a pos-
terior probability distribution using Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods. This approach allows us to not
only determine point estimates of the reconstruction and projection geometry, but also to quantify their
uncertainty. Quantifying uncertainty in X-ray CT reconstructions has immense scientiﬁc value, since
it allows for more informed conclusions to be made on the basis of the reconstructions. In the second
method the reconstruction artifacts caused by the geometric misalignments are approximated by Gaus-
sian distributions, and the projection geometry is corrected by solving successive convex optimization
problems. This method does not have the explicit uncertainty quantiﬁcation aspect, but it provides a
more scalable method of correcting the projection geometry.
We test the reconstruction methods on both simulated and real tomographic data, and in both cases
we are able to considerably improve the quality of the reconstruction compared to naive reconstruction
methods, which do not take uncertainty in the projection geometry into account.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of Scientiﬁc Computing, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulﬁlment for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering,
Msc Eng. The work comprises 32.5 ECTS points, and was supervised by Associate Professor Martin
Skovgaard Andersen and Senior Researcher Jakob Sauer Jørgensen.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I wish to express my gratitude to a number of people without whom this thesis would not have been
possible. Firstly I thank my supervisors Martin Skovgaard Andersen and Jakob Sauer Jørgensen for
inspiring weekly discussions and valuable input on tomography, optimization and algorithms. I also want
to thank Professor Per Christian Hansen for inviting me to attend inspiring seminars hosted by the
CUQI1 research group. I would also like to thank the whole CUQI group for great discussions regarding
uncertainty quantiﬁcation for inverse problems. Moreover I would like to thank PhD student Nicolaj
Brogaard Riis for sharing his research regarding model errors for X-ray CT, which directly lead to the
development of one of the major algorithms in this thesis.
I would also like to thank Ryan Warr from the University of Manchester for kindly providing a to-
mographic data-set of a lizard head sample.
Finally I want to thank my friends and family for their continued love and support.
1https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/cuqi
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
2
2.1
Linear Inverse Problems - Ill-Posedness and Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Reconstruction Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Projection Geometries and Modelling Errors for X-ray CT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Geometric Model Parameters for Fan-Beam Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Reconstruction Artifacts for Fan-Beam Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
12
3.1
Markov Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Metropolis-Hastings sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Gibbs sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
18
4.1
Bayesian Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Two-Stage Gibbs Sampler for full posterior
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Numerical Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.1
Sampling without Non-Negativity Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.2
Sampling with Non-Negativity Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
29
5.1
Extended Bayesian Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Numerical Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
Full Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.2
Simpliﬁed Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.3
The Curious Case of the Virtual Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.4
Experiments with Alternative Geometries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Model Discrepancy Method
43
6.1
Iterative Reconstruction Algorithm with Model Parameter Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Reconstruction Update Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.2
Model Parameter Update Step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.3
Final Reconstruction Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Numerical experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2.1
Full Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2.2
Virtual Detector Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
55
7.1
MCMC sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.2
Model Discrepancy Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Comparison with Alternative Geometry Alignment Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8
Conclusion and Further Perspectives
66
iv
==PAGE:6==
Introduction
DTU Compute
1
Introduction
Tomographic imaging is a form of computational imaging that is used to synthesize volumetric or cross-
sectional images of an object from a collection of projection images. In X-ray computed tomography
(CT), a set of X-rays is used to reconstruct the internal X-ray absorption of an object based on a math-
ematical model that describes the X-ray image formation. The most well known application of X-ray
CT is in medical imaging, where it provides a non-invasive method of looking at the interior of a patient
for diagnostic purposes [26]. Other applications can be found e.g. in materials- and geoscience, where it
provides a non-destructive way of analyzing the micro structure of materials [9, 15].
Popular reconstruction methods for X-ray CT are based on idealized models and assumptions that may
not always be valid in practice. For example, oversimpliﬁcations of the underlying physics may ignore
crucial nonlinearities, the X-ray source intensity may slowly drift, or the projection geometry (center of
rotation, detector position, X-ray source position etc) may be inaccurate or riddled with uncertainty.
Any mismatch between the actual data acquisition process and the reconstruction model can lead to
tomographic images with severe artifacts that degrade their quality, and hence also their scientiﬁc or
diagnostic value.
In this thesis we will develop reconstruction methods, which can detect and address uncertainties in
the projection geometry for X-ray CT. Correcting for geometric misalignments is crucial for obtaining
high-quality reconstructions. This is especially true for custom experimental setups, where measurements
of the projection geometry are often riddled with uncertainty. In the literature many diﬀerent methods
have been developed to address the geometric misalignment problem. One class of methods is based on
doing a calibration scan, where a specially designed object is scanned, and based on the projection mea-
surements the geometry may be determined, see e.g. [4]. The downside of this approach is that it may
be expensive and time-consuming to perform the required additional measurements. Because of this a
lot of research have been dedicated towards correcting misalignments in the projection geometry without
the need of a calibration scan. A simple brute force way of attacking this problem is by doing a sweep of
geometric conﬁgurations in the reconstruction model, and then choosing the conﬁguration, which yields
the "best" reconstruction based on some quality measure. An obvious downside to this straightforward
approach is that you may need to compute a lot of additional reconstructions to obtain the desired level of
quality, which is computationally demanding. This is especially true if several geometric parameters are
being calibrated simultaneously. For this reason there have been proposed other classes of methods, where
the geometric parameters are determined solely from the recorded projection measurements without the
need to compute additional reconstructions. These methods often take advantage of inherent symmetry
present in the problem. For instance [8] estimates the center of rotation in simple 2D geometries by doing
Fourier analysis in combination with a cross-correlation technique to directly detect center of rotation
misalignment in the recorded data. The advantage of methods that do not require the computation of ad-
ditional reconstructions in the calibration process is that they are often computationally cheap, however
they are highly dependent on the quality of the recorded data, and they may struggle to detect sub-pixel
level misalignments. There also exists methods, where the ﬁnal reconstruction and projection geometry
are jointly determined. For instance in [3] a non-linear least squares optimization problem is formulated
to determine the optimal reconstruction and center of rotation simultaneously. However non-convexity
1
==PAGE:7==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
of the optimization problem necessitates a high-quality initial geometry estimate to obtain a satisfactory
solution. A common theme for all the misalignment correction methods mentioned is that they only give
a point-estimate of the projection geometry, and you have no measure of how (un)certain you are of the
computed estimate.
In this thesis we have developed two diﬀerent methods, which treat the problem from a Bayesian perspec-
tive, and they are both in the group of computing the reconstruction simultaneously with the corrected
geometry. Our approaches diﬀer from standard 2D calibration methods in that we work with a more
complicated parametrization of the projection geometry, which potentially allows us to detect and cor-
rect more complicated misalignments in the geometry, compared to methods solely focusing on a single
parameter e.g.
the center of rotation.
The ﬁrst method samples reconstructions and projection ge-
ometries jointly from a posterior probability distribution using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods.
This method yields an ensemble of probable reconstructions and projection geometries, so
we not only ﬁnd point estimates of both, but we are also able to quantify the uncertainty in both the
reconstruction and the projection geometry, which has great scientiﬁc value. The additional uncertainty
information comes at the cost of increased computational eﬀort compared to more simple misalignment
correction methods. For the second method the error caused by the mismatched projection geometry is
approximated using Gaussian distributions, and the geometry is corrected by solving successive convex
optimization problems. This method does not give quite the same level of uncertainty quantiﬁcation of
the estimated geometry, however it is more scalable for higher dimensional inverse problems, while still
working on very general X-ray CT setups.
The thesis is organized as follows: In chapter 2 we describe X-ray CT as a linear inverse problem,
introduce the geometric model parameters, and describe the reconstruction artifacts caused by geometric
misalignments in the reconstruction model. Chapter 3 gives a brief introduction to MCMC methods,
speciﬁcally the Metropolis-Hastings and the Gibbs sampler, which serves as the core tools for the ﬁrst
algorithm we will present. In chapter 4 we study the X-ray CT problem without modelling errors from
a Bayesian perspective, and develop a Gibbs sampler for sampling reconstructions from the posterior
distribution. Chapter 5 extends the methods from chapter 4 to incorporate uncertainty in the geometric
model parameters, where we include a Metropolis-Hastings step in the Gibbs sampler to sample the geo-
metric parameters. In chapter 6 we develop an alternative algorithm based on Gaussian approximations
of the reconstruction model error. We test the developed algorithms on a real tomographic data-set from
a lizard-head sample in chapter 7. Finally in chapter 8 we give a short conclusion and discuss further
perspectives.
2
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
In this chapter, we give an introduction to X-ray CT. Firstly we give a brief introduction to general
discrete linear inverse problems from a classical perspective of ill-posedness and regularization. Secondly
we frame the X-ray CT problem as a discrete linear inverse problem. Finally we cover common 2D X-ray
CT conﬁgurations, and introduce the geometric model parameters, which are the source of the model
errors that will be investigated in subsequent chapters.
2
==PAGE:8==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
2.1
Linear Inverse Problems - Ill-Posedness and Regularization
For linear inverse problems we have a model on the form
b = Ax + ϵ,
where A ∈RM×N is the linear forward operator, b ∈RM is the data, x ∈RN is the unknown, and
ϵ ∈RM is (unknown) noise. The inverse problem is to compute x given observed data b. On the surface
the problem does not look too daunting, as we "only" need to solve a system of linear equations. However
diﬃculties arise if the problem is ill-posed. In [18] Hadamard gave the following conditions for a problem
to be well-posed:
• The problem must have a solution.
• The solution must be unique.
• The solution must depend continuously on the data.
For linear systems of equations there are three diﬀerent scenarios for the number of solutions: No solutions,
one unique solution, or inﬁnitely many solutions. For instance a consistent underdetermined, M < N,
system has a non-trivial null-space, which means we have inﬁnitely many solutions. On the other hand
for an overdetermined, M > N, linear system, the measured noisy data b may not be in the column space
of A, which means we have no solutions. Hence the uniqueness and existence criteria may fail to hold. To
address this, we instead look for approximate least squares solutions by solving the well known normal
equations
AT Ax = AT b,
(1)
which have a unique solution if A has full column rank. The most common cause for concern for linear
inverse problems is the stability condition. The stability condition essentially says that small perturba-
tions in the data should lead to small changes in the solution. However for linear inverse problems this
fails to hold if the forward operator A is ill-conditioned. Keeping the normal equations (1) in mind, we
assume that A is square and invertible. Writing
b = btrue + ∆b = Axtrue + ∆b,
where xtrue is the ground truth, and ∆b is an (unknown) perturbation of the right hand side due to noise,
the naive solution to our inverse problem is
A−1b = A−1btrue + A−1∆b = xtrue + ∆x.
It is the inverted noise term ∆x = A−1∆b that is the cause of our problems if the forward operator A is
ill-conditioned. The condition number for square and invertible matrices is deﬁned as
κ(A) = ||A−1||2||A||2.
A standard result in numerical analysis, see e.g. [14], states that
||∆x||2
||x||2
≤κ(A)||∆b||2
||b||2
,
Hence if the condition number is very large, then small perturbations of the data may result in very large
perturbations of the solution, which means we fail to satisfy the third Hadamard condition. The common
3
==PAGE:9==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
strategy to address this issue is to regularize the solution. This is done by solving optimization problems
on the form
min
x
T (x, b) + αR(x)
s.t.
x ∈C,
(2)
where T (x, b) is the data-ﬁtting term and R(x) is the regularization term, C is a set of constraints, we
want our solution to satisfy, and the parameter α ≥0 is the regularization parameter, which controls how
much weight we put on each term. If α is too small we put too much emphasis on the data-ﬁtting term,
which means we get solutions dominated by inverted noise if the problem is ill-posed. On the other hand
if α is too large we introduce signiﬁcant bias to the solution, and the solution loses meaning in the context
of the inverse problem we aim to solve. In general choosing the "optimal" regularization parameter is
a matter of testing a range of diﬀerent values, and picking the one that yields the "best" solution by
some (subjective) quality measure. There does exist automated methods of choosing the regularization
parameter based on statistical or heuristic measures, see e.g. [19] for a thorough investigation of diﬀerent
methods, but in general these are intractable for large inverse problems. We will now present the data-
ﬁtting and regularization terms that we use throughout the thesis. As discussed earlier for the data-ﬁtting
term we use least-squares
T (x, b) = ||Ax −b||2
2.
For the regularization term we use either Tikhonov type:
R(x) = ||Dx||2
2,
where D ∈RN×N is either the identity matrix or a ﬁnite diﬀerence approximation of a derivative operator.
Alternatively we use a Total Variation (TV) regularization term.
We describe TV in the context of
image reconstruction, where it has gained a lot of popularity due to its ability to preserve contrast and
sharp edges, while still suppressing high frequency inverted noise [16]. For discrete problems the TV
regularization term is
R(x) =
N
X
i=1
||Dix||2,
where Dix ∈R2 is the gradient of pixel i. TV is not diﬀerentiable, which makes solving (2) more involved.
To circumvent this we instead use a smooth approximation of TV, where we replace ||Dix||2 in the sum
with
φρ(Dix),
φρ(y) :=
q
y2
1 + y2
2 + ρ,
y ∈R2,
where ρ > 0 is a smoothing parameter. Naturally this means we do not solve the TV regularized problem
exactly, however it is now diﬀerentiable, which allows us to use a larger set of methods, when solving (2).
Letting g denote the sum of the data-ﬁtting and regularization term of (2), the gradient, ∇g, is Lip-
schitz continuous if there exists a constant K such that
||∇g(x) −∇g(y)||2 ≤K||x −y||2,
for all
x, y ∈RN.
One can show that with our choices of data-ﬁtting and regularization terms the gradient of g is Lipschitz
continuous. This means we can solve (2) by using an accelerated gradient method with a ﬁxed step
size determined by the Lipschitz constant of the gradient [10]. If we have non-trivial constraints, for
instance non-negativity constraints, we add a projection step in the accelerated gradient method. The
4
==PAGE:10==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
Algorithm 1 Accelerated Projected Gradient method for solving (2)
Input: Initial condition x0; Number of iterations Ngrad; Lipschitz Constant K.
Let y1 = x0 and t1 = 1
for k = 1 to Ngrad do
Projected Gradient Step
xk = PC(yk −1
K ∇g(yk))
Momentum Step
tk+1 =
1+√
1+4t2
k
2
yk+1 = xk + tk−1
tk+1 (xk −xk−1)
end for
projection step involves evaluating the projection operator PC(x) = argmin
u∈C
||u−x||2. For completeness
the algorithm, we use to solve (2) is described in Algorithm 1.
In this section we have analyzed discrete inverse problems from a classical perspective of needing to
address the stability concerns of the solutions to perturbations in the data, which motivates the problem
(2). In chapter 4 we will analyze the inverse problem from a Bayesian perspective. In the Bayesian setting
solutions are no longer point estimates, but instead high dimensional probability distributions. In the
Bayesian analysis, we will also see how the data-ﬁtting and regularization term can be nicely interpreted
by notions of likelihood and prior distributions.
2.2
Reconstruction Model
Tomography is the science of obtaining reconstructions from projection data. We focus on the X-ray CT
problem, where projection data is acquired by measuring the intensity of X-rays after they have been
attenuated by penetrating an object. The key idea is that diﬀerent parts of the object have diﬀerent at-
tenuation coeﬃcients, which determine how much the X-rays are attenuated, and the goal is to determine
the attenuation coeﬃcients of the object from the projection data.
Let D = [−a, a]2 be a square domain in R2, where our object is located, and let f : D →R be a
(non-negative) function, which represents the attenuation coeﬃcients of the object. If we let R denote
an X-ray through the object, we can relate the initial intensity, I0, and the intensity after penetration of
the object, IR, using Lambert-Beers law:
IR = I0 exp(−
Z
R
f(t)dt).
Since intensities are positive, we may take the logarithm on each side and rearrange to obtain
−log
IR
I0

=
Z
R
f(t)dt,
(3)
where we denote the quantity on the left as a projection data-point, which is the result of a line integral
through the object. It is well known that certain classes of functions (belonging to a Schwartz space) on
a 2D domain can be perfectly reconstructed given a full set of line integrals (i.e. using all possible ori-
entations of rays through the object) by utilizing the inverse-Radon transform [21]. We will now explain
how to discretize (3) to obtain a discrete linear inverse problem.
5
==PAGE:11==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
We discretize the domain D into an n × n uniform pixel grid with square pixels of side length 2a/n,
and we make the assumption that f is constant in each pixel (k, l) with a value fkl. Letting Rpixel denote
the set of pixels that the X-ray R intersects, the integral is then given as the sum
X
(k,l)∈Rpixel
fkl∆Rkl,
where ∆Rkl denotes the length of the ray inside the pixel (k, l). We illustrate the discretization procedure
in Figure 1 on a small 6 × 6 pixel grid.
Figure 1: Illustration of discretization of X-ray CT problem for a single X-ray.
The red pixels are the pixels, which are intersected by the ray, which comprises
the set Rpixel.
It is the attenuation coeﬃcients fkl that are the unknowns of the system, and for each X-ray R we
have an equation
X
(k,l)∈Rpixel
fkl∆Rkl = −log
IR
I0

,
which indicates that we have a linear system of equations for our unknown attenuation coeﬃcients. To
obtain a more natural notation for this linear system of equations, we let N = n2 and introduce the
vector of unknown attenuation coeﬃcients x ∈RN, where the elements xj are given by
xj = fkl,
j = (l −1)n + k,
which corresponds to stacking the elements of the 2D pixel grid into a vector. Assuming we have M total
X-rays, denoted by R(i), i = 1, ..., M, we can deﬁne a matrix A ∈RM×N, with the elements
aij =



∆R(i)
j ,
j ∈R(i)
pixel
0,
otherwise
6
==PAGE:12==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
Finally deﬁning b ∈RM, where bi = −log
 IR(i)
I0

, we have
b = Ax.
Hence the X-ray CT problem can be formulated as a linear inverse problem, where we are given (noisy)
measurements of the projection data b, and the goal is to ﬁnd the unknown attenuation coeﬃcients x.
In the next section we describe common X-ray CT projection geometries, and introduce the geometric
parameters which are the source of modelling error that will be analyzed in later chapters.
2.3
Projection Geometries and Modelling Errors for X-ray CT
X-ray CT setups are comprised of an X-ray source and a detector rotating around the object to obtain
projection measurements at diﬀerent projection angles. The detector is made up of individual detector
pixels, which measure the incoming X-ray intensity. Assuming a setup, where the detector has p detector-
pixels, and we do measurements for m diﬀerent projection angles, the quantity p · m is the total number
of projection data-points, and it corresponds to the total number of X-rays, M, in the reconstruction
model described in the previous section.
The most common 2D X-ray CT conﬁgurations are parallel-beam and fan-beam, which are shown in
Figure 2. For parallel-beam we have one X-ray source for every detector pixel, and all the X-rays run
in parallel for each projection angle. Due to symmetry it is only necessary to record projection data for
angles in the interval [0, 180] degrees. For fan-beam the X-rays diverge from a single source. Here we
do not have the same symmetry as in parallel-beam, so we generally need to record projections in the
interval [0, 360] degrees to ensure that enough information has been captured for accurate reconstruction.
Figure 2: Illustration of parallel-beam (left) and fan-beam (right) projection
geometry for a single projection angle. The square represents the object domain,
and the thick black line represents the detector containing detector pixels, that
measure the incoming X-ray intensity. The angle that the detector makes with
the horizontal line is the projection angle.
7
==PAGE:13==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
From a geometric model error perspective the most interesting geometry is the fan-beam geometry,
since here more parameters are needed to completely specify the geometry. Hence going forward we focus
exclusively on fan-beam geometry. In the next section we characterize the diﬀerent geometric model
parameters, we need to specify the projection geometry, and illustrate the reconstruction artifacts arising
if we compute reconstructions using mismatched reconstruction models.
2.3.1
Geometric Model Parameters for Fan-Beam Geometry
For each projection angle the 2D fan-beam projection geometry is characterized by six parameters: The
location of the center of the detector, the location of the X-ray source, and the length and orientation
of the detector. However throughout the thesis, we assume that the length of the detector is a known
quantity, which does not need to be estimated. This is a fair assumption, since this quantity is generally
known with a very high level of accuracy from the manufacturer. Furthermore we will argue shortly that
the orientation of the detector can be omitted by applying an appropriate rotation to the system. This
leaves the detector center, D, and the X-ray source location, S, which are each characterized by two
coordinates in the plane. To describe it quantitatively, we deﬁne a coordinate system, where the origin
is located in the center of rotation, and the x-axis is parallel to the detector, see Figure 3. The center
of rotation represents the point that the detector and source rotates around for the diﬀerent projection
angles.
Figure 3: Fan-beam geometry with model parameters. The red square denotes
the square domain, where the object is located, and the origin C is the center
of rotation. The full black line is the detector with center D, and xd and yd
are the horizontal and vertical oﬀsets respectively. S is the location of the X-
ray source, where xs and ys are the horizontal and vertical oﬀsets respectively.
The black striped lines show the edges of the X-ray fan, and we have omitted
showing individual rays for clarity.
It is the geometric parameters xd, yd, xs, and ys that are the sources of the model error we focus on in
8
==PAGE:14==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
this thesis. Note that we make the convention that ys is a positive quantity, so the source has coordinates
S = (xs, −ys) in our coordinate system. The assumption that the center of rotation goes through the
origin does not make our model any less general, since a change in the center of rotation simply amounts
to a translation of the detector and source. Now one could argue that we are missing one parameter:
The orientation of the detector, which is the angle that the detector makes with the x-axis. However if
the detector is tilted ω degrees with respect to the x-axis, we could apply a rotation to the coordinate
system (and the object) to end up in the same situation, which is depicted in Figure 3. Hence we do
not consider the orientation of the detector as a variable. Note that this invariance of the detector-tilt
hinges on the assumption that the X-ray source intensity is uniform in all directions. To generate the
forward operator A for a given projection geometry we use the Astra-toolbox [2, 1], which allows you
to do completely custom geometries. Additionally the toolbox does the forward- and back-projections
(matrix-vector product with A and AT respectively) without explicitly forming the matrix A, which saves
memory for large problems.
A data-set with all projection measurements is called a sinogram, and in Figure 4 we show the Shepp-
Logan phantom and the resulting computed sinogram. The phantom is on the rectangular domain [−1, 1]2
(arbitrary units) discretized into a 512 × 512 grid. The data is simulated using the following projection
geometry: The detector is 10.5 units wide, and we have 512 · 1.5 = 768 detector pixels. We simulate 360
projections, where the ﬁrst angle is at 0 degrees, and we do 1 degree increment per projection. Finally
we use the geometric parameters xd = 0, yd = 10, xs = 0 and ys = 4.
100
200
300
400
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Detector pixel
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Projection Angle
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Figure 4: Example of simulated sinogram data for the Shepp-Logan phantom.
Left: Shepp-Logan phantom. Right: Simulated sinogram based on the Shepp-
Logan phantom. The geometric model parameters are xs = 0, ys = 4, xd = 0
and yd = 10.
9
==PAGE:15==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
2.3.2
Reconstruction Artifacts for Fan-Beam Geometry
In this thesis we think of our projection geometry (and by extension the forward operator A) as being
parametrized by the geometric model parameters xs, ys, xd, and yd.
Using a reconstruction model,
where the geometric model parameters does not match the true parameters used to acquire/simulate the
data, will result in reconstruction artifacts. In this section we will present reconstructions with various
reconstruction artifacts caused by mismatches of diﬀerent geometric parameters. We use the simulated
noise free data from Figure 4. For the reconstruction models we change the geometric parameters from
the true values, and compute reconstructions by solving a TV regularized least squares problem with
non-negativity constraints using Algorithm 1. The resulting reconstructions are shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Illustration of reconstruction artifacts using TV regularization with
non-negativity. The top left reconstruction is the TV reconstruction using the
true model (xtrue
s
= 0, ytrue
s
= 4, xtrue
d
= 0 and ytrue
d
= 10). For the other
reconstructions the title states the model parameter(s) that was changed from
the true value. The lower right reconstruction has parameters xs = 0.05, ys =
4.5, xd = 0.1 and yd = 11.
Errors in the horizontal oﬀset (xd and xs) parameters cause misalignment artifacts, which are es-
pecially noticeable on the boundary of the phantom, and around the interior ellipses.
On the other
hand errors in the vertical oﬀset (yd and ys) parameters predominately consist of changing the size of
the reconstruction at least for this particular geometry setup. In chapter 5 we will conduct numeri-
cal experiments with alternative projection geometries, where errors in the vertical parameters cause
10
==PAGE:16==
X-ray Computed Tomography with Modeling Errors
DTU Compute
other types of reconstruction artifacts. When both horizontal and vertical oﬀset errors are present, we
see a combination of the artifacts. Finally when we have errors in all the model-parameters, we see a
compounded eﬀect in the artifacts. Naturally for diﬀerent phantoms the reconstruction artifacts would
manifest themselves diﬀerently, which we will see in chapter 7, when we work with real tomographic data.
The methods we present for dealing with model errors in later chapters are computationally expen-
sive, so we run the majority of the simulations on lower dimensional problems. For this reason we show
examples of model error artifacts for lower resolution reconstructions. The sinogram data is generated
with the following geometry: The detector width is 10.5, and we have 1.5 · 128 = 196 detector pixels. We
simulate 180 projections starting at 0 degrees with 2 degree increments. We again use xd = 0, yd = 10,
xs = 0 and ys = 4. We reconstruct the phantom on a [−1, 1]2 domain discretized into a 128 × 128 pixel
grid. The reconstructions with artifacts can be seen in Figure 6. This time we use Tikhonov regulariza-
tion with non-negativity, since it is more indicative of the regularization techniques, we utilize in chapter
5, when we address the errors in the projection geometry using a Bayesian sampling approach.
Figure 6: Illustration of model error artifacts for low resolution phantoms using
Tikhonov regularization with non-negativity. The top left reconstruction is the
Tikhonov reconstruction without model errors (xtrue
s
= 0, ytrue
s
= 4, xtrue
d
= 0
and ytrue
d
= 10). For the other reconstructions the title states the model param-
eter(s) that was changed from the true value. The lower right reconstruction
has parameters xs = 0.1, ys = 5, xd = 0.2 and xd = 11.
11
==PAGE:17==
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
DTU Compute
We see that in general the reconstructions look less sharp, which is natural due to the lower resolution.
If we look closely, we also see some discretization artifacts in the interior due to the coarser discretization.
Otherwise qualitatively the reconstruction artifacts look similar to the high resolution reconstruction.
3
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
From a Bayesian perspective, solutions to inverse problems are high dimensional probability distributions.
To analyze these solutions we need to be able to sample from these distributions.
The tool we use
are MCMC methods, where samples from the desired probability distribution are approximated by a
stationary Markov chain.
In this chapter we give a brief overview of Markov chains, and introduce the Gibbs sampler and
Metropolis-Hastings sampler, which will serve as the main algorithms for generating samples from our
posterior distributions in later chapters. This chapter is only meant as a short informal introduction to
the subject, and we refer to [25] for more details.
3.1
Markov Chains
A stochastic process {Xn}n∈N deﬁned on the probability space (Ω, F, P) has the Markov property if
P(Xn+1 ∈A|Xn, Xn−1, ..., X0) = P(Xn+1 ∈A|Xn),
∀A ∈F.
In words the Markov property says that given the present, the future is independent of the past. Since
the future of the Markov chain only depends on the current state, the stochastic process {Xn}n∈N can
be completely characterized by its transition probabilities. We say that the function K : X × F →R+
is the transition kernel of the Markov chain {Xn}n∈N if
P(Xn+1 ∈A|Xn = x) =
Z
A
K(x, s)ds := K(x, A),
∀A ∈F.
An important concept for Markov chains is stationarity, which is the key property for MCMC sampling.
The probability distribution p is a stationary distribution for the Markov chain if Xn ∼p implies Xn+1 ∼
p. Note in particular that this means if the initial state X0 ∼p, then Xn ∼p for all n ∈N, i.e. the whole
chain is stationary in distribution. Not all Markov chains have a stationary distribution, but a suﬃcient
condition for p to be the stationary distribution for a Markov chain with transition kernel K is that the
following holds [25]:
K(y, x)p(x) = K(x, y)p(y),
∀(x, y).
(4)
This equation is known as the detailed balance equation. In essence detailed balance says that for any
pair of points x and y the probability to jump from a neighbourhood Nx around x to a neighbourhood
Ny around y (where Nx and Ny have equal volume) is equal to the probability of jump from Ny to Nx.
The MCMC strategy for sampling from a probability distribution p is the following: Construct a Markov
chain, whose stationary distribution is exactly p.
In practice this revolves around algorithms, which
generate a Markov chain, where the transition kernel satisﬁes (4) for the desired probability density p.
Before we present concrete MCMC methods, we brieﬂy touch on the limiting behavior of Markov chains.
12
==PAGE:18==
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
DTU Compute
When we use MCMC methods to generate Markov chains {Xn}n∈N with the desired stationary distri-
bution, we can not expect that the initial state X0 ∼p, since p is exactly the distribution, we aim to
draw samples from. Instead we must rely on limiting properties of Markov chains, which guarantee that
a Markov chain converges to its stationary distribution regardless of the initial distribution of X0 under
certain assumptions. These assumptions are
• Aperiodicity: The probability of the transition K(x, x) is non-zero for any state x.
• Irreducibility: Given suﬃciently many transitions it is possible to reach any state y starting at any
state x.
See [25] for more details. The initial period, where the chain is not stationary, is known as the transient
period.
When analyzing samples generated using an MCMC method, the samples generated in the
transient period are removed, which is known as doing burn-in of the Markov chain.
3.2
Metropolis-Hastings sampler
The samples {yk}k∈N generated by Algorithm 2 constitutes a Markov chain, whose stationary distribution
is p [25].
Algorithm 2 Metropolis-Hastings
Input: Initial y0 satisfying p(y0) > 0; Proposal density q(by|y); Number of samples Nsamp.
for k = 0 to Nsamp do
Sample by ∼q(by|yk−1).
Compute acceptance probability: paccept
by|yk−1 := min
n
1,
p(by)
p(yk−1)
q(yk−1|by)
q(by|yk−1)
o
.
Set yk = by with probability paccept
by|yk−1. Otherwise set yk = yk−1.
end for
Algorithm 2 looks very simple, and all we need is the ability to evaluate our probability density
function. This makes it easy to use for very general probability distributions, where we do not have
any prior knowledge on its shape or moments. The biggest obstacle with utilizing Metropolis-Hastings
eﬃciently is choosing an appropriate proposal density q(by|y). Ideally the proposal q should "resemble"
the density p, however if our knowledge of p is poor this is diﬃcult to achieve. We have a lot of freedom in
choosing the proposal density, however the choice has a major impact on the performance of the sampler
with respect to the convergence rate to the stationary distribution. A common choice for the proposal
density, which we will also utilize, is the following:
q(by|y) =
1
√
2πnsn exp

−1
2s2 (by −y)T (by −y)

,
(5)
i.e. a normal distribution N(y, s2I) (I denotes the identity matrix of appropriate dimension). Using this
proposal density in Algorithm 2 the proposed samples are a random walk from the current sample, and
the step-sizes are controlled by the parameter s, which we henceforth refer to as the Metropolis-Hastings
step-size. Additionally this proposal density is symmetric, i.e. it satisﬁes q(by|y) = q(y|by), which means
the acceptance probability simpliﬁes to
paccept
by|yk−1 := min

1,
p(by)
p(yk−1)

.
13
==PAGE:19==
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
DTU Compute
An important quantity to monitor, when sampling using the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, is the ac-
ceptance rate. The acceptance rate is deﬁned as the fraction of proposed samples, which are accepted
(after the burn-in phase). If the acceptance rate is very small, we have very slow convergence, and the
samples tend to be very correlated, with the extreme being an acceptance rate of 0, where we never move
away from the initial sampling point. However a very high acceptance rate is not necessarily desirable
either, since this may be an indication that we only move in a relatively narrow high probability region,
and do not visit the entire distribution. Hence an acceptance rate that is not too high and not too low
is desirable, however quantifying the optimal acceptance rate for a given problem is diﬃcult. Empirical
observations have suggested that an acceptance rate in the region 25 −50% is most eﬃcient [17], so that
serves as our guideline for the numerical experiments in later chapters. Using the proposal density (5),
we can directly control the acceptance rate by tuning the parameter s, since this controls how far away
the proposed samples on average are from the current sample.
We will now illustrate the importance of tuning the proposal density appropriately, when using Metropolis-
Hastings.
We consider a Gaussian mixture model, where we do a mixture of X1 ∼N(0, 0.52) and
X2 ∼N(6, 0.52) with equal mixture proportions. This results in a bi-modal distribution, where the two
modes are separated by a region of very low probability. We use a Metropolis-Hastings sampler with the
Gaussian random walk proposal (5). We test three diﬀerent Metropolis-Hastings step-size parameters to
illustrate how this parameter aﬀects the performance of the sampler. We initialize the sampler at X0 = 0
for each test. The results can be seen in Figure 7.
14
==PAGE:20==
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
DTU Compute
Figure 7: Illustrating the eﬀect of diﬀerent proposal step-sizes on Metropolis-
Hastings sampling performance for bi-modal Gaussian mixture distribution.
The analytical probability density function is shown as the dashed orange line,
and the histogram shows the distribution of 105 samples
For the smallest step size s = 0.1, the samples stay in one mode, since the proposed samples never
move far enough away from the current sample to cross the region of very low probability. For the largest
step size s = 100 we do sample from both modes, however the acceptance rate is very low, which severely
hurts the eﬃciency of the sampler. The step size s = 2 also samples from both modes with a much more
reasonable acceptance rate, and we see that the histogram resembles the true density quite accurately.
3.3
Gibbs sampler
The core MCMC method we utilize in this thesis is the Gibbs sampler. The Gibbs algorithm generate
samples from a joint density function p(y1, y2, ..., yn). For simplicity of exposition we focus on the case
n = 2, however the extension to more dimensions is trivial. The samples yk = (yk
1, yk
2) generated by
Algorithm 3 constitutes a Markov chain with stationary distribution p(y1, y2) [25].
Algorithm 3 exploits the rather remarkable property that all information in the joint density is con-
tained in the conditionals. The samples also have the nice property that the individual chains {yk
1}k∈N
and {yk
2}k∈N are Markov chains on their own [25]. This allows us to analyze properties such as auto-
correlation and convergence of the chain to the desired distribution using only the conditionals. This will
prove quite useful in later chapters, when we want to analyze convergence of the full chain, when we use
the MCMC methods to solve the inverse problem.
15
==PAGE:21==
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
DTU Compute
Algorithm 3 Two-stage Hierarchial Gibbs sampler
Input: Initial y0
2; Number of samples Nsamp.
for k = 1 to Nsamp do
Sample yk
1 ∼p(y1|yk−1
2
)
Sample yk
2 ∼p(y2|yk
1)
Set yk = (yk
1, yk
2).
end for
Note that for the Gibbs sampler, we have an acceptance rate of 1, which on the surface bodes well
for the eﬃciency compared to the Metropolis-Hastings sampler. However it comes at the cost of being
less general, since in order to eﬃciently utilize the Gibbs sampler, some knowledge of the condition-
als is required, and naturally the sampler is most eﬃcient if the conditionals are easily sampled from.
Sometimes the conditionals also require MCMC methods to sample. One could for instance utilize the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to sample some of the conditionals if they are non-standard distributions.
We utilize this in chapter 5, when we sample geometric model parameters using a Metropolis within
Gibbs sampler.
To illustrate some of the properties (and shortcomings) of the two-stage Gibbs sampler, we present a
simple example. Here we use the Gibbs sampler to sample from the distribution
"
y1
y2
#
= Rπ/4Dc
"
x1
x2
#
=
"
cos(π/4)
−sin(π/4)
sin(π/4)
cos(π/4)
# "
1
0
0
c
# "
x1
x2
#
,
"
x1
x2
#
∼N(0, I).
Note that (y1, y2)T is Gaussian, so an MCMC sampler is of course not necessary (or recommended by
any means) in this case, but it is simply to illustrate potential issues that can arise when using the Gibbs
sampler. The parameter c > 0 controls the correlation between y1 and y2, where c = 1 amounts to
zero correlation, and as c approaches 0 the correlation approaches one. Using standard results regarding
conditional Gaussians, we know that the conditional distribution p(y1|y2) (and p(y2|y1)) is Gaussian. The
expectation and variance for the conditional are
E(y1|y2) = E(y1) + cΣ12Σ−1
22 (y2 −E(y2)),
V (y1|y2) = V (y2) −Σ12Σ−1
22 Σ21,
where Σ = Rπ/4D2
cR−π/4 ∈R2×2. Naturally analogue expressions exist for the distribution y2|y1. We
sample from the conditional one dimensional Gaussians using the built-in Matlab function normrnd.
Figure 8 shows 106 samples drawn using a Gibbs sampler for two diﬀerent values of c.
16
==PAGE:22==
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
DTU Compute
c = 0.5
c = 0.001
Figure 8: Illustration of convergence issues, when using Gibbs for highly cor-
related variables. With moderate correlation (c = 0.5) we see that the chain
reaches stationarity, and the samples resemble the true joint distribution. With
very high correlation (c = 10−3) the chain does not reach stationarity, and the
samples do not resemble the true joint distribution. The orange ellipsoids repre-
sent 99.7% conﬁdence intervals. Notice that the ellipsoid for the case c = 10−3
is extremely ﬂat due to the large condition number of the covariance matrix.
For c = 0.5 the chains look stationary, and from the scatter plot the samples are well represented in
the 99.7% conﬁdence ellipsoid. Note that it looks like the 99.7% conﬁdence ellipsoid is too small compared
to the number of samples outside the ellipsoid, but this is simply a graphical consequence of the fact, that
we have drawn a lot of samples. If we count the number of samples inside the ellipsoid, we can verify that
99.7% of the samples are inside. However for c = 10−3 the generated samples do not reﬂect the true joint
distribution. Indeed we see from the contour representing a 99.7% conﬁdence ellipsoid, that we have not
explored the distribution fully even after taking 106 samples. This experiment illustrates an issue with
the Gibbs sampler for sampling from joint distributions with highly correlated variables. The problem
is revealed in the individual y1 and y2 chains. As expected we see very high correlation between y1 and
17
==PAGE:23==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
y2, however we also see high auto-correlation within y1 and y2, which is not reﬂective of a Gaussian
distribution. The issue is that given yk−1 = [yk−1
1
, yk−1
2
]T the sampled yk
1 from Algorithm 3 will (with a
very high probability) be very close to yk−1
2
, because of the very ﬂat contours of this distribution, and
then when we sample yk
2 this will again be close to yk
1. This results in high auto-correlation, and slow
convergence of the chain. We will encounter potential issues with high correlation in chapter 5, when we
sample the reconstruction and geometric model parameters for the X-ray CT problem.
4
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
In this section we analyze and solve the X-ray CT problem without model errors from a Bayesian per-
spective. We do this by developing a Gibbs sampler, which can sample from the full posterior probability
distribution, when we assume a Gaussian prior for x and Gaussian measurement errors. This method of
treating inverse problems from a Bayesian sampling perspective uses a similar approach outlined in [11].
4.1
Bayesian Model
Without geometric model errors, we consider the following model for our linear inverse problem
b = Ax + ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, λ−1I),
(6)
where A ∈RM×N is the deterministic forward operator, b ∈RM is the measured noisy sinogram, x ∈RN
contains the unknown attenuation coeﬃcients, and ϵ ∈RM is the unknown measurement noise with
unknown precision (inverse variance) parameter λ. Keeping in line with the Bayesian viewpoint, x is a
random variable with prior density p(x). The prior takes into account any knowledge we may have of the
solution beforehand. We use a Gaussian prior x|δ ∼N(0, (δL)−1), where L is a known precision matrix,
and δ is an unknown precision parameter. The main motivation behind choosing the Gaussian prior is
that it leads to a closed-form expression for the posterior density, which makes the sampling procedure
more tractable. The matrix L ∈RN×N contains information about the correlation structure between the
elements of x, and the precision parameter δ controls the strength of the correlation. A simple choice
is L = I, which corresponds to the prior assumption that the individual pixels in the reconstruction
are completely uncorrelated. This assumption is obviously not true for any reasonable image, since we
expect that there is some structure present.
However since we do not have an estimate of the true
covariance structure of x the choice L = I may be reasonable. Other common choices of L are ﬁnite
diﬀerence approximations of derivative operators. The one we utilize in this thesis is a ﬁnite diﬀerence
approximation of the 2D Laplacian operator with zero boundary conditions. Following [11] this operator
can be represented by the matrix
L = I ⊗L1D + L1D ⊗I,
L1D =


2
−1
0
· · ·
0
−1
2
−1
...
...
0
...
...
...
0
...
...
−1
2
−1
0
· · ·
0
−1
2


∈Rn×n,
(7)
where we remember that n2 = N. The zero boundary conditions ensure that L is symmetric positive
deﬁnite (SPD), such that the prior distribution p(x|δ) is proper.
From a statistical perspective this
18
==PAGE:24==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
precision matrix corresponds to the assumption that each pixel only has non-zero correlation with its
neighbour pixels. To be more precise deﬁne the pixel neighbour set ∂kl := {(k −1, l), (k + 1, l), (k, l −
1), (k, l + 1)}. Notice that the neighbour-set for the boundary pixels require boundary conditions, which
we again assume are zero boundary conditions. Then one can show that the following assumption on
each pixel:
xkl|∂kl ∼N((xk−1,l + xk+1,l + xk,l−1 + xk,l+1)/4, (4δ)−1),
corresponds to x|δ ∼N(0, (δL)−1), where L is given as in (7), see [11] for more details. In words this
assumption simply states that given all neighbour pixels, the mean is the average of the neighbour-pixels
and the variance is controlled by the precision parameter δ. This is a pretty reasonable assumption for
images, since we generally expect that neighbouring pixels have similar pixel-values.
Staying in the Bayesian framework the precision variables λ and δ are also stochastic with gamma
distributed priors λ ∼Gamma(γλ, βλ) and δ ∼Gamma(γδ, βδ), where γλ and γδ are shape parameters,
and βλ and βδ are rates. This yields the densities
p(λ) = βγλ
λ λγλ−1 exp (−βλλ) /Γ(γλ),
p(δ) = βγδ
δ δγδ−1 exp (−βδδ) /Γ(γδ),
where Γ is the gamma function. The reason that the gamma distribution has been chosen as prior, will
become apparent, when we obtain the expression for the posterior distribution.
The solution to the inverse problem from a Bayesian perpective is a probability distribution of our
unknowns (x, λ, δ) conditioned on the observed data b. Hence the goal is to obtain an expression for the
full joint posterior distribution p(x, λ, δ|b). We ﬁnd an expression for the full posterior by utilizing Bayes’
law:
p(x, λ, δ|b) ∝p(b|x, λ)p(x, λ, δ).
The ﬁrst is factor is the likelihood distribution p(b|x, λ), that tells us the likelihood of observing the data
b given a realization of the unknowns (x, λ) (note that δ is omitted here by independence). This can be
thought of as the Bayesian analogue to the data-ﬁtting term in (2). The second factor is the prior term,
described earlier in this section, which can be thought of as the Bayesian analogue to the regularization
term in (2).
From (6) the likelihood is Gaussian b|x, λ ∼N(Ax, λ−1I), which implies
p(b|λ, x) ∝λM/2 exp

−λ
2 ||Ax −b||2
2

.
Using the law of conditional probability and independece of λ and δ, we have
p(x, λ, δ) = p(λ, δ)p(x|λ, δ) = p(λ)p(δ)p(x|δ).
Combining all expressions for the likelihood and priors, we ﬁnd
p(x, λ, δ|b) ∝p(b|x, λ)p(x|δ)p(λ)p(δ)
∝λM/2+γλ−1δN/2+γλ−1 exp

−λ
2 ||Ax −b||2
2 −δ
2xT Lx −βλλ −βδδ

.
(8)
19
==PAGE:25==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
From a Bayesian viewpoint it is this posterior distribution, which is the solution to our inverse problem,
so now the objective is to develop techniques to eﬃciently sample from this distribution. With these
samples in hand, we can compute quantities such as the posterior mean of the x-samples as our point
estimate for the reconstruction, as well as associated pixelwise credibility bounds for quantifying the
uncertainty of the reconstruction. We also obtain samples of δ and λ, which can be used to analyze the
convergence of the full chain, as will be explained in more detail in the next section.
Before we present the sampler, we brieﬂy explain, how the precision variables λ and δ are related to
the classical regularization parameter α from (2). Given realizations of δ and λ, the posterior takes the
form
p(x|λ, δ, b) ∝exp

−λ
2 ||Ax −b||2
2 −δ
2xT Lx

.
Maximizing the posterior is equivalent to minimizing the negative logarithm of the posterior, which means
the maximum apriori probability (MAP) solution can be obtained by solving the following Tikhonov
optimization problem:
min
x
λ||Ax −b||2
2 + δxT Lx.
Dividing through with λ, and writing L = DT D (which exists since L is assumed to be SPD) this is
equivalent to
min
x
||Ax −b||2
2 + α||Dx||2
2,
α := δ
λ.
(9)
Thus when we obtain samples of λ and δ, we also obtain diﬀerent samples of the regularization parameter
α, which illustrates well how this Bayesian sampling perspective regularizes the solution. However when
going the Bayesian sampling path, we not only obtain the regularized point estimate for the unknown x,
we also get important information regarding the uncertainty of the estimate, which tells us how much
we can trust the reconstruction. This is obviously important in real world applications, where the object
we wish to reconstruct, is truly unknown. Indeed one can easily imagine scenarios in e.g. medical X-ray
CT, where reconstructions accompanied by uncertainty measures allow for a diagnosis to be made on a
more informed background. As we will see the biggest limitation of the Bayesian sampling method is the
computational cost of sampling from the high dimensional posterior distribution.
4.2
Two-Stage Gibbs Sampler for full posterior
The two-stage Gibbs sampler is the natural choice, since our variables partition as [x, (λ, δ)], and our
conditional distributions have very nice properties, due to our choice of priors. Remembering Algorithm
3, we need to sample from the conditional distributions p(x|λ, δ, b) and p(λ, δ|x, b) to get a sample from
the full posterior using a Gibbs sampler. For the conditional distribution p(λ, δ|x, b), we ﬁrst notice that
since λ and δ are conditionally independent, we can simply sample from p(λ|x, b) and p(δ|x, b) individually
to obtain a sample from the conditional joint distribution. From the full posterior distribution (8), we
ﬁnd that
p(λ|x, b) ∝λM/2+γλ−1 exp

−
1
2||Ax −b||2
2 + βλ

λ

,
p(δ|x, b) ∝δN/2+γδ−1 exp

−
1
2xT Lx + βδ

δ

.
20
==PAGE:26==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
Hence we ﬁnd that
λ|x, b ∼Gamma(M/2 + γλ, 1
2||Ax −b||2
2 + βλ),
δ|x, b ∼Gamma(N/2 + γδ, 1
2xT Lx + βδ).
The property that the prior and the conditionals for λ and δ are in the same family of distributions
is known as conjugacy. This is the main reason, we choose the Gamma distribution for the precision
variable priors, since the above conditionals are easily sampled from. Unless otherwise stated, we follow
[11] and choose γλ = γδ = 1 and βλ = βδ = 10−4. With these parameter choices the precision variables
have exponential priors, and since the probability density function of an exponential distribution with
such a low rate is relatively ﬂat this means that the prior is not very informative. That is we do not
assume much knowledge of where the parameters lie beforehand.
For the conditional p(x|λ, δ, b), we ﬁnd from the full posterior:
p(x|λ, δ, b) ∝exp

−1
2(λ||Ax −b||2
2 + δxT Lx)

.
Doing straightforward (but tedious) calculations one can show
λ||Ax −b||2
2 + δxT Lx = (x −µ)T (λAT A + δL)(x −µ) −bT (A(λAT A + δL)−1AT −λ)b,
where µ := (λAT A + δL)−1λAT b.
Hence the conditional distribution for x is Gaussian x|λ, δ, b ∼
N(µ, (λAT A + δL)−1).
The most intuitive way to sample from this distribution is to ﬁrst compute
a Cholesky factorization of the SPD matrix (λAT A+δL) = RT R. Then the solution to the linear system
RT Rx = λAT b + RT ξ,
ξ ∼N(0, I),
has the desired distribution. Indeed we have
x = (RT R)−1λAT b + R−1ξ = (λAT A + δL)−1λAT b + R−1ξ = µ + R−1ξ,
which yields
E(x) = E(µ + R−1ξ) = µ,
E((x −µ)(x −µ)T ) = E(R−1ξξT R−T ) = R−1R−T = (λAT A + δL)−1.
However using this method in a two-stage Gibbs solver for sampling the x-conditional requires the com-
putation of a new Cholesky factorization for each sample, since λ and δ change each iteration.
For
large inverse problems this is prohibitively expensive, so we must turn to other methods to sample this
Gaussian. These methods revolve around solving the linear equation
(λAT A + δL)x = λAT b + λ1/2AT ξM + δ1/2DT ξN,
ξM ∼N(0, IM),
ξN ∼N(0, IN),
(10)
where ξN and ξM have dimensions N and M respectively, and L = DT D (which exists since L is assumed
SPD). The solution
x = µ + (λAT A + δL)−1(λ1/2AT ξM + δ1/2DT ξN)
(11)
is a linear combination of independent Gaussians, so it is also Gaussian. Furthermore it satisﬁes E(x) = µ
and
E((x −µ)(x −µ)T ) = (λAT A + δL)−1E((λ1/2AT ξM + δ1/2DT ξN)(λ1/2AT ξM + δ1/2DT ξN)T )(λAT A + δL)−1
= (λAT A + δL)−1(λAT A + δL)(λAT A + δL)−1 = (λAT A + δL)−1,
21
==PAGE:27==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
so an exact solution to (10) does indeed yield a sample of the desired Gaussian distribution. However
as the dimension of the inverse problem increases it becomes too expensive to solve (10) using direct
methods for every sample. Instead we compute approximate solutions of (10) using an iterative solver.
To this end, we note that solving (10) is equivalent to solving the following regularized least squares
optimization problem:
min
x
λ
2 ||Ax −b −λ−1/2ξM||2
2 + δ
2||Dx −δ−1/2ξN||2
2,
(12)
which can be easily realized by taking the gradient of the objective function and setting it to 0. We use
an accelerated gradient method with ﬁxed step size as described in Algorithm 1 to solve (12). For very
large problems running this algorithm to convergence for every sample is too expensive, if we want a lot
of samples. For this reason we resort to running the algorithm for a ﬁxed number of iterations for each
sample, and then stop regardless of whether the algorithm has converged or not. This has the conse-
quence, that we can not theoretically guarantee to have obtained a sample from the desired Gaussian
distribution, and in turn the convergence of the whole Gibbs sampled Markov chain to the desired sta-
tionary distribution can not be ensured. However notice in (10) that for each Gaussian sample, we need
to solve linear systems with diﬀerent perturbed right hand sides. Hence depending on the conditioning
of the problem and the size of the perturbation, the solution to diﬀerent perturbations may be "close" to
each other. Thus when we apply the accelerated gradient method to solve (12) in each Gibbs iteration,
we use the previously sampled x as the initial condition in an eﬀort to remedy the concerns that the
truncated iterations cause.
We now have all the neccessary parts needed to sample from the full posterior using a Gibbs sampler,
which is summarized in Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 Gibbs Sampler for Full Posterior without Modelling Errors
Input: Initial reconstruction x0 ∈RN; Number of accelerated gradient iterations Ngrad; Number of
Gibbs samples Nsamp; Sinogram data b ∈RM; Gamma prior parameters γλ, γδ, βλ, βδ; Forward
operator A.
for k = 1 to Nsamp do
Sample precision variables from conjugate Gamma distributions
λk|x, b ∼Gamma(M/2 + γλ, 1
2||Axk−1 −b||2
2 + βλ)
δk|x, b ∼Gamma(N/2 + γδ, 1
2(xk−1)T Lxk−1 + βδ)
Sample x-conditional from approximate Gaussian distribution using Ngrad accelerated gradient iter-
ations on (12) with initial condition x[0] = xk−1
xk|λk, δk, b ∼N(µk, (λkAT A + δkL)−1),
µk := (λkAT A + δkL)−1λkAT b
end for
We sample from the gamma distributions using the built-in Matlab function gamrnd. To initialize
Algorithm 4 we need an initial reconstruction x0. To obtain this we compute MAP estimates using (9)
for diﬀerent regularization parameters using the accelerated gradient method to convergence, and then
we pick the reconstruction, which qualitatively looks the best.
As mentioned earlier the individual conditionals sampled from Algorithm 4 are Markov chains themselves.
This means that we can do analysis on the one-dimensional λ and δ chains to monitor convergence for the
22
==PAGE:28==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
full joint posterior. We use the Geweke test [13] to assess convergence of the chains, and we now brieﬂy
explain the implementation using the δ-chain as an example (calculations on the λ-chain are completely
analogue). Assuming K samples after burn-in, we let Kn1 = ⌊K·n1
100 ⌋and Kn2 = ⌊K·n2
100 ⌋, and compute
the empirical means of the sub-chains:
δn1 =
1
Kn1
Kn1
X
k=1
δk
and
δn2 =
1
K −Kn2
K
X
k=Kn2+1
δk.
(13)
The Geweke test consists of testing the null-hypothesis that δn1 = δn2. The test statistic is
RGeweke =
δn1 −δn2
q
ˆSn1(0)/Kn1 + ˆSn2(0)/(K −Kn2)
,
(14)
where ˆSn1(0) and ˆSn2(0) are spectral variance estimates, see e.g.
[24], for the chains {λk}
Kn1
k=1 and
{δk}K
k=Kn2+1 respectively. The test statistic in (14) looks akin to test statistics for unpaired two-sided
mean testing. In fact if the full chain has converged, then we have RGeweke ∼N(0, 1) as K →∞[13].
Notice that the Geweke test only tests the hypothesis that the means of the two sub-chains are equal,
which is a neccessary, but not suﬃcient condition for convergence of the full chain. Hence the Geweke
test can only be used to inform that the chain has not converged, but it can not be used to verify that
the chain has converged. This is a signiﬁcant drawback of the test, however the major beneﬁt of the test
is that it is cheap to run, and easy to interpret. Also to our knowledge there does not exist any general
tests for verifying convergence of MCMC chains. For the implementation of the Geweke test, we use the
code provided in [11], and we follow the advice from [13] and use n1 = 10 and n2 = 50 unless otherwise
stated.
Finally we make a remark, which concerns how to incorporate constraints into the x-samples in the
Gibbs sampler. The unknown x is a vector of attenuation coeﬃcients, which are non-negative by nature,
so a natural constraint to incorporate is non-negativity of the x-samples, which was also done for the
MAP solutions computed in chapter 2. A natural way to do this is to replace (12) with the optimization
problem
min
x
λ
2 ||Ax −b −λ−1/2ξM||2
2 + δ
2||Dx −δ−1/2ξN||2
2
s.t.
x ≥0,
(15)
when sampling the conditional x distribution. In Bayesian terms this extension corresponds to using
a stronger prior on x, which can be thought of as a Gaussian, where all the negative probability mass
has been transfered to the boundary of the non-negative orthant. In [12] they show that replacing (12)
with (15) in the Gibbs sampler yields samples from the correct full posterior, if we also change N in the
δ-sample step with the number of non-negative elements in the current x-sample. Again this assumes
that (15) has converged for each iteration, however as mentioned earlier we only use a ﬁxed number of
iterations for each sample. To solve (15) we use an accelerated gradient method with a non-negative
projection step as described in Algorithm 1.
4.3
Numerical Experiments
In this section we perform numerical experiments on simulated data to evaluate the performance of the
Gibbs sampler. We test a variety of diﬀerent priors both with and without non-negativity constraints,
and compare the results.
23
==PAGE:29==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
4.3.1
Sampling without Non-Negativity Constraints
We use the Shepp-Logan phantom as the ground truth. The object is discretized into a 128 × 128 pixel
grid. We use 1.5 · 128 = 196 detector pixels, and we take 180 projections starting at 0 degrees with
2 degree increments for each projection. The geometric parameters used to generate the sinogram are
yd = 10, ys = 4, xd = 0 and xs = 0.
To simulate measurement errors, we add 2% (meaning that
||ϵ||2/||b||2 = 0.02, where ϵ ∈RM is the noise realization) i.i.d. Gaussian noise to the sinogram. We use
Ngrad = 70 accelerated gradient iterations for each conditional x-sample. For the precision matrix L, we
test both the identity and the derivative matrix (7). We take a total of Nsamp = 2000 samples, and we
discard the ﬁrst 1000 for burn-in. The resulting MCMC chains for the precision variables are shown in
Figure 9. We show the full chain, the chain after burn-in, a histogram of the chain after burn-in and the
auto-correlation function (ACF) (computed using the built-in Matlab function acf) of the chains after
burn-in.
(a) Identity Precision Matrix
(b) Derivative Precision Matrix
Figure 9: MCMC chains of precision variables for sampling from the full pos-
terior. We show the full MCMC chains (ﬁrst column), the chain after burn-in
(second column), the histograms after burn-in (third column) and the auto-
correlation function after burn-in (fourth column) for both precision variables.
24
==PAGE:30==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
Both chains look stationary, and that the convergence happens quite fast. Stationarity is supported
quantitatively by the Geweke test. The p-values are
pid
λ = 0.998,
pder
λ
= 0.997,
pid
δ = 0.998,
pder
δ
= 0.997,
so at a high signiﬁcance level, we accept the hypothesis that the two means are equal, and therefore
based on this statistic, we can not reject that the chains are stationary. Since we use simulated data,
we know the true value of the noise-precision λ, which is λtrue ≈4.4 · 104, and we see that our samples
are in the same order of magnitude as the true value. From the ACF we see that the chains have fairly
low auto-correlation indicating that the samples are fairly independent, so that they may be treated as
samples from the posterior. In Figure 10 we show the mean of the x-samples after burn-in, and we also
show the width of the 95% empirical pixelwise credibility interval (that is for every pixel, we ﬁnd the
2.5% and 97.5% empirical fractiles of the samples, and compute the width of this interval).
25
==PAGE:31==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.13
0.135
0.14
0.145
0.15
0.155
0.16
0.165
0.17
0.175
0.18
(a) Identity Precision Matrix
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.13
0.135
0.14
0.145
0.15
0.155
0.16
0.165
0.17
0.175
0.18
(b) Derivative Precision Matrix
Figure 10: Sample mean and width of 95% credibility interval for x-samples.
Comparing the two sample means, we see that the reconstruction with the
derivative precision matrix looks smoother compared to the identity precision
matrix. For both reconstructions, we see streaking artifacts outside the bound-
ary of the phantom, which are due to discretization errors. For the credibility
intervals, we see that the uncertainty in the reconstructions is uniform. Note
that the colorbar for the credibility interval is diﬀerent from the colorbar of the
sample mean reconstruction.
Comparing the sample means in Figure 10, we see that the sample mean with the derivative precision
matrix looks smoother compared to the sample mean of the identity precision matrix. For the credibility
intervals we see that the uncertainty in both reconstructions look uniform. Interestingly the uncertainty
for the identity precision matrix is smaller than for the derivative precision matrix despite the fact that
we see the reconstruction is noisier.
26
==PAGE:32==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
4.3.2
Sampling with Non-Negativity Constraints
We now repeat the numerical experiments with added non-negativity constraints.
We use the same
projection geometry as described for the case without non-negativity constraints, and we have the same
noise level on the sinogram. The resulting precision variable chains can be seen in Figure 11.
(a) Identity Precision Matrix
(b) Derivative Precision Matrix
Figure 11: MCMC chains of precision variables for sampling from the full
posterior with non-negativity constraints. They look qualitatively like the chains
without non-negativity, but we have converged to diﬀerent levels
Again the chains look stationary, and we can compute the Geweke p-values as
pid
λ = 0.996,
pder
λ
= 0.999,
pid
δ = 0.997,
pder
δ
= 0.998,
so we can not reject stationarity based on this criterion.
Comparing the chains with non-negativity
with the chains without non-negativity in Figure 9, the most notable is that the value of the λ-precision
parameter is quite diﬀerent, and it is actually further away from the true value. In Figure 12 we show
the sample mean and the 95% credibility interval for the x-samples.
27
==PAGE:33==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT without Model Errors
DTU Compute
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
(a) Identity Precision Matrix
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
(b) Derivative Precision Matrix
Figure 12: Sample mean and width of 95% credibility interval for x-samples with
non-negativity. The streaking artifacts are gone from the reconstructions due
to the non-negativity constraints. For the credibility intervals, we see that the
uncertainty in the images now somewhat resemble the phantom. Comparing the
two sample means, we see that the reconstruction with the derivative precision
matrix looks smoother compared to the identity precision matrix.
Comparing the sample means for the diﬀerent precision matrices, we again see that the derivative
precision matrix produces a smoother sample mean reconstruction. From the credibility intervals, we see
that they somewhat resemble the phantom itself, and we see relatively low uncertainty in the large dark
ellipsis and outside the circular boundary of the phantom. This is because the non-negativity constraint
is active for a majority of the x-samples in these regions, which leads to a low uncertainty here. We
also notice that we have some streaking artifacts in the credibility image now. These are again due to
discretization errors.
28
==PAGE:34==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
5
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
In this chapter we incorporate uncertainty in the geometric model parameters into an extended Bayesian
model, and develop an augmented Gibbs sampler to sample both reconstruction and geometric model
parameters from the full posterior. This allows us to correct model error artifacts in the reconstruction,
and characterize the uncertainty in the geometric model parameters.
5.1
Extended Bayesian Model
Letting θ denote a vector of geometric model parameters from chapter 2, we deﬁne Aθ as the forward
operator with these geometric model parameters. Then the statistical model takes the form
b = Aθx + ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, λ−1I).
(16)
Again the model is treated from a Bayesian viewpoint, and we use the same priors as described in the
previous chapter for x and the precision variables λ and δ. Additionally θ is a stochastic variable with
prior distribution p(θ), which we specify later. This implies that the forward operator Aθ is stochastic,
which is a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent framework from the previous chapter, and this is the main source of
complication for the sampling. From a Bayesian perspective the goal is once again to obtain samples
from the full posterior p(x, λ, δ, θ|b) for the use of computing point estimates and credibility intervals.
Assuming independence of θ and the remaining variables Bayes’ law yields
p(x, λ, δ, θ|b) ∝p(b|x, λ, δ, θ)p(x|δ)p(λ)p(δ)p(θ)
∝p(θ)λM/2+γλ−1δN/2+γδ−1 exp

−λ
2 ||Aθx −b||2
2 −δ
2xT Lx −βλλ −βδδ

.
(17)
The diﬀerence between this model, and the model in (8) is the addition of the prior term p(θ), and
the fact that the forward operator Aθ is parametrized by the stochastic variable θ. To sample from the
full posterior we again use a Gibbs sampler. The sampler is very similar to the sampler described in
Algorithm 4. The only addition is the need to sample from the conditional distribution p(θ|x, λ, δ, b).
From the full posterior (17), we ﬁnd
p(θ|x, λ, δ, b) ∝p(θ) exp

−λ
2 ||Aθx −b||2
2

.
(18)
Due to the stochastic operator Aθ this is not a standard distribution for any non-trivial choice of p(θ),
so to sample from this, we must use an MCMC method. We choose the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
with the Gaussian random walk proposal described in chapter 3. We use this sampler, because our prior
knowledge of the shape of this conditional distribution is poor, so we need to use a very general method.
For the prior distribution of the model parameters, we choose a Gaussian distribution, where we assume
that the diﬀerent model parameters are independent:
θ ∼N(µθ, Dθ),
µθ :=


µxs
µys
µxd
µyd


,
Dθ :=


σ2
xs
σ2
ys
σ2
xd
σ2
yd


.
From Figure 3 we remember that xs and ys are the horizontal and vertical coordinates respectively of
the X-ray source, and xd and yd are the horizontal and vertical coordinates respectively of the detector
29
==PAGE:35==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
center. The Gaussian prior yields a conditional on the form
p(θ|x, λ, δ, b) ∝exp

−λ
2 ||Aθx −b||2
2 −1
2(θ −µθ)T D−1
θ (θ −µθ)

.
(19)
When we sample from this conditional in practice, we do it component wise. That is we sample each
individual geometric parameter independently using a one-dimensional Metropolis-Hastings sampler. The
reason for this is that sampling all the geometric parameters simultaneously may lead to a very large
number of rejections in the sampling process, which severely hamper the eﬀectiveness of the sampler.
Also the component wise approach ﬁts in perfectly with the Gibbs framework. Another consideration
regarding the Metropolis-Hastings sampler is that of burn-in.
For every full iteration of the Gibbs
sampler, we start a new MCMC chain, when we use Metropolis-Hastings. For this reason, we run Nmetro
iterations of Metropolis-Hastings for each model parameter in each full Gibbs iteration. This can be
thought of as a mini burn-in phase, and it is again done to limit the amount of complete rejections in
the sampling process. For ease of reference we present the Metropolis-Hastings step in Algorithm 5 using
the model parameter xs as an example for sampling from p(xs|x, ys, xd, yd, λ, δ, b). Naturally the other
model parameters can be sampled using analogue methods.
Algorithm 5 Metropolis-Hastings for geometric Model Parameters
Input: Reconstruction x ∈RN; Model Parameters θ = (xs, ys, xd, yd)T ; Noise Precision λ; Gaus-
sian Prior Parameters µxs and σxs; Metropolis-Hastings step-size sxs; Number of Metropolis-Hastings
iterations Nmetro; Sinogram data b ∈RM.
for k = 1 to Nmetro do
Sample Gaussian proposal bxs ∼N(xs, s2
xs)
Set bθ = (bxs, ys, xd, yd)T
Compute p(bxs|x, ys, xd, yd, λ, δ, b) = exp

−λ
2 ||Abθx −b||2
2 −1
2
(bxs−µxs)2
σ2xs

Compute p(xs|x, ys, xd, yd, λ, δ, b) = exp

−λ
2 ||Aθx −b||2
2 −1
2
(xs−µxs)2
σ2xs

.
Compute acceptance probability paccept
bxs|xs := min
n
1, p(bxs|x,ys,xd,yd,λ,δ,b)
p(xs|x,ys,xd,yd,λ,δ,b)
o
Set xs = bxs with probability paccept
bxs|xs . Otherwise keep xs unchanged.
end for
With the Metropolis-Hastings sampling for the geometric model parameters in hand we generate
samples from the full posterior p(x, λ, δ, θ|b) by utilizing the Gibbs sampler described in Algorithm 6.
Extra computational cost from Algorithm 6 compared to Algorithm 4 comes from the fact that a
new forward operator Aθk must be generated for each sample, and we must do one forward projection
for every Metropolis-Hasting iteration, when sampling the geometric model parameters. An additional
source of extra computational cost is that rejections in the Metropolis-Hastings sampling of the geometric
model parameters means that we need more samples to reach stationarity. In the next section we do
numerical experiments on simulated data using this extended Bayesian approach. Here we will see that
chain convergence for the geometric model parameters is a major problem for some geometries.
5.2
Numerical Experiments
In this section we do numerical experiments on simulated data using the extended Bayesian sampling
approach. We will see that chain convergence for the geometric model parameters is a signiﬁcant issue
30
==PAGE:36==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
Algorithm 6 Metropolis within Gibbs Sampler with uncertain Model Parameters
Input: Initial x0 ∈RN; Initial geometric model parameters θ0 = (x0
s, y0
s, x0
d, y0
d)T ; Number of acceler-
ated gradient iterations Ngrad; Number of Gibbs Iterations Nsamp; Sinogram data b ∈RM; Gamma
prior parameters γλ, γδ, βλ, βδ.
for k = 1 to Nsamp do
Precision Variables using Conjugate Gamma Distributions
Sample λk|xk−1, θk−1, b ∼Gamma(M/2 + αλ, 1
2||Aθk−1xk−1 −b||2
2 + βλ)
Sample δk|xk−1, θk−1, b ∼Gamma(N/2 + αδ, 1
2(xk−1)T Lxk−1 + βδ)
Geometric Model Parameters using Metropolis-Hastings (Algorithm 5)
Sample xk
s|xk−1, λk, yk−1
s
, xk−1
d
, yk−1
d
, b
Sample yk
s |xk−1, λk, xk
s, xk−1
d
, yk−1
d
, b
Sample xk
d|xk−1, λk, xk
s, yk
s , yk−1
d
, b
Sample yk
d|xk−1, λk, xk
s, yk
s , xk
d, b
Set θk = (yk
s , xk
s, xk
d, xk
d)T .
Sample xk|λk, δk, θk, b from approximate Gaussian by using Ngrad accelerated gradient iterations on
(12) with forward operator Aθk and initial condition x[0] = xk−1.
end for
for many of the simulations we present. However through some simpliﬁcations, and a slight reformulation
of the parametrization, we are able to achieve convergence for certain types of geometries.
5.2.1
Full Model
We again use the Shepp-Logan phantom as the ground truth. The phantom is discretized into a 128×128
pixel grid. We use 128 · 1.5 = 196 detector pixels, the detector width is 10.5, and we take 180 projections
starting at 0 degrees with a 2 degree increment per projection. We simulate the sinogram data using the
true geometric parameters ytrue
d
= 10, ytrue
s
= 4, xtrue
d
= 0.2, and xtrue
s
= 0.1. To simulate measurement
errors we add 2% i.i.d. Gaussian noise. Our initial guess for the geometric model parameters is y0
d = 9,
y0
s = 3, x0
d = 0, and x0
s = 0. For the Gaussian priors of the geometric model parameters, we choose
µθ =


x0
s
y0
s
x0
d
y0
d


=


0
3
0
9


and
Dθ =


σ2
xs
σ2
ys
σ2
xd
σ2
yd


=


0.12
1
0.12
1


,
which reﬂect that we have more knowledge in the position of the horizontal parameters compared to the
vertical parameters (which is also the case for general real world setups). For the Metropolis-Hastings
step size parameters, we choose
sys = 5 · 10−4,
sxs = 10−5,
syd = 5 · 10−4,
sxd = 2 · 10−5,
which were chosen through manual tuning by observing the acceptance rate.
We run NMetro = 20
Metropolis-Hastings iterations for every model parameter, and we run NGrad = 70 accelerated gradient
iterations for the sampling of the x-conditional. We use a derivative precision matrix with non-negativity
constraints for the x-prior. Finally we take a total of Nsamp = 5000 samples, and we remove the ﬁrst
4000 as burn-in.
31
==PAGE:37==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
In Figure 13 we show the chains for the precision variables, and the geometric model parameters. We
again show both the full chains and the chains after burn-in alongside histograms and ACF.
Figure 13: MCMC chain data for precision variables and geometric model pa-
rameters. The ﬁrst column show the full MCMC chain, where the red dotted
lines show the true value of the geometric parameters.
The second column
show the MCMC chain after burn-in. The third chain show the histogram of
the chain after burn-in. The fourth column show the ACF of the chain after
burn-in.
We see that we are not able to estimate the geometric model parameters very accurately, however we
do see improvement compared to the initial estimates, especially for the horizontal parameters (xd and
xs). We also see that the geometric parameter chains do not look stationary after 5000 total samples,
however looking at the axis of the diﬀerent parameters, we see that they have barely moved in the ﬁnal
1000 samples. The auto-correlation in the geometric model parameter chains is also incredibly high. This
has the consequence that the eﬀective sample size for these variables is likely fairly low, and one could
argue that more samples should be drawn to make any meaningful statements regarding these variables.
However this comes at a computational cost, and it is simply not realistic to draw many samples for
high dimensional inverse problems. We did conduct experiments, where we ran more (15000) samples,
however the results did not change noticeably (results not shown).
The MCMC chains for the geometric parameters resemble the chains from the simple Gibbs example
in section 3.3, see Figure 8, where we also have very slow convergence and high auto-correlation due to
high correlation of the variables. Hence a plausible explanation for the convergence problems is high
correlation between the geometric model parameters and the reconstruction x, and/or between the indi-
vidual geometric model parameters. Indeed it is quite intuitive that the geometric parameters and the
reconstruction are correlated, due to the very nature of the problem we are studying. From the chains
we also do see correlation between the geometric parameters themselves, indeed the xs and xd parameter
seem very correlated after the burn-in. Another plausible explanation for the slow convergence is that we
32
==PAGE:38==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
have hit a mode in the distribution from which we can not escape. This may resemble the example from
section 3.2, see Figure 7, where the sampler was stuck in one mode for the small Metropolis-Hastings
step size. For that simple example, we solved the problem by increasing the Metropolis-Hastings step size
signiﬁcantly. However for this more complicated problem, we are not able to increase the step size notice-
ably, while still maintaining a reasonable acceptance rate. This is because the data-ﬁtting term in (19)
is incredibly sensitive to perturbations in the geometric model parameters, so only relatively very small
perturbations have a reasonable chance of being accepted. This is a consequence of the high correlation
between the reconstruction and the geometric model parameters, since the current x-sample is "adapted"
to the current projection geometry in the Gibbs sampler. We omit doing the Geweke test for the geomet-
ric parameters, since it is immediately apparent that they are not stationary. However we remark that
again the precision variable chains look stationary, which is also supported by the Geweke test with a high
signiﬁcance (exact p-values not shown). In Figure 14 we show the MAP reconstruction using the true
geometric parameters (for comparison purposes) θtrue = (ytrue
s
, xtrue
s
, ytrue
d
, xtrue
d
)T = (4, 0.1, 10, 0.2)T , the
MAP reconstruction using the initial geometric parameters θ0 = (y0
s, x0
s, y0
d, x0
d)T = (3, 0, 9, 0)T , the sam-
ple mean of the x-samples after burn-in, and the width of the pixelwise 95% credibility interval for the
x-samples after burn-in.
MAP - True Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Figure 14: MAP reconstruction using true projection geometry, MAP recon-
struction using initial guess of projection geometry, sample mean and width of
95% credibility interval for x-samples. We see major reconstruction artifacts in
the MAP reconstruction using the initial geometric model parameters. In the
sample mean we see that the misalignment artifacts have been corrected, but we
still have size artifacts due to the errors in the vertical parameters.
33
==PAGE:39==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
Looking at the sample mean from Figure 14, we see that the misalignment artifact present in the
initial MAP reconstruction has been corrected resulting in a much higher quality reconstruction. We
still have size artifacts, due to large errors in the yd and ys parameters. The fact that the sample mean
reconstruction is of such relatively high quality may support the conjecture that we have arrived at a
mode in the probability distribution. Also the fact that the misalignment artifacts (connected to the
horizontal parameters), but not the size artifacts (connected to the vertical parameters) are able to be
corrected suggests that the model is much more sensitive towards changes in the horizontal parameters.
We have experimented with diﬀerent tuning of all the algorithm parameters to obtain faster convergence
or better estimates of the diﬀerent geometric parameters, but we were not able to obtain noticeably better
results. We also conducted experiments using the identity precision matrix and without non-negativity
constraints, and the results were similar albeit the reconstructions looked slightly worse in a similar
manner as the diﬀerence in chapter 4 illustrated (results not shown).
In an eﬀort to identify which
geometric parameters cause the problems with the slow convergence of the sampler, we do numerical
experiments using simpliﬁed models in subsequent sections.
5.2.2
Simpliﬁed Model
In the simpliﬁed model, we assume that the geometric parameter yd is known in the sampling process,
so we ﬁx yd = 10 (the true value) in our model. Naturally this makes the method less general, and it
leaves us with three geometric parameters to estimate alongside the precision variables. We use the same
geometry to generate the sinogram data as for the full model in the previous section, and we use the
same parameters for the priors and parameters of the sampler, except for yd which is ﬁxed to the true
value. The resulting MCMC chains can be seen in Figure 15.
Figure 15: MCMC chain data for precision variables and geometric model pa-
rameters for the simpliﬁed model. We again see slow convergence of the geo-
metric model parameters, and we see especially that ys hardly moves away from
its initial value, however the chain looks more stationary.
From Figure 15 we see similar convergence issues for the horizontal oﬀset parameters as for the full
34
==PAGE:40==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
model. It is also very apparent from these chains that the horizontal parameters are highly correlated.
For the ys-parameter we see the chain is more stationary compared to the results for the full model,
however we are very far away from the true parameter value. The fact that the ys chain looks more
stationary supports the claim that high correlation between yd and ys in the full-model may have been a
cause for the slow convergence of these parameters. Figure 16 shows the MAP reconstruction using the
true geometry, the MAP reconstruction using the initial geometry, the mean of the x-samples, and the
width of the 95% credibility interval.
MAP - True Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure 16: MAP reconstruction using the true geometry, MAP reconstruction
using the initial geometry, sample mean and width of 95% credibility interval
for x-samples using the simpliﬁed model. We again see that the misalignment
artifacts have been removed in the sample mean reconstruction, but we still have
size artifacts
From Figure 16 we once again see that the misalignment artifacts has been corrected in the sample
mean, which is of much higher quality compared to the initial MAP estimate. We again see "size" artifacts
in the sample mean due to the relatively large error in the ys-parameter. Comparing the results from the
simpliﬁed model to the full model, we have not gained much in the estimation of the parameters, or in
the quality of the reconstruction. However in the coming section we will present a reformulation of the
simpliﬁed model, which (somewhat curiously) yield much better results.
35
==PAGE:41==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
5.2.3
The Curious Case of the Virtual Detector
In this section we again assume that the parameter yd is known, but we introduce a slight reformulation
of the geometry. The reformulation involves the concept of a virtual detector, where the detector in the
reconstruction model goes through the center of rotation (and hence through the object). Naturally such
a conﬁguration is not possible in a real world data acquisition process, when we do actual projection
measurements. However for simulation studies it is not an issue, since the projection geometry and the
phantom geometry are treated as separate in the Astra-toolbox. Also given projection measurements it
is possible to convert any set projection geometry to a virtual detector geometry by appropriately scaling
the width and position of the detector in the reconstruction model. Figure 17 illustrates the concept of
the virtual detector graphically.
Figure 17: Illustration of the concept of a virtual detector geometry. The red
line represents the detector of a "physical" model. The blue line represents an
equivalent projection geometry using a virtual detector going through the center
of rotation of the object.
Figure 17 illustrates that two projection geometries are equivalent if the triangles (red and dotted
lines for physical detector, and blue and dotted lines for virtual detector) are similar. However the fact
that these triangles must be similar has an interesting consequence, when we perturb the geometries
with the intent of doing numerical experiments. Indeed if we perturb the source location in the virtual
detector geometry, then to obtain an equivalent perturbation in the physical geometry, it is necessary to
also change the vertical distance (and possibly width) of the physical detector. However in the simpliﬁed
model these parameters are considered constant values. This implies that while the simpliﬁed model and
the virtual detector model are in many ways two sides of the same coin, we do not necessarily obtain the
same results using the two models, when we do MCMC experiments.
36
==PAGE:42==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
For the numerical experiments with the virtual detector geometry, we again discretize the object on
a 128 × 128 pixel grid. We have 1.5 · 128 = 192 detector pixels, and the width of the detector is 3. We
simulate 180 projections starting at 0 degrees with a 2 degree increment per projection. For the geometric
parameters we use xtrue
s
= 0.1, ytrue
s
= 4, xtrue
d
= 0.2, and ytrue
d
= 0 to simulate the data, and we add 2%
Gaussian noise to simulate measurement errors. We initialize the algorithm with the same guesses for
the geometric parameters as in the simpliﬁed model from the previous section (except for yd, which is
ﬁxed to 0), and we also use the same algorithm tuning parameters. Figure 18 shows the MCMC chains
for the precision variables and the geometric parameters.
Figure 18: MCMC chain data for precision variables and geometric model pa-
rameters using the virtual detector model. We see quite fast convergence of the
geometric model parameters, and they look much more stationary compared to
the previous models. It is worth noting that the true parameter value is not
contained in any of the histograms of the geometric parameters.
We see that the chains for the geometric parameters look much more stationary compared to the
results from the previous sections, and we see that the MCMC chains for ys and xd are very close to the
true values, while the chain for xs is a bit further away from the true value. However it is worth noting
that the true parameter values are not contained in any of the histograms. Looking at the ACF for the
diﬀerent chains, we have much less auto-correlation in the geometric parameter chains compared to the
results from the previous section. Figure 19 shows the MAP reconstruction using the true geometry, the
MAP reconstruction using the initial geometry, the sample mean of the x-samples, and the width of the
95% credibility interval.
37
==PAGE:43==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
MAP - True Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Figure 19: MAP reconstruction using the true geometry, MAP reconstruction
using the initial geometry, sample mean, and width of 95% credibility interval
for x-samples using the virtual detector model. Both the misalignment and size
artifacts have been corrected in the sample mean.
In Figure 19 we see that both the misalignment and the size artifacts are corrected in the sample
mean. Interestingly the relatively large deviation in the xs parameter chain compared to the true value
has not resulted in any noticeable reconstruction artifacts. Hence the reconstructions are obviously not
very sensitive to this parameter for this particular geometry, which may also explain why it is diﬃcult to
estimate very accurately in this particular geometry. Notice from the initial MAP reconstruction that the
reconstruction artifacts look more pronounced compared to the previous models. This is because we use
the same initial values for x0
d, x0
s, and y0
s, which produce relatively larger errors in the virtual detector
geometry, because it is more compact as is illustrated in Figure 17.
As mentioned earlier we do not necessarily expect that the simpliﬁed model, and the virtual detector
model should behave exactly the same for the MCMC method. That being said, we do not completely
understand, why the virtual detector model performs so much better than the simpliﬁed model. From
the results it seems like the virtual detector model has much fewer modes in the posterior distribution,
and that the correlation between the individual geometric variables has been greatly reduced, which
leads to the increased performance. However we do not completely understand how this reformulation of
the model achieves this. One possible explanation is that the change to the virtual geometry increases
the sensitivity of the model to geometric parameter perturbations, due to increased compactness in the
geometry. A more mundane explanation for the vast performance diﬀerence is that we have not found
38
==PAGE:44==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
the correct tuning parameters for the full and simpliﬁed models, we presented in the previous sections,
although a lot of diﬀerent values were tried to no avail. Finally it is possible that the Astra-toolbox
software, which does the assembly of the forward operators for the diﬀerent projection geometries, does
not behave quite as we expect for the non-virtual geometries.
There is an important point that must be made regarding virtual detector setups, which is their us-
ability for real world problems. Indeed to properly convert a physical geometry to a virtual detector
geometry one needs to use the geometric parameters to scale the width of the detector appropriately.
However this creates an obvious complication, since it is exactly these geometric parameters, that we want
to estimate. Scaling using the initial measured uncertain geometric parameters will result in uncertainty
of the detector width in the model, which further complicates the estimation. Hence the virtual-detector
results we have shown in this section should be seen as proof of concept, that there does exist geometries,
where the MCMC sampler converges fairly quickly to accurate model parameter estimates, and not so
much as a ﬁnal ﬁx for the algorithm to now be used in real world scenarios.
5.2.4
Experiments with Alternative Geometries
In this section we do numerical experiments with alternative geometries to test the applicability of the
method for diﬀerent types of projection geometries. As mentioned in the previous section the increased
compactness of the virtual detector geometry may have contributed to the increased performance, because
of an increased sensitivity to perturbations in the geometry, and we test this hypothesis here. We test two
additional geometries, which have very diﬀerent characteristics. The diﬀerent geometries are depicted
(alongside the projection geometry from section 5.2.1) in Figure 20.
39
==PAGE:45==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
Figure 20: Illustration of the diﬀerent projection geometries used for the simu-
lated experiments. The red geometry is the geometry originally tested in section
5.2.1 for the full model. We will refer to the magenta geometry as the compact
geometry, and the blue geometry as the elongated geometry going forwards.
We now present results for the compact (magenta) and the elongated (blue) geometry from Figure 20.
For the elongated geometry the detector width is 6, and the true geometric parameters are xtrue
d
= 0.2,
ytrue
d
= 20, xtrue
s
= 0.1, and ytrue
s
= 20. Our initial guess for this geometry is x0
d = 0, y0
d = 25, x0
s = 0,
and y0
s = 25. For the prior we use
µelongated
θ
=


x0
s
y0
s
x0
d
y0
d


=


0
25
0
25


and
Delongated
θ
=


σ2
xs
σ2
ys
σ2
xd
σ2
yd


=


0.12
102
0.12
102


,
and for the Metropolis-Hastings step size parameters we use
selongated
ys
= 5 · 10−4,
selongated
xs
= 2 · 10−5,
selongated
yd
= 5 · 10−4,
selongated
xd
= 4 · 10−5.
For the compact geometry the detector width is 7 and the true geometric parameters are xtrue
d
= 0.2,
ytrue
d
= 2, xtrue
s
= 0.1, and ytrue
s
= 2. Our initial guess for this geometry is x0
d = 0, y0
d = 2.5, x0
s = 0, and
y0
s = 2.5. For the prior we use
µcompact
θ
=


x0
s
y0
s
x0
d
y0
d


=


0
2.5
0
2.5


and
Dcompact
θ
=


σ2
xs
σ2
ys
σ2
xd
σ2
yd


=


0.12
12
0.12
12


.
For the Metropolis-Hastings step size parameters we use
scompact
ys
= 5 · 10−5,
scompact
xs
= 2 · 10−5,
scompact
yd
= 5 · 10−5,
scompact
xd
= 4 · 10−5.
40
==PAGE:46==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
We remark that the initial guesses for the elongated and compact geometries are chosen such that the
reconstruction artifacts are similar for the two geometries for ease of comparison. Finally for both the
compact and elongated geometry we reconstruct on a 128×128 pixel grid, we use 128·1.5 = 196 detector
pixels, and we take 180 projections starting at 0 degrees with a two degree increment per projection. The
algorithm parameters for the Gibbs sampler are the same as in the section 5.2.1. The resulting MCMC
chain for both the elongated and compact geometry can be seen in Figure 21.
(a) Elongated Geometry
(b) Compact Geometry
Figure 21: MCMC chains of precision variables for sampling from the full
posterior for the elongated and compact geometry. We show the full MCMC
chains (ﬁrst column), the chain after burn-in (second column), the histograms
after burn-in (third column) and the auto-correlation function after burn-in
(fourth column) for both precision variables.
Overall the chains presented for the elongated and the compact geometry in Figure 21 look qualita-
tively similar. Once again we see that the auto-correlation in the geometric parameters is very high, and
the chains do not yet look stationary. There is also a lot of correlation between the horizontal parameters
and the vertical parameters respectively, resembling the results from section 5.2.1. Hence a more compact
41
==PAGE:47==
MCMC Sampling for X-ray CT with Model Errors
DTU Compute
geometry does not seem to result in better performance. Thus the increased performance of the virtual
detector model is not due to increased compactness of the virtual detector geometry. The reconstructions
associated to the elongated and compact projection geometries are shown in Figure 22.
MAP - True Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a) Elongated Geometry
MAP - True Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80 100 120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(b) Compact Geometry
Figure 22: Reconstructions for the elongated and compact geometry. Again the
major misalignment artifacts have been corrected, while we have size artifacts.
Looking at the reconstructions from Figure 22 we see that the major misalignment artifacts have
been corrected, while we have artifacts related to the size of the reconstruction. In this way the results
42
==PAGE:48==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
mirror the results from section 5.2.1. Interestingly the sample mean reconstruction and credibility interval
for the compact geometry contain interior artifacts, which are especially visible near the center, top and
bottom. These artifacts arise, since errors in the vertical geometric parameters for the compact projection
geometry has a very large inﬂuence on where the X-rays intersect the pixels of the phantom in the model.
This also explains the very high level of uncertainty in the overall sample mean for the compact geometry.
We also conducted numerical experiments, where we transformed the elongated and compact geometries
to virtual detector setups, and it resulted in much faster and more accurate convergence of the geometric
model parameters similar to the results from section 5.2.3 (results not shown).
6
Model Discrepancy Method
In this chapter we will present a diﬀerent approach to solving the X-ray CT problem with modelling errors.
We take a step back from the Bayesian sampling framework, and instead focus on MAP estimates using
approximate deterministic forward operators. We immediately emphasize that this method involves many
heuristic approximations, and we do not have proof of convergence for the ﬁnal algorithm we present.
However we include the method, since the results obtained are promising, and it allows us to deal with
quite high dimensional inverse problems.
6.1
Iterative Reconstruction Algorithm with Model Parameter Updates
Another way to approach the inverse problem, when the forward model is parametrized by stochastic
parameters is to do a "clever" rewrite of the model with the aim of removing the stochastic term from the
forward operator. Again letting θ denote a vector of geometric model parameters, the statistical model
can be written as
b = Aθx + ϵ = Aθx + (Aθx −Aθx) + ϵ = Aθx + η + ϵ,
η := (Aθx −Aθx).
(20)
Here Aθ is an approximate forward model, which uses a deterministic estimate θ for the model param-
eters. Obviously we have not gained anything by rewriting the model in this way, since the stochastic
forward operator is still contained inside the term η, which we denote as the model discrepancy term.
However through several (heuristic) approximations, which are described in subsequent sections, we will
obtain a rather simple model, which eliminates the stochastic part of the forward operator.
Rewriting the model as in (20) is not a novel idea, and it has been successfully applied to several diﬀerent
inverse problems for treating modelling error, see e.g. [6, 20]. We were also speciﬁcally inspired to take
this approach by work done in [23], where it is used to address uncertainty in the projection angles for
X-ray CT. The ﬁnal algorithm we present in this section is based on further research by the authors of
[23], which has not yet been published. Hence the method we present is not completely original, but we
have adapted it to ﬁt our current problem.
Before we present the details of the algorithm Figure 23 shows the overall idea: We iteratively update
the reconstruction x using (ideally) increasingly accurate geometric model parameter estimates. Hence
each full iteration involves two steps: The ﬁrst step is to update the geometric model parameter estimate
(i.e. update θ), and the second step computes a MAP reconstruction x with these updated parameter
estimates.
43
==PAGE:49==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
Figure 23: Overview of iterative reconstruction algorithm with model parameter
updates. Each full iteration contains a model parameter update step, and a
reconstruction update step.
6.1.1
Reconstruction Update Step
The ﬁrst approximation involves the model discrepancy term η. The true distribution of η is diﬃcult to
assess, since it depends both on the distribution of θ and x, and the map θ →Aθ is non-linear. Hence
we make the assumption that the model discrepancy is Gaussian with mean µ ∈RM and covariance
structure Γ ∈RM×M, η ∼N(µ, Γ). Again assuming Gaussian i.i.d. measurement errors ϵ ∼N(0, λ−1I),
we obtain the model
b = Aθx + η + ϵ = Aθx + ν,
ν := η + ϵ,
ν ∼N(µ, Γ + λ−1I),
(21)
where we have assumed the model discrepancy and the measurement errors are independent. We remark
that since we are not in the Bayesian sampling setting, we consider the noise precision parameter λ a
ﬁxed quantity. In practice this means, we need some method of estimating the noise level in the data.
Due to the slightly more complicated noise term computing regularized MAP solutions to (21) amounts
to solving the following type of optimization problem:
min
x
1
2||Aθx −b + µ||2
(λ−1I+Γ)−1 + αR(x)
s.t.
x ∈C,
(22)
where we have used the notation
||x||2
W = xT Wx,
for a weight matrix W of appropriate dimension. The optimization problem (22) looks like a standard
regularized weighted least squares problem, which we can solve using Algorithm 1. However there is the
complication that the model discrepancy parameters µ and Γ are actually functions of x. Writing this
dependency up explicitly is infeasible, since the Gaussian approximation is an assumption to begin with.
44
==PAGE:50==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
The way we address this is to do an approximation, where we estimate µ and Γ, so that they are ﬁxed
quantities for the optimization problem. The natural way to estimate µ and Γ is based on samples of the
model discrepancy, i.e. considering samples
ηi = Aθixi −Aθxi,
θi ∼p(θ),
xi ∼p(x),
for some chosen prior distributions. The issue with this approach is that the prior on x needs to be
very informative to give usable model discrepancy samples, and we have no simple way of generating an
informative prior for our problem. Instead we take a diﬀerent (heuristic) approach, where x is ﬁxed in
the model discrepancy samples:
ηi
x = Aθix −Aθx,
θi ∼p(θ),
(23)
where the subscript notation indicates that x is ﬁxed. As illustrated in Figure 23 the ﬁnal algorithm
iteratively updates x with (ideally) increasingly accurate model parameters. Hence if we are at iteration k
in the algorithm, we use the MAP reconstruction xk−1 from the previous iteration in (23) to compute the
model discrepancy samples. These samples are then used to compute the mean and covariance structure
of the model discrepancy by using the empirical formulae:
µ =
1
NS
NS
X
i=1
ηi
x,
(24)
Γ =
1
NS −1
NS
X
i=1
(ηi
x −µ)(ηi
x −µ)T ,
(25)
where NS is the number of model discrepancy samples. With these parameters in hand, we solve (22) to
obtain a reconstruction. This ﬁnishes the reconstruction step of the algorithm. In the next section we
address the model parameter update step.
6.1.2
Model Parameter Update Step
It is clear that depending on the true value of the model parameters θtrue the estimate θ might result
in a very poor estimate of the true forward operator, which may seriously hamper the overall quality of
the reconstruction due to artifacts as illustrated in chapter 2. To address this we use an update scheme
for the parameter θ to hopefully obtain increasingly accurate estimates. We choose a Gaussian prior
distribution for the geometric model parameters θ ∼N(θ, Dθ), where the mean is our current estimate θ,
and the covariance matrix Dθ ∈Rp×p is diagonal. By assumption the total error ν from (21) is Gaussian
ν ∼N(µ, λ−1I + Γ), so the joint distribution of (θ, ν) is again Gaussian satisfying
"
θ
ν
#
∼N
 "
θ
µ
#
,
"
Dθ
Cν,θ
CT
ν,θ
(λ−1I + Γ)
#!
,
(26)
where Cν,θ is the cross-covariance of the total error ν and the model parameters θ. A classical result for
multivariate Gaussians implies that the conditionals of (26) are also Gaussian. In particular
E(θ|ν) = θ + Cv,θ(λ−1I + Γ)−1(ν −µ).
(27)
This conditional expectation tells us: Given a total error realization ν, what is the expected (and most
probable, since we have a Gaussian) model parameters, so heuristically we use this conditional expectation
45
==PAGE:51==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
as our updated model parameter vector θ. Naturally this estimate is extremely reliant on the assumption
that the model discrepancy can be well approximated by a Gaussian distribution, which may not be valid
in practice. To use (27) we need a realization of the total error ν. Given x and θ we can use the residual
ν = b −Aθx.
(28)
Finally we need an estimate of the cross-covariance between the total error and the model parameters.
This can be computed using model discrepancy samples by ﬁrst noticing
Cν,θ = Cov(ν, θ) = Cov(η + ϵ, θ) = Cov(η, θ) + Cov(ϵ, θ) = Cov(η, θ),
where the ﬁnal equality follows from assuming independence of the measurement noise and the model
parameters θ. Hence we may compute an estimate of Cν,θ using the empirical formula
Cν,θ = Cη,θ =
1
NS −1
NS
X
i=1
(ηi
x −µ)(θi −¯θ)T .
(29)
We now have all the necessary tools to do the parameter update step (27), and we present the ﬁnal
reconstruction algorithm in the next section.
6.1.3
Final Reconstruction Algorithm
The full iterative reconstruction method can be seen in Algorithm 7. As mentioned many of the steps are
based on approximations, and heuristic ideas, so we do not have any guarantees regarding convergence
of the algorithm.
Algorithm 7 Iterative Reconstruction with Modelling Parameter Updates
Input: Noise precision λ; Regularization parameter α; Initial reconstruction x0 ∈RN; Number of
model error samples NS; Initial model parameter vector θ
0, Model Parameter covariance Dθ; Number
of iterations Niter; Sinogram data b ∈RM.
for k = 0 to Niter do
Model Parameter Update Step
for i = 1 to NS do
Sample geometric model parameters: θi ∼N

θ
k, Dθ

Sample model discrepancy: ηi
xk = Aθixk −Aθ
kxk
end for
Compute: µ, Γ, ν, and Cv,θ using (24), (25), (28), and (29) respectively.
Update geometric model parameters: θ
k+1 = θ
k + Cv,θ(λ−1I + Γ)−1(ν −µ).
Reconstruction Step
for i = 1 to NS do
Sample geometric parameters: θi ∼N(θ
k+1, Dθ)
Sample model discrepancy: ηi
xk = Aθixk −Aθ
k+1xk
end for
Compute: µ, Γ and ν using (24), (25), and (28) respectively.
Set: xk+1 = argmin
x∈C
1
2||(A¯θk+1x −b + µ)||2
(Γ+λ−1I)−1 + αR(x)
end for
46
==PAGE:52==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
Algorithm 7 is conceptually the same as the algorithm developed as an extension to the method
described in [23] by the same authors. However there is a key diﬀerence, which lies in the model parameters
that we attempt to estimate. The algorithm is originally developed for the projection angle uncertainty
problem, where it is a common assumption that the projection angles are independent. This means that
the uncertainty for a single projection angle only aﬀects one single projection. This in turn implies that
the covariance matrix of the model discrepancy, Γ, is block-diagonal, where each block represents the
covariance structure for a single projection angle. This block diagonal structure for the covariance matrix
can be leveraged for major performance gains when solving the optimization problem (22), which is the
computational bottleneck in Algorithm 7, and this is also exploited by the authors of [23]. However the
geometric parameters, we are studying in this thesis are global parameters in the sense that a change in
any of the geometric parameters aﬀect all the projections simultaneously. This implies that the covariance
matrix Γ is a full matrix. We illustrate this in Figure 24, where we show the structure of the covariance
matrix of the model discrepancy for the geometric parameter xd. For illustrative purposes we choose a
quite small model problem, where we discretize the Shepp-Logan phantom unto a 64 × 64 pixel grid. We
use 64 · 1.5 = 96 detector elements, and 90 projections starting at 0 degrees with a 4 degree increment.
For the geometric parameters we choose xs = 0, yd = 10 and ys = 4. We sample xd from N(0, 0.12) for
the model discrepancy samples taking a total of NS = 500 samples. We compute the empirical covariance
matrix using the built-in Matlab function cov.
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
5500
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
2000
2500
3000
3500
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
3200
3400
3600
3800
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
Figure 24: Covariance structure for geometric parameter xd based on NS = 500
model discrepancy samples. We see that it is a full matrix. The left ﬁgure shows
the full covariance structure from the simulated model discrepancy samples. The
right ﬁgure shows a zoomed in region of the covariance matrix to better illus-
trate the structure. Each diagonal block represent the covariance structure of a
single projection angle, and oﬀdiagonal blocks represent covariance structure
between projection angles. The black border around each block is due to rays
not penetrating the phantom.
As mentioned the computational bottleneck in Algorithm 7 is solving the optimization problem.
To solve it we again use the accelerated gradient method described in Algorithm 1.
However notice
that evaluation of the gradient of the objective function now involves multiplication with the matrix
(Γ + λ−1I)−1, i.e. evaluation of the gradient requires us to solve a system of linear equations involving
47
==PAGE:53==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
the matrix (Γ+λ−1I). As illustrated in Figure 24 this is a full matrix of dimension M ×M, which means
that it is too expensive to naively solve these linear systems for large inverse problems, since we may
need to run a lot of accelerated gradient iterations to achieve convergence of the optimization problem.
Fortunately the matrix has structure we can exploit to make solving these linear systems feasible. The
covariance matrix at each iteration is given by
λ−1I + Γ = λ−1I +
1
NS −1
NS
X
i=1
(ηi
x −µ)(ηi
x −µ)T = λ−1I +
NS
X
i=1
uiuT
i ,
ui :=
ηi
x −µ
√NS −1.
(30)
Letting U ∈RM×NS be the matrix, where the i′th column is given by ui, we can write (30) as
λ−1I + UU T .
Using the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula, see e.g. [22], we have
(λ−1I + UU T )−1 = λI −λ2U(I + λU T U)−1U T .
(31)
Notice that the inverse on the left hand side exists, since UU T is positive semi-deﬁnite and λ > 0. The
right hand side is convenient, since when we apply Algorithm 7 in practice, we have NS << M. Using
(31) for multiplying with the inverse covariance matrix, involves two matrix-vector multiplications, which
are O(NSM) ﬂops, and the solution of an NS × NS linear system of equations, which uses O(N 3
s ) ﬂops.
Also for memory, we only need to store U, which is O(NSM). This is much more eﬃcient than the naive
approach, which is O(M 3) ﬂops and O(M 2) memory.
Finally we make a remark regarding the choice of regularization term. For the Bayesian sampling ap-
proach in previous chapters we use a Gaussian prior for x, which results in Tikhonov type regularization.
The Gaussian prior is necessary to obtain a closed form expression for the full posterior, which simpliﬁes
the sampling considerably. However Tikhonov type regularization is not necessarily the most suitable for
obtaining high quality reconstructions. With the model discrepancy approach we have more ﬂexibility in
choosing complicated regularization terms, since we only need to solve a fairly limited number of regu-
larized weighted least squares problems. The regularization term, we will utilize for this method is the
smooth variant of TV described in section 2.1.
6.2
Numerical experiments
6.2.1
Full Model
Once again we use the Shepp-Logan phantom as the ground truth.
We discretize the phantom into
a 128 × 128 grid.
The detector width is 10.5, we have 1.5 · 128 = 196 detector pixels, and we take
180 projections starting at 0 degrees with a 2 degree increment per projection.
The true geometric
parameters used to simulate the data are once again ytrue
d
= 10, xtrue
d
= 0.2, ytrue
s
= 4, and xtrue
s
= 0.1.
To simulate measurement errors we add 2% Gaussian i.i.d. noise to the sinogram. We use Niter = 100
outer iterations, and we take NS = 500 model discrepancy samples for each iteration. We ran Ngrad = 300
accelerated gradient iterations to solve the optimization problem for each iteration, which was suﬃcient
for convergence. For the noise precision λ, we use the true value λtrue = 4.5 · 104. For the initial guess of
the geometric model parameters, we use: x0
d = 0, y0
d = 9, x0
s = 0, and y0
s = 3. For the Gaussian variance
48
==PAGE:54==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
parameters we choose
Dθ =


σ2
xd
σ2
yd
σ2
xs
σ2
ys


=


0.0052
0.12
0.0052
0.12


.
Finally we use smoothed TV for the regularization term, and we solve the problem with non-negativity
constraints. In Figure 25 we plot the geometric model parameter estimates for each iteration of Algorithm
7, that is we plot the estimates {θ
k}Niter
k=0 .
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
xd - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
11.5
y d - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
xs - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
y s - Parameter Estimates
Figure 25: Geometric parameter estimates for the full model using the model
discrepancy method. The black line represents the true values. We see that
the horizontal oﬀset parameters (xd and xs) can be estimated fairly accurately,
although the method has not quite converged. The vertical oﬀset parameters
(yd and ys) are not estimated as accurately. We also see a lot of correlation
between the parameters
Figure 25 shows that we are able to estimate the horizontal parameters quite accurately. However
we also observe that the method does not seem to have converged, and we also have a lot of correlation
between the horizontal parameters. The ﬁnal parameter estimates for the vertical parameters are not as
accurate, and again we see correlation between these variables. We tried to run more iterations (1000),
however the method still did not converge, and the parameter estimates were not markedly diﬀerent
from the values shown in Figure 25 (results not shown). These results for the model discrepancy method
mirror the results for the full model using the MCMC method from section 5.2.1, where we also had
signiﬁcant convergence problems and high correlation. In Figure 26 we show a MAP reconstruction using
the true projection geometry, a MAP reconstruction using the initial projection geometry, and a MAP
reconstruction using the ﬁnal geometric model parameter estimates from Figure 25.
49
==PAGE:55==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
MAP - True Geometry
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Estimated Geometry
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 26: MAP reconstructions using the true geometry, MAP reconstruction
using the initial geometry, and MAP reconstruction using the ﬁnal estimated
geometry obtained by running Algorithm 7. We see that the misalignment ar-
tifacts have been removed using the ﬁnal parameter estimates, while we have
artifacts related to the size of the reconstruction
From the MAP reconstructions in Figure 26 we see that the misalignment artifacts are removed from
the reconstruction with the ﬁnal parameter estimates, while we still have size artifacts due to the errors in
the vertical geometric parameters. Again the result mirrors the results obtained using the MCMC sam-
pling method in section 5.2.1. This supports the conjecture that the convergence problems, we observe
for both methods are not related to the tuning of the diﬀerent algorithm parameters, but rather that the
problem contains many modes and high correlation that makes exact estimation of the parameters very
diﬃcult. Finally note that the overall quality of the reconstructions using the model discrepancy method
are less noisy compared to the sample mean reconstructions obtained using the MCMC method. This is
related to the fact that the TV regularization term is extremely powerful, when we reconstruct piecewise
constant phantoms such as the Shepp-Logan phantom.
As mentioned earlier the model discrepancy method is more scalable, since we only need to compute
one MAP reconstruction at every iteration of the full algorithm. We now present results for a fairly
high dimensional problem.
Here we discretize the phantom on a 512 × 512 pixel grid, and we have
512 × 1.5 = 768 detector pixels. The remaining variables are the same as for the lower resolution prob-
lem. The resulting parameter estimates are shown in Figure 27. The results are very similar to the results
obtained for the lower resolution problem.
50
==PAGE:56==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
xd - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
8
9
10
11
12
y d - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
xs - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
y s - Parameter Estimates
Figure 27: Geometric Parameter estimates for the full model using the model
discrepancy method for high-resolution problem. Overall the results are very
similar to the results for the low-resolution phantom presented in Figure 25.
The resulting MAP reconstructions can be seen in Figure 28. As expected they look similar to their
low resolution counterparts except that they are much sharper.
MAP - True Geometry
100
200
300
400
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
100
200
300
400
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Estimated Geometry
100
200
300
400
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 28: MAP reconstruction using the true geometry, the initial geometry,
and the ﬁnal estimated geometry obtained by running Algorithm 7. We see that
the misalignment artifacts have been removed, while we have artifacts related
to the size of the reconstruction
Overall the results in this section mirror the results using the MCMC method for the full model. We
see that accurate estimation of the model parameters is diﬃcult especially for the vertical parameters,
51
==PAGE:57==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
but we are able to correct severe misalignment artifacts in the reconstruction. This indicates that both
methods arrive at local modes, and that they are very susceptible to high correlation.
In an eﬀort to improve performance we conducted experiments using a simpliﬁed model, where we ﬁxed
yd = 10 analogue to experiments from section 5.2.2 for the MCMC method. Similarly to the results for
the MCMC method, this did not lead to improved performance for the model discrepancy method (results
not shown). However changing the geometry to a virtual detector geometry again markedly improved
performance, which we show in the next section.
6.2.2
Virtual Detector Model
Again we consider a geometry, where the parameter yd = 0 is ﬁxed, such that we are in a virtual detector
geometry. For the low resolution experiments we discretize the phantom on a 128 × 128 pixel grid. The
detector width is 3, and we have 128 · 1.5 = 196 detector elements. The true geometric parameters used
to generate the data are ytrue
d
= 0, xtrue
d
= 0.2, ytrue
s
= 4, and xtrue
s
= 0.1. Our initial guess for the
three remaining geometric parameters are x0
d = 0, y0
s = 9, and x0
s = 0. The remaining parameters for the
algorithm are the same as in the previous section. The resulting geometric parameter estimates can be
seen in Figure 29.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
x d - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
x s - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2
3
4
5
y s - Parameter Estimates
Figure 29: Geometric parameter estimates for the virtual detector model using
the model discrepancy method. We see that the parameter estimates converge
to the true parameter values. This performance is similar to the performance
obtained for the MCMC sampling methods with the virtual detector geometry,
although the estimation of xs is more accurate for this method.
We are able to estimate all the parameters very accurately, and the algorithm converges quite quickly.
This is similar to the results for the MCMC sampling method in section 5.2.3, when we used the virtual
detector setup, although we actually obtain a more accurate estimate of the xs parameter using the model
52
==PAGE:58==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
discrepancy method. However note that the oscillations in the xs parameter seem to be larger than for
the xd and ys parameter in Figure 29, which likely reﬂects that it is more diﬃcult to accurately estimate
this parameter in this particular geometry, which is analogue to the results of the MCMC method.
It is very interesting that the results using the MCMC method and the model discrepancy method
are so similar, since the two methods are very diﬀerent in their approach to solving the problem. This
supports the conjecture that the virtual detector projection geometry has fewer modes, and that cor-
relation between the variables is highly decreased. We still can not explain, why the virtual detector
geometry seems to have these properties, but only observe that it is consistent between both methods. It
also reaﬃrms that it is the presence of multiple modes and high correlation, that causes the convergence
issues and not the tuning of the diﬀerent algorithm parameters, we use for the methods. The MAP
reconstructions associated with the parameter estimates from Figure 29 are shown in Figure 30. Here
we see that the artifacts have been removed from the MAP reconstructions, because we were able to
accurately estimate all the geometric model parameters.
MAP - True Geometry
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Estimated Geometry
20
40
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 30: MAP reconstruction for the true geometry, the initial geometry, and
the ﬁnal estimated geometry obtained by running Algorithm 7 with a virtual
detector geometry. We see that the misalignment and size artifacts have been
corrected.
Finally we present results for the high resolution phantom with the virtual detector geometry. This
time we discretize on a 512 × 512 pixel grid, and we use 512 · 1.5 = 768 detector pixels. The remaining
parameters are the same as for the low resolution virtual detector setup. The parameter estimates can be
seen in Figure 31, and the associated reconstructions can be seen in Figure 32. The results are very similar
to the low resolution results for the virtual detector setup, except the oscillations for the xs parameter
seem to be smaller. This may have something to do with the higher resolution, since the discretization
errors are greatly reduced.
53
==PAGE:59==
Model Discrepancy Method
DTU Compute
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
x d - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.2
0.4
x s - Parameter Estimates
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2
3
4
5
y s - Parameter Estimates
Figure 31: Geometric Parameter estimates for the virtual detector model using
the model discrepancy method for high-resolution problem.
We see that the
parameter estimates converge to the true parameter values.
MAP - True Geometry
100
200
300
400
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Initial Geometry
100
200
300
400
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
MAP - Estimated Geometry
100
200
300
400
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 32: MAP reconstruction for the true geometry, the initial geometry,
and the ﬁnal estimated geometry obtained by running Algorithm 7 using the
high-resolution phantom with a virtual detector. We see that the model-error
artifacts have been corrected.
We also conducted experiments for the alternative geometries illustrated in Figure 20, and again
we had diﬃculties for non-virtual detector geometries, while the virtual detector geometries were more
54
==PAGE:60==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
successful (results not shown).
7
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
In this chapter we apply the methods developed in the previous chapters to a real tomographic data
set. The data was recorded using a custom-built, laboratory micro-CT scanner with an energy-sensitive
HEXITEC detector in the Henry Moseley X-ray Imaging Facility at The University of Manchester [5].
The scanned object is a lizard head, and we take one of the central slices of the full 3D cone-beam
data set. We have 80 detector pixels, and each detector pixel is 0.25mm wide. We have 180 projections
starting at 0 degrees and with a 2 degree increment per projection. The object is reconstructed in the
domain [−6mm, 6mm]2, which is discretized into an 80 × 80 pixel grid. The vertical detector distance
and source distance were measured to be 138mm and 332mm respectively. We are not given any explicit
measurements of horizontal oﬀset, but the geometry was set up with the intent of no horizontal oﬀset
in either detector or source. Figure 33 shows the measured sinogram for the lizard head sample, and we
also show a representation of the measured projection geometry.
Figure 33: Recorded sinogram (left) and measured projection geometry (right)
for the lizard head sample. We see that the projection geometry is very elon-
gated, and resembles a parallel-beam geometry.
Notice from the measured projection geometry that it is vertically elongated, which means that small
changes in the vertical parameters do not alter the overall projection geometry much, so we do not
expect that the geometry is very sensitive towards vertical misalignments. However the geometry is fairly
sensitive to horizontal oﬀsets in the geometric parameters, which means that even very small horizontal
55
==PAGE:61==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
misalignments in the experimental setup may result in reconstruction artifacts. Notice also that the
projection geometry is fairly close to a parallel-beam geometry, which will be relevant in section 7.3,
where we compare the results using our methods to an alternative misalignment correction method.
7.1
MCMC sampling
We ﬁrst apply the MCMC sampling method developed in chapter 5. Our initial guess for the geometry is
simply the measured geometry: x0
s = 0, y0
s = 332, x0
d = 0, y0
d = 138. For the Gaussian prior parameters
we use
µθ =


x0
s
y0
s
x0
d
y0
d


=


0
332
0
138


and
Dθ =


σ2
xs
σ2
ys
σ2
xd
σ2
yd


=


0.12
1
0.12
1


.
For the Metropolis-Hastings step-size parameters we use
sxs = 10−5,
sys = 5 · 10−4,
sxd = 10−5,
syd = 5 · 10−4.
We run Ngrad = 70 accelerated gradient iterations for the x-sampling, and Nmetro = 20 Metropolis-
Hastings iterations for sampling the geometric model parameters. We again use the derivative precision
matrix, and we also use non-negativity constraints. We take Nsamp = 5000 total samples, and we discard
the ﬁrst 4000 for burn-in. The resulting MCMC chains can be seen in Figure 34.
Figure 34: MCMC chain data for precision variables and geometric model
parameters for lizard head sample using full model. We see signiﬁcant auto-
correlation in the geometric model parameter chains.
The horizontal oﬀset
parameters have moved signiﬁcantly away from their initial positions (red dot-
ted lines in full chains), indicating that misalignment in the experimental setup
was present
From the chains we once again see convergence issues, and we have prominent auto-correlation as
well. We also see signiﬁcant correlation between the horizontal geometric parameters. This resembles
56
==PAGE:62==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
the chains for the full model with the simulated data from section 5.2.1. We do see that the horizontal
parameters have moved signiﬁcantly from their initial positions, which indicates that there indeed was
a misalignment present in the experimental setup. In Figure 35 we show the MAP reconstruction using
the initial measured geometry, the sample mean of the x-samples, and the width of the 95% credibility
interval.
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Figure 35: MAP reconstruction using initial measured geometry, sample mean,
and width of 95% credibility interval for x-samples on the lizard head sample.
We see that the features and details are more pronounced on the sample mean
reconstruction compared to the MAP reconstruction using the initial measured
geometry
Since we are working with a real data set, we do not have a true reference of the interior of the lizard
head, but it is immediately apparent that the sample mean reconstruction is of higher quality compared
to the MAP reconstruction computed using the initial measured geometry. We are able to distinctly
make out ﬁner details of the reconstruction, and prominent features such as the eyes look much sharper
in the sample mean reconstruction, which signiﬁcantly improves the scientiﬁc value. It is also encouraging
to see, that even though the initial reconstruction does not have massive misalignment artifacts as was
the case in the simulated studies, we are still able to signiﬁcantly improve the reconstruction using the
developed method, indicating that it is fairly sensitive to misalignments in the geometry. The lizard head
sample is also more complicated compared to the Shepp-Logan phantom, which has very distinct and well
deﬁned features. This bodes well for the usability of the method in diﬀerent scenarios and for diﬀerent
types of reconstructions. Note that the correction in the horizontal geometric parameters is on the scale
of one tenth of a millimeter, which is smaller than a single detector pixel. This shows that even tiny
misalignments in the projection geometry have massive inﬂuence on the quality of the reconstruction.
This also reaﬃrms the importance of having tools to correct for geometric misalignments, especially for
smaller custom experimental setups, where it is diﬃcult to obtain accurate measurements of the geomet-
ric parameters.
57
==PAGE:63==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
From the axis scale of the diﬀerent geometric parameters after burn-in in Figure 34 we see that the
estimates have actually moved relatively much in the ﬁnal 1000 iterations. This may beg the question if
more iterations will change the result signiﬁcantly. To answer this question we conduct an experiment,
where we instead draw Nsamp = 30000 samples. We use the same sampling parameters as for the exper-
iment with Nsamp = 5000. The MCMC chain data can be seen in Figure 36, and we have removed the
ﬁrst 15000 as burn-in.
Figure 36: MCMC chain data for precision variables and geometric model
parameters for lizard head taking 30000 samples.
We see signiﬁcant auto-
correlation in the geometric model parameter chains.
The horizontal oﬀset
parameters have moved signiﬁcantly away from their initial positions, however
it is on the same level as the results after 5000 iterations.
From Figure 36 we see that the MCMC chain values are on the same level as the chains after 5000
samples, so we do not expect major changes in the resulting reconstructions, which can be seen in Figure
37. As expected we do not see any discernible diﬀerence in the quality of the reconstruction using the
larger sample size compared to the results using only 5000 total samples.
58
==PAGE:64==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Figure 37: MAP reconstruction using initial measured geometry, sample mean,
and width of 95% credibility interval for x-samples on the lizard head sample
using larger sample size. We see that the features and details are more clear
in the sample mean reconstruction compared to the initial MAP reconstruction,
however they are not markedly diﬀerent from the results after 5000 samples.
To illustrate the robustness of the method, we also conduct an experiment with a diﬀerent (worse)
starting guess for the initial projection geometry. This experiment reﬂects situations, where there are
larger misalignments in the experimental setup. Our initial starting guess for this experiment is y0
s = 138,
x0
s = 1, y0
d = 332, and x0
d = 1. Note that our initial starting guess for the vertical parameters has not
changed, since we know that the geometry is not very sensitive to these parameters, and the earlier
simulation experiments show that estimation of these parameters is very diﬃcult for the method. The
remaining sample parameters are the same as for the experiment conducted using the measured projection
geometry, and we draw a total of Nsamp = 5000 samples. The resulting MCMC chains can be seen in
Figure 38.
59
==PAGE:65==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
Figure 38: MCMC chain data for precision variables and geometric model pa-
rameters for lizard head sample with worse initial geometry guess.
We see
signiﬁcant auto-correlation in the geometric model parameter chains. We have
ended up on signiﬁcantly diﬀerent parameter estimates compared to Figure 34.
The chains look qualitatively similar after burn-in to the chains shown in Figure 34, however we do see
that especially the horizontal oﬀset parameters have ended on signiﬁcantly diﬀerent values. This again
supports the conjecture that many local modes in the posterior distribution exists for the full model, and
that it is diﬃcult for the proposed sampler to leave these modes. The resulting reconstructions can be
seen in Figure 39.
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Width of 95% Credibility Interval
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Figure 39: Initial MAP reconstruction, sample mean and width of 95% credi-
bility interval for x-samples on the lizard head sample with worse initial guess.
60
==PAGE:66==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
From the initial MAP reconstruction in Figure 39, we see that this initial projection geometry is indeed
much worse than the measured, and we have severe misalignment artifacts, which are qualitatively similar
to the ones we observe in the simulated studies. Again the sample mean reconstruction is of much higher
quality, and if we compare it to the sample mean reconstruction from Figure 35, we can not detect any
noticeable diﬀerence. This shows that the method is robust to large errors (for the horizontal parameters)
in the measured geometry. However it also shows that the exact geometric values that the sampler ends
up at for the full model should not be taken as the true geometric model parameters, since we obtain
very diﬀerent estimates for the diﬀerent initial guesses.
7.2
Model Discrepancy Method
To utilize the model discrepancy method for correcting the geometric parameters, we need an estimate of
the noise precision λ. This is an unknown quantity, since we are working with a real data-set. However
from the MCMC chains in Figure 34, we do obtain estimates of λ, and since we have no better estimates
for the noise precision, we simply use the sample mean of the λ-samples from the MCMC chain after
burn-in. For the initial guesses of the geometric parameters we use the measured geometry, and for the
Gaussian variance of the geometric model parameters we use
Dθ =


σ2
xd
σ2
yd
σ2
xs
σ2
ys


=


0.012
12
0.012
12


.
We take NS = 500 model discrepancy samples for each iteration, and we run Ngrad = 300 accelerated
gradient iterations to solve the regularized weighted least squares problem in each iteration. Finally we
take Niter = 200 total iterations of Algorithm 7. The resulting geometric parameter estimates are shown
in Figure 40.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
xd - Parameter Estimates
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
137
138
139
140
141
y d - Parameter Estimates
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
xs - Parameter Estimates
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
331
331.5
332
332.5
333
y s - Parameter Estimates
Figure 40: Geometric parameter estimates for the lizard head sample using the
model discrepancy method. We see some convergence issues, especially for the
vertical oﬀset parameters. The black line shows the initial measured geometric
parameters.
61
==PAGE:67==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
Again we see issues with convergence of the method, especially for the vertical parameter estimates.
Interestingly the parameter yd has changed a lot in the estimation, but it is unclear if this reﬂects the
actual underlying geometry, or if it is an issue related to the convergence of the method. Moreover we see
that the horizontal parameters are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from their initial position, and they are actually
pretty close to the estimates from the MCMC method in Figure 34. Similarly to what was done for
the MCMC method we conducted an experiment running more iterations (1000), however the method
still did not converge, and the parameter estimates ﬂuctuated around the same values as in Figure 40
(results not shown). The MAP reconstructions using the initial and ﬁnal geometric parameter estimates
can be seen in Figure 41. Similar to the MCMC method we see vast improvement in the quality of the
reconstruction using the newly estimated geometry. The relatively large change in the yd parameter has
not resulted in any noticeable change in the reconstruction, which also reaﬃrms that this geometry is
not sensitive towards (relatively) small changes in the vertical parameters.
MAP - Initial Parameters
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
MAP - Final Parameter Estimates
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure 41: MAP reconstruction using the initial measured geometry and the
ﬁnal estimated geometry obtained by running Algorithm 7 for the lizard head
sample. We see vast improvements in the quality of the reconstruction.
We also experimented with a worse initial geometric parameter guess for this method to test the
robustness of the method. We used the same worse initial guess as the experiment using the MCMC
method. We use the same algorithm parameters as the experiment conducted using the measured initial
guess. The parameter estimates can be seen in Figure 42.
62
==PAGE:68==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
xd - Parameter Estimates
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
137
138
139
140
141
y d - Parameter Estimates
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
xs - Parameter Estimates
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
331
331.5
332
332.5
333
y s - Parameter Estimates
Figure 42: Geometric model parameter estimates using the model discrepancy
method for the lizard head data with a bad initial guess.
We note that the
parameter estimates for the horizontal parameters are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
with this starting guess compared to the parameter estimates obtained using the
measured geometry.
For this initial geometry we see that the estimated horizontal oﬀset parameters are signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the results for the measured initial geometry in Figure 40.
In fact they resemble the
estimates obtained for the worse initial guess using the MCMC method in Figure 38, where we also see a
relatively large change in the xs variable. This is interesting, since it indicates that the methods seek out
the same local minimum in the projection geometry. Figure 43 show the reconstructions using the initial
and the ﬁnal geometric parameter estimates from Figure 42. Again we see that the ﬁnal reconstruction
is of much higher quality compared to the initial reconstruction. We do not see any discernible diﬀerence
between the ﬁnal reconstruction for the bad initial guess versus the ﬁnal reconstruction for the measured
initial guess from Figure 41. This again indicates that the method is somewhat robust towards the initial
guess of the geometry.
63
==PAGE:69==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
MAP - Initial Parameters
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
MAP - Final Parameter Estimates
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure 43: MAP reconstruction for the initial parameter estimates and the ﬁnal
parameter estimates obtained by running Algorithm 7 for the lizard-head sample
data using a bad initial guess. We see vast improvements in the quality of the
reconstruction after correcting the geometric model parameters.
7.3
Comparison with Alternative Geometry Alignment Method
Finally in the interest of comparison we use an alternative projection geometry alignment method on the
problem at hand, and compare the resulting reconstruction with our methods. The alternative alignment
method we use is proposed in [7], and it belongs to the class of methods, where the correction is done
without any need of computing additional reconstructions, which makes it extremely eﬃcient compu-
tationally. The method is only designed to correct the horizontal detector oﬀset (corresponding to our
variable xd), and it is primarily developed for parallel-beam geometries. However our current geometry
is very close to a parallel-beam geometry, since it is very elongated. The author of [7] also remarks that
the method is valid for certain fan-beam geometries if we have measurements in the full angular range
(0 to 360 degrees), which is the case for our data set. Since the method is only designed to estimate xd
it assumes that the remaining geometric parameters are known. This is of course a diﬀerent paradigm
than the one we have worked with in this thesis, but we remark that at least for the vertical geometric
parameters this assumption is not too bad, since small perturbations in these have very little impact
on the reconstruction for this particular geometry. We will not explain the method in full detail, but
simply mention that it relies on center of mass calculations of the measured sinogram, and since it uses
information for all the diﬀerent projection angles, it is relatively resistant towards noise in the data. For
ease of reference we refer to the method from [7] as the center of mass method going forward. We have
implemented the center of mass algorithm in Matlab, and we have "veriﬁed" our implementation by
testing it on simulated data, where we introduced misalignments in the xd parameter. In these scenarios
the method works very well, and we are able to very accurately estimate the misalignments (results not
shown).
We use the center of mass method on the measured lizard head sinogram, and we assume that the
remaining geometric parameters are equal to the measured xs = 0, ys = 332 and yd = 138. We obtain
64
==PAGE:70==
Application to a Real Tomographic Data Set
DTU Compute
the value xd = 0.2037 for the misalignment correction from this method. This is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from 0, which indicates that this method is also able to detect a misalignment in the geometry. Before we
present the MAP reconstruction using this corrected geometry, we conduct a ﬁnal experiment using our
MCMC method as an interesting comparison. For this ﬁnal experiment we only attempt to estimate the
geometric parameter xd, and we let xs = 0, ys = 332 and yd = 138 be ﬁxed in the sampling procedure.
In this way the assumptions for both methods are completely analogue. For the MCMC sampling we
use the initial estimate x0
d = 0, Gaussian prior standard deviation σxd = 0.1 and Metropolis-Hastings
step size sxd = 10−4. The remaining algorithm parameters are the same as described in section 7.1. The
resulting MCMC chains for the precision variables, and the geometric parameter xd can be seen in Figure
44.
Figure 44: MCMC chains for precision variables and geometric parameter xd
for lizard head data. The red dotted line in the full xd chain represents the value
using the center of mass alignment approach (xd = 0.2037). We see that the
MCMC chain converges quite quickly, and that the convergence is quite close
to the value from the center of mass method.
From Figure 44 we see that the chains look stationary, and we have very little auto-correlation
compared to the results for the full model in Figure 34. From the full chain we also see that convergence
of the method happened within a few hundred samples. The reason for the better convergence compared
to the results presented in section 7.1 is that we have reduced the complexity in terms of the number
of geometric parameters. This reduction in complexity seems to remove a lot of the local modes, and it
also eliminates potential correlation between the geometric parameters. This result again indicates that
the convergence problems for the full model are caused by correlation between the geometric variables
and the existence of local modes in the posterior distribution. We see that the estimate xd = 0.2037
obtained from the center of mass method is on the very outskirts of the histogram of the MCMC chain
for xd. This consistency between the methods is reassuring, and it gives an indication that the correct
misalignment has been identiﬁed in this restricted model. In Figure 45 we show the MAP reconstruction
using the initial measured geometry, the MAP reconstruction using the center of mass method, and the
sample mean of x-samples from the MCMC method with the restricted model.
65
==PAGE:71==
Conclusion and Further Perspectives
DTU Compute
MAP - Initial Geometry
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
MAP - Center of Mass Alignment
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Sample Mean
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure 45:
Comparison of reconstructions using center of mass alignment
method and our MCMC method. Both alignment methods yield much better re-
constructions compared to the initial measured geometry. We see no discernible
diﬀerence between the reconstructions for both alignment methods.
From Figure 45 we see no discernible diﬀerence between the reconstructions for both methods. This
makes sense, since the parameter estimates for both methods are very similar. Comparing to the recon-
struction using the full MCMC model from Figure 35, we also do not see any discernible diﬀerence in
reconstruction quality.
As mentioned the center of mass method is an extremely eﬃcient method computationally, and from
Figure 45 we see that the more expensive MCMC method does not yield any noticeable improvement in
the reconstruction. However the MCMC method also gives important information regarding the uncer-
tainty of the parameter estimate, which is very valuable. Indeed for the chains in Figure 44 we see that
the histogram of the xd samples is relatively narrow, so we are quite certain of our estimate. It is also
worth mentioning that our methods work for more general fan-beam geometries, whereas the center of
mass method is more restrictive.
Finally we remark that we conducted similar experiments using the model discrepancy method. This
method also converged quickly in this restricted scenario, and the estimated xd parameter was very close
the the estimate obtained from the center of mass method(results not shown).
8
Conclusion and Further Perspectives
In this thesis we have developed (to our knowledge) novel approaches to addressing the problem of un-
certain projection geometries for X-ray CT. Both methods take their roots in a Bayesian treatment of
the inverse problem, and we obtain estimates of both the reconstruction and geometric model parame-
66
==PAGE:72==
Conclusion and Further Perspectives
DTU Compute
ters. We have demonstrated that both methods are able to correct severe reconstruction artifacts due to
geometric misalignment for both simulated and real tomographic data. However there are issues present
in the developed methods. For general geometries we are not able to accurately estimate the true projec-
tion geometry using the most general model parametrization, and the methods suﬀer from convergence
problems. The convergence problems are likely caused by the existence of local modes in the projection
geometry, and correlation between the geometric model parameters also seems to have a large inﬂuence on
convergence. We have found a parametrization involving the concept of a virtual detector, which signiﬁ-
cantly improves convergence for both methods, however there are problems applying this parametrization
in practice for real world data without adding extra uncertainty to the model. We do not quite understand
the underlying reason for the increase in performance using the virtual detector model. However the fact
that we are able to ﬁnd alternative parametrizations that do improve performance dramatically indicates
that our original parametrization of the problem may not be the most suitable, and that further inves-
tigation should be dedicated towards analyzing how diﬀerent parametrizations may improve performance.
One can discuss the practicality of the proposed methods for use in real world scenarios. Indeed for
the limited number of parameters we are currently including, a brute force approach, where we simply
test a range of diﬀerent projection geometries is likely computationally less expensive. The true strength
of (especially the MCMC) methods presented in this thesis is the ability to not only compute the point
estimates, but also to quantify how certain we are of our estimates, and how errors may aﬀect the ﬁnal
reconstruction, which is something that classical alignment methods do not give. We are not able to
accurately give these uncertainty estimates for all geometries due to convergence problems. However
when the methods do converge they are generally very close to the true parameter value, which is very
reassuring. The question of quantifying uncertainty is of great importance in X-ray CT, and further
research into the subject is deﬁnitely mandated.
We also remark that these methods may be extended to include additional sources of model uncer-
tainty. Indeed the framework presented can be extended to include errors in the projection angles, the
X-ray source intensity or other types of model error. In this way one can have a uniﬁed framework,
where many diﬀerent sources of model errors are treated simultaneously yielding a very powerful tool of
addressing model errors for X-ray CT.
Questions that can be addressed by further work include: Determining and addressing the convergence
issues for both methods. Extending the model to work on 3D X-ray CT problems, which would necessi-
tate an improvement of the scalability of the methods to work eﬃciently on very large inverse problems.
Implementation of stronger non-Gaussian priors in the MCMC sampling method for potentially higher
quality reconstructions. Utilization of more advanced MCMC sampling methods for improved eﬃciency
and performance.
Finally we remark that while we have focused on the X-ray CT problem in this thesis, much of the
work and algorithms can be generalized to ﬁt to other linear inverse problems yielding a powerful tool to
address model errors.
67
==PAGE:73==
References
DTU Compute
References
[1]
W. van Aarle et. al. The ASTRA Toolbox: A platform for advanced algorithm development in
electron tomography. Ultramicroscopy 157 (2015), 35–47.
[2]
W. van Aarle et al. Fast and ﬂexible X-ray tomography using the ASTRA toolbox. Opt. Express
24 (2016), 25129–25147.
[3]
C. C. Cheng et al. Correction of center of rotation and projection angle in synchrotron X-ray
computed tomography. Sci Rep 8 (2018).
[4]
K. Yang et al. A geometric calibration method for cone beam CT systems. Med Phys. 33 (2006),
1695–1706. doi: 10.1118/1.2198187.
[5]
R. Warr et al. Hyperspectral X-ray CT dataset of a single, iodine-stained lizard head sample [Data
set]. Zenodo (2020). doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4352944.
[6]
S. Arridge et al. Approximation errors and model reduction with an application in optical diﬀusion
tomography. Inverse Problems 22 (Feb. 2006), 175–195. doi: 10.1088/0266-5611/22/1/010.
[7]
S.G. Azevedo et al. Calculation of the Rotational Centers in Computed Tomography Sinograms.
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 37 (4 1990), 1525–1540. doi: 10.1109/23.55866.
[8]
T. N. Vo et al. Reliable method for calculating the center of rotation in parallel-beam tomography.
Optics Express (2014), 19078–19086.
[9]
L. Salvo et. al. 3D imaging in material science: Application of X-ray tomography. Comptes Rendus
Physique 11 (2010), 641–649.
[10]
A. Back and M. Teboulle. A Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm for Linear Inverse
Problems. SIAM J. Imaging Sciences 2 (2009), 183–202. doi: 10.1137/080716542.
[11]
J. M. Bardsley. Computational Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation for Inverse Problems. Computational
Science and Engineering. SIAM, 2018.
[12]
J. M. Bardsley and P.C. Hansen. MCMC algorithms for computational UQ of nonnegativity con-
strained linear inverse problems. English. S I A M Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 42.2 (Jan.
2020), A1269–A1288. issn: 1064-8275. doi: 10.1137/18M1234588.
[13]
S. P. Brooks and G. O. Roberts. Assesssing Convergence of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Algorithms.
Statistics and Computing (1998).
[14]
W. Cheney and D. Kinkaid. Numerical Mathmatics and Computing. 7th ed. Brooks/Cole Cengage
learning, 2013.
[15]
V. Cnudde and M. N. Boone. High-resolution X-ray computed tomography in geosciences: A review
of the current technology and applications. Earch-Science Review 123 (2013), 1–17.
[16]
A. H. Delaney and Y. Bresler. Globally convergent edge-preserving regularized reconstruction: an
application to limited-angle tomography. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 7 (1998), 204–
221.
[17]
A. Gelman, G. O. Roberts, and W. R. Gilks. Eﬃcient Metropolis Jumping Rules. Bayesian Statistics
5 (1996), 599–608.
[18]
J. Hadamard. Sur les problèmes aux dérivées partielles et leur signiﬁcation physique. Princeton
University Bulletin (1902), 49–52.
68
==PAGE:74==
References
DTU Compute
[19]
P. C. Hansen. Discrete Inverse Problems: Insights and Algorithms. Fundamentals of Algortihms.
SIAM, 2013.
[20]
T. M. Hansen et al. Accounting for imperfect forward modeling in geophysical inverse problems —
Exempliﬁed for crosshole tomography. GEOPHYSICS 79 (2014).
[21]
S. Helgason. The Radon Transform. Vol. 5. Springer, 1999.
[22]
W. H. Press et al. Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientiﬁc Computing. Cambridge University Press,
2007.
[23]
N.A.B. Riis, Y. Dong, and P.C. Hansen. Computed Tomography Reconstruction with Uncertain
View Angles by Iteratively Updated Model Discrepancy. J Math Imaging Vis (2020). doi: s10851-
020-00972-7.
[24]
B. D. Ripley. Stochastic Simulation. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. John Wiley Sons,
1987.
[25]
C. P. Robert and G. Casella. Monte Carlo Statistical Methods. Springer Texts in Statistics. Springer,
2004.
[26]
G.D. Rubin. Computed tomography: revolutionizing the practice of medicine for 40 years. Radiology
273 (2014), 45–74. doi: 10.1148/radiol.14141356.
69
