==PAGE:1==
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice
Sheet is melting?
Master Thesis
National Space Institute, DTU Space
Danish Meteorological Institute, DMI
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
Master Thesis
February 7, 2021
By
Magnus Barfod Suhr
With supervisors
Jacob L. Høyer, DMI
Sebastian B. Simonsen, Geodesy and Earth observation, DTU Space
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must
include the customary bibliographic citation, including
author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Elektrovej, Building 327,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Magnus Barfod Suhr - s153092
Signature
Date
07/02/2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The mass balance of the vast Greenland Ice Sheet plays a key role in monitoring of
climate change. As the ice sheet holds a potential sea level rise of up to 6-7 meters,
any considerate amount of melt could potentially alter the balance of Earth’s climate.
One crucial contributor to the mass balance of the Greenland Ice Sheet, is the surface
melt. With a melting surface, the melt water will not only run off the ice sheet it will
also penetrate the ice and lubricate the bedrock of the glaciers, accelerating their mo-
tion and further increase the mass loss due to surface melt. The surface temperatures
are observed with automatic weather stations as well as with satellites orbiting Earth.
From satellite thermal infrared radiation observations as well as radiation observations
from PROMICE stations, an algorithm for correcting satellite data to match the true tem-
perature measurements of the surface is created. With a model based on data from 13
PROMICE stations and observations from the MODIS and AVHRR instruments, cor-
rections to the satellite data is predicted. With these corrections applied, the number of
surface melt days across Greenland during the extreme melt event in 2012 is found. Melt
found from the model is compared to results from other studies with similar approach.
With the predicted temperature corrections, melt days of 2012 can be found within er-
rors of RMSE = 18.5%, MAE = 15.2%, and MBE = 8.9%, compared to melt days found
from uncorrected satellite data, which yields errors of RMSE = 61.2%, MAE = 56.2%,
and MBE = 56.2%. Additionally, melt found with satellite data corrected with a simple
cold bias corrections yields errors of RMSE = 41.1%, MAE = 39.2%, and MBE = 39.2%.
These results clearly show, that the model improves the satellite observations of surface
temperatures.
With the corrections applied it is found that the satellite data can be used to predict the
surface melt days and extent to a degree comparable to results from the National Snow
& Ice Data Center and the study by Nghiem et al. (2012).
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory and background
4
2.1
Study area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
PROMICE data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Satellite data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Digital elevation model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Theoretical background for model building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Data processing and methods
12
3.1
Solar mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Ice mask
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Lapse rate correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Moving mean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Cold bias correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Finding the optimal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.7
Predicting the corrections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.7.1
Spatial prediction of corrections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.8
Validation of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.8.1
RMSE, MAE, MBE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
iv
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:7==
4
Results and analysis
27
4.1
Number of melt days . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Validation of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.1
Cumulative melt days . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Melt extent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.3
Statistical error analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Discussion
40
5.1
Choosing optimal area size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Challenges with elevation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Challenges at North East Greenland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Prediction methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4.1
Different model inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4.2
Statistical comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Melt extent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusion
53
7
Future work
55
7.1
Local cold-bias correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Larger amount of data - temporal and spatial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.3
Mass balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Bibliography
58
A Appendices
62
A.1 RMSE, MAE, and MBE tables for the 7 different ﬁts
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 Correction maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.3 Melt across Greenland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Climate change has resulted in increasing temperatures and melting of the Greenland
ice sheet (GrIS). According to Hall et al. (2012), surface temperatures and the surface
mass balance (surface accumulation, such as precipitation vs. surface ablation such as
melt) play a key role in the overall mass balance of the GrIS.
The ice sheet losses mass by melt at the base of the ice due to geothermal heat and fric-
tion, by melt at the surface regulated by surface temperatures and ﬁnally by calving ice
into the surrounding ocean. As temperatures increase, the total mass balance of the ice
sheet changes with the surface mass balance (accumulation and ablation) and the ice
discharge. Thereby, the total mass balance of the ice sheet indicates how much mass is
lost or gained from the ice sheet. The GrIS has generally been losing mass during the
last decades, the ice sheets contribution to sea-level rise changed from 0.23 ± 0.08 mm
year
in 1996 to 0.57 ± 0.1 mm
year in 2005 (Rignot and Kanagaratman, 2006). In total it has been
shown, that since 1992, the GrIS has contributed to sea-level rise with 12.1 ± 2.3 mm (Si-
monsen et al., 2021). It has been estimated that if the entire GrIS melted it would result
in 6-7 meters of sea level rise (Lowe et al. (2006); Nghiem et al. (2012)). Rising sea level
could potentially have a big inﬂuence on coastal areas. The melting of the ice would
also decrease the salinity in the ocean water and inﬂuence the ocean currents (NCAR
and UCAR, 2021).
The study by Rignot and Kanagaratman (2006) shows that the mass loss is mainly due
to dynamics in the glaciers (discharge), which is responsible for 2/3 of mass loss, and
melt water runoff minus accumulation (surface mass balance), which accounts for 1/3 of
mass loss. They even state, that the accelerated motions of the glaciers is also caused (at
least partly) by running surface water coming from increased surface melt. The surface
melt water penetrates the ice all the way down to the bedrock, speeding up the motion
of the glacier.
Both Hall et al. (2012) and Rignot and Kanagaratman (2006) show that surface melt
contribute hugely to the mass loss of the GrIS. All in all it is obvious that a reliable
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
1
0 7 / 0 2 / 2 0 2 1
==PAGE:9==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
monitoring of the surface of the GrIS is needed, considering that knowledge about the
surface temperatures, evidently can provide important information on general mass bal-
ance and mass loss.
In order to monitor surface melt, weather stations can be used. Data from the Automatic
Weather Stations (AWS) located in different positions around the Greenlandic coastal ar-
eas will provide surface temperatures. The stations are a part of the Programme for Moni-
toring of the Greenland Ice Sheet (PROMICE). The stations provide limited coverage of the
ice sheet, especially because they are all located along the coast and do not cover the
interior of Greenland. With data from satellites it is possible to cover the entire surface
of the GrIS. A limitation of the satellite derived surface temperature observations is a
potential cold bias when using MODIS derived data (Hall et al., 2013).
The objective of this study is to create a model, to predict how much the GrIS is melt-
ing based on both the satellite and PROMICE AWS data. Thermal infrared observations
from several satellites are used to construct the satellite data set. The satellites surveying
the entire Earth, and speciﬁcally relevant for this study, the GrIS, carry infrared instru-
ments, that measure the passive thermal radiation from. The satellite data has been pre-
processed by the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI). It consists of temperature readings
for the entire GrIS through 2012, with as few data gaps due to eg. cloud cover as possible.
In 2012, an extreme melt event occurred on the GrIS. This resulted in most of the ice
sheet experiencing surface melt at some point during the year (Nghiem et al., 2012). The
extreme melt event of 2012 serves as a good case study, for developing a model, that
helps with the correcting of the data measured from satellite. One of the reasons, this
year was chosen for investigating, was that the satellite data set from 2012 was the only
processed data available at the beginning of this project.
The melt event in the arctic in 2012 is not a common occurrence, therefore it is interesting
to look at why it happened.
Several studies, state that a mass of warm air became stagnant above the GrIS prior to
the melt event that happened mainly during July 2012 (Neff et al. (2014); Nghiem et al.
(2012)). However, this is not the only reason why this melt event occurred.
Neff et al. (2014) show that there are three main parts, that all add up to an explanation
of the melt event. The ﬁrst; the warm mass of air that was present above the GrIS plays a
2
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:10==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
large role. The air was transported from the North American Continent, and originated
from a record heat and drought period in these areas. These masses of air, were not only
warm, they were also very humid. This ensured that water vapor also was transported
by an atmospheric river to the areas above Greenland (Bennartz et al. (2013); Neff et al.
(2014)).
Bennartz et al. (2013) state that low-altitude-level clouds containing water droplets in-
creased the surface temperatures by being in a narrow range of cloud optical thickness
that was critical for the balance of the radiation budget. The clouds were thick enough
to enhance the downwelling infrared ﬂux, and thin enough to allow penetration of solar
radiation (Bennartz et al., 2013).
Along with the warm and humid air, the ﬂuctuations of the Arctic Oscillation also inﬂu-
enced the melt event as this further increased hot air streaming in from south of Green-
land. These transitions also allowed warmer ocean waters to ﬂow to the south of Green-
land (Neff et al., 2014). All in all these factors play a key role in the melt event happening
on the GrIS during July 2012, which rarely occurs. In fact, an event of comparable size
last occurred in the year 1889. Prior to that there was a major melt event in the Medieval
Warm Period from the 10. to the 14. century (Nghiem et al., 2012). This testiﬁes to the
rarity of such an event, and therefore the interest in investigating the 2012 extreme melt
event.
In the following we will start with a description of the study area, followed by a de-
scription of data from the PROMICE weather stations and from satellites. The theory
behind the algorithm including basic corrections and ﬁlters applied to the satellite data
will be introduced. Any assumptions needed for the completion of the study will also
be described. The process of ﬁnding the best model for minimizing the error between
the two data sets will be shown. The results of the model will be presented. Differ-
ent methods will be used to validate the results in part by comparing to the PROMICE
data, which is considered to be true. The model will also be validated by comparison
with the products of other similar studies. Some of the challenges encountered along
with different methods of ﬁnding the model will be discussed. Finally, possible future
improvements to the study and the product of the study will also be presented.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory and background
In this section the theoretical background for the study will be presented. The study area
of the GrIS will be introduced. The main data sets used for the implementation of the
model will be described. Assumptions for creating the model and a description of the
theory behind it will be presented.
2.1
Study area
The GrIS extents between approximately 60◦N and approximately 82◦N in latitude and
between approximately −72◦E and approximately −18◦E in longitude. The lowest
point of the ice sheet itself is at 0 meters above sea level (masl), while the highest point
is at approximately 3700 masl. The highest point is at a fjeld/mountain located on the
southeast coast. This point is not as interesting for this study as the highest point in the
central areas of Greenland, which is at approximately 3200 masl. The area of the ice sheet
is approximately 1.7 million km2 (Nghiem et al., 2012). This is not to be confused with
the total area of Greenland, which is approximately 2.2 million km2, which also includes
the coastal areas.
The GrIS has a huge inﬂuence on the current climate. There is a large potential for
sea-level rise in the massive ice sheet, which can melt and potentially shift the balance of
the Earth’s climate system. In turn this could cause even further changes and problems
due to eg. feedback loops. A feedback loop is a loop where for example an increase
in one component causes an increase in the next component, which in turn causes even
more increase in the ﬁrst component.
Studies state, that the GrIS holds a water equivalent of 6-7 meters of sea level rise (Lowe
et al. (2006); Nghiem et al. (2012)). This is potentially a big problem at the many coastal
areas that would be ﬂooded. Apart from the more apparent issues the melting would
cause, it would also be a big factor in several feedback loops. The melting of the ice
would result in huge amounts of fresh water ﬂowing into the oceans, causing the salin-
4
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:12==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
ity to drop and the ocean water density to change. This would alter the major currents
in the oceans and by that alter the transportation and distribution of heat in the oceans.
Finally this could stimulate further climate changes, and also possibly accelerate the
melting of the ice sheets across the world (NCAR and UCAR, 2021).
Therefore Greenland is very interesting to study in respect to many aspects scientiﬁc re-
search.
The GrIS consists of different zones where different processes take place. The two main
zones are the ablation zone (zone with net loss of mass) and the accumulation zone
(zone with net gain of mass). In the ablation zone, the processes that removes ice from
the ice sheet can consist of eg. melt or sublimation. This is generally the lower parts of
an ice sheet or glacier and these areas can also experience calving of large chunks of ice
(NSIDC, 2021a).
The accumulation zone is logically the zone where more snow/ice is added to the ice
sheet than removed from it. This typically happens as snow slowly turns into ice (NSIDC,
2021b). The most interesting areas for this study, are the zones where melt occur. This
can happen in both general zones. Since the accumulation zone is naturally located in
the central areas of the GrIS, it could be natural to believe that no melt occurs, however
this is not necessarily true. Even though the net mass change is positive, it can still ex-
perience melt, which is what we are interested in, in this project.
As a part of the accumulation zone is also the dry snow zone, which are areas where no
melt is happening at the surface during any time of the year. This zone is interesting for
this study, since large parts of the zone, that most years would qualify as being part of
the dry snow zone, actually experienced surface melt during 2012.
2.2
Data sets
In order to build the model for predicting more accurate surface temperatures on the
GrIS, two data sets were used. In the following section the two main data sets used for
this study of surface melt will be presented. The ﬁrst data set is temperature data from
the PROMICE stations, which will act as the ’truth’ in this study. The second data set is a
set of temperature measurements comprised of observations from a number of satellites
and then processed by DMI. The ESA Glacier CCI DEM, which is used in the model will
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
5
07/02/2021
==PAGE:13==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
also be introduced.
2.2.1
PROMICE data
The PROMICE data set is the result of a number of AWS’s scattered around the Green-
landic coastal areas as a part of the PROMICE program. As the name suggests (Pro-
gramme for Monitoring of the Greenland Ice Sheet), the programme aims to monitor the
ever evolving GrIS. This has been done since 2007 by 25 weather stations (22 active in
2016) on different locations in Greenland - see the locations in ﬁgure 2.1. The elevation
of the stations and Greenland can also be seen in the ﬁgure (Fausto et al., 2015). The
stations are located mainly along the coast (except the north-westernmost part) with a
few station positioned more inland. Most of the stations are located in pairs or groups
such that one station is on the ice sheet and the other in the pair is close to or directly on
land. This is denoted by a subscript of U (upper) or L (lower) respectively.
Figure 2.1: The locations of the PROMICE weather stations around Greenland. (Fausto et al., 2015)
6
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:14==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
The coordinates (in degrees north and west) and the elevation in masl of the stations
used in this study can also be seen in table 2.1 and the PROMICE website (GEUS, DTU
Space, and ASIAQ, 2007).
Station name
Latitude (◦N)
Longitude (◦W)
Elevation (masl)
KPCU
79.8347
25.1662
870
SCOU
72.2230
26.8182
460
SCOL
72.3933
27.2333
970
QASL
61.0308
46.8493
280
QASU
61.1753
46.8195
900
NUKL
64.4822
49.5358
530
NUKU
64.5108
49.2692
1120
NUKN
64.9452
49.8850
920
KANL
67.0955
49.9513
670
KANM
67.0670
48.8355
1270
UPEL
72.8932
54.2955
220
UPEU
72.8878
53.5783
940
THUU
76.4197
68.1463
760
Table 2.1: PROMICE station data sheet for stations used in this project
The programme was launched by the Danish Energy Agency (DANCEA) and is now run
by the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland (GEUS) in collaboration with the Dan-
ish National Space Institute (DTU Space) and the Greenland Survey (ASIAQ) (GEUS, DTU
Space, and ASIAQ, 2007). The data used for this project is not taken directly from the
website. DMI has carried out a simple manual quality control of the data, where the
skin temperatures computed from the ingoing and outgoing radiation, has been plotted
to check for any obvious errors. For this study it is the skin temperatures, that are used
and not the temperatures at 2.7 meters, that the stations also measure. For most of the
data measured by the stations, a measurement is taken every 10 minutes, and hourly
averages are then transmitted via satellite during the non-winter seasons (100-300 days
a year depending on which parameter).
In this project the PROMICE data will act like the truth. It is assumed that the PROMICE
data is the most accurate measure of surface temperatures on GrIS. Therefore we can use
the PROMICE data for validating the ﬁnal model and corrected satellite data.
As mentioned, the processed PROMICE data consists of data from 25 stations. All sta-
tions measure the same parameters (surface temperature, wind speed, air pressure, etc.)
but not all measurements will be used for the project. In fact we mainly look at the
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
7
07/02/2021
==PAGE:15==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
surface temperatures measured by the PROMICE stations. The stations have operated
during different periods starting from 2007 where the ﬁrst set of stations began opera-
tion in the area around Nuuk. Only the stations operating in 2012, were included in this
study.
Since 2007, stations have been placed around the coast, as can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1 to get
a more accurate view and better monitoring possibilities of the GrIS.
In 2012, 20 of the 25 stations were active, so in theory all these could be used, but for
various (unknown) reasons some of the data sets have holes in 2012. Because of this
data gap they could not be used for this project, so they were excluded as well.
Finally we ended up with 13 stations located in the 7 different areas, as seen on the
Greenland map in ﬁgure 2.1, except the location denoted as TAS. The 13 stations are
located in ’only’ 7 different locations with 2-3 stations in the area near each location. For
example, around Nuuk (NUK) 3 different stations were operational in 2012. At most
sites one station is placed on the ice (station denoted by subscript U for upper), while
one is directly on the land areas below the ice (station denoted by subscript L for lower).
2.2.2
Satellite data
The second data set is a set of surface temperature observations, combined from two dif-
ferent satellite sensors, namely the Moderate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS,
onboard the Aqua and Terra satellites), and the Advanced Very-High-Resolution Radiometer
(AVHRR, onboard NOAA and MetOp satellites). Both instruments used for this data set
measures thermal infrared (IR) temperatures. The MODIS sensor has a spatial resolu-
tion of 1km, which is also the spatial resolution the ﬁnal data set ends up with (Nielsen-
Englyst et al., 2018). The AVHRR produces data in resolution of 1.1 km.
The disadvantage of each of the IR sensors is that because they measure in the visible
and infrared bandwidth, they can not ’see through’ clouds. In other words, they require
clear-sky conditions (Nghiem et al., 2012). MODIS measures in 36 different bands at ap-
proximately 0.4 to 14.0 µm, while AVHRR measures in 6 channels at approximately 0.6
to 12.5 µm. Not all channels are used for temperature measurements. For MODIS, the
channels 20-23, 31, and 32 measure surface temperatures, while the channels 3, 4, and
5 of the AVHRR are used for this purpose. All channels used, measure in the IR or the
8
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:16==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
near IR bandwidths (NASA (2021); NASA (2020)).
The sensors measure thermal radiation emitted from any surface - in this case the snow
and ice on the GrIS. The radiation measure is called Brightness temperature, which in sim-
ple terms are a product of the actual physical temperature of the surface as well as the
emissivity (Nghiem et al., 2012). Emissivity is basically a measure of how well any sur-
face emits energy as radiation.
As both sensors experience the same drawback of the need of clear-sky conditions an
interpolation has been carried out as processing by DMI.
An optimum interpolation routine similar to the process in Høyer and Karagali (2016),
was applied to the two data sets to produce a gap-free set of brightness temperature ob-
servations.
The result of the processing done by DMI, is a data set of several different parameters.
This data set consists of 366 ﬁles (one for each day of the year of 2012) wherein derived/-
analysed measurements are included. Each of the 366 ﬁles is composed of 8 different
parameters:
• Analysed sea and ice surface temperature
• Estimated error standard deviation of analysed surface temperature
• Latitude
• Longitude
• Land sea ice lake bit mask
• Number of MODIS observations in grid point
• Level 3 standard deviation of observed MODIS surface temperature in grid point
• Reference time of sst ﬁeld
The main parameters, used for this study was: ’Analysed sea and ice surface tempera-
ture’, which is the temperature measurements in kelvin after processing, and ’Latitude’
and Longitude, which are the locations for each processed temperature measurement.
The remaining parameters are not used, so they will not be described any further.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
9
==PAGE:17==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
2.2.3
Digital elevation model
As the GrIS is a very diverse environment with respect to elevation it is important to
have an accurate understanding of how the terrain behaves, both in general across
Greenland, and especially in the surroundings of the PROMICE stations. The knowl-
edge about the terrain across Greenland, comes from a Digital Elevation Model of the
arctic (ArcticDEM) created by The National Science Foundation (NSF) and The National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) (University of Minnesota, NSF and NGA, 2021),
and provided by DTU Space.
The ArcticDEM is created from high-resolution imagery from the WorldView 1, 2, and 3
satellites in the DigitalGlobe Satellite Constellation administrated by the Polar Geospa-
tial Center (PGC) at the University of Minnesota (University of Minnesota, NSF and
NGA, 2021). The ArcticDEM is available in spatial resolutions of 1, 2, 10, 32, 100, and
500 meters, and 1 kilometer. For this study, the 1 kilometer DEM is used, though it is
regridded to match the grid of the satellite data for simplicity.
The ArcticDEM is used both as an input of the model to predict corrections and also to
compute the lapse rate for the areas around each PROMICE station. This will be elabo-
rated in following sections.
2.3
Theoretical background for model building
The satellite data does not match the surface temperature values from the PROMICE
data perfectly. The PROMICE observations are assumed to be the most precise measure-
ments of surface temperature, therefore a difference of the two data sets can be seen as
an error. A model is built to correct this error. We can measure the difference between
the observations directly at the PROMICE locations. However, we want to ﬁnd a correc-
tion that can be applied to the entire satellite data set. Ideally this would result in more
accurate surface temperature estimates from satellite observations of GrIS.
To model this correction we assume that there is a linear correlation between the surface
temperature and the three parameters: latitude, longitude, and elevation. Though this
might be a simpliﬁcation of the parametrisation of surface temperatures, the assumption
was also used in the studies by Fausto et al. (2009) and Ritz et al. (1997).
10
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
07/02/2021
==PAGE:18==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
The linear model of these parameters can be written as:
correction = m0 + m1 · lat + m2 · lon + m3 · ele
(2.1)
In equation 2.1 m0 is the constant term of the linear model whereas m1, m2, and m3 are
the coefﬁcients for each of the parameters used for building the model, in this case lati-
tude, longitude, and elevation.
A multiple linear regression is carried out to ﬁnd which parameters to include in the
model and the coefﬁcients of the correlation between the observed data error and each
location parameter. The coefﬁcients can then be used to predict the corrections for the
entire satellite data set.
Before the regression can be carried out, some assumptions and ﬁlters to the data is ap-
plied, to limit the amount of data and optimise relevance and computational need.
Melt mainly occurs during the summer season. There is no reason to use data from days
with no or limited sun hours. In cooperation with the supervisors of this project it was
assumed that 18 solar hours a day is needed for melt to happen. Thus, a lower limit of
18 hours of sun was deﬁned (Høyer (2021), personal communication).
When the correction is found, it can be applied to the satellite data resulting in new sur-
face temperatures. To estimate the number of surface melt days we need to deﬁne the
temperature at which the surface is melting.
We would expect melt happening at temperature above 0◦C. However, the ice sheet sur-
face can experience melt at air temperatures below freezing. Therefore, we need to deﬁne
a surface temperature threshold for when it is deﬁned as melt. Thresholds were tested,
to ﬁnd the inﬂuence on the model. Thresholds of −0.5◦C, −1◦C, and −2◦C were tried to
see the effect of this in the difference of the number of melt days for both the PROMICE
data and the satellite data. Initial tests, with the different threshold did not show any
improvement to the correlation with the PROMICE observations. As at least two other
studies (Hall et al. (2013); Nghiem et al. (2012)) have used a temperature threshold of
−1◦C, this was also chosen to be used as threshold in this study. Hall et al. (2013) states
that ”Several studies have shown that there may be a cold bias in the MODIS-derived
surface temperature” as the reason for the choice of threshold for when a pixel is con-
sidered as melting. This statement further supports the choice of surface temperature
threshold for this study, as we also use a MODIS derived set of surface temperatures.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
11
==PAGE:19==
3
Data processing and methods
The data described in the former section is used to create a model of the surface temper-
atures across Greenland. This model is used to predict a correction for each location on
the ice sheet of Greenland. With the predicted correction applied, the satellite data can
be used to ﬁnd whether a location is melting or not.
The model is created to predict a correction to the observed error between the temper-
atures for each PROMICE station and the temperatures from the satellite data for each
day of the year 2012. This is done by taking the difference between the surface tempera-
ture at the PROMICE stations and at either the grid point from the satellite data closest
to the position of the weather station or the average surface temperature of larger area
around the station.
To make the model more robust, the satellite data from 4 areas of different size around
each station is taken into account and tested to see which is best. This is to done avoid
potential errors - if for example the grid point closest to the station happened to be di-
rectly on land and therefore deﬁned as NaN in the data. This is done in 4 areas around
each station in the following way:
• 1x1 area; Only predicting using the closest grid point.
• 5x5 area; Predicting using an average temperature of an area of 2 grid points in
each direction from the grid point closest to the station. In practice done by taking
a mean of the 2 pixels south, north, west, and east of the grid point closest to the
station. Creating one mean temperature value for the 5x5 area around the point
closest to the station.
• 11x11 area; Predicting using an average temperature of an area of 5 grid points
in each direction from the grid point closest to the station. Creating one mean
temperature value for the 11x11 area around the point closest to the station.
• 25x25 area; Predicting using an average temperature of an area of 12 grid points
in each direction from the grid point closest to the station. Creating one mean
12
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:20==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
temperature value for the 25x25 area around the point closest to the station.
The choice of optimal area size for training the model, will be discussed further in section
5.1. However, before the model is created, some corrections are applied to both data sets.
These corrections were applied to make sure we only look at the melting season (solar
mask) and at areas with ice (ice mask), to consider the change in surface temperatures
due to elevation (lapse rate correction), and ﬁnally to correct for rapid changes in the daily
temperatures (moving mean). These corrections will be explained in the following.
3.1
Solar mask
As seen in ﬁgures 3.1 and 3.2, there are higher variability in surface temperatures during
the winter (or the non-melt season). Even though this variability probably would not
affect the number of melting days greatly, we want to ﬁlter out the part of the year that
is not relevant of this study. This was done by introducing a solar mask. This mask
was at ﬁrst simply created by manually looking up which days in the year of 2012 had
more than 18 hours of sun in each station location. Then a binary mask that deﬁnes the
value of the surface temperature in both data sets to NaN if that day had less than 18
hours of sun was created. The value of 18 hours is chosen based on the consideration
that in general more sun equals more thermal energy deposited into the ice, which in
turn equals more melting. 18 hours is chosen as a threshold to make sure that not all
data was ﬁltered out. If the threshold was set at eg. 22 hours, almost all the data at the
southernmost stations (such as QAS) would be ﬁltered out. On the other hand, if the
threshold was set too low, not all data used would be relevant, and thereby it would be
unnecessarily computationally expensive.
This simple mask was a proof-of-concept, with which it could be checked whether or
not this approach would affect the resulting model and/or computational needs etc.
The simple mask could only be used at certain locations - sites where PROMICE stations
are located. That was not desirable for the ﬁnal model, as we want to include and make
predictions for the entire GrIS.
In general, a spatially continuous mask of the number of sun hours for any location of
the GrIS, can be computed based on the latitude of the site and the declination of sun at
that point in time.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
13
==PAGE:21==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Following Goswami et al. (2000), the declination, the hour angle, and the number of sun
hours are computed with equations 3.1 , 3.2, and 3.3 from the location on Earth (latitude)
and the time.
δ = 23.45◦· sin
360
365 · (d + 284)

(3.1)
hour angle = cos−1

cos (90.833)
cos (lat) · cos (δ) −(tan (lat) · tan (δ))

(3.2)
solar hours = 2 · hour angle
15
(3.3)
In the equations above, δ is the declination of the sun, depending on d, which is the day
of the year, meaning that January 1st will be day number 1 (d = 1) and eg. June 1st is
day number 153 (d = 153) etc. The variable lat is the latitude of the site in question.
The fraction 360
365 converts the number of day in the year to a orbital position. Lastly,
90.833 is an approximation of the solar zenith angle at sunrise/sunset. These constants
are needed to get the solar hours as a usable value and unit.
With equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 the continuous solar mask was computed and the mask
was used to ﬁlter out days where less than 18 hours of sun was present according to the
site’s latitude and day of year. This was to ensure that the model was applicable to years
other than 2012 and for locations across the entire ice sheet.
3.2
Ice mask
As the satellite data provides observations from both land, ocean and ice, we needed to
limit our observations to only ice covered pixels. Here, we apply the ESA Glacier CCI
ice mask for the GrIS (Rastner et al., 2012). This was done by applying the ice mask to a
uniform grid to tell us whether or not each pixel was ice. As can be seen in the descrip-
tion of the satellite data set (see section 2.2.2), each of the 366 ﬁles containing the satellite
data also includes a land-cover-mask from DMI, which could be used as an ice mask to
ﬁlter out all non-ice pixels. However, the spatial extent of the DMI ice mask is greater
than just Greenland, and therefore unsecessarily large for this project. As we wanted
14
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:22==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
to use the most restrictive ice-mask, the ESA Glacier CCI ice mask was chosen (Høyer
(2021), personal communication).
As the ice mask and the satellite data was on different grids we used a linear interpola-
tion to transform the ice mask to the satellite data grid.
With the transformed ice mask, the satellite data measured from non-ice areas (water
or bare ground) could be excluded in the data set and we could move on to the next
correction.
3.3
Lapse rate correction
A lapse rate correction is needed due to difference in height around each station. We
are comparing the surface temperature at the PROMICE station site with surface tem-
peratures from satellite in areas several km around the station. The change in elevation
can inﬂuence the measured surface temperatures. When a mass of air elevates to higher
or lower altitude the temperature changes. Because the mass of air does the work of
expanding with higher altitudes but does not get extra energy from any external sources
the temperature of the mass decreases. The lapse rate is assumed to be dry adiabatic,
since the air can be assumed to contain marginal amounts of water (Danielson et al.,
2002).
To create a data set, where we could use an average temperature of an area around the
grid point closest to the station, the correction is applied to make sure that the temper-
ature data in the used area has the same reference elevation. The lapse rate correction
was created based on the ArcticDEM described earlier. The correction is found by as:
Lapse rate correction = elevation · 9.8
1000
(3.4)
The elevation at each satellite grid point, is found from the ArctidDEM. The constant
9.8
1000, is used since the rate of temperature decrease is 9.8
◦C
km (dry-adiabatic lapse rate)
(Danielson et al., 2002). The lapse rate correction is added to the satellite data at each
grid point in the area around each station.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
15
07/02/2021
07/02/2021
==PAGE:23==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
3.4
Moving mean
Another correction that is applied to the satellite data is a moving mean. This is done
based on the assumption that if the temperature value in a pixel one day is eg. −2◦C,
and the value in the same pixel the next day is eg. −15◦C it could be seen as an error
(Høyer (2021), personal communication). The difference before and after applying the
moving mean can be seen on the pink graphs in ﬁgures 3.1 and 3.2. This shows that the
worst peaks have been dampened. A moving mean of 7 days is chosen.
3.5
Cold bias correction
At the beginning of the project it was hypothesized that part of the error between the
PROMICE data and the satellite data was due to a cold bias. This can be seen in ﬁg-
ure 3.1, where daily temperature variations at a single station site is shown for both the
satellite and PROMICE station observations. There appears to be a general bias at the
Scoresbysund station location, so that the satellite data (seen in pink) underestimates the
temperature compared to the PROMICE data (seen in blue). There is also a similar bias
at all the remaining stations. This cold bias is also stated to be present in MODIS derived
data in Hall et al. (2013).
16
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:24==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 3.1: Comparison of PROMICE data and raw unprocessed satellite data at Scoresbysund station
location.
To amend the problem of the bias, the mean of the difference between the PROMICE
data and the satellite data at each station site is added to the whole satellite data set.
The result of this correction can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2, where the two graphs generally
align better than before the correction (ﬁg. 3.1). Unsurprisingly this does not make the
graphs align perfectly, due to this correction being a mean of all the differences and a
very simple way of correction for the bias. This means that the correction will be better
for some locations than others, but in general it makes the two temperature proﬁles
match better. The satellite data in ﬁgure 3.2 (pink graph) has also been smoothed with
the moving mean (see section 3.4), which is why the two satellite data graphs in ﬁgures
3.1 and 3.2 does not follow the exact same curve, but still show the same tendencies, the
one in ﬁgure 3.2 simply being translated towards the true data (blue).
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
17
07/02/2021
==PAGE:25==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 3.2: Comparison of PROMICE data and satellite data corrected for cold-bias and with moving
mean at Scoresbysund station location.
This correction does not remove the bias perfectly as it is a very simple way of trying to
correct for this bias or ’error’. Also, there is still some error between the satellite data
and the true PROMICE data, which is not necessarily due to the cold bias in the MODIS
data. This ﬁnal difference is what we want to correct for with the model described in the
following.
3.6
Finding the optimal model
With the mentioned corrections and ﬁlters being applied to the data sets, we can begin
to create a model based on the different possible parameters in the data as mentioned in
section 2.3. Drawing inspiration from similar studies (Fausto et al., 2009), the parame-
ters latitude and elevation are included - this is due to the simple fact that temperature
changes with elevation and how much to the north the site is located (due to the amount
of sun the location is exposed to). An indication of a longitudinal dependency was also
found during the preliminary data analysis.
According to Fausto et al. (2009), longitude is needed as a parameter to include the ob-
18
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
07/02/2021
==PAGE:26==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
servation that temperatures are generally slightly colder in East Greenland than West Greenland
for similar altitudes and latitudes (Fausto et al., 2009). Compared to even earlier studies
(Ritz et al., 1997) an introduction of the longitudinal dependency has improved the per-
formance of the method and model used by Fausto et al. (2009). Hence, we introduce
longitude into the parametrisation.
The work of ﬁnding the optimal model consisted of comparing model ﬁts based on any
combination of these 3 parameters. This is done mainly by comparing the R2 values of
the different ﬁts.
We investigate the following 7 possible permutations of the parameter space, spanned
by latitude, longitude, and elevation:
• Latitude
• Elevation
• Longitude
• Latitude & Elevation
• Latitude & Longitude
• Elevation & Longitude
• Latitude & Elevation & Longitude
The models are built using the mentioned permutations, to predict the shown difference
between the PROMICE data and the satellite data. Ultimately we want the model to
predict corrections, that can correct this error in the satellite data. This is done in order
to estimate how many days in the year, the temperature is above the deﬁned threshold
of −1◦C and therefore assumed to be melting.
The R2 values for each model are given in table 3.1 along with the coefﬁcients for each
model - blank cells in this table means that the parameter is not included in the model.
The ﬁrst column of the coefﬁcient table (marked ”constant”) is the constant term in each
model equation, denoted as m0 in equation 2.1. The rest of the columns are the coef-
ﬁcients determining the dependence of latitude, longitude, and elevation, denoted as
m1, m2, and m3 in equation 2.1.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
19
==PAGE:27==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Model / Coefﬁcient
Constant
Latitude
Elevation
Longitude
R2
Lat
-0.1105
0.0310
-
-
0.0070
Ele
0.7610
-
0.0015
-
0.2453
Lon
8.393
-
-
0.1151
0.0707
Lat/Ele
-0.0658
0.0101
0.0015
-
0.0717
Lat/Lon
15.87
-0.1011
-
0.1261
0.2858
Ele/Lon
8.709
-
-0.0004
0.1155
0.2471
Lat/Ele/Lon
16.19
-0.1011
-0.0004
0.1264
0.2876
Table 3.1: Coefﬁcients and R2 values of each of the 7 model permutations.
As can be seen in table 3.1 many of the models would potentially not predict the cor-
rection optimally - the best R2 value is 0.2876 which does not indicate a very good ﬁt
between the input parameters and the response variable, which is the correction to the
satellite data, that we want to predict.
The models actually predict the correction and thereby the number of melt days for
Greenland in 2012 better than expected based solely on R2 values, compared to the
’truth’ of PROMICE (see section 4).
We will get back to that later in the project, when the model is validated for example
with the error statistics RMSE, MAE, and MBE (see section 4.2).
The coefﬁcients for each model are not that different (except for the constant term, see
table 3.1), which hints that each model will perform similarly with regards to the predic-
tions.
It is hard to conclude anything about which model will perform the best, when only
looking at the coefﬁcients of table 3.1, in fact these do not say much about the perfor-
mance, but it does give a hint about the difference from one model to another, where we
can see than each coefﬁcient is similar for each model.
Another notion, that has to be made here, is that we see the elevation coefﬁcients are
very small compared to the other coefﬁcients in the models, when this parameter is in-
cluded. This could be due to the fact that the data set does not include much variation in
elevation. As we see in the PROMICE data sheet, (table 2.1), most of the elevations are
similar and none of them are close to the heights that we know exist in the main areas
of Greenland (for example at the highest point in the interior of Greenland, which is at
more than 3000 masl). If data with more varying elevation values were included in the
model building, this parameter would likely play a bigger role in reference to the model
20
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
07/02/2021
==PAGE:28==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
coefﬁcients. This tendency can also be seen on the correction map ﬁgures that include
elevation along with other parameters (see ﬁgure 3.3) and will be further discussed in
section 5.2.
Even though we can not conclude something from the R2 value table alone, this still
gives a good indicating, that we probably should not build a model based on eg. lat-
itude alone. Surprisingly the values in the table even suggests that a model based on
latitude & elevation together would not yield very good results.
On the other hand, Since we know that temperature naturally changes with height (ele-
vation) and with amount of sun (latitude) and we can see that a model based on latitude,
elevation, and longitude have the best ﬁt (including the knowledge from Fausto et al.
(2009)), we can say from this, that we will probably get the best prediction results from
that particular model. Because of this, that is the model we will focus on.
3.7
Predicting the corrections
Now that the model has been created based on the parameters latitude, elevation, and
longitude, we can predict the corrections and apply them to the satellite data. This is
done in a couple of ways. The ﬁrst, was to simply check whether a model could predict
corrections so it was possible to ﬁnd number of melting days or if the corrections found
by the model would be completely off.
The ﬁrst method was to use the PROMICE stations’ parameters as input to the model,
meaning that the latitude, longitude, and elevation from the PROMICE station data
sheet (table 2.1) has been used as input to the model. This means that temperature
corrections are found in the 13 locations where the stations are positioned. This is of
course not the ﬁnal goal of the prediction process, since the predictions are very local
and sparse. We intend to check if the model can be used as theorised at all.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
21
==PAGE:29==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
With the model used, based on all three parameters, the corrections (temp corr) in each
of the 13 station locations are found as:
temp corr = m0 + m1 · lat + m2 · ele + m3 · lon
(3.5)
= 16.186 −0.1011 · lat −0.0004 · ele + 0.1264 · lon
Where the coefﬁcients m0, m1, m2, and m3 can be seen in table 3.1 and lat, ele, and lon
are vectors of the PROMICE station parameters. The predicted corrections are applied
to the satellite data in the nearest grid point resulting in number of melt days in this
location. The results can be seen later in the report (see section 4).
A second method used to predict the corrections to apply to the data was very simi-
lar to the one previously described. The PROMICE station parameters were still used as
input to the model, but for this, the corrections were predicted in a way similar to the
leave-one-out principle. Here the corrections for a station location, eg. KANL, were pre-
dicted based on a model created from the rest of the stations, excluding that particular
station (KANL). With this method, the model’s ability to predict corrections in a location,
that had not been used for the model building/training in the ﬁrst place is investigated.
This means that the coefﬁcients of the models change, because a new model is created
every iteration, for each station location (excluding the station in question). Apart from
the fact that corrections are predicted based on a model build in a leave-one-out manner,
the approach for this method is the same as the previous one, where all 13 station were
used. The model would predict 13 corrections (one for each location), which could then
be applied to the data in that particular location when ﬁnding the number of melt days.
The performance of this method is expected to be lower compared to the other ways of
predicting corrections. The predicted corrections and resulting number of melt days can
be seen in section 4.
3.7.1
Spatial prediction of corrections
The last method of predicting corrections, is the one that is expected to be the most use-
ful. This is not necessarily because it is the best to predict the corrections themselves, but
instead because of the advantage that it can predict corrections for the entire ice sheet.
22
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:30==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
In principle, this method is the same as the ﬁrst described, where the model is built on
data from all 13 PROMICE stations, but now we use the actual satellite grid coordinates
as input. This means that corrections are found for the entire GrIS, instead of very locally
in the 13 station locations alone.
For the purpose of the project, we are interested in the ability to predict corrections for
the entire GrIS, instead of only in a few locations. Because of its applicability, this last
method is the one that is focused the most on.
With the complete span of lat/lon along with the ArcticDEM as input parameters to the
model, corrections are found across the entire area. With these, a map of the corrections
can be made, showing which areas that have the largest corrections. These maps also
show the inﬂuence of each parameter to the corrections.
To see some of the difference, and visualise the inﬂuence of each parameter, the correc-
tion map created from the model based solely on elevation and solely on longitude can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.3 (left and middle), along with the correction map from the ”best”
model (based on all three parameters) to the right in ﬁgure 3.3. The ﬁrst two ﬁgures are
included to show some obvious impact from the parameters elevation (left), and longi-
tude (middle) respectively. For instance we see how precisely the corrections follow the
height contours (marked with white lines) of Greenland in the elevation model ﬁgure
(left). This is expected, since the model is created based on that parameter alone.
We can also see in the longitude ﬁgure (middle), that the model predicts the corrections
to be higher on the east side of Greenland, which can be expected from what was de-
scribed earlier, and learned from Fausto et al. (2009). It is seen that it is colder on the east
side of Greenland, and that therefore can have larger impact on the model.
Finally, we see obvious dependencies to both latitude and longitude in the ﬁgure that
shows the model based on all three parameters (right). We see differences in corrections
in the east of Greenland vs. the west, and in the north of Greenland vs. the south. At the
same time, we see a surprisingly small dependency to elevation, which was expected
based on the small elevation coefﬁcient. This elevation dependency (or lack there-off)
will be discussed further later. We see on the maps of the corrections, that all the mod-
els included predict corrections in approximately the same range (from around -1 ◦C to
around 7 ◦C). Correction maps made from predictions by the rest of the models, can be
seen in ﬁgures A.1 to A.4 in appendix A.2.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
23
07/02/2021
==PAGE:31==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 3.3: Map of the corrections that should be applied to each pixel in Greenland, predicted from model
based on elevation (left), longitude (middle), and latitude & longitude & elevation (right). The red
crosses represent the location of the PROMICE stations.
3.8
Validation of the model
To validate the created model, different measures will be used. The number of melt
days, predicted by the chosen model with different methods will be compared to inves-
tigate the performance of the model. This will include melt days from both true data
(PROMICE), raw satellite data and corrected satellite data. A cumulative comparative
approach will also be used to compare the results from the model with other studies
from the National Snow & Ice Data Center (NSIDC) (NSIDC, 2019). The extent of the
melt on speciﬁc days will also be investigated, both temporally and spatially, again to
see how well the model predicts melt compared to actual observations from other stud-
ies such as Nghiem et al. (2012) and NSIDC (2019). Finally a statistical comparison of
each method of predicting melt will be carried out. This is done using the error statistics
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and Mean Bias Error
(MBE) (Willmott and Matsuura, 2005), which are used to compare the predictions with
actual observations from PROMICE.
24
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:32==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
3.8.1
RMSE, MAE, MBE
The error statistics RMSE, MAE, and MBE are all measures to see how well (or poor) the
used model predicts the number of melt days. To be able to compare to the truth, we
only look at the prediction in the location of the stations. We will compare methods that
predict temperature corrections from both PROMICE station and satellite grid coordi-
nates as well as melt days from raw satellite data and satellite data where only cold bias
correction has been applied.
The RMSE is a way of measuring how well something is predicted compared to a known
value. When comparing the melt days, the residuals are computed simply by subtract-
ing the predicted number of melt days for each station from the known number from the
PROMICE data. Following Willmott and Matsuura (2005), RMSE is computed as can be
seen in eq. 3.6.
RMSE =
s
1
n
n
∑
i=1
( ˆyi −yi)2
(3.6)
In eq. 3.6, n is the number of observations (in this project this is equal to 13, since we
have a ”known” number of days above the set threshold from each of the 13 PROMICE
stations. yi are the number of melt days predicted with the model (for each 13 stations).
ˆyi are then the known number of melt days.
Since the error/residual is squared in this statistic, the larger errors are given greater
weight.
The MAE is less sensitive to large errors,, whereas RMSE is particularly useful when
large errors are extra undesirable.
Since we do not necessarily have one preferred way to measure how well the model has
predicted number of melt days, we will look at both the statistics.
The MAE is a measure of the magnitude of the errors. Following Willmott and Matsuura
(2005), MAE is computed as can be seen in eq. 3.7.
MAE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
| ˆyi −yi|
(3.7)
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
25
==PAGE:33==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
The n is again the number of observations, the yi are again the predicted values and ˆyi
are the known values.
The last statistic used, is the Mean Bias Error (MBE). It is similar to the MAE, except that
we take the sign/direction of the error into account. Following Willmott and Matsuura
(2005), MBE is computed as can be seen in 3.8.
MBE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
( ˆyi −yi)
(3.8)
Again, n is the number of observations, yi are the predicted values, and ˆyi are the known
values.
This statistic is called the mean bias error because it estimates the bias (or the systematic
error) in a model. We will not focus on this metric as much as the other two, but it will
be used as a part of the evaluation of the model.
26
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:34==
4
Results and analysis
The model created from a set of PROMICE temperature observations and a set of com-
posite satellite temperature observations has been used to predict corrections to the error
of the satellite measurements. These corrections are created to replicate and correct the
difference between the true PROMICE data and the satellite data. With the corrected
data, number of melt days across Greenland is found.
In this section the number of melt days predicted with the model will be presented.
Additionally we will validate the created model, by comparing the results to other sim-
ilar products made by eg. National Snow & Ice Data Center (NSIDC), which will also
be presented. We will also compare the results to other studies, presented in previously
published scientiﬁc articles in the same study area and try to compare their results, with
the results from this project.
4.1
Number of melt days
The main objective of this project is to create a model than can process data and predict
whether a pixel or location on Greenland is melting at the surface or not. In general the
models could be based on the 7 different permutations of the parameter space seen ear-
lier. The parameter space consists of the three possible parameters; latitude, longitude,
and elevation. This means that the 7 possible models are any combination of these 3
parameters. Based on the performance of the ﬁtted model and the R2 values for each
possible permutation (see section 3.6, table 3.1), the ’best’ model could be chosen. The
model with the best ﬁt, was the model build with all three parameters, thus the results
in this section are all from the predictions made with the model created with latitude,
longitude, and elevation.
In table 4.1, the number of melt days for each station and for each method (see below),
predicted with the chosen model, can be seen.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
27
==PAGE:35==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Method/Station
KPC
SCO
QAS
NUK
KAN
UPE
THU
UPE 2
SCO 2
QAS 2
NUK 2
NUK 3
KAN 2
PROMICE
59
81
52
62
54
81
67
88
81
57
70
74
79
12 stations
110
73
44
53
55
63
77
54
73
48
57
53
65
13 stations (AWS)
92
86
50
60
62
65
52
75
92
53
58
58
77
13 stations (satellite)
55
55
53
61
58
55
56
64
65
71
65
64
85
CB and MM
38
38
20
35
38
42
49
50
49
37
45
45
57
Raw satellite data
51
9
19
21
24
21
61
30
3
33
38
31
38
Table 4.1: Actual and predicted melt days from 6 different methods.
The results of the model are also seen in ﬁgures 4.1 and 4.2. Figure 4.1 shows the absolute
comparison of number of melt days for each of the 13 stations, while ﬁgure 4.2 shows
the percentage wise comparison (where the ’truth’ is 100% and included for reference).
There are 6 different bars for each station, these 6 bars show the number of melt days for
each of the 6 methods used to ﬁnd melt days. The 6 methods are:
• Truth (PROMICE); The number of melt days from the PROMICE weather stations.
The values are found by looking at how many days during the year, the tempera-
ture is above the temperature threshold of −1◦C.
• 12 stations (leave one out); Number of melt days found by using leave one out,
where we try to predict a value for each station with a data set excluding that
particular station. For this the PROMICE station parameters are used as input to
the created model, which is based on the set of latitude, longitude, and elevation
from PROMICE stations (see table 2.1). With the predicted corrections applied to
the satellite data at each station location, the number of melt days are found using
the threshold of −1◦C.
• 13 stations (station parameters); Number of melt days found by using PROMICE
parameters as input to the created model, which is based on the set of latitude, lon-
gitude, and elevation from PROMICE stations (see table 2.1). With the predicted
corrections applied to the satellite data at each station location, the number of melt
days are found using the threshold of −1◦C.
• 13 stations (satellite data parameters); Number of melt days found by using satel-
lite data parameters as input to the created model, which is based on the set of
latitude, longitude, and elevation. With this method, a correction map is created
from the satellite data (see section 3.7). This correction map is applied to the satel-
28
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:36==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
lite data and a temperature from each station location for each day is found and
used to see how many days the temperature exceeds the threshold of −1◦C.
• Cold-bias & moving mean -corrected; Number of melt days found by correcting
the raw satellite data with a cold-bias correction (see section 3.5) and the moving
mean (see section 3.4). This is not actually a prediction, because no model is uti-
lized. The number of melt days is found using the temperature threshold of −1◦C.
• Raw satellite data; Number of melt days are found from the raw and unprocessed
satellite data. The number of melt days is found using the temperature threshold
of −1◦C.
The difference between the two 13 station methods is that the ﬁrst (yellow bar in ﬁgures
4.1 and 4.2) is predicted using the PROMICE parameters (latitude, longitude and eleva-
tion from PROMICE, table 2.1) as input, whereas the second one (purple bar in ﬁgures
4.1 and 4.2) is predicted using the parameters from the given satellite data as input. Of
course this means that the yellow method only can predict in locations where we have
a PROMICE station, and the purple method can predict for the whole Greenlandic ice
sheet. For this project, the latter is preferable as we want to predict the number of melt
days for the entire ice sheet, and not only in some very speciﬁc locations. Especially as
these locations are not very well distributed across the ice sheet. It should be mentioned
that the yellow and purple methods uses the same model (same coefﬁcients) but simply
uses different inputs.
In the comparison of the number of melt days, we see a clear improvement when ﬁnding
the amount of melt days, from the corrected satellite data compared to the raw satellite
data. It is apparent that the 3 methods where a model is used, ﬁnd a larger number of
melt days than the uncorrected data in nearly all locations. It is however evident, that
the prediction in the location of the KPC station in very poor for two of the methods
used. This will be discussed in section 5.3.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
29
==PAGE:37==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 4.1: Comparison of the predicted melt days at each location.
Figure 4.2: Percentage wise comparison of the predicted melt days at each location.
30
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:38==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
4.2
Validation of the model
In this section we will look at how well the models perform. This is visualised in ﬁgures,
where some of the results from the prediction and comparison with the known number
of melt days are shown. We will also try to compare the predicted number of melt days
to the actual known number by looking at different error statistics. We will compare
the melting found by the model in a couple of different ways with the similar NSIDC
product. For this, both cumulative melt days (total number of melt days for each pixel
across Greenland during 2012) and melt extent (how large of the area of the surface is
actually melting at a particular day) will be looked upon. We will also try to infer which
pixels across Greenland have experienced melt at a point in time during 2012.
4.2.1
Cumulative melt days
A way to validate the model in this project is to make a map of Greenland, visualising
how many melt days occurred during 2012 for each pixel. This has been done both as
a cumulative map (counting total number of days through 2012 for each pixel) and as
a binary map, where a pixel is deﬁned as ”true” if it has experienced melt just a single
day during the year. These maps can be seen in ﬁgures 4.3 and 4.5. The cumulative plots
in ﬁgure 4.3 show the cumulative number of melt days across Greenland found in three
different ways: with raw uncorrected satellite data (left), with corrected satellite data
(middle), and by NSIDC (right) (NSIDC, 2013).
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
31
==PAGE:39==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 4.3: Map of cumulative melt days for each pixel during 2012. Left is cumulative melt with raw
uncorrected satellite data, middle is cumulative melt with corrected satellite data, and right is cumulative
melt from NSIDC (NSIDC, 2013). The red crosses represent the location of the PROMICE stations.
Figure 4.4: Map of melt or not for each pixel dur-
ing 2012 with raw data.
Figure 4.5: Map of melt or not for each pixel dur-
ing 2012 with corrected data.
32
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:40==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
First of all, we see in ﬁgure 4.3, that the number of melt days found across Greenland
from the uncorrected data is generally much lower than with the corrected data. The
maximum number of days found in the raw satellite data, are, unsurprisingly, found
around the southern coastal areas. At these locations, the number of melt days add up
to approximately 110 during 2012. For comparison, the maximum number of melt days
in the corrected satellite data is approximately 180-190, in corresponding areas.
The two types of maps (cumulative and ’melt or not’) is compared to a similar prod-
uct from the NSIDC (NSIDC, 2013). The cumulative melt days ﬁgure from NSIDC can
be seen on ﬁgure 4.3 (right). The ﬁgure is created by NSIDC based on a set of data with
lower resolution than the data set used for this project. In the NSIDC data, each pixel
has a size of 25km, where the resolution is 1km in the data used for this project. This
gives a much more coarse map compared to what is seen in ﬁgure 4.3 (left and middle).
Since the maps show the same, a comparison is still reasonable.
An important notion, is that at this point it was not possible to ﬁnd which temperature
threshold is used by NSIDC to ﬁnd the number of melt days. This could change the
outcome of their results, but as other studies (Hanna et al. (2013); Nghiem et al. (2012))
use −1◦C as we do, it is reasonable to think the same threshold has been used to create
the product seen in ﬁgure 4.3 (right).
The ﬁgure of NSIDC results (4.3, right) shows that the areas towards the interior of
Greenland does not experience as much melt as the coastal areas do. These are also
the areas that has the highest elevation - logically that would mean that these areas has
less surface melt compared to the lower elevation areas, that is the coast.
This trend ﬁts very well with the cumulative melt days map created with the model
for this project, which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3 (middle), where we can see that the
model also predicts fewer melt days closer to the center of Greenland and in the higher
elevated areas. The product from NSIDC on ﬁgure 4.3 (right) also conﬁrms what we see
predicted in ﬁgure 4.5, where it is seen, that according to the model in this project, close
to the entire ice sheet experienced surface melt at one point or another during 2012 (also
in accordance with Hanna et al. (2013) and Nghiem et al. (2012)).
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
33
==PAGE:41==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
It is also obvious that the product from NSIDC follows the contours of Greenland, as ex-
pected. This part simply acts to further conﬁrm that the melt deﬁnitely depends on the
elevation, and that the building of the model deﬁnitely should include this parameter.
An important notion to say about the NSIDC results is that on the 2012 melt season re-
view website (NSIDC, 2013) it is mentioned, that the number of melt days in the south-
western coastal areas (where the QAS, NUK, and KAN stations are located) was more
than 120. This gives more information than the map and colorbar in ﬁgure 4.3, which
only shows melt days between 0 and 100.
In general we see that the model created for this project overestimates the temperature
corrections, and thereby the melt, in some areas. We see in ﬁgure 4.3, that the number
of melt days at most local areas at the southwestern coast match the value from NSIDC,
but some of the outermost areas (closest to the coast, and thereby probably areas with
lowest elevation) experienced melt in up to 180-190 days during 2012 in our model.
The same can be said for the southeastern coastal areas, where we also see predicted melt
days up to 180-190 through 2012, whereas the NSIDC product says around 100 days.
As we will see in the following sections, where other types of results of our model is
compared with other NSIDC products, there is a tendency of overestimation of the tem-
perature corrections predicted by the model.
All in all, from the comparison of cumulative melt days between our and NSIDCs re-
sults we can see that our corrections, and with those, the melt days through 2012, match
theirs quite well, with some inconsistencies around the outermost edges of southern
Greenland. The predictions, seems to match the product of NSIDC adequately even in
the interior of Greenland, where the elevation changes a lot. Since the model in this
project is not build with very much elevation data (see section 5.2), that result might be
a bit of a positive surprise.
Indeed, it should be mentioned that the ’melt or not’ ﬁgure (ﬁg. 4.5) does not say a
lot, because melt occurred close to everywhere. Actually this was to be expected, since
close to 99% of the surface of the ice sheet experienced melt on 12th of July alone (Hanna
et al. (2013); Nghiem et al. (2012)). The ﬁgure is included to conﬁrm this. From a compar-
34
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:42==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
ison of ﬁgures 4.5 and 4.4, we further conﬁrm, that the model improves the performance
of ﬁnding number of melt days.
We can also compare ﬁgures 4.5 and 4.4 with the knowledge from Nghiem et al. (2012),
Hanna et al. (2013), and NSIDC (ﬁgure 4.3, right), to conﬁrm, that our whole model and
prediction scheme, indeed changes and improves the predicted melt occurring on GrIS
in 2012.
We see that the areas that experienced melt at any point during 2012 with the corrected
and predicted melt map (ﬁgure 4.5) correspond more closely to the actual observations
compared to the melt occurrence based on the raw, uncorrected data (ﬁgure 4.4).
4.2.2
Melt extent
The results from NSIDC is used to create a temporal graph of the melt extent during
2012. An interactive chart can be seen on NSIDCs Greenland today website (NSIDC, 2019).
This is a visualisation of the melt extent evolution through 2012, as it shows the melt
extent for each day of the year as the area of the ablation zone. On the website it is
shown in km2 of surface melt area, but it can also be shown as a percentage of the total
ice sheet area, which is approximately 1.7 million km2 (NSIDC, 2021c).
The data used for the NSIDC product has been downloaded from their website (NSIDC,
2019). In ﬁgure 4.6, the melt extent in percentage of the ice sheet size is shown over
the course of 2012. The melt extent from NSIDC is shown in red, the melt extent from
raw satellite data in green, and the melt extent from corrected satellite data in blue. The
dates of the different peaks for the predicted melt extent (blue), has been added for easier
comparison with the NSIDC product and results from Nghiem et al. (2012).
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
35
==PAGE:43==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 4.6: Comparison of the predicted melt extent with NSIDC’s product, in percentage of the total ice
sheet area of 1.7 million km2.
It is known, that the two distinctive large peaks (in NSIDC results, red curve) represent
the two days in 2012 with biggest melting area. These days are 12th of July and 29th
of July (Hanna et al. (2013); Nghiem et al. (2012)). The melt extent on these dates are
explored further in section 5.5, where the melt extent from the NSIDC study in shown
spatially and compared to the melt extent found in this study. From this study, the peaks
were found to be on July 14th and July 30th instead of July 12th and July 29th.
We know from Nghiem et al. (2012) and Hanna et al. (2013), that 98.6 % of the surface
of the GrIS experienced melt on 12th of July. This coincides really well with the predic-
tions and results from this study, which predicts the melt extent to be 97.9% on 14th of
July. However, this is not exactly what we see in the NSIDC product. As it can be seen
in ﬁgure 4.6 on the red graph, the NSIDC product ﬁnds that ’only’ around 85% of the
surface experienced melt at the peak extent on July 12th. It should be mentioned that
this percentage has been created, by taking the data from NSIDC and dividing it with an
approximate value of the ice sheet area of 1.7 million km2. This is a signiﬁcant difference
compared to the product from the studies in both this project and also Nghiem et al.
36
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:44==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
(2012) and Hanna et al. (2013).
For the sake of validation, it can be said that the predictions made by the model in this
project, match the maximum melt from other studies well, at least with respect to the
amount of melting. If we look at the date of the most extreme melt, it does not perform
perfectly. The model predicts the maximum melt to be on July 14th, whereas it in fact
happened on July 12th according to Nghiem et al. (2012). This is not ideal, but since the
model was not created for the purpose of predicting the exact day of peak melt extent,
it is acceptable that is is a few days off, when the amount of melt appears to be more
accurate.
With respect to the other day of interest - July 29th, and the previous days, we see that
the results does not match perfectly either, but still well. Nghiem et al. (2012), states
that the melt extent decreased to 44.9% on July 22nd, where this study predicts 44.3% on
July 24th as minimum in the time span between the melt extent peaks. The surface melt
extent then increased again some days later on July 29th to 79.2%. As the second peak,
this study predicts that value to be somewhat higher of 89% on July 30th, the predictions
still follow the actual observations to a reasonable level.
The most important we can take from the comparison carried out in ﬁgure 4.6 is, when
looking at the melt extent from the raw data (green) and the predicted melt extent (blue).
From that, it is seen that there is a large difference. The larger amount of melt from the
predictive method is not necessarily for the better in itself. However, when we take the
NSIDC product (red) and results from Nghiem et al. (2012) into account, we see that the
predicted melt extent, in most regions match better than the melt extent from the raw
satellite data. According to the results of Nghiem et al. (2012), even the NSIDC product
is underestimating the actual situation at that point in time. This further validates, that
the corrected satellite data estimates the melt extent better than the raw satellite data.
All in all, we can see a strong indication, that the corrections introduced in this study
improves the ability to ﬁnd number of surface melt days on the GrIS in 2012, as well as
the amount of melt on each day.
We see that at eg. the beginning of April, the prediction does not match very well with
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
37
==PAGE:45==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
what is shown by NSIDC (see ﬁgure 4.6). This, along with the fact that the peaks are
predicted to dates that are a couple of days off, could suggest that the predictions does
not work perfectly when it comes to the amount of melt on each particular day. It would
indeed seem, that the model works optimally closer to the peaks, meaning that the pre-
dictions probably is best at the middle of the melt season. This is seen from ﬁgure 4.6,
where the ’tails’ of the predicted melt extent does not cover all the trends of the NSIDC
graph, whereas the tendencies towards the middle of the summer is covered to some ex-
tend, though overestimated. The difference in the tails of the melt season can also be due
to the introduction of a solar mask. If data from some locations in the southern regions
are excluded because there is less sun in the beginning of April or the end of October,
the amount of data shown in the ﬁgure could be less than the actual case.
4.2.3
Statistical error analysis
Following Willmott and Matsuura (2005), and the deﬁnitions of the error statistics (see
section 3.8.1), the values of RMSE, MAE, and MBE can be seen in table 4.2. The table
shows an assessment of the 5 different methods described earlier (see section 4.1) used
to evaluate the melt in 2012 (both with predicted corrections and from raw data).
The table consists of metrics of the ”predictions” compared to the ”truth” of PROMICE
data. In the table, the statistics can be seen both as absolute and as a percentage of the
’true’ number of melt days.
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
20.27
15.69
6.15
30.43
22.63
6.75
Model with 13 stations
13.52
10.69
1.92
20.61
15.60
1.68
Model from whole Greenland
14.40
11.38
7.54
18.53
15.24
8.86
Cold-bias and moving mean
29.04
27.85
27.85
41.07
39.92
39.92
Raw satellite data
45.68
40.46
40.46
61.20
56.20
56.20
Table 4.2: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt days
with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on longitude, latitude, and elevation.
In appendix A.1, tables with RMSE, MAE, and MBE for predicting the number of melt
days with the ﬁts/models based on latitude alone, longitude alone, elevation alone,
latitude & longitude, latitude & elevation, and elevation & longitude can be seen for
38
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:46==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
comparison of the ﬁts. The results seen in table 4.2 will be discussed in the following
sections along with the other results presented in this section.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
39
==PAGE:47==
5
Discussion
In this section the model performance will be evaluated. The optimal size of area around
the stations to extract satellite data for training the model will also be discussed. The
model performance will be investigated by looking at various challenges that we en-
counter in the process of predicting temperature corrections.
In this section we will also discuss the predicament of sparse spatial coverage of the
PROMICE data and with that, what would happen if the varying elevation of Green-
land was covered better in the data used as ground truth in the study. A discussion
about which model is best and most applicable will be carried out as well as a further
investigation of the relation between predicted melt, and melt observed by other studies
(Nghiem et al. (2012); NSIDC (2019); NSIDC (2020)). With the melt extent, a measure of
the performance of the model will be reviewed with comparisons between the melt from
the raw given satellite data and the predicted surface melt.
5.1
Choosing optimal area size
Several problems can occur when ﬁnding the difference in surface temperature between
the PROMICE and satellite data. The surface temperature data can be affected by dirty
ice. If the station is located close to the ice border, the temperature readings could in part
be from exposed ground. The difference in surface temperature between the two data
sets is used to train the model, and it is therefore important to have the best possible
measurements of satellite surface temperatures. A tool for making the model more ro-
bust towards these issues is to take the area surrounding the station into account as well
and not just the nearest grid point from the satellite data. This makes it more robust,
since we take the mean of the temperatures in a larger area around the station question
and by that making sure, that one faulty data pixel does not inﬂuence the used data too
much.
The difference between PROMICE and satellite data was found with an average surface
temperature from the satellite data taken from 4 different areas of different size. The 4
40
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:48==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
areas are also described in section 3 and they include either the nearest grid point, the
5x5 nearest grid points, the 11x11 nearest grid points, or the 25x25 nearest grid points
around the PROMICE station in question.
In order to determine which area is the best to include in the model, we will look at R2
values to see which area results in the best model ﬁt.
In table 5.1 we see the R2 values for the model based on latitude, elevation, and lon-
gitude when using the 4 different areas, around the pixel of each station (the 4th being
1x1, meaning just the grid point closest to the station location). It is seen that the R2
measure is around 9 times larger for the 25x25 area than the 1x1 area (R2 = 0.2876 vs.
R2 = 0.0309). The much higher R2 value for the method with the largest area, compared
to the smallest area, suggests that some stations are located close to the ice border or
directly on bare ground. This would mean that the satellite data for those areas would
be ﬁltered out by the ice mask, and the model would be build on less data.
Area size
1x1
5x5
11x11
25x25
R2 value
0.0309
0.1312
0.1947
0.2876
Table 5.1: R2 values for the model based on latitude, elevation, and longitude for each of the 4 areas
around the station grid point.
In table 5.1 it is seen that, the 25x25 has the best R2 value of the models from the 4 areas
(R2 = 0.2876). The best area size used for the model is chosen solely based on the R2
value. Because of that, the used model is the one created with temperatures from area
of 25x25 pixel around the station locations. This is also assumed to be more robust, as
errors from dirty ice or bare ground will have a smaller inﬂuence.
5.2
Challenges with elevation
One of the challenges of this study, and thereby also with the resulting model for pre-
dicting corrections, is that we do not have a large variation in the elevation data, used
to build the model. This is seen in the fact that the 13 PROMICE stations all are located
around the coastal areas of the ice sheet. The distribution of the station locations is a
positive thing for the intent of building a model based on latitude and longitude, since
the data is fairly well distributed respective to these parameters.
As it can be seen in table 2.1 the elevation data available for the model only include a
difference of around 1000 meters, which is signiﬁcant, but not completely representative
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
41
==PAGE:49==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
for the varied elevation proﬁle that exists on Greenland. The lowest point of Greenland
is at sea level, while the highest point in the central area of Greenland has an elevation
of more than 3000 masl (Fausto et al., 2015) (see also ﬁgure 2.1). These complications
are also reﬂected in the values of the coefﬁcients of the models in table 3.1. In the table
we see that the coefﬁcient linked to the parameter elevation is small (0.0015 and 0.0004)
compared to the other two (∼0.01 and ∼0.1 respectively) in all models.
This situation would likely be different if any of the used PROMICE stations were lo-
cated closer to the central area of Greenland which has a higher elevation, and thereby
enabling the model to better estimate the elevation dependency of the corrections.
To back up this statement, a test has been made. A ﬁctive data point has been fabricated,
by taking a location of longitude and latitude some place in the interior of Greenland
and deﬁning its elevation as 3000 meters. Along with the location (including elevation),
this ﬁctional station’s temperatures has been deﬁned, by copying the daily mean tem-
peratures measured at the Scoresbysund station. This means, that this whole test is not
as representative in the results, as if there actually had been a station at the location we
constructed. However, it still gives a deﬁnitive hint about the effect such a station would
have to the model, had it existed.
Including the fabricated station, the model (still based on the parameters latitude, el-
evation, and longitude) has the coefﬁcients as can be seen in table 5.2.
Model / Coefﬁcient
Constant
Latitude
Elevation
Longitude
Lat/Ele/Lon
1.9153
-0.0059
0.0029
0.0378
Table 5.2: Coefﬁcients of model created with an extra ﬁctive station at higher elevation.
In the table, we see, that the coefﬁcient for the elevation parameter, is much higher (in
fact around 7 times larger) than the elevation coefﬁcient in the original model based on
all three parameters (0.0029 vs 0.0004).
The correction map, created with the model including the extra station, can be seen in
ﬁgure 5.1, where it is evident, that the elevation has a larger inﬂuence on the resulting
corrections than in the original model. Again, just as with the correction map created
with the model based solely on the elevation parameter (ﬁgure 3.3, left), we see that
42
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:50==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
the predicted corrections follow the height contours really well. The corrections still in-
clude inﬂuence from latitude (correction difference in the north compared to the south)
and longitude (correction difference in the west compared to the east). This is expected
when building the model with the used parameters - including more elevation data and
a more varying elevation proﬁle than the original data.
Figure 5.1: Map of the correction that should be applied to each pixel in Greenland, predicted from model
based on latitude, elevation, and longitude. The red crosses represent the location of the PROMICE
stations including the fabricated station.
We can also see on ﬁgures 5.2 and 5.3, that compared to the predicted melt days of the
original model (ﬁgures 4.1 and 4.2), the new fabricated station introduces data that can
appear to create a ’better’ model. This is seen from the fact, that the new model ﬁnds
melt days closer to the truth compared to the old model. This can also be seen in table
5.3, where the errors have decreased with the fabricated station included, compared to
what we saw with the original model in table 4.2. The model including the fabricated
station yields percentage wise errors of: RMSE = 16.23%, MAE = 12.13%, and MBE =
0.374%, whereas the original model had percentage wise errors of: RMSE = 18.53%,
MAE = 15.24%, and MBE = 8.86%. This suggests that a model including stations that
cover the elevation proﬁle better would also be able to predict better corrections and ﬁnd
the number of melt days closer to the truth of PROMICE.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
43
==PAGE:51==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 5.2: Comparison of the predicted melt days at each location including the fabricated high-elevation
station.
Figure 5.3: Percentage wise comparison of the predicted melt days at each location including the fabricated
high-elevation station.
44
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:52==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
In the table showing the RMSE, MAE, and MBE statistics of the predictions including
the fabricated station, only the new values has been included (both absolute values and
percentage of the ’true’ number of melt days - for comparison see table 4.2.
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model from whole Greenland, including fabricated station
11.74
8.69
1.46
Model from whole Greenland, including fabricated station (percent)
16.23
12.13
0.374
Table 5.3: RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt days with the 5 different methods
- with ﬁt based on latitude, elevation, and longitude, including the fabricated high-elevation station.
With all this said, we can see that the predictions would change if more high-elevation
stations were included in the model building. However, this does not necessarily mean
that these corrections make the number of melt days more accurate compared to the
truth. As the temperature data for this additional location has been fabricated (by tak-
ing the same temperatures as Scoresbysund), we can not assume that these results are
realistic.
5.3
Challenges at North East Greenland
A quick investigation of the predicted results, seen in ﬁgures 4.1 and 4.2, show an ob-
vious overestimation of predicted number of melt days given by two of the prediction
methods at the ﬁrst station (KPC). The two methods that overestimate the number of
melt days at this particular station are the leave-one-out-like method, where the correc-
tions are predicted with a model, build with the other 12 stations, and the 13 station
method that uses the PROMICE stations own parameters as input.
This overestimation is not a huge problem in it self, due to the fact that the methods cov-
ering the entire GrIS, does not overestimate melt at KPC in the same manner as the other
two methods. The 13 station method with satellite data as input (to cover the entire ice
sheet instead of only locations with PROMICE stations) does not predict melt perfectly,
but at KPC, much better than the other two predictive methods. On the other hand, it
is deﬁnitely worth discussing what happens at KPC stations, since it is an apparent and
unambiguous overestimation of corrections.
One reason that immediately comes to mind, as to why the corrections at this particular
location is inadequately predicted, is indicated in the sparse coverage of the PROMICE
station locations. The KPC station is located at the north-easternmost part of the GrIS
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
45
==PAGE:53==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
(see ﬁgure 2.1). This station is located furthest away from any other station. In the 12
station model, this would mean, that we try to predict the entire north-east area of Green-
land based on the other 12 stations with no data to cover this area at all. This could both
mean an overestimation and an underestimation of the corrections, but as seen in ﬁg-
ures 4.1 and 4.2 it results in a gross overestimation of the corrections and thereby melt
days. In general, the coverage is worse on the east coast compared to the west coast of
Greenland and similarly in the northern part of Greenland compared to the south. This
further conﬁrms the fact, that this faulty prediction, can come from the poor spatial cov-
erage of the PROMICE stations. A larger number of stations would increase the spatial
coverage (if located optimally) and thereby probably increase the performance of the
models. Indeed it would seem that more temperature data from more varied locations
would improve the performance of the model predictions. This could potentially have
the largest effect at the KPC station, due to this being located in the area with the worst
spatial coverage of stations.
A deﬁnite reason, as to why this overestimation at KPC station is present, is not found
at this point. With more investigation it could probably be corrected for, but as the error
is not present in the method, that can predict corrections across the entire ice sheet, this
is disregarded at this point.
5.4
Prediction methods
In this section we will discuss which of the three prediction methods is the best. These
are the three model prediction methods also described in section 4.1. This includes the
methods applicability as well as their performance, with regards to temperature correc-
tion predictions, and with that, the melt day predictions. The model predictions will
also be compared to the raw satellite data, to evaluate the improvement introduced by
the model.
5.4.1
Different model inputs
When trying to decide which method of model building is the best, several conditions
have to be taken into account. It is not hard to say which model is the most functional
and applicable, since only one of the 3 possible methods can be applied to the entire
46
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:54==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
GrIS. This is not the case for the ﬁrst two (based on 12 and on 13 stations), which can
only be used where we have PROMICE stations located (or other weather stations, that
could provide corresponding temperature data). With that said, it is still interesting to
look at which of them is the ’best’ had the situation been different. Also, they show the
inﬂuence of having stations close by and the models ability to estimate the corrections
without a station (leave-one-out), making them interesting prediction models.
When looking at the predicted melt days in ﬁgure 4.1, it is obvious, that both the meth-
ods involving only the PROMICE parameters as input, have trouble at the north-easternmost
area at the KPC station. This has already been presented and commented on in an earlier
section (see section 5.3). Apart from that one location, both models predict the number
of melt days pretty well. Of course there are some discrepancies, and that is also the case
for the model that covers the entire ice sheet. None of the models predict the correc-
tions and melt days perfectly. They would possibly improve, if more data was available.
This means that if PROMICE stations (or other similar weather stations) were positioned
scattered across the ice sheet, the models would probably be built to perform even better,
than what we see now. This it at least hinted at, when looking at section 5.2, where we
see that if a single high-elevation station (in this case fabricated) is added to the data set,
the model performs better. All this, along with former discussions, implies the idea, that
a better weather station coverage of the GrIS would produce a model, better aimed to
predict the temperature corrections and with them, the number of melt days.
5.4.2
Statistical comparison
As we can see in table 4.2, the prediction using the model based on all 13 stations and
each stations own latitude, longitude, and elevation gives the results closest to the truth,
out of these 5 methods. It is not surprising that the cold-bias and the uncorrected models
(bottom two rows) perform worse than the others, as little has been done to improve the
predicted number of melt days in these two methods.
The two methods where we predict based on all 13 stations (2nd and 3rd method in table
4.2), perform the best - this is not surprising either, since the two use the same model to
predict. The difference between these two comes from the fact, that one of them uses
the stations’ own parameters as input, whereas the other (the worse of the two) uses
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
47
==PAGE:55==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
latitude, longitude, and elevation from the satellite data grid and the ESA CCI DEM
as input. It is not surprising that a model which takes the parameters of the stations
would perform better - both because the location is not the exact same (latitude & lon-
gitude), and also because the elevation of that location is not the same in the DEM as in
the PROMICE data sheet.
As can be seen in table 4.2, the model using all the stations as input has an MBE of 1.92
days. This bias indicates, that generally the model underestimates the number of melt
days by 1.92 days. We see that the 13-station-model has a smaller MBE than the predic-
tions from the model covering the entire ice sheet. This would appear to show that this
model performs signiﬁcantly better than the other. However, from ﬁgures 4.1 and 4.2 we
see that there is a large error for the KPC station, where the model grossly overestimates
the number of melt days. Since there is a general underestimation at the rest of the sta-
tions, the KPC station counters this underestimation resulting in an unrealistically low
MBE. The overestimation of melt days at the KPC station, is not seen for the model that
covers the entire ice sheet. Therefore, the MBE for these predictions better shows a re-
alistic measure of the bias of 7.54 days. Though this underestimation of 7.54 days could
seem large, it is still only a percentage wise error of 8.86%.
We see, that the method, covering the entire ice sheet, predicts the number of melt days
with an error of approximately 15%, this is seen from the MAE, where the sign is not
taken into account, so any overestimation and underestimation of melt days will not
cancel each other out. This gives a view on how well the model performs and is a satis-
fying error (compared to the unpredicted results, which has an MAE of approximately
40%). As mentioned, the methods covering only the locations of the PROMICE stations,
predicts the corrections better (approximately the same MAE, but a better RMSE). How-
ever, as these methods’ coverage is very sparse, it is not as relevant as comparing the
predictions of the entire ice sheet to the raw satellite data and to the satellite data cor-
rected for cold-bias and moving mean.
The method where the data is only corrected for cold-bias and with moving mean (2nd
last row in table 4.2) performs much worse than the method covering the entire ice sheet.
It is seen that the cold-bias-corrected method yields a MAE of approximately 40%, which
shows, that the prediction works and improves the prediction of melt days signiﬁcantly.
48
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:56==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Even though, we see that the cold-bias corrected data has a smaller error than the raw
satellite data, the improvement is still far less than with the model predictions from the
entire ice sheet applied.
This comparison shows that the predictive method covering the entire ice sheet outper-
forms the non-predictive-methods by far with respect to all three error statistics. This is
seen in the fact that the method covering the whole GrIS yields errors of:
RMSE = 18.53%, MAE = 15.24%, and MBE = 8.86%, whereas the other two models
yield errors of:
RMSE = 41.07% and RMSE = 61.20%, MAE = 39.92% and MAE = 56.20%, and
MBE = 39.92% and MBE = 56.20%, respectively.
From this we can say that the model created, evidently improves the ﬁnding of melt and
number of melt days through 2012.
5.5
Melt extent
In section 4.2.2, a comparison of the temporal melt extent was made (ﬁgure 4.6). Here
we saw two distinct peaks of melt extent, which correspond to speciﬁc days in the melt
product from NSIDC. The NSIDC have also created an interactive tool, that shows the
melt extent for any given day (NSIDC, 2020).
We also saw, that the amount of melt found in this study is overestimated compared to
the melt extent found by NSIDC (see ﬁgure 4.6, and the interactive chart on their web-
site NSIDC (2019)), but the dates of the two most distinctive peaks matches quite well
in terms of melt extent. However, the dates of these peaks are slightly off. We also saw
that the melt extent matches what has been found by Nghiem et al. (2012).
As examples of the melt extent product from NSIDC, ﬁgure 5.5 shows the melt extent
on Greenland on July 29th 2012. The ﬁgure shows that the areas toward the interior of
Greenland did not experience melt on that day. This matches the cumulative visualisa-
tion, as the areas with highest elevation experience less melt. We can see a similar trend
if we look at the melt extent of July 12th in ﬁgure 5.4. This ﬁgure also shows that areas
with high elevation experience less melt. This all makes sense; the higher the area, the
less melt. It is not coincidental that we have chosen to investigate these two days, since
they are the days with the largest amount of melt during the year of 2012 (Nghiem et al.,
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
49
==PAGE:57==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
2012). We also see that those two days combined (ﬁgures 5.4 and 5.5) show that almost
the entire ice sheet was melting at the surface at some point (which we can also see in
ﬁgures 4.5 and 4.3).
Figure 5.4: Greenland melt map from NSIDC on
July 12 2012.(NSIDC, 2020)
Figure 5.5: Greenland melt map from NSIDC on
July 29 2012. (NSIDC, 2020)
We can use the two ﬁgures of melt extent from NSIDC, to investigate the extent of the
melting areas and compare to the predictions of this study. The melt extent can be seen
in the ﬁgures as how far into the interior, the ablation zone reaches. As we see in ﬁgure
5.5 the central areas and the north of the ice sheet did not experience melt on 29th of July,
whereas it is the southern areas that did not experience melt on 12th of July, according
to NSIDCs product (ﬁgure 5.4).
The predicted melt extent has also been visualised in a spatial manner to be able to
compare more directly to the NSIDC product of ﬁgures 5.4 and 5.5. Since we see in ﬁg-
ure 4.6 that the peak melt extent found by this study occurred on July 14th and July 30th
(instead of July 12th and July 29th), these are the dates that are shown as melt extent
maps in ﬁgure 5.6. To be able to see the difference, the same type of ﬁgures (predicted
melt extent) can be seen in ﬁgure A.5 in appendix A.3 for the 12th and the 29th of July.
50
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:58==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure 5.6: Melt across Greenland on July 14th (left) and July 30th (right) from corrected satellite data.
As seen, when comparing to the NSIDC product in ﬁgures 5.4 and 5.5, the overestima-
tion of melt extent, becomes apparent. It is obvious, that the results of the model cover
the tendencies of the second peak of melt extent found on July 30th (July 29th in other
studies: Nghiem et al. (2012); NSIDC (2019)), where it is seen that the northwestern areas
do not experience melt along with a little bit of non-melt in the south of Greenland. Both
of these trends are also seen in our results, taking the overestimation into account. With
regards to July 14th (July 12th in the other studies), the overestimation is even more ob-
servable, especially in the southern regions. A part of the southern areas of Greenland
did not experience surface melt according to Nghiem et al. (2012). This is not what the
predictions of melt in this study show, where the areas without melt are much smaller
than seen in the other studies. It still shows the trend seen in other studies, but the over-
estimation of melt is obvious.
It should be remembered, that when looking at the results of Nghiem et al. (2012), the
NSIDC products actually seem to be underestimating the melt extent at these dates. Fig-
ure 1 in Nghiem et al. (2012) show composite maps of melt extent from several satellites
of 12th and 29th of July, that match the melt extent shown in ﬁgure 5.6 from this study,
much better than the results in ﬁgures 5.4 and 5.5 from NSIDC.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
51
==PAGE:59==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
If comparing to the ﬁgure from Nghiem et al. (2012), it can be said that the results from
this study actually match the observations really well, and to an adequate level. How-
ever the dates still does not match perfectly.
A comparison of the melt extent found by the raw satellite data and by the corrected
satellite data on July 14th and July 30th is carried out. Figure 5.7 show the melt extent
on July 14th (left) and July 30th (right), found from the raw satellite data. To compare,
the predicted melt extent, which has already been discussed, can be seen in ﬁgure 5.6.
Again, these dates have been chosen, since they correspond to the predicted melt extent
peaks of 2012, seen as the blue curve in ﬁgure 4.6. The actual maximum melt extent hap-
pened on 12th July and 29th July (Nghiem et al., 2012), seen on the red curve in ﬁgure
4.6. The predicted melt extent along with the melt extent from raw data of 12th and 29th
July can bee seen in appendix A.3.
Figure 5.7: Melt across Greenland on July 14th (left) and July 30th (right) from raw satellite data.
When comparing the melt extent of the raw satellite data (ﬁgure 5.7) with the predicted
melt extent (ﬁgure 5.6) it is obvious that the model performs well in terms of improving
the satellite data to ﬁnd number of melt days. Albeit, not perfectly, the model predicts
the temperature corrections and thereby improves the predicted number of melt days,
and speciﬁcally the melt extent, to a certain degree.
52
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:60==
6
Conclusion
To help with monitoring of climate changes and consequences thereoff, satellite obser-
vations of the surface temperature of GrIS can be very beneﬁcial. However, an error in
the observations between PROMICE weather stations and satellite surface temperature
readings has been observed. In order to remedy this error in the satellite data, a model
has been created to predict corrections to the data. The model uses thermal infrared
observations from MODIS and AVHRR (interpolated to a composite gap-free data set)
along with a set of temperature observations from 13 automatic weather stations, from
the PROMICE programme, located across the coastal areas of the GrIS. Simple correc-
tions and ﬁlters such as a very simple cold bias correction, and an ice mask, to ensure
the exclusion of non-ice pixels in the composite satellite data set, has been applied to the
satellite data. A model to predict the errors observed between satellited data and true
PROMICE data is then created. A brief comparison of how well the model predicts the
error (and thereby correction) between the satellite data and the PROMICE data showed
that the optimal model, with a R2 measure of R2 = 0.2876, was dependant on both lati-
tude, longitude, and elevation.
The model also takes the area around each station into account to make the predictions
more robust. The predicted corrections to the satellite data seeks to correct the error be-
tween the true PROMICE temperatures and the satellite data. The predicted corrections
have been numerically and visually compared to the results and products of other stud-
ies done by eg. Nghiem et al. (2012) and NSIDC (2013), which have carried out similar
analysis of the melt event in 2012.
A statistical comparison of the results have been carried out as well as a discussion
of different challenges and possible improvements to the model have been presented.
This showed that when using a complete coverage of the GrIS and the satellite data, the
model predicts the corrections and ﬁnds the number of melt days with an error of ap-
proximately 15% .
The statistics also show that with the predicted corrections applied, the number of melt
days is found much better than without the corrections applied. This is showed in all
three statistics where the predicted number of melt days yields a RMSE of 18.5%, a MAE
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
53
==PAGE:61==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
of 15.2%, and a MBE of 8.9%, while the raw uncorrected satellite data yields a RMSE of
61.2%, a MAE of 56.2%, and a MBE of 56.2% and the data only corrected for cold-bias
and with moving mean had a RMSE of 41.1%, a MAE of 39.9%, and a MBE of 39.9%.
The much better performance, when applying predicted corrections is also shown in
the visual comparisons of the melt extent on the dates of peak melt extent in July 2012.
Here, it was shown, that the predicted melt match the product from Nghiem et al. (2012)
and NSIDC (2020) much better than the uncorrected data.
The study has proved that if true data from PROMICE stations are utilised, the melt
can be found from satellite data, with computed corrections and thereby improve the
performance, and predict a result closer to the real station observations, than if uncor-
rected raw satellite data or satellite data that is only corrected for cold bias is used.
54
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:62==
7
Future work
In this section, some of the ideas for possible future work to improve the performance
of the model will be brieﬂy presented. This includes changes to the model itself. The
section will also include ideas that could possibly make the model perform better and
be more robust if external changes such as better PROMICE station coverage were im-
plemented. An addition to the model, that would not change the existing results, but
simply make it more functional will also be brieﬂy presented.
7.1
Local cold-bias correction
A simple change to the model, that could possibly increase the performance of predicting
melt, could be to investigate whether a cold bias is present everywhere. The cold bias
correction for this study is found in a simple manner of averaging all differences between
satellite and PROMICE temperatures. This would be much more complex and possibly
improve the performance, if the cold bias is location dependant. It could be interesting to
investigate if it makes a difference to apply different corrections according to the location
and if proved, implement a more local correction.
7.2
Larger amount of data - temporal and spatial
The satellite data set used, has been pre-processed by DMI, such that it mainly consists of
temperature data. This data set was one of the reasons, 2012 was chosen as a case study
for this project, mainly because it already existed. The model has been created with the
intention, that it could be used not only for the year 2012, but also for other years that
could pose as an interesting study. As an example, the GrIS also experienced increase
surface melt in 2019, compared to the average melt of the previous decades (Tedesco and
Fettweis, 2020).
One thing that could be interesting, is to carry out a similar study to this, using data
from 2019 alone. Otherwise, a corresponding data set from 2019 could be used to fur-
ther improve the performance of the model created in this study. For that, it is essential
that a data set similar to the one used in this study, is created by pre-processing satellite
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
55
==PAGE:63==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
observations from MODIS and AVHRR. If such a data set was created the model could
acquire improved performance with regard to predicting temperature corrections.
It could of course also turn out to not improve the model at all, this could for example
happen if the lack of spatial coverage is of greater importance than the lack of temporal
coverage.
If the sparse spatial coverage is a larger disadvantage than the temporal coverage, the
solution could be to use data from more PROMICE stations. This does not necessarily
mean that more stations would have to be set up. As we saw in the early stages of this
study, many of the stations do not have data for 2012. The data for a station could have
some data gaps. If for example the data only consisted of temperature readings from
February through April it would be excluded in this study. Because of the data gaps in
some of the PROMICE station data, there could possibly be better coverage in data for
the year of 2019. For this study it is not investigated if more stations have been com-
missioned, but as the importance of climate change monitoring keeps increasing, it is
reasonable to think that the station coverage have been expanded. Additional stations
located in the interior of Greenland would, as we have discussed, probably ensure a
better performance of the model.
7.3
Mass balance
This idea is not about improving the performance of the model created for this study,
instead it is a way of increasing the number of functionalities of the entire study. It could
be interesting to implement an analysis of mass balance data. This has not been part of
the goals for this project, but if the right set of data was available, knowledge about the
mass loss could be found by looking at the surface mass balance. Rignot and Kanagarat-
man (2006) estimates, that 2/3 of the mass loss is due to dynamics of the glaciers, while
1/3 is due to runoff minus accumulation, which is part of the surface mass balance.
Though ’only’ 1/3 of the mass loss comes from runoff, the surface melt also affects the
glacier dynamics, where it penetrates the ice, and accelerates the bedrock motion (Rig-
not and Kanagaratman, 2006). Since our study is focused on surface melt days and areal
extent of the melt, it can not conclude anything on how much ice is lost as either runoff
or other types of ablation. An implementation of analysis of the mass balance would be
56
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:64==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
a logical next step if the functionalities of the product of this study should be expanded.
This would require new data, but with current techniques it is hard to measure runoff
directly. The study of Yang et al. (2019) provides a method for estimating the surface
runoff with superglacial lake volumes. The volumes of the lakes are estimated with
lake maps from Landsat-8 images combined with dry lake topography and bathymetry,
and in turn used to estimate the runoff. If the correct data was used, a similar approach
could possibly be implemented to expand the functionalities of the product of this study.
If knowledge about the surface mass balance was found (in part from the runoff), this
could potentially be used to gain information on the overall mass balance. Again, this
would have to be combined with data on other types of mass loss such as glacier dy-
namics, that according to Rignot and Kanagaratman (2006) is responsible for 2/3 of the
mass loss.
With the currently available data of PROMICE weather stations and composite satellite
measurements it has not been possible to improve the created model further. Hopefully
in the future, as more data becomes available, it could be possible to estimate the surface
temperatures even better.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
57
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
Bennartz, R., Shupe, M. D., Turner, D. D., Walden, V. P., Steffen, K., Cox, C. J., Kulie, M. S.,
Miller, N. B., and Pettersen, C. (2013). July 2012 greenland melt extent enhanced by
low-level liquid clouds. Nature, 496:83–86. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12002.
Danielson, E. W., Levin, J., and Abrams, E. (2002). Meteorology. McGraw-Hill Higher
Education.
Fausto, R. S., Ahlstrøm, A. P., As, D. V., Bøggild, C. E., and Johnsen, S. J. (2009). A
new present-day temperature parameterization for greenland. Journal of Glaciology,
55(189):95–105. https://doi.org/10.3189/002214309788608985.
Fausto, R. S., van as, D., Antoft, J. A., Box, J. E., and Colgan, W. (2015). Greenland
ice sheet melt area from modis (2000–2014). Geologic survey of Denmark and Greenland
bulletin, 33:57–60. https://doi.org/10.34194/geusb.v33.4498.
GEUS, DTU Space, and ASIAQ (2007). Promice website. Accessed online December 7,
2020, https://www.promice.dk/home.html.
Goswami, D. Y., Kreith, F., and Kreider, J. F. (2000). Principles of Solar Engineering. Taylor
& Francis.
Hall, D. K., Comiso, J. C., DiGirolamo, N. E., Shuman, C. A., Box, J. E., and Koenig,
L. S. (2013). Variability in the surface temperature and melt extent of the greenland ice
sheet from modis. Geophysical Research Letters, 40(10):2114–2120. https://doi.org/
10.1002/grl.50240.
Hall, D. K., Comiso, J. C., DiGirolamo, N. E., Shuman, C. A., Key, J. R., and Koenig,
L. S. (2012). A satellite-derived climate-quality data record of the clear-sky surface
temperature of the greenland ice sheet. Journal of climate, 25(14):4785–4798. https:
//doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00365.1.
Hanna, E., Fettweis, X., Mernild, S. H., Cappelen, J., Ribergaard, M. H., Shuman, C. A.,
Steffen, K., Wood, L., and Mote, T. L. (2013). Atmospheric and oceanic climate forc-
58
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:66==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
ing of the exceptional greenland ice sheet surface melt in summer 2012. International
Journal of Climatology, 34(4):1022–1037. https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.3743.
Høyer, J. L. (2021). Personal communication.
Høyer, J. L. and Karagali, I. (2016). Sea surface temperature climate data record for the
north sea and baltic sea. Journal of Climate, 29(7):2529–2541. https://doi.org/10.
1175/JCLI-D-15-0663.1.
Lowe, J. A., Gregory, J. M., Ridley, J., Huybrechts, P., Nicholls, R. J., and Collins,
M. (2006).
The role of sea-level rise and the greenland ice sheet in dangerous
climate change:
Implications for the stabilisation of climate.
Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/43155434_The_role_of_
sea-level_rise_and_the_Greenland_ice_sheet_in_dangerous_climate_change_
Implications_for_the_stabilisation_of_climate.
NASA (2020). Advanced very high resolution radiometer /3 (avhrr/3). https://nssdc.
gsfc.nasa.gov/nmc/experiment/display.action?id=2002-032A-01.
NASA
(2021).
Modis
speciﬁcations.
https://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/about/
specifications.php.
NCAR and UCAR (2021).
How much is the sea level rising?
Accessed online Jan-
uary 13, 2021, https://scied.ucar.edu/learning-zone/climate-change-impacts/
rising-sea-level.
Neff, W., Compo, G. P., Ralph, F. M., and Shupe, M. D. (2014). Continental heat anomalies
and the extreme melting of the greenland ice surface in 2012 and 1889.
Journal of
Geophysical Research, 119(11):6520–6536. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014JD021470.
Nghiem, S. V., Hall, D. K., Mote, T. L., Tedesco, M., Albert, M. R., Keegan, K., Shu-
man, C. A., DiGirolamo, N. E., and Neumann, G. (2012). The extreme melt across
the greenland ice sheet in 2012.
Geophysical Research Letters, 39(L20502).
https:
//doi.org/10.1029/2012GL053611.
Nielsen-Englyst, P., Høyer, J. L., Madsen, K. S., Dybkjær, G., Tonboe, R., and Aler-
skans, E. (2018). In situ observed relationships between skin temperatures and 2 m
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
59
==PAGE:67==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
air temperatures in the arctic. The Cryosphere Discuss. https://doi.org/10.5194/
tc-2018-150.
NSIDC (2013).
An intense greenland melt season:
2012 in review.
Ac-
cessed online January 16,
2021,
http://nsidc.org/greenland-today/2013/02/
greenland-melting-2012-in-review/.
NSIDC
(2019).
Greenland
today
data
and
analysis
tools.
Ac-
cessed
online
December
27,
2020,
http://nsidc.org/greenland-today/
greenland-today-data-and-analysis-tools/.
NSIDC (2020). Greenland melt map. Accessed online December 27, 2020, https://
greenland-measures.labs.nsidc.org/.
NSIDC (2021a). Glacier glossary, ablation. Accessed online January 13, 2021, https:
//nsidc.org/cryosphere/glossary/term/ablation.
NSIDC (2021b).
Glacier glossary, accumulation.
Accessed online January 13, 2021,
https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/glossary/term/accumulation.
NSIDC (2021c). Quick facts on the ice sheet. Accessed online January 11, 2021, https:
//nsidc.org/cryosphere/quickfacts/icesheets.html.
Rastner, P., Bolch, T., M¨olg, N., Machguth, H., Bris, R. L., and Paul, F. (2012). The ﬁrst
complete inventory of the local glaciers and ice caps on greenland. The Cryosphere,
6:1483–1495. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-6-1483-2012.
Rignot, E. and Kanagaratman, P. (2006).
Changes in the velocity structure of the
greenland ice sheet. Science, 311(5763):989–990. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
1121381.
Ritz, C., Fabre, A., and Letr´eguilly, A. (1997). Sensitivity of a greenland ice sheet model to
ice ﬂow and ablation parameters: consequences for the evolution through the last cli-
matic cycle. Climate Dynamics, 13:11–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s003820050149.
Simonsen, S. B., Barletta, V. R., Colgan, W., and Sørensen, L. S. (2021). Greenland ice
sheet mass balance (1992[U+2010]2020) from calibrated radar altimetry. Geophysical
Research Letters, 48. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL091216.
60
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:68==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Tedesco, M. and Fettweis, X. (2020). Unprecedented atmospheric conditions (1948–2019)
drive the 2019 exceptional melting season over the greenland ice sheet. The Cryosphere,
14:1209–1223. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-14-1209-2020.
University of Minnesota, NSF and NGA (2021). Arctic digital elevation model. Accessed
online January 25, 2021, https://www.pgc.umn.edu/data/arcticdem/.
Willmott, C. J. and Matsuura, K. (2005). Advantages of the mean absolute error (mae)
over the root mean square error (rmse) in assessing average model performance.
CLIMATE RESEARCH, 30:79–82. https://www.int-res.com/abstracts/cr/v30/n1/
p79-82.
Yang, K., C.Smith, L., Fettweisf, X., J.Gleason, C., Lu, Y., and Li, M. (2019). Surface melt-
water runoff on the greenland ice sheet estimated from remotely sensed supraglacial
lake inﬁlling rate. Remote Sensing of Environment, 234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rse.2019.111459.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
61
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendices
A.1
RMSE, MAE, and MBE tables for the 7 different ﬁts
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
15.84
14.54
7.77
23.55
21.17
10.13
Model with 13 stations
13.75
12.54
7.62
20.05
18.12
10.06
Model from whole Greenland
14.95
11.62
7.62
19.24
15.53
9.08
Cold-bias and moving mean
28.26
27.00
27.00
40.11
38.73
38.73
Uncorrected
40.86
35.92
35.92
54.16
49.60
49.60
Table A.1: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt
days with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on latitude.
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
16.97
12.08
1.15
27.01
18.11
0.04
Model with 13 stations
13.95
10.54
1.00
21.66
15.53
0.37
Model from whole Greenland
14.40
11.38
7.54
18.53
15.24
8.86
Cold-bias and moving mean
29.04
27.85
27.85
41.07
39.92
39.92
Uncorrected
45.68
40.46
40.46
61.20
56.20
56.20
Table A.2: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt
days with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on longitude.
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
14.04
13.08
8.31
19.53
18.55
10.72
Model with 13 stations
13.49
12.62
8.46
19.14
18.09
11.26
Model from whole Greenland
14.42
11.15
7.00
19.01
15.21
8.58
Cold-bias and moving mean
28.38
26.85
26.85
40.59
38.61
38.61
Uncorrected
38.05
33.92
33.92
50.92
47.03
47.03
Table A.3: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt
days with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on elevation.
62
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:70==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
18.65
14.69
5.62
28.81
21.51
6.44
Model with 13 stations
13.58
10.62
2.15
20.67
15.45
1.91
Model from whole Greenland
14.40
11.38
7.54
18.53
15.24
8.86
Cold-bias and moving mean
29.04
27.85
27.85
41.07
39.92
39.92
Uncorrected
45.68
40.46
40.46
61.20
56.20
56.20
Table A.4: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt
days with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on latitude and longitude.
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
16.93
15.15
8.23
24.43
21.61
10.32
Model with 13 stations
13.57
12.69
8.38
19.39
18.27
11.19
Model from whole Greenland
14.42
11.15
7.00
19.01
15.21
8.58
Cold-bias and moving mean
28.38
26.85
26.85
40.59
38.61
38.61
Uncorrected
38.05
33.92
33.92
50.92
47.03
47.03
Table A.5: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt
days with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on latitude and elevation.
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
17.00
12.23
1.77
26.85
18.12
0.81
Model with 13 stations
13.67
10.15
0.77
21.35
15.03
0.07
Model from whole Greenland
14.40
11.38
7.54
18.53
15.24
8.86
Cold-bias and moving mean
29.04
27.85
27.85
41.07
39.92
39.92
Uncorrected
45.68
40.46
40.46
61.20
56.20
56.20
Table A.6: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt
days with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on elevation and longitude.
Absolute [days]
Percentage [%]
RMSE
MAE
MBE
RMSE
MAE
MBE
Model with 12 stations
20.27
15.69
6.15
30.43
22.63
6.75
Model with 13 stations
13.52
10.69
1.92
20.61
15.60
1.68
Model from whole Greenland
14.40
11.38
7.54
18.53
15.24
8.86
Cold-bias and moving mean
29.04
27.85
27.85
41.07
39.92
39.92
Uncorrected
45.68
40.46
40.46
61.20
56.20
56.20
Table A.7: Absolute and percentage wise RMSE, MAE, and MBE for the prediction of number of melt
days with the 5 different methods - with ﬁt based on longitude, latitude, and elevation.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
63
==PAGE:71==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
A.2
Correction maps
Figure A.1: Map of the corrections that should be applied to each pixel in Greenland, predicted from model
based on latitude. The red crosses represent the location of the PROMICE stations.
Figure A.2: Map of the corrections that should be applied to each pixel in Greenland, predicted from model
based on latitude and elevation. The red crosses represent the location of the PROMICE stations.
64
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
==PAGE:72==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
Figure A.3: Map of the corrections that should be applied to each pixel in Greenland, predicted from model
based on latitude and longitude. The red crosses represent the location of the PROMICE stations.
Figure A.4: Map of the corrections that should be applied to each pixel in Greenland, predicted from model
based on elevation and longitude. The red crosses represent the location of the PROMICE stations.
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
65
==PAGE:73==
Magnus Barfod Suhr, s153092
DTU
How much of the surface of the Greenland ice sheet is melting?
February 7, 2021
A.3
Melt across Greenland
Figure A.5: Melt across Greenland on July 12th (left) and July 29th (right) from corrected satellite data.
Figure A.6: Melt across Greenland on July 12th (left) and July 29th (right) from raw satellite data.
66
How much of the surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet is melting?
