==PAGE:1==
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
Master Thesis
February, 2021
By
Magnus Peter Eilersen
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5.5 months at the Section for DTU Compute, De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
ii
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
3D modelling takes on a unique shape in Virtual Reality. By creating a VR-3D modelling
application built on the principle of signifiers and affordances from Don Normans book
”The Design of Everyday Things” [D. Norman 1988] we not only reaffirm the strengths
of this principle in creating an easily understandable system, but we also highlight some
cases where it works less well. We then show how in these weaker cases, by applying
other design principles such as clear feedback and use of standards, we can overcome
these problems and create a system where different design approaches solve problems
that they fit particularly well with.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jakob Andreas Bærentzen and Jeppe Revall Frisvad
for providing the opportunity to work on this project, and also for their continued feedback
and ideas to keep the project moving forward.
I’d also like to thank some of the my predecessors for this project whose previous work
has made this continued development possible.
Valerii Kamalov, [Kamalov 2018]
Lars Kofod Jensen, [Jensen 2019]
Morten Nobel-Jørgensen &
Egill Ingi Jacobsen
Last but not least, big thanks to all the people who tested the application and provided
great thoughts and feedback on it.
Emilie Yu,
Rahul Arora,
Karan Singh,
Emil Ørup Kristensen &
Fred Baumann Jensen
iv
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Motivation
3
3
Background
5
3.1
Other 3D-modelling solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Notable Academic Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Box modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Theory
11
4.1
The Design of Everyday Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Analysis
15
5.1
The Original System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.2
Challenges in the original system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6
Design & Implementation
19
6.1
Universal Face Merging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.2
Moving the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
6.3
Making the worktable dynamic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.4
Symmetry by sensing feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.5
Optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.6
Full code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7
Testing
29
7.1
Format of the test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.2
Local Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.3
Remote Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
8
Discussion
35
9
Conclusion
37
9.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Bibliography
39
A Initial self test
41
B User tests
43
B.1 Tester E.K. - local test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
B.2 Tester F.J. - local test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
B.3 Tester Emilie Yu - remote test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
B.4 Tester Rahul Arora - remote test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The idea of a Virtual Reality (VR) goes back many years, the idea of getting rid of the
computer interface and stepping into an alternate world that would react as if you were
there yourself, influencing it. However only recently have we have been able to success-
fully and commercially produce VR-equipment that is starting to scratch the surface of that
vision. In the last decade we’ve seen a lot of advancement in VR, not only technologically
but also in public interest, and with public interest, and an increasing amount of different
users, it has also become important to implement a good user experience(UX).
There are many decades of knowledge about good UX in the realm of the personal com-
puter, but since VR is a completely new interface, only some lessons from traditional UX
design can be copied over to VR, most of the time new solutions has to be thought up
specifically for VR.
This difference in interface can be easily seen when comparing inputs from the the tradi-
tional PC and VR. On a PC you most commonly have a mouse and keyboard, the mouse
allows for movement in 2 directions, and maps onto the screen, where the interface is
always(almost) designed as a flat plane. The keyboard allows for typing in text, com-
mands, or acts as a huge array of customizeable buttons. In contrast VR, as it is most
commonly seen right now, give you two controllers for your hands, and a head mounted
display(HMD) which acts as not only the output screen, but also tracks your head move-
ments. All of these controllers work in 3 dimensions, and additionally also tracks 3 dimen-
sions of rotations for what we call 6 Degrees of freedom(6DOF) controls. This adds a lot
of control compared to the 2 dimensional mouse, and simply porting over our 2d menus,
that worked with the mouse, is firstly a waste of all the freedom that we have, and sec-
ondly very awkward to control. Like a car with 2 steering wheels separated for the front
and back tires, sure it allows for more control, but we don’t need that amount of control
for what cars need to do. In short, with more degrees of freedom, we paradoxically loose
some control over each individual degree.
It’s clear that we need to tailor VR-applications to make use of the VR-interface. There
are already many great examples of people coming up with new user interfaces that has
been designed with VR in mind. Some examples will be investigated in the background
chapter.
This project aims to tackle this exact problem of designing good UX in a VR environment.
The project is a continuation of previous projects[Jensen 2019]&[Kamalov 2018] and is
also described in [Bærentzen, Frisvad, and Singh 2019] The product, that we are trying to
make work in VR, takes the form of a VR-3D-modelling application. To achieve this goal
several design principles has been chosen: First and most importantly, the design is based
heavily on several ideas from Don Normans book ”The Design of Everyday Things”[D.
Norman 1988] Most central of these is the idea of signifiers and visibility, which means
clearly showing what you can interact with, and how you can interact with it. Another
principle is to make use of natural mappings, meaning that something interactable, takes
a form that gives an idea of how it works.
These principle can be seen in the fundamental actions of the system, figure 1.1 show
the basic signifiers in the system, there are 3 different kinds, the face handle, the vertex
handle and the edge lock. These signifiers are mapped to the thing they control, and they
are shaped to indicate their function, the face handle looks like a drawer handle, and hints
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
1
==PAGE:10==
that it should be pulled.
The vertex handles are attached to the vertices and look like pins, which hints that they can
be moved around. The edge locks are shaped like an open band, and when interacted it
closes, to indicate locking the faces together. Another important element is the feedback,
the face handle and hand trigger is highlighted, when a hand touches them, indicating
that your hand can interact with the handle. Another important feedback is the size of the
handles scaling depending on the distance from the hands. When a hand moves closer
to a handle, the handles grow, this shows an attraction to the hands.
Figure 1.1: A look at the handles that signify actions
These design principles and more, will be explained further in the theory chapter.
The system is built using the Unity platformUnity 2019, and the model is represented by
a half-edge mesh data structure, this structure is handled by the GEL library [Bærentzen
2020 https://github.com/janba/GEL]. In this project the technical details of a half-edge
mesh data structure is not important, as we are working on a higher level, and the GEL
library has many high-level functions available.
2
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:11==
2
Motivation
The motivation behind this project is to explore the possibilities that a VR-3D-modelling
solution can bring, what can our approach bring to the table, that traditional software and
other VR-3D-modelling programs cannot? We are interested in finding out what works
and what doesn’t work with our approach and widening the knowledge of VR-UX.
VR brings something truly new to the table, double screens which provides depth percep-
tion, head and hand tracking with 6DOF which allows you to move seamlessly in a 3D
space.
The closest example to such an big interface change in newer times, could be said to
be the touchscreen of the smartphone. And with the smartphone we’ve also seen the
development of new UX solutions, such as swiping, multi-point actions and gyroscopic
features, that makes sense and is possible in the space that is the smartphone.
It is the same story with VR, and while there has already been dedicated a lot of time
and effort to find the things that work well in VR, it is still important to keep exploring and
developing VR over time.
With this work we are exploring a different approach than most of the other solutions
for VR-modelling, and hopefully some of our findings will show how we can improve this
experience.
The hope is that a more human-centered signifier approach is both easier to use, and is
feasible to implement.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:13==
3
Background
3D-modelling can be hard for a beginner to get in to, there are several barriers that has
to be overcome, mostly in the form of tools that has to be learned. Contemporary 3D
modelling software is like many other complex programs filled with menus, drop-downs
and tools, and you might sometime hear people say that a it would take a lifetime to learn
everything that program can do. Furthermore there is an abstraction layer when it comes
to working on a model in these programs, you are not modifying the model directly, all your
input has to come through a keyboard, mouse or in some cases a tablet. With VR we can
solve this second point quite easily, since accurate hand tracking is built into the foundation
of VR. In other words we can interact with a world directly through our hands,(or if you
want to be precise, through a very small abstraction layer in terms of controllers or hand
tracking), main difference here is still that one goal of these controllers are to accurately
replicate the hand. Something traditional controls do not aim to do.
This new type of input that VR enables brings a lot of interesting possibilities. There are
already a substantial amount of VR-3D-Modelling software out there with a varying degree
of user-friendliness.
But let’s also first look at some of the traditional 3D modelling solutions.
3.1
Other 3D-modelling solutions
3D-modelling is a big field with many people dedicating their lives to make 3D models for
film, games, advertising or more technical modelling such as for product manufacturing
or buildings.
Here is a variety of different 3D-modelling solutions that focus on different areas of 3D-
modelling.
3.1.1
Blender
Blender(1995)[Blender 1995] is a huge player in the entertainment industry, or for mod-
elling that focuses more on the artistic aspect of modelling. Along with Autodesk Maya,
which is one of Blenders main competitor, they are responsible for many of the 3D models
you see in films, games or advertisements.
Blender is a very traditional 3D-modelling application, it has many features and allows to
model pretty much anything your imagination can think of. To support this great versatility
comes the inclusion of many, many tools and options. Figure 3.1 shows an overview of
how the default blender editor looks, as can be seen there are dozens of different tabs, and
under each tab more options, or different editor views which allows for different modelling
workflows. It is not a surprise that beginners can feel very overwhelmed when starting
out, and there are a whole field of learning material for just Blender in the form of Youtube
videos, books or forum posts.
Blender shows the fundamental rule, that with functionality comes complexity. If you want
something that can do anything, it wont be simple.
3.1.2
Autodesk AutoCAD
AutoCAD[AutoDesk 1992] is a popular Computer Assisted Design (CAD) tool, which pro-
vides a more technical side of modelling. In a CAD program, there are more focus on pro-
viding tools for precise measurement of volumes and tools for simulating how the model
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: What greets you when you first open Blender
would be affected in the real world, such as forces from gravity, weather, human use
etc. AutoCAD is very popular as well, and is used for many engineering disciplines, and
around manufacturing-companies all over the world.
Blender and AutoCAD have very different use cases, but the thing they have in common
is the amount of functionality and tools they provide the user.
3.2 show how a typical AutoCAD layout looks, as with the Blender layout 3.1, it also has
a ton of menus everywhere, again confusing for a beginner, and again many resources
for learning the skill that is AutoCAD.
Blender and AutoCAD are both traditional desktop application, controlled with a mouse
or keyboard, or maybe sometimes a drawing tablet.
Now we’ll take a look at what the world of VR has to offer when it comes to 3D-modelling
software.
3.1.3
Google Blocks
Google has a foot in many domains and VR is no exception. Google Blocks[Google
2017] is an application by Google that allows the user to ”play” around with shapes in
a VR environment. While the program does allow for some more complex traditional
tools, such as extrusion and subdivision of faces, Google Blocks is mainly presented as
an experience where you can construct scenes or models by placing primitive shapes in
different patterns. More advanced actions that manipulate the shapes, are not directly
available and the user has to look for them, and sometimes enable them in hidden away
menus.
Google blocks uses a tool interface, as I like to call it. A tool interface works by having a
selection of different tools, very much like traditional 3D-modelling software, the difference
being that in VR the tools have a physical form to them, that represent what they can do.
Figure 3.3 shows the tools that Blocks offer you, there are tools for placing, drawing,
painting, moving, modifying and erasing shapes.
6
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.2: How an AutoCad scene might look
With these limited tools, and having a physical representation of them. Google Blocks
manages to keep its interface pretty simple to understand and use for a beginner, espe-
cially if you already have some experience in modelling and/or VR.
3.1.4
Adobe Medium
Adobe Medium[Adobe 2018] is a 3D Modelling application focused on sculpting, and is
like Google Blocks built for VR. In fact Medium and Blocks also use the same type of
tool-based interface, in figure 3.4 mediums tools can be seen on the left, located around
the wheel, and on the right is a more traditional options menu.
Since Medium is a sculpting program, it is not focused on making rigid structures and is
different from what the product of this report, tries to do in this aspect.
But they are still similar in the aspect of being VR modelling applications, and there are
similar challenges such as UI and tool limitations.
3.1.5
Gravity Sketch
I don’t think it would be unfair to call Blocks and Medium, consumer oriented artistic experi-
ences, sure you might be able to make models for professional use, but the tools are at the
end of the day pretty limited, especially compared to the traditional giants(Blender/Maya).
Gravity Sketch is what happens when you try to go the other direction. Lot’s of tools,
precise editing and it is designed for professional use in companies.
You can do a lot of things with gravity sketch, they support both freehand drawing and
modelling controlling faces and vertices, and each mode has many tools.
To support all of this, gravity sketch does have to rely on several menus, and many button
combinations. Because of this Gravity Sketch does tend to look more like some of the
traditional modelling programs, and does require a bit of knowledge to control.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.3: Google Blocks’ tool based interface
3.2
Notable Academic Research
3.2.1
Plane, Ray, and Point: Enabling Precise Spatial Manipulations with
Shape Constraints
The paper ”Plane, Ray, and Point: Enabling Precise Spatial Manipulations with Shape
Constraints”[Hayatpur et al. 2019] explores how to constrain movement in a VR environ-
ment. Especially interesting is how it shows how much easier an object is to precisely
control when you introduce constraints. The study also makes use of intuitive hand con-
trols to control the constraints, by mapping hand gestures to similar actions, examples:
when pointing upwards with your thumb a upwards ray constraint is created, when pointed
forward with an index finger a forward facing ray constraint is created, and when pointing
forward and upwards, essentially indicating a plane with your fingers, a plane constraint
is created.
This makes the actions in the real world map to actions in the virtual world in a intuitive
way, and makes such actions much easier to remember. No arbitrary buttons needed.
This paper also really highlights the point that it’s hard to have precission with all the
freedom we have in VR, so to give the user more control, we need to provide tools for
limiting control.
3.2.2
CASSIE: Curve and Surface Sketching in Immersive Environments
Another study ”CASSIE: Curve and Surface Sketching in Immersive Environments” [Yu
et al. 2021] describes how by combining the freedom of drawing in VR and smart au-
tomation, well defined models can be obtained easily from the ideation stage. What is
really interesting here is the task of recognising user intention, and providing automatic
precision and cleanup, which would be impossible to do manually.
If user intent can be correctly understood, it is possible to provide a lot of help and support
the action to provide a much easier experience. However, wrongly predict a users intent
and the experience suddenly becomes very frustrating.
8
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.4: Adobe Mediums tool based interface
To get this dynamic right, testing is often needed to see if the automation creates a good
experience or frustration.
3.2.3
The VR Book
While not really a piece of research, I felt like this book needed to be mentioned some-
where. ”The VR Book”[Jerald 2016] is a fitting name, this book documents and explains
an broad amount of the aspects of VR, it goes through the history, different forms of real-
ity, also collectively called mixed reality (MR), different perceptions and how we faithfully
stimulate them, health/physical challenges with VR and content creation in VR, to just
name some of the broad themes. While I’ve only dipped my toes in what this book offers,
listing some of the basic design principles that this book provides seems fitting for this
project.
• Focus on the user experience rather than the technology
• Simplify and harmonize the communication between user and technology
• Focus on making the technical intermediary between the user and content transpar-
ent so users feel like they have direct access to the virtual world and its entities
• Since presence is a function of both immersion and the user, we can’t entirely control
it. Maximize presence by focusing on what we do have control over— immersion
• Minimize breaks-in-presence
Especially the points relating to reducing the gap between user and content, lies very
close to points that [D. Norman 1988] also makes, as we shall see in the next chapter.
3.3
Box modelling
Box modelling is a widely used method for creating 3d models, box modelling focuses
on the manipulation of rough geometry, through direct control of faces and vertices. The
usual workflow of box modelling is to ”block out” the model in rough shapes, and then
adding more detail through dividing faces and moving vertices.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
9
==PAGE:18==
3.5 shows an example of different steps in the box-modelling approach.
Box modelling creates a low-poly blocky look, but often a surface subdivision is applied to
the model if more soft shapes are needed, for example animals or characters. Programs
such as blender are often used for box-modelling.
This project is built on this box modelling approach, in contrast to some more free-form
modelling, like Adobe Medium shown earlier.
Figure 3.5: Example of box modelling, taken from http://dcdesign.wikidot.com/wiki:box-
modelling
10
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:19==
4
Theory
4.1
The Design of Everyday Things
4.1.1
Signifiers and Affordances
The book ”The Design of Everyday Things”[D. Norman 1988] introduces the concept of
signifiers and affordances. An affordance is described in the book as ”the term affordance
refers to the perceived and actual properties of the thing, primarily those fundamental
properties that determine just how the thing could possibly be used” Here examples of
simple objects are mostly used, shapes can have affordances, balls afford to be grabbed
(if the right size) or rolling, cubes have the affordance of being stacked, and materials
have affordances too, wood can be carved or burned, glass can also be carved (but it’s
harder) and smashed. Objects can have many affordances, and listing every affordance
of even these simple objects would seem like a very hard task.
Signifiers is what signifies an objects affordance, for simple objects an affordance seem
to blend together with it’s signifier, again a ball shape signifies being grabbed and affords
to be grabbed.D. Norman 2008
But for more complex objects such as doors or drawers, a handle is a signifier that signifies
the affordance of opening by pulling.
All of this is also closely related to a persons knowledge of the world/domain and stan-
dards.
4.1.2
World and Domain Knowledge
Let’s imagine a well designed door that leaves no question as how to operate it, it is clear
which way it opens, and the handle is clearly visible. Would this door never be used
incorrectly? What if someone who had never seen a door in their life encountered it?
Would they know that the handle has to be pushed down and not up?
We all walk around with untold amount of knowledge about the world, and in the case of
doors this is knowledge that we’ve all built since childhood, it is so familiar and ingrained
we rarely think about what we know about doors. In general we know a door can open, and
will lead to another space, and that there is some mechanism that allows it to open. We
have this knowledge because we have tons of experience with doors, that has culminated
into this general idea of doors.
On top of that there are many standards that are associated with things. With doors for
example, if we have a normal lever door handle, the standard is to push it down to open the
door, design a door where you have to pull the lever up, and most people would probably
be confused and maybe think that it was locked.
Standards are kind of arbitrary, and usually stem from something that works pretty well,
even if a new idea comes along that could replace that standard, it has to be much better
than the old standard, because the standard has a lot of value in its familiarity, changing a
standard is frustrating for users, because what used to be automatic now requires some
thinking.
Take for example the Dvorak keyboard layout, in tests it’s been shown to perform 10%
better than the widely adopted standard QWERTY,D. Norman 1988 but because learning
to type on a keyboard is relatively hard, people who know the QWERTY layout simply
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
11
==PAGE:20==
doesn’t want to learn something new from scratch. And since the majority of people use
the QWERTY layout, the industry produce these keyboards, and young people learning
to type will only encounter that layout and will learn that layout without knowing any better,
and the cycle continues.
There are tons of standards like this all around us, and often the standard arose in the
past, because of some restraints that we don’t have any more. The QWERTY layout was
designed to prevent typewriters from jamming, but we don’t use typewriters anymore.
It’s important to be aware of standards when designing, you can come up with a great
design on paper, but because it differs from a standard, the user is confused, and subse-
quently frustrated at your design. Standards can be a big frustration for a designer who
wants to create a beautiful and efficient design, but departing from a standard is usually
more trouble than not. On the bright side, standards can be utilized by a designer to
make their design more familiar. And a complicated feature might be easily understood
because it has a standard attached to it.
4.1.3
Design for exploration
A designers dream would be to produce a design that is so elegant that the user under-
stands it just by looking at it or holding it. That dream is as far from reality as it gets, a
design is never perfect, you might get a lot of good results with one group of people, but
suddenly someone with a different background completely misunderstands your design.
A principle to mitigate some of this confusion is to design for exploration, what this es-
sentially means is to design something that can be explored and played with to build
understanding of how it works.
This requires the designer to follow some principles. From D. Norman 1988
• Make it easy to determine what actions are possible at any moment (make use of
constraints).
• Make things visible, including the conceptual model of the system, the alternative
actions, and the results of actions.
• Make it easy to evaluate the current state of the system.
• Follow natural mappings between intentions and the required actions; between ac-
tions and the resulting effect; and between the information that is visible and the
interpretation of the system state.
If a user is presented with a design with no explanation of how to operate it, will they be
able to learn how on their own? Maybe, if the system is transparent and consequences
of actions are easily understood. Clearly indicating places where the user can interact
with the system is a good start, buttons or handles could work for this. Then when the
user interacts with a button or handle, clearly showing if that action had an effect through
feedback. And also clearly showing why some action did not have an effect if possible.
Another good practice is to prevent certain actions, if they are pointless in a current state,
this can be hard on a physical design, but still possible through locking or hiding buttons.
In a computer system this is much easier, but can also be problematic, if you hide controls
that the user suddenly wants to access again, and don’t understand why they are gone.
Another paper (co-authored by Don Norman), also show the strength of these principles
in what they call Direct Manipulation Interfaces [Hutchins, Hollan, and D. A. Norman 1985]
The idea behind a Direct Manipulation Interface, lies very much in the name, what you see
on (for example) a screen, is what you can manipulate directly, is there data on the screen?
12
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:21==
pull it directly over on a graph to graph it, no need for intermediate commands. This is
also what you might call ”What you see is what you get”, the operations and interactable
parts of the system are laid clearly out for the user.
4.1.4
Testing
No matter how much time is spent on designing a great system, the user WILL show its
flaws when they get their hands on it. This is why testing is crucial to obtain the best
result, when you are creating something, you become blind to a lot of aspects, and you
have a domain knowledge, and also knowledge of how it works behind the scene. A new
user won’t have all of this, and testing is done to highlight this gap, and find the obvious
oversights and pain points.
4.1.5
Final words
All in all designing is not easy, we are designing stuff for humans, and humans are very
different and complicated. For this reason we can’t have perfect design laws, we can only
have principles that might or might not apply to a specific design. And secondly why we
need to test designs often, and learn from feedback.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:23==
5
Analysis
5.1
The Original System
To get an idea what changes were implemented and why they were implemented, this
chapter will start by describing the previous state of the system. In it’s previous version
the system had the following features.
• Face extrusion (freeform & guided): by grabbing the handles on the faces it is
possible to make an extrusion, this extrusion will follow the hand, and can be limited
to the face normal if the thumb is touching the thumbstick.
• Vertex translation: Vertices can be moved by grabbing them and moving them
around.
• Edge collapsing: If two adjacent vertices are put closely together they will merge
into one.
• Edge loop subdivision: It is possible to make an edge loop by grabbing a vertex
with each hand and making a snapping motion, like breaking a stick.
• Vertex allignment by sensing: By grabbing one vertex with one hand, and touching
another vertex(with a flat hand) with your other hand, it is possible to align the first
vertex with the second on the closest world axis. The model starts aligned with the
world axis, but if non 90◦angles are introduced to the model, the edges will not be
aligned with the world axis anymore, which makes the vertex alignment behave a
bit confusing.
• Face alignment by sensing: Very similar to the vertex alignment it is possible to
align a grabbed face with another face, that you are holding a flat hand on, the
grabbed face will be moved so that the two faces are on the same plane.
• Interlocking faces: Between every face there are small face locks that can be
activated by touching them with your index finger, when faces are locked together
they will extrude together.
• Load and save model: Under the model there is a worktable, this worktable has
buttons for saving and loading up to three different models.
• Undo Redo actions: The worktable also has undo and redo buttons, which enables
undoing and redoing operations.
• Rotate model: The worktable sits on a turntable, this turntable has handles for
rotating the model, this only allows for rotating around the vertical axis.
• Scale and move model: The turntable also allows for scaling and moving the
model, this is done by grabbing two handles and moving them around together(to
move), or apart/towards from eachother(to scale).
• Move user: It is also possible to move the user around, this is done by using the
thumbsticks.
Here are some pictures of the old system.5.1
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5.1
Figure 5.2
5.2
Challenges in the original system
From the previous work on this application, several pain points had already been identi-
fied, this gave a good starting point for improvements. This is a list of some of the points
that this thesis, aimed to address.
• Limited control over merging and snapping:
• Limited feedback on alignment of vertices and faces
• Optimization
An example of the limited control in merging an snapping can be seen in (5.3) because
the extrusion is happening up against another face, the system sees it as a collision and
won’t let the action go through.
Figure 5.3: This operation wouldn’t go through in the previous version of the system
In addition to these points, as part of me learning about the system I did an initial test of
the system with myself as the tester.
The test followed a similar structure as from the previous work by Jensen 2019.
In short it consists of 3 tests,
• A discoverability test where the user is completely new to the system, and is asked
to reproduce some simple models without guidance.
16
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:25==
• A design test where the user learns about the more advanced features, and is then
asked to create some more advanced models.
• A creativity test where the user can create whatever he/she wants.
Since I already knew the advanced features of the system, I wasn’t able to faithfully do
the first test, but it was still done.
These are the main points that came out of that test.
The full test thoughts are attached as Appendix A.
• Moving around the model is tedious, the turntable feels too far away from the model,
and rotating is limited.
• Using the analogue sticks to move the model around feels weird and against the
goal of making the system feel intuitive and immersive.
• Sometimes it would be nice if you could move faces, the only way now is to either
move it in very small increments, or moving the 4 vertices of the face.
With all of these points collected, there are several problems to work on
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:27==
6
Design & Implementation
6.1
Universal Face Merging
To solve the problem of the user having limited control over the extrusion of the model, for
example not being able to merge two faces, the system needed some more freedom, ini-
tially the idea was to connect two faces if an extrusion was done next to another extrusion.
This would make the user have a lot more freedom, and prevent them from having to think
many steps ahead when building the model. This initial solution worked well, but some
situations would still not work, that you probably would expect to work, and we wanted to
follow the principle of least surprise.
Figure 6.1:
extruding up against
neighbouring face
Figure 6.2: Let go and the faces
merge
Then came the idea of a universal face merge feature, meaning that any face that lies
approximately on top of another face and face the opposite direction, after an action will
remove both of the faces and merge the model together. Being a global rule makes it
much easier for a user to understand, if two faces lie on top of each-other they cancel
each-other out, no exceptions. This new feature made the modelling approach a lot less
strict, and also makes it possible for different sequences of actions to lead to the same
outcome.
Figure 6.3: extruding up against an
arbitrary face
Figure 6.4: Let go and the faces
also merge
This in principle also meant that the facebridging feature was replaced by this more gen-
eral facemerging. It was however decided to keep facebridging and make it a little less
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
19
==PAGE:28==
strict, now if you connect two facehandles, as you would do to make a facebridge, they will
always connect, they don’t need same orientation or same size, only a matching amount
of vertices.
6.1.1
Implementation
To implement this we need information about the faces, luckily the this is very easy to get
from the GEL library through a function call manifold.GetHMeshIds(vertexIds, halfedgeIds,
faceIds); which will write the faceIds, to the provided array.
With faceIds you can access vertex information easily through the GEL library.
Now with all the faces available, we could just compare every face with all the other faces,
this is however pretty inefficient, and will run O(n2) time, with n being the number of faces.
This can easily be done much more efficiently by only comparing the faces that are being
extruded to all the other faces. This will run in O(n∗s) time where n being the total number
of faces, and s being the extruded faces(which will in most cases only be a constant 5).
Now we just need to be able to compare two faces, as already described we want the
faces to cancel out if they are facing eachother and are on top of eachother, a facing
check can easily be done comparing normals of the face, which is available through GEL.
To check if the faces are on top of eachother, what we do is compare the vertices, if there
are the same amount of vertices in each face, and they match up pairwise, they must be
on top of eachother, this operation is a bit more expensive, so to save some time we first
compare normals, and only if the normals are facing eachother do we further compute the
vertex pairs.
Finally if any faces match up, we delete both faces and run a stiching command that GEL
provides, this stiching command will locate any ”cracks” in the model i.e. an edge not
connected to two faces. and try to stitch that crack up by merging vertices together.
6.2
Moving the model
It was identified that moving the model around was a bit restrictive, and the turntable that
provides the means for the movement, could sometimes be in an awkward spot.
One advantage of the turntable is however how it has a clear signifier, and it uses handles
like the rest of the model. It was initially a wish to keep this aspect of having the physical
signifier that the handles provide, so the first implementation consisted of two turntables
instead of 1 (6.5), one at the top and one at the bottom of the model, to improve the prob-
lem of the turntable being in an awkvard spot. It was also decided to make the turntable
into flat rings instead of a cylinder, this was done to make the turntables take up less
space and not obstruct the view too much.
While I think this iteration did improve on some aspects, it still felt clunky and awkward,
and there was still the problem of having to use the thumbstick to move the turntable
around, if you maybe wanted to switch from sitting to standing.
An additional idea was thought up, what if we could move the turntable and model on the
vertical axis using a rope, imagining that the whole thing was hanging from that rope (6.6)
you would grab the rope and pull it up and down to adjust the position of the turntable and
model.
While this was following the idea of having a signifier for the action, it was still quite a big
thing for the simple action of moving the model on one axis, what if we wanted rotation or
movement along other axis?
20
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:29==
Figure 6.5: A first try of improving movement of the model
Feeling a bit stuck coming up with a smart way to signify the moving of the model, a step
was taken back. Maybe we had to take another approach?
The signifier approach was proving to be quite clunky for this specific problem, so a new
idea was proposed, what if we just try implementing a more standard movement feature?
In most VR applications it is very common to be able to grab objects and directly move
them around, like you would with an object in real life.
While there is no direct signifier, it is a very intuitive way of moving objects, it’s how we
do it in the real world! And with it being a standard way of moving things in VR we will
assume that it won’t be weird for the user to move the model this way.
Figure 6.6: A rope idea to still have a signifier attached
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
21
==PAGE:30==
It is also possible to scale the object by grabbing it with tho hands, and pulling them apart
or pushing them together.
This ended up being the final implementation(for now), and we decided to let the test
results judge how well it worked.
6.2.1
Implementation
Implementing this new movements is in theory easy, but in practice it’s a little more tricky
because were working in different coordinate-spaces.
What we in essence want to do, is to lock the position and orientation of the model to the
hand, when the hand grabs the model. After that any change in the hand position is also
applied to the model, simple in essence since we just need to note the change in hand
position and apply the same change to the model. The model and the hands are however
in different coordinate-spaces, so we need to transform the hand movements (which are
in world space) through the space-change matrix that gives us the model-space. Unity
provides this world to model space matrix, so we luckily don’t have to calculate it our-
selves.
We can now move and rotate the model, but we still need to implement the scaling of the
object. To make it intuitive we want the hands to stay where we grab the model, if I for
example grab a chair by two feet, my hands should stay at the two feet while I scale it.
To achieve this we need to take several factors into account.
First we need to simply scale the object linearly with the distance between our hands, if
the distance doubles, so does the size of the model.
controlsManager.SetGlobalScale(initialScale * (distanceBetweenControllers /
initialDistanceBetweenControllers));
Second we need to move the center of the model away/toward where we grab it, as we
scale it. Otherwise our hands would slide along the model as we scale it.
var scaleMovement = (initialPosition - initialControllerCenter) *
((distanceBetweenControllers / initialDistanceBetweenControllers)-1);
Finally we also want to be able to move the model while we scale it, this is simply to take
the difference of the initial center point between the controllers with the new center point.
var deltaMovement = (activeControllers[1].transform.position +
activeControllers[0].transform.position) * 0.5f -
initialControllerCenter;
6.3
Making the worktable dynamic
With the way to move of the model now changed, the problem of being limited to a specific
space was now much better, if you want to model somewhere else you can just grab the
model and take it with you. There was however still one thing keeping the user bound to
a specific location, the Worktable (6.7)
The worktable was situated on top of the turntable, but with the turntable gone it was just
floating there, bound to a specific point in space, we somehow needed a way to bring it
with us if we wanted to give the user freedom.
The obvious idea is to just connect the worktable to the model or to the user, so we did
that, it was decided that the position of the worktable should follow the position of the user.
22
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:31==
Figure 6.7: The worktable in the previous version of the system
The question now became how should it follow the user? Should it always appear in front
of the user, or maybe be remodeled to fit on the hand?
Having it somehow connect to the hand seemed like a good idea, since you would then
always have it at hand! heh. An initial experiment was to put the undo/redo button,
from the worktable, on the back of the hand 6.8, this seemed to a very convenient place,
and very easy to access, however there was a problem with expanding it to also fit the
save/load buttons.
Figure 6.8: The undo/redo buttons on the arm
So to find a balance between functionality and ease of access, it was decided to put the
worktable itself on the hand, and to avoid it being in the way, you access it by facing the
palm of the hand upwards 6.9.
Figure 6.9: The menu is summoned by facing your left palm upwards
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
23
==PAGE:32==
6.3.1
Implementation
This implementation was fairly simple, the whole worktable was already functional, so it
just needed to appear when the palm hand was facing upwards.
A simple dot-product between an upwards vector, and a vector perpendicular to the palm,
calculates whether the menu is active or not.
Vector3.Dot(OVRInput.GetLocalControllerRotation(lController) * Vector3.right,
Vector3.up) > 0.95f
To give the feature a little more feedback, a small animation was also added, where the
menu grows out of the hand when summoned and shrinks back in when dismissed.
6.4
Symmetry by sensing feedback
The symmetry by sensing (SBS) or alignment features, where you can allign points or
faces, are really nice for cleaning up the model, and making it straight. It was however
identified that there where some struggles with the feature in the previous work by Jensen
2019. One problem seemed to be users not really knowing when they were doing the SBS,
or their sensing hand would slip away from the handle and cancel the action.
To better signify that a SBS action is taking place, it was decided to add some feedback
to these actions, to clearly show the user what their input is doing. The feedback is made
to show what axis or plane we are aligning with, so with vertex alignment we get a line
that we snap to, and with plane alignment we get a plane that we snap to. Examples of
both cases can be seen in fig. (6.10) to (6.13)
These improvements, gives the user a little more feedback on when their alignment ac-
tions are taking place.
Figure 6.10: before sensing vertex
Figure 6.11: when sensing vertex
Figure 6.12: before sensing a plane
Figure 6.13: when sensing a plane
24
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:33==
6.4.1
Implementation
This implementation, is essentially two different problems with some similarities. We want
to be able to draw a line on a specific axis, and we want to be able to draw a surface on
a specific plane.
To draw a line, Unity provides a handy line-renderer, all we need to know is two points, so
we find the position of the sensed vertex and we take the position of the alligned vertex,
and draw a line through them.
To draw the plane, we need a slightly different aproach, in Unity a plane object is created
with a grid texture. When we sense a face-handle we spawn the plane at the center
position of that face, then to rotate it accordingly we take the normal of the face, and
apply a rotation to the ”sensing-plane” so it faces the same direction.
6.5
Optimisation
While need for optimisation was a concern, it was nevertheless never apparent how im-
portant it was when working on small scale models.
With the inclusion of the general merge function, one worry with it was that it could poten-
tially scale poorly with big models. It was decided to test this by creating as big a model
as possible. And unfortunately the application ran into problems quicker than expected,
let’s present the data.
Creating a big model is done the quickest using multi-face extrusion, while doing that the
program ran into computation-time problems on a pretty small model.
The model (6.14) is a box of 8x11x1 faces, which gives 22+16+176 = 214 faces An ex-
trusion of the 8 faces at the end creates 26 newly created or moved faces. Comparisons
that need to be made is 26*214 = 5564
Figure 6.14: model
Looking at the computation time we can see that the Comparison takes 157ms or 18.9%
of the frame.( 6.15) Which is not that great, however looking further down the profiler
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
25
==PAGE:34==
list, we see two other major bottlenecks, isValidMesh and UpdateControls. Both of these
functions also scale with model size.
Figure 6.15: multi-face extrusion
Let’s now look at a single face extrusion. (6.16) Here we see, as should be expected,
a much lower impact from the mergecheck. And the two major bottlenecks being is-
ValidMesh and UpdateControls.
26
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.16: single-face extrusion
These 2 bottlenecks are unavoidable, they always scale with size, where the merge can
be somewhat counteracted by not moving too many faces at a time.
There is of course room for improvement, but it would be the best use of time first looking
at optimizing isValidMesh and UpdateControls.
The program does run, but at around 200 faces there is a noticeable lag of 500ms when
doing operations.
I will not look at optimizing it for now, but it is now clear where optimization should happen.
6.6
Full code
Full code for the full implementations is available at https://github.com/magei00/VRModelling
VRModelling 2021
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:37==
7
Testing
To get feedback about the new version of the system, with the newly implemented fea-
tures, tests were carried out. This chapter will go over how the tests were performed and
highlight the most important points from the tests. The tests performed were qualitative,
and were mostly focused on investigating the users experience when interacting with the
system.
7.1
Format of the test
Four tests were performed in total, 2 tests were done locally and 2 tests were done re-
motely with email correspondence.
The format of the test is heavily inspired by the test from previous work on this project by
[Jensen 2019].
The test is comprised of 3 parts:
• Initial experimenting test, where the user is on their own.
• Guided introduction to all the features of the system
• Challenge to build a bigger model of a chair/house
One of our main design goals of this system is that it should be as self-explaining and
intuitive as possible, that is why there is an emphasis in the first test on the user experi-
menting alone. This is to get an idea of how easy the system is to pick up for a complete
beginner. In the initial experimenting test, the tester is asked to create a T shape (see
7.1), just so they have some direction in what to model.
Figure 7.1: One of the T’s created in the first test
The second part is mostly guiding the tester through all the different actions that are pos-
sible in the system. In the local tests, they would first get told that a specific action is
possible, and be encouraged to figure out how to do the action, this is to see if actions
are mapped well in the system.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
29
==PAGE:38==
In the third part, the tester is tasked with creating a bigger model, using all the knowledge
from the first two test, essentially having the full capability of the system at their disposal.
To help the user choose what to model, a chair or house is suggested, and a small drawing
shown to them 7.2 The tester is then mostly on their own, though it is sometimes necessary
to help the tester remember some of the details of an action.
Figure 7.2: Chair and house sketch, by Andreas Bærentzen
7.2
Local Tests
In this section I will highlight the most important observations from the local tests, the full
notes from the test feedback can be seen in Appendix B
Both testers had very limited experience with VR, and only one of them had some expe-
rience with 3D modelling.
7.2.1
Part 1, exploring
The first part of the tests where the tester were on their own, went really smooth in both
cases, without any introduction to the system, (except the knowledge that it is a 3d mod-
elling application), both testers were able to figure out most of the basic operations, and
clearly understand how they work and what they do.
Handles
As had already been observed in [Jensen 2019] the handles are very clear indicators of
being interactable, especially the scaling with hand proximity, gives a clear sign that your
hands can interact with them. The testers both immediately grabbed the face-handles and
discovered that it resulted in and extrusion. With some more playing around, both users
quickly discovered how the vertex handles worked as well. There was more trouble with
the edge-locks(which you need to touch with your index finger), since both face-handles
and vertex-handles are controlled with the palm. Both users could not figure out how to
interact with the edge-locks, they tried grabbing it like the other handles, without success.
Moving the model
For the newly implemented ”model-movement by grabbing it” control, both testers found
out about it after playing around with the model, in both cases it happened because of
accidentally grabbing the model, but once the model was grabbed, it was very natural for
them to move it around, and they understood that they were holding the model.
One of the testers figured out that it was triggered by grabbing the model itself, but the
other tester thought he had to grab a handle to do it, resulting in not being able to grab
the model again, but after being told that moving the model isn’t linked to a handle, he
figured out how it worked.
30
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:39==
The worktable menu
The new worktable menu appears when facing the palm of your left hand upwards. Both
testers found out about the menu by accident, when their hand by chance faced upwards,
after being surprised and trying to understand how it appeared, they both quickly realised
it was connected to the orientation of the left hand.
Pushing the buttons on the menu, proved to be a little more of a challenge. Both testers
tried to push the buttons with their index finger, and it took quite some time for them to
figure out that they had to use their palm.
The undo/redo feature was easy for them to understand and use, the saving/loading sys-
tem required some explanation, and some reassurance from me that the save had regis-
tered.
7.2.2
Part 2, explaining additional actions
The biggest challenge among the more advanced actions, was for the testers to under-
stand the flat hand gesture. When told to ”sense” a handle by holding a flat hand gesture
om the handle, both of the local testers understood it as doing a literal flat hand as in fig-
ure (7.3) This literal flat hand did not register on the controller, because the testers palms
would be too close to the trigger button. What instead works much more efficiently is to
grab the controller with your pinky and little finger, and stretch the rest of your fingers
away from any buttons on the controller. (7.4) This results in no input on the controller
and a flat hand gesture in the application. This confusion is very understandable, how
would they know a flat hand in the application means a weird grip on the controller. To
prevent this confusion, it might be necessary to better explain the special grip you need
on the controller, another option is to make the flat hand gesture a little less strict, by only
having too move thumb and index finger away from buttons. Pure hand-tracking would
probably also avoid this problem.
Another actions that the testers had trouble with was the subdivision action, the subdivi-
sion action was largely ignored for most of this project, mostly because it was forgotten,
but for the sake of giving the testers the full power of the system it was shown to them.
They would both however have a lot of trouble applying the subdivision as wanted, and
often when they tried to split the model in one direction, it would split it in a completely
different direction. It is safe to say that the behaviour of the tool is weird, and I’m not even
sure myself what is causing it. Through trial and error, and undoing, it would with patience
behave as wanted.
7.2.3
Part 3, building a bigger model
for this part I’ll explain each users experience separately.
E.K.
We started with building the chair, the user started by creating the seat of the chair using
guided extrusion, without any trouble he moved on to creating the feet, one long guided
extrusion followed by 3 extrusion into plane alignments, and the feet were done.
For the back of the chair, he locked 3 faces together and created a slanted back, here
he commented on how he couldn’t precisely angle the back, but after roughly getting a
nice angle, he was able to clean it up using vertex alignment. The model can be seen at
(7.5) Even though a simple chair, the whole process went very smooth, and small miss-
alignments were able to be fixed quickly.
He was up for another challenge and we went on to the house. For this challenge he
decided to take another approach and start by creating a big block for the whole house,
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7.3:
Ineffective flat hand
gesture
Figure 7.4: Effective flat hand ges-
ture
and then subdivide that big block into the smaller details. This approach quickly became
a little too overwhelming, a combination of acting too quickly and the subdivision tool
misbehaving(in his own words), quickly made the model into a mess (7.6) Due to fatigue,
and feeling a bit overwhelmed by the task, we stopped the test here.
F.J. Again the chair was chosen as the first challenge, again the tester started by modelling
the base of the chair, but spent a little more time getting a good ratio between leg width
and seat width. The tester generally spent a little more time on details, and trying some
different approaches, for the back of the chair he wanted to included holes like on the
sketch, and through some different iterations created a very nice pattern for the back. (7.7)
While F.J spent some more time on this model, the result also show some more details,
the whole experience went rather smooth, where most of the pauses were because the
user had to think about how the model should look and fit together and not so much how
to do the actions required.
This was the only test we managed to do with F.J. because of fatigue and time constraints,
7.3
Remote Tests
The full notes from the test feedback can be seen in Appendix B Note: Emilie and Rahul
did not know about the subdivision tool, since it was not mentioned to them because of
bad communication. Hence the feedback from both of them that they were missing a
subdivison tool.
From the remote tests, we sadly couldn’t get as realtime feedback as the local tests pro-
vided. We did get some very nice feedback, and both Emilie Yu and Rahul Arora has
extensive experience with VR, which provided some different feedback compared to the
local tests.
The most interesting points:
Rahul found the line & plane constraints confusing, much like the local testers, and Emilie
would have liked to see some more freedom in the restrictions, like moving the vertex
32
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:41==
Figure 7.5: Chair by tester E.K
along the line, and moving the face on the plane.
The hand-menu is maybe a bit to strict to summon, and a great idea from Rahul was to
make the threshold for dismissing it a bit larger than for summoning it, solving the problem
of being right on the edge of the threshold and quickly flickering between on and off.
Rahul mentions that the undo/redo could have better color schemes (grey instead of red
for inactive).
In general a lot more feedback could still be added, to edge locks, to vertex merging and
for moving the model.
Figure 7.6: Attempted house by tester E.K
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 7.7: Chair by F.J.
Figure 7.8: Tree by Emilie Yu
Figure 7.9: Replica of environment by Rahul Arora
34
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:43==
8
Discussion
This project is heavily based on the principle of creating a human-based UX, using many
of the principles from Don Normans ”Design of everyday things”[D. Norman 1988]. So
did we succeed in creating this human-based UX? Looking at the results from the tests
the newly implemented features, were very well received, the moving of the model, and
hand menu came very naturally to the local testers, and the remote testers also seemed
to have only small problems with the menu. The universal face-merging was also used
many times in the local tests, and it seemed like the testers expected the faces to merge
when extruding up against neighbouring faces. The least successful implementation was
probably the alignment indicators, while they did give a little more feedback on when an
alignment was happening, the problem of the sensing hand drifting away and canceling
the alignment still happened, and there was also the problem of the hand gesture being a
bit challenging to perform. For a better user experience the alignment features still require
more work.
A big part of the previous works on this project focused mainly on the principle of signifiers
and affordances. It was an original aim to continue building on this principle, but it turned
out to be several challenges in continuing this approach. First of all there is limited space
on the model for signifiers, for example it was discussed whether to have a way to move
faces, and how it could work. Like with extrusion this is an action that happens to the
face, so should there be another handle on the face? or maybe the face-handle should
have two parts? In any case it would increase the perceived complexity of the model,
with new handles. And what about more actions in the future, it would be impossible to
keep adding signifiers and handles to the model. The current balance of 3 handles, face,
vertex & edge, seems like a good amount, with maybe space for 1 more handle, but more
than that would seem to create too much clutter.
Another thing to consider is if it is possible to come up with a good simple signifier? As
with the example of the ”rope” concept, for moving the model, discussed in the design
chapter, this concept was getting a bit too ridiculous just so we could have something
that signified that the model could be moved. Going with the more simple implementation
of just grabbing the model, both provided more flexibility and was shown to be easy to
use without any dedicated signifier. Here it can also be argued that the act of grabbing
the model, utilizes a standard that many other VR-applications use, and in this case it
provides a good and simple solution.
I think this project is a great example of how the signifier/affordance approach might not
always provide the best solution, making use of other design principles such as clear
feedback and standards is also important, and ideally each problem would be solved
using a design that fits that problem particularly well.
The use of signifiers is a very strong tool, as has already been shown with the basic
handles of the system, but having signifiers as the only tool in your toolbelt does not
seem to provide the best results, a mix of different approaches really seem to bring the
best experience.
It is also interesting to take a look at how this project now lies compared to the other 3D
modelling software presented in the background chapter. Looking at the other VR entries,
a common factor for those is how they rely on a tool-based UI or actual menus, where
we in this project still has abstained from having any of that(for now), I find it interesting
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
35
==PAGE:44==
how far this ”clean” aproach can be pushed without becoming a mess. And even with the
applications current limited actions, it is still possible to create rather nice models.
There are still many improvements to be made to the system, some minor tweaks, but
also bigger challenges, the Testing chapter shows a great deal of good experiences in
the system, but also kinks that should be worked on.
36
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:45==
9
Conclusion
This project has been a continuation of the previous work by [Kamalov 2018], [Jensen
2019]& Bærentzen, Frisvad, and Singh 2019, the system has now been expanded with
new features, that allows for more free movement of the model, much more freedom in
modeling through automatic face-merging, a more dynamic worktable and feedback on
the alignment tools.
Through testing it was shown that many of these newly introduced features both made
sense and were easy to use. In addition they seem to have created a more fluid modeling
experience, and give more flexibility in the modelling approach.
It was also discovered that the signifier approach that the early system is built heavily on,
might not be the easiest or most suitable in all situations, and introducing solutions using
other design principles/ideas, can create good solutions. Especially the more traditional
way of moving the model by grabbing it, seem to work very well, and is easy to understand
because of how it is a standard way of doing movement in VR(and real life), that the user
is already familiar with.
Through the alignment actions, it was also discovered that hand gestures doesn’t translate
completely from the real world to VR with the current generation of controllers, something
which can lead to confusion and having to learn arbitrary hand positions to gain certain
in-application results, this is something that hand-tracking might be able to solve.
For continued work, it is also important to remember that with more features comes in-
creased complexity, using smart design and good testing this complexity can be greatly
reduced, but sooner or later the system will require a lot of experience to be fully utilized.
9.1
Future Work
A 3D modelling system is not a small thing, and creating a fully functional system lies far
beyond the scope of this report. Here are some of the current apparent major challenges
in the system, that might inspire further development of this system.
9.1.1
Optimization
While optimization is a boring thing to list, it is apparent, especially now where the system
is even more user friendly, that performance is affecting the user experience. With a more
fluid system, the user naturally builds bigger models before tiring, the system however
tires very quickly when the models become too big. The reasons for these problems and
some potential solutions, is described in the design/implementation chapter.
9.1.2
Further work on SBS/alignment features
While the inclusion of the line and plane indicators when using the alignment actions, does
seem to provide some added feedback, the users still struggle with consistently applying
these actions, the problem seems to partly be hands drifting away from the handles, and
partly having the wrong grip on the controllers. The second issue could maybe be solved
with hand tracking?
9.1.3
Hand Tracking
As has already been suggested in previous iterations of this application, the use of hand
tracking might provide an even more seamless experience? It would in any case be
a pretty drastic change in the system, and would in my view be a big, but interesting
challenge to work with.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
37
==PAGE:46==
9.1.4
Subdivision improvements
As mentioned in the Test chapter, the subdivision tool behaves weirdly, a fix of this tool,
and maybe an expansion of it could provide a lot of creative freedom for future users.
38
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
Norman, Don (1988). The Design of Everyday Things.
Kamalov, Valerii (2018). “Virtual Reality-based Interactive 3D Modelling”.
Jensen, Lars Kofod (2019). “Virtual Reality-Based Interactive 3D Modelling using Signi-
fiers”.
Bærentzen, Andreas, Jeppe Revall Frisvad, and Karan Singh (2019). Signifier-Based Im-
mersive and Interactive 3D Modeling.
Unity (2019). Unity. URL: https://unity.com/.
Bærentzen, Andreas (2020). GEL. URL: https://github.com/janba/GEL.
Blender (1995). Blender. URL: https://www.blender.org/.
AutoDesk (1992). Autocad. URL: https://www.autodesk.com/products/autocad/.
Google (2017). Google Blocks. URL: https://arvr.google.com/blocks/.
Adobe (2018). Adobe Medium. URL: https://www.adobe.com/products/medium.html.
Hayatpur, Devamardeep et al. (2019). “Plane, Ray, and Point: Enabling Precise Spa-
tial Manipulations with Shape Constraints”. In: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST 2019, New Orleans,
LA, USA, October 20-23, 2019. Ed. by François Guimbretière, Michael Bernstein, and
Katharina Reinecke. ACM, pp. 1185–1195. DOI: 10.1145/3332165.3347916. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347916.
Yu, Emilie et al. (2021). “CASSIE: Curve and Surface Sketching in Immersive Environ-
ments”. In: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). URL:
http://www-sop.inria.fr/reves/Basilic/2021/YASBS21.
Jerald, Jason (2016). The VR book.
Norman, Don (2008). “The way I see it - Signifiers, not affordances.” In:
Hutchins, Edwin L., James D. Hollan, and Donald A. Norman (1985). Direct Manipulation
Interfaces. DOI: 10.1207/s15327051hci0104_2.
VRModelling (2021). VRModelling. URL: https://github.com/magei00/VRModelling.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:49==
A
Initial self test
Self test thoughts:
I want to be able to move/scale the model more, it’s too in my face, and i can’t see the top
of it. extrusions behave weirdly in the beginning, and you get a skewed model.
Sitting down modelling:
Sitting down is definitely the most comfortable for longer periods of time, this however
limits your movement and your hands easily hit the table if you are sitting at one. Should
probably try to sit away from table. Maybe have that as a hint somehow, put a chair away
from your table and put on the headset.
The model get to big to handle way to quick, after a few extrusions it is already starting to
reach your head. I end up relying too much on the thumbsticks too move around. I think it
would work better if you could re-position the entire model, somehow grab a center point
and move it around, this center point would also be where the model rotates around when
using the workbench. It would also need some kind of zoom functionality, in the beginning
you can work rough and zoom out, and if more detail is needed later you can zoom in.
Trying to play around with edge collapsing is pretty confusing. After some more playing
around it makes more sense, in the begging i want to move the vertex pin on top of the
other vertex pin that i wanted to merge with, but that would often result in collision and the
operation would not go through. I think it can maybe be visualized better when a merge
will take place.
I encountered a lot of lag because of the bug ”String too long for TextMeshGenerator.
Cutting off characters.” Was my own fault when creating the debug messages
Creating the house:
There were times where I wanted to move sections of vertices, like a cross section of the
building, but I had to move every vertex individually. I’m not sure how this could be done
elegantly. I wanted to merge vertices that did not share an edge. but that is only possible
with face bridging.
Creating the chair:
Immediately annoyed by not being able to flatten the cube, I have to move every vertex
down, and then also align them for it to look nice. I would really like to see some way to
move faces, the challenge is to have two distinct face actions.
The turntable is very low, and I use the thumbstick to move up and down a lot, a simple
experiment would be to move the model lower down, the problem here is that you can’t
look under the figure anymore. I think we can come up with a better alternative to the
worktable, or improve it somehow.
Highly useful features: Moveable faces. An idea here would be to cancel extrusion
when you go to freeform, and then move the already existing face in freeform. SBS, being
able to move vertices along the shared axis. This introduces room for error, because you
might move the vertex a little back/forth when trying to align to two axis, here we could use
the ruler rule, where it snaps if you touch the thumbstick. Merging where edges overlap
should also merge. moving slices of a model.
edge splitting, being able to split into 3’s 4’s 5’s by pulling further apart. Theoretically only
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
41
==PAGE:50==
prime subdivisions are needed, but it is probably nicer to be able to directly split into 4
instead of into 2, 3 times.
being able to move model up and down. being able to move model on the xy plane.
42
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:51==
B
User tests
B.1
Tester E.K. - local test
Test person E.K. - Thinking aloud test
This is a first time VR user Some experience with 3D modelling in CAD and google blocks.
No introductions to the application except the controller button.
Exploration test Observations:
Hand-menu was found quickly by accident, he quickly discovered why it appeared. Later
on he was also able to consistently bring it up when needed.
He tried pressing the buttons on the hand-worktable with his fingers, when it is only pos-
sible with the palm. Also he thought he needed to press buttons on the controller while
pressing the worktable buttons, which is not needed. He later on figured this out on his
own.
By accident discovered the analogue stick movement, he used this a lot throughout the
test.
Handles disappear weirdly now, I have to fix this.
Disable log for next test.
He doesn’t know what the ruler lines are for, but recognises that there is some alignment
tied to it. Doesn’t understand how it works and why it disappears after some amount of
extrusion.
After finishing the simple T object test, he wants to clean it up and align stuff, but doesn’t
know how.
When wanting to move an edge he tried to grab onto the latches.
He is confused about how he was able to move the model before, mistakenly thinks the
vertex handles does it. (I need to play with the hitboxes and make handles have priority
over the extrudable.)
He shortly after realised that he could grab the model, and that was how it works. It was
easy for him to move the model after that.
User was sometimes confused about which trigger to use on the controller for grabbing
handles.
Has the idea of undoing an extrusion by pushing it back in again, this can work, but he
unfortunately wasn’t precise enough and thought it didn’t work.
After getting a bit used to moving the model by grabbing it, he stops using the analogue
stick as often.
His thoughts after first test. He found it easy to form stuff (create the structure) but hard
to align. Moving the model, sometime he moved it by accident, he didn’t quite understand
why it worked sometimes and sometimes not. Vertex handles didn’t always work/respond.
My thoughts after this test:
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
43
==PAGE:52==
There are many problems with the handles not responding, and the movement of the
box not responding, this is because of several issues, sometimes the handles disappear
because of old code that would hide the controls, when your hands are located under
the worktable, since changed the worktable to follow the hand, this now causes weird
behaviour. Another problem is the hitbox of the model(for moving the model), and the
handles overlapping, there needs to be some order to the hitboxes, it would make sense
for the handles to take priority over the model hitbox, since if you grab around a handle,
you probably intent to use that handle.
A last problem is that you can’t move the model twice in a row, unless you first take your
hand outside the hitbox and into the hitbox again. This is because the hand leaves the
hitbox when you are extruding, but when the extrusion takes place, the hitbox is expanded
into the hand, but it does not trigger a collision when doing it this way, there needs to be
a continuous check to see if the hand is in the hitbox.
Todo after this test: Fix hitboxes of handles. (DONE) Fix handles not always responding.
(DONE) Fix handles not working twice in a row unless you leave the hitbox and hit it again.
(DONE)
Fix handles disappearing. Fix face bridging.
Showing the more advanced features:
The flat hand gesture was not easy to do, even after explaining to use a flat hand gesture.
Even when holding out a flat hand in the real world, some parts of the hand might still
be too close, to the controller, which then doesn’t allow for the sensing actions. I had
to very meticulously show him how to hold the hand on the controller, to trigger the flat
hand gesture, and even then it wasn’t consistent, because he was afraid of dropping the
controller. Part of it was also that the neartouch features of the rift controllers was different
from normal buttons.
With the sensing features, he would sometimes leave the vertex with the sensing hand,
but would know he did it immediately because of the lack of line/plane.
Feedback from him: Just touching a button being an action was new to him, and not how
he thought the controls worked.
Chair test:
It was sometimes hard to finish guided extrusions, because he would let go of the guided
button first, resulting in a skewed extrusion.
I hinted that scaling was possible, he immediately intuitively guessed how it worked.
Splitting edge didn’t always work.
House test:
The tester tried to take an approach where he would crate 1 big block and use the subdi-
vision tool to get the details. Because the subdivision tool is a bit finicky and also hard to
specify the subdivision, the model became quite a mess. Because of this and because of
some technical and performance issues, the test ended quickly
B.2
Tester F.J. - local test
Testperson F.J.
No experience with VR. No experience with 3d modelling.
44
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:53==
Experimental test:
Notices the handle change size, and interacts with it.
Menu accidently appears, doesn’t know what it is.
He thinks it’s linked with the position and orientation of his hand, when it is only the orien-
tation.
Grabs the model by accident, imedietly understands how to move it around.
Figures out how to move vertices, when he discovers they also turn yellow when toching
them.
Menu, had to explain how the loading and saving works. Sidenote, loading & saving
should probably be harder to trigger, or have some kind of confirmation. It is very easy to
overwrite your model or a saved model by accident.
He wants to push the buttons with his finger.
It is also not completely clear if a save goes through, maybe having a small, save succes-
full text appear, or even better a small image/3d model of the saved model. This would
also show what is in that save slot. Like some videogames have a small screenshot of
your last position.
Menu was a bit hard to summon consistenly for him.
Forgets how he moved the model around before, think he needs to use one of the handles.
He think it is cool to move the model around.
His thoughts after the test:
The menu was initially weird, after some struggle figured out how it works. The handles
restricted his thinking a bit, he thought that was the only way to interact with the model.
showing him the advanced moves:
Releasing the guiding trigger to early, gets skewed extrusion. Doing the flat hand gesture
was a challenge
Making the chair:
The user was very metodical, and thought his approach through, he didn’t have a lot of
problems, but sometimes needed remimnders how some features worked.
B.3
Tester Emilie Yu - remote test
Overall it was fun to use, the interface is fluid and the grabbing interactions are a very
satisfying way to model. I really enjoyed it!
Here are some points I noted:
• Precise extrusion: I really liked the feeling of guidance of the extrusion direction
when in the guided mode, maybe it could work to also snap the extrusion distance
to the ruler increments that are displayed? It could be useful to be able to do precise
proportions.
• Hand occlusion: sometimes the hand model really got in the way for me (pic below),
such that I couldn’t see what I’m doing. Maybe the hands could be made a bit less
opaque?
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
45
==PAGE:54==
• Moving the whole model becomes tricky when the model is quite thin like the tree.
Maybe grabbing in the air could move the model, instead of having to aim your
hand to be inside it? I have relatively bad tracking and small play area, so it was a
bit annoying to have to precisely reach at the model (and avoid the little handles) to
move it.
• Edge flaps lack a bit of haptic feedback maybe, since it is activated on proximity,
not with a button press, it could use some more prominent feedback. The coloring
is good but doesn’t feel quite satisfying/strong enough to me. On the other hand, I
almost never used the edge flaps, but that must depend on what the user is building.
• Vertices merge: I think it could help to add a little of visual feedback when a merge
will happen on vertex release. Now we can only guess while we’re moving a ver-
tex close to another one, and sometimes vertices can’t be merged due to the mesh
topology I guess. So it could be nice to have an indicator of an impeding merge/merge
fail while editing.
• Plane and line constraints: I think it would be nice to be able to use the plane and
line constraints as guides, they could constrain either to move along a plane or a
line, but still allow to move in this 2D or 1D space, instead of fixing the vertex/face
definitely. Also the line constraint was a bit confusing to me: what line direction is
chosen, when hovering on a vertex? Maybe it would make more sense to pair line
constraints with edges, like hover over an edge to indicate that we wish to constrain
the vertex move to be along its direction.
Finally, more broadly on the modelling tool in general, the 2 things which bothered me
were the lack of an edge loop cut feature (or other features which enable you to subdivide
faces/edges), which forces the user to plan in advance what kind of extrusion they want
to do (see tree branch example), and the fact that it’s not possible to move a whole face
at once. It surprised me at first because in Blender the default ”grab” makes the primitive
move, and extrusion is another tool. I think I would have expected grabbing the face to
enable me to move it around. But after a while I got used to it, and I agree that extruding is
usually more useful to lay down the shape anyway. The only downside was that to move
a face I had to move each vertex individually.
What I mean with planning extrusions is maybe easier to explain in the case of the tree
branches: when I want to create multiple smaller branches spawning from a main branch, I
need to first create this little extrusion (the small cube on the right) and then I can extrude
out multiple branches from the cube (and continue the main branch). If I were to first
create the whole main branch, it would then be impossible to add secondary branches.
This planning exercise is not so easy to do, so I think more options to refine the mesh
topology would help.
B.4
Tester Rahul Arora - remote test
At a high level, I definitely missed a subdivision tool. It would have been nice to be able
to build a large block and then divide into the 7 subblocks I ended up using for each side.
I like the ability to constrain the motion but it wasn’t completely clear to me how the con-
straint toggle mapped to the buttons on the Oculus controller. I had similar problems
when mapping Oculus Touch inputs to hand poses in my gesture-based animation project:
https://www.dgp.toronto.edu/projects/magical-hands/ . Many users had trouble making
the ”correct” hand poses. But I think this can be solved by using hand tracking directly,
46
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:55==
instead of the controllers. Maybe you have looked into the relatively-recent Oculus hand-
tracking API? If yes, was it not robust or accurate enough?
I like the signifier-based approach: especially the fact that the handles change size based
on distance.
I noticed two performance issues. Not sure if it’s a problem only on my setup: 1. The
application became very laggy in the end. Even just rotating the whole model would
noticeably slow it down. 2. I drew the vertical pillars using the constrained extrusion
method and sometimes when I finished the extrusion, the controller vibrated for a good
5 seconds, indicating some error probably, and the constraint failed, leading to a twist
and/or tilt.
Some minor suggestions for the UI:
> I sometimes found it frustrating that the left-hand menu disappeared when I didn’t want
it to. Maybe make the threshold for hiding it more conservative? > I found it hard to
hit the load button for model 2. My controllers kept physically hitting each other. This
might be because I’m using the Oculus Quest 1 and the controllers are shaped a bit
differently compared to the Rift. > I think it’s better to make an unavailable button Gray,
rather than Red. Naturally, most of the time, the undo button is available, but redo is
not. I just naturally assumed them to have opposite colours because of their opposing
functionalities.
Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
