==PAGE:1==
Traversable area detection for mobile robots
using camera only
Sebastian Schifter Schou (s153043)
Master of Science in Engineering
2021
==PAGE:2==
Traversable area detection for mobile robots using camera only
Report written by:
Sebastian Schifter Schou (s153043)
Supervisors:
Jens Christian Andersen, Professor at Deparment of Electrical Engineering, DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
7. September 2020- 7. February 2021
ECTS points:
30
Education:
M.Sc.Eng.
Specialization:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Version:
1. edition
Notes:
This thesis is made as part of the requirement to obtain a master degree
in electrical engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
Rights:
©Sebastian Schifter Schou, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Summary
An increasaed interest in robotics within service industries prompts a need for small
mobile robots to be able to navigate in small, object filled environments.
Methods
exist, yet are very expensive. Instead, this project sets out to determine if a 3D camera
could be used as a cheaper alternative for traversable area detection for a small mobile
robot. Using an Intel Realsense D435, a depth camera using stereo vision, the depth
data was clustered using quadtrees and PCA and approximations were voted on using a
spherical accumulator, and the best approximations were then detected with a gradient
hill climbing method. Planes were then rectified and verified, and a concensus were used
to extend the planes. This were then converted to a top view, height restricted areas
were added, and all of the plane information, including traversable area, is then sent out
on a rostopic. All of this can be done in 35ms (30.3Hz). The traversable area detected is
highly accurate, detecting the correct positions of planes within 3cm. Future project can
add to the accuracy by adding memory of detections, and feature detection could also
be used to map the detections, making it possible for a robot to remember everything
the algorithm detected.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This project is done in collaboration with the Institute of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark as part of finishing a master in electrical engineering.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Algorithm
3
2.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Camera
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Voting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Peak detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Post processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Future features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.8
Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3
Conclusion
37
Appendices
39
A Original project plan
41
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
The Intel RealSense D435 camera and its dimensions. It uses two imagers,
IR light, and an RGB module to produce its color and depth frames. The
image is from [4]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Overview of the algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The priciple behind stereo vision: Two cameras with different positions look-
ing at the same object. The area where the two imagers FOV coincide is the
depth FOV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Camera data from the dataset ‘corridor 01’. Top image shows RGB image,
middle image shows RGB image aligned with depth data, and bottom shows
colorized depth data, with lighter pixels representing greater distances. No-
tice how depth aligned image has a large border due to depth FOV (horizontal
91.2◦, vertical 65.5◦)being larger than RGB FOV (horizontal: 69.4◦, vertical:
42.5◦) [6, table 2-5]. Also notice the lack of black spots in the depth image
(bottom) compared to the color imaged aligned with the depth image (mid-
dle). This is due to the hole filling filters taking place after image alignment.
6
2.4
The principle of summed area tables (SATs). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Flowchart of the clustering algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Data clusters of the corridor 01 image (figure 2.3).
Red nodes represent
planes found, green nodes are ignored due to low sample density and too
few samples to split, and uncolored nodes are too small and too thick to be
considered.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Different accumulator designs. Image from [2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.8
Flowchart of the voting algorithm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.9
Accumulator map after voting for the nodes in the image ‘corridor 01’. No-
tice that, as θ ∈[−π, π[, the top and bottom of θ are connected. The ρ
dimension has been collapsed, instead showing the sum of all votes for each
rho dimension in the (ϕ, θ) cell. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.10 The different types of neighbors for the cell. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.11 The difference the Gaussian low pass filter did on the accumulator votes. . .
18
2.12 Flowchart of the peak detection algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.13 Result of the peak detection and initialization of the planes. Top image is
the planes colored in the depth aligned color image from figure 2.3. Middle
image shows node parameter values for each plane. Bottom image shows a
plot of the planes’ parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
vii
2.14 Overview of the post processing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.15 Image ‘door 02’ with peak detection. As seen, the door is several planes,
which is incorrect. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.16 Rectified and verified planes for ‘corridor 01’ and ‘door 02’. . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.17 The points chosen to create the points normal vector. The gray cells are
skipped points. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.18 The two morphological transformations: dilate (top) and erode (bottom)
with a 3 × 3 kernel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.19 The planes from figure 2.16 expanded and cleaned up.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.20 All objects seen in the image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.21 Top view of the ‘corridor 01’ scene. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.22 Top view of the image with height restricted areas.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.23 Flowchart of the post processing algorithm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.24 Images ‘ramp up 01’ and ‘ramp up 02’ including ramps, showcasing the dif-
ficulty in detecting them. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.25 Image ‘stairs up 02’ including stairs, showcasing the diﬀiculty in detecting
them.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Problem introduction
Development in robotics and automation allows robots to take on more complicated
tasks, and having robots perform duties such as service tasks autonomously are becom-
ing a realization. For robots to be utilized in e.g. hospitals, elderly care homes, etc., they
would have to sense the world around them, and determine which areas are traversable.
A common way for systems to obtain data from their surroundings is LIDAR, which
uses a laser to emit light into the environment, and then measures the time it takes for
the light to return to determine distance to the point. They are eﬀicient and able to
map the surroundings with great precision, but for a higher quality LIDAR, it is also
rather costly[7]. For a cheaper solution, a 3D camera can be used. They use multiple
cameras to capture the environment, and then use the overlapping images from different
perspectives to match characteristics in the images, and from this determine the depth
of the points in the image. While not as precise as well as being susceptible to error at
long distances, the 3D camera is great at indoor uses for a small mobile robot, where
long distance detection isn’t a necessity anyways.
Specification and Requirements
The focus of this project will be on indoor environments. From this follows that the floor
and other detected planes are relatively smooth as opposed to outdoor ground planes.
The solution might therefore not be suitable for outdoor use. For detection of planes the
RGB-D camera Intel RealSense D435 will be used[4]. It is low-cost ($179.00), and uses
stereo depth to determine depth, as well as infrared lasers to determine depth in poorly
lighted environments[3]. The camera can be seen in image 1.1. The Intel RealSense SDK
also allows support for the Robot Operating System (ROS), the Open Source Computer
Vision Library (OpenCV), as well as for C/C++, which are also part of the requirements
for this project.
For ROS specifically, it has to be the Melodic version of ROS, as it is the one used
for the robots on DTU which might be used as part of the project, specifically the
Flexbot, which has flexible ”legs” that allows it to change its height, and the Terrain-
Hopper, which is suited to drive in rough terrains. Furthermore, as both of these robots
use Linux Ubuntu 18.04, the project has to be able to run on this OS as well.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: The Intel RealSense D435 camera and its dimensions. It uses two imagers,
IR light, and an RGB module to produce its color and depth frames. The image is from
[4].
Goals
The goal of the project is to be able to determine the ground plane, the obstacles on the
ground plane, and how these obstacles can be traversed around, whether this should be
over, under, or to just avoid them altogether.
1.2
Problem statement
Using an Intel RealSense D435 depth camera, determine the ground plane and obstacles
on it, and from this, deduce the traversable areas to be used in a robot’s route planning.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Algorithm
2.1
Overview
To solve the problem, an algorithm has been made. An overview of the algorithm can
be seen on figure 2.1, which, when given a depth image, produces plane information
including traversable areas, height restricted areas, plane equations and positions, and
more.
Besides camera processing, the algorithm consists of four steps: 1.
Clustering, in
which the image data is split into clusters of data, each representing a plane, 2. Voting,
where each cluster votes on an appropriate approximation for a plane, 3. Peak detection,
which detects local maximums for the voted planes, and 4. Post processing, which veri-
fies and merges planes, as well as expanding the planes to contain all data belonging to
the planes, computing traversable areas, and finding height restricted areas. After these
four steps, the information is then published on a Rostopic, making it easily attained in
a system running ROS.
For the first 3 steps, the method Hough plane transformation by Vera, Eduardo, Lu-
cio Djalma, et. al. [8] is used and modified to fit the use of this project.
The following sections each explain the algorithm steps in further detail.
Figure 2.1: Overview of the algorithm.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Algorithm
2.2
Camera
To understand the algorithm, first the data, and therefore the camera, must be un-
derstood.
The camera used is an Intel RealSense D435; a 3D camera which uses a
combination of IR projections and stereo depth to detect distances [6].
Stereo depth is the technology of using two cameras with known positions and direc-
tions, looking at the same scene, and matching features between the two images. Since
the relative position and direction between the cameras are known, the features disparity
between the two images can be used to find the distance to the camera, as seen in figure
2.2. On problem with stereo vision and feature detection is surfaces with no visible
features, e.g. plain walls and floors. To help with this problem, the D435 uses an IR
projector to project small infrared dots within the two imagers collective field of view
(FOV), which is then used in feature detection, as the cameras are able to see within
the infrared spectrum.
Due to the infrared projector, the camera can even detect depth in environments with
low to no lightning, essentially making the algorithm able to see in the dark. However,
in high illuminated environments, the IR spots cannot be detected, and plain surfaces
Figure 2.2: The priciple behind stereo vision: Two cameras with different positions
looking at the same object. The area where the two imagers FOV coincide is the depth
FOV.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Camera
5
can have large holes of missing data. This also counts for reflective surfaces, as the IR
spots reflected, and the data is then either missing or incorrect.
Depth data from the D435 is generally of high quality, though it does have its lim-
its: Data must be between 0.195m [6, section 4.6] to 10m [4]. It can also vary up to
2% of the objects distance when within 2m and 80% of depth FOV [6, section 4.7][5].
Depth FOV is overlapping FOV of the two imagers. This error increases with distance
and in the extremities of the FOV. Lastly, due to using stereo vision, the object must
be within viewing range of both the imagers.
For the purpose of a slow-moving mobile robot, most of these problems aren’t a problem.
High distances aren’t needed, and objects will rarely, if ever, be too close the camera.
The data accuracy error does mean that small approximations are needed, and then pin-
point precision isn’t possible, but for most cases, the regions of interests (ROI), which
here is the floor, is within the 80% depth FOV, making the problem passable.
To get the data, Intel has made the RealSense SDK, which makes it easy to incor-
porate the camera with C++. A pipeline to the camera is established, and the desired
camera modes are chosen, those being depth, color, and IR images. In this algorithm,
only depth data will be used for the algorithm, while color will be used for visualization.
With the pipeline established and the camera modes chosen, the depth scale, which
determines the depth accuracy, here 1mm, and the camera intrinsics, which is used to
compute the depth into 3D data, can be acquired.
The RealSense SDK also offers filters for the data, in which three filters are used here:
Decimation, spatial edge-preserving, and temporal. The decimation filter decimates the
data image into a smaller size, allowing for faster computation as the data amount is
significantly decreased. For this algorithm, decimation filter size is chosen to be four,
meaning length and width is each decreased to a fourth of the original image size, de-
creasing the data amount to a sixteenth of its original size. This still allows for quick
computation without sacrificing quality. For this application, the starting size for the
data matrix is [848»480] = 407, 070, which means after decimation the matrix size is
[212»120] = 25, 440, which is much more manageable.
The spatial edge-preserving filter allows for smoothing of the depth data without erasing
edges. This filter will also remove small holes, estimating them to be roughly the same
value as the holes neighboring pixels. The last filter is the temporal filter, which smooths
the image over time, applying past image information to correct for missing data.
To use the functions of the OpenCV library, these data images are transferred to OpenCV
matrix structures. Simultaneously, when converted, the depth data is multiplied with
its scale, such that the depth data is in meters.
The result can be seen in figure 2.3. Top image is what the color camera see, mid-
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Algorithm
Figure 2.3: Camera data from the dataset ‘corridor 01’. Top image shows RGB image,
middle image shows RGB image aligned with depth data, and bottom shows colorized
depth data, with lighter pixels representing greater distances. Notice how depth aligned
image has a large border due to depth FOV (horizontal 91.2◦, vertical 65.5◦)being larger
than RGB FOV (horizontal: 69.4◦, vertical: 42.5◦) [6, table 2-5]. Also notice the lack
of black spots in the depth image (bottom) compared to the color imaged aligned with
the depth image (middle). This is due to the hole filling filters taking place after image
alignment.
dle is color image aligned to depth image, which is the reason for the black border, as
depth FOV is larger than color FOV, and the black spots, as those spots has no data.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Clustering
7
Bottom image is the depth data mapped to the brightness. The brighter a pixel is, the
greater the distance is. The image is mapped to the filtered depth, which is why it does
not have spots of missing data as the middle image. Computation time for capturing,
filtering, and converting a frame is approximately 47ms. If only the depth data is loaded,
which is the only data used if visualization isn’t needed, then all of this can be done in
approximately 5ms.
2.3
Clustering
The first step of the algorithm is to split the data up in clusters of data representing flat
surfaces. To do this, a principal component analysis (PCA) is used. PCA is done by
calculating the covariance of the data, and then compute the eigenvalue decomposition of
it. This results, for a three dimensional data set, in three eigenvectors in the direction the
data varies, and three eigenvalues, which is how much the data varies in each direction.
From the smallest eigenvalue, it can then be decided if the data is a surface or if it varies
to much to be flat. The covariance and mean of data is
µ(x,y,z) =



µx
µy
µz


, Σ(x,y,z) =



σxx
σxy
σxz
σyx
σyy
σyz
σzx
σzy
σzz


,
(2.1)
where the covariance matrix elements are found by
σab =
1
m −1
 m
X
k=1
akbk −µb
m
X
k=1
ak −µa
m
X
k=1
bk + mµaµb
!
(2.2)
and the means are found by
µa = 1
m
 m
X
k=1
ak
!
, µb = 1
m
 m
X
k=1
bk
!
,
(2.3)
where ak and bk are 3D coordinates.
To get the data in 3D, a pinpoint camera model is assumed, meaning coordinates are
calculated by



xk
yk
zk


=




ik·d−cx
fx
−zk
jk·d−cy
fy
−zk
zk




(2.4)
where is the pixel coordinate for the k’th sample, (cx, cy)is the pixel coordinate for center
of the camera, fx and fy are the focal length in x and y direction, and dis the decima-
tion scale factor. In the algorithm, instead of multiplying each pixel coordinate with the
decimation scale factor, the focal length and camera center are divided by it, as these
are constants and therefore only have to be computed once. Each coordinate is saved in
a new matrix, which will be used later in section 2.6.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Algorithm
While PCA is perfect for this purpose, it is computation heavy, as can be seen in
equation 2.2 and 2.3. Each mean of a coordinate involves finding its sum, mean for each
covariance, four sums and sum of a product is needed. To solve this, summed area tables
(SAT) are implemented.
A SAT is a table of values summed up from top left corner to bottom right cor-
ner, as seen in figure 2.4. Making a SAT is done by setting element (ik, jk) in the SAT
to the value of the original matrix, M, and then following it up with
SAT(ik, jk) = SAT(ik, jk)+SAT(ik−1, jk)+SAT(ik, jk−1)−SAT(ik−1, jk−1) (2.5)
In example, setting the SAT value of (2,3) in figure 2.4 would be done by
SAT(2, 3) = 5 + 36 + 48 −25 = 64
(2.6)
Getting an area of the matrix is now easy, as it is four lookups and simple arithmetic
operations:
SAT(ik, jk) = SAT(ik, jk)+SAT(ik−1, jk)+SAT(ik, jk−1)−SAT(ik−1, jk−1) (2.7)
In example, to get the red area in figure 2.4, then the yellow and green area should be
subtracted, while the blue is added;
Area((2, 1), (3, 3)) = 78 −36 −24 + 9 = 27
(2.8)
As 3D coordinates has to be calculated anyways before performing PCA, by simultane-
ously computing the SAT for x, y, z, x·x, x·y, x·z , y ·y , y ·z, and z ·z, each covariance
Figure 2.4: The principle of summed area tables (SATs).
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Clustering
9
can be reduced to five SAT references and three arithmetic operations, which can be
computed in constant time.
With SATs computed and an easy way to check if an area is flat, a method for di-
viding the data is needed. Here, quadtrees are used. Quadtrees are a recursive data
structure, which consists of nodes split into four smaller quadtrees. Here the root node
is the whole image, and each time the data in an area is deemed to varying to be flat,
the node is split into four smaller areas, which in have PCA run on them. This will
continue until the areas are deemed flat enough, or until the reach a minimum number
of samples, here set to 400 samples over the square of the decimation factor, which is
set to four, resulting in a minimum of 25 samples per node.
As explained in section 2.2, the camera is best within 80% of the depth FOV. Ob-
serving the depth data, it is seen that the outer most data is does not match reality, so
to fix this, the border of the matrix is set to zero. The number of rows and columns set
to zero is set to 12 over the decimation factor, which, with a decimation factor of four,
equal 3 rows and columns are set to zero from each side. This means, that with a matrix
of [212»120] = 25, 440 samples (from section 2.2) would become [206»114] = 23, 484 this
would result in a maximum of 939 iterations, though this is highly unlikely. The entire
flowchart for the clustering algorithm can be seen on figure 2.5. When the image first has
been processed, the quadtree is initialized. Initialization includes setting minimum and
maximum bounds for the node to be the size of the image, setting the root to this node
and initializing the ID. IDs are only for troubleshooting. Then the SATs are initialized,
which is done by looping over the rows and columns in the depth matrix, calculating the
3D coordinate, and summing using equation 2.5. With the initialization done, the root
node is set to be processed. First step of processing is to check if the sample density is
too low. This is a percentage of valid data within the boundaries of the node, simply
samples
area
(2.9)
If this is below 90%, computing the nodes thickness would be error prone and there-
fore pointless, so the node skips directly to checking if the node should be split into four
children. If the sample density is good, the PCA is computed, where the minimum eigen-
value (variance) of the covariance matrix is found, and the corresponding eigenvector is
set as this nodes normal. The node thickness is found by
thickness = 1.96
√
minimum variance
(2.10)
where the 1.96 is the 95 percentiles for the normal distribution. If the thickness isn’t
within 0.3, the node is deemed not a plane, checks if the plane should be split, and con-
tinues to next node. Else if it is a node, the node is set to a plane, the normal vector is
saved and converted into spherical coordinates, and the maximum distance to the node
and the maximum ϕ angle is found (more on this in section 2.4).
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Algorithm
Figure 2.5: Flowchart of the clustering algorithm.
If the node isn’t a plane and has enough samples to split, the node is split into four
children, each getting their own ID and boundaries, and then does it all over recursively,
until all nodes either are planes or has too few samples to be considered.
The result of the clustering can be seen in figure 2.6.
Top image is the image in
figure 2.3 split into quadtrees. Red nodes are those deemed a plane, green nodes are
nodes which has low samples density and too few samples to be split further, while the
rest are nodes which are too small to split further. Bottom image is all the nodes pa-
rameters (ρ, ϕ and θ) plotted (more on these parameters in section 2.4). Here it obvious
to see that there are patters. Those patters are found in the next section.
This clustering makes sure as much similar data is clustered together, while allowing
for relatively small areas to be considered still, in an effective and computational easy
way. All in all, the initialization and clustering of the data only takes 14ms, with 11ms
of it being the initialization.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Voting
11
Figure 2.6: Data clusters of the corridor 01 image (figure 2.3). Red nodes represent
planes found, green nodes are ignored due to low sample density and too few samples
to split, and uncolored nodes are too small and too thick to be considered.
2.4
Voting
Voting is the next step of the algorithm, in which each node deemed a plane votes on
approximations for planes they could fit in. To do this, first each node needs to be
quantified. A plane can be described with a normal vector and a point on the plane,
giving the plane equation
n · p = nxpx + nypy + nzpz = ρ,
(2.11)
where n is the normal vector, p is a point on the plane, and ρ is the shortest distance
from coordinate origin and the plane. This means that given the normal vector and the
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Algorithm
distance, the plane can be described with just four variables. However, if the plane is
converted into spherical coordinates, this can be simplified into three variables, those
being
ρ = n · p, ϕ = cos−1(nz), and θ = tan−1
ny
nx

(2.12)
where
ρ ≥0, ϕ ∈[0, π[, and θ ∈[−π, π[
(2.13)
To ensure that the distance ρ is positive, if it is found to be negative when taking the
dot product between the normal vector and normalized mean of the node, the normal
vector is multiplied with -1;
n =



n
ρ ≥0
−1 · n
ρ < 0
(2.14)
One problem with using spherical coordinates is the way θ is calculated. When facing a
surface, the x- and y-coordinate of the normal vector is very small, meaning the smallest
of changes in nx and ny will cause the θ value to change wildly. This can be fixed by the
use of accumulator and through the use of standard variations (more on this in section
2.6)
The accumulator keeps track of which values the nodes votes, however, there are many
ways to do this. In a paper by Dorit Borrmann, Jan Elseberg, et. al.[2], different accu-
mulator map designs are discussed. As seen on figure 2.7, these designs are (a) array, (b)
cube, (c) octahedron, which is just the square rotated, and (d) ball. The advantages of
array and cube accumulators are that they can be easily implemented. However, due to
their shape, the cell size is irregular, meaning bigger cells are favored over smaller cells.
The ball accumulator map has adapting discretization in the theta direction, making
the cell size the same throughout the whole map.
The cell size on the surface of the map is determined by the resolution of ϕ and θ,
ϕ′ and θ′. The number of ϕ latitude circles is determined by Nϕ = ϕmax/∆ϕ, where ∆ϕ
is set to the desired resolution or thickness, here ∆ϕ = 4◦. From this, the number of
cells in each latitude circle, Nθ,i, is determined by
N(θ, i) = max(Nϕ · 2sin
 
ϕ′
i
/Nϕϕmax
!
, 1)
(2.15)
This would make the number of cells at the poles, where ϕ′ = Nϕ, ϕ = n and ϕ′ = 0,
ϕ = 0, equal 1, meaning that in the scenarios where the camera is directly facing a wall
and θ varies wildly, they will still all be within the same cell.
For each cell on the surface, an array of Nρ = ρmax/∆ρ cells is initialized, in which
the nodes will vote for the planes distance. Here ∆ρ = 8cm, while the max distance
ρmaxis found from the furthest node declared a plane.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Voting
13
Figure 2.7: Different accumulator designs. Image from [2].
The voting process is rather simple: Each node start out voting for the cell which
corresponds to their ρ, ϕ and θ values, and from there votes on cells in positive and
negative direction for ρ, ϕ and θ. Voting in a direction is ended when either the cell
being voted on is out of bounds, the cell has had a previous better vote from the same
node, or the vote count is too low. Having a vote limit ensures that nodes only votes on
plane approximations which makes sense.
The vote limit is set to be within two standard deviations of the mean, this being
the node values for ρ, ϕ and θ;
µ(ρ,ϕ,θ) =



µρ
µϕ
µθ


=




nxµx + nyµy + nzµz
cos−1(nz)
tan−1  ny
nx




,
(2.16)
The covariance matrix for this parameter space can then be computed using first order
error propagation:
Σ(ρ,ϕ,θ) = JΣ(x, y, z)J T
(2.17)
where J is the Jacobian. A kernel for this node, which includes the nodes parameters,
the covariance matrix for the parameter space, and the vote limit, can then be com-
puted. The Jacobiain of µρ,ϕ,θ, which is the partial derivative for each element for each
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Algorithm
parameter, is then
J =




∂µρ
∂nx
∂µρ
∂ny
∂µρ
∂nz
∂µϕ
∂nx
∂µϕ
∂ny
∂µϕ
∂nz
∂µθ
∂nx
∂µθ
∂ny
∂µθ
∂nz



=




nx
ny
nz
pxpz
∥p∥2·(p2x+p2y+p2z)
∥p∥2·(p2x+p2y+p2z)
∥p∥2
p2x+p2y+p2z
−py
p2x+p2y
px
p2x+p2y
0



,
(2.18)
where p = n · ρ. To avoid dividing with zero, if ∥p∥2, p2
x + p2
y + p2
z or p2
x + p2
y is below
ϵ = 0.00001, then the divisor of the division is changed to ϵ.
The voting is computed using the Gaussian probability density function (PDF), in which
the parameter for the current cell q = (ρ, ϕ, θ)T must satisfy
PDF(q)PDF(µ(ρ,ϕ,θ) + 2
√
λv),
(2.19)
where µ(ρ,ϕ,θ) are the kernels parameters and (λ, v) is an eigenpair of Σ(ρ,ϕ,θ).
The
Gaussian PDF can be found by
PDF(q) =
1
q
(2n)2|Σ(ρ,ϕ,θ)|
exp
−1
2 δTΣ(ρ,ϕ,θ)−1δ

,
(2.20)
where and |Σ(ρ,ϕ,θ)| is the determinant of Σ(ρ,ϕ,θ), and δ = q −µ(ρ,ϕ,θ). While the func-
tion looks computational heavy, it isn’t. The determinant and inverse of the covariance,
as well as the left side of equation 2.20, which is a constant, only needs to be found once
per kernel.
Last thing for the kernel to do is to find how much the node represent the image. This
is done by the weighing function
wc = wa
Anode
Aimage
+ wd
nnode
nimage
,
(2.21)
where A is the area in pixels for the node or image, and n is the number of samples in the
node or image. The weights wa and wd are for area and density, fulfilling wa + wd = 1,
and are set to wa = 0.75 and wd = 0.25 [8][1]. This root representation is used when
sorting the planes.
The flowchart for the voting algorithm can be seen in figure 2.8. The algorithm sets
up the accumulator, in which limits and lengths are calculated from maximum node dis-
tance and angle, and the for each node deemed a plane, the kernel is computed. Then
cells are voted on, starting with µ(ρ,ϕ,θ) and continuing to vote on nearby cells in posi-
tive and negative direction for ρ, ϕ and θ, until the node is deemed too far away from its
original values to be considered for the approximated plane cell, which happens when
ρ is out of bounds, the votes is below the voting limit, or the node has voted on a cell
twice, but with worse results. If the node votes on a cell it hasn’t encountered before,
then it sets its number of votes as the current number of votes, adds them to the sum of
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Voting
15
Figure 2.8: Flowchart of the voting algorithm.
votes and sets the node as a reference to the cell. If the cell has been voted on before, it
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Algorithm
Figure 2.9: Accumulator map after voting for the nodes in the image ‘corridor 01’. Notice
that, as θ ∈[−π, π[, the top and bottom of θ are connected. The ρ dimension has been
collapsed, instead showing the sum of all votes for each rho dimension in the (ϕ, θ) cell.
is added to a vector of cells, which is used for the next section, in which a peak in votes
has to be detected.
In figure 2.9, the accumulator can be seen for the image in figure 2.3, though without
the third dimension, ρ. Instead, all votes in each ρ cell has been added together. In
the figure, θ and ϕ, with their limits from equation 2.13, can be seen. The bluer a cell
is, the more votes it has. Once again, as in with figure 2.6, groups can be seen. One
thing to remember about this figure, is that the top and bottom in ϕ direction, meaning
that the two clusters in the top and bottom to the right of middle is the grouped together.
The voting algorithm easily votes on appropriate approximations, with an accumula-
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Peak detection
17
tor which makes it easy to group together the votes planes. Computation time depends
on number of nodes, however, they are usually few (e.g. in figure 2.6 there are 132 nodes),
which all have small computations (Jacobian and Gaussian PDF easily computed) and
only votes on a few cells. Approximately, the computation time is linear, and can be
done in 2ms.
2.5
Peak detection
With cells for plane values voted on, the best plane to represent the nodes needs to be
picked. For this, a gradient hill climbing method is used. The way this method works is
by picking the mean cell µ(ρ,ϕ,θ) for a kernel, check if any of its neighbors has a higher
vote count, and if they do, pick that cell as the mean cell and do it over again until
no neighbor cell with a higher count exists. For each cell picked as the mean, all the
nodes which voted on that cell are moved over to another vector, where they later are
transferred back again to local maxima cell, which will later become a plane.
To get the neighbors, the number of neighbors wanted is chosen, and three arrays
with offset index values for ρ. ϕ and θ are looped through, returning all applicable,
existing neighbors. The number of neighbors wanted is chosen on the use. The accumu-
lator is a 3D parameter space, so the neighbors can be split up as seen in figure 2.10.
The figure shows four types of the neighbors (left to right), where the first one is no
neighbors, second one is the neighbors which share a face with the center, the third one
which shares a side with the center, and the fourth one which only shares a corner with
the center. For the use gradient hill climbing method, all 26 neighbors are included in
the search of a local maxima.
To avoid having local maxima close to each other, a low-pass filter is applied on
cells and their 6 closest neighbors (second figure in figure 2.10). The low-pass filter
sums the votes for the mean cell and its adjacent cells with a mean cell weight of 0.2002
and neighbor cell weight of 0.1333. The weights reflect a Gaussian distribution. On
figure 2.11, the difference the low-pass filter made can be seen. The figure compares
figure the accumulator map before and after being filtered, and while little difference is
seen, adjacent peaks have now been consolidated. While some the voted cells are hard
to see due to a low amount of votes, the number of votes does not solely decide if a cell
Figure 2.10: The different types of neighbors for the cell.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Algorithm
Figure 2.11: The difference the Gaussian low pass filter did on the accumulator votes.
becomes a plane, but rather the number of samples in the nodes which voted on the cell.
This will be described later in section 2.6.
With all peak cells found, planes are computed.
For each peak cell, plane parame-
ters are computed. This includes calculating the cartesian normal vector from the cells
spherical coordinates, as well as a point on the plane, which is done by
n =



sin(ϕ)cos(θ)
sin(ϕ)sin(θ)
cos(ϕ)


p = n · ρ
(2.22)
Afterwards, nodes are checked if they already exist in a previous plane. As nodes can
vote for multiple cells in the accumulator, it happens that a node exist in multiple planes.
To avoid this, a search for nodes in previous planes is performed, and if a duplicate is
found, a least square error for the two planes and the node is done;
s(node, plane) = (ρnode −ρplane)2 +
X
a∈[x,y,z]
(na,node −na,plane)2
(2.23)
The plane with the smallest least square error gets to keep the node. If the plane ends
up not having any nodes left due to only containing duplicates, then it is removed.
For each node, the nodes samples and root representation is added to the plane. The
flowchart for the peak detection algorithm can be seen in figure 2.12. Starting with the
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Peak detection
19
Figure 2.12: Flowchart of the peak detection algorithm.
Gaussian low-pass filter, then performing gradient hill climbing to detect local maxima
for each kernel. With the peak cells detected, planes are initialized, and the nodes for
the peak cell is transferred to the plane as well as checked against other planes for du-
plicates. Does duplicates exist, the plane with the smallest least square error is chosen,
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Algorithm
and the node is deleted from the other plane. If the planes are above 500 samples, the
planes are added to a vector of all accepted planes.
The result of peak detection can be seen in figure 2.13. Top image shows the detected
planes in the image from figure 2.3. Here it correctly detects the two walls, the floor, and
the ceiling. When the planes are distinct, as they are in this image, it is easy to detect
the planes with no errors. However, when there are more planes or similar planes, more
processing is needed to be able to detect the planes correctly. More on this in the next
section. In the middle image, a plot in the spherical parameter space is seen. It shows
the four distinct planes’ angle in the 2D coordinate, and their distance to the coordinate
origin in the color bar. Their ID can be matched with the bottom image, where their
color is also written. The bottom image shows the nodes coordinates in parameter space.
Notice how plane 0, the red wall, has nodes at -180 degrees and 180 degrees, as these
two values are the same in the parameter space.
Peak detection and plane initialization can find the best plane approximations for the
nodes with ease. The computation is once again linear, and the computation time is at
only 3ms. This means that for the first 3 steps of the algorithm (clustering, voting, peak
detection, see figure 2.1), the computation time is only 19ms.
2.6
Post processing
Post processing can be split into three parts, as seen in figure 2.14: rectifying and verify-
ing planes, expanding planes through point consensus whilst also detecting objects, and
detection of traversable areas.
While planes were correctly classified in figure 2.13, this is not always the case, as
seen in figure 2.15, which depicts the corner of a room with a few objects and a door
ajar. In the figure, while it is correct for the most part, many nodes are classified as
different planes despite clearly being part of the same plane (here the door). Given
the data is not of the highest quality and that stereo vision, even when paired with IR
projections, has problems (see section 2.2), the detected planes are not always correct.
Therefore, a quality control must be done.
Quality control is done in 6 steps: (1) compute normal and standard deviation, and
remove outlier nodes, (2) merge similar planes, (3) match previously unfit nodes, (4)
remove nodes which has no neighbors, (5) remove small planes, and (6) classifying the
planes type (wall, floor, ceiling, etc.).
Computing the new normal and rho is done simply getting the mean of the nodes’
normal and ρ, and from the mean, the nodes variance can be found to determine the
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Post processing
21
Figure 2.13: Result of the peak detection and initialization of the planes. Top image
is the planes colored in the depth aligned color image from figure 2.3. Middle image
shows node parameter values for each plane. Bottom image shows a plot of the planes’
parameters.
planes standard variation.
nµ = 1
N
N
X
i=1
ni, σa =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
(ai −aµ)2,
(2.24)
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Algorithm
Figure 2.14: Overview of the post processing.
Figure 2.15: Image ‘door 02’ with peak detection. As seen, the door is several planes,
which is incorrect.
where N is the number of nodes in the plane, and a represent ρ, ϕ and θ. In addition,
since θ ∈[−π, π[ with −π and π being the same, the difference for θ is instead
∆θi =



θi −θµ
θi −θµ ≤π
2π −(θi −θµ)
θi −θµ > π
(2.25)
==PAGE:33==
2.6 Post processing
23
A quality check of the nodes is then done. Before computing the standard deviation,
nodes are removed if
1. their least square error is too large (s(node, plane) ≥1.5, see equation 2.23), and
2. both θ and ϕ vary more than 8◦from the mean.
This ensures that obvious incorrect angles are excluded from the standard deviation.
After computing the standard deviation, nodes are removed if
3. their node parameters are outside 2 standard deviations (q /∈µ ± 2σ)
Nodes are not completely erased, but instead moved to another vector, which will later
be matched to planes. It should be noted, that whenever a node is removed, the number
of samples and root representativeness are updated.
After this, planes will be matched against each other, and those which are similar are
merged. If two planes are merged, new plane parameters, including normal and standard
variation, will be computed for the merged plane. Merging is done when
1. one of the planes parameters are within two standard variations of the other plane
(µ1 ∈µ2 ± 2σ2 or µ2 ∈µ1 ± 2σ1), or
2. their normal vector and distance is similar (n1̸ n2 < 8◦and ∆ρ < 0.16m)
The angle between two vectors are found using the dot product:
n1 · n2 = ∥n1∥∥n2∥cos(α) ⇔α = cos−1
 n1 · n2
∥n1∥∥n2∥
!
= cos−1(n1 · n2)
(2.26)
The last equation is possible since all normal vectors are normalized, making the product
of the two vectors’ length equal 1.
The reason for using two testing methods, one variable depending on the planes pa-
rameters, and the other static, using constants to determine similarity, is due to some
planes having very small standard variances. This can result in similar planes not merg-
ing, which should be avoided.
Before matching unfit nodes, first planes with lower than 900 samples (remember, this
is out of 23,484 samples, see section 2.3, so planes with less than 4% of the total sam-
ples) are found, and all of their nodes are transferred to the vector of unfit nodes. This
ensures that small planes exist and are unique, and aren’t just small, faulty variations
of another plane.
Then nodes are matched by looping over the unfit nodes and comparing each planes
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Algorithm
parameters with the nodes, and transferring the node to the plane which fits best, if
such a plane exists. To fit, the node must fulfill:
1. least square error has to be small (s(node, plane) < 1)
2. must be similar to plane (like with merging, µnode ∈µplane±2σplane, or nplane̸ nnode <
8◦and ∆ρ < 0.16m)
Many nodes are sorted away by this process, as they may have voted on the plane, but
do not fit in it. The small planes which had all of their nodes removed will match with
their nodes again if they indeed do fit better there, ensuring the planes quality.
Sometimes, the planes will have small nodes scattered throughout the image, which
just randomly matched with the planes’ parameters. To make certain that data is in sig-
nificant clusters, nodes with no or small neighbors are removed. When checking nodes,
if a node with less than 50 samples is found, the sample sum for it and its neighbors.
If the sample sum is less than 150, then the samples of the neighbors of the neighbors
are found, and so on, until the sum is above 150 (max 6 nodes), or there are no more
neighbors. In the latter case, then the node is removed.
Small planes are then removed. Any plane with less than 500 samples are removed,
to ensure only correct planes are shown. Lastly, planes are categorized as either floor,
wall, ceiling, or other. To check if a plane is a floor, it must fulfill the following:
1. y-component of the normal vector must be positive, to ensure the plane is below
the camera,
2. ϕ and θ parameters must be within 8 degrees of 90 degrees, as this classify a plane
which is parallel with x-z plane of the camera, and
3. distance to plane is correct. Can be one of two cases:
a) if a camera height is given, then it must be closer to that height than the
currently designated floor. If there is no current floor, then it is automatically
closer.
b) If no camera height is given, the floor must be within 0.5m and 1.0m, and
must be lower than the currently designated floor. If there is no current floor,
then it is automatically lower.
There can only be one floor, so if a better fitting floor is found, they exchange type.
For a wall, the absolute value of the y-component of the normal just must be below
0.1, to ensure the plane is standing up. As there can be multiple walls, there isn’t any
other criteria. However, as flat objects can be near walls, walls can be replaced by a new
plane if
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Post processing
25
1. they have similar normal vectors,
2. they are within 0.5 m of each other, and
3. the plane is further away than the current wall.
For ceilings, which there can be only one of as well, the following must be true:
1. y-component of the normal must be negative, to ensure the plane is above the
camera,
2. ϕ and θ parameters must be within 8 degrees of 90 degrees, just as with floor, and
3. distance to plane must be further away than current ceiling. If there is no current
ceiling, then it is automatically further away.
With this, the planes has been rectified, verified, and classified, giving the results seen
in figure 2.16. With the corridor, the most noticeable difference from figure 2.16 is, that
the ceiling is removed, due to being too small. Some of the other planes has also lost
some nodes, due to them not fitting within them and from being too small and without
neighbors. Most importantly, the leftover planes are planes for certain.
For the door, most noticeable difference from figure 2.16 is, that the faulty planes
have been removed, and some of their notes has been transferred to a more correct
plane (yellow). Unfortunately, it can also be seen that some blue nodes have been re-
moved from the right side of the door, due to not fitting within the plane. While it
is obvious for humans that they fit within the correct plane, the camera can measure
wrong, meaning the nodes were seen as being too different to be part of it. However,
with the next part of the post processing, planes will be expanded via a consensus, look-
ing through every 3D point, and trying to match them with the resulting planes.
Plane consensus and object detection is done by iterating through the 3D data gen-
erated in section 2.3. Iterating over the data is done by OpenCV ‘forEach’ method
with C++’s lambda function, which runs the computation is parallel threads, making
Figure 2.16: Rectified and verified planes for ‘corridor 01’ and ‘door 02’.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Algorithm
the computation several times faster[https://learnopencv.com/parallel-pixel-access-in-
opencv-using-foreach/]. This method wasn’t used for the quadtree initialization, as the
SATs require the sums to be calculated in order, which the ‘forEach’ method doesn’t.
However, for the consensus, computation does not have to be in a certain order.
First, not all data needs to have a consensus done on it. Data which has already been
classified in a node or has distance outside of range (outside 20cm and 10m, see section
2.2) is ignored. To further limit the amount of data needed, only every other point
is used, decreasing the amount from[206×114]=23,484(see section 2.3) to a maximum
of[103×57]=5,871, though will with certainty be less than that.
With only relevant data left, consensus is initialized. This includes finding the nor-
mal vector for the plane containing the point and its neighbors, as seen in figure 2.17.
Vectors are found by
vN = pN −p, vE = pE −p, vS = pS −p, vV = pV −p
(2.27)
With p being the point analyzed. The normal vector can then be found by
nSE = vS × vE, nNW = vN × vW
(2.28)
Then, for each plane, the distance of the point to the plane is found by
d = |(pplane −p) · nplane|
(2.29)
If the distance is lower than 8cm to the plane, then it enters the next part of the consen-
sus, which is finding the distance to the closest node. This is done by iterating over the
Figure 2.17: The points chosen to create the points normal vector. The gray cells are
skipped points.
==PAGE:37==
2.6 Post processing
27
nodes in the plane, detecting what point of that node is the closest to the point (done
by simple if statements), and then computing the distance from the two 3D points. If
the lowest distance is less than 2m, then the point is deemed not an object, and the
point enter last step of the consensus for this plane; finding the angle between the planes
normal vector and the two normal vectors found from the points neighbors.
The two normal vectors are first ensured they point the correct direction, as is done
for each node, see equation 2.14. Then the angle between the points normal vectors
and the planes normal vector is found by using equation 2.26, and taking the maximum
angle of the points two normal vectors. To ensure points which are further away from
points are correct, a scale factor is found, which is multiplied with the previous found
smallest angle, initialized to be 8 degrees. The scale depends on the distance from the
closest node, such that the further away a point is from a node, the more accurate the
normal vector has to be. The scale is found by
k = 1 −dnode
2
(2.30)
If the angle difference is less than the current best angle multiplied with the scale, then
the angle, distance, and plane is set to the current best fit. If the points distance to a
plane is less than 4cm and the angle difference is less than 4 degrees, then the point is
set to belong to the plane, skipping the consensus for the other planes, as it is deemed
too fitting to be in another plane.
With the point determined, three things can happen:
1. If the point fit to a plane, the point and its closest neighbors are added to this
plane.
2. If the point doesn’t fit a plane, but was within 8cm and close to a node, nothing
is done with point.
3. If far from being in a plane, it is added as an object.
Objects need to be classified as either being restricting, height restricted, or irrelevant.
An object is deemed irrelevant if the height is 1.5m above floor level, or if it is faulty,
meaning if over half of its neighbors are further away than 20cm.
An object is deemed restricting if it is below 0.6m above floor level, in which an area of
6cm around the object is added to an OpenCV image containing all restricting areas.
Lastly, an object is deemed height restricted if the objects height is within 0.6m and
1.5m above floor. In this case, an area of 6cm around the object is added to a map of
heights and corresponding areas. To avoid having too many heights in the map, objects
heights are rounded down to lowest 10cm, giving the map a maximum 9 different heights.
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Algorithm
Later, these height restricted areas will be cleaned up to avoid overlapping areas and
areas outside of floor.
With the consensus done and all points designated to planes, a top view is computed,
such that traversable areas can be found. First, the planes’ points are cleaned up and
smoothed using morphological transformation. Morphological transformation within im-
age analysis use a kernel to perform simple operation on an image. In image 2.18, two
morphological transformation are shown; dilation (top) and erosion (bottom), both with
a 3 × 3 kernel. The kernel size decides how aggressive the operation needs to be as it
moves across the image, changing the center value depending on the operation. For
dilation, the image is expanded, meaning when a kernel center is on a pixel, if any of
the other elements in the kernel is non zero, then the center is set to 255 (in a binary
image, the value of a pixel is either 0 or 255). This will be done for all pixels in the
image, resulting in the top right image in figure 2.18. For erosion, the opposite is done:
if any element in the kernel is zero, then the pixel the kernel is centering on will be set
to zero, resulting in the bottom right image in figure 2.18.
Individually, the transformation isn’t of much value, but when combined, then can
be used to remove small patches of irrelevant data or close holes in patches which should
not have holes. These operations are called ‘open’ and ‘close’, respectively, and are a
combination of dilation and erosion:
open(x) = erosion(x) →dilation(x), close(x) = dilation(x) →erosion(x)
(2.31)
Using both morphological transformations after each other with a square 5 × 5 kernel
results in figure 2.19. Small points have been removed, and small holes and gaps have
Figure 2.18: The two morphological transformations: dilate (top) and erode (bottom)
with a 3 × 3 kernel.
==PAGE:39==
2.6 Post processing
29
been filled out. In figure 2.20, the objects can be seen. Notice how in the black spots
with no or little data, the data is likely to be assigned an object. Notice also how the
closed door to the right, while it isn’t determined a plane, can be clearly seen as a large
number of objects close and parallel to a wall. While no door detection algorithm is
implemented here, future projects could use this.
With planes drawn in 2D, it is time to convert them to a top view coordinate. This
is done by first, if a floor plane exists, making another ‘forEach’ loop over the 3D data,
and checking if the data exists in the floor. If it does, it is transformed to top view.
Then a ‘close’ and ‘open’ operation with an 11×11 kernel is done on the floors top view,
such that holes are filled, small spots are removed, and then an ‘erode’ operation with
a kernel of 5 × 5 is used to remove the edge of the floor, such that the floor extending
inside the walls is avoided. Afterwards, another ‘forEach’ loop is done over the 3D data,
this time for the rest of the planes. If a point is within one of the planes, its category is
determined like with objects:
1. If the point is above 1.5m above floor level, then the point is discarded.
2. If the point is below 0.6m above floor level, then the point is added as a restricted
area. This is also done if the point is outside floor level.
Figure 2.19: The planes from figure 2.16 expanded and cleaned up.
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Algorithm
Figure 2.20: All objects seen in the image.
3. If the point is in between those two heights, then an area of 1.5cm around the
point is added to the map of height restricted areas in the height of points height
rounded down to nearest 10cm.
The reason for doing this and not just setting every point of planes not dictated floors
is to avoid planes which in no way restrict the robot interfere with it. E.g. if a door
frame is seen as a plane, the top of the door frame should obviously not stop the robot
from going through.
First finding the floor and then the rest of the planes helps when determining if a
point should be height restricted. Only if the object is above floor level should be added,
as to add to the map of height restricted areas takes a lot of time, as only one process
can do it at a time. This is because C++ maps can only be used by one function at a
time, and since the ‘forEach’ runs in parallel threads, a ‘mutex’ object must be used to
lock the process when an area is added to the map.
Lastly, a ‘close’ operation with an 11 × 11 kernel is done on every other plane, and a
‘close’ operation with a kernel of 7 × 7 is done on the restricted area. Then each plane
area is removed from the floor area. This results in figure 2.21. This shows the floor
clearly within the walls and avoiding objects like the trashcan. In the top view, the
bottom center is where the robot is seeing from. The image is taken at a height of 86cm,
and the floor can first be detected 1.47m from the robot.
The distance from robot (bottom center) to the first pixel of floor is calculated knowing
that each pixel represent a 3 times 3 cm area, and that there are 333 pixel in the image
(representing 10m), and that the floor starts at pixel 284, giving a height of
l = (jcamera −jfloor)∆h = (333pixel −284pixel)0.03 m
pixel = 1.47m
(2.32)
With this calculation, it can also be seen that the floor can be detected up to almost 6m
==PAGE:41==
2.6 Post processing
31
Figure 2.21: Top view of the ‘corridor 01’ scene.
away;
(333pixel −135pixel)0.03 m
pixel = 5.94m
(2.33)
The width of the corridor can also be found to be 1.98m, which is close to the 2 m it
really is.
When the traversable area is found and passed on via a rostopic, the pixel coordinates
are calculated back to meters.
This leaves the last part of post processing: area detection. With the top view, it is easy
to obtain the contours of the area using OpenCV’s function ‘findContours’, which can
then be translated into real world coordinates for traversable areas.
If the plane is a wall, the area is calculated and added as a restricted area. Area is
calculated by getting the number of pixels within the contour and multiplying with the
squared resolution, this being 3cm:
A = N · (∆h)2
(2.34)
If the plane is a floor or of type ‘other’, the contour and area is found, and it is then
determined if the contour is hollow (if the mean of the pixels within the contour is below
125) and if an object is within the contour. Then, it is determined what should be done
with the area:
==PAGE:42==
32
2 Algorithm
1. If the area is hollow, is less than 0.2m2, and doesn’t have an object within it, the
area is filled to become part of a larger area.
2. If it is hollow and either above 0.2m2 or has an object within it, it is added as a
restricted area.
3. If isn’t hollow and is above 0.2m2, it is added as a traversable area.
When this is done for all planes, then height restricted areas are determined. This is
done by iterating over the map for height restricted areas, and for each height, the areas
are drawn in an OpenCV image. Then only the areas within the floor area is kept, and
any area which is already described in a lower height is removed, and so is areas which
is within walls. If there are any areas left, it is added to the floor as a height restricted
area. This can be seen in figure 2.22, where the gray areas are height limited areas. As
there isn’t many height restricted areas in the corridor scene, it can be diﬀicult to spot
a height limited area, but one can be spotted near the trashcan, spotted in the top view
just above the start of the floor to the left.
The information is then sent out on a rostopic with information on all planes, in-
cluding normal vector, position, spherical parameters, ID, plane type, number of nodes,
area, and lists of traversable areas, restricted areas, and height limited areas.
The flowchart can be seen in figure 2.23. The planes are rectified, merged, matched
Figure 2.22: Top view of the image with height restricted areas.
==PAGE:43==
2.7 Future features
33
Figure 2.23: Flowchart of the post processing algorithm.
with unfit nodes, has small nodes removed, are removed if too small, and classified. Then
the consensus is done in which first minimum and maximum object height is found, and
then 3D points are matched to the planes. If they belong to a plane, it is inserted into
the plane, else the point is seen as an object, and, depending on its height, is ignored, set
as restricted area, or set at height limited area. The planes are cleaned up using morpho-
logical transformations, converted to top view, and the floor area is refined by removing
other planes top view from it, having small holes filled out or added as restricted areas,
the contour is found, and the height limited areas are added. The information is then
sent over a rostopic for other processes to receive.
With the post processing, the algorithm has now verified, rectified, and classified the
planes, extended the planes to fitting points using a consensus, and areas are detected
with great accuracy. All of this is done in only 9ms.
2.7
Future features
For future projects, the algorithm could have the following features implemented:
• Rotation matrix for top view
• Better detection of ramps and stairs
The rotation matrix would be useful if the robot is driving on a ramp or if the camera
is looking at the world at an angle. As of now, the top view is just the x-z plane of the
==PAGE:44==
34
2 Algorithm
camera, which isn’t a problem when the camera is parallel with the floor, which it has
been with the cases used here. In the future, a robot mounted with a gyroscope and
accelerometer could be integrated to pass of these parameters to the traversable area
detection algorithm to always depict the top view correctly and not as an approximation,
as is done for now.
Better detection of ramps and stairs would need a bit more work. Ramps aren’t al-
ways detected, as seen in figure 2.24, where the ramp either isn’t found (left), or not
well defined (right, purple plane). Same goes for stairs, as seen in figure 2.25, which are
also hard to detect. One way to perhaps implement better detection would be to cycle
through different detection modes, which would vary its parameters fitted for general
plane search, ramp search and staircase search. A ramp search could use a finer angle
resolution when voting on plane approximations while a staircase search could use a
finer distance resolution and allow for smaller nodes. Then, when it has cycled through
the modes, they would be superimposed on each other, such that a full top view with
stairs, ramps, and other planes could be found. Higher certainty of planes could also
be guaranteed if the algorithm remembered the planes positions and areas, as feature
detection could then be used to detect if a plane has been spotted in the same area
several picture in a row, assuring that what it sees is indeed a plane. Feature detection
could in general also be used to map a with the algorithm, such that not only the current
plane detection is seen, by in general all information seen since the detection started.
2.8
Result
The algorithm takes a depth image, clusters it, votes on approximations, detects best
plane approximations, filters the planes, expands them using a consensus, and computes
the traversable, height limited, and restricted areas, giving highly accurate information
on planes and objects in the image, all of this within 75ms if using color camera, and
only 35ms if only using depth.
A live detection of traversable areas can be seen here:
https://youtu.be/OWF9BdsN6UE
The project files can be found here:
https://github.com/SebastianSchou/FloorDetectionProject.git.
==PAGE:45==
2.8 Result
35
Figure 2.24: Images ‘ramp up 01’ and ‘ramp up 02’ including ramps, showcasing the
diﬀiculty in detecting them.
Figure 2.25: Image ‘stairs up 02’ including stairs, showcasing the diﬀiculty in detecting
them.
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3
Conclusion
This projects purpose was to determine if a 3D camera could be used as a cheaper alter-
native for traversable area detection for a small mobile robot. Using an Intel Realsense
D435, a depth camera using stereo vision, the depth data was clustered using quadtrees
and PCA and approximations were voted on using a spherical accumulator, and the best
approximations were then detected with a gradient hill climbing method. Planes were
then rectified and verified, and a concensus were used to extend the planes. This were
then converted to a top view, height restricted areas were added, and all of the plane
information, including traversable area, is then sent out on a rostopic. All of this can be
done in 35ms (30.3Hz). The traversable area detected is highly accurate, detecting the
correct positions of planes within 3cm. Future project can add to the accuracy by adding
memory of detections, and feature detection could also be used to map the detections,
making it possible for a robot to remember everything the algorithm detected.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
Appendices
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX A
Original project plan
==PAGE:52==
Traversable area detection for mobile robots
using camera only
Project plan
Sebastian Schifter Schou (s153043)
Master of Science in Engineering
2020
==PAGE:53==
Traversable area detection for mobile robots using camera only, Project plan
Report written by:
Sebastian Schifter Schou (s153043)
Supervisors:
Jens Christian Andersen, Professor at Deparment of Electrical Engineering, DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
7. September 2020- 7. February 2021
ECTS points:
30
Education:
M.Sc.Eng.
Specialization:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Version:
1. edition
Notes:
This project plan is made as part of the requirement to obtain a master
degree in electrical engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
Rights:
©Sebastian Schifter Schou, 2020
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Problem introduction
Development in robotics and automation allows robots to take on more complicated
tasks, and having robots perform duties such as service tasks autonomously are becom-
ing a realization. For robots to be utilized in e.g. hospitals, elderly care homes, etc., they
would have to sense the world around them, and determine which areas are traversable.
A common way for systems to obtain data from their surroundings is LIDAR, which
uses a laser to emit light into the environment, and then measures the time it takes for
the light to return to determine distance to the point. They are eﬀicient and able to
map the surroundings with great precision, but for a higher quality LIDAR, it is also
rather costly[3]. For a cheaper solution, a 3D camera can be used. They use multiple
cameras to capture the environment, and then use the overlapping images from different
perspectives to match characteristics in the images, and from this determine the depth
of the points in the image. While not as precise as well as being susceptible to error at
long distances, the 3D camera is great at indoor uses for a small mobile robot, where
long distance detection isn’t a necessity anyways.
With a 3D camera recording the information of the robot’s environment, isolating the
ground and determining which part of it is traversable is the next step, and will be the
purpose of this project. To do this, methods from Vera, Lucio, et al.[4] are used, in
which the planes are found from the depth image by dividing the image into smaller
parts, performing a principle component analysis (PCA) on them, determining their
plane characteristics and grouping them by use of a Hough Transform. A RANSAC
method will possibly also be considered as an alternative, as well as to determine which
method is most effective and reliable. To determine ground plane beyond the depth
sensors ability, the methods of Yang, Wang, et al.[5] will be considered, which uses a
seed growing algorithm from the information of both the depth image and RGB image
to determine which points are part of the ground plane.
When the ground plane is isolated, detection of obstacles will be done, in which the
dimensions of the obstacles will be determined, as well as their contour and density.
This will be used by the robot to determine if the obstacles can be passed by driving
over (e.g. a small obstacle flat enough to be driven over or a small box which can fit
under the robot between its wheels), driving under (e.g. a table), or if the robot has to
==PAGE:55==
2
1 Introduction
pass around the obstacle.
By using these methods, the robot will be more flexible in its route planning, and
will therefore be able to navigate around in a obstacle filled environment easier.
Specification and Requirements
The focus of this project will be on indoor environments. From this follows that the floor
and other detected planes are relatively smooth as opposed to outdoor ground planes.
The solution might therefore not be suitable for outdoor use. For detection of planes the
RGB-D camera Intel RealSense D435 will be used[2]. It is low-cost ($179.00), and uses
stereo depth to determine depth, as well as infrared lasers to determine depth in poorly
lighted environments[1]. The camera can be seen in image 1.1. The Intel RealSense SDK
also allows support for the Robot Operating System (ROS), the Open Source Computer
Vision Library (OpenCV), as well as for C/C++, which are also part of the requirements
for this project.
Figure 1.1: The Intel RealSense D435 camera and its dimensions. It uses two imagers,
IR light, and an RGB module to produce its color and depth frames. The image is from
[2].
For ROS specifically, it has to be the Melodic version of ROS, as it is the one used
for the robots on DTU which might be used as part of the project, specifically the
Flexbot, which has flexible ”legs” that allows it to change its height, and the Terrain-
Hopper, which is suited to drive in rough terrains. Furthermore, as both of these robots
use Linux Ubuntu 18.04, the project has to be able to run on this OS as well.
Goals
The goal of the project is to be able to determine the ground plane, the obstacles on the
ground plane, and how these obstacles can be traversed around, whether this should be
==PAGE:56==
1.2 Problem statement
3
over, under, or to just avoid them altogether. Tracking of obstacles and environment as
well as route planning for the robot is not part of the project requirements but will be
attempted to include in the project as well.
1.2
Problem statement
Using an Intel RealSense D435 depth camera, determine the ground plane and obstacles
on it, and from this, deduce the traversable areas to be used in a robot’s route planning.
==PAGE:57==
4
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 2
Schedule
The time plan for the project stretches from September 7th, 2020 to February 7th, 2021.
It can be seen in appendix A as well as in table 2.1. The content of the tasks will be
Name
Begin date
End date
Project planning
09/07/20
10/07/20
Detect floor plane
10/07/20
10/20/20
Isolate floor plane
10/20/20
11/02/20
Deduct camera height
11/02/20
11/09/20
Detect floor obstacles
11/09/20
12/03/20
Robustness
12/03/20
01/01/21
Apply to robot
12/11/20
01/07/21
Write thesis
12/21/20
02/05/21
Navigation
01/04/21
01/28/21
Table 2.1: Tasks in the project with their start and end dates.
discussed below.
Project planning
Apart from making the project plan, this also includes looking up solutions and research
done on the subject, figuring out how the camera works, setting up the project with all
of the libraries (ROS, OpenCV, Intel RealSense SDK), making a script ready to analyze
the camera data, as well as having set up GitHub for the project, to be able to track
progress.
Detect floor plane
This is the first part of the project, where the methods of Vera, Lucio, et al.[4] are im-
plemented; making functions for quadtree, PCA, plane function extraction, and Hough
Transform. RANSAC will also be considered here. At the end of this task, the floor
plane should be obtained, as well as planes for walls and other objects.
==PAGE:59==
6
2 Schedule
Isolating floor plane
With the floor plane obtained, it will be refined to only show areas with no obstacles in
its way. Here the methods of Yang, Wang, et al.[5] will be considered, using the seed
growth to combine color and depth data in the image to stretch the traversable floor
plane beyond the range of the depth camera. This would make it possible to obtain the
traversable area for e.g. a long corridor. At the end of this task, traversable area, which
does not take into consideration the robot’s or obstacles’ dimensions, should be found.
Deduct camera height
From the ground plane, it is then of interest to find how the camera is placed in the
world. As the camera should be mounted on a robot, knowing the height of the camera,
as well as the rotation of the ground plane, will help making sense of traversable areas.
At the end of this task, the traversable area should be corrected for any rotation in the
image, and the camera height should be obtained.
Detect floor obstacles
Theoretically the last step in traversable area detection. Here, objects will be analyzed,
and their dimension, contour, and density will be found. From that, it will be decided
on whether an object can be ignored, driven over, driven under, or if the object should
be avoided. This also includes checking if traversable areas are wide and high enough for
the robot and removing them if they are not. At the end of this task, traversable area
which takes into consideration the robot’s and obstacles’ dimension and characteristics
should be found.
Robustness
While the above task should be last before applying it to the robot, there can be many
scenarios which will cause problems for the script. Here these scenarios will be tested to
make certain the script is robust for a wide variety of environments and obstacles. At
the end of this task, the script should be robust and bug free.
Apply to robot
If the robot is up and running, then the script will be integrated into the robot, utilizing
data from the robot to better the script. At the end of this task, the script should be
integrated and running on the robot, allowing to detect traversable areas while mounted
to the robot.
==PAGE:60==
2 Schedule
7
Write thesis
As the task implies, here the thesis will be written. The thesis will of course be written
alongside the project, but at this point the deadline is becoming close, and progress on
the thesis will be intensified. At the end of this task, the project will be done, and the
thesis will be fully written and ready to be handed in.
Navigation
This task is not a necessity, and it is not certain whether there will be time and resources
to do this task, but an attempt will be made. With the traversable areas found and
implemented to work with the robot, it should be utilized as part of the route planning.
At the end of this task, (hopefully) the traversable areas found is used in the robot
navigation.
==PAGE:61==
8
==PAGE:62==
Appendices
==PAGE:63==
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIX A
Schedule
==PAGE:65==
12
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
Intel. Beginner’s guide to depth (Updated). https://www.intelrealsense.com/
beginners-guide-to-depth/. Accessed 6. October 2020.
[2]
Intel. Depth Camera D435. https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-
d435/. Accessed 6. October 2020.
[3]
LIDAR RADAR. Differences between the Lidar Systems and Depth Camera. https:
//lidarradar.com/info/differences- between- the- lidar- systems- and-
depth-camera. Accessed 6. October 2020.
[4]
Eduardo Vera et al. “Hough Transform for real-time plane detection in depth im-
ages”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters 103 (2018), pp. 8 –15. issn: 0167-8655. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2017.12.027.
[5]
Kailun Yang et al. “Expanding the Detection of Traversable Area with RealSense
for the Visually Impaired”. In: Sensors 16 (November 2016), p. 1954. doi: 10.3390/
s16111954.
==PAGE:67==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineeringi
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 326
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Frederico A. Limberger and Manuel M. Oliveira. “Real-Time Detection of Planar Re-
gions in Unorganized Point Clouds”. In: Pattern Recognition 48.6 (2015), pp. 2043–
2053. issn: 0031-3203. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2014.12.
020.
[2]
Dorit Borrmann et al. “The 3D Hough Transform for Plane Detection in Point
Clouds: A Review and a new Accumulator Design”. In: 3D Research 0202 (June
2011). doi: 10.1007/3DRes.02(2011)3.
[3]
Intel. Beginner’s guide to depth (Updated). https://www.intelrealsense.com/
beginners-guide-to-depth/. Accessed 6. October 2020.
[4]
Intel. Depth Camera D435. https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-
d435/. Accessed 7. February 2021.
[5]
Intel. What is the minimum accuracy for Intel RealSense D400? https://www.
intel.com/content/www/us/en/support/articles/000030916/emerging-
technologies/intel-realsense-technology.html. Accessed 7. February 2021.
[6]
Intel RealSense Depth Camera D400-Series. Intel. 2017.
[7]
LIDAR RADAR. Differences between the Lidar Systems and Depth Camera. https:
//lidarradar.com/info/differences- between- the- lidar- systems- and-
depth-camera. Accessed 6. October 2020.
[8]
Eduardo Vera et al. “Hough Transform for real-time plane detection in depth im-
ages”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters 103 (2018), pp. 8 –15. issn: 0167-8655. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2017.12.027.
==PAGE:70==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineeringi
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 326
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
