==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Technology Platform and Architecture
Development for hair removal products at
Philips
Daníel Freyr Jóhannsson
s171948
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mekanik
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1960
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this thesis, the possibility of further implementation of the methodology of technol-
ogy platforms and architecture within the hair removal and grooming devices product
program at Philips is considered. The thesis project is based on through analysis, of
both products, parts and market.
Throughout the years, Philips has developed numerous different products in var-
ious product families. Even though fundamentally similar and built up from similar
functioning parts, in many cases, the products have been developed independently
from one another, resulting in increasing product and part complexity. The com-
plexity results in increased research and development cost per product, specialized
manufacturing lines and therefore production cost, ultimately reducing Philips’s com-
petitiveness in the field.
The hair removal and grooming devices considered in the thesis are electronically
powered, hand held devices. In the analysis, each product is carefully considered in
regards to main product purpose, engineering principles utilized to achieve set pur-
pose and finally on part level. Products and product families are then compared in
order to identify overlapping in products, design principles and parts. The product
program is then considered in regards to defined market segments in order to under-
stand product variation and availability.
From the analysis, focus area for improvement proposals and future goals are
defined. Following, improvement recommendations for Philips product program are
presented. A high level conceptualization is developed for different architecture con-
struction proposals.
The alternative proposals are then evaluated against one an-
other and the highest ranking one further described and discussed. Along with the
recommended architecture proposal a implementation guide is presented in order to
maximize the likelihood of successful implementation.
Additional data and further work is needed in collaboration with Philips to val-
idate the proposals, however, the thesis highly suggests that Philips could greatly
benefit from such an approach to their product program, reducing complexity and
increasing re-use of designs, ensuring their future as leaders in the field.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master’s thesis with the title Platform Development for hair removal products at
Philips is written by Daníel Freyr Jóhannsson a MSc student in Mechanical Engineer-
ing. The duration of this thesis project is 5 months, which corresponds to 30 ETSC
credits. The supervisor of the project is Niels Henrik Mortensen, professor at the
department of Mechanical Engineering and head of Engineering Design and Product
Development Section at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
I would like to extend gratitude to my supervisor of this thesis project, Niels
Henrik Mortensen for his guidance, support and valuable inputs.
Furthermore, I
would like to thank my family, especially my wife, Eva Ingibjörg Ágústsdóttir for all
her support, assistance and patience throughout the course of the project and my
daugther, Edda Ingibjörg Daníelsdóttir.
Kongens Lyngby, February 4, 2021
Daníel Freyr Jóhannsson
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Philips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scope & Structure of Thesis Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Research & Literature
6
2.1
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Platforms and Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
The Philips Development Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Topic Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Research Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Research & Literature Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Hair Removal & Grooming Technology
13
3.1
Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Hair Removal/Grooming Element
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Power Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.3
Water Seal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.4
Motor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.5
Drive Shaft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.6
Electrical Circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.7
Shell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.8
Cutting Length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Analysis
26
4.1
Current Situation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1
Data Availability & Collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Market Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
4.1.3
Regional or Global Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.4
Product Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.5
Architectures & Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Comparison with Braun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
Regional variance Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.2
Product Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.3
Architectures & Platforms Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3
Analysis Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Focus & Goals
62
5.1
Focus Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2
Goal Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Implementation Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Conceptualization Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Conceptualization
65
6.1
Improvement Proposals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1.1
8 Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.1.2
6 Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.1.3
4 Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.1.4
2 Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.1.5
1 Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.1.6
Architecture Proposals Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
More Detailed About the Chosen Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.2.1
Configuration Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
7
Discussion
90
8
Conclusion
92
8.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A
PFMP
94
B
Sharing Matrix
97
C
Current Architectures
101
C.1 Philips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
C.2 Braun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
Bibliography
111
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Companies constantly seek ways to stay competitive and relevant. With globalization
the whole world is becoming the same market and therefore competition increases.
Consumers therefore have more and more options to choose from and for companies
to fulfill their consumers needs at profitable sales prices, product development and
manufacturing processes need to be optimized to the utmost extent.
This prompt development time and market pressure can lead to increase in com-
plexity and inconsistency in companies’ product portfolio and manufacturing as well
as excessive development cost on each individual product variant. Successful imple-
mentation of architectures and platforms in product development can decrease time to
market and increase variants and/or customizability of end products with modulariza-
tion and re-use of components, whilst reducing R&D cost and simplifying production
and assembly lines. Each module can then be developed and tested individually, en-
abling quick implementation of innovations across the entire product portfolio, whilst
limiting implementation risk.[1]
Philips, Volkswagen, Sony, Bang & Olufsen and SCANIA are among companies
that have successfully implemented the methodology of architectures and platforms in
their product development and production. This implementation has contributed to
their success and allowed them to quickly introduce more product variants, through
high degree of component re-use and standardization of components.[2]
As previously mentioned, Philips has implemented the methodology of architec-
tures and platforms in some of their production and therefore understand the benefits
such approach can lead to. However, it is somewhat limited within individual product
families and therefore the possibilities not fully utilized. In this thesis project, devel-
opment of such architectures and platforms across multiple product families, within
hair removal technology, for both female and male products will be conducted based
on comprehensive product analysis.
1.1
Philips
Koninklijke Philips N.V. (e. Royal Philips), commonly known and hereafter men-
tioned as Philips, is a Dutch multinational company. Philips was founded in 1891 by
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Philips
2
Gerard and Frederik Philips. Philip’s first products were light bulbs and during the
20th century it grew enormously as a conglomerate corporation. In 2019 Philips had
around 81.000 employees in over 100 countries and annual sales were around e19.5
billion.[3]
Philips’s main goal is to be a worldwide leading health technology company which
improves both health and well-being of people with it’s technology through innova-
tion. Philips takes pride in creating long term value to both their customers and
shareholders while acting responsible towards the environment.[3]
Being a international conglomerate corporation means that a company engages in
two or more completely different businesses under the same corporation. That can
ease each subsidiaries access to cheaper founding and thereby provide economic of
scale. However that can lead to increased complexity in the corporation structure.[4]
The company structure of Philips, as presented on SEC form 20-F in 2014 is presented
in Figure 1.1. The corporation is split up in four main entities, Healthcare, Consumer
Lifestyle, Lighting and Innovation Group & Services.
Figure 1.1: Koninklijke Philips N.V. company structure as presented on SEC Form
20-F in 2014.[5].
In this thesis project, the possibility of further developing technology platform/s
and architecture/s across female and male hair removal products will be considered.
Philips’s hair removal products fall under Personal Care, a sub-part of the Consumer
Lifestyle entity, marked with red outline in Figure 1.1.
1.1.1
Challenges and Opportunities
Like many production companies Philips faces a challenge in regards to availability
of resources and pricing. Continuously decreasing access to cheap fossil fuels and
drainage of other natural resources, along with increased environmental thinking of
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Problem Statement
3
consumers creates a challenge for production companies.[6] Along with increased fo-
cus of environmental impact, the demand for products, such as Philips’s is increasing.
Large part of the increase in demand can be associated with great expansion of the
middle class (people earning between $10 and $100 per day), especially in Asia.[7]
These counter effective things of limited resources and increased demand forces them
to seek other ways of optimization than before with sustainability and reduction of
waste in mind.
Within these challenges lie opportunities as well. A rapid expansion of the middle
class and demand for products obviously opens up new markets while other markets
continue to exists, inspiring companies, such as Philips to solve other challenges, such
as limiting resources and production optimization.
1.2
Problem Statement
The hypothesis is therefore that with further implementation of technology platforms
and architecture, where engineering principles and components are shared across both
female and male hair removal and cutting products Philips stands to gain a lot.
With consideration to insights gathered on the topic, the following research ques-
tions are phrased as follows to support the hypothesis:
Q1: ”Is it possible to develop architecture/s and platform/s that Philips can utilize
throughout both their female and male targeted hair removal technologies?”
Q2: ”How is that architecture/s and platform/s constructed?”
1.3
Scope & Structure of Thesis Work
Due to unforeseeable circumstances, resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak where
many internal people are working from home and most external people have been
denied access into companies worldwide, the information this thesis project is based
on are somewhat limited. Therefore, unfortunately, this thesis project is not carried
out in collaboration with Philips in any way, like would have been preferred. With
that in mind, some things are left outside the scope of the project, solely due to
unavailable information.
Initially, thorough study of the conglomerate corporation, Philips was carried out
in order to gain insight on the company structure. Relevant literature research was
carried out and implementation on the methodology of architectures and platforms in
other companies was investigated. Extensive product portfolio research of Philips’s
hair removal products was carried out, firstly with information from the internet,
such as from Philips’s homepage, customer reviews and other miscellaneous sources.
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Scope & Structure of Thesis Work
4
Thereafter more detailed hands on research was carried out, where variety of the
considered products were examined and handled in stores and selected items where
then purchased in order to disassemble, examine and compare functional components.
The thesis project work was a non linear process, where phases sometimes had to
be revisited based on findings later on. This thesis report is constructed in the same
main way as the project work was carried out and is as follows:
Research and literature: Initially the methodology of technology platforms
and architecture and how it has been implemented, both at Philips and throughout
the world in various fields was researched. Main terms, commonly used throughout
the thesis report are then briefly explained. Important findings from the thesis topic
research is then introduced and possible benefits from further successful implementa-
tion of the methodology presented.
Hair removal and grooming technology: Main product families of Philips’s
hair removal and grooming devices is presented. Fundamental technology behind the
various product families is introduced and explained to gain insight on it’s differences
and performance steps.
Analysis: The current situation of Philips’s hair removal and grooming product
program is thoroughly analyzed. Data gathered during the research phase is struc-
tured and presented in various ways in order to elucidate challenges and improvement
areas. Comparison to Philips’s main competitor, Braun is conducted. Included in
the analysis are detailed product, product program structure and market analysis.
Findings and insight from the analysis are then used as a basis for the focus on the
further project work of a conceptualization of new and improved architecture/s.
Focus and goals: Based on findings and results from the research and analysis,
clear design focus and goals hoped to be achieved from the conceptualization of a the
architecture/s are defined. Along with that, implementation approach is presented
and scope of the conceptualization defined.
Conceptualization: Based on the analysis, set focus area and goals, alternative
improvement proposals are presented, discussed and evaluated against each other.
Based on the evaluation, the highest scoring proposal in the evaluation is then spe-
cially considered and the architecture proposal further developed and explained in
more detailed. Configuration examples are then presented, as well as an implementa-
tion guide.
Discussion: Most important aspects of the thesis work, such as important find-
ings from the analysis phase and the architecture proposal from the conceptualization
phase are briefly reflected on and further discussed.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Scope & Structure of Thesis Work
5
Conclusion: Finally the project is concluded on as a whole and suggestions on
future work on the matter presented.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Research & Literature
The research approach and following work of this thesis project is mainly based on
means and methods from the DTU course ”41083 Technology platforms and archi-
tectures”, taught by the supervisor of the project, Niels Henrik Mortensen, professor
at the department of Mechanical Engineering and head of Engineering Design and
Product Development Section at DTU. Additionally, other relevant material on de-
velopment of product platforms and architecture and related subjects is utilized in
this thesis project.
Due to the COVID-19 outbreak, access inside development facilities and/or factories
was not possible. Therefore data of the researched matter is mainly gathered through
detailed internet research, discussions with specialists as well as personal experience
and hands on investigation of selection of items.
2.1
Terminology
Following, main terminology, commonly used throughout in this thesis is described.
Many of the following terms lack concrete definitions and are therefore described as
deemed best fitting their usage in the thesis report, based on various sources or com-
bination of them.
Architecture: An Architecture is a strategic decomposition of a product family
and/or a product program which includes the description and documentation of the
building principle that allow for re-use of standard designs across a product family for
individual products. An architecture describes design rules for design entities such
as, design units, standard designs, interfaces, modules and application characteris-
tics.[2][8]
Platform: ”Platforms are the physical realization of the architecture”[9]. A set
of components, such as design units and interfaces, strategically constructed accord-
ing to the architecture rules, from which number of different end products can be
developed and produced from.[2]
Product family: A product family is a large set of similar functioning end
products that share market characteristics but vary to cater to individual need of cus-
tomers. The different individual end products are usually constructed from common
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Platforms and Architecture
7
technology and/or components. Such product families can be eﬀiciently developed
and produced by the means of product platforms and architectures.[2]
Design unit: A design unit is a design entity, a subsystem of a product family
e.g. a function, part, organ, module, standard design, etc..[2]
Standard design: A design unit that can be re-used across different products,
product families and/or architectures.[2]
Interface: The place where independent design entities, such as design units and
standard designs meet each other and/or the surroundings. These interfaces connect
these design entities and thereby allow them to be assembled/disassembled and func-
tion together.[2]
Module: A module is a design unit or a group of design units that are shared
across more than one products, product families and/or architectures through stan-
dardized interfaces and can therefore be removed, replaced and/or developed inde-
pendently.[9]
2.2
Platforms and Architecture
For a company to be successful is extremely diﬀicult, and in fact, only around 25% of
companies make it through their first 15 years.[10] To succeed, manufacturing compa-
nies not only need to realise the needs of their consumers but distributors and retailers
as well to be able to provide a desirable product at a reasonable price. Relationship
has to bee established with all these different stakeholders and manufacturing compa-
nies should strive to fulfill their different needs in their product design, development
and later on distribution while being profitable to please their shareholders.[11] This
requires a lot from company leaders and forces them to constantly seek measures of
improvement and optimizations while keeping and/or improving the quality of their
products.
Other factors worth considering are that with easier access to information and com-
parison, consumers product awareness and demand for high quality can increase and
due to globalization competition is getting more and more fierce. This forces compa-
nies to constantly increase product types and variants to fulfill market needs at faster
and faster rate, these different product types sometimes end up even competing with
each other. With more and more product variety and shorter development time com-
plexity usually grows rapidly, each different product type needs to be maintained,
technology and manufacturing methods need to be updated and so on. Product con-
cept can make up for around 70 to 80% of manufacturing cost, quality and through
put and successful product concept can therefore determine whether a business strives
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Platforms and Architecture
8
or not.[12]
The methodology of platforms and architecture focuses on simplification of design,
production and maintenance through high degree of re-use of standard designs across
complex products and/or systems. A strategic way of designing a product family
rather than a product variant, where certain components (such as interfaces) remain
fixed, while others differ depending on desirable function and/or performance of each
product variant.[13]
One of the first person to study the phenomenon of product architectures in engi-
neering design was Karl T. Ulrich, where he argues that product architecture is the
organized way a function is represented as a physical component.
”I define product architectures more precisely as: (1) the arrangements of
functional elements; (2) the mapping from functional elements to phys-
ical components; (3) the specifications of the interfaces among interacting
physical components” Karl T. Ulrich[14]
As mentioned in the introduction the methodology has been implemented by vari-
ous companies in different fields of production. Even though fundamentally different,
most companies see similar benefits from the implementations. According to research
the main benefits associated with the implementation of the methodology of plat-
forms and architecture are:
Increased product variety: With high degree of re-use of modular standard de-
signs, companies are able to quickly introduce new product variants and/or updated
technologies. Simultaneously reducing time to market.[2]
Decrease in complexity/Business improvements: Reduction in investments
and overall cost with fewer components and processes to maintain and develop. Scale
of economics can be achieved, even in small companies due to pooling of components
and processes.
Increased quality: With modular standard designs each innovations can be
developed, tested and transferred individually at high speed and introduced into vari-
ety of products when fully matured and ready, reducing risk and increasing quality.[1]
==PAGE:15==
2.3 The Philips Development Model
9
2.3
The Philips Development Model
Philips already has extensive and well documented platform approach, The Philips
Development Model, which can be seen in Figure 2.1. In the Philips development
model, activities are divided in two main categories, planning and realization/devel-
opment. The planning part is then again divided into three subcategories, Know-how
Planning, with activities that focus on business opportunities (e.g. new technologies,
products and markets), Programming where opportunities are evaluated and coordi-
nated, and decisions on implementations of those opportunities are taken and Product
Launch, which includes activities related to planning, preparation and development
of those market introduction.[2]
The realization part of the model is divided into six subcategories. Technology Know-
how Generation with traditional development activities, where new solutions are de-
veloped before introducing then into products, Manufacturing Processes and compo-
nent preparation where production technologies and key components are developed.
Architecture and Standard Design Creation, which includes all activities that relate
to design and development of the reference architecture. All parts of those reference
architectures, such as standard designs are fully matured, developed and tested be-
fore they are implemented in any products and/or technologies projects in order to
minimize risk of premature designs being implemented. Product Realization then de-
scribes all activities related to the development of products, Manufacturing describes
activities related to product manufacturing and production systems. Finally Design
Maintenance includes all activities related to maintenance of each design, throughout
it’s life cycle.[2]
==PAGE:16==
2.3 The Philips Development Model
10
Figure 2.1: The Philips development model. Where activities on the left side of
the model relate to planning and activities on the right side relate to
realization and/or development[15][2].
Figure 2.2: Effects the implementation
of standard designs and ar-
chitectures at Philips in 1995
had on time to market and
development resources[16].
With the implementation of stan-
dard designs through the methodology
of platforms and architectures in 1995,
Philips is able to introduce products to
market around four times faster then
they were before. Newly lunched prod-
ucts are also more reliable as the stan-
dard designs they are build from have
all been fully developed and tested indi-
vidually.[16][2]
However, not all products at Philips are
based on their standard designs and ar-
chitectures.
The development of prod-
ucts is differentiated in Peak Products,
Optimized Products and Standards De-
sign Based Products.
Peak products
are developed independently as they are
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Topic Research
11
based on premature and/or sensitive
technology, that is not fully matured and therefore kept out of the architecture as
standard designs in order to protect it from increased risk. Optimized products are
left out of the architecture as standard design due to highly competitive price com-
petition in some markets, therefore some products are developed independently and
usually cost optimized to the fullest extent. Then as the name suggest, standard de-
sign based products are designed using one or more standard design and/or modules,
that are re-used across products and/or product families.[2]
2.4
Topic Research
Primarily to gather insight, extensive research on the topic of hair removal products
and processes was conducted. As previously mentioned, restricted by the global close-
down due to the COVID-19 outbreak access to inside information from Philips were
excluded. Therefore the research on the topic was carried out as a detailed, high level,
third party research.
During the research multiple aspects on the topic were examined. Detailed online
research on different hair removal products and technologies was carried out, both
based on information by Philips, presented on their website, as well as various other
online sources. Online reviews of products were examined and their insight used to
gather other peoples opinions and insight on the matter. Interviews with a represen-
tative of Philips in Iceland and a specialist in the hair removal products department
at a leading electronic hardware store were conducted in order to get their profes-
sional opinion on products and product variety. Based on insights gathered from the
research, selected hair removal products from Philips were then purchased in order
to both test them personally and disassemble them in order to investigate product
and component commonality across different product families.
2.5
Research Findings
Philips has a rich product portfolio and offers variety of hair removal and grooming
products. They offer great selection at a wide price range. Initially in the research
process these different products were investigated and their differences and similari-
ties explored in order to identify possible opportunities for improvements. Philips’s
hair removal products are categorised in product families based on their purpose.
Each one of these product families has multiple product variants, based on features
and/or performance level. However, during the research it was quickly clear that the
complexity of Philips’s hair removal product portfolio was far more than initially sus-
pected. It is diﬀicult to compare products to each other and the number of variants
seem excessive.
==PAGE:18==
2.6 Research & Literature Conclusions
12
Highlights from the previously mentioned researches are presented here below.
Online Research: Customers value the overall quality of hair removal products
from Philips. Most reviews however are in regards to top of the line shavers, where
Philips has a loyal fan base. The most concerns people have is the lack of effort to
showcase difference between products and a fair way to compare them. This seems
to be the case regardless whether a new model is just a cosmetic makeover of it’s pre-
decessor or if it is a completely refurbished model with new and advanced technology.
Representatives: Due to complexity the representatives and heads of purchasing
have trouble making decisions regarding their selection of products to carry. Accord-
ing to them people usually have a price range in mind when it comes to purchasing
such products and specific features are not the main interest. They have therefore
limited their product variety and usually carry only a portion of the offered selection
from Philips.
Personal insight: I have used Philips hair removal products myself for years.
My personal experience of the products is in correlation to others, where the quality
has impressed me and my selection of items has usually depended more on pricing
than features as it is diﬀicult to compare performance. Another interesting personal
insight is that I have found the products much more versatile than advertised. There
were various online sources that agreed with that claim when investigated further.
2.6
Research & Literature Conclusions
Despite their well documented and extensive platform approach, The Philips Devel-
opment Model, Philips seems to struggle with the methodology of architectures and
platforms when it comes to hair removal products. In many cases there are no obvious
performance steps between products and in many cases tenths of different product
variants available within the same model, with little or no significant difference, nor
an intuitive way of comparing them or their performance.
As a conglomerate, mass production corporation, Philips, as others, stands to gain a
lot with any type of well implemented optimization. With the initial research on the
topic in mind, as well as Philips’s earlier successful implementation of the methodol-
ogy of technological platforms and architectures, the hypothesis of the project is that
they can mature their approach further and increase sharing between different plat-
forms. With those implementations Philips can achieve greater scale of economics,
reduce complexity in their product development and production and focus on real
value adding variety. In a multi million piece a year production, even the smallest
business improvements can reduce cost by millions of dollars each year and therefore
a lot to gain for a manufacturing company such as Philips.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Hair Removal &
Grooming Technology
There are multiple different techniques and purposes related to removing, trimming
and cutting of hair. Products are usually designed specially depending on those tech-
niques and/or purpose. Philips offers variety of products for many of these different
ways, usually set up as product families along with similar products. In this chap-
ter these main product families will be described and the technology behind them
and most important features will be elaborated on. Descriptions here below are a
combination of information from Philips’s website, multiple online sources and per-
sonal experience. As the hypothesis of the project is to inspect the possibilities of
architectures and platforms sharing across different product families the focus will
be on the most important functional elements. Individual products/models with spe-
cialized features are considered outside of the scope of the project as they should be
implemented within the proposed architectures. Therefore, such features will mostly
be disregarded in the thesis.
Electric Shavers: Electric shavers are designed to shave facial beard as close to
the surface as possible. Philips began producing electric shavers in 1939 and gained
world wide recognition with the introduction of the two headed, ergonomic electric
shaver in 1951. Then in 1966 Philips introduced the triple headed shaver, allowing for
a closer shave and ever since then Philips has relied on that fundamental technology,
where the cutting is performed by three individually rotating heads.[17]
Performance level of the electric shaver depends mostly on the quality of the blades,
contour following of the rotating heads and ergonomic style. Other important fea-
tures are battery life, whether it can be operated with shaving cream or not, water
resistance and how well and easily it can be cleaned.
The electric shaver is Philips’s product family with by far the most product variety
within hair removal products, where the top end model of the electric shaver is the
flagship of Philip’s hair removal products.
Hair Clippers: Hair clippers are designed to cut or shave bulk of hair. The
cutting is performed by multiple stainless steel and/or titanium blades in a scissor
==PAGE:20==
3 Hair Removal & Grooming Technology
14
like motion. Hair clippers usually have length adjustment options, either built in,
controlled by adjusting a lever on the clipper themselves changing the angle of the
blades and/or with additional removable and usually adjustable combs.
Philips’s hair clippers are split up in two main product families, ones designed for
professionals and ones designed for home ownership and usage. Ones designed for
professionals are usually titanium bladed, cord operated with high output motor and
with more fixed and robust add on combs, whilst ones for home use are battery
operated and have adjustable multi-length combs with focus on convenience over ro-
bustness. Performance level of hair clippers depends mostly on the quality of the
blades, robustness and ergonomic style. Other important features are battery life
and how well and easily it can be cleaned.
Beard Trimmers: Similar to hair clippers beard trimmers rely on multiple stain-
less steel blades, moving in a scissor like motion for cutting. Like the name suggest,
beard trimmers are designed to trim and/or cut facial beards. Fundamentally there
is little to non difference between hair clippers and beard trimmers. The main dif-
ference is that beard trimmers usually have shorter blades for more fine trimming
and closer shave and usually have weaker motors being designed for more precise fine
trimming than hair clippers who, like previously described are designed to handle
a bulk of hair. Performance level of beard trimmers depends mostly on the quality
of the blades and ergonomic style. Other important features are battery life, extra
features (e.g. included vacuum cleaner) and how well and easily it can be cleaned.
Multi Groomers: Multi grooming devices are usually beard trimmers with addi-
tional extra features. Like beard trimmers, the main cutting element is fine stainless
steel blades moving in a scissor like motion. The number of included additional tools
usually increase with price and included items can be e.g. nose & ear trimmer, detail
trimmer, precision shaver and length control combs. Other than number of included
accessories, performance level of multi groomers depends mostly on the quality of the
blades and ergonomic style. Other important features are battery life, water resis-
tance and how well and easily it can be cleaned.
OneBlade: The Philips OneBlade is a relatively newly introduced hybrid between
traditional manually operated safety razors and electric trimmers. The OneBlade fea-
tures blades and tiny fast moving cutters on both sides of the razor so it can be
operated either with a pulling or pushing motion. The Oneblade is designed to trim,
edge and/or shave any length of hair. There are no performance steps in the OneBlade,
at least not yet. There are however two different type of OneBlade shavers, regular
and a PRO one, where the main difference is the PRO model being more ergonomic
and includes adjustable trimming comb with 14 length settings while the regular one
is available either just for facial hair, with 3 fixed length setting combs, or for facial
and body hair where additional two body combs are included as well.
Lumea IPL: Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) puts the hair to sleep and prevents it
==PAGE:21==
3 Hair Removal & Grooming Technology
15
from growing back for up to six months with warm gentle light. Typical results from
usage is around 92% reduction of hair in a treated area after just three treatments.
Performance level of the Lumea IPL depends on hair reduction, included attachments
and accessories (e.g. face and/or precision attachment, pen trimmer and premium
pouch) and whether it can be operated both corded and cordless or just corded.
There are complications related to usage of IPL machines and e.g. they cannot be
used if a person has skin cancer, infections or other skin conditions, is pregnant or
breastfeeding and effectiveness is extremely dependant on skin tone. The Lumea IPL
product family differs the most from other hair removal technology product families
Philips offers. While all other considered product families are fundamentally a power
source connected to a motor, which rotates a shaft, that moves a cutting/hair removal
element, the Lumea IPL destroys the hair and it´s root with heat, generated by a
flashing multi-spectrum light.
Electric Shavers for Females: Electric shavers for females from Philips are
foil shavers. Foil shavers have straight heads covered by foil layer with holes that
captures the hairs, underneath are oscillating blades that perform the cutting. Per-
formance level of electric shavers depend mostly on whether it is a single or dual foil
shaver, whether it can be operated with shaving cream or not, contour following and
flexibility of the head and quality of the blades. Other factors are included length
settings combs and other included accessories.
Female Trimmers: Philips’s female trimmers can be split in two main product
families, bikini trimmers and pen trimmers (Precision & Touch-up pen trimmers).
Performance level of bikini trimmers depend mostly on offered different replacement
head options, such as precision head/s and multiple length setting combs. Bikini
trimmers performance level depends mostly on ergonomic style and included length
setting combs included.
Epilators: Epilators are designed to pull the hairs out with it’s root. The epila-
tion is performed by multiple tweezers. Performance level of epilators depend mostly
on number of tweezers, how gentle the epilation is, whether it can be operated cord-
less or not, whether it can be operated with shaving cream or not, water resistance,
ergonomic style and included accessories, such as trimmming head/s, bikini comb,
body brush and pedicure head.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Components
16
Figure 3.1: Overview of hair removal product families and their purpose, based on
description from Philips.co.uk.
3.1
Components
All of these previously described hair removal and grooming devices are electrically
powered devices. Driven by electronic power they power a light, move mechanism
or rotate a shaft, that then moves a hair removal element, such as a set of blades or
rotating knives in order to remove, cut or trim hair. In this section the fundamental
components in those devices will be described and the difference between them elabo-
rated on. More detailed overview of products, how they are shared between product
families and/or product variants can be seen in Appendix B.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Components
17
3.1.1
Hair Removal/Grooming Element
The most fundamental part of a hair removal or a grooming device is the element
that performs the hair removal, trimming or cutting. As briefly mentioned in chap-
ter 3, Philips utilizes many different engineering principles to achieve the desired hair
removal or grooming of their customers. The main categories being, set of blades,
opposite to each other that move in scissor like motion to perform the cutting, indi-
vidually rotating blades, foil shavers, intense pulsed light and epilation.
Scissor like blades: The technology is based on traditional ways of cutting
hair with scissors, where sharp blades are aligned opposite to each other and pivoted
around a point so that the blades slide against each other, cutting the object between
them. Electronically powered grooming devices, such as hair clippers, beard trimmer
and multi-grooming devices are operated in such way. However, for a close cut and
precision the blades are much smaller than in traditional scissors.
Therefore, the
blades are usually a set of multiple, two-edged blades, that slide against each other to
perform the grooming. The performance level of such blades depends mostly on the
material they are made of, usually stainless steel, titanium coated stainless steel or
full titanium. The material choice also effects whether or not maintenance is needed
and then what type of maintenance, such as lubrication and sharpening.
Devices with such cutting element can handle bulk of hair and perform cutting in
ranges from 0.4mm and up, depending on the accessorises. The technology is suited
for most all body parts, depending on the realisation of it.
Figure 3.2: Philips Qt400x blade from multiple directions[18].
Rotating blades: All Philips electric face shavers for men are equipped with mul-
tiple rotating blades. With those blades the shavers are able to offer an extremely
close, smooth shave. The blade quality is an important factor when considering the
performance of a shaver. The performance level is based on a combination of the
blade itself and their cover rings that glide over the skin surface. However, most
technical features related to the blades have their own name and no obvious logical
way for customers to compare them, other than looking at their price difference. A
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Components
18
naming example of such features are NanoTech blades, PowerCut blade system and
anti-friction coated cover rings.
In order to keep optimal performance all blades need to be replaced after 2 years
of use. In lower end models only the blades and the cover rings are replaced, like
can be seen on the left side of Figure 3.3, while the higher end models have a newly
implemented system where the whole shaving head bracket is replaced, as can be seen
on the right side of Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Left: Replaceable shaving heads and blades for a Philips shaver[19]
Right: Replaceable shaving head bracket for a Philips shaver[20].
Specifications regarding interchangeability of blades by Philips are a little vague.
While Philips assigns special blades to electric shaver families they are in many cases
much more interchangeable as the connection interfaces are stable between many dif-
ferent models. Figure 3.4 provides a overview of replacement blades and the models
they are applicable with. For example, the two different type of replacement blades
inside the blue square, SH90 and the newly released SH98 are claimed not inter-
changeable while in fact they are. This is suspected to be done on purpose as the
performance achieved with the new SH98 blades of the Series 9000 prestige (SP98xx)
is considered to exceed their predecessor, the SH90 of the Series 9000 (S9xxx) by a
large margin, while the S9xxx had many other desirable qualities, such as a automatic
cleaning station.[21] If customers were able to achieve the shaving excellence of the
new blades with their current model shaver, why would they purchase a new one
when they can simply purchase the new advanced blades during their next scheduled
blade replacement?
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Components
19
Figure 3.4: Overview of replacement blades for electric shavers.
Figure 3.5: Hybrid, foil shaver and scis-
sor like edge cutter of the
Philips SatineShave Prestige
female shaver.
Foil shavers: Similar to the rotat-
ing blade shaver, foil shavers are able to
achieve extremely close cut shave. The
cut is performed by oscillating blades.
The blades have straight heads that are
covered by a thin layer of foil. The foil
is holed in a mesh-like pattern, allowing
the hair to pass through in order to be
cut. This technology is used by most of
Philips’s competitors in their facial elec-
tric shavers as well as other devices. As
previously mentioned, Philips uses rotat-
ing blades in all their facial shavers for
men, but use this technology along with
scissor like edge cutters in their electric shavers targeted for females. The performance
level of foil shavers depend a lot on the thickness of the foil layer and the quality of
the blades below it. Other important factors are implemented features designed to
guide long hairs that lie flat into the holes in the foil layer to be cut. Foil shavers are
suitable for all parts of the body, depending on implementations, such as blade size.
==PAGE:26==
3.1 Components
20
Figure 3.6: Xenon Flash Lamp for a IPL
device[22].
Intense pulsed light: This hair re-
moval technology is a lot different from
others considered in this project.
All
other considered devices/product fami-
lies share fundamental principles and/or
components, while intense pulsed light
(IPL) devices does not. IPL hair removal
is achieved by pulsation of a gentle light
onto the desired body part. With mul-
tiple use in the same region long term
hair removal can be achieved as the light
puts the hair and its root to sleep. With
usage hair growth usually decrease grad-
ually. The hair removal element in this
case is therefore not a cutter or a knife but a non-coherent light from a xenon flash
lamp. The operation depends a lot on skin and hair color tone and has to be adjusted
in accordance to that.[23]
Figure 3.7: Philips
Satinelle
Prestige
Epilator head.
Epilators:
Epilators differ from
other considered hair removal/grooming
technologies in that way that they do not
cut or trim the hair, but remove it com-
pletely along with its roots.
An epila-
tor is a mechanical tweezer, where mul-
tiple hairs are grasped simultaneously by
the mechanism. The performance level
of epilators is mostly dependent on the
number of tweezers in the mechanism,
hair-catches per minutes, usually run in
tenths of thousands and how gentle the
epilation is. Gentle epilation is usually
achieved with add on features that mas-
sage the skin before and/or after the epi-
lation.
3.1.2
Power Source
The hair removal/grooming devices operation time depends on their power source.
Most of the devices are equipped with a battery for a cordless operation, while oth-
ers need to be plugged in to a power outlet with a cord during operation. Some of
the ones that are equipped with a rechargeable battery can still be operated while
plugged in for charging, while others have a special feature that prevents operation
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Components
21
while plugged in. This feature is only implemented in their waterproof products to
ensure the users safety during operation.
Products that are not equipped with a battery are usually low performance and cheap
ones, ones designed for professional usages or energy intensive devices, such as IPL
products.
Figure 3.8: Visual comparison of different batteries from Philips hair removal/-
grooming devices.
Dimensions of the simplified drawings are scaled
for dimensional comparison.
Far left: Ni-MH battery from Satinelle Prestige Epilator. Mid left: Li-
ion battery from a MultiGroom 5000. Mid right: Li-ion battery from a
Series 5000 shaver. Far right: Ni-MH battery from a OneBlade.
There are multiple different types of batteries in Philips’s hair removal and groom-
ing products. The main difference being whether they are rechargeable or disposable
ones. The type of rechargeable battery is also an important factor in the performance
level of a hair removal/grooming device. The rechargeable batteries are either nickel
metal hydride batteries (Ni-MH) or lithium ion batteries (Li-ion). Li-ion batteries
outperform Ni-MH batteries in most aspects, they are both lighter and smaller, have
lower self discharge rate, higher energy density and shorter charging time.[24][25] Ni-
MH batteries are however much cheaper and therefore used in cheaper models, while
Li-ion batteries are used in the more expensive ones.
Disposable batteries are then used in some of the lower end models of female hair
removal devices and in small deceives such as precision trimmers. Those are either
powered by AA or AAA battery/batteries depending on their size and energy need.
Operation and charging time are an important performance factor, that is easy for
customers to realise and compare between product variants and across manufactur-
ers.
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Components
22
Battery technology is developing rapidly and the batteries are a standard, usually ex-
pensive items that are most likely purchased from a specialized vendor and installed
in the devices on the assembly line. Therefore, by optimizing and standardizing the
batteries interfaces and dimensions and gain further component pooling in that area
across product families beneficial effects could be achieved through economics of scale.
3.1.3
Water Seal
To make their products resistant from water damage Philips has developed and uti-
lized different techniques.
In smaller devices, such as the OneBlade and bikini trimmers water resistance is
achieved with the plastic outer shell, where a o-ring is placed between the top and
bottom shell interface to make sure no water is able to penetrate the device and
damage the electronics.
In the water resistant models of the beard trimmer, hair clippers and the series shavers
water is prevented from the sensitive internals with the same means. The devices are
built up with a inner shell that is closed off with a water resistant top cover. Inside
this inner shell all the water sensitive functional units, such as the motor, pcb and
battery are stored. As can be seen in Figure 3.9 water resistance is achieved by the
same means across these product families, adjusted to the dimensions and functional
units inside the inner shell.
Higher end models of female hair removal products are water resistant as well. Func-
tional units are placed on a bracket that is slid into the shell and closed off with a
water seal lid that goes over the drive shave, see far right of Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Left and Mid: Water resistant inner shell of MultiGroom 5000 and Se-
ries 5000 shaver
Right: Different means of water resistance in Philips’s hair removal/-
grooming devices.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Components
23
3.1.4
Motor
All considered devices are equipped with a standard closed motor.
There are no
specified power output information on the motors of the units that were disassembled
and no information in manuals on applicable replacement units.
Similarly to the
previously mentioned batteries the motors are likely standard items, purchased from
a specialized vendor, depending on the dimension and desired power output of the
device they are installed in. Therefore by dimension and interface sharing, component
pooling in that area across product families could be achieved through economics of
scale.
Figure 3.10: Dimensional and drive shaft comparison of motors from Satinelle Pres-
tige Epilator, MultiGroom 5000, Series 5000 shaver and OneBlade.
3.1.5
Drive Shaft
Rotational power is transformed from the motor to the hair removal/grooming ele-
ment through a drive shaft. The considered devices have different interfaces on the
drive shaft. Those drive shafts are either connected directly to the moving mechanism
of the hair removal/grooming element or in the Series shavers case, through gearing
and a coupling.
Figure 3.11: Drive shaft mechanism of Satinelle Prestige Epilator, MultiGroom
5000, Series 5000 shaver and OneBlade.
3.1.6
Electrical Circuit
Electric current is transferred from the power source to the motor in two different
main ways. For devices not equipped with a battery the connector from the wall plug
is directly wired to the motor along with the needed electronic elements.
In all battery powered devices the electric current and all electronic elements are
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Components
24
included on a printed circuit board (pcb), which is then connected to the motor. The
pcb is usually attached to a bracket that mechanically supports the battery and/or
the motor within the inner shell. The shape and size of the pcb is usually the same
within product families but differs across them, based on necessary electric features
and dimensions. Different realisation of a pcb for some of the considered product
families can be seen on the left side of Figure 3.12 and their dimensional comparison
on the right side.
Figure 3.12: Left: Pcb, inner shell and functional units of Satinelle Prestige Epila-
tor, MultiGroom 5000, Series 5000 shaver and OneBlade
Right: Dimensional comparison of the same pcb’s.
3.1.7
Shell
The outer shell of the hair removal and grooming devices has two main functions, that
is serve as a housing that protects and mechanically supports it’s internal components
and work as a handle during operation by the user. The shell is usually somewhat
similar within product families, but differs between them. Even though all designed
to be held in a human hand they differ a lot in size and shape depending on product
family and/or product variant. In Figure 3.1 examples of shells can be seen. Detailed
visual overview of outer shells can be seen in Appendix B. Different material, color
and/or finish is typically the thing that customers notice the most when comparing
products before purchase. Typically the outer shell is made of plastic, in some cases
with added rubber for increased comfort during operation. Top performance level
devices of Philips’s male grooming, shaver, beard trimmer and multi grooming have
an out shell made from aluminum for an exquisite quality look and feel.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Components
25
Figure 3.13: Outer shell of Satinelle Prestige Epilator, MultiGroom 5000, Series
5000 shaver and OneBlade.
3.1.8
Cutting Length
Desired hair cutting length is achieved in most cases by ad-on combs that differ in size.
In some cases the combs can be adjusted to allow for more variance in cutting length,
while in others they are fixed. How these combs are attached to the hair removal or
grooming device differ between product families and sometimes even within product
varieties. Usually the comb is made of plastic and includes a fastening mechanism,
designed to attached firmly to the devise. An example of different realisation of such
length control combs can be seen in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Length control comb for a MultiGroom 5000, Beard Trimmer 5000,
SatineShave Prestige, OneBlade PRO and OneBlade.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
In optimization projects it is important to investigate and understand the current
situation, as well as identifying the desired outcome. In order to gain a deep un-
derstanding on Philips’s current hair removal and grooming devices architectures and
platforms thorough analysis were carried out. Along with data collection, the analysis
is one of the, if not the most extensive part of this thesis project, as the subjects have
not been thoroughly considered in this way before, with the intentions of developing
architectures across different product families.
Firstly a detailed overview of the current situation is presented and discussed. Data
availability and the analysis approach are then described. The current architectures
and platforms are presented, discussed and thoroughly analysed. Product variants
are then considered in relation to market and market approach. Thereafter, similar
analysis were conducted on another mayor manufacturer of hair removal and groom-
ing devices, Braun. This was done in order to create a detailed comparison of the
product and market approach by two mayor manufacturers in the same field. Lastly,
as a foundation for the focus and concept design, the most important findings from
the analysis are further presented, discussed and concluded on.
4.1
Current Situation
As introduced in chapter 1, Philips is an international conglomerate corporation.
With that, economics of scale can be achieved with shared resources, such as over-
head expense and greater quantity in purchased raw material and components. By
engaging in different businesses under the same corporation, subsidiaries can gain ac-
cess to cheaper founding and an expanded customer base, and the corporation brand
gain greater recognition. However, a known downside of such a corporate construction
is ineﬀiciency due to misaligned goals between subsidiaries and/or departments.[4]
The thesis project is motivated by a discussion the supervising professor, Niels Hen-
rik Mortensen had with associates at Philips about independent development and
management of product families and therefore lack of sharing across them. A holistic
overview and comparison of Philips’s hair removal and grooming devices product fam-
ilies and their program structure has not been done before neither by, nor for Philips.
Comprehensive analysis on the different product families and comparison between
them would be needed in order to explore the possibilities of increased sharing be-
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Current Situation
27
tween product families and simplification of the hair removal and grooming deceives
program in general. To achieve a overview of all the different product families as well
as product variants within them, the analysis is performed with a high level approach,
where the main focus is on the big picture rather than on specific details. Along with
that, focus is set on identifying possible improvement areas across the considered
product program, e.g. by comparison to competitors.
4.1.1
Data Availability & Collection
As previously mentioned in chapter 2 the thesis project was not carried out in cooper-
ation with Philips. Therefore all data collected and used in this analysis was collected
by the thesis report author.
Lack of inside information from Philips somewhat limits the possibility of numerical
analysis. Detailed market analysis based on sales numbers, revenue and profit are
therefore unavailable. Such analysis could give an interesting view in regards to dif-
ferent architectures and how they contribute to the companies operation.
Discussions and data from Philips’s designers and/or other solutions responsibles
could have better explained how the hair removal and grooming devices are designed
and developed, by whom, where they are located and who they report to. Cost infor-
mation, such as research, design and development cost, raw material cost and vendor
components cost is as well part of information unavailable to the author and therefore
excluded from the thesis project scope. These limitations however open up another
interesting approach to such analysis. By investigating and analyzing the subject
from the outside in of such depth as done in this thesis project, valuable insight is
achieved, based on aspects that otherwise might not have been considered. The out-
side in approach also gives a valuable example of a customers view when considering
such products for purchase. With possible future collaboration with Philips and ad-
ditional inside information available later on, the findings can then be adjusted and
considered accordingly.
The data collection process was extremely time consuming and required a lot of
manual work. Most of the data was collected online. Therefore the data had to be
gathered, filtered and adjusted to allow for a fair comparison during the analysis.
The data collection focus can be split up in two main ways, information available
to customers and information on parts and technology, mostly gathered from disas-
sembly of products, both performed by the author during the thesis project work
and from others that have performed similar disassembly and shared their process
online. The information given by manufacturers to customers were mostly used in
order to compare products based on performance, price, technology and etc., while
the disassembly was aimed towards gathering information on the physical realization
of design units, whether they are standard designs, modules or product specific as
well as information on their dimensions and interfaces between them.
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Current Situation
28
4.1.2
Market Analysis
For the market analysis, offered hair removal and grooming products by Philips are
considered, based on world regions, purpose, performance, price and etc.. To allow
for a detailed analysis, the products are are divided into segments based on these
considered factors. By use of the so called Power Tower, introduced by Meyer &
Lehnerd[26], the products are segmented and examined if Philips has managed to
strategically construct their product portfolio to fulfil customers needs, based on
those considered factors. How application of architectures and platforms is applied
throughout these different segments, performance and market scaling achieved is also
considered.
Market segmentation is the process of dividing a diverse group of a market into rela-
tively more identical smaller groups, based on characteristics, such as needs, location,
interests and etc.. By doing so each segment can be targeted more directly based on
needs.[27]
Philips sells their hair removal and grooming devices all over the world. They have
different websites based on the location (IP address) of the viewer. The available
products and/or product variants vary between the different sites. In many cases the
difference in product variants can be minor, such as different included accessories or
different packaging, while in other cases the difference can be more significant and
have effects on performance and/or operation. Hair removal and grooming devices
are small, easily handled and stock items in most electronic stores and relevant online
stores. Therefore, they are easily accessible and market segments regional borders
unclear. Performance level of hair removal and grooming devices depends highly on
the type of product, or product family as many of them have different purposes. It is
therefore challenging to define clear market, performance and cost segments for hair
removal and grooming devices.
Based on the performed analysis, Philips clearly differentiates their offered products
between regions of the world. For parts of the analysis the offered products is there-
fore segmented in three, products offered in Europe, USA and Asia & Pacific. In
other parts of the analysis, the market is segmented based on the hair removal or
grooming need as products designed to cater to the same customer need have shared
purpose.
For the high level approach to the analysis, the performance level of Philip’s hair
removal products is segmented into a typical three levels, Low, Medium and High
performance devices. Product families and products variants within them are in many
cases different from one another and their features and performance level dependant
on different things.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Current Situation
29
Low Performance: Simple version of hair removal or grooming devices. Lower
end components, such as hair removal element material and battery type. Typically
don’t include extra features or functions. Somewhat limited performance, fits for less
demanding customers.
Medium Performance: More advanced products, usually equipped with higher
quality components. High enough performance to cater to the needs of most cus-
tomers. Some or many accessories and extra features available.
High Performance: Products designed for the most demanding customers. High
quality components, such as titanium blades, lithium batteries and etc.. Aluminum
shell in some cases for a more prestige fell and look. Luxury accessories and features
included, e.g. LED screens, wireless charging and automated self cleaning stations.
The performance step between low and medium performance devices is typically
much more that between medium and high performance devices. As previously men-
tioned medium performance items are in most cases high enough quality and perform
well enough for most customers, while high performance items are targeted towards
more prestige group of customers, looking for something a little extra.
In Figure 4.1 the considered data was constructed in a power tower construction.
The offered products are segmented based on the previously described world regions
and performance level. Products within the same product family are given the same
color and number of different product variants within each segments counted. On the
top right of each segment the overall number of different product variants within the
segments can be seen. Market predictions for the different regions are also presented.
In order to understand how these different products appeal to customers, 100 most
sold items lists on Amazon in relevant hair removal products and grooming devices
category and world region was investigated.[28][29][30] If a item within a segment was
featured on a top 100 selling list, the items place on the list is presented within the
segment. Therefore the more numbers featured in the yellow star text box, the more
items within the segment were on the considered top lists. The lower the numbers
are, the higher they appear on the list.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Current Situation
30
Figure 4.1: Power Tower structure for products offered by Philips worldwide, based
on world region and performance level.
Figure 4.2: Total number of product variants in each world region.
The total number of product variants of each product family, available in each of
the three world regions can be seen in Figure 4.2. Number of variants was considered
based on world region because some of the variants are available in more them. The
number of product variance vary from 2 types of precision trimmers in Asia & Pacific
to 48 variants of shavers available in Europe.
If the only difference between two
products are included accessories it is not considered a product variance. In Figure 4.3
the available product variants are presented again, now broken down into market and
performance segments, like done in the power tower in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Current Situation
31
Figure 4.3: Number of product variants of each product family within market seg-
ment.
As can be expected the highest number of variants is within the Series Shaver
family.
The extremely high number of medium performance variants available in
Europe is worth consideration. As will be further elaborated on later in the thesis
report, Philips does achieve product variation with standard designs and component
commonality within some product families. However, as this high number of variants
does not seem to follow a trend it is diﬀicult to imagine why the emphasize on it mostly
in regards to the shavers, especially in mid performance ones, offered in Europe.
Figure 4.4: The bar graph represents the number of product variants within each
market segment in Figure 4.1, while the overlaying black line represents
number of products on a relevant top selling list in each segments.
As can be seen in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.4, the product variants in each segment
range from 16 to 41. The offered products in each world region are very similar per-
formance wise. Interestingly, there are no hair clippers available from Philips in the
USA based on the considered data. In low performance deceives in the Asia & Pacific
region, 12 of the 19 available product variants are on the 100 most sold items lists on
Amazon, while only 1 of the 16 available product variants in the high performance
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Current Situation
32
segment in the same region is on the same list. Similarly, most popular items in the
USA are in the low performance segments and only 1 in the high performance, while
in Europe two product variants in each segment is featured on a top 100 selling list.
From this it can be concluded that while in most cases product variety Philips offers,
seems to spread the customers interests across products, resulting in only few of the
items being top selling items, while in Asia & Pacific they really have achieved value
adding variety within that segment, as most low performance items are high selling
and popular items.
As the hypothesis of the thesis project is to inspect the possibilities of increas-
ing sharing and commonality between product platforms and architectures, a power
tower was also constructed with a different approach than previously discussed. As
previously described, while product variants differ between them, the three different
regional market segments are a lot similar. For the purpose of the high level approach
of these analysis the focus will be on one of the previously described market segments,
Europe, as the company is European and the Europe market segment included the
most variety of products.
In accordance with the hypothesis the product portfolio is considered based on func-
tionality of products. This is done in order to categorize products that share a purpose
or are designed to cater to the same or a similar need of the customer. In order to
segment the market based on customers need and thereby categorize products based
on their purpose, the needs have to be thoroughly considered. To allow for segmen-
tation of different product families and variants the market was segmented based on
hair removal.
The performance levels of the hair removal and grooming devices is defined in the
same way as in the previous power tower in Figure 4.1. So are most other elements of
the power tower, such as the product families and number of variants within them in
each market segment, total number of products in each market segment, number of
items in each segment that is on a top selling list on Amazon. Other items included
in the following power tower are price comparison and for what body part/s the de-
vice is designed for. The functionality based market segments in the power tower are
defined as follows.
Clean Shave: Extremely close cut of facial hair, resulting in a smooth shave.
Clean shave is a shave where the hairs are cut shorter than 0.4mm. Closeness of
shave depends on cutting element, face countering and mechanism related to those
features.
Trim/Cut: Hair trim or cut where the hair is trimmed or cut 0.4mm or longer.
Complete Hair Removal: Hair removal processes where the hair is completely
removed, along with its root. This is achieved either by pulling the hair out with its
root with an epilator or by putting the hair and root to sleep or killed with IPL device.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Current Situation
33
Figure 4.5: Power Tower structure for products offered by Philips in Europe, based
on hair removal or grooming purpose and performance level.
As can be seen in Figure 4.5 the pricing of items is mostly in accordance with
the performance. However, according to the analysis, devices designed for trimming
and cutting are relatively cheaper than products from the other two market segments.
That is also the segment which includes most different product families. This is in
accordance with what could be inspected as multiple product families within that
segment, such as beard trimmers, hair clippers and multi grooming tools are based
on the same or similar technology. Devices that share so many functional aspects
and purpose are exceptional examples of things that could and should be designed
and developed within the same architecture. Whether or not they are will be further
elaborated on when the architectures and platforms behind these products will be
presented and further discussed in subsection 4.1.5.
Interestingly, not many items Philips offer in Europe are popular enough to be a top
seller on Amazon in the UK and in fact no product designed for females are on the top
100 most sold items in the relevant category. This is in no way enough information
to conclude on the popularity of the products but should give an interesting idea of
market appeal.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Current Situation
34
Figure 4.6: The bar graph represents the number of product variants within each
market segment in Figure 4.5, while the overlaying black line represents
number of products on a relevant top selling list in each segments.
As can be seen in Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.6 only one market segment is repre-
sented by more than one product on a top 100 most sold items list. That is the
case for high performance cutting and trimming devices, in four other segments, one
item makes it to the relevant top seller list. This is similar as identified worldwide
in Figure 4.1. There is no clear reason for why there are so few items that reach top
selling list but is it possible that it could be due to high variation. By offering to
much product variety sales can spread unnecessarily across those product variants,
resulting in higher complexity and cost and therefore lower profit margin per prod-
uct variation. To much variation can also inadvertently kill sales by overwhelming
customers, resulting in them turning their business elsewhere.[31]
To successfully develop further platform sharing between different product families
the current situation has to be considered. When the product portfolio of Philips
is considered in regards to these different defined market segments, three out of the
four strategical ways to implement platforms into a market place can be seen, vertical
scaling, horizontal scaling and niche specific platform, lacking only a clear beachhead
strategy.[26] From the analysis and as initially suspected Philips has achieved decent
implementation of platforms within product families. Therefore when considered in
regards to purpose or function and performance level, in Figure 4.7 there is clear
vertical scaling of products within functional purpose market segments. As all IPL
devices fall into the same segment and are fundamentally different from the rest they
are considered a niche specific platform in this case.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Current Situation
35
Figure 4.7: Product platforms and scaling in regards to functional market segments.
When considered in regards to regional market segments and performance level
there is again clear vertical scaling between products of same product families based
on performance level. As well there is a lot of sharing and scaling horizontally based on
world region. However, when three out of four considered strategies can be identified
within a product portfolio strategy it is diﬀicult to say that there is a strategy being
followed across product families, across regions and/or functionality.
Figure 4.8: Product platforms and scaling in regards to regional market segments.
Based on the market analysis there are many positive things, such as wide range
of products for most hair removal and grooming purposes or needs. However, there
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Current Situation
36
are some challenges as well as some of the market segments seem to have extensive
and unclear product variety. There are also opportunities identified in regards to
the hypothesis of increase sharing across product families or platforms. By reducing
complexity and simplification of products serving the same market segments Philips
can benefit greatly.
The possibility of that can depend on other product and/or
component based factors, which will be further considered in the following chapters.
4.1.3
Regional or Global Architectures
As discussed in subsection 4.1.2 there is regional difference between variants of hair re-
moval and grooming products. In this part of the analysis, a high level visual overview
of the offered products, based on world region market segments is presented and dis-
cussed. Minor variations that were identified during the analysis, such as different
included accessories (extra blades, included pouch and etc.) or special packaging were
not considered different product variations in the presented overview.
Figure 4.9: Overview of product variants of Philips hair removal and grooming de-
vices in different segments based on world region, where products with
the same colored outline are within the same product family.
The overview is not meant to give a detailed review of the different product
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Current Situation
37
variations, but rather a high level visual overview, to visualize the sharing between
world region market segments.
As can be seen in Figure 4.9 products vary a lot
based on for what region of the world they are intended. However, from the analysis
there is no clear factors that explain those distinguishing product variations.
In
many cases it is diﬀicult to figure out how and why products differ from similar
products, both within region and between different world regions. All rechargeable
devices are designed to operate at the range from 100 to 240 V so regional wall outlet
electricity voltage difference is not an issue and in fact, only a special wall plug, or
an adaptor is needed based on location.
Similarly if there were such operational
limits, there should be no sharing between regions as the limitations should effect the
whole product range. There are clear opportunities identified for Philips to simplify
the product variations based on world regions. Without a clear factor that prevents
such sharing it is diﬀicult to justify such difference between the offered products. For
comparison, similar overview of Braun’s product variation based on the same world
regions is presented in Figure 4.27
4.1.4
Product Analysis
In the following section, the analyses are focused on the physical realisation of the con-
sidered product families. The physical structure of products and their design units,
considered and discussed in this section is based on disassembly of selected products
of various product families, as well as thorough investigation of repair manuals and
spare part catalogues.
With the current product portfolio management approach, each product family is
considered and developed independently from the other. By doing so, Philips has
managed to utilize sharing and performance scaling within individual product fami-
lies. However, in order to successfully develop and implement architectures and plat-
forms across product families, they have to be considered with a holistic approach.
To do so, the current product portfolio is constructed as a Product Family Master
Plan (PFMP). For overview and high level approach purposes, individual product
variants within product families (product numbers) are not considered specifically
in the developed PFMP. Variations within product family numbers are considered
features within their architecture.
The PFMP is a tool that can be used to generate an overview of a variation within
a product family. Such an overview can be beneficial and helpful in distinguishing
between value adding variations and non-value adding variations within the consid-
ered product family. By doing so the already existing products, product families and
design units can be used in order to identify already existing or possible standard
designs and future architecture/s.[2]
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Current Situation
38
Figure 4.10: PFMP of Philips’s hair re-
moval and grooming prod-
ucts
from
Appendix
A
thumbnail.
In order to provide a comprehensive
overview of a product family structure
and variation within it it, it has to be
considered from multiple aspects. In a
PFMP a product family is considered
from three main aspects, or viewpoints,
Customer view, Engineering view and
Part view.[2]
In the customer view, features, speci-
fications and application characteristics
within the product family should be pre-
sented from the customers or the mar-
kets viewpoint. In the engineering view
the products is described from an engi-
neering viewpoint. What is behind a fea-
ture or functionality of a product.
In
the engineering view value adding va-
riety and non-value adding variety can
easily be identified, e.g.
when a same
or similar functionality or feature within
the product family is achieved with dif-
ferent engineering principles and/or per-
formed by different organs. Finally, the
part view is meant to give an overview
of the physical realisation of products within a product family.
How engineering
principles and/or organs are realised at a part level. Value adding and non-value
adding variety can as well easily be identified within the part view, e.g. where the
physical realisation of a principle is achieved with multiple different parts throughout
a product family. To connect elements of the PFMP between different viewpoints
they are linked together with causal links.
A well documented product family and a successfully developed overview should con-
tribute to better strategical decisions regarding the product family and its variety by
limiting non-value adding variety and product complexity, especially in the engineer-
ing and part view.[2]
Due to the high level approach of the analysis and lack of detailed information, such as
part numbers of individual components, the part view is excluded from this analysis.
As the purpose of the project is to develop architecture/s across product families, spe-
cific parts and/or design units on a part level are not considered. The focus is directed
towards the current commonality of design units and their relative dimensional com-
parison and engineering principles behind variations. In order to successfully develop
improved architecture, built on increased sharing across product families and thereby
reduce complexity, it is important to thoroughly investigate and fully understand how
variety is realised across the product families and the engineering principles behind
that.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Current Situation
39
The developed PFMP of Philips hair removal and grooming devices can be seen in
Appendix A. As previously mentioned, product variations within the same product
are not specifically considered in the PFMP. Each product variant included in the
PFMP can therefore be considered a representative of all variations available within
it. Therefore, some features, specifications and/or characteristics could not be in-
cluded in all product variations within the same product number, but if market in
the PFMP, at least one of the variations under that product number is available with
the considered element.
Although already introduced and briefly discussed in chapter 3, the main customer
requirements considered in the PFMP and the engineering principles used to fulfil
those requirements will be further described here below.
Main findings from the
PFMP overview will then be presented and elaborated on.
Customer view
The customer view represents features, specifications and application characteris-
tics of products as they appear to the customer. These elements will be described
here below. The customer view part of the PFMP can be seen in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Customer view of the PFMP developed for hair removal and grooming
devices from Philips.
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Current Situation
40
Gender: Philips targets its products towards different genders. On their website
products are either directed towards male or female users. No products are adver-
tised for all genders or gender neutral. Some products are better suited to specific
gender/s while there are others, such as body hair removal products that should be
equally suited for all genders, such as body hair removal devices.
Type: The current hair removal and grooming device program at Philips can be
split up in product families based on product types. Within these product types there
is clear scaling of performance and sharing of design units with some standard designs.
Product types are named after their purpose or hair removal/grooming characteris-
tics. This is an intuitive way of naming the products and universally implemented
throughout the hair removal and grooming business as people usually are looking for
items to fulfill some specific hair removal and/or grooming need. Performance level of
products targeted towards male users are indicated uniformly across product types,
where the increasing product number indicates increased quality and/or performance.
This is not the case in products targeted towards female users, which can make perfor-
mance and quality comparison more diﬀicult. Overview of different product families
based on their purpose or function can be seen in Figure 3.1. The following product
types are: Shavers, OneBlades, Beard Trimmers, Hair Clippers, Multigrooming kits,
IPL Lumea, Epilators, Electric shavers for females and Trimmers.
Body part: An important factor for customers is for what body part/s the de-
vices are meant. Many devices can be used on multiple body parts, sometimes with
interchangeable heads that include different hair removal elements. The body parts
categories in the analysis are: Hair, beard, body, ear and nose, bikini area, feet &
legs and eyebrows.
Figure 4.12: Body parts.
Hair length: Complete hair removal, smooth shave and possible length settings
are important factors for customers when considering hair removal or grooming de-
vices. In many cases versatility is the most important factor, while in other high
precision of specific purpose is of main interest of the customer. Some products can
cut the hair across these different categories, while others are designed for a more
specified hair removal or cutting.
The possible cutting lengths of the considered
products are as follows:
• Remove completely
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Current Situation
41
• Smooth < 0.5mm
• 0.5-3 mm
• 4-10 mm
• 11-20 mm
• >20 mm
Price: As in most cases, price is an important factor to customers. From inter-
views and research it was clear that in many cases price was by far the most deciding
factor or customers, if not the only one. Customers usually decide on a price and
pick a product within their limits, rather than considering specific product features.
The price range of product was defined as follow:
• <20 £
• 20-50 £
• 50-100 £
• 100-200 £
• 200-300 £
• >300 £
Operation: The devices are either operable corded, cordless or both. The op-
eration of a product is important for customers as they will need do decide it they
want the flexibility and comfort of cordless use on the account of having to charge
or replace the batteries in their device. Cord operated devices are reliable in that
way that they never run out of charge but obviously are dependant on continuous
external power during operation, corded operated devices are also not showerproof to
ensure the safety of the user.
Showerproof: A binary field in the PFMP, devices are either showerproof or not.
Hair removal process can benefit from being performed in shower or bath as warm
water and other liquids can soften the skin and hair, easing the process.
Less mess: A binary field in the PFMP, a special clean up system. Beard trim
without hairs all over the place. A feature currently only available in one product
variant.
Dry or Wet: Is the device designed for wet or dry use. Wet use means the de-
vice can be operated with shaving cream in order to achieve maximum comfort and
excellent shaving results.
Cleaning: How is the device cleaned. Cleaning of hair removal and grooming de-
vices is extremely important and can in some cases have great impact on performance
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Current Situation
42
and lifetime of the device. Possible options are: self cleaning, manual wet cleaning
and manual dry cleaning. Where self cleaning means that the user does not have to
clean the device manually. Manual wet cleaning means the manual cleaning can be
performed with water and/or other applicable liquid cleaning solutions. Manual dry
cleaning means the cleaning can not be performed in water or other cleaning liquids
and has to be performed manually, this is the most sensitive case as devises not meant
for wet cleaning can be severely damages or even ruined it they come in contact with
water.
Compatible with App: A binary field in the PFMP, devices are either smart-
phone compatible or not.
By connecting the device to a smartphone application,
customers can f.ex. monitor performance of the device and customize settings.
In Figure 4.13 possible length settings and price range of the different product
families is compared. Those are two mayor factors customers consider when choosing
a hair removal and/or grooming device. There is a lot of overlap in cutting length
between products with same or similar purpose in the range from 0.4mm to 5mm and
there is some overlapping up to around 20mm cutting length. The value of this will
be further considered based on engineering principles behind the options and parts
used. Most products vary in the price range from around £20 to £120, while shavers
are available in a wide range from £20 to around £400 and Lumea IPL devices only
available in high price range between around £300 to around £450. How performance
and therefore price scaling is achieved will as well be further considered based on en-
gineering principles and components.
Figure 4.13: Possible cutting length range and price range comparison of different
product families.
Engineering view
As previously mentioned, the engineering view provides an overview of the engi-
neering principles behind the physical realisation of the features, specifications and
application characteristics in the customer view. The engineering view can be used
to identify overly complex product family portfolio, where same or similar features
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Current Situation
43
are achieved with different methods. By doing so each method or physical realisation
has to be developed, maintained, manufactured, purchased and etc. independently
from one another, resulting in higher cost and degree of complexity.
Figure 4.14: Engineering view of the PFMP developed for hair removal and groom-
ing devices from Philips.
Hair removal Technology: Philips relies on five different fundamental engi-
neering principles for hair removal and grooming. As previously described in sub-
section 3.1.1 the function of the device is mostly dependent on the hair removal
technology. Therefore, the variation is considered highly value adding as it is funda-
mentally what makes one product family different from another. The five different
identified principles are: Individual rotation heads, foil shave cutting, Scissor like
cutting, epilation, IPL.
Figure 4.15: Drawings of hair removal and grooming principles as they appear in
the sharing matrix in Appendix B.
Adjustable length setting: A binary field in the PFMP, where products either
have adjustable length setting option or not.
Length control: Specifies how adjustable length setting is achieved on products
that have the option as defined in the binary filed above. The different engineering
principles identified that achieve the adjustable length settings are: Click on comb,
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Current Situation
44
Slide on comb, comb and scroll. The length control is achieved with different principles
based on the device and/or the functional head they are intended for.
There is
clear value in possible length adjustments of hair removal and grooming devices, by
increasing length options the usability of the device is increased simultaneously. It
is not clear if the variation is value adding or not since the length control units
are usually simple plastic pieces and therefore cheap in production.
However, by
standardization of interfaces that connects the length control to the device, Philips
can simplify production of the items a lot and reduce complexity by sharing the add
on pieces across products and product families.
Figure 4.16: Drawings of adjustable length settings principles as they appear in the
sharing matrix in Appendix B.
Power Source: Describes the energy storage or continuous provision for opera-
tion of the device. The detected engineering principles for energy storage and/or pro-
vision are: Corded, rechargeable Lithium battery, rechargeable Nickel-Metal Battery,
disposable battery. There is a clear value adding variety between these different power
storage and provision elements as operation time, charging time and convenience are
extremely dependant on the power source. However, there are opportunities as well
as f.ex. dimensional difference between batteries and therefore battery interface with
the device vary, without adding clear value. As mentioned in subsection 3.1.2 batter-
ies are promptly developing and to ensure competitiveness in battery life and quality,
usually purchased from specialized vendors. By standardizing the battery slots across
different product families, batteries could be purchased in greater quantity resulting
in cost reduction.
Figure 4.17: Drawings of battery power principles as they appear in the sharing
matrix in Appendix B.
Motor: As all considered devices are equipped with the same motor principle
the field is a binary choice in the PFMP. All devices are equipped with a standard
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Current Situation
45
model closed motor. The motor units are previously described and discussed in sub-
section 3.1.4. This is considered a clever way as the motors are cheap items, usually
bought in from specialised vendors. However they do vary in size between different
product families and improvement possibility identified in standardizing the motor
slot or interface further so the same motor units can be utilized across more products
to achieve greater economical scaling in purchasing.
Replacement head: A binary field in the PFMP, devices are either equipped
with a removable functional top (head) or not. Devices that are equipped with such
an interchangeable top are much more versatile than others, as special function is
achieved with the cutting elements, located in the head.
Head replacement interface: Describes the engineering principles behind in-
terchangeable heads. The utilized methods are Philips SmartClick, Slide, click on
mechanism, click and rotate mechanism. As can be seen in Appendix B, in most
cases the same principle is utilized within the same product family. There is no clear
value adding variety in the different ways of interchangeable head realisation. By fur-
ther standardization of interfaces between devices and the removable head, Philips
can simplify their engineering behind the function to a great extent. Another ben-
eficial factor with further standardization would be possible sharing of replacement
heads. Theoretically, if Philips had only one principle of fastening interchangeable
heads on their devices, all replacement heads could be designed and developed to
work across product families and same interchangeable function could be achieved
across them.
Figure 4.18: Drawings of interchangeable head principles as they appear in the
sharing matrix in Appendix B.
Water resistance: A binary field in the PFMP where products are either water
resistant or not. The water resistance is depended on if the device is operable corded or
not as devices designed to be used plugged into a power outlet are not water resistant.
Water resistant technology: Describes the engineering principle that protects
the sensitive internal functional elements from water damage. The water resistance
is achieved with a combination of the device shell and a special water seal. The water
resistance principle is the same within product families but varies across them. The
main detected water resistance principles are: Water proof inner shell, top shell water
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Current Situation
46
proof, O-Ring. There is no clear value adding variety between a water proof inner
shell in male grooming devices and a water proof top shell in female hair removal and
grooming devices. Those two principles seem to have been decided on and developed
independently from one another.
Figure 4.19: Drawings of water proofing principles as they appear in the sharing
matrix in Appendix B.
Shell: The outer shell of the considered devices is usually made of plastic. It is
cheap, easy manufacturing process, where color or material variations can simply be
achieved. High end male product models however are usually equipped with a outer
shell made of aluminum to demonstrate its high quality and give a distinguished look
and feel. This is considered to be a value adding variety as the most expensive, high
end products usually appeal to a special type of customers, looking for something
extra. A high quality finish and look of an aluminum shell is considered to achieve
that purpose and therefore add value.
Vacuum System: A single product variant, the beard trimmer 7000 series is
equipped with a special vacuum cleaner designed to reduce needed clean up after
beard trim.
This is considered an interesting feature as hair and beard clean up
after trim can be inconvenient. The product was specially investigated due to this
distinguished feature and the product seems to vary much from others within the
same product family due to the vacuum cleaner feature. The vacuum cleaner feature
is large, compared to the overall dimensions of a beard trimmer. The feature does
not seem to have been developed as a add on feature included in a well defined archi-
tecture but the specific product variant rather developed specifically to launch this
special feature. According to research the feature does not seem to have gained a lot
of popularity, which could be the reason it has not been implemented further in the
product portfolio.
Bluetooth: A single product variant, the Series 7000 shaver is equipped with
Bluetooth, allowing it to exchange data with smartphones equipped with a special
application. With that advanced personalised settings can be set up and performance
and needed maintenance of the shaver monitored. The feature does not seem to make
a significant impact on other aspects of the Series 7000 shaver as the needed tech-
nology to transmit data via Bluetooth is extremely small. This is considered to be
a value adding variety as next generation of hair removal and grooming devices will
most likely be more and more connectable with other devices. By further develop-
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Current Situation
47
ment of the feature within boundaries set by the architecture it can be implemented
on more devices across different product families.
As previously mentioned the part view of the PFMP was not developed for the high
level approach of the thesis project. However, to allow for realistic development of
shared architecture/s across product families the main functional components have to
be considered and compared. This was done on a top level, where specific details were
disregarded and focus was on engineering principles, component dimensions and types.
This analysis was done to provide a overview of the current situation, how customer
requirements and engineering principles are physically realised and how they differ
or are shared, both within product families and across them. The overview can be
seen in Figure 4.20 and in full size, along with explanation and guide in Appendix B.
The design units considered in the developed sharing matrix will be elaborated on,
discussed and most interesting findings presented here below.
Figure 4.20: The component sharing matrix of hair removal and grooming devices
from Philips developed for the analysis, full size can be seen in Ap-
pendix B.
Cutting Technology: As product families are based on their hair removal or
grooming technology there is great sharing of cutting technology within them and
almost non between different product families.
Blade Type: Blade types are in most cases one of the performance scaling factors
of products within a product family. The exact same disposable blade is used in all
OneBlade devices. All three considered product variants of the Multigroom share the
same blade type as well. Interestingly the same blade type is utilized in low and mid
performance level hair clippers and beard trimmers, and even one beard trimmer that
==PAGE:54==
4.1 Current Situation
48
is considered high performance model. The highest quality models of beard trimmers
and hair clippers then share blade type between them. In consideration to the shaver
series there are multiple different blades available, usually model dependant. How-
ever there are only three that really differ on a interface level and blades within them
therefore interchangeable to each other. For the high level approach of the analysis
they are therefore considered the same blade type, which each is shared across two
different product families. The only sharing of blades (epilation element is considered
a blade in this case) is between different models of SatineShave shaver and precision
trimmers.
Shell: As usually the most distinguishing feature customers can visually and
physically compare between product variants, outer shells are not much shared across
products nor product families. The outer shell is only shared across some different
product variants of the OneBlade and then between all mid performance level female
devices.
Battery: As a mayor contributing factor in performance scaling of products there
are performance or quality levels of the batteries. There is some sharing of batteries,
both between product variants of similar performance within a product family and be-
tween product families. Low and some mid performance level products of multigroom,
hair clippers, beard trimmers and shavers share battery type and similar dimensions,
and high performance level products of the OneBlade, multigroom and beard trimmer
then share a battery type and similar size between them. The same type of battery is
used in all series shaver except the previously mentioned lowest performance model.
Mid performance level female products then share a battery type, while low perfor-
mance model female devices are equipped with a disposable battery, either one or two,
standard AA or AAA. As previously mentioned there are opportunities in increase
battery sharing across platforms even more, by standardizing battery slot dimensions
within the devices.
PCB: As a carrier of the needed electric circuits and highly dependant on needed
functions, there is not much sharing of PCB’s between product variants not families,
the only sharing is between product variants with very similar performance level and
included features. However, there is a well utilized dimensional sharing of the PCB’s
within product families. For a potentially successful architecture/s proposal across
product family, that would need to be continued across the developed architecture/s.
Motor: As a standard, most likely outsourced item, there is well utilized sharing
across product families, that have similar dimensions. By doing so Philips is most
likely to benefit highly in material sourcing with large quantity purchases of few items.
Motor Shaft: There is good sharing within products variants within the same
product family. There were however detected at least five different ways of transfer-
ring the rotational force from the motor to the hair removal or cutting mechanism.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Current Situation
49
The necessity of that variations would need further consideration. If all this variations
are absolutely necessary this is a well utilized way of making a standard motor unit
a special unit based on product families with low material cost.
Water Sealant: A simple O-ring is shared across all OneBlade variations to
make the devices resistant to water damage, similarly a O-ring is used in bikini trim-
mers as well. Two other variations of water sealant were detected, a waterproof cover
on the inner shell, utilized in water resistant models of multigrooms, hair clippers,
beard trimmers and shavers and then a waterproof inner cover on the shell of mid
performance level female products. The waterproof inner shell is dependant on di-
mensions of the devices and therefore not much shared across product variants, other
than principle wise.
Interchangeable Head Mechanism: There were eight different types of re-
movable heads or removable head mechanisms detected. In OneBlade products, the
interchangeable head is simply a disposable replaceable blade, shared across all prod-
ucts within the family. All multigrooms share the same removable head mechanism.
Product variants within the shaver family that are equipped with a more advanced
Flexhead, have removable heads, where the interface is shared across the product
family. The only sharing of interchangeable heads and their mechanism in female
products are in mid performance level ones. Other female devices have their own
unique removable head types. This is considered a non value adding variety. The
interchangeable heads and their mechanism could be standardized much more, allow-
ing for increased sharing in removable and replaceable heads.
Power Button: A fairly insignificant aspect of the considered devices. Even
so ten different ways of achieving the same basic function of turning a item on is
considered excessive.
Gearing: The only devices equipped with gearing are shavers, they are shared
across all product variants.
Charger Connection: Similarly to the power button, an insignificant aspect,
yet it differs in ten ways across the considered product variants. These ten different
variations are considered non value adding variety as customers usually don’t care
into what kind of mechanism a universal charger plug is connected to charge the
device.
Length Control: There were 13 different ways of length control add-ons and/or
mechanisms detected during the analysis. In most cases they are product variant
based and only shared across few products or product families.
In the cases the
length is controlled by a simple add on comb the variation is considered a non-value
adding variety as there are eight different add on types, only dependant on size of
==PAGE:56==
4.1 Current Situation
50
the device and interface it connects to.
Charger Cable: There are five different charger cables available, based on prod-
uct variants. All OneBlade devices share a charger cable, that is not interchangeable
to any other Philips hair removal or grooming device. One product variant, the low-
est performance level beard trimmer has a USB charger plug and low performance
epilator has a special charger plug. Other devices share a charger plug, however the
included charger is black for male devices and white for female devices, in other ways,
they are interchangeable. The two special cases of the low performance model beard
trimmer and epilator are considered non-value adding variations.
As can be seen in the customer view, Philips offers variety of products designed
to remove and/or groom all kinds of body-hair in wide price and performance range.
From the engineering view, there is some unnecessary complexity and non-value
adding variety identified.
In the sharing matrix, where engineering principles are
realised on part level, decent sharing within product families is detected. Scaling of
products within families is detected as well, typically with more advanced material
and technology in hair removal elements, water resistance and better battery. From
the sharing matrix a lot of part variety is identified, assumed to create unnecessary
complexity and increase cost, such as development cost, raw material cost, manufac-
turing cost and assembly cost. There is little to no sharing across different product
families, other than the motor unit. From the product analysis, there are identified
opportunities in both simplification of overall product portfolio as well as increase
sharing between different product families and more uniform product performance
scaling between product families.
4.1.5
Architectures & Platforms
Based on findings from the previously described analysis, such as product structure
presented in the PFMP and component comparison in the sharing matrix along with
other relevant research, the current architecture and platform structure of Philips’s
hair removal and grooming devices product portfolio is identified as presented in this
section. The identification and consideration of the current architecture structure is
vital to the further development of a new and improved architecture structure that
allows for increased sharing across product families. The development of a concept
architecture/s will be based on the current structure, with focus on increased sharing
across product families, reduction of complexity and limitation of non-value adding
variety. The current architecture structure identified during the research and analy-
sis are described, discussed and compared here below and most significant findings
elaborated on.
An overview of the detected current architectures can be seen in
Figure 4.21.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Current Situation
51
Figure 4.21: Overview of the current architecture and platform structure.
As can be seen in Figure 4.21 currently there are 13 different architectures
that the current product portfolio of hair removal and grooming devices are derived
from. There is little to non use of platforms within these architectures. The only
architectures that have different platforms are: the Shaver, the OneBlade and the
SatineShave & Epilator architecture. Variants within two product families, beard
trimmers and hair clippers were identified to be based on two different architectures
each. These 13 architectures can be seen in section C.1.
The Shaver architecture includes two different platforms, the FlexHead plat-
form and the PowerTouch platform. The platforms are similar in most cases, where
the main difference between them is the newer flexible head of the FlexHead platform,
that allows for better countering of the face during shaving and updated inner and
outer shells accordingly.
The PowerTouch platform is being phased out and only
available in lower performance level and cheaper models.
Figure 4.22: Left: PowerTouch Platform, Right: FlexHead Platform.
==PAGE:58==
4.1 Current Situation
52
The Oneblade architecture includes two platforms as well, the OneBlade plat-
form and the more advanced Oneblade PRO platform. Again there is a performance
and/or quality step between the different platforms, where the OneBlade platform
includes all lower performance product variants and the OneBlade PRO all the more
advanced product variants. The OneBlade PRO platform also includes more robust
quality shell and a charging stand, not available in products in the OneBlade platform.
As can be seen in Figure 4.20 there is high degree of sharing of functional components
within the OneBlade architecture.
Figure 4.23: Left: OneBlade Platform, Right: OneBlade PRO Platform.
As can be seen in Figure 4.20 there is a lot of sharing between two different product
families in mid performance level female products.
The two product families are
identified as platforms of the same architecture. Those platforms are the SatineShave
platform and the Epilator platform. Epilators and female shavers don’t share hair
removal purpose nor engineering principles, yet those products are derived from the
same architecture and in fact they are exactly the same, just equipped with different
removable head. Philips then sells these products in multiple different configurations,
either separated or include both replaceable heads in the same package.
Figure 4.24: Left: Epilator Platform, Right: SatineShave Platform.
The current architectures identified are mostly family architectures, where as the
name suggests the architecture only covers a specific product family, where products
within the family share design units, such as interfaces and standard designs. To
achieve an assortment architecture/s, where multiple product families are derived
from the same architecture the key interfaces of the current architectures were spe-
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Comparison with Braun
53
cially considered.[2]
These key interfaces identified are: Shell & Cutting System, the interface
between the shell of the device and the hair removal and/or cutting element. Outer
Shell, the interface between the usually two pieces of outer shell. Inner Shell and
Water Seal the interface between the inner shell that contains functional and water
sensitive elements and the cover that provides water resistance. PCB, Battery &
Shell, the interface between the battery and PCB and how they are connected to
and/or secured within the device. Motor & Shell, how the motor is secured within
the device. Adjustable Comb & Shell/Cutting System, the interface between
the length control element and the device and/or the removable head containing the
cutting/hair removal element.
This is a simplification of the physical structure done in order to allow for a high level
approach to the concept design for assortment architecture across product families.
Figure 4.25: Key interfaces.
4.2
Comparison with Braun
To better understand possibilities of developing new and improved architecture/s for
Philips’s hair removal and grooming products consideration of competitors is used for
comparison. To get the best comparison on approach of product structure, develop-
ment and management the most identical manufacturer is considered. There are four
mayor manufacturers of electric shavers in the world, Philips, Braun, Panasonic and
Remington.
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Comparison with Braun
54
Figure 4.26: Electric
shavers
mar-
ket share in USA in
2016[32].
As can bee seen in Figure 4.26, the two
with the largest market share, Philips and
Braun combine for around half of all sold
electric shavers in the USA in 2016. In ad-
dition to being the two manufacturers with
the largest market share, those two man-
ufacturers have extremely identical prod-
uct portfolio within hair removal products.
Therefore Braun’s hair removal products
will be investigated and comparison be-
tween Philips and Braun will be carried
out.
4.2.1
Regional variance Comparison
In this part of the comparison, Braun’s products are considered based on the world
region market segment they are available in and compared to Philips’s. Again, clear
minor difference, such as included accessories and different packaging is disregarded.
Figure 4.27: Global comparison Braun.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Comparison with Braun
55
Similarly to Philips, Braun offers different products based on regions of the world.
The regions are again segmented in, Europe, USA and Asia & Pacific. As can be seen
in Figure 4.27 there are much more products shared between more than one or all
segments than in Philips’s case in Figure 4.9. Again the varying factors between prod-
ucts within same product model number are not clear. By comparison with Braun,
Philips should be able to share more product variants between regional segments, the
viability of that however would have to be further analysed and a decision made in
accordance to results from those analysis. There seems to be a clear market demand
for different solutions and/or features of the considered products. These demands
must be considered during development of the proposed new architecture/s.
The
variance however has to be value adding and has to be achieved within the proposed
architecture.
4.2.2
Product Comparison
Figure 4.28: PFMP of Braun’s hair re-
moval and grooming prod-
ucts
from
Appendix
A
thumbnail.
In this section Braun’s products are con-
sidered in more detail.
As the two
mayor manufacturers, it is interesting
to analyse their products and compare
them. To create a detailed overview of
Braun’s product portfolio and the en-
gineering principles behind those prod-
ucts a PFMP was created.
Again the
product variants within the same prod-
uct number are disregarded for overview
and high level approach purposes.
The PFMP contains a Customer view
and a Engineering view. Again, like was
done for Philips products the Part view
is disregarded from the PFMP, the parts
are considered specifically in a sharing
matrix, where the physical realization of
engineering principles and product vari-
ants are compared.
The comparison in this section is sup-
posed to elucidate how the product port-
folios compare, from various viewpoints,
or the viewpoint of a customer, from
an engineering point of view and from
a part view. Product variants are com-
pared, with special focus on how product variants are achieved and the complexity
behind them. I.e. comparison of sharing of similar and/or the same functions, design
principles and parts.
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Comparison with Braun
56
Customer view
The offered hair removal products from Braun and Philips are extremely identical.
Both manufacturers offer products that should be able to solve any grooming and
hair removal need a customer could have.
As previously described, products are
categorized in product families, based on their purpose and hair removal or groom-
ing technology. Braun offers fewer product families than Philips. When comparing
product families the only product families that either one of them offers, that the
other one does not have a directly competing product family are Philips’s OneBlade
and female shaver (SatineShave) families. Within each product family, similar prod-
uct variants are available, with similar performance scaling. The naming of product
variants within product families even follows a similar trend between the two manu-
facturers. Therefore, it is easy for customers to identify a similar performance level
model from the two different manufacturers.
Figure 4.29: Customer view of the PFMP developed for hair removal and grooming
devices from Braun.
As can be seen in the customer view of Braun’s products in Figure 4.29 it is more
simple then the customer view of Philips’s products in Figure 4.11. Philips offers
32 product models from 9 different product families, while Braun offers 21 product
models from 7 product families.
There is less overlap in important customer aspects, such as pricing and in general
Braun products are cheaper than Philips products.
Different from Philips, where product models vary within their product family, all
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Comparison with Braun
57
product models of Braun shavers share mayor features, usually important to cus-
tomers, such as being showerproof, allow for both wet & dry shave, wet cleaning and
cordless operation. Similarly, all Braun beard trimmer and most multi groom and
epilator models are fundamentally the same within their product family and can be
operated under same conditions, regardless of performance level or product variance.
Engineering view
From an engineering point of view, there are some fundamental differences in how
Braun achieves the purpose of their product from Philips. The most noticeable one is
the engineering principle behind the shavers, where are previously described Philips
shavers rely on their signature three individually countering rotating heads, Braun
shavers are foils shavers, similar to Philip’s female shavers. Interestingly Braun does
not utilize that technology and offer female foil shavers as well but only offers IPL
devices targeted for all genders.
Figure 4.30: Engineering view of the PFMP developed for hair removal and groom-
ing devices from Braun.
The engineering view of Braun’s PFMP is smaller than the one for Philips. This
indicates less engineering principles behind the offered products and therefore simpler
development, maintenance and management of those engineering principles. The only
considered aspect where there were more engineering principles behind a function or
a customer requirement, was in the motor, where Braun utilizes three principles, a
closed standard motor like all Philips product rely on, a closed cylinder motor and
a open motor unit. All water resistant devices, other than the epilators rely on the
same technology of a waterproof inner shell and length settings are achieved through
two different engineering principles.
==PAGE:64==
4.2 Comparison with Braun
58
Again, for comparison between product families and product variants on a part
level, a sharing matrix of components was created for Braun. In the sharing matrix,
engineering principles are realised on a part level and their similarities or differences
compared in order to elucidate standard designs, shared across product platforms.
Figure 4.31: The component sharing matrix of hair removal and grooming devices
from Braun developed for the analysis, full size can be seen in Ap-
pendix B.
As can be seen in Figure 4.31, there is some sharing both within and between
product families. Motor and drive shaft is shared across all beard trimmers, multi
grooming devices and hair clippers. The outer shell is shared between product vari-
ants of all these devices as well and then some variants of shavers share outer shells,
all shavers share drive shaft as well. Both beard trimmers and multi grooming devises
share interchangeable heads and their interface to the device as well as water proof
inner shell. The three mid performance level models of shavers that have interchange-
able heads all share them and interface between them as well. There are three types
of shell in Braun’s shavers, based on performance level, within these the batteries and
waterproof inner shell are shared.
Noticeable difference as well is in more simple aspects, such as charger connector
and connection and power button. There is a lot shared across product families, and
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Comparison with Braun
59
a shared power button in the male targeted devices, gives a distinctive family look
across all products, making it clear to customers that this is a Braun product, which
is a clever and strong product strategy.[26]
4.2.3
Architectures & Platforms Comparison
Based on findings from the previously described analysis, product structure presented
in the PFMP, component comparison in the sharing matrix and from other relevant
research, the product architecture and platform structure of Braun’s hair removal
and grooming devices product portfolio is identified as presented in this section. The
identification and consideration of Braun’s architecture and platforms is used both
for comparison as well as to inspire and validate possibilities of sharing between
different product families for the concept design, developed and proposed later on in
this thesis project. An overview of the detected architectures and platforms can be
seen in Figure 4.32.
Figure 4.32: Overview of the architecture and platform structure from Braun.
As can be seen in Figure 4.32 there are 7 different architecture that Braun’s
hair removal and grooming devices are derived from. There is much more use of plat-
forms detected at Braun than at Philips, where e.g. Braun shavers are derived from
three platforms, from one architecture, the beard trimmer and multi groom devises
are platforms of the same architecture and three epilator platforms are included in a
single architecture. Larger pictures of each architectures can be seen in section C.2.
==PAGE:66==
4.3 Analysis Conclusions
60
Figure 4.33: Comparison between Philips and Braun products families, models, ar-
chitectures and platforms.
As can be seen in Figure 4.33 Philips both offers hair removal and/or grooming
devices from more product families and more product models than Braun does. As
could be suspected based on that, Philips products are therefore derived from more
architectures than Braun products. However, there is much more use of platforms
at Braun than at Philips, indicating that they currently are able to compete with
Philips, using much fewer architectures with use of platforms within them. These
findings, from the comparison between the two mayor manufacturers, Philips and
Braun validates the suspicion that Philips’s product portfolio is overly complex and
could benefit from further implementation of an assortment platform with sharing
across product families.
4.3
Analysis Conclusions
The main detected challenges of Philips’s hair removal and grooming devices from a
customer perspective is in regards to product variance complexity and diﬀicult com-
parison between them. There is a lot of performance and feature overlapping, regional
product variance and seemingly no holistic approach to development and management
of hair removal and grooming products. The considered data highly suggests inde-
pendent product and/or product family development, which has resulted in overly
complex and complicated solutions, with lack of sharing between products and prod-
uct families.
From an engineering and manufacturing perspective this complexity
suggests unnecessarily high development, maintenance and manufacturing complex-
ity and therefore cost.
Market analysis were based on defined customer segments of performance level
of products and both different world regions and hair removal or cutting purpose,
constructed visually in a Power Tower structure. The market analysis showed lack
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Analysis Conclusions
61
of consistency in offered products, based on world region and high product variance
between them. Reason for this could not be further analyzed due to lack of data.
Whether or not this variance complexity is intentional and value adding is proposed
to be further considered upon available data.
In the product analysis products were compared from different viewpoints in the
PFMP, where product features or aspects available to customers were considered both
based on engineering principles and on a part level to identify value adding variety
from non-value adding variety. Feature and performance overlapping was identified
as well as unnecessary variations of engineering principles intended for same of similar
purposes and lack of part commonality and sharing.
Current architecture and platform structure was configured based on the analysis.
High number of architectures was detected as well as limited use of platforms, sup-
porting the suspicion of individual product design and development.
Similar analysis were carried out for Braun’s hair removal and grooming deceives
product portfolio for comparison and inspirational purposes. Braun’s products were
detected to be derived from fewer architectures and much higher use of platforms
within their architectures was identified. This suggest improvement and optimization
possibilities within Philips’s product program.
Based on the analysis, Philip’s product program is considered overly complex and
complicated. Non-value adding variety was detected, both on engineering and part
level. As a leading manufacturer within the field of hair removal and grooming prod-
ucts Philips is considered to be able to gain a lot from simplification of their product
program through a holistic approach of architecture and platform development. By
limiting the number of architectures, development, maintenance and manufacturing
cost can be reduced and the overall product program further optimized.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5
Focus & Goals
In this section, design concept focus and goal settings for the developed architecture
proposal are defined and presented. This is done in order to maximize the success
potential of the new architecture concept. By clearly defining both the focus area of
the concept work and the desired outcome, hoped to be achieved, the likelihood of
successful concept development and implementation increases tremendously. Other
important aspects regarding the concept development and its implementation will also
be further addressed. The focus area and goal settings is based on original project
motivation of further standardization between product families along with findings
and results from the previously discussed analysis.
5.1
Focus Area
Research and analysis findings were presented and discussed in detail with Niels Hen-
rik Mortensen, professor at the department of Mechanical Engineering and head of
Engineering Design and Product Development Section at DTU and the supervisor of
this thesis project. The results from the previously described research and analysis
supported the original suspicion of limited sharing across product families. These
results were evaluated in order to set a clear focus for the conceptualization phase of
new and improved architecture/s and platform/s.
The decided focus area for the conceptualization phase is on overall simplifica-
tion of the product program on engineering principle and part level. In
order to achieve said simplification, assortment architecture/s and platform/s will be
developed with a high level approach. The developed architecture/s and platform/s
should aim to retain the current product families and possibilities of current product
variants within it in order to fulfill customer requirements.
With such simplification, the product program will be better suited for the next
steps of production, where traditional production means are highly automated, the
ongoing fourth industrial revolution or Industry 4.0. Such automation is based on
network of things, connected together through the internet with modern smart tech-
nology (IoT), machine to machine communication and self monitoring, in so called
cyber physical systems. Such automation is ill suited for products with early customer
order decoupling point (CODP) and highly complex manufacturing lines.[33]
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Goal Settings
63
5.2
Goal Settings
Philips already has great market share and is well established within the field of hair
removal and grooming devices. However, in order to stay on top and keep their status
they must keep pursuing means of optimization and progress. The methodology of
architectures can easily be mistaken for a goal, when as said by the supervisor of this
project, Niels Henrik Mortensen:
”Architectures and standard designs are not a goal, it’s a means”
Where architecture in itself should not be an optimization goal of a company, but an
effective means to achieve set optimization goals through standardization and com-
monality on engineering principle and part level and with limitation of non-value
adding features and variety.
Philips has already somewhat successfully implemented standard designs and in-
terfaces within individual product families and desire to implement it further, across
more product families has been expressed. Standardization down to part level across
different product families is both diﬀicult and time consuming, and decision on such
implementation would have to be taken on an executive level.
The goals for the
conceptualization phase of the project are therefore aimed towards highlighting opti-
mization possibilities and opportunities, successful implementation of such approach
could entail. To increase the likelihood of successful development and implementation
of the concept architecture/s the following goals were defined:
• Improve ability to launch new features and products, i.e. reduce time
to market
• Make the product program better suited for automated manufactur-
ing processes of Industry 4.0
• Reduce development and manufacturing cost without jeopardising
quality
Additionally, by showing that these previously mentioned goals can be met, another
goal is hoped to be achieved with this thesis project work and report. With coopera-
tion from Philips during a similar project, inside information can be included in the
analysis. By doing so numerical data can be used to support claims and gain more
realistic results. That additional goal is:
• Make it appealing to Philips to engage in project/s regarding further
development of assortment architecture/s and platform/s
==PAGE:70==
5.3 Implementation Approach
64
5.3
Implementation Approach
How change is enforced is often equally important as the changes it proposes. In order
to increase the likelihood of successful implementation, approach on implementation
is defined. Road map to the proposed implementation is therefore developed along
with the conceptualization of new architecture.
The road map is aimed towards
segmentation of the implementation, allowing for reaching set goals in smaller steps.
That both gives a sens of accomplishment along the way and serves as a guideline,
where all changes in the product program proposed during the implementation period
should aim towards contributing to the long term goals.
5.4
Conceptualization Scope
Based on findings and results from both the research and the analysis phase, the
conceptualization phase scope is defined. As previously mentioned, Philips already is
a leading manufacturer in the field of hair removal and grooming devices and many of
their products are equipped with sophisticated solutions and excel in quality and per-
formance. The conceptualization will take that into account and aim to base the new
proposed architecture/s on identified well implemented already existing engineering
principles, solutions and parts. Identified value adding variety will be included in the
proposed architecture/s as much as possible in order to fulfil needs of different market
segments, defined and discussed in subsection 4.1.2. By basing the new proposed ar-
chitecture on already existing and proofed engineering principles, solutions and parts
implementation complexity and investment is minimized as much as possible. That
approach aligns well with the methodology of architectures and platforms, as by rely-
ing on already proven technology possible risk and quality decrease is minimized as
well.
Specific features available in some product variants will be disregarded in the con-
ceptualization phase of the project. The conceptualization is aimed towards achieving
previously set goals by the means of developing assortment architectures with a high
level approach. If proven to be value adding variety, based on more detailed further
consideration with additional production cost, sales and profit margins information
such features and/or variations should be included within the architecture without
altering and customizing it toward each feature. The conceptualized architecture will
focus on functionality, mayor components and interfaces of the devices, disregarding
detailed design features within the modules.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Conceptualization
In this section, propositions on how to meet the set goals are presented and eval-
uated. Firstly, alternative architecture concept proposals are described and briefly
discussed. How the current product program fits within each proposal is presented
and component level sharing matrix created for each alternative proposal. Key per-
formance indicators are then defined and the alternative architecture proposals are
then evaluated against each other according to those key performance indicators in
order to identify the proposal considered best suited for achieving set goals. There-
after, the highest scoring architecture proposal is used as a base for more detailed
conceptual design of the final architecture proposal. Examples of different product
variants derived from varying configurations within the concept proposals are then
presented. Lastly, an implementation guideline for the final architecture proposal is
presented and discussed.
6.1
Improvement Proposals
According to the analysis, the product program is both complex and seems to lack
holistic product program management. Also, some of the different product families
seem to have been created and developed independently from others. By doing so,
research and development cost and work sharing across product variants and/or fam-
ilies is to extremely low extent. This not only leads to increased cost and man-hours
in R&D, but Philips also misses out on utilizing their own earlier experience of suc-
cessful or unsuccessful designs from other more established products.
The initial activity suggested to improve the product program is to implement a
PFMP for all available products and maintain it. With a well developed and con-
tinuously maintained PFMP, Philips should gain better oversight of their product
program, more easily identify value adding variety of new product proposals, both
on engineering principle and part level. Along with the implementation of a PFMP
for the product program, Philips is suggested to set clear goals, such as in terms of
product variety and market segments coverage in relation to their overall hair removal
and cutting devices product program as a whole.
As a more of a mid or long term activities, in order to achieve the earlier defined
==PAGE:72==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
66
goals, the suggested means is focused on decreasing the overall number of architec-
tures the product program is derived from.
As previously presented, the current
product program is considered to be derived from 13 different architectures, mostly
based on product families. By successfully and strategically combining some of the
product families under the same architecture, substantial production, development
and material sourcing optimization can be achieved.
The concept development approach is to consider alternative numbers of archi-
tectures and how the current product families would be derived from each one of
them. As there were no sales statistics, manufacturing cost or profit margin for indi-
vidual products nor product families available for the analysis, all currently available
product families are included in the proposals. Five alternative architecture/s combi-
nations are considered, first the current 13 architectures are decreased to 8, then
6, 4, 2 and finally all product program is considered as a single architecture. For
each considered proposal a merger graph is presented.
In the merger graph, how
each one of the current 13 architectures is merged into a combined architecture is
visually presented. With a high level approach, for each considered proposal, how
each product variant from the current product program would be configured is also
presented visually. This was done to make sure that no product family nor variant
would be missing from the concept designs. Lastly, for each concept proposal, a shar-
ing matrix was developed. As can be expected, the more of the current architectures
are merged together in assortment architecture/s, the more Philips has to commit
to the methodology. The alternative architecture proposals are therefore evaluated
in order to identify where the highest gain is suspected to be achieved in accordance
with implementation diﬀiculty and risk.
The current architectures where not changed in any way until they where merged
with others. This was done for implementation purposes. To make the proposals
implementation as realistic as possible and so that each of the proposed merger of
architectures could serve as an implementation step, further described in section 6.3.
The Lumea IPL architecture is only combined with other architectures in the final
two proposals (1 and 2 total architecture/s) and is therefore not considered on part
level along with the others until it is merged with other architectures.
In the following subchapters, the five alternative architecture proposals, how cur-
rent architectures are merged into each concept proposal, how current products are
derived from the proposed architectures and sharing matrix for the proposal are pre-
sented.
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
67
6.1.1
8 Architectures
The first proposed configuration consists of 8 total architectures. Some of the archi-
tectures, the OneBlade, Shaver, SatieShave & Epilator and Lumea remain unchanged.
The small and low priced female device architectures, Bikini Trimmer and Precision
Trimmer architectures are merged into one architecture. The current two different
Hair Clipper architectures are merged into a single architecture. The MultiGroom
architecture and the two Beard Trimmer architectures are then merged into a sin-
gle architecture, similarly to the previously identified and discussed configuration of
Braun.
Finally, the SatineShave Essential and Satinelle architectures are merged.
Between all of the proposed merged architectures, engineering principles, necessary
components and many key dimensions are shared and/or could be shared without
much development work and implementation risk. Therefore, this proposal is con-
sidered to be possible within a fairly short period of time and with low investment
cost and low implementation risk. Visual representation of the proposed architecture
merger can be seen in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Overview of the 8 total architectures proposal and how the current 13
architectures are merged into 8.
In this configuration, even though a drastic reduction from 13 to 8 architectures,
the product program is still derived from a relatively high number of architectures.
However, due to the extremely little fundamental difference in the merged archi-
tectures, this configuration can be implemented without much investment. In the
proposal, this configuration is estimated to be implementable within the next gener-
ation of the products within its product families.
By merging the two low cost product families, Bikini Trimmer and Precision Trim-
mer architectures, research and development cost can be shared between them. Both
product families have had reliability and quality problems in the past and with com-
bined resources those important aspects can be improved simultaneously across both
product families.
Similarly, the two lower performance level female devices archi-
tecture, the SatinShave Essential and the Satinelle have had quality and reliability
problems. The proposal is therefore to merge those as well in the first implementation
step, where a lower end female device architecture will be created, similar to the mid
performance devices architecture, the SatineShave/Epilator architecture. The Hair
==PAGE:74==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
68
Clipper architectures are suggested to be merged into a single Hair Clipper architec-
ture. To maintain a special corded device architecture, fundamentally different from
other similar architectures is considered unnecessary. If a corded operation variant
is needed, the battery slot within the merged architecture will simply be left empty,
like currently done in the Shaver architecture. Lastly, the MultiGroom and Beard
Trimmer architectures are suggested to be merged into a single architecture. This
assortment architecture of beard trimmers and multi purpose cutting devices is in-
spired to the product configuration at Braun. By merging these currently identified
as three independent architectures, Philips is considered to be able to optimize the
product families research and development by a lot and with resource pooling and
simplified manufacturing line/s.
Figure 6.2: 8 architecture proposal.
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
69
Figure 6.3: Current product program configuration in the proposed architecture.
Row 1: OneBlade Architecture, Hair Clipper Architecture.
Row 2: Beard Trimmer & MultiGroom Architecture.
Row 3: SatineShave & Epilator Architecture, SatineShave Essential &
Satinelle Architecture.
Row 4: Bikini & Precision Trimmer Architecture.
==PAGE:76==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
70
Figure 6.4: Sharing matrix for the 8 architectures proposal.
6.1.2
6 Architectures
The next proposed configuration consists of 6 total architectures. Like before, some
of the architectures, Shaver, SatieShave & Epilator and Lumea remain unchanged.
The decrease from 8 to 6 architectures is achieved by merging the small, low to mid
performance OneBlade architecture to the already merged architecture of the Bikini
Trimmer and Precision Trimmer. All those architectures are similar in dimensions
and are built up from similar components. Then, the already merged Hair Clipper
architecture is merged with the merged MultiGroom and Beard Trimmer architecture.
Visual representation of the proposed architecture merger can be seen in Figure 6.5.
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
71
Figure 6.5: Overview of the 6 total architectures proposal and how the current 13
architectures are merged into 8 and then 6.
In this configuration, the already merged low performance small female trimmers
architecture, the Bikini & Precision trimmer architecture is merged with the similar
low to mid performance, small electrical devices for men, the OneBlade architecture.
These products not only already share similar outer dimensions and necessary internal
components, but are also built up with similar engineering principles, such as a half
inner shell, protected from water with a simple O-ring and then closed off with a
product specific outer shell. The bikini trimmer and the OneBlade razor, share a
purpose but that purpose is not achieved with the same engineering principles nor
parts. Therefore, it is suggested that the foil shaver element of the Bikini Trimmer is
eliminated and focus set on spreading the use of the more advanced OneBlade. The
other proposed change from the earlier 8 architecture configuration is to now merge
the Hair Clipper and MultiGroom & Beard Trimmer architectures. The products
already share a lot, both in terms of dimensions, engineering principles and even
parts.
Figure 6.6: 6 architecture proposal.
==PAGE:78==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
72
Figure 6.7: Current product program configuration in the proposed architecture.
Row 1: OneBlade, Bikini & Precision Trimmer Architecture, Hair Clip-
per, MultiGroom & BeardTrimmer Architecture.
Row 2: Shaver Architecture, SatineShave & Epilator Architecture.
Row 3: SatineShave Essential & Satinelle Architecture.
==PAGE:79==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
73
Figure 6.8: Sharing matrix for the 6 architectures proposal.
6.1.3
4 Architectures
The next proposed configuration consists of 4 total architectures. Two architectures
still remain unchanged from the current situation, the Shaver and Luema. In the
change from 6 to 4 architecture the Hair Clipper, MultiGroom & Beard Trimmer
architecture is merged together with female products with similar purpose, dimen-
sions and compoents, the SatieShave & Epilator architecture and the already merged
SatineShave Essentila & Satinelle architecture. Visual representation of the proposed
architecture merger can be seen in Figure 6.9.
==PAGE:80==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
74
Figure 6.9: Overview of the 4 total architectures proposal and how the current 13
architectures are merged into 8, 6 and then 4.
This configuration is the first one to rely on some mayor change in the construction
of the current architecture. To be able to derive all the current products from only
four architectures the Hair Clipper, Beard Trimmer & MultiGroom architecture is
merged with both mid performance female device architecture, the SatineShave/Epil-
tor architecture and the low performance female device architecture, the SatineShave
Essential & Satinelle architecture. By doing so, all of the larger more complex electric
devices are merged and derived from a single architecture, except the most established
architecture, the Shaver architecture and the most fundamentally different one, the
Lumea IPL architecture.
Figure 6.10: 4 architecture proposal.
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
75
Figure 6.11: Current product program configuration in the proposed architecture.
Row 1: OneBlade, Bikini & Precision Trimmer Architecture, Shaver
Architecture.
Row 2: MultiGroom, BeardTrimmer, Hair Clipper, SatineShave/Epi-
lator, SatineShave Essential & Satinelle Architecture.
Figure 6.12: Sharing matrix for the 4 architectures proposal.
==PAGE:82==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
76
6.1.4
2 Architectures
The next proposed configuration consists of 2 total architectures. In this proposal,
no architecture is unchanged from the current 13 identified during the analysis. In
this configuration the product program is derived from only two architectures, small
devices architecture and larger more complex devices architecture. Visual represen-
tation of the proposed architecture merger can be seen in Figure 6.13.
Figure 6.13: Overview of the 2 total architectures proposal and how the current 13
architectures are merged into 8, 6, 4 and then 2.
As previously mentioned this proposed configuration consists of two architectures.
One of them includes the smaller devices, OneBlade, Bikini Trimmer and Precision
Trimmer, while the other includes all the other more advanced and larger devices,
Shaver, Hair Clipper, Beard Trimmer, MultiGroom, SatineShave/Epilator, Satine-
Shave Essential & Satinelle and Lumea. This configuration will need to be achieved
over some time and with some investments, both ideally and physically. However, the
implementation is expected to lead to great optimization and overall simplification.
By sharing resources, research and development, engineering principles and parts be-
tween so much of the product program a great scale of economics can be achieved
and implementation of innovation can promptly and safely be implemented across all
similar performance level products simultaneously.
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
77
Figure 6.14: 2 architecture proposal.
Figure 6.15: Current product program configuration in the proposed architecture.
Row 1: OneBlade, Bikini & Precision Trimmer Architecture
Row 2: Shaver, MultiGroom, BeardTrimmer, Hair Clipper, Lumea,
SatineShave/Epilator, SatineShave Essential & Satinelle Architecture.
==PAGE:84==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
78
Figure 6.16: Sharing matrix for the 2 architectures proposal.
6.1.5
1 Architecture
In the final architecture configuration proposal, all the current 13 architectures are
merged into a single architecture. Therefore, in this proposal, all the current prod-
ucts are derived from the same architecture. Visual representation of the proposed
architecture merger can be seen in Figure 6.17
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
79
Figure 6.17: Overview of the 1 total architecture proposal and how the current 13
architectures are merged into 8, 6, 4, 2 and then 1.
In this single architecture configuration both the smaller devices and the more
advanced ones, are derived from the same architecture. This could have great op-
timization results and resources would be shared across all products, resulting in
great material purchase quantity and research and development cost would be shared
across all products. Innovation could again be introduced in all products with high
quality and low risk. However, there is a great downside to this configuration, as
when compared to the 2 architecture configuration proposal, as the smaller deceives
and the larger, more advanced ones have little to no sharing between them, neither
dimensional nor on engineering principle and part levels. This configuration could
lead to exponential increase in cost per unit in the smaller devices and/or result in
decreased quality in the larger more advanced ones.
==PAGE:86==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
80
Figure 6.18: Single architecture proposal.
Figure 6.19: Current product program configuration in the proposed architecture.
OneBlade,
Bikini - & Precision Trimmer,
Shaver,
MultiGroom,
BeardTrimmer, Hair Clipper, Lumea, SatineShave/Epilator, Satine-
Shave Essential & Satinelle Architecture.
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
81
Figure 6.20: Sharing matrix for the 1 architecture proposal.
6.1.6
Architecture Proposals Comparison
In order to evaluate which one of the proposed architecture configurations should
be used for the final conceptualized architecture proposal, the alternative configura-
tions are evaluated against each other, based on defined key performance indicators
(KPI’s). The defiend KPI’s are not all considered equally important and therefore
have different weight in the evaluation, rating from 2-4, where the most important
ones weight 4 and less important 3 and 2 respectively. Similarly the alternative ar-
chitecture proposals are graded in regards to each KPI, with a grade ranging from
1-4, where 4 means that the proposal is considered extremely well suited in regards
to the considered KPI and lower grades less well suited respectively. For the evalu-
ation score, the grade each architecture proposal is given in regards to each KPI is
simply multiplied with the KPI’s weight and the weighted scores then added together.
The evaluation, KPI’s and final evaluation score can be seen in Table 6.1. As can
be seen, the KPI’s and the evaluation is based on three main categories. Internal
Eﬀiciency & Realisation, where the proposals are evaluated based on how they are
suited in regards to manufacturing and realisation of the concept design. Customer
Category, where evaluation is based on aspects visible and important to customers.
The final category is Innovation & Ability to Move Forward, where the propos-
als are evaluated based on how well they are suited for the next generation of products
through innovation and automated manufacturing and assembly with Industry 4.0.
==PAGE:88==
6.1 Improvement Proposals
82
Table 6.1: Architecture proposals compared using defined key performance indica-
tors.
As can be seen in Table 6.1, the proposal where the product program is derived
from two different architectures, one for the smaller devices and one for the larger
more technically advanced ones received the highest score in the evaluation. The
current situation received the lowest overall grade, suggesting that any one of the
proposals would be beneficial to implement. Additionally, since the proposals require
unequally drastic change and investment in both infrastructure and the architecture
methodology, they are evaluated where expected positive impact the implementation
has compared to expected necessary effort of the implementation.
Figure 6.21: Effort vs. impact graph for
the proposed alternative ar-
chitecture configurations.
In Figure 6.21 the impact the pro-
posal is expected to have is shown com-
pared to effort expected to be needed for
the implementation. The current situa-
tion is considered to need no implemen-
tation effort and have no impact. The
others are somewhat linear, where the
needed effort results in a positive im-
pact of similar scale.
Again, suggest-
ing that any implementation will carry
positive benefits.
Similarly to before,
even though requiring the second most
expected effort, the proposed 2 architec-
ture configuration is considered the most
beneficial one as it is expected to result
in the most positive impact. Therefore, it is not considered desirable to reduce the
architectures further than down to two. Implementation suggestion will be further
elaborated on in section 6.3.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 More Detailed About the Chosen Architecture
83
6.2
More Detailed About the Chosen Architecture
As previously mentioned in the evaluation and comparison between the architecture
proposals in subsection 6.1.6, the architecture configuration where the product pro-
gram is derived from two architectures is considered to be the proposal that will lead
to the highest positive impact on the product program. The final concept architecture
will therefore be developed, where the all product families and variants are derived
from two architectures.
In this section the conceptual architecture proposals are further described. Con-
figuration examples of possible product variants, dependant on different customer
requirements, such as hair removal or cutting purpose and product performance level.
The two architectures proposed that the product program should be derived from
are divided based on two main things, outer dimensions and complexity of the prod-
ucts. Small and simple devices are considered unfeasible to be included in the same
architecture as the larger more technologically advanced ones. For the concept design,
already proven engineering principles and parts are used in order to reduce the risk
and investment of implementation.
Figure 6.22: High level overview of the
larger device architecture.
For the larger and more advanced
products, the water sealant is inspired
by the engineering principle already uti-
lized on the Shavers, MultiGroom de-
vices and Beard Trimmers.
All wa-
ter sensitive components are therefore
carefully placed within an inner shell
with a waterproof top cover. Inside the
water resistant inner shell, the motor,
PCB and battery are located.
There-
fore, these components should be stan-
dardized dimensionally. The inner shell
and cover are therefore a standard de-
sign, whilst the PCB, motor and battery
vary based on desired product performance level and/or specific features, within stan-
dard outer dimensions and interfaces.
Similarly, the drive shaft, installed on the
motor module, varies based on the product purpose. The hair removal or cutting
element and outer shell are then product dependant but all designed to allow for
installation of the inner shell module. The removable hair removal and cutting ele-
ments interface to the outer shell is based on the rotation locking interface, currently
used on MultiGroom devices.
This solution is also inspired by Braun, which has
implemented the same locking mechanism on their multipurpose devices as well as
beard trimmers. Since all products share the inner shell module, they therefore are
designed to all use the same charging cable. The charge stand and charging & clean-
==PAGE:90==
6.2 More Detailed About the Chosen Architecture
84
ing stand are also applicable to all products and included based on the quality level
of the product variant, during packaging phase of the production. Similarly, other ex-
tra accessories should be designed in the same way, within the architectures interfaces.
Figure 6.23: High level overview of the
smaller device architecture.
The other proposed architecture con-
cept is mostly based on the current
OneBlade architecture.
As previously
mentioned in section 6.1, small and sim-
ple female products are however also in-
cluded in the proposed concept.
The
OneBlade was considered the most ad-
vanced and best developed architec-
ture of all the small devices considered
for this project and therefore, already
proven engineering principles and suc-
cessful technical solutions utilized in the
proposal. Similarly to the other architec-
ture proposal, all products share a sin-
gle inner shell module, where water re-
sistance is achieved with a O-ring.
In
the inner shell module, all sensitive com-
ponents, such as the PCB, battery and
motor are carefully placed. These components are performance and/or feature depen-
dant but should again fit within the standard architecture dimensions. The PBC and
motor are smaller than in the other proposed architecture, both due to more extreme
dimensional constraints and less necessary power and feature need. The batteries are
however shared across both architecture and only vary based on performance level.
Whilst the inner shell is always the same and fits within every outer shell, the outer
shell is again product dependant. For the cutting and hair removal elements, the
X-shaped interface of the OneBlade is used. The length adjustments are the same
design as in the other architecture, only vary in dimensions, so the engineering prin-
ciple is shared, while the components are not on part levels. There is a special length
settings piece needed for the precision head. Again, the charging cable is a standard
item, shared across both architectures. The charge stand and charging & cleaning
stand are also applicable to all products within the architecture and are the same
design as in the other architecture, but again vary in dimensions so the engineering
principle is shared, but not components on part level due to different product dimen-
sions. Such items are again included based on the quality level of the product variant,
during packaging phase of the production. Similarly, other extra accessories should
be designed in the same way, within the architectures interfaces.
The architecture proposals are based on the current structure of the product
program, both in regards to available performance level of components and possi-
ble product variants. Within the configuration it it should be easy to replace, add
==PAGE:91==
6.2 More Detailed About the Chosen Architecture
85
and/or remove modules or components independently from others. Research and de-
velopment cost is shared across number of different product families and innovations
can be implemented simultaneously in various products. With that, the ability to
quickly launch new features and products is increased and time to market is severely
reduced as well as simplification of manufacturing lines and overall later CODP. An
overview of the proposed architectures, as well as explanation on interchangeability
of components can be seen in Figure 6.24.
Figure 6.24: Overview of the proposed two architectures.
Left: Architecture all
larger and more advanced electronic devices are derived from. Right:
Architecture smaller and simpler devices are derived from.
==PAGE:92==
6.2 More Detailed About the Chosen Architecture
86
6.2.1
Configuration Examples
Configuration examples of product variants derived from the two proposed architec-
tures are presented in Figure 6.25 and Figure 6.26. In the configuration examples,
performance level and quality of the product variants are shown with a high level ap-
proach with stars, the most simple, lower quality products with a single bronze star,
more advanced and mid level quality products with two silver stars and finally the
most advanced, highest quality products with three golden stars. The standard de-
signs, shared across each architecture are colored with a grey outline, while the parts
that contribute to the distinguish product variant purpose, performance and/or qual-
ity level are outlined with the same color as the product variant, representing how
that variant can be derived from the architecture proposal.
These configuration examples only represent a fraction of possible product variants
that can be derived from each proposed architecture. The shown example configu-
rations derived from the larger architecture in Figure 6.25, are: Low price Epilator,
high quality IPL, mid range MultiGroom, mid range Shaver and high quality Shaver.
Figure 6.25: Configuration example of five different product variants derived from
the larger device architecture.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 More Detailed About the Chosen Architecture
87
The example configurations derived from the smaller architecture in Figure 6.26,
are: low price Precision Shaver, low price Female Shaver, mid range Female Shaver,
OneBlade and OneBlade Pro.
Figure 6.26: Configuration example of five different product variants derived from
the smaller device architecture.
Product scaling is both simple and easy to achieve in the proposed architectures.
The scaling of the proposed architecture is defined as a vertical platform scaling,
where the initial platform is scaled down in order to meet the production restraints of
lower cost devices[26]. By doing so Philips can focus their R&D efforts on their high
end products and inherit features and/or parts to lower end products when intro-
ducing innovation on the higher end products. Thereby slowly phasing out outdated
technology for newer more advanced ones, continuously upgrading all their products
through innovation on the high end level. As previously described in chapter 4, the
performance level of products is in most cases dependant on performance of three
main components, the motor, the battery and the hair removal or cutting element.
Other means of product scaling which is extremely important as it is the one, most
visible to consumers, is the outer shell and included accessories. Both of which are eas-
ily achieved within the architectures, as they are built up from standard dimensions
inner shells and product variants usually have their own distinguished outer shell and
accessories, such as the charger stand and charger & cleaning stand are included on
packaging level. In both of the architectures, an example was presented where, even
==PAGE:94==
6.3 Implementation
88
though product variant specific, the outer shells always shares a distinguished Philips
look, making it clear to potential customers that the product is a Philips product
from first glance.
6.3
Implementation
In order to increase the likelihood of a successful implementation of the architecture
proposal, the recommendation is to segment the implementation in small, yet effec-
tive steps. Such a drastic reduction of architectures from the current 13 to the final
proposal of 2 can not only be intimidating, but also risky and expensive. By seg-
menting the implementation, implementation risk is reduced, specific R&D cost of
modifying every product towards the new architecture and overall investment cost
are distributed over a longer period of time. Within the implementation guide, the
recommendations are as well to use every product update and/or refurbishing as a
step towards next implementation segment. The benefits of such an approach can
then be explored and evaluated in each implementation step and decisions on further
development taken based on those evaluations.
The recommendation for implementation of the architecture proposal is simply a
four phase step implementation, based on the architecture proposals introduced in
section 6.1. In the first phase of the implementation, the recommendation is to reduce
architectures from 13 to 8 in the way previously described in subsection 6.1.1. Then
in the second phase to reduce the architectures from 8 to 6 in the way previously
described in subsection 6.1.2. In the third phase to reduce the architectures from
6 to 4 in the way previously described in subsection 6.1.3. Finally, in the fourth
phase of the implementation the recommendation is to reduce from 4 to 2 in the
way previously described in subsection 6.1.4 and in more details in section 6.2. A
visualisation of the proposed implementation segments can be seen in Figure 6.27.
==PAGE:95==
6.3 Implementation
89
Figure 6.27: Implementation segments overview.
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The hypothesis of this thesis project is that the production and manufacturing com-
pany Philips stands to gain a lot by further implementing the methodology of archi-
tectures and platforms across hair removal and cutting devices product families. In
order to support the hypothesis, supporting research questions were formulated. The
questions presented in section 1.2 were whether it is possible to develop architecture/s
and platform/s that Philips can utilize throughout both their female and male tar-
geted hair removal technologies and how that architecture/s and platform/s could be
constructed. To answer these questions thorough analysis were conducted.
The analysis was highly limited to the available data. As this project was not
carried out in any collaboration with Philips, the data was limited to individual re-
search, both online and physically, where selected items were inquired and disassem-
bled. Both Philips headquarters in the Nordics as well as representatives in Iceland
were contacted in order to inquire more information, such as product examples, com-
ponents and drawings, without luck. Due to the COVID-19 outbreak, all returned
devices and/or replaced components were also directly disposed by the representative
repair shop. For the same reason, they were also unable to loan out any spare parts
for examination. With such an outside approach to the analysis, there are numerous
aspects, most likely only recognisable to those with special knowledge on the matter
not considered. However, by conducting the analysis independently from the outside
of the company, the results are completely unbiased and in no way influenced by the
status quo and all aspects therefore questioned and considered in the same way. This
is considered to provide both interesting and valuable insight on the matter.
The product program was thoroughly inspected, both in regards to hair removal
or cutting purpose, engineering principles and parts. Over 200 product variants were
considered in three main world region. Multiple attempts were made to try to un-
derstand the regional variance, as well as reasons behind product variation, which in
many cases seemed different, just to be different. The considered products were then
constructed in a Power Tower, first in customer segments, based on world regions
and performance level of products, then again based on performance level and hair
removal or cutting purpose. This is a mayor simplification but highlights overlap in
all defined customer segments. In the same way, the developed PFMP manifested the
same, wheres similar task or main purpose is achieved with variation of engineering
==PAGE:97==
7 Discussion
91
principles and therefore parts. This is considered to overly complicate and complexify
the product program. Development seems to be carried out independently on each
product family or even on individual product variant. These results contradict what
would be expected, based on the Philips model, described in section 2.3. This ap-
proach can only result in higher R&D, material and manufacturing cost. Results also
showed that in some less developed product families, Philips has had some quality
and reliability problems. That is considered to be in many ways a result of inde-
pendent development of a product families. If however new product families were
derived or based on already proven solutions or even derived from the same architec-
ture, Philips could reduce the implementation risk and increase the quality by relying
on fewer engineering principles and parts, allowing them to invest more time, money
and development in them.
Even though the high level approach and the architecture proposals being highly
conceptualized, all aspects of the proposals are considered reasonable and achievable
in near future. All of the proposed changes are based on already proven engineering
principles and/or parts currently found within one or more products of Philips’s prod-
uct program. In cases where realisation possibilities were doubted, current solutions
were implemented within the proposed architecture. Examples of this is the drive
shaft of the architecture proposal for the larger and more advanced devices described
in section 6.2. Currently there are different interfaces that connect the drive shaft
to the moving mechanism of the hair removal or cutting element. Assumptions were
made that these specialized interfaces were necessary and therefore implemented in
the architecture proposal.
Multiple things were considered outside of the scope of the project, such as addi-
tional accessories included with purchased devices. Recommendations in regards to
such things is that they are developed within the boundaries defined in the architec-
ture. Similarly, as Philips approaches different world regions with different products
it is recommended that these variations are achieved as late in the production process
as possible. There was no clear way of recognising how and why some products vary
based on regional segments. However, it was assumed that they are mostly in regards
to outer shells, labeling and packaging. Further analysis, based on additional infor-
mation from Philips would be needed to gain a more detailed insight on that matter.
Even though lacking insight information, consideration on part level and quantita-
tive development, manufacturing, sales and market cost data, the thesis is considered
to provide valuable insight into Philips’s current structure of their hair removal and
grooming devices product program. The results suggest that the product program is
in some cases overly complex and development departmentalized. The thesis project
also provides recommendations on improvement implementation to further optimize
and ensure the future of Philips’s product program.
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis project was carried out in order to explore the potential benefits of further
development of the methodology of technology platforms and architecture, where en-
gineering principles, components and resources are shared across product families of
Philips’s hair removal and cutting devices.
The thesis contains thorough product, component and market analysis of hair
removal and cutting devices. More than 200 product variants of 13 different product
families or architectures were carefully considered. Each different product family, en-
gineering principles and parts utilized to achieve desired purpose was analysed and
compared to each other to explore similarities and differences. A Product Family Mas-
ter Plan (PFMP) was developed for the product program to provide visible overview
and in order to highlight improvement areas, such as identify value adding variation
in the product program from non-value adding variation and over complexification of
the product program. A part sharing matrix was then constructed, where main com-
ponents of the product families were compared to each other and a overview provided
of component sharing. This not only increases development cost, but also production
and material sourcing complexity and cost. Quality issues were detected in some of
the lower end products, suggesting they could highly benefit from sharing of R&D
and component inheritance from more developed products. For the market analysis,
market segments were defined, based on performance level of products, world regions
and product purpose.
Based on the analysis results, focus area and goals were defined for the conceptu-
alized development of improvement recommendations and suggested actions to take
to achieve set goals. Improvement proposals were presented and evaluated against
defined key performance indicators and expected positive impact on the product pro-
gram compared to necessary implementation effort. An implementation guide was
developed, with focus on reduced implementation risk, distribution of investment and
measurable benefits in each step.
The hair removal and grooming product program at Philips is concluded to be
extremely well suited for further implementation of the methodology of technology
platforms and architectures. Even easily implemented and low investment activities,
such as a holistic product program overview and increased collaboration between de-
==PAGE:99==
8.1 Future Work
93
partments could greatly benefit Philips’s hair removal and grooming devices product
program by re-use of engineering principles and resources pooling. The devices are
all built up with relatively few and similar components, they are all designed to be
hand held and operated by similar customers so dimensional difference is considered
well within reasonable variance for standardization. Scaling within product families
is achieved with more advanced components, without much or any variation of the
devices themselves. Therefore, with further work, architecture/s, from which multiple
product families are derived from could successfully be developed and implemented at
Philips. Such an implementation could contribute greatly to the continuity of Philips
as a leading manufacturer of hair removal and grooming devices.
8.1
Future Work
Based on the analysis results, there are multiple products that overlap with each
other, both in regards to customer targets, purpose and performance. More impor-
tantly, there are numerous engineering principles developed, utilized and maintained
that carry out the same or similar tasks. Therefore, Philips should be able to highly
optimize their product program with implementation, such as proposed in chapter 6.
However, as this thesis project was carried out independently and therefore with-
out inside information and data from Philips, more detailed quantitative analysis is
needed to validate the benefits of the proposed recommendations. Therefore, it is
suggested that future work is carried out in collaboration with Philips. Presenting
Philips with the results of this thesis project, could inspire them to participate in fur-
ther consideration and development of the methodology of technology platforms and
architectures in their production. Through collaboration with Philips, sales statistics,
R&D, production and material cost can be included in the analysis, as well as detailed
part and interface analysis. By doing so, cost thresholds can be identified and much
more realistic results can be achieved.
With a holistic product program overview and management, i.e. with a well devel-
oped and continuously maintained PFMP for the whole product program, Philips can
highly simplify and optimize their hair removal and grooming product program. As
previously mentioned, how drastic the architecture merger and the implementation
of standard designs should be would need further consideration.
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX A
PFMP
PFMP created to give an overview of hair removal and grooming product families of
both Philips and Braun can be seen here below. The PFMP include a customer view
and an engineering view. For the high level analysis and lack of detailed data the
part view is not included. For more detailed view of how the functions and designs
of the devices is achieved part wise, see Appendix B.
==PAGE:101==
Shaver Series 1000
Shaver Series 3000
Shaver Series 5000
Shaver Series 6000
Shaver Series 7000
Shaver Series 9000
Shaver Series 9000 Prestige
OneBlade Pro Face
OneBlade Face
OneBlade Face + Body
Beard Trimmer Series 1000
Beard Trimmer Series 3000
Beard Trimmer Series 5000
Beard Trimmer Series 7000
Beard Trimmer 9000 Prestige
Hair Clippers DIY
Hair Clipper Series 3000
Hair Clipper Series 5000
Hair Clipper Series 9000
Multigroom Series 3000
Multigroom Series 5000
Multigroom Series 7000
IPL Lumea Advanced
IPL Lumea Prestige
Epilator Series 8000
Satinelle Essential
SatineShave Essential
SatineShave Advanced
SatineShave Prestige
Essential Bikini Trimmer
Precision Trimmer
Touch-up Pen Trimmer
Customer view ...
[ 1 ]
Gender
For what gender the grooming device is desigend/marketed for
Male
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Female
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
All Gender
[ 1 ]
Type
Commercial type of grooming product
Shaver
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
OneBlade
X
X
X
Beard Trimmer
X
X
X
X
X
Hair Clipper
X
X
X
X
Multigroom Kit
X
X
X
IPL Lumea
X
X
Epilator
X
X
Electric Shaver
X
X
X
Trimmer
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Body Part
For what body part the device is designed/marketed for
Hair
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Beard
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Body
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Ear and Nose
X
X
X
Bikini area
X
X
X
X
X
X
Feet and Legs
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Facial hair and eyebrows
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Hair Length
Hair trim length
Remove completely
X
X
X
X
Smooth < 0.4 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
0.5 - 3 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
4 - 10 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
11 - 20 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
> 20 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Price
Price range of product
< 20 £
X
X
X
X
20-50 £
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
50-100 £
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
100-200 £
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
200-300 £
X
X
X
 
> 300 £
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Operation
Powersource
Cordless
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Corded
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 0,1 ]
Showerproof
Is the grooming device usable in shower
Showerproof
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[0, 1 ]
Less Mess
Vacuum system
Clean up system
X
[ 1 ]
Dry or Wet
Can the device be used with shawing cream
Wet
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Dry
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Cleaning
Cleaning technology
Self Cleaning
X
Manual Wet Cleaning
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Manual Dry Cleaning
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[0, 1 ]
Compatable with App
Is the grooming device compatable with smart devices application
Smartphone compatable
X
Engineering view …
[ 1 ]
Hair Removal
[ 1 ]
Hair Removal Technology
What is the technology behind the hair removal process
Individual Rotating Heads
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Foil Shave Cutting
X
X
X
X
X
X
Scissor Like Cutting
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Epilation
X
X
Intense Pulsed Light
X
X
[0, 1 ]
Adjustable Length Settings
Does the device have length control options
Adjustable Length
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Length Control
How is the length setting controlled
Click On Comb
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Slide On Comb
X
X
X
Comb and Scroll
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Power Source
How is the operation powered
Corded
X
X
Rechargable Lithium Battery
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Rechargable Nickel-Metal Battery
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Disposable Battery
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Motor
How is the operation motored
Closed Standard Motor
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 0,1 ]
Replacement Head
Does the device have interchangeable heads
Head Replacement
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Replacement Head Interface
How is the interchangeable head connected to the device
SmartClick
X
X
X
X
X
Slide
X
X
X
Click On Mechanism
X
X
X
X
X
Click and Rotate Mechanism
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 0,1 ]
Water Resistance
Is the device water resistant
Water Proof
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Water Resistance Technology
How are the internals of the device protected from water
Water Proof Inner Shell
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Top Shell Water Seal
X
X
X
X
O-Ring
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Shell
From what is the shell made off
Plastic
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Aluminum
X
X
X
[0, 1 ]
Vacuum System
Vacuum cleanere implemented in the device
Easy Cleanup
X
[0, 1 ]
Bluetooth
Smartphone application
Smartphone Compatable
X
Part view
Kind - Of
Part - Of 
Causal Links
Satine
Shave
Trimmers
Multi
Groomers
IPL 
Epilator
PFMP Philips Grooming Devices
Shavers
OneBlade
Beard Trimmers
Hair Clippers
==PAGE:102==
Hair
Clippers
Trimmers
Series 3
Series 5
Series 6
Series 7
Series 8
Series 9
BT3000
BT5000
BT7000
HC5000
MGK3000
MGK5000
MGK7000
Silk-expert Pro 3
Silk-expert Pro 5
Silk-épil 3
Silk-épil 5
Silk-épil 9
Silk-épil 9 Flex
FaceSpa
Silk-épil FG 1100
Customer view ...
[ 1 ]
Gender
For what gender the grooming device is desigend/marketed for
Male
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Female
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
All Gender
X
X
[ 1 ]
Type
Commercial type of grooming product
Shaver
X
X
X
X
X
X
Beard Trimmer
X
X
X
Hair Clipper
X
Multigroom Kit
X
X
X
IPL
X
X
Epilator
X
X
X
X
X
Trimmer
X
[ 1 ]
Body Part
For what body part the device is designed/marketed for
Hair
X
X
X
X
X
Beard
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Body
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Ear and Nose
X
X
X
Bikini area
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Feet and Legs
X
X
X
X
X
X
Facial hair and eyebrows
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Hair Length
Hair trim length
Remove completely
X
X
X
X
X
Smooth < 0.4 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
0.5 - 3 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
4 - 10 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
11 - 20 [mm]
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
> 20 [mm]
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Price
Price range of product
< 20 £
X
20-50 £
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
50-100 £
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
100-200 £
X
X
X
X
X
200-300 £
X
X
X
 
> 300 £
X
[ 1 ]
Operation
Powersource
Cordless
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Corded
X
X
X
X
X
[ 0,1 ]
Showerproof
Is the grooming device usable in shower
Showerproof
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Dry or Wet
Can the device be used with shawing cream
Wet
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Dry
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Cleaning
Cleaning technology
Manual Wet Cleaning
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Manual Dry Cleaning
X
[0, 1 ]
Compatable with App
Is the grooming device compatable with smart devices application
Smartphone Compatable
X
X
Engineering view …
[ 1 ]
Hair Removal
[ 1 ]
Hair Removal Technology
What is the technology behind the hair removal process
Foil Shaver Cutting
X
X
X
X
X
X
Scissor Like Cutting
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Epilation
X
X
X
X
X
Intense Pulsed Light
X
X
[0, 1 ]
Adjustable Length Settings
Does the device have length control options
Adjustable Length
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Length Control
How is the length setting controlled
Click On Comb
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Comb and Scroll
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Power Source
How is the operation powered
Corded
X
X
X
Rechargable Lithium Battery
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Rechargable Nickel-Metal Battery
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Disposable Battery
X
[ 1 ]
Motor
How is the operation motored
Closed Standard Motor
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Closed Standard Cylinder Motor
X
X
Open Motor
X
X
X
X
[ 0,1 ]
Replacement Head
Does the device have interchangeable heads
Head Replacement
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Replacement Head Interface
How is the interchangeable head connected to the device
Click On Mechanism
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Click and Rotate Mechanism
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 0,1 ]
Water Resistance
Is the device water resistant
Water Proof
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Water Resistance Technology
How are the internals of the device protected from water
Water Proof Inner Shell
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Top Shell Water Seal
X
X
X
X
[ 1 ]
Shell
From what is the shell made off
Plastic
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Aluminum
X
[0, 1 ]
Bluetooth
Smartphone application
Smartphone compatable
X
X
Part view
Epilator
PFMP Braun Grooming Devices
Beard
Trimmers
Shavers
Causal Links
Part - Of
Kind - Of
Multi
Groomers
IPL 
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX B
Sharing Matrix
Sharing matrix was created in order to realize functional parts and present an overview
of shared components and technologies, both between product variants within the
same product family as well as between products across product families. The shar-
ing matrix is a more detailed visual realization of the engineering view from the
PFMP, presented in Appendix A.
On top of the sharing matrix all different product platforms are presented, both with a
picture and a name. However, some of these product platforms have multiple products
variants. For the purpose of the project, those different variants, usually dependant
on small implemented feature change are disregarded. Such feature difference should
not affect the main goal of developing a product architecture/architectures across
families as such varying features could still be implemented within the architecture.
Products are categorised based on their performance level and color coded accord-
ingly, Low performance level in yellow, mid level performance in green and high level
performance in red. These are the same categories as used in the Power Tower.
Design units difference is illustrated visually, each considered design unit is placed
in the same row, where the same fundamental technology is presented with the same
illustration. If the technology is shared with other product variants, it is colored with
the same background color. If the background color is white, the technology is not
shared with other products, even though the fundamental design is similar to others.
With that it is possible to both illustrate shared use of similar technology, as well as
sharing of components.
Other considerable explanations can be seen in Figure B.2.
==PAGE:104==
B Sharing Matrix
98
Figure B.1: Explanation guide to sharing matrix.
Figure B.2: Explanation guide to sharing matrix color coding and illustration.
==PAGE:105==
Product Platforms
OneBlade
Face
OneBlade
Face + Body
OneBlade
Face
OneBlade
Face + Body
OneBlade
Face
OneBlade
Face + Body
OneBlade Pro
Multigroom
3000
Multigroom
5000
Multigroom
7000
Hair Clipper
3000
Hair Clipper
5000 Pro
Hair Clipper
5000
Hair Clipper
9000
Beard Trimmer
1000
Beard Trimmer
3000
Beard Trimmer
5000
Beard Trimmer
7000
Beard Trimmer
9000
Shaver
1000
Shaver
3000
Shaver
5000
Shaver
6000
Shaver
7000
Shaver
9000
Satinelle Essential
Epilator
SatinShave
Prestige
SatinShave
Advance
SatineShave
Essential
Bikini Trimmer
Precision
Trimmer
Touch up Trimmer
Low
Low
Low
Low
Mid
Mid
Mid
Low
Mid
High
Low
High
Mid
High
Low
Low
Mid
High
High
Low
Low
Mid
Mid
Mid
High
Low
Mid
Mid
Mid
Low
Low
Low
Low
Cutting Technology
Blade type
Shell
Battery
PCB
Motor
Motor Shaft
Water Sealant
Interchangeble Head Mechanism
Power Button
Gearing
Charger connection
Length control
Charger cable
Sharing between platforms
Performance Level
Sharing Matrix Philips
Part of Inner Shell
Part of Inner Shell
Part of Outer Shell
Part of Outer Shell
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Part of Inner Shell
?
?
?
?
Part of Outer Shell
==PAGE:106==
Product Platforms
Multi Groom 3000 Multi Groom 5000 Multi Groom 7000
Hair Clipper
5000
Beard Trimmer
3000
Beard Trimmer
5000
Beard Trimmer
7000
Shaver
 3
Shaver 
PS  3
Shaver
5
Shaver
6
Shaver
7
Shaver
8
Shaver
9
Silk-épil 3
Silk-épil 5
Silk-épil 9
Silk-épil 9 Flex
Silk-épil Trimmer
Low
Mid
High
Mid
Low
Mid
High
Low
Low
Mid
Mid
Mid
High
High
Low
Low
Mid
Mid
Low
Cutting Technology
Blade type
Shell
Battery
PCB
Motor
Motor Shaft
Water Sealant
Interchangeble Head Mechanism
Power Button
Gearing
Charger connection
Length control
Charger cable
Sharing between platforms
Performance Level
Sharing Matrix Braun
Part of Outer Shell
?
?
?
?
Part of Inner Shell
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
On PCB
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C
Current Architectures
C.1
Philips
Shaver Architecture
Figure C.1: Shaver architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:108==
C.1 Philips
102
OneBlade Architecture
Figure C.2: OneBlade architecture construction and key components.
MultiGroom Architecture
Figure C.3: MultiGroom architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:109==
C.1 Philips
103
Beard Trimmer Architectures
Figure C.4: Beard Trimmer architectures construction and key components.
Hair Clipper Architectures
Figure C.5: Hair Clipper architectures construction and key components.
==PAGE:110==
C.1 Philips
104
SatineShave Essential Architecture
Figure C.6: SatineShave Essential architecture construction and key components.
SatineShave & Epilator Architecture
Figure C.7: SatineShave & Epilator architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:111==
C.1 Philips
105
Satinelle Architecture
Figure C.8: SatineShave Essentila architecture construction and key components.
Bikini Trimmer Architecture
Figure C.9: Bikini Trimmer architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:112==
C.1 Philips
106
Precision Trimmer Architecture
Figure C.10: Precision Trimmer architecture construction and key components.
Lumea IPL Architecture
Figure C.11: Lumea IPL architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:113==
C.2 Braun
107
C.2
Braun
Shaver Architecture
Figure C.12: Shaver architecture construction and key components.
MultiGroom and Beard Trimmer Architecture
Figure C.13: MultiGroom and Beard Trimmer architecture construction and key
components.
==PAGE:114==
C.2 Braun
108
Hair Clipper Architecture
Figure C.14: Hair Clipper architecture construction and key components.
Silk-épil 3 Architecture
Figure C.15: Silk-épil 3 Flex architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:115==
C.2 Braun
109
Silk-épil 5/9/9 Flex Architecture
Figure C.16: Silk-épil 5/9/9 Flex architecture construction and key components.
Silk-épil Trimmer Architecture
Figure C.17: Silk-épil Trimmer architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:116==
C.2 Braun
110
Silk-Expert Architecture
Figure C.18: Silk-Expert architecture construction and key components.
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[1]
N. H. Mortensen, “Week 1 Terminology, introduction and pfmp.,” Technical
University of Denmark, 2019.
[2]
U. Harlou, “Developing product families based on architectures: Con-
tribution to a theory of product families,” Technical University of Den-
mark, 2006.
[3]
Philips.com, “Our purpose,” Visited: 1 November 2020, 2019, https://www.
philips.com/a-w/about/company.html.
[4]
W. Kenton, “Conglomeration,” Visited: 3 November 2020, 2019, https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/c/conglomeration.asp.
[5]
M. van Ginneken, “Form 20-F,” Visited: 2 November 2020, 2014, https://www.
sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/313216/000119312515059725/d849894d20f.
htm.
[6]
Philips.com, “Rethinking the future,” Visited: 1 November 2020, 2019, https:
//www.philips.com/a-w/about/sustainability/sustainable-planet/
circular-economy.
[7]
Cleanleap.com, “Emerging middle class,” Visited: 2 November 2020, 2020,
https : / / cleanleap . com / demographic - dividends / emerging - middle -
class.
[8]
N. H. Mortensen, “Week 10 Architecture, lecture notes from 41083 technol-
ogy platforms and architectures f19.,” Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[9]
——, “Week 2 Terminology, lecture notes from 41083 technology platforms
and architectures f19.,” Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[10]
M. T. Deane, “Top 6 Reasons New Businesses Fail,” Visited: 4 November
2020, 2020, https://www.investopedia.com/financial-edge/1010/top-6-
reasons-new-businesses-fail.aspx.
[11]
N. Kokemuller, “How to Become a Successful Leader in Manufacturing,”
Visited: 4 November 2020, https : / / smallbusiness . chron . com / become -
successful-leader-manufacturing-40497.html.
[12]
K. Ehrlenspiel, Kostengünstig Konstruieren[In German]. Springer, 1985,
isbn: 0387139982, 9780387139982.
==PAGE:118==
Bibliography
112
[13]
C. Y. Baldwin and C. J. Woodard, “The Architecture of Platforms A
Unified View,” Working Paper 09-034, 2008.
[14]
K. T. Ulrich, “The Role of Product Architecture in the Manufacturing
Firm,” Research Policy, Elsevier, volume 24, 1995.
[15]
J. Nieuwland, “Architectures as a framework for managing technol-
ogy, slides from effektiv produktutveckling med modularisering,” IBC Euro-
forumkonferens, 2000.
[16]
R. Sanchez, “Modularity in Product, Process and Knowledge Archi-
tectures: Foundations for a New Management Framework, executive
seminar presentation,” Copenhagen Business School, 1994.
[17]
Wikipedia, “Philishave,” Visited: 12 November 2020, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Philishave.
[18]
“Philips Trimmer Qt4000, Qt4001, Qt4005, Qt4006, Qt4011 Blades,”
Visited: 10 December 2020, 2020, https://www.amazon.in/Philips-Trimmer-
Qt4000-Qt4001-Detachable/dp/B072NHCW4G.
[19]
“Shaver Head Replacement for Philips,” Visited: 10 December 2020, 2020,
https://www.amazon.co.uk/Replacement-Philips-Centtechi-Electric-
Accessories/dp/B07CWRYQFX.
[20]
“Shaver S9000 Prestige Shaving heads,” Visited: 10 December 2020, 2020,
https://www.philips.co.uk/c- p/SH98_70/shaver- s9000- prestige-
shaving-heads.
[21]
O. Nicolae, “Philips Norelco S9000 Prestige (SP9820) Review: A True
Game Changer,” Visited: 10 December 2020, 2020, https://shavercheck.
com/reviews/philips-s9000-prestige-review/.
[22]
“Ipl Xenon Flash Lamp,” Visited: 10 December 2020, 2020, https://www.
aliexpress.com/item/32980568206.html.
[23]
“How does IPL hair removal work?” Visited: 10 December 2020, 2020,
https://www.philips.com.hk/en/c-m-pe/skincare1/how-does-ipl-hair-
removal-work.
[24]
K. Hall-Geisler, “How can lithium-ion batteries improve hybrids?” Vis-
ited: 11 December 2020, 2020, https://auto.howstuffworks.com/lithium-
ion-batteries-improve-hybrids.
[25]
Leakeem, “A Comparison Between Nickel-Metal Hydride (NiMH) and
Lithium-ion (Li-ion) Batteries,” Visited: 11 December 2020, 2020, https:
//turbofuture.com/misc/Which-is-better-Nickel-Metal-Hydride-NiMH-
or-Lithium-Ion-Li-ion-batteries.
[26]
M. H. Meyer and A. P. Lehnerd, The Power of Product Platforms: Build-
ing Value and Cost Leadership. Simon & Schuster Inc., 1230 Avenue of the
Americas, New York, 1997, isbn: 0-684-82580-5.
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
113
[27]
Wikipedia, “Market segmentation,” Visited: 16 December 2020, 2020, https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_segmentation.
[28]
Amazon, “Bestsellers in Personal Care Appliances,” Visited: 3 November
2020, 2020, https://www.amazon.in/gp/bestsellers/hpc/3150028031.
[29]
——, “Best Sellers in Shaving & Hair Removal,” Visited: 3 November
2020, 2020, https://www.amazon.co.uk/Best-Sellers-Beauty-Shaving-
Hair-Removal.
[30]
——, “Best Sellers in Men’s Shaving & Hair Removal Products,” Vis-
ited: 3 November 2020, 2020, https://www.amazon.com/Best- Sellers-
Beauty-Mens-Shaving-Hair-Removal-Products.
[31]
121creative, “Product choice: Why too many products can kill sales,”
Visited: 3 November 2020, 2017, https://www.121creative.com.au/blog-
ideas-that-inspire/uncategorized/why-too-many-products-can-kill-
sales.
[32]
GrandViewResearch, “U.S. Electric Shavers Market Size, Share & Trends
Analysis Report By Product Type (Trimmers / Clippers, Rotary
Shavers, Foil Shavers), Competitive Landscape, And Segment Fore-
casts 2018 - 2025,” Visited: 13 November 2020, https://www.grandviewresearch.
com/industry-analysis/us-electric-shavers-market.
[33]
“Fourth Industrial Revolution,” Visited: 27 December 2020, 2020, https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourth_Industrial_Revolution.
==PAGE:120==
