==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
master’s thesis
Heuristics for a pick-up and delivery
problem with time windows
Author: Adri`a Albert i L´opez - s201596
Supervisor: Prof. Evelien van der Hurk
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
2
Abstract
Pick-up and Delivery Problem with Time Windows (PDPTW) is the problem of serving a
number of requests using a ﬂeet of vehicles. In this work, diﬀerent types of customers are
handled: walking and disabled customers (which use wheelchairs), and an heterogeneous
ﬂeet of vehicles is considered. The maximum time between the start and the end of the
service is of one hour.
This thesis presents an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) for solving large scale
instances of the PDPTW. The requests for one day are grouped by time slices and clustered
by pick-up and delivery locations. A construction heuristic calculates an initial solution by
creating routes and assigning these routes to the vehicles. Then, an ALNS is applied to
improve the solution.
The metaheuristic is evaluated on real life large instances supplied by the transport company
Konsentra. It ﬁnds better solutions than the company’s solutions, achieving a reduction
in operational costs of 49% on average.
The results indicate an improvement in vehicle
eﬃciency, with an increase in customers served per vehicle hour by the minibuses of 304%
on average. The improvement of the initial solution by the ALNS is of 30% on average,
compared to 11% for the LNS, which proves that the performance of the ALNS is clearly
better than implementing an LNS.
Keywords: Pick-up and Delivery Problem with Time Windows, Adaptive Large Neigborhood
Search, Metaheuristics, Heterogenous ﬂeet
==PAGE:4==
3
==PAGE:5==
4
Contents
1
Introduction
6
2
Literature review on PDPTW
8
2.1
Vehicle routing problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Solution methods for the PDPTW and DARP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Exact algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Problem description
15
3.1
The pick-up and delivery problem with time windows . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
PDPTW in this report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Problem formulation
17
4.1
Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Objective function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Methodology
22
5.1
Construction Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.2
Travel times matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.3
Customers clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.4
Routes construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.5
Vehicles assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.1
Conceptual formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.2
Destroy methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.3
Repair methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.3.1
Routes construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.3.2
Vehicles assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.4
Adaptive weight adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.5
Acceptance and Stopping criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Case Study - Konsentra
38
6.1
About Konsentra AS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Customers requests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:6==
5
6.2.1
Requested time distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.2
Time windows deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.3
Special requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2.4
Simpliﬁcations and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3.1
Simpliﬁcations and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Parameter tuning
46
7.1
Tuning plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.1.1
Construction heuristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.1.2
ALNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2.1
Construction heuristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2.2
ALNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.2.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8
Results
54
8.1
Presentation of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.2
Analysis of the ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8.2.1
Comparison initial solution - LNS - ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2.2
Variability of the heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.2.3
Evolution of the operational cost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2.4
Analysis of the destroy and repair methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9
Discussion
72
10 Conclusion
75
References
77
A Case Study
81
B Results Parameter Tuning ALNS
89
C Performance Destroy and Repair methods ALNS
93
D Learning Objectives
104
==PAGE:7==
6
1
Introduction
Road transportation plays an essential role in our society. A growing dependency on private
vehicles has led to severe congestion in our roads and signiﬁcant impacts on air quality [1].
Public transportation provides the preferred solution to such problems. Nevertheless, some
particular situations cannot be served by regular public transportation systems, for example,
services in rural areas or for disabled people with special needs. Demand responsive transport
(DRT) services arose to meet this demand. DRT is a transport service where day-to-day
operation is determined by the requirements of its users. Typically, this involves users calling
a booking service, which will then plan a route for the day to pick-up users and take them
to their required destination [2].
The Pick-up and Delivery Problem (PDP) is a practical problem designed to create routes
and vehicle schedules for transportation services. The PDP is a generalization of the Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP) and, since the VRP is NP-hard, the PDP is a NP-hard problem
too. Depending on the particularities, diﬀerent approaches of the problem are considered.
In this thesis, the Pick-up and Delivery Problem with Time Windows (PDPTW) is ad-
dressed based on a case study, which has been treated by other authors in previous works
[3] [4] reporting good results. Some assumptions and simpliﬁcations are made to reduce the
complexity of the problem. Heterogeneous ﬂeets of minibuses, which have a limited capacity,
are considered. Minibuses have a maximum usage time of eight hours, thus, a unique driver
might be assigned to each vehicle. In addition, all requests must be served, which means
the customers that cannot be served by the vehicles in the ﬂeet will be served by taxis. The
maximum trip duration for all customers is restricted to sixty minutes, with the aim of ho-
mogenizing customers’ constraints, causing a direct impact on the time windows. Moreover,
customers may have some special requirements and needs, such as travelling alone, travelling
in a taxi, or wheelchair space for disabled people. Special requirements are omitted except
for disabled passengers, which suppose 10% of the requests, that have spaces intended for
them in minibuses. Real life data of the case study is supplied by the transport company
Konsentra, which operates in the region of Oslo, Norway.
This thesis proposes a metaheuristic to solve the PDPTW for large instances. An Adaptive
Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) heuristic is presented, tuned, tested and analyzed. The
size of the instances is reduced by clustering them by time and pickup or delivery location.
Then, an initial solution is found using a construction heuristic, which is the starting point
for the ALNS. Destroy methods that have not been used previously to solve this study case
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
7
are introduced, such as the removal of the routes with the highest average extra in-vehicle
time, the highest average waiting time, and the largest time gap between routes scheduled
together in a vehicle. A two-stage approach for the repair methods is presented, where new
routes are created with the customers from the destroyed routes and, in a second stage, all
vehicles are re-scheduled.
An extensive parameter tuning is developed using subsets of the data from the case study.
The heuristic is tested on real life data supplied by the transportation company and compared
to the schedules made by the company. The performance of the heuristic is analyzed and
a detailed study of the destroy and repair methods is developed. In addition, the ALNS is
compared with the performance of a LNS.
The contributions of this thesis are the following. The ALNS heuristic implemented can
ﬁnd good quality solutions in reasonable time for large instances for Pick-up and Delivery
Problem with Time Windows. Evaluated on a real life case, it ﬁnds better solutions than
the company’s solutions, achieving a reduction in operational costs of 49% on average, based
on our cost estimation. The results indicate an improvement in vehicle eﬃciency, with an
increase in customers served per vehicle hour by the minibuses of 304% on average. The
improvement of the initial solution by the ALNS is of 30% on average, compared to 11% for
the LNS, which proves that the performance of the ALNS is clearly better than implementing
an LNS.
The thesis is divided in diﬀerent parts. First, the vision of other authors about this prob-
lem and some exact and heuristic methods presented in previous works are discussed in the
Literature Review section. In a second part, a description of the problem and a mathemat-
ical formulation of the problem are developed. Then, the heuristics used in this thesis are
explained in detail, describing all the steps followed to get a solution. In the Case Study
section, a explanation and analysis of the data supplied by Konsentra is developed, and the
simpliﬁcations and assumptions made are justiﬁed. Later, the optimal value for the param-
eters of both construction heuristic and ALNS are sought. Finally, the heuristic is tested
and the results are presented and analyzed, together with a performance discussion of the
methods in the heuristic.
==PAGE:9==
8
2
Literature review on PDPTW
2.1
Vehicle routing problems
The pick-up and delivery problem with time windows (PDPTW) is a generalization of the
vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW). Since the VRPTW is NP-hard, the
PDPTW is NP-hard too [5].
Dumas et al. [6] states that the aim of the vehicle routing problem (VRP) is to design a set
of routes, originating and ending at a depot, for a ﬂeet of vehicles which services exactly
once every customer. These routes are designed to minimize an objective function, that
usually involves the total operation cost. The customers’ demands are always known and
the vehicles have load constraints. According to Hu et al. [7], in VRP all requests have the
same origin node (depot) and all vehicles leave the depot at the same time.
In the vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW), the issues described above
have to be dealt within ﬁxed delivery times. As explained in Dumas et al. [6], these delivery
times are deﬁned with an earliest and latest delivery time, which constitutes a time window
in which the vehicle is allowed to deliver the load to the customer.
The PDPTW is a generalization of the VRPTW in which each customer request is associated
with a speciﬁc pick-up node and a speciﬁc delivery node. Thereby, each customer has to
be picked-up and then delivered by the same vehicle [7], which introduces two additional
side constraints: precedence constraint and coupling constraint. The two constraints require
that any paired pick-up and delivery locations must be serviced by the same vehicle and the
pick-up node must be visited before the corresponding delivery node [8]
In some of the PDPTW applications, it is required that the total time between a pick-up
node and the corresponding delivery stop does not exceed a given threshold [5]. Thus, some
constraints are applied to the total ride time [7]. In this case, the problem is called the
dial-a-ride problem (DARP). A part from the total ride time, other quality of service criteria
can be deﬁned: route duration, route length, customer waiting time, customer ride time and
diﬀerence between actual and desired delivery times are the most common ones [9].
The problem might be considered in a static or a dynamic mode [9]. In the static mode,
all requests are known beforehand, while in the dynamic case requests are added gradually
during the day and vehicles routes must be calculated in real time.
==PAGE:10==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW ON PDPTW
9
Note that VRPTW is the particular case of PDPTW where all destinations (delivery nodes)
are a common depot [6].
2.2
Solution methods for the PDPTW and DARP
In the following section, some of the most relevant methods in the literature are described.
The problem can be solved optimally when the instance is not very large, using an exact
algorithm. Otherwise, if the size is too large, we need to use a heuristic to ﬁnd the best
solution possible, without knowing if it is the optimal one or not. First, some exact algorithms
are presented and later some heuristics are explained.
2.2.1
Exact algorithms
Column generation is the most extended tool to solve vehicle routing problems in an exact
way. Dumas et al. (1991) [6] considered a set partitioning formulation with a constrained
shortest path as a subproblem of the PDPTW when transporting goods, also called pricing
problem. The problem is solved using column generation, resulting in the ﬁrst branch-and-
price algorithm applied to PDPTW. It is designed to solve small scale dial-a-ride problems
and it can handle diﬀerent types of vehicles and multiple depots. To simplify the presenta-
tion, a homogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles and a single depot are considered. Eight problems that
range from 20 to 55 requests (40 to 110 nodes) are tested, obtaining the optimal number of
vehicles in a relative short time (313 seconds for the largest instance).
Barnhart et al. (1998) [10] described general branch-and-price and branch-and-cut algorithms
for solving large-scale mixed integer programming problems.
Baldacci et al. (2007) [11]
applied these algorithms for a Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem and, later on, Baldacci
et al. (2011) [5] used branch-and-price and branch-and-cut algorithms to solve the PDPTW.
An algorithm based on a set partitioning formulation strengthened by additional cuts is
proposed. They use three bounding procedures to compute lower and upper boundaries for
the problem. Then, they attempt to generate a reduced problem using variables whose cost
is between the lower and the upper boundaries. If the resulting problem has the correct
size, it is solved by integer programming; otherwise, a branch-and-cut-and-price algorithm is
used. This algorithm could solve 15 instances unsolved so far, nine of the instances presented
by Ropke and Cordeau (2009) [12] and six instances derived by Li and Lim (2001) [8] from
the Solomon VRPTW data-set.
==PAGE:11==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW ON PDPTW
10
Ropke and Cordeau (2009) [12] computed a branch-and-cut-and-price algorithm for the pick-
up and delivery problem with time windows. Two relaxations for the PDPTW, elementary
and non-elementary pricing problems, are compared using this algorithm. They found that
the elementary shortest path problem as pricing problem allows stronger lower boundaries
and it is not much harder to solve than the non-elementary. This algorithm is currently the
best exact solution method available in the literature in terms of the size of the instances
that can be solved optimally.
2.2.2
Heuristics
When instances are too large to be solved by an exact method, heuristics are used to ﬁnd a
good solution. Diﬀerent methods, tools and heuristics have been used to solve the PDPTW
and similar approaches. In this section, the most relevant for this work are presented.
A sequential insertion heuristic algorithm was ﬁrst used by Jaw et al. (1986) [13]. First,
customers are sorted by certain criteria, in the paper, lower earliest pick-up times (EPT) is
proposed as a criterion. Then, the algorithm processes each customer in the list in sequence.
The request is assigned to a vehicle j, if feasible, in the best possible place in the schedule
(minimum value of the objective function). If it is not feasible to insert costumer i in vehicle
j, the algorithm examine the insertion in the next vehicle j + 1. Finally, if no insertion is
possible, the request is assigned to a ”rejected customers” list. A detailed explanation of the
constraints imposed by the time windows and how to manage them to insert costumers in
a feasible position in the schedule is developed. The algorithm is tested on a simulated set
of 250 customers and on a real instance with 2617 requests. The method is centered in both
the satisfaction of the customer and minimization of operational cost.
Some parallel and sequential insertion heuristics are presented in Solomon (1987) [14]. Time-
Oriented, Nearest-Neighbor Heuristic is a sequential heuristic that starts every route ﬁnding
the unserved customer closest to the depot (in terms of time and distance). In subsequent
iterations, the customer closest to the last routed customer is inserted into the route. If there
are no feasible customers to insert, a new route is opened. An insertion heuristic, similar
to the one presented by Jaw et al., is also described. In this case, the best overall (based
on certain criteria) unrouted customer is inserted in the best feasible position. Finally, a
sweep heuristic is proposed. First, the customers are geographically clustered and a vehicle
is assigned to them. At the second stage, a scheduling process using an insertion heuristic is
used on each cluster/vehicle. The process is repeated with unscheduled requests from each
cluster. Solomon concluded that the insertion heuristic has an excellent performance for
==PAGE:12==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW ON PDPTW
11
routing problems, specially embedded in a sweep-insertion heuristic.
The meta-heuristic presented in this work will use an insertion sequential heuristic, with
similarities to these heuristics presented above.
These heuristic methods are successful in solving real problems with reasonable computa-
tional requirements but have limitations concerning global optimality of the solutions and
the ability to account for diﬀerent objectives [15]. With the aim of solving these problems,
some heuristic techniques appeared such as simulated annealing(Jr. et al. (1998) [15]), tabu-
search (Nanry and Wesley Barnes (2000) [16], Li and Lim (2001) [8], Cordeau et al. (2001)
[17], Lau and Liang (2001) [18]) and genetic algorithms (Jorgensen et al. (2007) [19]). These
heuristic techniques are capable of eﬃciently searching for near-globally optimal solutions in
the solution space with respect to a deﬁned objective function.
Bent and Hentenryck (2006) [20] presented a two-stage algorithm for the PDPTW. The ﬁrst
stage minimizes the number of routes, while the aim of the second stage is the minimization of
travel costs. In the ﬁrst stage, a simulated annealing algorithm is used for the neighborhood
search with the idea to relocate pairs of customers, selecting a better position in routes
schedules.
Three criteria are used: minimization of routes, maximization of the sum of
squares of the route sizes (requests in the route) and minimization of the travel cost. From
an initial solution, a number of local searches are developed, starting in each iteration from
the best solution found so far and the initial temperature of the simulated annealing. A
time limit is used as an stop criterion to end the search. The second stage consists on a
Large Neighborhood search (LNS). At each iteration, a neighbor is selected, changes on this
neighbor occur and the new solution is accepted if the objective value is lower than the actual
solution. A branch-and-bound algorithm is used to explore the selected neighborhood. The
authors concluded that this two-stage approach should produce high-quality results and that
speciﬁcally LNS is a good method to minimize the travel cost.
A variation of the LNS was introduced by Ropke and Pisinger (2006) [21]. In LNS the solution
is destroyed (some requests are removed) and then repaired (the requests are inserted again
in the solution). Only one removal method and one insertion method are used. Ropke and
Pisinger used several removal and insertion heuristics and they called this variation Adaptive
Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS). ALNS works as a LNS with the diﬀerence that at each
iteration a diﬀerent removal and insertion heuristic are selected. For selecting the heuristic
to use, weights are assigned to the diﬀerent heuristics and a roulette wheel selection principle
is used. Weights are updated at the end of each segment (a segment is a number of iterations
of the ALNS). For the updating of weights, scores are assigned to the heuristics when they
==PAGE:13==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW ON PDPTW
12
are used, depending on their performance. In addition, each time a heuristic is used, an
incremental variable is updated. Weights allow to assign probabilities of being selected to
each heuristic, and a random number is generated to choose the one to be used.
The heuristic could have the tendency to get trapped in a local minimum if only solutions
better than the current one were selected. For this reason, a criteria based on simulated
annealing is used for the acceptance of new solutions to be explored. Computational tests
with instances from 50 to 1,000 locations were performed. They found the best solutions
until that moment for the instances from Li and Lim (2001) [8] and stated that the ALNS
improve the performance of the LNS for the PDPTW. Also, they discovered that the LNS
is more sensitive to changes in removal heuristics than in insertion heuristics.
Later on, other authors have worked with ALNS to solve PDPTW and variations. They have
introduced new removal and repair methods, but mostly focused on the removal methods.
Because, as said in Ropke and Pisinger [21], it is the most sensitive stage. Li et al. (2016)
[22] introduced destroy methods with the focus on improving the proﬁts. Ghilas et al. (2016)
[23] presented a PDPTW with Scheduled Lines and used 10 diﬀerent removal heuristics and
5 repair methods.
In Liu et al. (2019) [24], an ALNS heuristic is used to solve a vehicle routing problem
with time windows and synchronized visits. This variant diﬀers from the classical VRPTW
because some customers need synchronized services, which means such customers must be
served by two or more vehicles simultaneously at the same start time.
The problem is
important for its many applications such as the daily logistics of home health care companies.
The authors considered the ALNS a good tool for solving this problem with a reasonable
computattion time.
ALNS has also been used to solve new challenges that have arisen with technological progress.
It is the case of the paper by Sacramento et al. (2019) [25]. They present an ALNS heuristic
to solve what they called the ”VRP with drones”. It consists of a mixed truck-drone problem
where each truck is equipped with a single drone. The drone delivers goods while the truck
can visit other customers too.
They concluded that the ALNS performed well for this
problem.
From 2018, two master’s thesis developed in DTU focused on this problem. Schwartzlose
and Pedersen (2018) [3] and Lantzenberg (2019) [4] presented heuristic methods to solve the
problem and tested their methodology on the same case study studied in this thesis.
Schwartzlose and Pedersen [3] presented a meta-heuristic and math-heuristic approach for
==PAGE:14==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW ON PDPTW
13
solving large-scale DARPTW with heterogenous ﬂeets.
They introduced a methodology
combining diﬀerent algorithms and heuristics.
In a ﬁrst step, a Labelling Algorithm is
applied to classify compatible requests and create routes (called tours in their thesis). The
set of routes is then used to schedule the requests in the vehicles by applying an ALNS and
a Column Generation. Both procedures are used separately and collaboratively. Thus, the
construction of routes precedes the ALNS, and the destroy methods only remove the routes
from the schedule, keeping them into the routes set. Later, the repair methods re-insert the
routes into the vehicle schedules. This diﬀers from the approach presented in this report, in
which the routes removed from the schedule are destroyed and new routes are constructed,
in each iteration of the ALNS. The heuristic was tested with real life data from Konsentra
(the same data used in this thesis). The column generation did not perform as expected due
to its high computational cost. The results obtained by applying the ALNS improved the
schedule of the case study in terms of a multiobjective function, which considers both cost
and quality of service factors, diﬀerently from the approach presented in this document that
considers and objective function with only cost factors.
In Lantzenberg [4] a metaheuristic to solve a DARPTW is presented. The problem is formu-
lated in the same way as in Schwartzlose and Pedersen but with diﬀerent objective function.
In that approach, a simple objective function is considered, with only cost factors, as in the
present thesis. These cost factors include the cost for operating the ﬂeet of vehicles and the
cost of the extra taxis required. The heuristic presented is divided in two main parts: the
clustering of the customers and an ALNS. The set of customers is divided in time slices to
reduce the size of the sets, idea implemented in this thesis in the same way Lantzenberg
did. Later, the customers are divided between walking and wheelchair requests and they are
treated separately. Walking customers are then clustered using a K-mean clustering, which
is a main part of Lantzenberg’s work. Thus, a detailed clustering phase is presented. A
parallel insertion is applied in the resulting clusters to construct the routes. Then, an ALNS
uses four diﬀerent destroy methods but only one repair method, basically the same method
for the construction of the initial solution. A schedule solution example is available from the
company to compare the results. Notice that this comparison have some limitations due to
diﬀerent travel times calculations and assumptions. Therefore, the results cannot be taken
into account as an absolute truth, it is only a comparison of performances. Lantzenberg
obtained a reduction of 32% in operational costs compared with the study case on average,
with only 5 minutes of running time for the ALNS. Therefore, he achieved a very eﬃcient
method to schedule the Konsentra’s requests.
In this thesis, an ALNS is applied to an initial solution. The ALNS proposed follows the
guidelines introduced by Ropke and Pisinger [21], as is the best approach for large instances
==PAGE:15==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW ON PDPTW
14
encountered so far, and continues the work started by Schwartzlose and Pedersen [3] and
Lantzenberg [4]. Diﬀerent assumptions have been considered, such as an homogeneous max-
imum trip duration of one hour and diﬀerent travel times calculations, and a more extensive
analysis and description of the case study is developed.
Concepts and inspiration from
other authors mentioned in this review are used for the conception of the destroy and repair
methods, but adapted to the speciﬁc problem addressed in this work.
==PAGE:16==
15
3
Problem description
3.1
The pick-up and delivery problem with time windows
In the considered problem, we are given a number of requests and a ﬂeet of vehicles. A
request consists of picking-up a customer at one location and delivering it to another location
[21]. This deﬁnes pick-up and delivery pairs. Given such a pair (p,d), a route must service
customers p and d with the same vehicle and must schedule the pick-up customer (p) before
the delivery customer(d) [20]. The start and end terminals do not need to be at the same
location, two vehicles can have diﬀerent start and end terminals [21].
Time windows are deﬁned by an interval between the earliest service time and latest service
time. Vehicles must arrive at the site before the end of the time window (before the latest
service time), and they may arrive early but they have to wait until the earliest service time
to begin the service [20].
Each request is assigned a set of feasible vehicles, depending on the special needs of the
requests and the vehicle typologies available in the ﬂeet. Each vehicle has a limited capacity
that imposes a constraint on the problem [21].
The main task is to construct valid routes for the vehicles. A route is valid if time windows
and capacity constraints are obeyed, the vehicle serves only the requests it is allowed to
serve, corresponding pick-up and deliveries are served on the same route, and each pick-up
is served before the corresponding delivery [21]. The aim is to plan a set of minimum cost
vehicle routes able to accommodate as many requests as possible [9].
If some requests cannot be assigned to a vehicle of the ﬂeet, these requests are placed in
a virtual requests bank. Such requests might be served by an external operator or renting
extra vehicles, for example [21].
3.2
PDPTW in this report
The problem dealt with in this thesis is a Pick-up and Delivery Problem with Time Windows
(PDPTW). Some characteristics were described above but in this section a description of
the speciﬁc problem treated in the thesis is developed.
An heterogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles is considered with varying capacities and hourly costs. The
==PAGE:17==
3
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
16
ﬂeet is made up of minibuses of diﬀerent capacities and ﬂeet size is limited and deﬁned pre-
viously. Therefore, it is possible that some requests cannot be served by the ﬂeet of vehicles,
so these costumers must be assigned to taxis. Taxis have a diﬀerent way of computing the
operational cost, based on a ﬁxed initial price and a variable price depending on the travel
distance. Thus, the more taxis are used, the higher is the total operating cost. Nonetheless,
all demands must be fulﬁlled, what means each customer must have a vehicle assigned.
Some customers have special needs. Thus, two types of passengers are considered: walking
and disabled customers. The passenger type must be taken into account in customers allo-
cation in vehicles, as the capacity of the vehicles may change depending on the considered
request type.
Pick-Up (PU) and Drop-Oﬀ(DO) requests types are considered.
In PU, the customer
speciﬁes the preferred time at which it has to be picked-up and, in DO, the customer speciﬁes
the preferred delivery time. There is one hour to complete the trip and, thus, the time
windows for both pick-up and delivery are deﬁned.
In PU requests, the customer must
reach the delivery location within one hour from the pick-up time and can not be picked-up
before this time. In DO requests, the customer may be picked-up within one hour before
the delivery time and cannot arrive to the delivery location after the requested time.
The main objective is to minimize operational costs.
==PAGE:18==
17
4
Problem formulation
In this section, a mathematical model of the problem is given. First, the sets, parameters
and decision variables are introduced. Later, the objective function is formulated. Finally,
the problem constraints are presented.
The mathematical model presented is based on the models proposed by Ropke and Pisinger
[21], Ramaekers et al. [26], Baldacci et al. [5], Hu et al. [7] and Dumas et al. [6].
4.1
Notation
The PDPTW problem is deﬁned on a directed graph G = (N, A), where N is the set of all
vertices and A is the feasible arcs set. Let there be n customers indexed by i. We associate
the pick-up location of the customer i a node i and the delivery location a node n + i.
Diﬀerent nodes may correspond to the same physical location. P = {1, . . . , n} is the set of
pick-up nodes and D = {n + 1, . . . , 2n} is the set of delivery nodes. There are not terminals
in the problem considered, as the drivers start from their homes. However, a starting {0}
and ending {2n+1} nodes are introduced. Therefore, N = {0, . . . , 2n + 1} is the union of
the pick-up nodes, the delivery nodes and the dummy nodes N = {0} ∪P ∪D{2n + 1}.
An heterogeneous ﬂeet of m vehicles is considered. K is the set of all vehicles, |K| = m,
indexed by k.
Each vehicle has a deﬁned capacity.
Two types of requests r ∈R are
studied in this thesis, walking and wheelchair, depending on customers’ needs. Thereby, the
vehicles capacity diﬀers for the two types of requests Qr
k. Each node has a load request qr
i ,
that will be 0 for one type of request and 1 for the other. This load satisﬁes the relation
qr
i = −qr
n+i (i = 1, . . . , n), which means that the load added to the vehicle in the pick-up
node is subtracted in the delivery point.
A service time si and a time window [ai, bi] is associated with each node i ∈N. Service time
denotes the time needed for loading and unloading when the vehicle reaches the nodes. And
time windows indicates the times between the nodes can be visited. A vehicle may arrive at
the node before ai, but it has to wait until the start of the time window to serve the node.
However, it never can serve the node after the latest arrival time bi.
Each arc (i, j) ∈A has associated a distance dij and a travel time tij. It is assumed that
distances and times are non-negative (dij ≥0, tij ≥0). The operation costs associated with
minibuses are computed using the travel time, so we can deﬁne the cost per hour chk. Taxis
==PAGE:19==
4
PROBLEM FORMULATION
18
have two components, a ﬁxed cost cft and a cost per kilometer traveled ckt. The kilometer
rate is applied after surpassing a minimum distance of mimkm km.
If the vehicle k ∈K uses the arc (i, j) ∈A, the binary decision variable xijk is equal to 1,
0 otherwise. If the request i ∈P is assigned to a taxi, the binary decision variable zi will
equal to 1, 0 otherwise. The decision variable Tik computes the time at which node i ∈N is
served by vehicle k ∈K. The load of vehicle k ∈K for the request type r ∈R after serving
the node i ∈N is followed by the decision variable Lr
ik. Finally, the variable dk is used to
compute the current travel time of the vehicle k ∈K.
Sets:
n
Number of requests
m
Number of vehicles
N
Set of nodes
P
Pick-up nodes
D
Delivery nodes
{0}
Dummy starting point
{2n+1}
Dummy ending point
A
Set of feasible arcs
K
Set of vehicles
R
Set of request types
Parameters:
ai
Earliest service time
i ∈(P ∪D)
bi
Latest service time
i ∈(P ∪D)
si
Service time
i ∈(P ∪D)
dij
Travel distance of arc (i, j)
i, j ∈N
tij
Travel time of arc (i, j)
i, j ∈N
Qr
k
Capacity of the vehicle k for the request type r
k ∈K; r ∈R
qr
i
Load at node i for the request type r
i ∈(P ∪D); r ∈R
chk
Hourly cost for vehicle k
k ∈K
Dk
Maximum ride time by vehicle k
k ∈K
cft
Fixed cost of a taxi
ckt
Kilometer cost for a taxi
mimkm
Minimum billed distance by a taxi
==PAGE:20==
4
PROBLEM FORMULATION
19
Decision variables:
xijk
Indicates if the vehicle k travels from i to j (=1),
or not (=0)
k ∈K; i, j ∈(P ∪D)
Tik
Time the vehicle k serves the node i
k ∈K; i ∈(P ∪D)
Lr
ik
Load in vehicle k for the request type r after serve
the node i
k ∈K; r ∈R; i ∈(P ∪D)
zi
Indicates if node i is served by a taxi (equal to 1),
or not (equal to 0)
i ∈P
dk
Current travel time of the vehicle k
k ∈K
4.2
Objective function
The objective function presented is cost-centered, which means that only operational costs
are taken into account and the goal is to minimize total operational cost. Quality of service
factors are secured by the constraints. Thus, the objective function is composed of two parts:
the costs associated with minibuses and the cost of the taxis used. The cost of minibuses
is calculated as the price per hour multiplied by the time from the ﬁrst to the last service
of the minibus. On the other hand, taxis have a ﬁxed cost when used and a variable cost
depending on the kilometers they travel. In Equation 1, the objective function is presented.
[MIN]
X
k∈K
[ chk (T2n+1,k −T0,k) ] +
X
i∈N
X
j∈N
[ zi (cft + ckt · dij) ]
(1)
4.3
Constraints
A set of constraints must be deﬁned to limit the problem. In this section, the constraints,
which are the mathematical formulation of the particularities presented in the problem de-
scription chapter, are presented. First, the equations are displayed. Then, the explanation
of each constraint is developed.
==PAGE:21==
4
PROBLEM FORMULATION
20
X
k∈K
X
j∈N
xijk + zi = 1
∀i ∈P
(2)
X
j∈N
xijk −
X
j∈N
xn+i,j,k = 0
∀i ∈P; ∀k ∈K
(3)
X
j∈N
xjik −
X
j∈N
xijk = 0
∀i ∈P; ∀k ∈K
(4)
X
j∈N
x0jk = 1
∀k ∈K
(5)
X
i∈N
xi,2n+i,k = 1
∀k ∈K
(6)
Tjk ≥(Tik + si + tij)xijk
∀i ∈N; ∀j ∈N; ∀k ∈K
(7)
Tik ≤Tn+i,k
∀i ∈P; ∀k ∈K
(8)
ai ≤Tik ≤bi
∀i ∈(P ∪D); ∀k ∈K
(9)
Lr
jk ≥(Lr
ik + qr
i )xijk
∀i, j ∈N; ∀k ∈K; ∀r ∈R
(10)
Lr
ik ≤Qr
k
∀i ∈(P ∪D); ∀k ∈K; ∀r ∈R
(11)
Lr
0k = Lr
2n+1,k = 0
∀k ∈K; ∀r ∈R
(12)
xijk ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈(P ∪D); ∀k ∈K
(13)
zi ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈(P ∪D)
(14)
Tik ≥0
∀i ∈(P ∪D); ∀k ∈K
(15)
Lr
ik ≥0
∀i ∈(P ∪D); ∀k ∈K; ∀r ∈R
(16)
The ﬁrst set of constraints (2)-(6) handles the service of customers and vehicles allocation.
Constraint (2) ensures that each customer is served exactly once, either by a minibus or by
a taxi. The second one (3) makes sure that pick-up and delivery are provided by the same
vehicle. Equation (4) is the responsible of ﬂow conservation. If there is an incoming arc to
a node, there must be an outgoing arc. This means that if a vehicle arrives to a location, it
has to leave this location too. Constraints (5) and (6) state that the routes start and end at
the dummy nodes.
The set of constraints (7)-(9) handles the manage of time variables. In (7), time decision
variables are updated. It is only updated when a node is served (xijk = 1), what makes the
equation non-linear. It can be linearized by Tjk ≥Tik +si +tij −M(1−xijk) setting a proper
value for M. Constraint (8) ensures the pick-up occurs before the delivery and in (9) time
windows are deﬁned.
The group of constraints (10)-(12) take care of the load of vehicles. Constraint (10) updates
==PAGE:22==
4
PROBLEM FORMULATION
21
load decision variables. As in the equation that updates the time variable, it is only updated
when a node is served (xijk = 1) and needs to be linearized by Lr
jk ≥Lr
ik + qr
i −M ′(1 −xijk).
In (11) is checked if the maximum capacities of the vehicles are obeyed, while in (12) the
load in the dummy nodes is set to zero.
The last set of constraints (13)-(16) deﬁnes the decision variables. In (13) and (14) the
variables have to be binary, whereas in (15) and (16) the variables are always positive or
zero.
==PAGE:23==
22
5
Methodology
In this section, the methods used to solve the Pick-up and Delivery Problem in this report
are presented. As explained before, the PDPTW problem is NP-Hard. That means does not
exist any polynomial time algorithm to solve it in an exact method for large instances, as
is the case. Thereby, a metaheuristic is used to ﬁnd a feasible solution close to the optimal
one. An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) heuristic is developed starting from
an initial solution created by a Construction Heuristic.
5.1
Construction Heuristic
We require a heuristic that builds an initial solution, which will be called the Construction
Heuristic. The aim is to have a good initial solution to base the neighborhood search on. The
solution is composed by the schedule for each vehicle and, if necessary, a bank of requests
served by taxis.
The heuristic has diﬀerent stages. First, the data is read and allocated to the corresponding
parameters. At this time, travel times between locations are calculated. Next step is to clus-
ter the customers by requested time and location. For each cluster, routes are constructed.
And ﬁnally, these routes are assigned to vehicles to generate vehicles schedules. In Algorithm
1, the general procedure for the Construction Heuristic is shown.
Note that the term ’route’ is used to describe an ordered group of requests a vehicle might
cover, but it does not refer to the tour the vehicle may cover, composed by one or multiple
’routes’.
In the next few subsections, the diﬀerent functions and features presented in Algorithm 1
will be described precisely.
5.1.1
Data processing
There are two sets of data to be imported: information of the customers and requests; and
information related to the vehicles (minibuses and taxis). In section 6: Case Study, a more
detailed description about the diﬀerent data sets and their characteristics is presented.
==PAGE:24==
5
METHODOLOGY
23
Algorithm 1: Construction Heuristic
Data: Data-set ﬁles.
Result: Vehicles schedule.
1 begin
2
customers, vehicles = ReadData(files)
3
TravelTimes = CalcTravelTimes(customers)
4
clusterstime = ClusterByTime(customers)
5
for clustert ∈clusterstime do
6
clusterslocation = ClusterByLocation(clustert
7
for clusterl ∈clusterslocation do
8
routes = ConstructRoutes(clusterl, TravelTimes)
9
vehicleschedule = AssignRoutesToV ehicles(routes, vehicles)
10
end
11
end
12 end
During this thesis, object-oriented programming is used. Thus, objects for each customer
and vehicle are created from data and the attributes shown in Table 1 are ﬁlled. For the
customers, ID, request type, requested time, space type and locations of the pick-up and
delivery are given. Time windows are calculated at this point, depending on the request
type, using the requested time. In the case of the vehicles, there are diﬀerent attributes for
the minibuses and for the taxis. Minibuses have an ID, the capacities for both walking and
wheelchair customers requests, and a price per hour. Instead, taxis have a ﬁxed price and a
price per kilometer. The function ReadData() in Algorithm 1 is in charge of these tasks.
Customer
Minibus
Taxi
ID
ID
Fixed price
Request type
Capacity walking
Variable price
Request time
Capacity wheelchair
Space type
Price
Location pick-up (lat-long)
Location delivery (lat-long)
Table 1: Attributes.
==PAGE:25==
5
METHODOLOGY
24
5.1.2
Travel times matrix
To determine the travel time between nodes, the best way is to have real data collected
going from one node to other several times, at diﬀerent weekdays and hours in the day. As
these data are not available, and it is diﬃcult to get because of the large number of locations
(800-1,000 requests, 1,600-2,000 locations, 2,560,000 - 4,000,000 trips), an approximation is
used. Travel distances are calculated using the Haversine Formula which is a method for
calculating the distance between two points by assuming that the earth is not a ﬂat ﬁeld, it
has a degree of curvature [27]. A medium speed of 50 kilometers per hour has been set.
A matrix with the travel time between each node is pre-calculated, reducing the comput-
ing time. Instead of calculating the travel time each time it is required, it is only neces-
sary to access the matrix and ﬁnd the travel time between two locations. The function
CalcTravelTimes() is responsible for calculating this travel time matrix. As some of the
locations are repeated, for example because is a school, a pre-process is developed to remove
the repeated locations. Thus, the size of the calculations is reduced.
5.1.3
Customers clustering
Due to the large amount of requests handled in the data-sets of this work, it is necessary
to cluster the customers into smaller instances. A cluster could be deﬁned as a group of
”requests that look like to be served by the same vehicle”, Bodin and Sexton [28]. The
requests in a same time span and close locations are candidates to be served by the same
vehicle, so they should be in the same cluster.
The clustering is divided in two stages: a clustering by requested time and a clustering by
location. First, the customers are clustered depending on the earliest pick-up time. Clusters
are divided by time slices every timeSlice minutes. For example, if timeSlice = 60min,
the requests with earliest pick-up time between 8 o’clock and 9 o’clock will be one cluster,
between 9 and 10 another one, etc.
These time clusters might still be very large instances. A minimum number of customers in
the time cluster is set (minCluster). If this threshold is exceeded, another clustering stage
is applied on each time cluster, the clustering by location. However, customers have two
diﬀerent locations: pick-up and delivery locations. To solve this disjunctive, the datasets
were analyzed. It has been found that when requests are Drop-Oﬀ(DO) type, some deliv-
ery locations are the same (because kids are delivered to the school, for example) and the
==PAGE:26==
5
METHODOLOGY
25
opposite, when requests are Pick-Up (PU) types, some pick-up locations are the same (for
example, the kids are picked-up in the school). For this reason, DO types are clustered by
delivery location and PU types by pick-up location.
A K-medoids clustering method is used. It is a partitional clustering method where all the
requests are assigned only to one of the K clusters. Clusters are deﬁned by a center point
location and customers are assigned to the cluster of their nearest center. The center points
are determined by the algorithm of the Python module used (sklearn.cluster.KMedoids) in
a smart way to speed up the convergence. K-medoids is a variation of the K-means method,
with the main diﬀerence that in K-medoids a point of the data is used as a center while in
K-means the centroid is the mean of all points in the cluster. A longer explanation about
K-medoids is developed in Jin and Han [29]; and in Zhou [30] for the K-means method.
The maximum number of clusters is determined as Kmax = customers in time cluster
minCluster
. During the
execution of the algorithm, some of these clusters will remain empty, so the ﬁnal number of
clusters is going to be lower.
Functions ClusterByTime() and ClusterByLocation(), shown in Algorithm 1, are responsi-
ble for the clustering phase. Parameters timeSlice and minCluster will be tuned in section
7 - Parameter tuning.
5.1.4
Routes construction
At this stage, the aim is to create routes to later be assigned to the vehicles. Normally, a
route is assimilated to the schedule of a vehicle, but in this thesis is deﬁned as an ordered set
of pick-ups and deliveries, with the vehicle empty before the ﬁrst pick-up and after the last
delivery. Later, a set of routes will be assigned to a vehicle to create a vehicle schedule. The
travel time of the route is the time between the ﬁrst pick-up and the last delivery. Routes
might contain one or more requests and both pick-up and delivery of each request must be
part of the same route.
The function for the creation of routes, ConstructRoutes(), is shown in Algorithm 2. Start-
ing from a cluster of customers, a new route is opened. The customers are sorted by earliest
pick-up time. The ﬁrst customer in the list is inserted in the empty route, this is the job of
the function OpenRoute(). After this, the insertion in the route of Kcustomers are compared,
and the best resulting route will be the chosen one. First, a variable BestRoute is an empty
set with inﬁnite cost associated. The next customer in the list is inserted into the opened
route resulting on the called PossibleRoute. If this PossibleRoute is feasible and the cost is
==PAGE:27==
5
METHODOLOGY
26
lower than the cost of the best route, the possible route becomes the current best route and
the customer is removed from the customers list. The operation starts again for the next
customer in the list.
Algorithm 2: ConstructRoutes
Data: Customers (in a cluster) and TravelTimes.
Result: Routes.
1 begin
2
Routes ←−∅
3
while any customers to insert do
4
NewRoute = OpenRoute(Customers, TravelTimes)
5
iterations ←−0
6
i ←−0
7
while iterations < maxIterroutes do
8
BestRoute ←−∅
9
for customer ∈Customers [i : i + Kcustomers] do
10
PossibleRoute =
InsertCustomer(customer, newRoute, TravelTimes)
11
if PossibleRoute is feasible and
cost(PossibleRoute) < cost(BestRoute) then
12
BestRoute ←−PossibleRoute
13
Remove customer from Customers
14
end
15
end
16
if BestRoute = ∅then
17
iterations+ = 1
18
i+ = Kcustomers
19
end
20
else
21
add BestRoute to Routes
22
end
23
end
24
end
25 end
If a feasible route is found, the BestRoute is added to the set of Routes. Else, another
iteration with the next Kcustomers is developed, until maxIterroutes consecutive iterations
without ﬁnding a feasible solution are run.
When this happens, the route closes and a
==PAGE:28==
5
METHODOLOGY
27
new route is opened, repeating all the steps described until all customers in the cluster are
assigned to a route.
Once a route is closed, a time window for the start of the route is calculated. This time
window is composed by the earliest and the latest times the route may start without violating
requests time windows. For this purpose, it is necessary to ﬁnd the most restricted request.
The insertion of customers into the route is developed by the function InsertCustomer().
The function inserts the pick-up of the request in all the possible positions inside the route.
And for each possible insertion of the pick-up, the ﬁrst possible insertion of the delivery is
sought. The routes obtained are compared and the best one in terms of duration is chosen.
Therefore, the route with the best possible pick-up insertion and a feasible delivery insertion
is selected.
The feasibility of a route is checked by the accomplishment of the time windows for each
request in the route and checking that the route duration is no longer than the maximum
riding time of each vehicle (8 hours). This second condition should not happen, because the
customers are clustered by time slices of less than 8 hours, but is checked for more robustness.
Parameters Kcustomers and maxIterroutes will be tuned in section 7 - Parameter tuning.
5.1.5
Vehicles assignment
When all customers are assigned to a route, it is time to assign these routes to the vehicles.
As mentioned in the problem description, it is possible that some customers can not be
served by one of the company’s vehicles and, in this case, they are assigned to a requests
bank (that later will be served by taxis). Then, the aim of these lines is to explain how the
assignment of the routes to the company’s minibuses is done.
First of all, the set of vehicles is sorted by lowest hourly price per capacity. The minibuses
with the lowest hourly price per unity of capacity, if they are full, will be the ones with
lowest total cost per customer served. For this reason, these vehicles will have priority for
the assignment. The routes are sorted by the earliest time they are able to be scheduled.
For each vehicle, a set of routes will be assigned. The process explained below is for each
minibus. The next minibus in the list is selected and the ﬁrst route in the list is assigned
to it. Once the vehicle has a route assigned, a number of Kroutes are compared. For this
comparison, each of these routes is scheduled in the vehicle and the cost per customer
==PAGE:29==
5
METHODOLOGY
28
of the total vehicle tour is computed. The route out of the Kroutes routes which has the
lowest indicator is the one selected. It might happen that none of the routes is feasible
to be scheduled on the minibus. In this case, another iteration is run until maxItervehicles
consecutive iterations without ﬁnding a feasible solution. At this point, the vehicle schedule
ﬁnish and we start with the scheduling of the next minibus.
The scheduling process ﬁnishes when all routes are assigned or all buses have the schedule
full. If not all routes are assigned to a minibus, the customers on the remaining routes are
allocated to a requests bank that will correspond to the customers served by taxis.
The parameters Kroutes and maxItervehicles will be tuned in section 7 - Parameter tuning.
5.2
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS)
After obtaining an initial feasible solution, the next step is to improve this solution by the
search of neighbours. As stated before, the method used for this purpose will be the Adaptive
Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic (ALNS).
5.2.1
Conceptual formulation
The ALNS is an extension of the Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic (LNS). The LNS (see
Algorithm 3) takes as an input an initial solution and an stopping criterion, and gives as an
output an improved solution. The main idea is to destroy part of the initial solution and
then repair this solution, obtaining a diﬀerent solution. This new solution might be better
or worse than the current one. Obviously, if the new solution is better, it is accepted and
set as the current best solution found. However, if it is worse, may still be accepted. An
acceptance criterion is determined to accept some solutions that are worse than the current
one, in order not to get trapped in a local optimum. Otherwise, we would have a descent
heuristic. The heuristic iterates over these steps until the stopping criterion is reached. Both
stopping and acceptance criteria will be detailed in further sections.
==PAGE:30==
5
METHODOLOGY
29
Algorithm 3: LNS
Data: Initial Solution (Sinitial and Stopping Criterion (stopping criterion).
Result: Improved Solution (Sbest).
1 begin
2
Scurrent ←−Sinitial
3
Sbest ←−Sinitial
4
while not stopping criterion do
5
Sdestroyed = Destroy(Scurrent)
6
Snew = Repair(Sdestroyed)
7
if cost(Snew) < cost(Sbest) then
8
Sbest ←−Snew
9
end
10
if accept(Snew, Scurrent) then
11
Scurrent ←−Snew
12
end
13
end
14 end
In the LNS heuristic, there is only one method destroying the solution and another one
repairing it. Nonetheless, the Adaptive LNS (ALNS) uses several heuristics both for destroy
and repair methods. In each segment, a probability is calculated for each destroy and repair
heuristic. A segment is deﬁned as a number of iterations after which the probabilities are
updated (concept introduced by Ropke and Pisinger (2006) [21]). The parameter segments,
that will be tuned and discussed in the parameter tuning section, deﬁnes the number of
iterations on each segment. The quality of the solutions obtained is the basis for the updating
of the probabilities. The better the performance of the method, more probability will be
assigned. In the coming section 5.2.4 (Adaptive weight adjustment), the method to measure
the quality of the solutions and update the probabilities will be described. The structure of
the ALNS is shown in Algorithm 4.
==PAGE:31==
5
METHODOLOGY
30
Algorithm 4: ALNS
Data: Initial Solution (Sinitial and Stopping Criterion.
Result: Improved Solution (Sbest).
1 begin
2
Sbest ←−Sinitial
3
while not stopping criterion do
4
Scurrent ←−Sbest
5
Calculate destroy/repair probabilities
6
iterations ←−0
7
while iterations < segments do
8
Generate a random number −→Select a DestroyMethod
9
Generate a random number −→Select a RepairMethod
10
Sdestroyed = DestroyMethod(Scurrent)
11
Snew = RepairMethod(Sdestroyed)
12
if cost(Snew) < cost(Sbest) then
13
Sbest ←−Snew
14
end
15
if accept(Snew, Scurrent) then
16
Scurrent ←−Snew
17
end
18
iterations+=1
19
end
20
end
21 end
5.2.2
Destroy methods
The destroy methods are in charge of removing routes from the current solution and have
a direct eﬀect on the local search, so it is important to select good heuristics. Six diﬀerent
removal heuristics are used in this report. All of them have as input the current solution
and the number of routes to be removed (n), and they return a destroyed solution with the
list of routes removed.
Random Removal Heuristic
At each of the n iterations, Random Removal Heuristic selects a random minibus and a
random route in the bus schedule, and deletes this route from the solution. It is always good
==PAGE:32==
5
METHODOLOGY
31
to have a random selection heuristic because it might give solutions that you have not taken
into account thinking rationally. Several authors have already used this removal heuristic in
an ALNS, such as Ropke and Pisinger (2006) [21], Li et al. (2016) [22], Ghilas et al. (2016)
[23], Schwartzlose and Pedersen (2018) [3] and Lantzenberg (2019) [4].
Extra in-Vehicle Time Removal Heuristic
This heuristic computes the additional time in-vehicle. For all the requests (req) in the route,
the extra time is computed to obtain the total extra time of the route. The extra in-vehicle
time is the diﬀerence between travelling directly from the pickup location to the delivery
location or being part of a route and visiting nodes in between. Thus, it can be calculated
as the real service time for the delivery (t deliveryreq) minus the real service time for the
pickup (t pickupreq) and minus the theoretical travel time between the pickup and delivery
(TravelTime(pickupreq, deliveryreq)). The n routes with the highest values of average extra
in-vehicle time per customers served (Equation 17) are the ones removed from the solution.
P
∀req ∈route [ (t deliveryreq −t pickupreq) −TravelTime (pickupreq, deliveryreq) ]
Num. Customers in Route
(17)
Waiting Time Removal Heuristic
This heuristic computes the waiting time for each route. Waiting time is the extra time
between the service time and the requested time. For PU requests (PU = 1), it is the real
service time for the pick-up (tpreq) minus the earliest pick-up time (etpreq) while for DO
requests (DO = 1), it is the latest delivery time (ltdreq) minus the real service time for the
delivery (tdreq). The sum of waiting times of all requests in the route computes the total
waiting time. The n routes with the highest values of average waiting time per customer
(Equation 18) are the ones removed from the solution.
P
∀req ∈route [ ( etpreq −tpreq ) · PU + ( tdreq −ltdreq] ) · DO ]
Num. Customers in Route
(18)
Worst Removal Heuristic
This heuristic calculates the cost of the route when serviced by the vehicle to which it is
assigned. The aim is to remove the n worst routes in terms of cost per customer served. In
Equation 19, it is possible to see the formula to calculate the cost per customer served.
==PAGE:33==
5
METHODOLOGY
32
Minibus price · Route duration
Num. Customers in Route
(19)
Customers per Hour Removal Heuristic
In this heuristic, the n routes with fewer customers served per unit time are the ones removed
from the solution. The most eﬃcient solutions have a higher number of customers served by
unit of time compared to the ineﬃcient routes. An eﬃcient solution should lead to a less
expensive solution too. In Equation 20, the formula is shown.
Num. Customers in Route
Route duration
(20)
Time Between Routes Removal Heuristic
This heuristic computes the time gaps between routes. Thus, for a route i we calculate the
time between the service time of the last customer in the previous route (serviceTimei−1,N)
and the ﬁrst customer in route i (serviceTimei,0). And the time between the service time
of the last customer in route i (serviceTimei,N) and the ﬁrst customer in the next route
(serviceTimei+1,0). This time gap between routes might be high because they are far geo-
graphically or they are distant in the time. The n routes with highest values, obtained using
the formula in Equation 21, are removed. For the ﬁrst route, only the time gap with the
next route is computed, and for the last route, only the time gap with the previous route.
If there is only one route, the time gap is equal to zero.
(serviceTimei,0 −serviceTimei−1,N) + (serviceTimei+1,0 −serviceTimei,N)
(21)
5.2.3
Repair methods
The purpose of the repair methods is to insert the customers again in the solution. In this
thesis, not only the requests removed in the destroy phase are taken into account but also
the customers in the requests bank (the ones served by taxis in the current solution). The
inputs of the methods are the destroyed solution and the customers to be scheduled, and the
output is a new solution.
==PAGE:34==
5
METHODOLOGY
33
In the Construction Heuristic section, three steps are described: clustering, routes construc-
tion and vehicle assignment. For all repair methods, the clustering phase is the same as in
the construction heuristic. However, three diﬀerent routes construction heuristics and four
diﬀerent vehicle assignment methods are considered. Combining each routes construction
heuristic with every vehicle assignment method, we obtain twelve diﬀerent insertion heuris-
tics. In the following lines, the three routes construction heuristics and the four vehicle
assignment heuristics are presented separately.
The parameters that are common to the construction heuristic will keep the same value, as
they will be tuned only once. This assumption is made to reduce the number of parameters
to be tuned.
5.2.3.1
Routes construction
These heuristics are responsible for taking the removed routes and the requests served by
taxis, and re-construct the routes for these customers. The ﬁrst step is to completely destroy
of to assignment. We add to these customers the ones in the requests bank, so we have the
complete list of customers ready to construct new routes.
The base for the insertion heuristic is the same described in the construction heuristic, with
a main diﬀerence. In the construction heuristic, when trying to insert the requests in the
route, the best possible insertion for the pickup is sought and a possible insertion for the
delivery. In this case, the best possible insertion for the delivery is sought too (in terms of
less route duration). That makes the heuristic notably slow, so it is diﬃcult to do it on the
whole dataset. However, with only the requests destroyed and from the requests bank, it is
aﬀordable.
In Table 2, the three heuristics for the construction of routes are presented. The diﬀerence
between the heuristics is the way the customers are sorted to be selected for the insertion
in routes. The same values for the parameters described for the construction heuristic are
used to reduce the number of parameters to be tuned. Thus, once the customers are sorted
depending on each insertion method, the insertions of the ﬁrst Kcustomer in the list are
compared, and the best one in terms of cost is selected.
==PAGE:35==
5
METHODOLOGY
34
Routes construction
Requests sorted by
Random Insertion
Random
ET Insertion
Earliest pick-up time
LT Insertion
Latest pick-up time
Table 2: Routes construction heuristics.
5.2.3.2
Vehicles assignment
The inputs for this phase are: the vehicle schedules without the removed routes and the
routes recently created in the construction phase. One could start with the current schedule
and add routes to it if possible. However, the option chosen is to destroy all the schedule
and start from the entire set of routes to assign them to the vehicles. The routes that have
not been modiﬁed have a high probability to be served by the same vehicle, and with this
option we allow to visit more solutions.
The assignment of routes to the vehicles follows the same process as in the construction
heuristic. The diﬀerence remains in the order of the routes to be selected by the heuristic
for the assignment to the vehicles. In Table 3, the four heuristics for vehicles assignment
are presented. In the ﬁrst one, the routes are randomly sorted while in the next two are
sorted by route time windows. ET Assignment sorts the routes by the earliest time they
might start and LT Assignment by the latest time. Finally, Closest Assignment computes
the distance between the last location of the last route assigned to the vehicle and the ﬁrst
location in the possible routes to be assigned, and selects the closest one.
Vehicles assignment
Routes sorted by
Random Assignment
Random
ET Assignment
Earliest start time
LT Assignment
Latest start time
Closest Assignment
Distance between routes
Table 3: Vehicles assignment heuristics.
==PAGE:36==
5
METHODOLOGY
35
5.2.3.3
Summary
If we combine the routes construction heuristics with the vehicles assignment heuristics, we
obtain the twelve diﬀerent repair heuristics shown in Table 4.
Repair heuristic
Routes construction
Vehicles assignment
Random-Random
Random Insertion
Random Assignment
Random-ET
Random Insertion
ET Assignment
Random-LT
Random Insertion
LT Assignment
Random-Closest
Random Insertion
Closest Assignment
ET-Random
ET Insertion
Random Assignment
ET-ET
ET Insertion
ET Assignment
ET-LT
ET Insertion
LT Assignment
ET-Closest
ET Insertion
Closest Assignment
LT-Random
LT Insertion
Random Assignment
LT-ET
LT Insertion
ET Assignment
LT-LT
LT Insertion
LT Assignment
LT-Closest
LT Insertion
Closest Assignment
Table 4: Repair heuristics.
5.2.4
Adaptive weight adjustment
As mentioned before, the removal and insertion heuristics are selected with a certain prob-
ability based on their performance and solution quality. One could choose one destroy and
one repair method, and work always with them (LNS). But in this thesis we decided to use
all of them because one method may be well suited for one set of data and another one
might work better for a diﬀerent instance (ALNS). Moreover, alternating between destroy
and repair methods gives a more robust heuristic.
Ropke and Pisinger [21] designed a method to select the heuristics assigning a certain
probability.
A roulette wheel selection principle is used.
For k heuristics with weights
wi, i ∈{1, 2, ..., k}, the probability of choosing the heuristic j is calculated using Equa-
tion (22).
pj =
wj
Pk
i=1 wi
(22)
==PAGE:37==
5
METHODOLOGY
36
The weights wj are automatically adjusted using the statistics of the performance from
earlier iterations. As mentioned before, the search is divided in groups of iterations called
segments. During the segment, a score is calculated for each heuristic and set to zero at the
start of the next segment. The score of a heuristic is increased if it is selected and any of the
situations described in Table 5 are met. The scores for the removal and insertion heuristics
are updated equally, as we may not be able to tell which one is the reason of the success.
Scores will be tuned in the section 7 - Parameter tuning.
Score
Description
ρ1
The solution is a new global best solution
ρ2
The solution, which has not been visited before,
is accepted and the cost is better than the cost of the current solution
ρ3
The solution, which has not been visited before,
is accepted but the cost is worse than the cost of the current solution
Table 5: Score parameters.
Weights are updated at the start of each segment following the equation (23). The weight
for the next segment j +1 for each heuristic i has two parts, one referred to the weight in the
previous segment j and another calculated with the score obtained in the previous segment
j. A called reaction factor (r) balances the eﬀect of each part of the equation. It controls
how quickly the weight is aﬀected by the changes in performance. The reaction factor is a
value between 0 and 1 that will be tuned later. The score (πij) is divided by the times the
heuristic has been used (θij) on the corresponding segment. This value is also set to zero at
the start of each segment and it is used to judge equally all heuristics, independently of the
times that have been used. For example, a heuristic might be used only one time and ﬁnd
the best global solution. If a heuristic is not used, the new weight will maintain the value of
the previous weight (r will be 0).
wi,j+1 = wij (1 −r) + r πij
θij
(23)
5.2.5
Acceptance and Stopping criteria
The ALNS needs an acceptance function to state if the new solution will be accepted or
not. Accept only solutions better than the current global best solution would be a simple
==PAGE:38==
5
METHODOLOGY
37
acceptance criterion. But this would give a descent heuristic that might get stuck in a local
optimum. For this reason, it is necessary to accept some solutions worse than the current
one. To do this, the acceptance criteria used by Ropke and Pisinger [21] will be applied
in this thesis, which is based on the acceptance criteria of simulated annealing. This will
allow to visit new neighborhoods and explore new solutions, with the possible consequence
of leaving the local optimum.
The probability to accept a new solution (Snew) given the current solution (Scurrent) is man-
aged by the formula in equation (24). T is the temperature and it is always strictly positive
(T > 0). The temperature decreases every iteration by the expression (25), where c is the
cooling rate, a parameter that takes a value between 0 and 1 and speciﬁes the speed of de-
creasing the temperature. The higher is the cooling rate, the more time the heuristic may be
accepting solutions worse than the current solution. Parameter c will be tuned in section 7.
paccept(Snew) = exp (−f(Snew) −f(Scurrent)
T
)
(24)
T = T · c
(25)
It is necessary to set an initial temperature T0 for the ﬁrst iteration. The initialization of the
temperature, as explained in Ropke and Pisinger [21], is dependent on the problem instance.
For example, if the objectives values considered are very high, the diﬀerences might be also
high numbers, and the opposite with small values.
As the temperature is dividing this
diﬀerence (see Equation 24), the magnitude of the temperature it is relevant and it should
vary for each problem instance. For this reason, Ropke and Pisinger [21] links the initial
temperature with the initial solution obtained. T0 is set such that a solution that is w%
worse than the current solution is accepted with 0.5 probability, as shown in equation (26).
Parameter w will be tuned when testing the ALNS.
T0 = −w · f(sCurrent)
ln(0.5)
(26)
The stopping criterion of the ALNS will be the time.
==PAGE:39==
38
6
Case Study - Konsentra
In this section, the case study is presented. The heuristic will be tested using the data of
this case study, so we will be able to compute the eﬃciency of the method on a real case.
The data is supplied by the company Konsentra AS.
6.1
About Konsentra AS
Konsentra is a non-proﬁt organization owned by the public sector which operates in the
region of Oslo, Norway. The company is in charge of transporting disabled people (or with
special requirements) and people who do not have access to current public transport because
they live in the countryside. As a public transport service, Konsentra must serve all requests.
For this purpose, a ﬂeet of minibuses is available for each of the four regions (presented below)
where the company works. Konsentra has an agreement with several taxi companies to serve
the requests that cannot be served by their minibuses.
Konsentra works in four diﬀerent regions in Oslo. Each region manages its requests inde-
pendently, a diﬀerent ﬂeet of minibuses is available, and there is a certain agreement with a
taxi company. These are the regions:
• Asker & Bærum (AB)
• Follo (FOL)
• Nedre Romerike (NROM)
• Øvre Romerike (ØROM)
As a non-proﬁt organization, it is important to reduce the operational costs associated with
their activity while keeping a high service quality and customer satisfaction. That means
the shortest transport time and the lowest waiting time are the most desirable.
The datasets supplied by Konsentra have two main parts. The set of requests by the cus-
tomers and the data of the vehicles available for each region. The following sections will
describe these two data sets.
==PAGE:40==
6
CASE STUDY - KONSENTRA
39
6.2
Customers requests
Data from Konsentra has a given structure and some speciﬁc rules. Each data-set represents
a given day from their schedule. The data of ﬁve diﬀerent days are given: 09/01/2018,
16/01/2018, 23/01/2018, 30/01/2018 and 06/02/2018, all of them a Tuesday. Each of the
datasets has a list of requests for this day and for the four regions, and contains the needed
information for each request. As the vehicle ﬂeets are deﬁned for each region, it is logical
to split the daily datasets into four diﬀerent datasets, one for each region. Thus, now each
data-set is for one region and day.
6.2.1
Requested time distribution
The major part of requests are recurrent requests. For example, requests for kids that go
to school every weekday. Then, there are also exceptional requests which only occurs one
speciﬁc day, for example, if somebody needs to go to the doctor. In Figure 1, the number
of requests at each time in the region AB for the ﬁrst day is shown. We can observe that
most of the requests are concentrated around 8 am and during the afternoon. This requested
times shape is the same for the ﬁve days in the region AB. The reason is that most of the
requests are recurrent. The graphs for the other days can be consulted in Appendix A.
Figure 1: Distribution of the requests during the day in the region AB for the day 1.
==PAGE:41==
6
CASE STUDY - KONSENTRA
40
6.2.2
Time windows deﬁnition
There are two types of requests depending on the way of giving the requested time, Pick-Up
requests (PU) and Drop-Oﬀrequests (DO). In a PU request, the requested time refers to
the time the customer needs to be picked-up while in the DO requests the requested time
refers to the time when the customer should be delivered. Each passenger has a maximum
trip duration depending on their age. In Table 6, these maximum times are shown. The
maximum trip duration includes both travel time and waiting time.
Customer age
Maximum trip duration
0-8
45 minutes
9-11
60 minutes
12-15
75 minutes
16+
90 minutes
Table 6: Maximum trip duration depending on the customer age.
The maximum trip time, the requested time, the request type, and the pick-up and delivery
locations deﬁne the time windows of the request. For example, if a passenger of 10 years old
requests a Pick-Up at 8:00, the delivery must be before 9:00. Thus, if the travel time is 40
minutes, the customer can be picked-up between 8:00 and 8:20. If the request is a Drop-Oﬀ
with the same requested time (8:00), the pick-up must be not before 7:00 and supposing the
same travel time (40 minutes), the time window for the pick-up is from 7:00 to 7:20.
Time windows are deﬁned by an earliest time and a latest time, both for pick-up and delivery.
The terminology is as follows:
• etp: earliest pick-up time.
• ltp: latest pick-up time.
• etd: earliest delivery time.
• ltd: latest delivery time.
• reqTime: requested time.
• maxRide: maximum trip duration.
• travelTime: travel time between pick-up and delivery.
==PAGE:42==
6
CASE STUDY - KONSENTRA
41
The calculation of time windows depends on the request type. Equations 27 and 28 display
the formulas for the calculation of the pick-up and delivery time windows for both Pick-
Up and Drop-Oﬀrequests types. The type of request, age of the customer, maximum trip
duration, and requested time will no longer be necessary, as it will only be compulsory to
respect the time windows.
Time Windows PU Requests:
etp = reqTime
ltp = reqTime + maxRide −travelTime
etd = reqTime + travelTime
ltd = reqTime + maxRide
(27)
Time Windows DO Requests:
etp = reqTime −maxRide
ltp = reqTime −travelTime
etd = reqTime −maxRide + travelTime
ltd = reqTime
(28)
These equations can be illustrated by Figures 2 and 3. Lantzenberg [4] uses these sketches
to illustrate the equations as a useful tool to better understand them in his Master’s thesis.
With the requested time one can obtain the earliest pick-up time (PU requests) or the latest
delivery time (DO requests). Using the maximum trip duration, the opposite one can be
found: the latest delivery time for PU and earliest pick-up time for DO. Finally, with the
travel time between locations, the other limits of the time window are obtained.
Figure 2: Illustration time windows for a PU request.
==PAGE:43==
6
CASE STUDY - KONSENTRA
42
Figure 3: Illustration time windows for a DO request.
6.2.3
Special requirements
Customers might have some special requirements and additional needs that must be re-
spected when planning the transportation. The special requirements are the following:
• Wheelchair
• Use the shortest route (directly from pick-up to delivery)
• Always the same driver
• Ride alone in the vehicle
• Travel in a taxi
• A travel companion
A customer can have some of the requirements together. For example, one customer might
need to travel alone in a taxi and always with the same driver, which adds several constraints
to the problem.
6.2.4
Simpliﬁcations and assumptions
Due to the complexity of the data-sets and the constraints supplied by Konsentra, some
simpliﬁcations are made. Moreover, some assumptions should be done because of lack of
information or data. Thus, it will allow to center the focus in the solving process of the
PDPTW.
==PAGE:44==
6
CASE STUDY - KONSENTRA
43
When a vehicle reaches the pick-up or delivery location, a service time is taken into account.
When a customer gets on the vehicle, an extra 1.5 minutes are added and when the customer
gets oﬀ, an extra 0.5 minutes are added. These service times would need experiments and
data collection to assign them the appropriate value. This experimentation is out of the
scope of this thesis, so the values mentioned above are used as estimation. The service time
when getting on is higher because the driver may wait for the customer while, when getting
oﬀ, the customer is already in the vehicle.
In this thesis, a maximum trip duration of 60 minutes will be considered for all customers,
regardless of the age. The service may be worse for the range 0-8 years old, but it might be
better for customers from 12 years old and on. In Figure 4, we can observe that only 15%
of the requests are in the range 0-8 years old in the data-set for the region AB and day 1.
For the other days in this region, the percentage is almost the same. The other graphs can
be consulted in Appendix A.
Figure 4: Percentage of customers per age in AB-1.
Diﬀerent special requirements have been exposed before, but not all of them are considered
in this thesis. In Figure 5, the percentage of customers that require each type of special
requirement are shown for the data-set AB-1. The other days, the distribution is almost the
same (graphs are attached in Appendix A). It can be seen that for all of them, except for
the wheelchairs, the percentage of customers is small. These constraints would increase a lot
the complexity of the problem while they are not representative. For this reason, only the
people that requires a space in the vehicle for the wheelchair are considered. The other ones
are considered as current customers. Thus, two types of customers are taken into account:
==PAGE:45==
6
CASE STUDY - KONSENTRA
44
walking and wheelchair, which will imply a constraint for the vehicles, with diﬀerent loads
for each request type.
Figure 5: Percentage of customers with special needs in AB-1.
6.3
Vehicles
There is a heterogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles for each region composed by minibuses of diﬀerent
sizes. Every vehicle has a speciﬁc capacity for walking and wheelchair passengers, but not
all minibuses have space for wheelchairs. In Figure 6, the distribution of capacities for the
ﬂeet of vehicles in the region AB is shown.
Konsentra has an agreement with local taxi companies to fulﬁll the demand that cannot
be served by minibuses. Thus, a list of taxis available is supplied by Konsentra. There
are diﬀerent types of taxis, depending on the size and if they can allocate a passenger with
wheelchair or not.
Minibuses have an associated hourly operating cost. Therefore, it is important to schedule
eﬃciently to minimize the operational costs as possible. On the other hand, taxis have a
ﬁxed cost plus a price per kilometer. For the ﬁrst six kilometers, the cost is constant and
for the other kilometers an extra cost per kilometer is added. It is an expensive service, for
this reason, it is necessary to reduce the use of taxis as much as possible.
==PAGE:46==
6
CASE STUDY - KONSENTRA
45
Figure 6: Capacities for the ﬂeet of vehicles in the region AB.
6.3.1
Simpliﬁcations and assumptions
There is no information regarding the drivers, so some assumptions are made. First, it is
assumed that the drivers will start their shift at the ﬁrst request location, and they will ﬁnish
the work at the last request location. Thus, the total working hours is the time between the
ﬁrst customer picked-up and the last one delivered. The work shift of the drivers is assumed
to be 8 hours. Therefore, minibuses can operate only 8 hours per day, computing this time
in the same way as for the drivers.
The number of taxis is assumed to be inﬁnite and not shared taxis are used.
Hence, a
customer that is assigned to a taxi will travel alone. Only two diﬀerent types of taxis are
considered: a small one for the walking requests and another one for passengers with a
wheelchair. Diﬀerent associated costs are considered for each type.
==PAGE:47==
46
7
Parameter tuning
7.1
Tuning plan
In this section the tests for the tuning of the parameters for both the construction heuristic
and the ALNS are discussed. First, the parameters used in the heuristic to ﬁnd an initial
solution are tested and, later, the parameters for the ALNS. We start the parameter tuning
with the construction heuristic because ALNS uses the initial solution, so it is the ﬁrst step in
the method. The main objective of the parameter tuning is to ﬁnd the optimal combination
of the parameters that leads to the best possible performance of the heuristic. Therefore, a
test for each possible combination of the diﬀerent parameters should be done. This would
take huge computation time, for this reason, another strategy is selected.
The tuning is developed sequentially. All parameters are set constant to a speciﬁc value, and
the parameter tested at the moment is the only one changing its value. When the best value
for this parameter is found, it is kept to this value and the next parameter is tested. As said
before, it is not the ideal strategy to ﬁnd the optimal combination for the parameters, but
allows us to ﬁnd a good combination with reasonable computational time.
The data for the fourth day (30/01/2018) for the region Asker-Bærum (AB) is used as a
dataset for the tuning.
7.1.1
Construction heuristic
The construction heuristic is divided in 3 main parts: clustering, creation of routes and
assignment of routes to vehicles. For each part, there are parameters that need to be tuned,
and they will be tested in the same order that appear in the heuristic.
At this stage, the objective is to minimize the number of customers served by taxis with the
lowest possible objective value. Moreover, a fast heuristic is sought, of around 1 minute (60
seconds) and less than 2 minutes if possible. That is not only because it is better to have
an initial solution quickly, it is because some parts of the construction heuristic are used as
insertion heuristic in the ALNS. Thus, if this heuristic is not fast enough, huge computation
times would be needed for the ALNS.
In Table 7, the parameters tuned for the construction heuristic and the values tested are
presented.
As it can be seen, two parameters for each stage of the heuristic are tuned.
==PAGE:48==
7
PARAMETER TUNING
47
The heuristic is run only one time for each value the parameter can take, since there is no
randomness. The whole data-set for AB day 4 is used. In bold can be found the constant
values for the parameters before being tested. The parameter timeSlice has no bold value
because is the ﬁrst one to be tuned.
Parameter
Values
Description
Heuristic Stage
timeSlice
minCluster
30, 60, 90
2, 5, 10, 15
Time slice
Minimum customers for clustering
Clustering
Kcustomers
maxIterroutes
5, 7, 10, 15
1, 3, 5
Customers compared
Max. iterations w/o feasible insertion
Routes construction
Kroutes
maxItervehicles
3, 5, 7, 10
3, 5, 10
Routes compared
Max. iterations w/o feasible assignment
Vehicles assignment
Table 7: Parameters tuned for the construction heuristic.
7.1.2
ALNS
The ALNS heuristic contains multiple parameters which aﬀect the performance. The objec-
tive at this stage is to select the values for the parameters that lead to the lowest value of
the objective function. The ALNS has a certain randomness, so it is necessary to repeat the
tests more than one time. Tests will be run 3 times for each conﬁguration, what leads to
a high number of tests to be performed, exactly 63. For this reason, the running time for
the ALNS should not be so high and it is set to 10 minutes. If the running time is low with
the entire dataset, only a few iterations of the ALNS are developed, not using most of the
destroy/repair methods. Thus, a subset of the data-set for day 4 in AB region is used. This
subset contains 284 customers and a ﬂeet of 15 vehicles is available. It is approximately 1/3
of the entire data-set.
Running time
10min
Number of runs
3
Requests
284
Vehicles
15
Table 8: Tests characteristics.
==PAGE:49==
7
PARAMETER TUNING
48
In Table 9 are presented the parameters tuned for the ALNS with the corresponding values
tested. In bold can be found the constant values for the parameters before being tested. The
parameter scores have no bold value because is the ﬁrst one to be tuned.
Parameter
Values
Description
{ρ1, ρ2, ρ3}
{10, 5, 3}
{10, 8, 3}
{10, 8, 5}
{10, 10, 10}
{10, 5, 8}
Scores
r
0.1
0.5
0.7
0.9
Reaction factor
ζ
0.05
0.10
0.15
Reaction factor
w
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
Initial temperature setting
c
0.85
0.90
0.95
0.99
Cooling rate
segments
5
10
15
Iterations per segment
Table 9: Parameters tuned for the ALNS.
The initial solution is always the same because there is no randomness in the construction
heuristic. Thus, the improvement of the ALNS solution with respect to the initial solution is
calculated following Equation 29. The average improvement and standard deviation between
the 3 tests are computed and used as a tool for the selection of the best value for the
parameter.
==PAGE:50==
7
PARAMETER TUNING
49
improvement = Sinitial −SALNS
Sinitial
· 100
(29)
• Sinitial: objective value for the initial solution.
• SALNS: objective value for the ALNS solution.
7.2
Results
In this section are presented the results of the test for the tuning of the parameters.
7.2.1
Construction heuristic
The results for the parameters on each stage of the construction heuristic are presented in
the following lines.
Clustering
In Table 10, the results for the parameters timeSlice and minCluster are shown. For the
time slice, the lowest objective value is obtained for 90 minutes but the lowest number of taxis
for 60 minutes slice. Therefore, it is not trivial which is the one to be selected. Observing
the dataset, it can be detected that most of the requests are at o’clock times, so a time slice
of 60 minutes makes a lot of sense. For the minimum number of customers for clustering,
the lowest operation cost is for a value of 5, while the number of taxis is almost the lowest.
Parameter
Values
Taxis
Objective value
Time[s]
timeSlice
30
60
90
182
177
211
173555
169328
163595
29
34
39
minCluster
2
5
10
15
246
181
188
177
176523
164150
167290
169328
27
31
34
36
Table 10: Results parameter tuning for the clustering stage.
==PAGE:51==
7
PARAMETER TUNING
50
Routes construction
In Table 11, the results for the parameters Kcustomers and maxIterroutes are shown. The
number of customers compared on each insertion should be of 10, as it has the lowest
number of taxis and operational cost. The running time is around 1 minute, so it is in the
desired rank. The same happens for the maximum number of iterations without ﬁnding a
feasible insertion, where the value equal to 3 is the best one in terms of number of taxis and
operational cost.
Parameter
Values
Taxis
Objective value
Time[s]
Kcustomers
5
7
10
15
181
192
171
197
164150
160710
151740
163262
32
46
68
105
maxIterroutes
1
3
5
180
171
173
164879
151740
151805
37
68
78
Table 11: Results parameter tuning for the routes construction stage.
Vehicles assignment
In Table 12, the results for the parameters Kroutes and maxItervehicles are shown. The number
of routes compared to be assigned is set to 5, as it had the lowest operational cost and number
of customers served by taxis. The maximum number of iterations without ﬁnding a feasible
assignment is set to 3. For all values, the number of taxis is the same and the operational
cost does not vary a lot, but maxItervehicles = 3 has the lowest objective value.
==PAGE:52==
7
PARAMETER TUNING
51
Parameter
Values
Taxis
Objective value
Time[s]
Kroutes
3
5
7
10
173
171
192
202
156579
151740
159821
163999
65
72
67
67
maxItervehicles
3
5
10
171
171
171
148978
151740
151740
65
67
67
Table 12: Results parameter tuning for the vehicles assignment stage.
7.2.2
ALNS
Table 13 presents the results for the parameter tuning of the ALNS. The average improvement
between three runs and the standard deviation are shown as the tools for selecting the best
value for the parameters. The results for each run are presented in Appendix B.
Two parameters in the update phase of the ALNS heuristic are considered: scores and
reaction factor. For the scores, diﬀerent combinations could be considered, but the one with
the highest average improvement is selected ({ρ1, ρ2, ρ3} = {10, 5, 3}. On the other hand, a
value of 0.5 for the reaction factor is clearly the best choice. That means it will be equally
important the past weights and the scores of the recent iterations in the weights update.
The maximum percentage of routes destroyed is set to 10% (ζ = 0.1). That means a random
number of routes between 2 and 10% of the total routes will be destroyed each iteration.
The acceptance criterion uses two parameters needed to be set: the parameter for selecting
the initial temperature (w) and the cooling rate. A value of w = 0.075 is the conﬁguration
with the best average improvement and lower standard deviation. Thus, the initial temper-
ature will be set to accept with a probability of 50% a solution 7.5% worse than the current
solution. The cooling rate will be equal to 0.90.
Finally, the number of iterations without changing the probabilities of the destroy/repair
heuristics is set to 10. There is not a big diﬀerence between segments = 5 and segments =
10, but as we want to encourage the heuristic to visit new solutions, it is better to allow
more iterations without changing the probabilities, so more heuristics can be used on each
segment.
==PAGE:53==
7
PARAMETER TUNING
52
Parameter
Values
Improvement
St. deviation
{ρ1, ρ2, ρ3}
10,5,3
10,8,3
10,8,5
10,10,10
10,5,8
52%
43%
48%
49%
47%
5%
6%
3%
3%
5%
r
0.1
0.5
0.7
0.9
46%
49%
43%
39%
2%
4%
4%
1%
ζ
0.05
0.10
0.15
45%
49%
44%
0%
2%
4%
w
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
42%
43%
51%
47%
5%
4%
1%
3%
c
0.85
0.90
0.95
0.99
47%
49%
46%
43%
2%
3%
3%
2%
segments
5
10
15
47%
48%
44%
4%
3%
2%
Table 13: Results parameter tuning for the ALNS.
==PAGE:54==
7
PARAMETER TUNING
53
7.2.3
Summary
After the tuning tests, all parameters have a value assigned. In Table 14, a summary of the
parameters and the values that have been set is displayed.
Parameter
Value
timeSlice
60
minCluster
5
Kcustomers
10
maxIterroutes
3
Kroutes
5
maxItervehicles
3
{ρ1, ρ2, ρ3}
{10, 5, 3}
r
0.5
ζ
0.1
w
0.075
c
0.90
segments
10
Table 14: Summary of values assigned to the parameters.
==PAGE:55==
54
8
Results
In this section, the computational experiments and the results obtained are presented. The
heuristic presented in this thesis is tested for the region Asker-Bærum (AB). The datasets for
ﬁve diﬀerent days provided by Konsentra are used for this purpose. The following notation
will be used to denote each dataset: AB-d (where ’d’ will be the day).
Prior to the computational experiments, three pre-tests have been run using the AB-4 dataset
(the same used for the parameter tuning) during two hours each one. These tests conﬁrmed
that all destroy and repair methods ﬁnd accepted or best solutions during the computation,
and they keep probabilities of being selected during all iterations. Consequently, all destroy
and repair methods are used in the experiments.
A time limit of 4 hours (240 minutes) has been set for the ALNS. This time limit is checked
at the end of each iteration. Thus, the ALNS might be running for some more minutes.
Furthermore, the initial solution is normally found in approximately 1 minute. Therefore,
the running time for the heuristic will be between 240 and 245 minutes.
The section is divided in two main parts. First, the results for the ﬁve datasets are presented.
Later, the performance of the ALNS heuristic developed in this thesis is discussed.
8.1
Presentation of results
The heuristic is operational cost centered because the objective function is only taking into
account the costs related to the use of minibuses and taxis. However, the maximum trip
duration imposed as a constraint will lead to a high quality service. Notice that diﬀerently
from Konsentra and other authors that worked on this study case [3] [4], a maximum trip
duration of 60 minutes is imposed for all customers. That means a reduction in the maximum
trip duration for 55% of the customers (average between the ﬁve data sets) and an increase
of 15 minutes for 15% of the customers. The other 30% already had this limit in 60 minutes.
The results for the ALNS are compared with the schedules made by Konsentra and with
the initial solution obtained. Furthermore, the datasets are tested also using a LNS and
compared with the solutions obtained with the ALNS. For this comparison, some KPIs (Key
Performance Indicators) are deﬁned.
• Customers: number of customers in the dataset. This indicator will allow to know the
==PAGE:56==
8
RESULTS
55
size of the dataset.
• Taxis: number of customers served by taxis. These customers are the ones that cannot
be served by minibuses. Considering how many customers are covered and this KPI,
number of customers served by minibuses can be deducted.
• Operation cost: value of the objective function.
Costs associated with the use of
minibuses and taxis.
• Cost x customer: the average cost per each customer served.
• EIVT: the average Extra In-Vehicle Time for the customers served by minibuses. It is
the amount of additional trip time compared to travel straight from origin to destina-
tion.
• WT: the average waiting time for the customers served by minibuses.
• CPH: the average Customers served Per Hour by minibuses. The higher this value is,
the more eﬃcient the vehicle schedules.
• Gap: comparison between the values for Konsentra’s schedules and the ﬁnal solution
obtained with the ALNS. Gap = (ALNS −Konsentra)/Konsentra.
The operation costs, average extra in-vehicle time, and customers per hour for Konsentra’s
schedules are calculated using the assumptions made in this thesis. Notice that in this work
minibuses can be used only in one shift of a maximum of eight consecutive hours, while
Konsentra allows two diﬀerent shifts. The total riding time of a minibus is computed as the
time between the ﬁrst request served and the last one, while Konsentra allows a break in
the middle of the day, and it does not compute breaks in costs. Nonetheless, as mentioned
above, the KPIs will be calculated following the assumptions made in this thesis.
A LNS version of the heuristic is tested to compare the performance with the ALNS. This
analysis may allow to evaluate the performance of the ALNS. In case the ALNS will not
improve LNS solutions, it will mean that the ALNS is not necessary or it must be improved.
There are not destroy and repair methods which clearly perform better than the others, for
this reason, the random removal heuristic and the random-ET insertion heuristic methods
are selected for the LNS. Random methods always set an idea of how good a solution is, if
the solutions found by random methods are always the best, the other methods are not well
designed.
The results for each dataset are presented below.
==PAGE:57==
8
RESULTS
56
AB-1
The dataset for the ﬁrst day is the biggest one in terms of customers served. The solution
found by the ALNS decreases Konsentra solution in 34% the number of customers served by
taxis. Moreover, the operation cost of the ALNS is 53% lower than the Konsentra schedule.
The extra in-vehicle time is reduced 28%, and four times more customers are served for
each vehicle hour. That means the eﬃciency of the routes is considerably higher in ALNS
solution than in Konsentra’s schedule, whereas the waiting time is 8 times higher in the
solution proposed. Thus, the quality of service in the ALNS solution is better than the
solution provided by Konsentra in terms of extra in-vehicle time, but it is worse in terms of
waiting time. In Konsentra’s schedule, ten customers arrived late to their destination with a
total accumulated delay of 384 minutes. On the other hand, the solution of the ALNS does
not have customers with delay.
AB-1
Konsentra
Initial
LNS
ALNS
Gap
Customers
874
-
Taxis
128
366
256
85
-34%
Operation cost [NOK]
293,518
202,787
176,262
136,690
-53%
Cost x customer [NOK]
335.8
232.0
201.7
156.4
-53%
EIVT [min]
17.0
4.2
7.7
12.6
-26%
WT [min]
2.5
27.1
22.6
19.6
+689%
CPH
2.5
7.4
8.2
10.3
+318%
Table 15: Table of results data-set AB-1.
AB-2
For the second day considered, the customers served by taxis are almost the same in both
ALNS and Konsentra solutions. Despite of this, the operational costs are 49% lower in ALNS
solution than in Konsentra’s one, which points out Konsentra’ results are less satisfactory in
this ﬁeld. The same trend is detected in extra in-vehicle time, with a reduction of the 20%.
The waiting time is 8 times higher in ALNS solution than for Konsentra’s schedule. Despite
of this, some customers arrived late in Konsentra’s solution (twelve), with an average delay
of 12 minutes.
==PAGE:58==
8
RESULTS
57
AB-2
Konsentra
Initial
LNS
ALNS
Gap
Customers
854
-
Taxis
113
357
207
111
-2%
Operation cost [NOK]
289,086
213,612
189,790
146,305
-49%
Cost x customer [NOK]
338.5
250.1
222.2
171.3
-49%
EIVT [min]
16.5
5.1
9.2
13.2
-20%
WT [min]
2.3
25.9
19.7
18.5
+706%
CPH
2.4
7.0
9.2
10.3
+332%
Table 16: Table of results data-set AB-2.
AB-3
The dataset for the third day is the smallest one in terms of requests. Nonetheless, it is the
most expensive dataset in the schedule of Konsentra. The ALNS found a solution which
serves 18% fewer customers in taxis than Konsentra solution and it cost 49% less. For the
extra in-vehicle time and customers served per hour, a reduction of 28% and an increase of
313% was obtained compared to Konsentra’s schedule. However, the waiting time is clearly
higher in the ALNS solution, being 622% higher than Konsentra solution. Nonetheless, as
it happened in previous datasets, Konsentra’s schedule presents delays for some customers
(six) which accumulate a delay of 249 minutes.
AB-3
Konsentra
Initial
LNS
ALNS
Gap
Customers
845
-
Taxis
129
368
196
106
-18%
Operation cost [NOK]
293,697
207,003
189,934
150,145
-49%
Cost x customer [NOK]
347.6
245.0
224,8
177.7
-49%
EIVT [min]
17.2
4.8
9.6
11.5
-33%
WT [min]
2.7
25.9
18.5
19.3
+622%
CPH
2.4
7.0
8.6
9.3
+289%
Table 17: Table of results data-set AB-3.
==PAGE:59==
8
RESULTS
58
AB-4
AB-4 dataset contrasts with previous days. Although the number of requests served by taxis
is higher in the ALNS solution than Konsentra’s one, the operation cost is 46% lower. The
number of customers served by taxis normally is an estimation of how expensive is a solution,
but it is only a trend. A solution with more customers served by taxis may be much cheaper
than another one if the schedule is more eﬃcient. This dataset is the one which manifests
the worst improvement of the ALNS solution compared to Konsentra solution.
This dataset is the one used for the parameter tuning. Observing that it is the one obtaining
the worst results, seemingly the parameter tuning is optimal for all datasets. Therefore, the
parameter tuning is good for the region AB, independently of the day. Consequently, one
can conclude that the heuristic is robust for the requests in region AB.
AB-4
Konsentra
Initial
LNS
ALNS
Gap
Customers
848
-
Taxis
131
348
170
146
+11%
Operation cost [NOK]
278,518
198,352
179,032
151,496
-46%
Cost x customer [NOK]
328.4
233.9
211.1
178.6
-46%
EIVT x cust [min]
17.0
4.8
9.0
11.9
-30%
WT [min]
2.6
26.3
18.6
20.9
+699%
CPH
2.5
7.2
8.7
9.9
+296%
Table 18: Table of results data-set AB-4.
AB-5
The ALNS solution on this dataset obtained 11% fewer customers served by taxis with
respect to Konsentra solution and the costs are 47% lower. The extra in-vehicle time is 36%
lower in the ALNS solution than in Konsentra’s schedule, while the waiting time is 713%
higher. On the other hand, it is interesting to point out that seventeen requests are delayed
in Konsentra’s schedule.
==PAGE:60==
8
RESULTS
59
AB-5
Konsentra
Initial
LNS
ALNS
Gap
Customers
865
-
Taxis
130
366
235
116
-11%
Operation cost [NOK]
285,813
226,727
192,475
151,866
-47%
Cost x customer [NOK]
330.4
262.1
222.5
175.6
-47%
EIVT [min]
17.4
4.8
9.5
11.2
-36%
WT [min]
2.5
25.8
17.7
20.3
+713%
CPH
2.5
6.8
8.8
9.6
+283%
Table 19: Table of results data-set AB-5.
Synthesis
Once presented the results for ﬁve days, a global analysis is developed.
It is diﬃcult to compare the results with the previous works of Schwartzlose and Pedersen
[3] and Lantzenberg [4]. Diverse mechanisms have been used for the calculation of travel
times, diﬀerent assumptions have been made and particular approaches are considered in
each thesis. Nonetheless, the comparison is useful at a qualitative level.
The AB-2 and AB-3 datasets were tested by Schwartzlose and Pedersen [3]. A higher number
of customers served by taxis and higher operational costs were found. Extra in-vehicle time
and waiting time obtained in Schwartzlose and Pedersen are considerably lower than in the
current work. This might be due to the diﬀerences in the objective function considered. In
that work, the objective function considers both cost and quality factors (extra in-vehicle
time and waiting time). Nonetheless, our results are better in terms of vehicle occupation,
serving two times more customers per hour.
Lantzenberg [4] tested the dataset AB-2. He used an objective function which only considers
operational costs, like in this thesis, so it is easier to compare the results. The number
of customers served by taxis were lower than in our results. Nevertheless, comparing both
absolute values of operational costs, the solution obtained in this thesis is 11,321 NOK
cheaper. That means a reduction of 7% of Lantzenberg’s operation cost. This might be
because of the eﬃciency in the usage of the vehicles. An extra in-vehicle time of 13.2 minutes
is reported in this thesis, while an extra time of 20.6 minutes is reported in Lantzenberg.
On contrast, the average waiting time is 5 minutes lower in Lantzenberg’s results.
==PAGE:61==
8
RESULTS
60
AB-2
Schwartzlose [3]
Lantzenberg [4]
ALNS
Taxis
164
34
111
Operation cost [NOK]
195,994
157,626
146,305
EIVT x cust [min]
3.3
20.6
13.2
WT [min]
8.5
13.7
18.5
CPH
4.6
-
10.3
Table 20: Comparison of results AB-2 dataset. Data extracted from Schwartzlose and Ped-
ersen [3] and Lantzenberg [4].
AB-2
Schwartzlose [3]
ALNS
Taxis
162
106
Operation cost [NOK]
238,010
150,145
EIVT x cust [min]
2.9
11,5
WT [min]
7.9
19,3
CPH
5.7
9.3
Table 21: Comparison of results AB-3 dataset. Data extracted from Schwartzlose and Ped-
ersen [3].
After analysing the results, some conclusions are drawn. The ALNS heuristic implemented
can ﬁnd good quality solutions in reasonable time for real life large instances for Pick-up
and Delivery Problem with Time Windows. Evaluated on a real life case, it ﬁnds better
solutions than the company’s solutions, achieving a reduction in operational costs of 49%
on average. The results indicate an improvement in vehicle eﬃciency, with an increase in
customers served per vehicle hour by the minibuses of 304% on average.
8.2
Analysis of the ALNS
One of the objectives of this report is to construct a good ALNS heuristic. For this reason,
it is interesting to analyze the performance of the ALNS in the computational experiments.
First, a comparison between the initial solution found, a LNS and the ALNS is developed.
Moreover, graphs of the evolution of the accepted and best solutions found are shown for
the diﬀerent data sets. And ﬁnally, the performance of the destroy and repair methods is
reviewed.
==PAGE:62==
8
RESULTS
61
8.2.1
Comparison initial solution - LNS - ALNS
A construction heuristic is used to ﬁnd an initial solution which later is used to run the
ALNS heuristic. Additionally, a LNS is run to compare to the performance of the ALNS. As
mentioned above, the LNS is developed with the random destroy method and the random-
ET repair method. The results are shown in the Tables 15-19 in the section Presentation of
results.
The initial solution is not good in terms of the number of customers served by taxis and op-
erational cost, as the solutions obtained are worse than Konsentra’s schedules. Nonetheless,
the main function of the initial solution is to lead to a well performance of the ALNS. In
Table 22, the improvements of the solution in terms of operational cost by the LNS and the
ALNS compared to the initial solution for the ﬁve datasets are shown.
Data-set
LNS
ALNS
AB-1
13%
33%
AB-2
11%
32%
AB-3
8%
27%
AB-4
10%
24%
AB-5
15%
33%
Table 22: Improvement over the initial solution by the LNS and the ALNS.
The LNS improved the initial solution between 8% and 15%.
In contrast, the ALNS is
improving more than 20% the initial solution for all datasets, reaching 33% of improving.
This may be due to the fact that the selected destroy and repair methods might work well
for some data-sets and worse for others. On the other hand, the ALNS has multiple methods
for the destroy and repair phases which combined lead to better results. Therefore, using
an ALNS instead of a simple LNS was a good choice, considering that LNS is likely to
get trapped in a local optimum. In contrast, ALNS has less probability to suﬀer from this
problem as its potential in ﬁnding solutions not encountered yet is wider.
==PAGE:63==
8
RESULTS
62
8.2.2
Variability of the heuristic
There is implicit randomness in the heuristic proposed, therefore, each run of the heuristic
may lead to a diﬀerent solution. Nonetheless, a good heuristic should reduce the variability
between diﬀerent runs of the heuristic and ensure that the solution encountered is always
in a conﬁdence interval. With the purpose of checking this performance, ﬁve runs of two
hours of duration for the data-set AB-1 have been run. In Table 23, the results of the tests
are presented. In the ﬁrst columns, the values for each run are shown and in the last two,
the average value and the coeﬃcient of variation, which consist of the standard deviation
divided by the average value.
The customers served by taxi have a high variability among experiments, whereas the oper-
ational cost has only a coeﬃcient of variation of 3%, which is low. It is important to outline
that the operation cost does not change a lot, so it means that the quality of the solution
obtained is always similar in terms of the objective function. The diﬀerence in the number
of customers served by taxis is only due to diverse solutions found. In the case of extra
in-vehicle time and waiting time, a coeﬃcient of variation of 6% is found, and for customers
per hour a 5%. In conclusion, the solutions does not vary a lot in terms of operational cost
and quality of service, and the only variability remarkable is in the customers served by taxis.
In future work, a multi-objective function could be considered, adding quality factors and
the number of taxis. This variation in the objective function may lead to a less variability
in the other factors.
Test
1
2
3
4
5
Average
Variation
Taxis
154
111
157
137
127
137
14%
Op. Cost [NOK]
158,065
149,069
154,639
148,004
148,454
151,646
3%
Extra Time [min]
11,2
11,7
11,3
12,6
12,7
11,9
6%
Wait Time [min]
21,5
18,9
20,4
18,8
19,5
19,8
6%
Cust x Hour
9,4
10,5
9,9
10,6
10,2
10,1
5%
Table 23: Stability of the solutions.
==PAGE:64==
8
RESULTS
63
8.2.3
Evolution of the operational cost
In this section, the convergence of the ALNS is discussed. In the heuristic, three types of
solutions are identiﬁed: the current solution, the accepted solution, and the best solution.
The current solution is the one the ALNS is working on. Thus, it is the solution destroyed
by the ALNS. A solution is called accepted if, after the destroy and repair phases, becomes
the current solution. Finally, the best solution is the one with the lowest operational cost
of all the solutions visited already. At the start of each segment, the best solution at the
moment is taken as the current solution to start the ALNS. That is why there is a diﬀerence
between the accepted and the current solution.
In Figures 7 to 11, the evolution of the accepted and best solutions during the iterations
is shown for each dataset. The accepted solution line is similar in all graphs, but the best
solution line is diﬀerent for each dataset.
In Figure 7, the evolution of the accepted and best solutions are shown for the AB-1 data set.
In the computational experiments with this dataset, the best solution was reached in 239
minutes (iteration 125). At the ﬁrst iterations, the heuristic improved the solution quickly,
but later it got trapped in a local optimum. Thus, the solution was not improved during the
next 100 iterations. Nevertheless, in ﬁve iterations the heuristic improved the solution two
times, reducing the operation cost by 21,000 NOK (15% of the ﬁnal operation cost). This
dataset is the one where the ﬁnal solution was found the latest.
In the test on the dataset AB-2 (see Figure 8) the heuristic had been continuously improving
until the iteration 87 (161 minutes), when the best overall solution was found. The accepted
solutions were relatively close to the best solutions during the improvement phase. The
accepted solutions, nevertheless, had higher operational cost associated when missing new
best solutions.
The evolution of the solutions for the dataset AB-3 is shown in 9, in which two stages are
detected. In the ﬁrst iterations, the heuristic improved the solution quickly, in a staggered
manner. However, at iteration 44 (60 minutes) the best overall solution was found, so no
new best solutions were found. In the heuristic, at the start of each segment, the current
solution is initialized with the best solution found. As the acceptance criteria depends on
the value of the current solution, the accepted solutions at the start of the segments tend
to have lower operational cost. In Figure 9, it can be observed that every 10 iterations (one
segment) the accepted solutions line is close to the best solution line, and worse solutions
are later accepted.
==PAGE:65==
8
RESULTS
64
In the test of the dataset AB-4 (Figure 10), a pattern repeated two times was detected.
The heuristic started improving the solution eight times during the ﬁrst 40 iterations and
no better solutions were found for the next 50 iterations. This pattern was repeated with
three improvements in 20 iterations, until ﬁnding the overall best in iteration 111 (183
minutes). The last 40 iterations presented no improvements and accepted solutions with
high operational cost.
For the last dataset tested (Figure 11), a fast decrease in operation cost was detected in the
ﬁrst ﬁve iterations, which means a lower decrease than for the others datasets. However, in
iteration 21, a second quick decrease is observed. Nine improvements were found between
iterations 21 and 56. Finally, two small improvements were achieved in iterations 83 and 91
(minute 143), when the ﬁnal solution was found.
Figure 7: Evolution accepted and best solutions by iteration AB-1.
==PAGE:66==
8
RESULTS
65
Figure 8: Evolution accepted and best solutions by iteration AB-2.
Figure 9: Evolution accepted and best solutions by iteration AB-3.
==PAGE:67==
8
RESULTS
66
Figure 10: Evolution accepted and best solutions by iteration AB-4.
Figure 11: Evolution accepted and best solutions by iteration AB-5.
To conclude the analysis of the evolution of the solutions found, some general comments are
presented. Making a general overview of the graphs in Figures 7 to 11, it is highlighted that
the ﬁnal solutions are found between minutes 60 and 239. One solution was found between
1 and 2 hours of computation, in two occasions between 2 and 3 hours and the other two
in more than 3 hours, which means the time limit of 4 hours it is a good threshold. With a
time limit of 3 hours, the solutions for the data-sets AB-1 and AB-4 would be 15% and 1%
higher, respectively. And with a time limit of 2 hours, the solutions for the datasets AB-1,
AB-2, AB-4 and AB-5 would be 15%, 1%, 5% and 1% higher. Therefore, the computing
==PAGE:68==
8
RESULTS
67
time could be reduced to 2 hours without signiﬁcant impact for three of the ﬁve datasets
and only a 5% impact for the AB-4 dataset, but a 15% impact for AB-1.
The assignment of the best solution found at the moment as the current solution at the start
of each segment leads to a ﬂuctuation of the accepted solutions near to the best solution.
Lantzenberg [4] did not implement this criteria and the evolution of the accepted solutions
tended to grow uncontrollably. In this thesis, the solution is improved more times than
in Lantzenberg thesis, where most of the ﬁnal solutions are found in the ﬁrst iterations.
Nonetheless, the heuristic presented by Lantzenberg is a fast ALNS, with a computation
time of only 5 minutes.
8.2.4
Analysis of the destroy and repair methods
A large number of destroy and repair methods are introduced in this work. Thus, an analysis
of the performance of these methods is mandatory to check if they are eﬀective and should
be used in future approaches. Two main tools are used for the analysis: the occasions the
method led to an accepted or best solution and the evolution of the probabilities of being
chosen. These analysis will be developed for both destroy and repair methods.
Only one chart will be presented for each analysis, the most representative one for the ideas
exposed. The charts for the other datasets can be found in Appendix C.
Destroy methods
Six diﬀerent removal heuristics are used in the ALNS heuristic. Each one is focused on some
aspects. For example, TravelTime method is centered on time, quality of service and cost,
while CustomersxHour is focused on quality of service and cost. Therefore, some might be
useless for the considered problem or data-set.
Figure 12 provides information about occasions a removal heuristic was used and led to
accepted and best solutions. All of them provide several accepted solutions and at least one
time found the best solution at the moment. Seemingly, all heuristics are useful.
==PAGE:69==
8
RESULTS
68
Figure 12: Times each destroy method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-5 test.
Figure 13 illustrates the evolution of the removal probabilities over the segments. Notice
that the destroy and repair probabilities are only updated at the start of each segment, for
this reason the probabilities are presented for every segment and not every iteration.
Some conclusions can be extracted from this chart. All the heuristics maintain a certain
probability of being selected during the iterations, thanks to the non-used heuristics kept
the same weight of the previous segment. This allows the methods to recover and to be used
if they are useful at some point of the ALNS. This graph is a clear example. The Waiting and
TravelTime heuristics had low probability of being selected at the middle of the iterations,
but they ﬁnished the experiment with high probability. Only one method ﬁnished almost
without probability of being selected (TimeBetweenRoutes).
==PAGE:70==
8
RESULTS
69
Figure 13: Evolution of probabilities for the destroy methods in AB-5 test.
One condition for the solutions to be accepted is that they may not have been previously
visited. Seemingly, for this reason, some heuristics that performed good at the start did
not perform good at the end of the test. And, obviously, it happened the same the other
way around. For example, CustomersxHour method has high probability at the start of the
iterations and low at the end. Oppositely, Waiting method has low probability at the start
and high at the end.
To sum up, checking the graphs for the ﬁve datasets tested, it is concluded that all destroy
methods are useful and contribute to the search of the best possible solution.
Repair methods
A large number of repair heuristics are used (twelve). Then, it is important to ﬁlter the
heuristics and check if they are useful or not. Figure 14 gives information about the utility
of the methods. All insertion heuristics led to accepted solutions but only some of them found
best solutions. Nonetheless, this chart is only a special case for the AB-4 dataset. Analysing
the results for all datasets together, it is observed that Random-Closest, ET-Closest and LT-
Closest methods only found accepted solutions, but they did not lead to best solutions often.
They might have led to accepted solutions because they are the most diﬀerent heuristics for
the way they schedule the routes in the vehicles, so alternative solutions were found. Despite
of this, this alternative way of scheduling it is not optimal as no improvements in the solutions
were found. Therefore, the Closest Assignment method is not useful for this case study. The
==PAGE:71==
8
RESULTS
70
other heuristics often found solutions that improved the current one, so all of them should
be considered in the solution method.
Figure 14: Times each repair method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-4 test.
The comments that can be made on the evolution of the probabilities for the repair methods
are similar to the ones made for the destroy methods. All methods kept possibilities of
being selected over the iterations. In the case of the AB-1 dataset, shown in Figure 15, all
methods kept similar probabilities of being selected. Some methods were successful at the
ﬁrst segments and ﬁnished with low probabilities, and the other way around.
==PAGE:72==
8
RESULTS
71
Figure 15: Evolution of probabilities for the repair methods in AB-1 test.
The importance that heuristics keep a certain probability is evident in this case. The repair
method that led to the ﬁnal solution, the overall best one found, it is the Random-Random
method. The probability of being chosen for this heuristic was low during all computation
time, but thanks to the maintenance of this probability, the best solution could be found.
To sum up, the ﬁrst nine destroy methods have shown that they are useful for the heuristic,
but the three methods which use the Closest Assignment as the heuristic for the vehicle
assignment should be discarded for future uses.
==PAGE:73==
72
9
Discussion
This thesis originated as an attempt to design and program a heuristic to solve the pick-
up and delivery problem with time windows for large instances.
The knowledge of the
author about this problem and the programming skills were low at the start of the work.
Nonetheless, as the project progressed, new knowledge was acquired that improved the
quality of the work. The result is an ALNS heuristic which found better solutions than
the ones presented by the company in the case study according to the estimation of costs
used in this thesis.
Nevertheless, some aspects worked well and some others should be
improved, so this section will discuss some of these aspects.
The heuristic is adapted to the case study tested in this thesis, so if one may want to use
the heuristic for another speciﬁc problem, some changes have to be introduced. The general
operation of the heuristic will be the same, but the assumptions and simpliﬁcations made
might vary. Moreover, the parameter tuning will not be valid for diﬀerent instances.
The case study takes into account many details and constraints, increasing the complexity of
the problem. For this reason, some simpliﬁcations were made when the restrictions aﬀected
only a few customers. However, they may relax the constraints of the problem and the
company must accomplish with these restrictions in real life. There exist two alternatives to
include these simpliﬁcations in the problem in the future: the company can ﬁx the schedules
manually or they can be considered in the heuristic. The second option should not be diﬃcult,
but, in this thesis, simpliﬁcations were made to center the focus on the most important goal,
the design and construction of an heuristic for the PDPTW with large instances.
In addition to the simpliﬁcations, several assumptions were considered. The travel times
between locations were calculated using the Haversine equation and setting a speed of 50
kilometer per hour. Therefore, it is diﬃcult to make an estimate of the required travel time
based on the point-to-point distance. The mixture of highways and urban roads also makes
it diﬃcult to estimate a single average speed that approximates all riding times well. The
travel distances and times should be calculated in one of these two ways: using a Distance
Matrix API supplied by a company, for example Google, or using real life data obtained by
Konsentra drivers. The ﬁrst way allows to include real-time traﬃc information and change
the routes if necessary. Service times when getting in the vehicle and when getting oﬀwere
considered, of 1.5 and 0.5 minutes, respectively. These values are estimations and some
experiments should be conducted by Konsentra to set the correct values.
The simpliﬁcations and assumptions that have been made led to signiﬁcant diﬀerences be-
==PAGE:74==
9
DISCUSSION
73
tween approaches to the problem. Therefore, the comparison between solutions cannot be
taken directly. What is undeniable, it is that the solutions found perform better for the
approach considered in this thesis than Konsentra’s schedules do, in terms of the objective
function.
The performance of the ALNS has been compared to a LNS and led to the conclusion that
the ALNS clearly obtains better solutions than LNS does. LNS tests considered only one
destroy and repair methods. Thus, in further works all pairs destroy-repair methods should
be tested to check if any combination performs better than the ALNS. If any pair destroy-
repair methods performs better than the ALNS, it will show that the ALNS it is not useful.
Otherwise, it will conﬁrm that the ALNS is the best option to improve the solution.
The heuristic presented is computationally heavy, what makes the ALNS could not complete
a high number of iterations (154 on average) in four hours of running time. If the ALNS
could complete more iterations, more solutions would be explored and a better solution
might be encountered. Further work may consider speed-up techniques specially focused on
repair methods.
An analysis of the algorithms in the ALNS was developed, which detected that the Closest
vehicle assignment method, included in three of the repair methods, never found a solution
which improved the previous solutions. When methods are not useful, they might have a
negative impact on the performance of the ALNS, because some iterations would be wasted
on using methods which never will improve the solution. There are two options for these
methods: remove them from the ALNS or try to improve them. In both cases, new tests
should be performed to compare the solutions to the ones including the current methods.
An extensive parameter tuning was performed, considering a large number of parameters
and possible values. Despite of this, the parameter tuning could be more extensive. Instead
of considering a sequential tuning, where all parameters had a ﬁxed value except the one
tuned, diﬀerent combinations between parameters should be considered. This decision was
made because of the large amount of time necessary for such a large parameter tuning, not
available in the time horizon of a thesis. Moreover, smaller instances than the ones tested
were considered for the tuning of the ALNS parameters. For an optimal tuning, instances
of the same size should be considered because the size of the instances might inﬂuence the
value of the parameters.
The tuning of the parameters was developed for only one region of the four where Konsentra
operates, because it would be tested only for this region. In previous works, a common
tuning was developed although the heuristics were tested for all regions. In further work, it
==PAGE:75==
9
DISCUSSION
74
would be interesting to tune the parameters for each region separately, as every region has
diﬀerent peculiarities.
Additionally, a dynamic approach could be considered in further work. Most of the requests
are similar every day, so the dynamic setting should consider only last-minute changes. For
example, a cancellation may occur or a customer might request an urgent trip. In the actual
version of the heuristic, these changes should be included in the requests list and the heuristic
needs to be run again.
To sum up, the results of the thesis are promising, as the heuristic is capable to schedule
the requests in the vehicles without any delays, in contrast with Konsentra’s solutions that
contain some delays. The ALNS works well for large instance of PDPTW, obtaining better
results than Konsentra and previous thesis for the approach considered in this thesis.
==PAGE:76==
75
10
Conclusion
In this thesis, a metaheuristic to solve the Pick-up and Delivery Problem with Time Windows
(PDPTW) for large instances is proposed. An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS)
heuristic is presented, tuned, tested, and analyzed. The PDPTW addressed considers hetero-
geneous ﬂeets of minibuses with limited capacity. All requests must be served, which means
the customers that cannot be served by the vehicles in the ﬂeet will be served by taxis.
Customers may have some special requests and needs, for example, disabled passengers are
considered.
The methodology presented consists of several steps. In the ﬁrst step, the size of the instances
was reduced by clustering them by time and pickup or delivery location. For each cluster,
routes were created using an insertion heuristic which inserted customers one by one to the
routes. These routes were then assigned to the vehicles to obtain vehicle schedules, which
became the initial solution. In a second phase, the ALNS was run with the initial solution as
input. Six diﬀerent destroy methods were considered, whereas the repair stage was divided
in two phases, creation of routes and assignment to vehicles, which correspond to the same
phases used to ﬁnd the initial solution. Three methods for constructing routes and four
vehicle assignment heuristics were introduced, which made a total of twelve repair methods.
The heuristic was tested on real life data supplied by the company Konsentra, speciﬁcally it
was tested on the datasets for ﬁve diﬀerent days in one region of the four where Konsentra
operates. An extensive analysis of the datasets was developed in Section 6, which led to
some simpliﬁcations and assumptions such as establishing the same maximum trip duration
for all customers or not considering some special requirements.
Before testing the heuristic, a parameter tuning was necessary. The parameters were tuned
in a sequential manner, by testing only one parameter at the same time. Smaller instances
than the ones in the tests were used in this phase due to the need of considering several runs.
The ALNS found better solutions than Konsentra’s solutions based on our cost estimation,
achieving a reduction in operational costs of 49% on average with a running time of 4 hours.
The results indicate an improvement in vehicle eﬃciency, with an increase in customers
served per vehicle hour by the minibuses of 304% on average. The extra in-vehicle time has
been reduced by 29% on average, whereas the waiting time has been incremented by 686%.
However, the schedules provided by Konsentra consider some customers delayed, while the
results in this thesis did not present any delay.
==PAGE:77==
10
CONCLUSION
76
A LNS version of the heuristic was tested and some conclusions were drawn. The performance
of the ALNS is clearly better than implementing a LNS, since the improvement of the initial
solution by the ALNS was of 30% on average, compared to 11% for the LNS.
==PAGE:78==
77
References
[1] Mark Cauchi and Kenneth Scerri. An Improved Variable Neighbourhood Search Algo-
rithm for Selective Dial-a-Ride Problems. In 20th IEEE Mediterranean Electrotechnical
Conference, MELECON 2020 - Proceedings, 2020. doi: 10.1109/MELECON48756.2020.
9140695.
[2] Simon Hunkin and Katharina Krell. A policy brief from the policy learning platform
on low-carbon economy: Demand-responsive transport. Technical report, Eropean Re-
gional Development Fund, 2018.
[3] Hans Schwartzlose and Frederik Pedersen. Optimization of on-demand public trans-
portation with heterogeneous ﬂeet. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark,
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, June 2018.
[4] Victor Lantzenberg. Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public trans-
port. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, July
2019.
[5] Roberto Baldacci, Enrico Bartolini, and Aristide Mingozzi. An exact algorithm for the
pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Operations Research, 59(2), 2011.
ISSN 0030364X. doi: 10.1287/opre.1100.0881.
[6] Yvan Dumas, Jacques Desrosiers, and Fran¸cois Soumis. The pickup and delivery prob-
lem with time windows. European Journal of Operational Research, 54(1), 1991. ISSN
03772217. doi: 10.1016/0377-2217(91)90319-Q.
[7] Ta Yin Hu, Guan Chun Zheng, and Tsai Yun Liao. A multi-objective model for dial-a-
ride problems with service quality and eco-eﬃciency. In IEEE Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, Proceedings, ITSC, volume 2018-March, 2018. doi: 10.1109/
ITSC.2017.8317630.
[8] Haibing Li and Andrew Lim. A metaheuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with
time windows. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Tools with Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 160–167, 2001. doi: 10.1142/s0218213003001186.
[9] Jean Fran¸cois Cordeau and Gilbert Laporte.
The dial-a-ride problem: Models and
algorithms. Annals of Operations Research, 153(1), 2007. ISSN 02545330. doi: 10.
1007/s10479-007-0170-8.
==PAGE:79==
REFERENCES
78
[10] C. Barnhart, E.L. Johnson, G.L. Nemhauser, M.W.P. Savelsbergh, and P.H. Vance.
Branch-and-price: Column generation for solving huge integer programs. Operations
Research, 46:316–329, 1998. doi: 10.1287/opre.46.3.316.
[11] R. Baldacci, N. Christoﬁdes, and A. Mingozzi. An exact algorithm for the vehicle routing
problem based on the set partitioning formulation with additional cuts. Mathematical
Programming, 115:351–385, 2007. doi: 10.1007/s10107-007-0178-5.
[12] Stefan Ropke and Jean Fran¸cois Cordeau. Branch and cut and price for the pickup
and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 43(3), 2009. ISSN
15265447. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1090.0272.
[13] Jang Jei Jaw, Amedeo R Odoni, Harilaos N Psaraftis, and Nigel H M Wilson. A heuristic
algorithm for the multi-vehicle advance request dial-a-ride problem with time windows.
Transportation Research Part B, 20, 1986. ISSN 01912615. doi: 10.1016/0191-2615(86)
90020-2.
[14] Marius M. Solomon. Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with
time window constraints.
Operations Research, 35(2), 1987.
ISSN 0030364X.
doi:
10.1287/opre.35.2.254.
[15] John W. Baugh Jr., Gopala Krishna Reddy Kakivaya, and John R. stone. Intractabil-
ity of the dial-a-ride problem and a multiobjective solution using simulated annealing.
Engineering Optimization, 30(2):91–123, 1998. doi: 10.1080/03052159808941240.
[16] William P. Nanry and J. Wesley Barnes. Solving the pickup and delivery problem with
time windows using reactive tabu search. Transportation Research Part B: Methodolog-
ical, 34(2), 2000. ISSN 01912615. doi: 10.1016/S0191-2615(99)00016-8.
[17] J. F. Cordeau, G. Laporte, and A. Mercier. A uniﬁed tabu search heuristic for vehicle
routing problems with time windows. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 52
(8), 2001. ISSN 14769360. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.jors.2601163.
[18] Hoong Chuin Lau and Zhe Liang. Pickup and delivery with time windows: Algorithms
and test case generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Tools with
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2001. doi: 10.1109/ictai.2001.974481.
[19] R. M. Jorgensen, J. Larsen, and K. B. Bergvinsdottir. Solving the dial-a-ride problem
using genetic algorithms. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 58(10), 2007.
ISSN 14769360. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602287.
==PAGE:80==
REFERENCES
79
[20] Russell Bent and Pascal Van Hentenryck.
A two-stage hybrid algorithm for pickup
and delivery vehicle routing problems with time windows. Computers and Operations
Research, 33(4), 2006. ISSN 03050548. doi: 10.1016/j.cor.2004.08.001.
[21] Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for
the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 40(4),
2006. ISSN 15265447. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1050.0135.
[22] Yuan Li, Haoxun Chen, and Christian Prins. Adaptive large neighborhood search for
the pickup and delivery problem with time windows, proﬁts, and reserved requests.
European Journal of Operational Research, 252(1), 2016. ISSN 03772217. doi: 10.1016/
j.ejor.2015.12.032.
[23] Veaceslav Ghilas, Emrah Demir, and Tom Van Woensel. An adaptive large neighbor-
hood search heuristic for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows and
Scheduled Lines. Computers and Operations Research, 72, 2016. ISSN 03050548. doi:
10.1016/j.cor.2016.01.018.
[24] Ran Liu, Yangyi Tao, and Xiaolei Xie. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic
for the vehicle routing problem with time windows and synchronized visits. Computers
and Operations Research, 101:250 – 262, 2019. ISSN 0305-0548. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cor.2018.08.002.
[25] David Sacramento, David Pisinger, and Stefan Ropke. An adaptive large neighbor-
hood search metaheuristic for the vehicle routing problem with drones. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 102:289 – 315, 2019. ISSN 0968-090X. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2019.02.018.
[26] Katrien Ramaekers, An Caris, Tabitha Maes, and Gerrit K. Janssens.
Pickup and
Delivery Selection: Problem Formulation and Extension to Problem Variants.
In-
formation Technology and Management Science, 18(1), 2016.
ISSN 2255-9094.
doi:
10.1515/itms-2015-0013.
[27] A. Sofwan, Y. A. A. Soetrisno, N. P. Ramadhani, A. Rahmayani, E. Handoyo,
and M. Arfan.
Vehicle distance measurement tuning using haversine and micro-
segmentation. In 2019 International Seminar on Intelligent Technology and Its Ap-
plications (ISITIA), pages 239–243, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ISITIA.2019.8937128.
[28] Lawrence Bodin and Thomas Sexton. The multi-vehicle subscriber dial-a-ride problem.
TIMS Studies in Management Science, 26, 01 1986.
==PAGE:81==
REFERENCES
80
[29] Xin Jin and Jiawei Han. K-Medoids Clustering, pages 1–3. Springer US, Boston, MA,
2016. ISBN 978-1-4899-7502-7. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7502-7 432-1.
[30] Hong Zhou. K-Means Clustering, pages 35–47. Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2020.
ISBN
978-1-4842-5982-5. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-5982-5 3.
==PAGE:82==
81
Appendices
A
Case Study
This Appendix presents the graphs used to analyse the data of the case study. It has been
found that all datasets are similar in terms of requested time distribution, ages distribution
and special requirements, which led to some simpliﬁcations. For this reason, the graphs are
presented above.
Requested time distribution
Figure 16: Distribution of the requests during the day in the region AB for the day 1.
==PAGE:83==
A
CASE STUDY
82
Figure 17: Distribution of the requests during the day in the region AB for the day 2.
Figure 18: Distribution of the requests during the day in the region AB for the day 3.
==PAGE:84==
A
CASE STUDY
83
Figure 19: Distribution of the requests during the day in the region AB for the day 4.
Figure 20: Distribution of the requests during the day in the region AB for the day 5.
==PAGE:85==
A
CASE STUDY
84
Ages distribution
Figure 21: Percentage of customers per age in AB-1.
Figure 22: Percentage of customers per age in AB-2.
==PAGE:86==
A
CASE STUDY
85
Figure 23: Percentage of customers per age in AB-3.
Figure 24: Percentage of customers per age in AB-4.
==PAGE:87==
A
CASE STUDY
86
Figure 25: Percentage of customers per age in AB-5.
Special requirements
Figure 26: Percentage of customers with special needs in AB-1.
==PAGE:88==
A
CASE STUDY
87
Figure 27: Percentage of customers with special needs in AB-2.
Figure 28: Percentage of customers with special needs in AB-3.
==PAGE:89==
A
CASE STUDY
88
Figure 29: Percentage of customers with special needs in AB-4.
Figure 30: Percentage of customers with special needs in AB-5.
==PAGE:90==
89
B
Results Parameter Tuning ALNS
In the ALNS there were six parameters to be tuned. The ALNS has an implicit randomness,
which means it is necessary to develop several runs for the same parameter conﬁguration.
Three runs for each conﬁguration have been computed and an average improvement of this
runs has been used to select the best value. In this Appendix, the results for each run are
presented in Tables 25-30. The improvement achieved by the ALNS is calculated over an
initial solution, which is common for all the runs as the dataset used is the same. This initial
solution is shown in Table 24.
Taxis
Op. Cost [NOK]
150
56502
Table 24: Initial Solution for the ALNS parameter tuning.
Scores
Taxis
Op. Cost [NOK]
Improvement
Avg. Imp.
St. Dev.
10,5,8
57
31688
44%
47%
5%
60
31511
44%
39
26879
52%
10,5,3
38
29080
49%
52%
5%
31
23652
58%
47
28149
50%
10,8,3
54
28319
50%
43%
6%
71
34055
40%
69
33752
40%
10,8,5
58
31482
44%
48%
3%
45
27734
51%
50
29700
47%
10,10,10
56
30512
46%
49%
3%
39
27035
52%
53
29327
48%
Table 25: Tuning of Scores parameter.
==PAGE:91==
B
RESULTS PARAMETER TUNING ALNS
90
r
Taxis
Op. Cost [NOK]
Improvement
Avg. Imp.
St. Dev.
0.1
54
29242
48%
46%
2%
63
31363
44%
62
30539
46%
0.5
53
30225
47%
49%
4%
56
29465
48%
37
26438
53%
0.7
67
32737
42%
43%
4%
67
34493
39%
56
29668
47%
0.9
72
34875
38%
39%
1%
76
34787
38%
69
33805
40%
Table 26: Tuning of r parameter.
ζ
Taxis
Op. Cost [NOK]
Improvement
Avg. Imp.
St. Dev.
0.05
55
31015
45%
45%
0%
54
31220
45%
59
31277
45%
0.10
59
30076
47%
49%
2%
49
29132
48%
49
27828
51%
0.15
64
32741
42%
44%
4%
65
32553
42%
50
28868
49%
Table 27: Tuning of ζ parameter.
==PAGE:92==
B
RESULTS PARAMETER TUNING ALNS
91
w
Taxis
Op. Cost [NOK]
Improvement
Avg. Imp.
St. Dev.
0.025
79
35217
38%
42%
5%
64
30074
47%
62
33499
41%
0.050
59
33294
41%
43%
4%
57
29643
48%
68
33857
40%
0.075
44
27087
52%
51%
1%
45
27282
52%
47
28303
50%
0.100
53
31235
45%
47%
3%
57
31028
45%
45
28343
50%
Table 28: Tuning of w parameter.
c
Taxis
Op. Cost [NOK]
Improvement
Avg. Imp.
St. Dev.
0.85
50
30294
46%
47%
2%
51
28912
49%
55
30761
46%
0.90
52
30266
46%
49%
3%
47
27427
51%
42
28162
50%
0.95
53
29270
48%
46%
3%
70
32680
42%
45
29307
48%
0.99
61
31454
44%
43%
2%
67
31398
44%
62
33636
40%
Table 29: Tuning of c parameter.
==PAGE:93==
B
RESULTS PARAMETER TUNING ALNS
92
Segments
Taxis
Op. Cost [NOK]
Improvement
Avg. Imp.
St. Dev.
5
43
27590
51%
47%
4%
51
29796
47%
54
31789
44%
10
47
28912
49%
48%
3%
55
31327
45%
52
27989
50%
15
69
32995
42%
44%
2%
58
30722
46%
58
31556
44%
Table 30: Tuning of Segments parameter.
==PAGE:94==
93
C
Performance Destroy and Repair methods ALNS
In this appendix are presented the graphs that show the performance of the destroy and
repair methods for each dataset tested. Two types of graphs are presented: the occasions
each method has led to an accepted or best solution, and the evolution of the probabilities
over the segments.
Destroy methods - Times used
Figure 31: Times each destroy method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-1 test.
==PAGE:95==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
94
Figure 32: Times each destroy method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-2 test.
Figure 33: Times each destroy method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-3 test.
==PAGE:96==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
95
Figure 34: Times each destroy method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-4 test.
Figure 35: Times each destroy method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-5 test.
==PAGE:97==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
96
Destroy methods - Probability evolution
Figure 36: Evolution of probabilities for the destroy methods in AB-1 test.
Figure 37: Evolution of probabilities for the destroy methods in AB-2 test.
==PAGE:98==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
97
Figure 38: Evolution of probabilities for the destroy methods in AB-3 test.
Figure 39: Evolution of probabilities for the destroy methods in AB-4 test.
==PAGE:99==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
98
Figure 40: Evolution of probabilities for the destroy methods in AB-5 test.
Repair methods - Times used
Figure 41: Times each repair method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-1 test.
==PAGE:100==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
99
Figure 42: Times each repair method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-2 test.
Figure 43: Times each repair method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-3 test.
==PAGE:101==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
100
Figure 44: Times each repair method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-4 test.
Figure 45: Times each repair method led to an accepted and best solution in AB-5 test.
==PAGE:102==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
101
Repair methods - Probability evolution
Figure 46: Evolution of probabilities for the repair methods in AB-1 test.
Figure 47: Evolution of probabilities for the repair methods in AB-2 test.
==PAGE:103==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
102
Figure 48: Evolution of probabilities for the repair methods in AB-3 test.
Figure 49: Evolution of probabilities for the repair methods in AB-4 test.
==PAGE:104==
C
PERFORMANCE DESTROY AND REPAIR METHODS ALNS
103
Figure 50: Evolution of probabilities for the repair methods in AB-5 test.
==PAGE:105==
104
D
Learning Objectives
The thesis presented is based on some learning objectives established at the start of the
project. These learning objectives are presented below.
1. Review relevant literature on the Dial-a-ride problem or Pick-up and delivery problem
with time windows (DARPTW or PDPTW).
2. Describe the case study and available data.
3. Formulate a mathematical model for the PDPTW.
4. Discuss existing literature on solution methods for the PDPTW with a speciﬁc focus
on heuristics and ALNS.
5. Design a heuristic method to solve the PDPTW.
6. Implement the designed heuristic in Python.
7. Experiment with the heuristic with the case study and conduct parameter calibration.
8. Evaluate the results for the case study in terms of operational costs and provided
service to the users, and computation time.
9. Appraise and critique the results of the heuristics and its value for the case study, and
provide recommendations for future research.
10. Relate the method and the results in a structured and well explained report.
11. Defend the report and explain the work done in a short speech.
