==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis
Artificial Intelligence for Estimating
People’s Perception of the World
Supervisor: Thomas Bolander
Author: Emilie Isabella Dahl (s153762)
Sunday 14th February, 2021
Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Abstract - English
One important human factor for society to accept human-robot social interactions is circumstance-
appropriateness. This can be implemented through theory of mind, which is an assessment of human’s
degree of capacity for empathy and understanding of others. Implementing theory of mind on a robot
will allow the robot to understand how people’s beliefs are subjective. For this implementation to know
when a false belief is created, an estimation of people’s perception of the world is needed. This thesis
explores how people create their perception of the world and conducts an experiment based on this.
Perception is based on different types of attentional factors. It was discovered that only some of
these factors are observable thus implementing a completely accurate estimation is not feasible. These
attentional factors are all of the type overt attention, and consists among others of eye movements and
saliency. Issues such as inattentional blindness, which is when people do not notice a stimuli when
looking directly at it, are not observable and can therefore not be estimated.
An experiment is conducted testing three methods for estimating individuals’ capability to perceive a
single target. The methods all rely on the deep neural network Gaze360, which estimates gaze directions
of people within the images. Gaze360 falls under the category Scene Analysis with a third-person view,
as both the people and the scene are visible within the images. The best method resulted in an accuracy
of 82.1% by using the quantile offset from Gaze360 to create a Von Mises probability distribution of
the participant’s field of vision. The target’s edges were extended by 30 degrees to reflect that humans
are able to perceive movements within their peripheral field of vision.
A small dataset is created to test the methods. It consists of 20 videos of approximately 16 seconds
each. In 6 of the videos the participant always look at the target, and in another 6 videos the participant
never looks at the target. Lastly, 8 of the videos show two participants interacting with the target.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
Abstract - Danish
Forståelse for hvilken opførsel der er passende, er en vigtig egenskab robotter mangler, for at samfundet
accepterer sociale interaktioner mellem mennesker og robotter. Dette kan implementeres vha. theory
of mind, som er en vurdering af menneskers evne til at føle empati og forstå andres synspunkter. For
at implementere theory of mind, er det nødvendigt at forstå, hvordan folks opfattelse af verden ser ud.
Denne afhandling udforsker, hvordan folk danner deres opfattelse af verden og udfører et eksperiment
baseret på denne teori.
Menneskers opfattelse af verden er baseret på forskellige opmærksomhedsfaktorer. Kun få af disse
faktorer er observerbare, så en nøjagtig vurdering af menneskers forståelse af verden er ikke mulig. De
opmærksomhedsfaktorer, som er observerbare kaldes overt opmærksomhed, og består bl.a.
af øjen-
bevægelser og saliency. Scenarier såsom uopmærksom blindhed kan ikke observeres og kan derfor heller
ikke estimeres.
Der er udført 3 eksperimenter som estimerer individers evne til at opfatte et enkelt objekt. Disse
metoder er alle afhængige af det dybe neurale netværk Gaze360. Gaze360 falder ind under kategorien
Scene Analysis ud fra en tredjepersons synsvinkel. Det estimerer derved folks blikretninger i et billede
eller en video.
Den bedste metode resulterede i en præcision på 82, 1% ved hjælp af kvartiler fra
Gaze360. Kvartilerne er brugt til at modellere en Von Mises sandsynlighedsfordeling af deltagerens
synsfelt. Objektets kanter, som bruges til at måle hvor meget af objektet folk kan se, er blevet udvidet
med 30 grader for at afspejle, at mennesker er i stand til at opfatte bevægelser inden for deres synsfelts
ydregrænser.
Et lille datasæt er lavet for at teste de forskellige metoder. Datasættet består af 20 videoer på 16
sekunder hver. I 6 af videoerne vil deltageren altid kigge på et bestemt objekt, mens i 6 andre videoer
vil deltageren aldrig se på objektet. Derudover er der 8 videoer, som viser to deltagere der interagerer
med objektet.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is based on the development of an artificial intelligence algorithm for estimating individual
people’s perception of their environment. The project is created in cooperation with the department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis is
created in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Masters degree in Human-oriented Artificial
Intelligence. The workload is 30 ECTS points, and the project has run from the 24th August 2020 to
the 14th February 2021. The supervisor of the project is Thomas Bolander of DTU Compute.
Kongens Lyngby, Sunday 14th February, 2021
Emilie Isabella Dahl (s153762)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like acknowledge the following people for their guidance, cooperation and support throughout
the process of this project.
Thank you to Thomas Bolander for guiding me throughout the process through weekly meetings
and advice. Thank you to Lasse Dissing who helped discuss geometrical issues and introduced me to
the systems used within their work with theory of mind.
In addition, I would like to thank Per Bækgaard, Dan Witzner Hansen, Fiona Bríd Mulvey and
Andrea Dittadi who helped me understand the topic and gave good advice when I needed it.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Robot’s Conception of Human Belief
3
2.1
Human-Robot Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Theory of Mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Perspective of the World
11
3.1
Cognitive Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Eye movements and Vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Emotion and Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Cognitive Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Field of Vision
19
4.1
Anatomy of the Visual System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Field of Vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Computer Vision
25
5.1
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Residual Network (ResNet) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Gaze Tracking
29
6.1
Gaze Tracking Terminology and Taxonomy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Scene Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Beholder Eye/Face . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Experiment
39
7.1
Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7.3
Implementation and Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.4
Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8
Discussion
55
8.1
Results from Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.2
Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
9
Further Improvements
61
9.1
Minor improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
9.2
Additional Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
10 Evaluation
65
11 Conclusion
67
A
Project Plan
69
B
Test Plan
71
C
Results
73
D
Github Code and Videos Demonstrating Solutions
79
E
Detecting Attended Visual Targets in Video
81
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The mind and cognitive competence of humans is said to be our main advantages compared to animals
and machines [1]. In recent years, research within Human-Robot Interactions (HRI) have had a focus
on discovering how we teach a machine to communicate and integrate with people and society. One of
the main abilities a robot would need in order to be socially accepted, is being able to understand the
individuality of people’s perception of the world.
This thesis explores how humans construct their individual perspective and how it can be estimated
through observable cues. An experiment attempts to estimate humans’ perceptions of the world based
on vision. Vision is emphasised as gaze tracking technologies can be used to gain an insight into what
people see, and thus a partial understanding of their perception. The goal is thereby to improve Human-
Robot Interactions by enabling robots to have knowledge of people’s different world perceptions through
gaze tracking technology.
1.1
Report overview
Initially, the need for this solution is emphasized in Chapter 2, which introduces different types of
human-robot interactions and how they can relate to an understanding of individuals’ belief system
through theory of mind. How humans gain a perception of the world is then explored in Chapter 3,
which emphasises the importance of the human attention and what attention actually is. Chapter 4
describes the more specific anatomy of the eyes and how information is transported to the brain. In
addition, Chapter 4 also describes the strengths and limitations of the human’s field of vision.
Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 are closely related. Chapter 5 introduces basic concepts within computer
vision, specifically deep learning, which are used in the gaze tracking technologies described in Chapter 6.
Chapter 6 explains the terminology and taxonomy of existing gaze tracking methods including examples
and explanations on how each type relates to this study.
Based on these technologies, multiple methods for estimating whether an individual is able to per-
ceive the status of a single target is implemented and described in Chapter 7. Chapter 8 discusses
the results from the experiment and its relation to the work from the preceding chapters. Potential
further improvements to the methods are highlighted in Chapter 9, whereafter the evaluation of the
development process is explained in Chapter 10. Lastly, the overall work is concluded in Chapter 11
followed by appendices.
A link for the GitHub repository containing the implementation and the test results is in Appendix
D.
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Robot’s Conception of
Human Belief
A robot’s lack of understanding of social context has created great frustration for humans with a non-
technical background working with robots in their daily lives [2]. For a robot to be socially accepted, the
main trait it lacks is circumstance-appropriateness. Circumstance-appropriateness can be implemented
using techniques modelling theory of mind on a social robot.
The following sections will describe the basics of Human-Robot Interaction, Section 2.1, as well as
developing techniques for implementing theory of mind, Section 2.2.
2.1
Human-Robot Interaction
When designing a successful robot, one of the main factors to take into account is the human factors.
Human factors is designing a product, process, or system with the intention of reducing human error,
increasing productivity and enhancing safety and comfort [3]. How humans interact with the device is
the core of human factors. In 2016 Thomas B. Sheridan, who is well respected in the human factors
community, wrote an overview of the status and challenges associated with Human-Robot Interactions
[4].
Over the years robots have evolved from the human-controlled master-slave servomechanisms,
initially created for handling nuclear waste, to a broad range of applications with humans as supervisory
control. Four of these evolving applications are described by Sheridan, where all have different levels of
automation and supervision from humans.
1. Telerobots: Humans have supervisory control of robots in performance of routine tasks. An
example of telerobots is robots doing assembly line tasks. People’s relationship to these robots is
typically planning, teaching, monitoring of automatic control, making repairs etc.
2. Teleoperators: Humans having remote control of vehicles in various hazardous or inaccessible
environments for non-routine tasks. E.g. a robot designed to handle nuclear waste is a teleopera-
tor.
3. Automated Vehicles: Vehicles guided by a human passenger, but operating using artificial
intelligence. These vehicles are seen in highway and railway vehicles as well as commercial aircraft.
4. Human–robot social interaction: Humans directly interacting with a robot that provide
entertainment, teaching, comfort and assistance particularly for children, elderly, autistic and
handicapped people.
Each type of application has some challenges, particularly in relation to human factors. For teler-
obots, the greatest challenge is the safety of the robots, often seen as collision avoidance [4]. Teleopera-
tors’ main challenges are within the control interface, in particular provision of 360 degrees observation
at the remote site and compensation of delays and dropout in communication. When continuous tele-
operation is impossible in certain conditions, the robots can be reprogrammed by a human supervisor
to execute pieces of an overall task automatically, thereby making it operate as a telerobot.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Robot’s Conception of Human Belief
Automated Vehicles are shown to be able to be autonomous when guided by artificial intelligence
in e.g. a self-driving car by Google [4]. However, it is exceedingly diﬀicult for computer vision and
artificial intelligence to learn the everyday social interactions between drivers. According to Sheridan,
there is a demand for further research in the social aspects of driving and the degree of automation
the vehicle can achieve safely. Commercial aircraft are highly autonomous as the operating pilots are
mostly exerting supervisory control in guidance and navigation. The main challenge of all automated
vehicles is actually the acceptance by the passengers [4].
The last application type of robots is human-robot social interactions. These interactions are the
main component this paper is focused on. The human-robot social interactions are closely related to
the idea of general-purpose robots, which are flexible for every-day tasks with non-technical humans.
The topic of social interactions are thereby described in further details in Section 2.1.1.
2.1.1
Human–robot Social Interaction
The human factors needed for a social robot to be accepted by the general public is a popular research
topic. Particularly interesting is the research into what qualities a robot would need to interact with
hospital patients or the elderly so that they trust it e.g. as an exercise coach or delivering food trays.
These desired qualities have been analysed for logistics robots in e.g. oﬀice spaces [2]. A study
conducted using a communicating robot in an oﬀice space concluded that familiarity, circumstance-
appropriateness, and social-role were the most important issues to gain social acceptance.
The fa-
miliarity of a robot depends on how relatable it looks and acts. Circumstance-appropriateness is an
understanding of the given circumstances, e.g. when to interact with human and when not to. And
finally, the social-role is highlighting a clear portrayal of the robot’s purpose in the given environment.
(a) Robovie IV interacting with people at the oﬀice.
(b) Robovie IV carrying a bag
with documents.
Figure 2.1: These images are from a robot-human interaction study conducted at an oﬀice [2].
The oﬀice space experiment’s robot is shown in Figure 2.1, where it communicated with an indi-
vidual, or carried objects for the workers as a delivery task. Throughout the experiment the authors
identified three levels of interactions with the robot: Direct interaction, observing other’s interaction
and rarely seeing the robot at all. The level of interaction with the robot affected which issues (famil-
iarity, circumstance-appropriateness, social-role) were important for acceptance of it. For the people
who had direct interaction with the robot, the most important features were familiarity and social role.
In comparison, people observing the robot or who had little to no relationship with it, the acceptance
became highly dependent on circumstance-appropriateness. As the largest group of people have little
to no contact with robots, ensuring that robots understand circumstance-appropriateness is the most
important factor for gaining social acceptance [2].
Today, some robots have already become socially accepted by the community. These robots either
have strong social-roles, such as the cleaning robot Roomba, or an entertaining children’s toy, such as
the robotic toy-dog AIBO [2]. However, these examples are all related to personal robots, which are
bought by people similar to the people who had direct contact with the robot from the oﬀice space.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Theory of Mind
5
When designing a social robot for hospitals, oﬀices, museums etc. they are no longer personal, and
circumstance-appropriateness becomes increasingly important for everyone to accept it.
Additional work relating to how humans use social cues to interact with a social robot is described
in Section 2.1.2
2.1.2
Teaching Robots Human Interaction
Various works describe how a robot’s action influences humans ([5], [6]). One of the experiments show
how designing a robot’s gaze to imitate distinct personality types, e.g. introvert or extroverts, influences
a user’s motivation and rating of the robot [5]. Users were asked to solve a puzzle, which the robot had
to teach and motivate them to keep solving. The test-setup is shown in Figure 2.2a. This work was
mostly related to improving the familiarity of robots, as it would act based on individuals’ personalities.
The robot also has a strong social-role as the instructor, making its purpose clear to the user.
Another paper tested how human eyes and hand behaviors were influenced when sharing a manipu-
lation task with a robot [6]. Unlike the previous experiment, this robot did not mimic the appearance of
a human and was therefore less familiar. However, a strong sense of social-role allows the user to better
understand its purpose and thus be more accepting of its presence. Figure 2.2b demonstrates how a
participant used the robot-arm to pick up pieces of food from a plate. The participant is equipped with
an eye tracker for monitoring eye movements in addition to the controls of the robotic arm. The work
shows that the participants’ pupils become larger when interacting with the robot. It seems that visible
cues are noticeable in humans, to some extent, when interacting with a robot.
(a) A scene from [5], which analyses the
motivation of people depending of the
behavior of a robot.
(b) This image is from the work [6], which
monitor eye and hand movements of peo-
ple interacting with robots.
(c) A group in a trian-
gular formation, where a
robot is to calculate an
appropriate angle to ap-
proach [7].
Figure 2.2: Examples of work related to human-robot social interactions. Each subfigure is from different
papers within the field of HRI.
A final example of social robot experiments is teaching a robot to be socially aware of the conditions
when approaching a group of people [7]. The intent for the robot is to be included in the conversation.
Figure 2.2c shows an example of a standard group formation, triangular formation, where the robot
needs to know how to join the group. This research allows the robot to become more aware of the
circumstances, as it knows that it needs to join the group from the correct angle to be able to make the
people aware and accept its presence.
2.2
Theory of Mind
The work mentioned in Section 2.1.2 relates to specific tasks; motivating a person by mirroring their
personality, reading the person’s visible cues toward a robot, and understanding how to approach a
social group. The work respectively focuses on familiarity, social-role and circumstance-appropriateness.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Robot’s Conception of Human Belief
In order to design an interface with general social knowledge instead of task specific knowledge, it is
essential to know the basic philosophy of how humans understand each other.
A study that explores solutions for improving human-robot interaction is a paper by Dissing and
Bolander called Implementing Theory of Mind on a Robot Using Dynamic Epistemic Logic [8]. The focus
of the paper is to teach robots theory of mind. Theory of mind is an individual’s ability to understand
and empathize with others through their desires, intentions and beliefs. Modelling the belief-system, in
particular, can teach a robot to understand how individuals’ knowledge differentiates, and thus be able
to consider their circumstances. A method to test individuals’ theory of mind is through false-belief
tasks [9].
A general example of a false-belief task is the Sally-Anne test, which tells a story of two girls, Sally
and Anne, who have a box, a basket and a marble [8]. Sally places the marble in the basket and leaves
the room. Anne moves the marble to the box without Sally being present. The individual being tested
will be asked Where does Sally think the marble is? If the subject correctly understands that Sally has
a false belief of the marble still being in the basket, the subject has correctly understood a first-order
false-belief task. In comparison, if subjects rely on real world truths and answer that Sally believes the
marble to be in the box, they do not have theory of mind. Theory of mind is generally developed over
time, and people learn it around the age of 6 [9]. Some people develop theory of mind more slowly or
perhaps not at all. Children with autism have trouble understanding false-belief tasks, and might reach
a mental age of about 10 years before they achieve an understanding [10]. Some complex problems
similar to false-belief tasks, white lies or double bluff, can take them even longer to learn, and some
may never fully grasp the concepts.
A second-order false-belief task is if Sally was actually spying on Anne, and thereby knows that the
marble is moved. Now the subject will, instead, be asked Where does Anne believe that Sally believes
the marble is?, as it is now Anne who has a false-belief of what Sally believes. These false-belief tasks
can be continued in n-ordered false-belief tasks, e.g. if Anne secretly had a camera monitoring Sally,
and thereby knew that Sally was spying on her. This would again result in Sally having a false-belief
of Anne having a false-belief, etc.
(a) A SoftBank Robotics Pep-
per robot interpreting partici-
pant’s beliefs.
(b) The data received from the two cameras recording the interactions.
Figure 2.3: The setup for the false-belief task created by Dissing et al. [8].
To test a robot’s theory of mind, a task similar to the Sally-Anne test was created by Dissing et
al.[8]. Figure 2.3a shows how a Pepper robot is stationed behind three numbered containers with small
colored cubes on top. The robot keeps track of where people believe the cubes are located using cameras
stationed around the robot, as seen in Figure 2.3b. The robot’s task is similarl to an observer keeping
track of Sally and Anne’s beliefs in the Sally-Anne test. The false-belief task could in principle be
conducted simply using a computer, a microphone and two cameras, but having the robot embodying
an observing agent facilitates a better interaction for the participants [8].
In the given solution Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) is used to teach the robot theory of mind.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Theory of Mind
7
DEL is a logical language that is used to model information changing events. This includes a model of
the changes of the agents’ believes and the actual real world changes [11]. In the proposed DEL solution
the changing event are called using triggers. The solution therefore has multiple triggers e.g. when a lid
of a container is lifted, a cube becomes visible, a cube is put into a container, a person leaves or enters
the room, etc. The current algorithm assumes that when a person is visible and facing the camera, the
person will be able to see the events occurring with the containers, thereby simplifying the estimation of
what agents see in order to estimate what they believe. The algorithm that Dissing et al. created relies
on the individuals attention always being on the containers and cubes, as well as not looking behind the
others’ back [8]. This is one of the shortcomings the work has in order to estimate people’s perception
of the world, and thus their beliefs. The importance of understanding human perception through gaze
direction is highlighted in the work of Langton et al. [12] which is further described in Section 2.2.1.
2.2.1
Gaze Direction Relation to ToM
Various research within perception and attention is described in detail in Section 3, however, explicit
theories are developed explaining the relation of human attention and theory of mind. Langton et al.
described in February 2000 a number of different works involving social cues, theory of mind and gaze
direction [12].
One of the theories presented by Langton et al. is by Perrett and his colleagues. Perrett et al.
suggest that eye movements are used to regulate turn-taking in conversations, express intimacy and
exercising social control [12]. These assumptions are also a basis for the research described in Section
2.1.2, where the authors try to understand whether human social cues are visible in human-robot
interaction. Overall, the suggestion highlights the importance of human gaze for determining social
cues and individual perceptions.
A concrete theory combining theory of mind with gaze direction is presented by Baron-Cohen as
shown in Figure 2.4a [12]. Baron-Cohen proposes a mindreading model consisting of a collection of
modules which allow humans to attribute the mental states of others. The model has 4 components:
1. Intentionality Detector (ID): The ID is a primitive perceptual mechanism which interprets
stimuli in terms of its desires and goals. So ID detector is a method to understand the goals and
motivation of others.
2. Eye-Direction Detector (EDD): The EDD simply detects eye-like stimuli and computes the
gaze direction and point of regard.
3. Shared-Attention Mechanism (SAM): SAM enables individuals to understand when a joint
connection with another individual is created. Based on information from ID and EDD it under-
stands the concept of having a joint connection when another agent’s eyes are directed towards
itself or the same location as itself.
4. Theory-of-Mind Mechanism (ToMM): ToMM is the last mechnism in the model. It interprets
SAM to create an understanding others intentions, believes and desires.
Therefore, according to Baron-Cohen, the use of gaze direction to establish joint attention underpins
the development of a theory of mind. The model’s specialized gaze module, EDD, is devoted to the
task of detecting eyes and computing the point of regard in the environment. Such a devoted module
would allow for rapid and obligatorily processing of the gaze of others.
Work mentioned by Langton et al. includes the search for a specialized neural circuitry tailored
to perceiving others’ gaze. An experiment by Perrett et al. identified certain cells in a macaque’s
brain, specifically the superior temporal sulcus (STS) of the temporal lobe, which responded maximally
to a particular direction in which another monkey’s eyes were looking. In addition, when the STS
was missing, the monkeys were no longer able to make gaze-direction judgements. This indicates that
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Robot’s Conception of Human Belief
(a) A mindreading model suggested by Baron-
Cohen [12].
(b) The test data for detecting whether eye direction or
head orientation influence people’s reaction time.
Figure 2.4: Figures from the research and work by Langton et al. [12].
a specialized cognitive module might exist for gaze tracking. The STS has later been claimed as a
dedicated area in the brain within different cognitive functions as ToM, audiovisual integration, motion
processing, speech processing, and face processing [13]. One paper proposes a multi-functionality of the
STS region by having flexible network coactivations with other brain regions. So, the functionality of
the STS become dependent on other regions of the brain [13].
Even if STS is not exclusively used for perceiving gaze direction, other studies have shown that
humans react reflexively on gaze directions, which indicates a module similar to the EDD exist. These
tests have shown that humans will react to gaze cues from other people reflexively even when told to
ignore them [12]. These reactions occurred most often when the participants see the visual cues from
their peripheral visual fields. In comparison, these reactions were not noticed at all when replacing the
human gaze direction with e.g. an arrow.
Perrett and Emery suggested altering the model created by Baron-Cohen by replacing the EDD
with a DAD, direction-of-attention detector. DAD was originally suggested as a hierarchy of attention
indicators. The eyes were the most influential, but if the eyes were not visible the orientation of the
head would be the next source of the individual’s attention direction, and lastly the body posture.
Like Perrett and Emery, Langton et al. questioned whether gaze direction was the only indicator
of a human’s attention and source of processing [12]. They created an experiment where people had to
judge where a person was looking based on either the head orientation or gaze direction. Examples of
the images the subjects judged are shown in Figure 2.4b. The person in the images would be looking to
the left, while the head was oriented to the right to confuse the participants. The reaction times were
measured when determining the direction of attention based on eyes or head separately. If the main
source of determined attention direction is the gaze, then the participants would be faster in determining
the direction based on the eyes and not be influences by the head’s orientation. The results showed
that people were significantly faster when the eyes and head had the same direction, but no evidence
suggested that the eyes were more important than the orientation of the head. Thereby, the orientation
of the head has a parallel effect on reflectively understanding another human’s attention [12]. Additional
experiments found that the posture of the body and even gestures such as pointing also had similar
effect. In addition, the same brain cells responding to gaze direction were also found to be sensitive to
conjunctions of eye, head and body positions [12].
Thus, the DAD module suggested by Perrett and Emery might not fully grasp how attention shifts.
However, it does include the influence of multiple features helping people communicate. Baron-Cohen’s
model seems significant as gaze has been proven to be able to indicate where other people’s attention
is directed, but the model is simplified. The model focus only on gaze direction and do thereby not
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Summary
9
include additional features which also direct people’s attention [12].
2.3
Summary
A potential solution to the problem of a robot’s lack of circumstance-appropriateness is implementing
the ability to understand a human’s different beliefs.
People who can interpret other’s beliefs and
understand that they might be different from reality has a theory of mind. To allow robots the same
attributes, implementing a theory of mind on a robot seems as the first step. A suggestion as to how
theory of mind is coupled to people’s basic attention flow is shown in a model by Baron-Cohen, where
one of the first sources of information is the human gaze. Langton et al. showed that head orientation
and body posture are as important as the human gaze when determining the direction of a person’s
attention. So, to accurately implement theory of mind on a robot, it is essential that the robot is
able to interpret people’s perception of the world, and thus their head orientation and gaze direction.
Understanding how people perceive the world is discussed in Chapter 3, while the technology within
determining gaze direction is explained in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Perspective of the World
How do humans gain their perception of the world? This question is essential when designing a system
which is able to interpret people’s understanding of the state of the world. Studies show ([14]) that we
do not always perceive what is right in front of us, as we might be focused on other tasks. This section
describes how studies evaluate people’s perception and attention, as well as highlight the potential
shortcomings of a computational system based on visible cues from the human body.
The overall
question is whether it is even possible to create an accurate model given the current knowledge of how
human’s perception of the world works.
3.1
Cognitive Attention
According to research noted in From Human Attention to Computational Attention: A Multidisciplinary
Approach by Mancas et al.
”Attention is the first step of perception” [15].
The initial gateway of
understanding how humans perceive the outside world is through the human senses: vision, audition,
touch, smell or taste. Attention is the method which humans use to filter and analyse the outer real
world and turn it into an inner conscious representation. However, the study of attention proves to be
more complex than a simple information reduction system.
Attention was first mentioned in philosophy in 1890 by William James, known as the father of
psychology.
James wrote that Everyone knows what attention is, as the explanation for why the
topic had not been researched before, it seems so fundamental.
However, after almost 100 years,
this statement was challenged by H. Pashler. Pashler spent several decades of research in cognitive
psychology and claims that No one knows what attention is [15]. The study of attention had been divided
and analysed in different fields including Philosophy, Experimental Psychology, Cognitive Psychology,
Cognitive Neuroscience, and Computer Science. Mancas et al. describes the fields as the layers of an
”attention onion” [15]. Philosophy was the first field of study to gain an interest, which sparked the
interest respectively in the other fields. Each field of study has built different sets of knowledge on top
of each other and divided the attentional concept into multiple layers.
The overarching question of ”What is attention” is thereby quite complex and Mancas et al. writes
that currently this question has no final answer.
However, multiple kinds of attention have been
established, which describe different methods of how the brain is provided with the capacity of selecting
relevant information and prioritizing tasks. In addition, attention not only serves to select a location
of interest, but also enhances the cortical representation of objects at that location, thus casting the
location in a form of spotlight [16]. Attention can be seen as three concepts: eye movement, memory
and action, and cognitive load. These concepts will be described in the following sections respectively.
3.2
Eye movements and Vision
The primary question to be answered by eye movements and vision within attention is “where” the
objects of interest are located. This section will first introduce how the location of attention is not
always observable.
This is followed by an introduction to research within eye movement and how
attention influences it.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Perspective of the World
3.2.1
Observable Attention
The methods analysed focuses on changes in people’s posture, which can indicate that a person is
preparing sensory receptors for an expected input. These changes could include eye movements, head
movements, external ear movements, changes in pupil size etc.[15].
The observable changes are all
examples of a type of attention called overt attention [15]. The contrast to overt attention is covert
attention, where no posture changes are visible. The covert attention focuses on bringing regions of a
scene to consciousness that is not fixated on by the eyes.
To estimate people’s perception of the world, this study relies on physical movements which are
visible in images, as this is the main indication of what they experience and thus what they see at the
given time. Similarly, the study of human eye movement and vision is built on the visible indication
of where humans have their attention. Eye movement alone is not the full and accurate depiction of
where the person’s attention is located as the other senses also contribute. However, eye movement is
often depicted as one of the most important senses, and can give an insight into one of the attention’s
input channels. Defining the human senses in a hierarchy is challenged by Fabian Hutmacher, as he
explains that the elaborate research within vision is mainly a cause of culture and current technology
[17]. Nevertheless, the visual sense is visible from an image and thus available to analyse in this study,
which is the main reason for the emphasis.
3.2.2
Founders of Modern Eye Movement Research
Al’fred Luk’yanovich Yarbus is known as one of the founders of modern eye movement research for
his work in 1965 [18]. Yarbus wrote about stabilised retinal images, as well as cognitive influences on
scanning patterns. Scanning patterns are shown to be a systematic method of how perspective of a
scene effects eye movements, and therefore the areas attended to. Tatler et al. extened Yarbus’ original
work on cognitive scanning patterns and how prior instructions influence the way people look at the
world [18].
Figure 3.1 shows the result of two experiments on human scanning patterns.
The figure shows
the original work of Yarbus, Figure 3.1a, as well as the extended work by Tatler et al., Figure 3.1b.
The tests were conducted by having a number of subjects view the same picture multiple times with
different instructions. The picture in Yarbus’ original experience was a painting of a social scene called
The Unexpected Visitor from 1888 by Ilya Repin. The image chosen by Tatler et al. was a portrait of
Yarbus himself, showing a single man instead of a complex social scene. The intention of the second
experiment was to challenge the concept of scanning patterns when looking at a close-up image of the
face. A systematic cyclic pattern of looking between the eyes and the mouth has been established by
Yarbus in a different chapter. The second experiment wanted to see if this pattern was noticeable when
looking at a portrait of a person with his upper body included [18].
The location of the individual’s eye movements were recorded over time illustrating the individual’s
scanning patterns.
The instructions given to the subjects are described in Table 3.1.
Both of the
scanning patterns shown in Figure 3.1 are from a random person within the group of test subjects.
The individual subjects did not have the same scanning patterns given the same instructions, but
a significant difference was noticeable when comparing the individuals’ own scanning patterns. The
conclusion of Yarbus’ paper was that people have different eye movements depending on the condition
and task they were given. Thus, scanning patterns are influenced by the perspective of the scene.
The second experiment concluded that the facial features, especially the eyes and mouth, did receive
the greatest fraction of the gaze allocation. However, the cyclic scanning between eyes and mouth was
less evident, and not shown for some of the subjects. Thus, when an image contains both a face and part
of the body the cyclic scanning pattern is not always visible. This could indicate that we view images
and the real world differently, as the real world view will seldom only have the face visible [18]. The
way we perceive the world is task-dependent and thus influence our eye movements as our attention
shifts.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Eye movements and Vision
13
(a) The results from Yarbus’ research
(b) The results from Tatler et al.’s research
Figure 3.1: The divers scanning patterns of different images given instructions seen in Table 3.1 from
[18]
Yarbus’ Instructions
1. Free examination
2. Estimate the material circumstances of the
family in the picture
3. Give the ages of the people in the picture
4. Surmise what the family had been doing be-
fore the arrival of the ’unexpected visitor’
5. Remember the clothes worn by the people
6. Remember the position of the people and
objects in the room
7. Estimate how long the unexpected visitor
had been away from the family
Tatler et al.’s Instructions
1. Free examination
2. Estimate how wealthy this person was and
what his social position was
3. Estimate how old the person was when the
picture was taken
4. Estimate what the person had been doing just
before this picture was taken
5. Remember as much as you can about the
clothes
6. Try to remember the positions and details of
everything
7. Try to estimate how long this person had been
away from home and why he had been away
Table 3.1: The instructions by Yarbus and Tatler et al. [18]
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Perspective of the World
The original work by Yarbus’ main focus was actually a method of creating stabilised retinal images,
but the cognitive factors of eye movement described in the same paper have become increasingly popular.
The cognitive factors were especially highlighted in 1990 through additional publications that related
to the cognitive work of Yarbus [18].
3.2.3
Types of Eye Movements
To understand how the perspective of a scene influences eye movements, it is also important to under-
stand which types of eye movements are actually possible. Today, three types of eye movements have
been established: fixations, saccades and smooth pursuit. Fixation is when the eyes rest on a seemingly
single location for a minimal period of time. Even though the eye might seem to look still, it has small
micro-saccades, which simply means that the eye is never truly still. The second type is saccades, which
are rapid eye movements between two locations (fixations). Often no visual data is acquired at the time
of saccades, as the focus is to create a new fixation at another location. The final type of movement is
a smooth pursuit. This is almost like a fixation, but when the fixation is located on a moving target.
This will make the eyes follow the moving target in a slow pace.
The scanning patterns from Section 3.2.2 are based on where the different fixational point are located
when viewing an image. The saccades do not jump too much, as the focus is mostly within the picture’s
frame. These days, eye technology often record fixation durations, saccade amplitudes and pupil size
using an eye tracker.
3.3
Emotion and Action
The second concept within attention is emotion and action, which asks the question “what” the object of
interest is rather than ”where” as seen in the previous section. Research shows that people’s attention
is guided by bottom-up and top-down saliency [15]. These concepts highlight which objects might draw
the attention of people. The concept of saliency is described in Section 3.3.1, which is followed by an
example of visual search which also use saliency in Section 3.3.2.
3.3.1
Saliency
The two types of saliency are bottom-up and top-down. First, bottom-up saliency refers to exogenous,
outside-the-person control of attention [15]. In images bottom-up saliency is based on image-based cues,
which might be a bright, dense, weirdly shaped or very colorful area within the scene [16]. In other
word, an area that stands out from the main format of the image. An example could be a white image
with a single circle drawn on it. As the circle stands out within the white background, it will have a
very high bottom-up saliency rate in contrast to the rest of the white background. For a bottom-up
saliency example within sound, this might be a simple knock on the door in a silent house. You cannot
help notice the knocking, as it stands out from quiet. Bottom-up saliency is not always a voluntary
action, as the attention is sometimes caused by reflex. This reflex was necessary in the past, when an
abnormality might be caused by potential danger.
In contrast to bottom-up saliency is top-down saliency, which refers to the endogenous or internal
control of attention [15]. Unlike bottom-up, which is approximately the same for every living being
(generalizable), top-down is different for every individual as it depends on subjective emotion and
experiences (ungeneralizable). Top-down is thereby based on task-dependent cues related to memory,
emotions and individual goals [16]. This makes it more complex for computers to model, as it requires
information about the individual’s internal states, goals, prior knowledge and/or emotions. Examples
of such implementations of saliency, both bottom-up and top-down, are described in Section 6.2.2. The
implementation of top-down saliency is often simplified as high-level features such as recognizing people,
faces, hands, animals, object, etc. Emotions are often tied to meaningful targets, so the simplification
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Emotion and Action
15
of subjective emotions tend to show good results. The first conceptual model of saliency was introduced
by Koch and Ullman in 1985, and later implemented and refined by Itti and Koch [16].
In addition, top-down saliency can actually be divided into two sub-components: Goal/action related
and Memory/emotion related [15]. The goal/action related top-down attention, also known as volitional
top-down attention, is when the attention is focused on objects related to the current goals of the
individual. When the attention is related to a goal, the user will not only react to novel situations,
but also manage the goals and actions accordingly. So, volitional attention can be seen as a behavioral
update when focusing on current actions to reach a desired goal.
In comparison, Memory/emotion related top-down attention is a process which is influenced by
experience and prior knowledge. If you recognize a friend or see a spider, which you are terrified of, it
will draw your attention. It does not have to be image related, you might simply hear a song you have
fond memories of, which will thereby also catch your attention.
Finally, the different types of attentional concepts can be independent, but they often relate to each
other. If you compare the three attentional concepts: bottom-up, volitional top-down, and memory/e-
motion top-down, they can be seen in a sort of hierarchy. The bottom-up attention is the strongest and
can pull your attention from either types of top-down attentions. Then volitional top-down attention
can overtake attention from a memory-related top-down attention, which in turn is at the bottom. How-
ever, even though some types of attention are more likely to inhibit the other components of attention
it is a balance that depends on the level of intensity. A good example is described by Mancas et al.:
”If someone searches for his keys (volitional top-down), he will not take care about a
car passing by. But if he hears a strange sound (bottom-up) and then recognizes a lion
(memory-related top-down attention), he will stop searching for the keys and run away.”
[15]
3.3.2
Visual search
Visual search has become quite popular when analysing perspectives of a scene. Visual search is research
in how human visually search scenes for targets. As described in Section 3.3.1, a person’s attention is
mostly influenced by bottom-up or top-down attention. A paper by Jeremy M. Wolfe describes how it
is simply not possible to fully process all stimuli in a visual field at once, which is the reason for an
attentional filter [19].
Wolfe describes how the first step of a search is the pre-attentive attributes within a scene, which
might indicate where the target object is. The pre-attentive attributes are a limited set of attributes
such as color, motion, size etc. that can be processed across the visual field in parallel [19]. An example
is if you are given the task to find a blueberry. The pre-attentive attribute would be the color blue and
have a small rounded shape. This would allow you to focus on the limited set of attributes within the
scene and attain an overview across the whole field in a single step. The bottom-up attention is thus
used to recieve an initial guidance through the image using the pre-attentive attributes in a stimulus-
driven manner. The next step is top-down attention in a user-driven manner. The top-down attention
allows the individual to recognize objects and thus recognize whether the desired target is at a given
location.
As the individuals looks at a scene it is known that the target is not at places already searched. We
therefore tend to ignore all areas already explored, which is also known as the inhibition of return. This
allows for a faster search, as the highly salient areas are not explored twice. In addition, an oversight
seen frequently when searching is the satisfaction of search. If we find the desired target, we are satisfied
and move on. We ignore the possibility that there might be multiple identical targets as we are satisfied
when simply finding one.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Perspective of the World
3.4
Cognitive Load
The final concept widely researched is the cognitive load. The cognitive load does not focus on answering
a specific question, but evaluates how the capacity of attention is divided. The brain has a limited
capacity, where five types of division of attention have been established.
These five types are also
known as the clinical model of attention [15]. The five variations are listed below.
1. Focused attention: When all attention is on a specific stimuli, thereby being focused on a
precise task.
2. Sustained attention: When maintaining a consistent response during a longer continuous ac-
tivity. So one might attain being attentive for a long period of time on the same topic.
3. Selective attention: When selectively maintaining cognitive resource on a specific stimuli and
thereby ignoring potential distractors.
4. Alternating attention: When switching between multiple tasks, allowing the attention to focus
on different tasks in a sequential process.
5. Divided attention: When dealing simultaneously with multiple tasks. This might also be known
as multitasking, where the attention divided in a parallel process.
The five kinds of attention are all relevant, as the degree of focus influences the perception the
individual will create. An interesting example is the study of selective attention, where one can become
blind to otherwise obvious situations. This example is described in Section 3.4.1. The clinical model
of attention is relevant as it distinguishes how clear a perspective the individual has of the real outer
world. If the degree of focus is small, i.e. when one has divided attention, the perception of the world
might not be as accurate, as if the attention is focused.
3.4.1
Selective Attention
Drew et al. conducted a study on inattentional blindness (IB), which is when people can look directly at
a salient stimuli without noticing it [14]. Inattentional blindness is a concequence of selective attention,
as a potential important stimuli is viewed as a distractor and thereby ignored.
This proves that even when implementing the best gaze tracking technology, there is a chance that
the person does not actually perceive the stimuli right in front of them. The study of inattentional
blindness is based of the well known study the invisible gorilla from 1999 by Simons and Chabris [14].
The observers are told to count a ball-passing game while a human in a gorilla suit wanders through the
field of players. Even though the gorilla walked through the center of the scene, a substantial portion
of the observers did not report seeing it.
Drew et al. extended this study to understand whether experts would notice a similar abnormality
within their field of expertise [14]. The task was given to expert radiologists as well as novices, to spot
nodules within five CT scans of the lungs. The last CT scan contains a hidden gorilla, which can be
seen in Figure 3.2a. Only 16.7% of the radiologists located the gorilla, and none of the novices reported
seeing it. Figure 3.2b shows the location of a radiologists who did not notice the gorilla, but evidently
looked directly at it.
Given the high score for inattentional blindness Drew et al. did an additional test to ensure that the
gorilla was actual visible [14]. So they showed a movie with accurate CT frames and ones containing
the gorilla to a number of subjects. The result showed that the gorilla was correctly located 88% of
the time, even with a high frame rate. In conclusion, it shows that expertise does have an effect on
inattentional blindness, as a small percentage of the radiologists did see the gorilla. It is believed that
the more diﬀicult the task, the higher the inattentional blindness rate, which also explains why people
who are used to looking at CT scans might find the task easier and thus become less blinded. However,
==PAGE:27==
3.5 Summary
17
(a) Gorilla visible in CT scan.
(b) Eye tracking of a radiologist looking at the
image.
Figure 3.2: Two identical CT scans highlighting a Gorilla in the left image, and the eye fixations in the
right image. The images are from [14].
more important is the fact that the radiologist were able to detect lung nodules with a mean detection
rate of 55% in comparison to the naive observers with a mean detection rate of 12%. In conclusion,
even this high level of expertise does not immunize individuals against inherent limitations of human
attention and perception. A better understanding of these limits could reduce the consequences of them
so that medical and other man-made search tasks become more accurate [14].
3.5
Summary
In conclusion, there are three concepts relevant to gaining a perception of the world showing how at-
tention is an essential part of estimating a person’s consciousness. These concepts try to answer three
different questions: ”where” the objects of interest are located (Eye movement), ”what” the objects of
interest are (Emotin and Action), and how attention can be divided given a degree of focus (cognitive
load). These concepts show that following visual cues from a human body will only allow an inter-
pretation of the overt attention, thus ignoring convert attention. In addition, the limited ability for
generalisation of top-down saliency creates a complex problem, as it seems unattainable to configure in-
dividuals’ prior knowledge and emotions. Given that the scenario of selective attention creates the issue
that a subject might be focusing on a different task and thereby experiencing inattentional blindness.
Thus, given the current knowledge and technology available, it is not possible to create a completely
accurate model of a person’s perception of a scene. However, it is possible to estimate a perspective of
the scene by relying on overt attention signals, scene estimations of bottom-up and top-down saliency,
and scoping to focused, sustainable or alternating degrees of focus. The limitations are a shortcoming
of an implementation, but an estimation of humans’ perception of the world is an advantage to having
none.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Field of Vision
It is evident that attention, and thus our perception, cannot be be estimated accurately solely based
on eye movements visible in an image (described in Chapter 3). Attention is mainly seen as a filtration
of our senses, which allows us to process and create our perception of the world. However, one of the
visible cues humans make and use to interpret each other’s focus of attention is our eyes and gaze
directions. Several psychophysical studies have even indicated that we are not blind to scenes which
are outside of our focus of attention [16]. We are able to make simple judgements on objects to which
we are not fixating on; objects which might only be visible in the outer corner of our eyes. So how do
the eyes physically work? This chapter will focus on how we are able to see the world by researching
the anatomy of the eyes and understanding the span of our field of vision.
4.1
Anatomy of the Visual System
Human eyes are quite distinctive and seem to have evolved in such a way that eye direction is particularly
easy for our visual systems to perceive. The white sclera creates a high contrast to the iris and dark
pupil, which is not seen often in other species [12].
The most basic features of the eye is displayed in Figure 4.1, where the eye is illustrated as if it
was sliced horizontally with the nose underneath. The outside world is represented through light waves,
which are processed in the eye and the brain. By simplifying the process, the overall flow consists of
approximately 9 steps. These steps are highlighted in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 which allows for a
better understanding of the following descriptions of the individual steps.
(1) The light waves will first travel through the transparent and hard outer shell called the cornea
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(2)
(4)
(6)
(5)
(5)
(6)
(4)
(4)
Light
Light
Light
Back of the eye
Bipolar
cells
Horizontal
cells
Amacrine
cells
Figure 4.1: Images from [20] with small edits consisting of the numbers, the combination of the two
figures, the light arrows and the depictions of amacrine, bipolar and horizontal cells.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Field of Vision
[21]. The cornea is involved in focusing light waves and covers the front of the pupil and iris. The
remaining part of the eye is covered by a white surface called the sclera. (2) After passing through
the cornea, the light rays reach the lens through the pupil. The pupil’s size is controlled by muscles
connected to the iris, which is triggered by the light levels and emotional arousal [20]. The big eye
movements are controlled by the brain, which is known as the oculomotor control, through 6 muscles
on each eyeball [22]. These muscles allow the eyes to look in multiple directions even though the head
is stationary.
(3) The lens is a curved, transparent structure that focuses and flips light rays so the image strikes
the retina opposite of reality. The light rays from the left world view strike the right side of the retina
and the top world view strike at the bottom. (4) The retina covers 180 degrees of the inner eye boundary
and consists of a series of photoreceptors which are light detecting cells. Photoreceptors can either be
rods or cones. Approximately 120 million rods are places throughout the retina and are triggered by
low light levels, which enables humans to see in darker conditions. The cones are more sparse as the
retina only has 6 million rods, which are mostly located in one section of the retina called the fovea.
The cones are triggered by more light and are able to distinguish between colour. The high density of
cones at the fovea enable people to see in more detail, so the eye moves until the focus of attention
reaches the fovea. The density of the rods and cones are explained further in Section 4.2. (5) The
photoreceptors send light signals to the brain after some initial processing. Figure 4.1 displays how the
light is received by the cones and rods. The retina is turned inside-out, so the light actually passes over
the optic nerve and ganglion cells to be caught by the photoreceptors. The photoreceptors send the
signal back through a network of neural cells, where the most outer neural cells are called the ganglion
cells towards the optic nerve.
Figure 4.2: Image from [21] with small edits consist-
ing of the numbers.
(6) The optic nerve is the pathway which
transports the light information to the brain. The
optic nerve runs along the inside of the eye, on
the inside of the photoreceptors, and exits the
eye through a spot called the blind spot.
The
blind spot does not have any photoreceptors, so
our sight is actually not complete. However, given
the fact that we have two eyes, where the blind
spots do not overlap, the missing piece can be
filled in by our brain. When only looking with
one eye, the blind spot is filled in given the con-
text, which is not always correct. (7) The optic
nerve from both eyes will cross at the optic chi-
asm, where the light signal from the left sides and
the right sides are exchanged. Figure 4.2 displays
how the signal is passed on from the eyes to the
brain. The left side of the brain analyses the vi-
sual information from the right side of the real
world perspective from both eyes.
(8) The visual information from the optic chi-
asm is passed on to a part of the thalamus called
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), as seen on
Figure 4.2 [21]. The LGN does not only recieve in-
formation from the eyes, but also the other senses.
It serves as a router, by processing the informa-
tion and sending it to the desired part of the brain.
(9) The final processing step is in the primary visual cortex, which is located at the back of the brain.
The primary visual cortex is connected with several areas of the brain and performs specialised functions.
This is seen as the area of the brain where the individual visual perception of the world occurs.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Field of Vision
21
4.1.1
Dorsal Stream and Ventral Stream
Visual processing is the ability to understand what the eyes see. Several abilities are defined as a part
of the visual processing. Some of these abilities are mentioned below [22].
• Visual closure: The ability to know what an object is, even if only part of it is visible.
• Visual Discrimination: The ability to compare features and distinguish them from each other.
• Visual Memory: The ability to recall something seen recently.
• Visual-spatial processing: The ability to estimate how an object’s location relate to yourself.
These abilities are only a segment of the abilities related to visual processing. So how can the brain
interpret visual information from the eyes? As mentioned above, the processing of visual information
happens in the primary visual cortex. The processed information exits the primary visual cortex and
follows two major pathways in the brain [23]. The two streams bring meaning and understanding to
the visual information, which is how humans create an inner perception of the world.
One of the streams is the dorsal stream, which is also known as the where or how pathway [22]. The
dorsal stream controls the direction of attention and localisation of elements of interest. The dorsal
stream is essential for coordination of bodily movements guided by the visual field [23].
The other stream is the ventral stream, which is known as the what pathway [22]. The ventral stream
is connected to the areas of the brain storing long-term memory (medial temporal lobe) and control
of emotions (limbic system). The ventral stream therefore recognises and identifies visual elements. In
addition, the ventral stream also judges the significance of the elements using the individual’s memory.
The dorsal and ventral streams are bidirectional and interconnected allowing them to share infor-
mation while processing in parallel [16]. The modelling of saliency can be compared to the streams, as
the bottom-up salient stimuli is processed in the eyes’ initial neural cells and the primary visual cortex,
which extracts edges, color, shape etc. The top-down saliency is then processed by the ventral streams
as it relates to memory and emotion. The processing of bottom-up salient stimuli will seem to pop out
of a scene, which indicates that we are able to process a larger visual field than within the fovea. The
speed of reaction with a bottom-up saliency-based form of attention is said to be between 25 to 50 ms
per item [16]. In contrast, the speed of reacting to a task-dependent, top-down, form of attention is
200 ms or more per item, which is more than 5 times slower than the saliency-based form.
Vision is thereby not only dependent on the eyes, but consists of many parts including the combined
functionality of the eyes, the eye muscles, and the brain [22]. The eyes are needed as the initial gateway
for the light rays of the outside world. The muscles are essential to move the eyes and thus allow the
focus to be in the desired direction, and lastly the brain is needed to understand, control and interpret
the information.
4.2
Field of Vision
A child’s ability to learn is highly dependant on their visual capability, as more than 80% of child’s
learning comes from vision [22]. The lack of vision can create movement, mobility, school and learning
challenges in addition to the social and emotional diﬀiculty that it brings. A person in the United
States of America is deemed legally blind when they are unable to see more than 10 degrees from the
point of fixation to each side [22]. A legally blind person is thus not always completely unable to see
the world outside, but they are significantly less capable with a lower than average field of vision. The
20 degrees around the point of fixation is shown in Figure 4.3a, with 10 degrees on each side. Blindness
is not only caused by damage to the eyes (Ocular level), but also by potential damage in the optic
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Field of Vision
(a) This shows the different fields of vi-
sion, where the red dots show the maxi-
mum boundaries for for being presumed
legally blind. The image is from [22].
(b) This image is from [25], and shows the den-
sity of the photoreceptors along the horizontal
meridian.
Visual Field
Horizontal 
meridian
Vertical
meridian
Fovea
Optic 
Nerve
Fixation
Blind
spot
(c)
This
illustra-
tion is based on
[26], but only in-
cludes
the
infor-
mation relevant to
this work.
Figure 4.3: These figures are from [22],[25] and based on [26]. They show the fields of vision, density of
photoreceptors and horizontal meridian.
nerve transporting the information to the brain (Connection Level) and damage to the brain (Brain
Level)[24].
The field of vision is commonly divided into 3 fields, as shown in Figure 4.3a:
1. The Central (or Fovea) field match up with the fovea in the eye, and is thereby the point
where our vision is best. The field is about 2 −5 degrees and is defined as 100 acuity [22].
2. The Paracentral (or Parafoveal) field is the next area outside of the central field. It is often
described as a number of letters’ width around the central field. When reading, the paracentral
field is typically about 2 −4 letters width to the left and up to 15 letters width to the right. It is
typically within an area of 18 degrees.
3. The Peripheral field is the last field of vision. People are not able to see objects clearly within
this field, however, it is essential for seeing movements. The peripheral field is divided into near,
mid and far peripheral fields, as seen in Figure 4.3a. The peripheral field is an area about 110
degrees.
So, why is the acuity actually so different in the various fields? The reason for the diverse focus is
the density of the cones and rods on the retina in our eyes. The density of the cones and rods along
the horizontal meridian are shown in Figure 4.3b. The horizontal and vertical meridians are illustrated
in Figure 4.3c, where the horizontal meridian crosses both the forvea and the blind spot. The majority
of the cones are all at the fovea, which is marked in Figure 4.3b as 0 degrees. The cones are then
drastically reduced and spread over the rest of the fields. The rods peak at 18 degrees from the center
of the fovea, where there are approximately 160ť000 rods/mm2, and no rods are located at the very
center of the fovea [25]. As the amount of cones and rods decline, the acuity of the vision thereby also
declines. Thompson et al. studies the visual capabilities of humans in the peripheral vision, where they
concluded that biological motion was perceived just as well in the peripheral field as in the central field
[27]. So, when estimating what people are able to perceive of the outside world, it is essential not only
to focus on the central field. Even though the central field is the focus of attention, the world in the
paracentral and peripheral fields still influence our perceptions of the world.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Field of Vision
23
4.2.1
Field of Vision Restrictions
The visual field is restricted by the anatomy of the head when trying to move the eyes in the desired
direction. These restrictions can be divided into 4 portions, which are described below [24].
• The Nasal Portion is the area of the visual field towards the nose and is measured in degrees
from the point of fixation. The area is normally limited to 60 degrees in the horizontal axis.
• The Temporal Portion is the opposite of the nasal, and thus the area towards the ear. The
area is larger than the nasal portion and is normally limited to 100 degrees in the horizontal axis.
• The Superior Portion refers to the vertical space above the center of the visual field. This
space is approximately 60 degrees in the vertical axis.
• The Inferior Portion is the final limitation and is the space underneath the center. This space
is a bit larger than the superior portion with about 75 degrees in the vertical axis.
Figure 4.4 shows how we move our head and eyes in order to keep the attentive stimuli in the
preferred viewing field.
Figure 4.4: Image from [21] showing peo-
ple’s preferred movements when viewing
a target.
The horizontal movement (yaw) is symmetric by allow-
ing 35 degrees to the left or right, but the vertical field is
not. The eyes are only able to pitch about 20 degrees up-
wards and 25 degrees downwards [21]. The variation in the
vertical degree make people look slightly more downwards
instead of completely straight.
These restriction do not allow both human eyes to see
the same scene. The field of vision where both eyes are able
to see the same scene is within the mid peripheral view, so
approximately 120 degrees overlaps both eyes.
The area
seen by both eyes is also called the binocular field. The
far peripheral field is thereby only seen by either the left
or the right eye and is called the left or right monocular
field. The binocular field allows people to better interpret
the depth within the scene. When viewing an object from
two different positions, the placement of the object changes
for each viewpoint, which is called the parallax. The appear-
ance of objects placed closer to the eyes will differ more than objects further away.
For this reason, humans’ preferred horizontal viewing area is typically within the binocular field, as
shown in Figure 4.4. People can comfortably perceive an area up to 30 degrees clearly, and will simply
move the eyes within the immediate field of view which is 70 degrees. For areas larger than 70 degrees
people will usually rotate their heads, and the maximum viewing area without moving our body is 190
degrees [21]. People are able to perceive a larger area within their peripheral view, but when looking
at objects we will usually move our eyes accordingly.
Figure 4.4 is different from Figure 4.3a, as Figure 4.3a illustrates the different fields of vision when
a person is fixating on an object. When fixating on an object, we are still able to see the area around
the fixation, even though it might not be in high resolution. Figure 4.4 illustrates our preferred viewing
area and how we will typically move our head and eyes to focus on different stimuli in a scene.
4.2.2
Kappa Angle
When a person is looking at an object, that object will line up with the fovea in the back of the eye to
make the object clear. This line from the object of fixation to the fovea is called the visual axis [28].
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Field of Vision
However, it is actually not possible to observe this axis from an image of the eye, as the fovea is not
completely lined up with the pupil. The angle that we are able to observe is called the optical axis,
which is the direct line from the center of the pupil and to the back side of the eye (not the fovea). The
fovea is often located about 4 −5 degrees horizontally and 1.5 degrees below the back of the eye [29].
The optical axis is found by estimating the direction a person’s pupil is looking, which is made more
simple by the contrast to the white sclera in the eye. The offset between the visual and optical axis is
called the kappa angle, as illustrated in Figure 4.5.
Kappa
Fixation Point
Fovea
Pupil Center
Optic Axis
Visual Axis
Figure 4.5: This illustration is based on [28] and [30], but only include the information relevant to this
work.
The kappa angle is not the same for every person, and studies have shown that the angle for an
average person can very up to 4 degrees [28]. As wearable eye trackers are currently able to estimate the
gaze direction with about a 1 degree accuracy, a 4 degree variation has a large effect on the estimation.
To compensate for this offset, eye trackers usually have an initial calibration, which estimates the
individual kappa angle.
4.3
Summary
People’s ability to percieve the world is dependent on the anatomy of the eyes, muscles and brain,
which all contribute to our understanding of the outside world. The acuity within the field of vision is
a product of the amount and types of photoreceptors, which are located on the back of the eye. The
photoreseptors which are able to see colours are almost exclusively located at one point of the eye called
the fovea. The resolution is at the highest when a stimuli is angled towards the fovea. Overall, the
field of vision can be divided into three parts: the central, paracentral and peripheral fields, which all
contribute with varying clarity. However, even though an action does not happen within the central
field, studies have shown that movements are just as accurately perceived from the peripheral view, as
the central view. So, when understanding what people are able to see, it is essential to include the near
peripheral field of vision.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Computer Vision
The previous chapters highlight how perception to some degree can be estimated based on gaze direc-
tion, which can be estimated using cameras or infrared sensors. Many gaze tracking models use basic
computer vision techniques, particularly the fundamentals of deep learning, which are described in this
chapter. It briefly mentions 5 different neural network architectures, which are used within the gaze
tracking methods mentioned in Chapter 6.
5.1
Deep Learning
Deep learning has changed the way data is viewed by teaching machines to outperform humans in
some tasks [31]. Artificial Intelligence is the overarching field containing machine learning and, in turn,
deep learning. Deep learning has over the last two decades proven how powerful it is at solving tasks
in computer vision, speech recognition, medical information processing, natural language processing
(NLP), cybersecurity, and many more [31].
Briefly explained, deep learning is a technique calculating weights in a neural network based on
data. A neural network is a network of small perceptrons that receive inputs from external sources,
adds weights, biases, and a nonlinear function before returning an output.
These perceptrons are
divided into multiple layers where the initial layer receives the input, followed by a number of hidden
layers, and finally the output layer. A network is considered deep when it contains more than one
hidden layer.
The weights and biases of each perceptron are trained by using stochastic gradient descent. Stochas-
tic gradient descent calculates the loss of the final result and uses it for back-propagation, moving
backwards through the network and updating all the internal parameters. The deep neural network
can have multiple different structures depending on e.g. the loss function, the amount of hidden layers,
the amount of perceptrons, the nonlinear functions etc. Some of these structures have proven quite
useful within computer vision, and has in turn been used within gaze tracking.
5.2
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a specific kind of neural network that utilizes the grid-like layout
of data such as images. The modern CNN was first introduced in 1998 by Yann LeCun et al. [32], and
after impressive results of AlexNet in 2012 [33], the technique revolutionized image classification. The
structure of CNN consists of three sections; convolutional layers, a fully connected layer, and often a
softmax function.
The convolutional layers slowly extracts features from the data to gradually create a more advanced
and complex input. Convolutions use kernels, also called filters, of weights which slide over the image
with a specific stride. At every stride, a matrix multiplication is performed and summed up, resulting
in a single number being added to the feature map. When the kernel has slid over the entire image, the
result is a feature map, which emphasizes different areas of the image. The dimensions of the feature
map is dependent on the size of the kernel, the size of the step a stride performs, and whether a padding
is added to an image. An activation function is used on the feature map to create a non-linearity in
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Computer Vision
the network. Finally, a convolutional layer is mostly followed by a max pooling, which reduces the
dimensions of the feature maps by selecting the maximum number within a small sliding window.
Multiple convolutional layers can by stacked and followed by fully connected layers, also known as the
output layers, which interprets the feature map. This will classify the input dependent on the extracted
features from the convolutions. A normal fully connected layer cannot receive n-dimensional data, so
the feature maps have to be flattened into 1-dimensional data first. The output, in a classification task,
will mostly be assigned a probability for every possible classification through a softmax function. The
softmax function basically ensures that the probability classifications are between [0 −1] and adds up
to 1.
The trends for CNN in early 2010s was to make the networks deeper to improve the performance
[31].
However, deep networks are notoriously hard to train due to the vanishing gradient problem.
The vanishing gradient problem occurs when the gradient is back-propagated to earlier layers, and the
repeated multiplication can make the gradient infinitely small and thus vanish. In 2015 Kaiming He
developed a new structure called residual network (ResNet), which is designed to be more stable for
training deep networks [31].
5.3
Residual Network (ResNet)
Residual networks (ResNet) are designed to avoid vanishing gradients by creating a traditional feed
forward network with an additional connection called the residual connection. A ResNet consists of
several basic residual blocks, which in turn contain different convolutions and activation functions
depending on the architecture of residual networks. These blocks’ output is typically the sum of the
output from convolutional layers and the original input.
This gives the algorithm an opportunity
to be selective on when to utilise specific blocks, and thereby have a smaller chance of encountering
the vanishing gradient problem in gradient descent. In 2015 ResNet was the deepest neural network
architecture seen yet and outperformed all previous state-of-the-art solutions [31].
5.4
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
The sequential order of the data does not influence a typical feed-forward neural network. However, it
can occur that the order of individual observations contributes to the interpretation. Recurrent Neural
Networks are designed to share information from previously hidden layers and pass it on to the following
time-steps. Passing data from previous time-steps allows the model to couple the data observations
together and calculate a more informed output.
The architecture of RNN allows for structures that vary in the number of input and output values,
which has not been seen before. In an original feed-forward network, the structures are simply one-to-
one e.g. give one image, receive one word [34]. Examples of RNN applications show four reoccurring
architectural structures of RNN: one-to-many, many-to-one, many-to-many (different), and many-to-
many (same) are shown in Figure 5.1 [35].
An application of a one-to-many architecture is seen in melody and arrangement generation [36].
In this particular music generation task, a one-to-many sequences generation (OMSG) task is created.
The authors of the paper wanted to generate music with correlation between tracks (drum, bass, guitar
etc.) which they did by using one melody as input and generating several tracks as output. Thus, a
one-to-many application of RNN.
The second application is many-to-one, where an example can be found within sentiment analysis
[37]. The sentiment analysis in this example can have the input at either character or word level. At
character level, the input was a list of characters in a sentence, while word level is a list of words in a
sentence. The output of the sentiment analysis would calculate whether the sentence was positive or
negative, thus making this sentiment analysis the type many-to-one.
==PAGE:37==
5.4 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
27
(a) One-to-Many
(b) Many-to-One
(c) Many-to-Many (Same)
(d) Many-to-Many (Different)
Figure 5.1: These figures show four reoccurring architectural structures of RNN. The illustrations are
from [35].
The third application is many-to-many (same), which is seen in entity recognition [38].
Entity
recognition is the ability to classify data according to the context (e.g. recognising people, cars, etc. in
the data). An example is the sentence I love Vietnam, where each individual word can be translated
to O O B-Loc. O translates to no entity and B-Loc translates to belonging to the entity location [39].
Every word in the sentence is translated to an entity, and thus a many-to-many (same) RNN.
Finally, the many-to-many (different) application is found within machine translation [40]. When
translating context, the number of words are often not the same in different languages. This tasks is
possible given RNN with an architecture of many-to-many (different), as it allows for the input and
output to vary in size.
The equation for calculating the individual nodes’ output in a traditional RNN can be seen in
Equation 5.1.
The output for the given time-step (ht) is the result of a function (fW ) given the
perceptron’s weights (W) with two inputs. In the Vanilla version of RNN, see Equation 5.2, an activation
function, tanh, is used on the weights multiplied with the hidden state from the previous time-step (ht−1)
and the input (xt).
ht = fW (ht−1, xt)
(5.1)
ht = tanh (Whhht−1 + Wxhxt)
(5.2)
Like with CNN, RNN also has problems with vanishing and also exploding gradients, where the
gradients become infinitely large. Gradient clipping is a method that simply ensures that the gradient
cannot become larger than a set value. This can remove the chance of exploding gradients even though
it might not be the most elegant solution. To avoid vanishing gradients one can implement another
network called Long Short Term Memory (LSTM).
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Computer Vision
5.4.1
Long Short Term memory (LSTM)
Long Short-term memory (LSTM) is another model designed to avoid the vanishing gradient problem.
The key concept of LSTM is the introduced cell state. The cell state consists of four gates which are
either added or removed. Equation 5.5 explains how the gates are used to calculate the cell state and
thus the result in the new output.





i
f
o
g




=





σ
σ
σ
tanh




(Whhht−1 + Wxhxt)
(5.3)
ct = f ⊙ct−1 + i ⊙g
(5.4)
ht = o ⊙tanh (ct)
(5.5)
The gates are typically called input gate (i), forget gate (f), output gate (o) and the final one was
dubbed gate gate (g) by Justin Johnson[34]. This model avoids the vanishing or exploding gradient
problem, as the back-progagation will go through the cell state where the weight can be updated given
elementwise multiplication through the forget gate (f). As the forget gate varies from each time-step
it will not have the continual matrix multiplication with identical values in each time-step seen in the
vanilla RNN (Equation 5.1).
5.4.2
Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network (RCNN)
RNN and CNN have been combined to Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network (RCNN) in 2015, which
advanced the state-of-the-art accuracies of object recognition [41]. The recurrency in CNN allows the
algorithm to boost the performance by enabling units to be modulated by other units in the same
layer. The key feature in RCNN is the recurrent convolutional layer (RCL). RCL creates recurrent
connections within every convolutional layer of the feed-forward CNN while still keeping the number of
parameters constant when using weight sharing between layers like RNN. The results from this network
demonstrates the advantage of the recurrent structure over purely feed-forward structures for tasks such
as object recognition [41].
5.5
Summary
Computer Vision is not confined to deep learning techniques and can extract features within an image
without neural networks. However, the best results are created based on neural networks, which are
utilised for gaze tracking, which will be discussed in Section 6.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 6
Gaze Tracking
6.1
Gaze Tracking Terminology and Taxonomy
A survey from May 2020 by Dario Cazzato et al. on computer vision contributions for human gaze
estimation and tracking describes the techniques used in various research papers dating back from 1792
to 2020 [42]. The survey describes the lack of a standardized terminology and thereby clarifies terms
used interchangeably such as eye detection, eye localization, eye tracking, gaze estimation, gaze tracking,
and point of regard. The terms used in this paper are primarily eye localization, gaze estimation, gaze
tracking and point of regard. Eye localization is the technique to detect and locate individuals’ eyes
in an image and create bounding boxes around the eyes. This is typically used as a preliminary step,
as locating the eyes is necessary to estimate what the individual is looking at, which is called gaze
estimation. This is often defined as a 3-dimensional vector from the location of the eyes and toward
the direction the gaze is looking in. When the gaze is estimated continuously over time, the act is gaze
tracking. Finally, the point of regard is the object or area the individual is looking at.
6.1.1
Gaze Tracking Taxonomy
In addition to the terminology, the survey also suggests a general taxonomy to standardize the different
aspects of gaze tracking.
Figure 6.1: Suggested Gaze Estimation Taxonomy from [42].
The schema, seen in Figure 6.1, categorizes the gaze tracking technologies into two categories; scene
analysis and beholder eye/face. Scene analysis describes when the data from the acquisition devices
displays the scene the beholder is viewing. This scene can contain the targeted beholder or simply be
the scene the individual sees. The second category is when the received data shows the eyes or face
of the beholder. This will thereby not contain the scene the individual is looking at, but the person
beholding the scene.
An overview of the different categories and sub-categories are illustrated in Figure 6.2. The model
==PAGE:40==
30
6 Gaze Tracking
Actor
Data
Data
    
Third-Person
Data
Camera
Computer
Beholder eye/face
Gaze
Data
First-Person
Data
Scene Saliency
Figure 6.2: This overview was created based on the suggested gaze estimation taxonomy types from
[42]. The model shows the three sub-categories within scene analysis (First-Person, Scene Saliency, and
Third-Person) as well as the setup for beholder eye/face. Beholder eye/face’s sub-categories all have
same setup.
shows how the sub-categories relate and differentiate to each other, which are described using examples
in Section 6.2 and Section 6.3.
6.2
Scene Analysis
Scene analysis consists of three groups; First-person view, scene saliency and third-person view. Each
of these groups will be described with brief examples of existing models, datasets, and an analysis on
how they relate to this study.
6.2.1
First-Person View
For first-person view the camera is often placed on the beholder, e.i. a head-mounted piece, so the image
from the device is equivalent to the beholder’s view. An example of the setup can be seen in Figure 6.2,
where the data consists of images of the scene viewed by the beholder. The egocentric vision is often
used to locate task-relevant foreground objects the beholder is manipulating. The gaze tracking will
mostly rely on eye, head and hand coordination to estimate where the beholder’s attention is focused.
The study within first-person view is fairly new as the popularity and technology of wearable devices
is gradually increasing. It is common for technologies within first-person view to predict gaze using
framed objects (objects surrounded by bounding boxes) [42].
A paper published in 2019 [43] uses the first-person view approach, where an example of the data
can be seen in Figure 6.3. The suggested network is divided into two parts: Object recognition and gaze
estimation. The object recognition part uses a pre-trained network called YOLO9000 [44] to extract
features from the input data. The gaze estimation part has two levels, a coarse and a fine-grained level.
The intent of the coarse grid location is to estimate the location of the gaze at an object level, while the
fine-grained gaze should predict the probable and precise gaze coordinates. It was discovered during
training that combining the losses from the two levels improved the performance of the overall network.
The coarse level, object level (classification), is estimated through a deep learning network using
several convolutional layers, specifically deformable convolutions, and a softmax function. Convoluti-
noal layers are described in Section 5.2, whereas deformable convolutions are quite similar. The main
difference is that deformable convolutions adds an offset to the original algorithm [45]. This offset
allows for better results when recognizing objects in the data that might be augmented or transformed
==PAGE:41==
6.2 Scene Analysis
31
Figure 6.3: Scene Analysis - First-person view example from [43] with the captions of the dot added.
The red dot is the gaze predicted by the coarse level, the middle/regular blue color is by the fine-grained
level, the light blue is the joint prediction, and finally the dark blue is the ground-truth.
due to a specific angle. The purpose of the softmax function at the end of the network is to gain a
probability distribution of the gaze on the objects as the final output. In contrast, the fine-grained level
estimates the probable gaze coordinates (regression). Like the coarse level, the fine-grained level uses
two deformable convolutions. In addition, the fine-grained level also uses two fully-connected layers to
create the coordinate output. The result of the network can be seen in Figure 6.3, where a couple of
frames shows the two coordinates of the coarse and fine-grained outputs as well as the averaged final
prediction.
The authors of the paper [43] used three different datasets for training the network, where two
are publically available and the third was created by themselves. They used the GTEA-plus Dataset
[46] which is composed of 35 videos using 5 different subjects. The subjects perform meal preparation
activities, which is annotated by using SMI eye-tracking glasses as well as hand annotations of the
actions in the frames. The second dataset is the Object Search (OS) Dataset [47] containing 57 videos
of object search and retrieval tasks by 55 different subjects. The data is annotated using eye trackers,
which provides the ground truth of the point of regard. The final dataset, which was created by the
authors, is called the Tools Search Dataset. This dataset is a collection of 4 videos, each about 3 −
4 minutes in length, recorded using an SMI eye-tracker. These videos are in an industrial setting of
finding tools and fixing problems in the drill machine, as seen in Figure 6.3 [43].
The performance of the network is evaluated using an Average Angular Error (AAE) metric, which
calculates the angular distance between the ground-truth and the prediction. The AAE for the GTEA-
plus Dataset was 6.2 degrees, whereas the previously reported best accuracy was 4.0 degrees. However,
for the OS Dataset the model achieved state-of-the-art performance with a AAE of 10.2 degrees, com-
pared to the previous best of 10.6 degrees. In addition, the network is reported to be able to run in
real-time performance (13-18 FPS) [43].
The first-person view is interesting and could potentially be useful in many scenarios where indi-
viduals are working with objects. However, this study is based on a robot’s point of view to predict
peoples’ field of vision. Using the techniques from first-person view would require everyone interacting
with the robot to use a head-mounted camera that sends data directly to the robot. This is not ideal in
a real life scenario as the intention of the robot is to help people, not create an additional inconvenience.
A more distinct option is to use the sensors already provided through the robot as the data.
6.2.2
Scene Saliency
The second sub-category is scene saliency that analyses an image (or screen) viewed by the beholder [42].
Figure 6.2 illustrates this scenario, where the beholder is shown an image and the algorithm predicts the
==PAGE:42==
32
6 Gaze Tracking
areas of the image a person would initially fixate on. Unlike first-person view, the data is not retrieved
from a head-mounted camera, which will change the view based on head movements. So the concept of
eye, head and hand coordination cannot be used within scene saliency. Scene saliency has been studied
extensively in literature over the years and has multiple applications including advertising, interface
optimization, video and sound surveillance, medical imaging, etc. [23].
Overall, there are three techniques that are used to determine a saliency map; bottom-up, top-down,
or a hybrid approach. The bottom-up approach predicts eye fixation areas by extracting the low-level
features (colour, intensity, orientation etc.) in the image. This is quite similar to how human attention
reflectively focuses on low-level features. In turn, the top-down approach locates high-level features
(objects, humans etc) within the frame. As mentioned in Chapter 3, this top-down approach is not
based on memory or emotion as the human brain will interpret it. Finally, the hybrid combines both
top-down and bottom-up approaches to improve the performance of the individual.
A comparison of top-down (high-level features) vs. bottom-up (low-level features) have been ex-
plored in 2017 [48]. The study created two different neural networks: one was trained using a pretrained
object recognition network for detecting high-level features (DeepGaze II), while the other was trained
to focus on contrasts in the images (ICF). The result in this study showed how DeepGaze II performed
extremely well with, at that time, state-of-the-art results, while the ICF was comparable, but not as
impressive. Upon further investigation, the authors found that the ICF performed better on 10% of the
data, specifically, on the images not containing objects or containing high contrast distractions. Their
conclusion was that high-level networks could be improved by training high and low-level models jointly
[48].
Figure 6.4: Scene Analysis - Saliency view example from [49]. The images from the left to the right
shows: the original image, the ground-truth of the eye fixations, the ground-truth combined with the
saliency map, and finally the suggested saliency map respectively.
An example of a hybrid approach to scene saliency is shown in Figure 6.4, which shows the original
image, the ground truth and the predicted saliency heatmap [49]. The example emphasises how peoples’
attention is drawn to the little girl’s face and the object in her hand. The model is designed using an
end-to-end system which combines several loss functions to gain the most accurate prediction. It uses
an attentive convolutional long short-term memory network (Attentive ConvLSTM) [49]. Attentive
ConvLSTM enables the algorithm to iteratively focus on relevant spatial locations to refine saliency
features. In addition, the model has a learned prior that models peoples’ bias, which are focusing their
attention on the center of an image. The strength of this model is the versatility of the types of images
it can analyse. The report shows how this model performs well for both images containing objects
(high-level features) and landscapes (low-level features).
Deep neural networks are very dependent on the datasets. Four of the most popular datasets within
saliency are SALICON, MIT1003, MIT300, and CAT2000 [49]. SALICON is the largest of the four
datasets containing 10, 000 training images, 5, 000 validation images and 5, 000 testing images, while
the smallest of the four datasets is MIT300 containing 300 natural images. MIT1003 and MIT300 has
annotated the data using eye-tracking techniques from respectively 15 and 39 observers. In comparison,
SALICON has the data annotated by simulated mouse movements [49]. The final dataset CAT2000
contains a large variety of categories such as Cartoons, Art, Satellite, Low resolution images, Indoor,
Outdoor, Line drawings, etc. [49].
==PAGE:43==
6.2 Scene Analysis
33
A comparison of the two mentioned networks can be seen in Figure 6.5. DeepGaze II maintains
state-of-the-art results when evaluating Area under the ROC curve (AUC) for the SALICON test set
at 0.885, while the attentive ConvLSTM’s result for AUC is 0.883 [49]. However, for other evaluation
matrics, the attentive ConvLSTM outperforms DeepGaze II and numerous other networks. AUC do
not penalize low-valued false positives giving a high score for high-valued predictions placed at fixated
locations while ignoring the others. An evaluation matrics, which is sensitive towards false positive
and false negatives, is Normalized Scanpath Saliency (NSS). For the NSS evaluation the attentive
ConvLSTM preforms significantly better with a result of 3.204 compared with DeepGaze II with 1.336
[49].
(a) Original image from
the SALICON validation
dataset.
(b) The ground truth.
(c) Results from DeepGaze
II.
(d) Results from the atten-
tive ConvLSTM.
Figure 6.5: Comparison of the results from two state-of-the-art networks predicting saliency maps [49].
Another interesting approach to determining the saliency map is focused on the human emotion-
evoking objects in the images, as these tend to draw our attention [50].
The approach seems too
subjective, as individuals have different emotions towards objects, which could thereby cause drifts on
saliency outcomes. This solution simply shows how different approaches can be when solving the same
problem.
Overall saliency maps are very capable, as they are able to highlight areas our attention is drawn
towards. Saliency maps have been used to enable gaze tracking as a classification task between the
highlighted saliency areas in an image, and thus only use the gaze to determine which area is the most
probable for the gaze. In order to determine whether an object is within a person’s field of vision a
classification task could be used. However, based on the knowledge of cognitive load, it is possible for
people to perceive more than one object at the time, and thus not seek a binary answer.
6.2.3
Third-person view
Finally, the last category within scene analysis is third-person view. Third-person view is where both
the beholder and the scene viewed by the beholder is in the image. Unlike scene saliency the model
does not predict what a person viewing the image will look at, but what the individual in the image is
looking at [42]. This is demonstrated in Figure 6.2, where the intention is to predict the gaze directions
of the people in the images.
There are multiple techniques to predict the individuals’ gaze direction in images. One method
combines the direction of the gaze with a saliency map. The saliency map is used to divide the image
into areas, which in turn can create a classification problem by detecting which saliency area a person
is looking at. This is to utilize existing technology to simplify the task at hand [42].
An interesting example of third-person view gaze tracking is a study by Sümer et al. [51]. The
intention of the study is to determine the joint attention between humans, which can be seen in Figure
6.6. The model is designed in an end-to-end fashion that takes a raw image as input and generates a
two-channel likelihood distribution (Attention Flow). The first channel detects and locates the faces of
people in the image, while the second determines the joint attention of the people, if there are any. The
model is designed using three modules; encoder, attention flow generator and saliency-based ground
==PAGE:44==
34
6 Gaze Tracking
truth generation.
The encoder extracts faces and objects in the scene through object classification
tasks. The attention flow generator estimates the likelihood of joint attention with the encoded images
as input. Finally, the saliency-based ground truth generation use saliency maps, specifically DeepGaze
II mentioned in Section 6.2.2, to produce Pseudo-attention maps to emulate the ground truth. By
employing saliency estimation in the method, they leverage information of the relative important regions,
which can also be salient for the persons in the scene.
Figure 6.6: Scene Analysis - Third-person view example [51]. The Image to the left is the original image
with the ground truth empathized by the green bounding box, and the input to the model. The two
images to the right are the outputs, first the face likelihood and then the joint attention map.
The model is trained and evaluated using various different datasets.
They discovered that the
encoder performed better when they used transfer learning from an object classification trained on
the well-known dataset ImageNet.
For evaluation they used the Video Co-Attention (VideoCoAtt)
dataset, which contains 380 RGB video sequences from 20 different TV shows [52]. The dataset has
been annotated manually to determine the joint attention areas within the images. The joint attention
network proved to outperform previous models with a prediction accuracy of 78.1% compared to the
previous state-of-the-art, which had an accuracy of 71.4%.
Third-person view scene analysis is the most important category given this particular case, as the
intention is to estimate what people (who are in the images) are looking at. The setup, having a third-
person camera view, is identical to the setup available by the robot. Thus, utilizing methods within
third-person view to broaden the intention from What is the people looking at to How likely is it that
people can see this object seems like a feasible task. Additional models within this sub-category are
described in Section 7.1 in more detail, as they have been implemented in an experiment described in
Chapter 7.
6.3
Beholder Eye/Face
The second main category for estimating gaze tracking, as shown in Figure 6.1, is the beholder eye/face.
Though this category has several sub-categories, the overall setup is similar for all. This setup can be
seen in Figure 6.2, where the camera is facing the person, while placed in the direction of the item the
person is fixating their gaze upon. The beholder of eye/face category, which will be described in the
following sections, is thus the opposite of first-person view. So instead of having a camera placed on
the person, the camera is located on / close to the device being viewed by the person and the data is
thereby an image of the person.
The techniques use to interpret the data within this category can either be calculated using the
physical geometric of the eye, or the appearances of the face in the images. Gaze tracking that focuses on
individuals’ faces have previously been done using intrusive methods (e.g. electrooculogram) in addition
to the non-intrusive methods (e.g. infrared illuminations etc.). The intrusive methods are not used as
much today, as the non-intrusive methods are very precise [42]. Some of the non-intrusive methods,
which are using cameras to collect data, rely on computer vision techniques to extract information from
the images similar to the previously mentioned categories for gaze-tracking. Section 6.3.1 and Section
==PAGE:45==
6.3 Beholder Eye/Face
35
6.3.2 describe examples from these non-intrusive methods for both the geometric approach and the
appearance based approach.
For most part, techniques within the beholder eye / face category relies on the face of the beholder
being clear and often within a certain distance of the camera. In addition, the image will be directly
facing the person of interest, so the scene the beholder is viewing is not visible within the image. The
intention with beholder eye/face is thus to locate, with an accurate precision, where the beholder’s main
focus of attention is e.g. on a computer screen.
The goal of this thesis is to allow a robot to estimate whether people are able to see certain objects
within the scene. A camera will therefore face both the people and the scene from a third-person view.
The data available will vary in conditions and quality as the people will stand at different distances and
angles to the cameras. In addition, the angle of the camera will not always be located at the object of
interest, as the object could be placed anywhere within the scene of the image.
The beholder eye / face category could be suitable if the intention was to discover where on the
robot itself people were looking, e.g. on the touch screen on the robot’s chest. This would ensure that
the person is close enough to reach the touch screen and thereby allow a more ideal scenario to use
beholder eye/face techniques. Even though this described use is not the focus of this work, the category
is a critical part of understanding gaze tracking. The two subcategories will therefore be described
through examples in the following sections.
6.3.1
Geometric Based
The geometric based approach estimates the gaze direction through geometric reasoning of 3D models
of the head and/or eyes [42]. Computer vision is used to detect the eye as well as the head position,
eye position, pupil center, iris edges etc. In some cases, data is manually inserted for calibration in the
initial stages. This data is used to personalize the estimations, as individual peoples’ gaze direction vary
based on the individuals’ eye shape [29]. Overall, the estimation often calculates the point of regard on
a scene opposite of the beholder using equations based on the known geometric distances in the scene
as 3D models.
(a)
The
setup
for
the
calibra-
tion of the algo-
rithm.
(b) The input data and the values being calibrated.
Figure 6.7: Beholder Eye/Face - Geometric based example from [53]. The figure shows how the method
is calibrated based on the input data.
An example of a model designed on a geometric method is called
Two-Eye Model-Based Gaze
Estimation from a Kinect Sensor by Zhou et al. [53]. Figure 6.7a shows the setup for this experiment.
The model estimates the gaze of both eyes individually, and combines the results by taking the average
at the end. Initially, the model is calibrated to the individual person by having the person look at
a limited about of dots on a computer screen. This is illustrated in Figure 6.7b. The calibration is
used to model the person’s facial features, so the model can calculate the direction of the gaze given
small head-movements. The five parameters, roll, yaw, pitch, P L
i , and P R
i , are estimated and used to
calculate the eyeball centers (OL/R,H
e
) in the head coordinate system and Kappa angles (αL/R,βL/R).
The Kappa angles are different for the two eyes, and is the angle between the angle the actual direction
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Gaze Tracking
the individual is looking, and the direction calculated based on the image features. Thus, all the above
parameters can then be translated to a location on the screen the beholder is estimated to look at.
The data is based on an kinetic sensor, which have a range between 80cm to 400cm from the sensor
to the person, thus the individual does not exceed this limit in the experiment. The model allows
for limited head movements to maintain a high accuracy, as too large head movements will provide a
smaller view of both eyes. Overall, the model performs with an average accuracy of 1.99 degrees over 11
test subjects. In comparison, the second best model mentioned in the paper had an average accuracy of
1.4 to 2.7 degrees. As the data is based on 3D geometric calculations, a dataset has not been necessary
to train a neural network. Geometric gaze tracking can thus be calculated without the use of deep
learning, whereas this is the central technique for most of the other tracking methods.
6.3.2
Appearance Based
The other approach within beholder eye/face is Appearance Based, which estimates a direct mapping
between the eyes/face and the point of regard using computer vision techniques and not specific geo-
metric models. This approach is divided into feature based systems and end-to-end systems as seen
in Figure 6.1. The main difference between the two systems is whether features from the images are
extracted prior to the gaze tracking algorithm. The following subsections, Section 6.3.2.1 and Section
6.3.2.2, describe examples within each system.
6.3.2.1
Feature Based Systems
It has been shown that low-level gradient features are well-suited to capture variations in the appearance
of the eye, as mentioned in Section 4.1.1. These low-level features are utilized when creating feature
based models. The feature based technique is used in an example by Huang et al. that estimates the
gaze of subjects looking at a tablet [54]. The input for the model is images from the built-in camera
within the tablet, which creates a simple setup.
(a) The setup
when
people
participate
in the experi-
ment.
(b) Cropped examples of the data, which show the diversity in the visibility of the face
and the potential reflections in from the glasses.
Figure 6.8: Beholder Eye/Face - Appearance Based, feature-based example from [54]. The figures show
the setup and examples of the data inputs.
The setup and examples of the data are shown in Figure 6.8. Unlike the example mentioned in
Section 6.3.1, the model does not need calibration and the study has no restraints on the individual’s
amount of head movement. This model is built in three parts; prepossessing, feature extraction and
regression estimation. The prepossessing step locates the beholder’s eyes, and crops the area of the eyes
with a small margin to the size of 30 × 100 pixels. The feature extraction step then locates the image’s
features through multi-level Histograms of Oriented Gradients (mHoG) and a dimensionality reduction.
Multi-level Histograms of Oriented Gradients is a machine learning technique for extracting a feature
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Beholder Eye/Face
37
vector describing an image. It calculates the gradient magnitude and the direction the magnitude is
changing in.
These two features combined will result in a feature vector and thereby mHoG. The
gradient magnitude is calculated through the horizontal and vertical distribution of intensity within the
image. This can thereby locate edges of objects within the image, if there is a high contrast.
The final step is a regression estimation. Four regression models were tested, where the best results
where gain through a Random Forest regression model, where two separate regressors are trained to
either estimate the horizontal coordinate or vertical coordinates. The combination of these regressors
produces the final estimation of the point of regard.
To train the deep learning network, a dataset was constructed dubbed TabletGaze. TabletGaze
contains 51 subjects, each with 4 different postures and 35 gaze locations. The subjects vary in race,
gender and in their need for prescription glasses, which all diversified the dataset. An example of the
data is seen in Figure 6.8b, which demonstrates how the eyes of an individual are not always visible
from the tablet’s camera given the user’s position. The algorithm will thereby be trained to identify
the point of regard even when the eyes are not visible, or when the glasses’ reflection obscure the view
of the eyes.
The paper evaluated different feature extractors and regression models to find the best solution.
Overall, the results where greatly influenced by how much of the face was visible within the images.
Given the TabletGaze dataset the best result, using euclidean distance as the error metric, was a mean
error of 3.17 cm given 100.000 images. In addition, the paper evaluated on the performance given
glasses, race and posture. They concluded that wearing glasses had an additional mean error of 0.4 cm,
in comparison to people without glasses. The result for race showed similar results as the results for
Asian compared to Caucasian had a noticeable difference of approximately 0.3 cm. Finally, the body
posture of the subjects had quite equal results, with the laying position having the highest variation
with a mean error of approximately 0.1 cm. They believe the reason the laying position varies is the
individual’s method of holding the tablet.
6.3.2.2
End-to-end systems
The other appearance based technique is creating an end-to-end system, so simply having the image
as input without specific feature extraction. An example of such a system developed by Palmero et al.
published in 2018, with the model illustrated in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: Beholder Eye/Face - Appearance Based, end-to-end example from [55]. The input data is
shown to the left and the architecture of the network is illustrated to the right.
The model by Palmero et al. is based of the EYEDIAP dataset, which they used for training and
testing of the model [55]. The EYEDIAP dataset is a publicly-available dataset which contains video
sequences with a wide range of head poses and showing the full face. It consists of 3-minute videos
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Gaze Tracking
of 16 subjects who look at two types of targets: a continuous screen target on a fixed monitor, or a
floating physical target. In addition, the subjects were recorded with 2 different lighting conditions.
The target’s position, eyes position and screen coordinates are all available in 3D coordinates, which is
used for the model created by Palmero et al.
Figure 6.9 illustrates the network, which predicts the direction a given individual is looking in [55].
The network takes a 3D space as input instead of the typical 2D images. Overall, it has a multi-modal
recurrent convolutional neural network (RCNN) structure, the basics of which are described in Section
5.4.2. The structure is divided into four parts: normalization, individual, fusion and temporal.
First, the normalization part’s goal is to align the angle of the head with the angle of the camera, as
the gaze direction is not only affected by the eye position, but also the head position. This will reduce
the appearance variability the network must learn to track. Finally, the normalization part crops the
image into three sections: the face region, the eyes region and the face landmarks.
The second, third and forth part are all a part of the deep learning network. The system takes the
three inputs streams through individual convolutional layers and fully connected layers, as shown in
Figure 6.9. The individual streams are then concatenated and pass through two fully connected layers.
The final, fourth layer is the recurrent part of the network. It uses information from previous time-steps
to generate the final prediction after a last fully connected layer.
Overall, Palmero et al. proved the importance of including head positions in the model, as the
model showed a 14.6% improvement on the EYEDIAP dataset compared to previous state of the art
methods in 2018. The model showed most improvement for the images with large head movement, with
a result of a 6.2 degree average error among participants. The result of the model given the images with
minimum head movement is a 5.1 degree average error. However, these results are significantly worse
than the results from the geometric model mentioned in Section 6.3.1. The geometric example had a
mean error of 2.7 degrees, though this is mostly due to the difference of the restrictions. The models
have a huge difference in the setup, whether the model is calibrated, and the general restrictions of the
data types and allowed movements from the subjects.
6.4
Summary
In conclusion, the gaze tracking taxonomy introduced by Dario Cazzato et al. in 2020 has been explored
through different examples within each of the categories Scene Analysis and Beholder Eye/Face [42].
By exploring each subcategory thoroughly, it seems apparent that research within Scene Analysis, and
specifically third-person view, is very well suited for this project.
Even though the gaze tracking
techniques mainly strive to estimate the exact point of regard of individuals, this study will simply
focus on estimating whether a point of interest is within the field of view of the individual people, so
the margin of error is larger. Chapter 7 will look into an experiment using third-person view algorithms
to solve the problem.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7
Experiment
The development within gaze tracking technology allows for an estimation of what a person is fixated
on. In this experiment the intention is to use gaze tracking to estimate what people are able to perceive
from the outside world.
The experiments are based on the work by Dissing et al. described in Chapter 2 [8]. One of the
work’s shortcomings is the lack of a precise estimation of when a person is actually able to see the
rearrangement of the cubes within the containers, as shown in Figure 2.3. The experiment in this study
uses the same setup as Dissing et al. with the intention of improving the estimation of when a person is
able to see the cubes being moved. Unlike other gaze tracking methods, this project focus on estimating
a probability of whether the people within the images are able to perceive one specific target. Which
objects within the image the people are looking at is thus not relevant unless it is within the boundaries
of the target.
The chapter will initially describe specific technologies utilized for creating different methods to
estimate a human’s perception of a target within the scene. The technologies include a gaze tracking
network, research within theory of mind, pose tracking networks, and face recognition techniques. The
technologies are followed by a detailed description of 3 different methods for solving the problem. Finally,
these methods are evaluated based on a set of videos designed specifically for this purpose.
The results and the experiment’s shortcomings are discussed in Chapter 8.
7.1
Technologies
Various existing technologies have been utilised to create simple experiments for estimating people’s
perception of the world through gaze tracking. In addition to the gaze tracking model, the experiment
also needs to be able to estimate the reliability of the result. This is done using probability distribution
functions, which allows for a more precise estimation. The probability distributions are described within
the specific method where it is used.
7.1.1
Gaze360
The setup has cameras viewing the scene from a third person view, which will be the main condition
when selecting gaze tracking techniques. The camera setup makes scene analysis third-person view
the most apparent building blocks for this study. Petr Kellnhoft et al. published their work with a
third-person view called Gaze360 in October 2019 [56]. The project focuses on estimating the 3D gaze
direction of individuals in images, particularly when head is at a large angle resulting in only one or no
eyes being visible from the camera’s point of view. An example of these angles are seen in Figure 7.1.
In order to create the gaze estimation model, Petr Kellnhofer et al. had to create their own dataset
to train the model. The new dataset is currently the largest publically available dataset of its kind when
it comes to number of subjects and variety. The dataset contains both indoor and outdoor photos, as
well as photos where the head is at a strong angle to make it possible for the model to handle all natural
scenarios. The data is acquired by using a Ladybug5 360 degree panoramic camera. Multiple subjects
within the camera view look at an AprilTag, which in turn makes it possible to translate their gaze
==PAGE:50==
40
7 Experiment
Figure 7.1: Results from [56].
The yellow error is the ground truth while the red is the Gaze360
prediction. The bars underneath show the actual error (yellow) in degrees and the estimated error
(red).
direction towards to the target [56]. In addition to static images, the dataset also contains annotated
video footage.
The Gaze360 model is designed to predict the 3D gaze direction resulting in two outputs. The
outputs are the predicted gaze direction, (θ, ϕ) and an appropriate offset able to calculate the confidence
level as an error quantile estimation, (σ). Overall, the network is built up on a video-based gaze-tracking
model using bi-directional Long Short-term memory capsules (LSTM) [56]. The bi-directional LSTM
creates a dependence on both previous and future inputs to utilise a gaze that is a continuous signal.
The model is trained by having 7 frames as input. However, the design can handle a single frame as
well, if this might be the case.
Figure 7.2: The architecture of Gaze360 model from [56].
The architecture of the model is illustrated in Figure 7.2. The image input is simply the cropped
head which is first processed by the backbone. The backbone is an ImageNet pretrained ResNet-18
to extract the high-level features of the faces. The backbone is followed by the bi-directional LSTM
network, and finally a fully connected layer to produce the outputs.
The gaze direction output is
spherical coordinates as it is believed that these are more naturally interpretable [56].
The error
quantile estimation is calculated using a pinball loss function. The error quantile is the estimated offset
from the predicted gaze direction to reach the 10% quantile and the 90% quantile, as seen in Equation
==PAGE:51==
7.1 Technologies
41
7.1.
q10 = (θ −σ, ϕ −σ)
The 10% quantiles
(7.1)
q90 = (θ + σ, ϕ + σ)
The 90% quantiles
The evaluation of the Gaze360, in comparison with other networks, show a state-of-the-art result of
a mean angular error of 13.5 degrees within a field of all 360 degrees. This proves its eﬀiciency when
allowing people to look in all angles. The network was also tested on a vending machine setup, where the
results showed an accuracy of 68%. This accuracy is quite small in comparison to other gaze tracking
technologies, which can have an angular error of only 1%. However, given the fact that Gaze360 has
no calibration and allows for the participant to move head, body and eyes freely within the image, it
becomes a unique solution.
7.1.2
Theory of Mind
When teaching a robot theory of mind, as the implementation by Dissing et al. [8], it is essential for
the robot to be able to detect when a person gains a false belief. The critical idea behind this work is
that the robot will be more aware of the circumstances if it has a theory of mind, which in turn will
create a better social acceptance.
But to be able to be aware of circumstance-appropriateness, it is also essential to understand what
people actually expect the robot to believe and understand. An example would be whether a person
assumes a robot would recognize a change of event if a blanket was thrown over its face. To gain
circumstance-appropriateness and familiarity means that the robot will know and react as people expect.
So, how do people actually expect a robot to act? Thellman and Ziemke created a number of tests to
analyse what people expect a robot to know based on false-belief tasks [57]. They used the same robot
as Dissing et al., a SoftBank Robotics Pepper. The subjects where asked to predict whether the robot
would gain a false belief when a transparent or opaque curtain was drawn in front of it. The results
showed that people do infer perceptual beliefs onto a robot with a tendency to imply anthropocentric
perceptual capabilities. Evidently this also implies that it is more diﬀicult for people to track a robot’s
beliefs and actions when they differ significantly from humans’ abilities. Thellman and Ziemke also
found that people can learn to predict a robot’s actions after familiarising themselves with it during
prolonged exposure, while simple verbal instructions weren’t particularly eﬀicient.
So, for people to easily understand the beliefs of a social robot and predict its actions, it becomes
apparent that its capabilities need to be similar to humans. When people naturally assume robots act
with the same capabilities as humans, they will become more accepting if the implementation reflects
this.
7.1.3
Extracting Features
The Gaze360 network needs to receive 7 ordered cropped image of the face of the person of interest.
In order to detect people and their features within a video, the deep learning network Detectron2 by
Facebook has been utilised [58]. Detectron2 is the second version and based on the original project
Detectron. It contains a Model Zoo, which contains a set of different pre-trained checkpoints. One of
these Model zoo checkouts is keypoint RCNN R 50 FPN 3x, which is able to determine the location of
17 keypoints on the human body. These include ears, eyes, nose, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hips, knees
and feet.
Figure 7.3 shows an example of the detrectron2 keypoints being used to locate two people in an
image. In addition to the keypoints, it also outputs a probability scale of how sure the network estimates
a person has been located. The two people in Figure 7.3a are both 100%, but in Figure 7.3b it estimates
the possibility of the shadow being a person with 65% accuracy.
==PAGE:52==
42
7 Experiment
(a) Detectron2 locating people in a frame with a
cofidence of 100%.
(b) Detectron2 locates two people and a shadow in
the frame. The shadow has a confidence of 65%,
but is not a person.
Figure 7.3: Screenshots of implementation of detectron2 [58] on a video taken from Test 3.
7.1.4
Face Recognition
Another main component is keeping track of the different people. Gaze360 has an input of 7 frames: 3
frames before, 1 frame it wants to analyse and 3 frames after. This makes it essential to keep track of
the people throughout the frames, as feeding an image with a different person would not result in an
accurate result.
To recognize the people detected from detectron2, a face recognition library by Adam Geitgey is
utilised [59]. The model has an accuracy of 99.38% on the Labeled Faces in the Wild benchmark [60],
which consist of 13233 images of 5749 people.
However, the face recognition is not always able to locate all features of the face, if the face is at an
angle, which detectron2 will localize. For this reason, a hierarchy of techniques has been implemented
to ensure that people are recognized correctly. The other technique used is based on the fact that the
data is a video. Therefore, a person will not be able to move very far from one frame to the next. The
location of the person in the image is therefore used to determine who the person is given the following
emphasises.
1. Location and recognition both have to result in the same identity for the person of interest.
2. Location is used when the face recognition and location do not give the same result.
3. Face recognition by itself is the last attempt to identify the person if the other solutions failed.
The hierarchy structure allows for identifying a person given all criteria and utilises the knowledge
common within video frames.
7.2
Methods
Three types of methods are implemented to determine whether the people visible in videos are able to
see a specific target object. The methods are all based on Gaze360, as it consistently includes a gaze
direction in every frame. In addition, Gaze360 also presents a confidence measurement, which allows
an analysis of the result in a probable manner.
For scoping the experiments, the gaze vectors have been converted to 2 dimensions instead of the
direct output in 3 dimensions. In addition, the target location will not change throughout the frames,
but the implementation is created in such a fashion that the bounding box of the target location can
be passed into the code, and thus change based on the object.
==PAGE:53==
7.2 Methods
43
7.2.1
Method 1: Facing the Camera
The method used for estimating what an individual is able to see in the implementation of theory of
mind by Dissing et al. is simply a detection whether the person is looking at the camera or not. If the
person is facing the camera, it is assumed that this person is able to see the target with 100% accuracy.
In contrast, when the person leaves or turns around, the method is 100% sure that the person cannot
see the target. This method simply uses detectron2 keypoints to detect people, and thus recognises
whether they are facing the camera using face recognition. The facial landmarks can only be located
when the whole face is visible. The implementation is therefore independent from the target’s location
and the gaze direction.
7.2.2
Method 2: Mean gaze direction within target bounding box
The second method uses gaze360 and the bounding box to estimate the visibility of a target to the
subject. The intention is to create a linear model that estimates the probability dependent on the
output from Gaze360. The linear model is calculated based on the gaze direction having a value of
100% at 0 degrees, and the average of the quantiles angles from the gaze direction have the value 20%.
This is illustrated in Figure 7.4, where Figure 7.4a illustrate the quantiles and gaze direction output
from Gaze360 in relation to the angles, and Figure 7.4b show the linear interpretation of the model.
Gaze
pi
90%
pi
10%
Direction
(a) Illustration of a linear model based on Gaze360
outputs. The actual orientation of the angles are
dependent on the camera’s point of view.
0
20%
Avg. 
100%
offset
Linear Model
(b) A linear model calculated based on
the average of the angluar offset from
the quantiles to the gaze direction.
Figure 7.4: Illustrations of how the linear model is created using an interpretation of gaze direction
values as parameters.
The offset angles are not linear. However, the simplification creates an easy and fast mapping which
utilises both the offset and the gaze direction. The model is then used to create a heatmap onto the
image, so every pixel in the image gets an estimated value on the basis of the linear model. An example
of this heatmap is shown in Figure 7.5, where the red line is the estimated gaze direction, the orange
and pink lines are the quantiles, the green lines are the angles towards the target, the white mesh is the
estimation, and lastly the blue bounding box is the target. The angles are dependent on the camera
angle and is thereby neither completely horizontal nor vertical.
The estimation of how probable the person in the image is to look at the target is simply based
on the mean of all the pixels within the target bounding box. So, the example in Figure 7.5 is 0.00%
because the majority of the heatmap values within the blue box is 0, while a few might be around 0.1
as the heatmap touched the edge.
==PAGE:54==
44
7 Experiment
Figure 7.5: Example of the heatmap created from the linear model. The image is from the analysis in
Test 1, which is introduced in Section 7.3.
7.2.3
Method 3: Von Mises distribution based on angles
The third and final method is designed to utilize the distribution knowledge from Gaze360 by imitating
a normal distribution in circular statistics.
The offset given by Gaze360 is deemed to be the 10% quantiles and 90% quantiles as illustrated in
Equation 7.1. The offset quantiles simulate an isotropic distribution, which is a simplification scoped by
the authors. An isotropic distribution is a multidimensional Gaussian distribution with the covariance
matrix being a scalar variance multiplied by an identity matrix.
The offset from 3D to 2D is no longer symmetrical, as the gaze direction typically won’t align
with the 2D plane. To utilize the distributional knowledge, the initial intention was to calculate the
distribution as a skewed normal distribution. The skewed normal distribution is not symmetrical, which
the two quantiles in 2 dimensions are not either.
However, the skewed normal distribution proved
complicated, as three parameters needed to be calculated numerically and the axis was based on angles
and not linear data.
Setting the mean gaze vector to the angle 0 and using the differences from the mean and to the
quantiles’ angles, three angular data points are created. These data points describe the mean, the 10%
quantile and the 90% quantile within a circular statistical distribution. Within circular statistics, the
analogous to the normal distributions on the line is the Von Mises distribution [61]. The solution there-
fore uses a Von Mises probability distribution to simulate a gaze distribution function. The formulae
for the Von Mises distribution is seen in Equation 7.2.
f(x | µ, κ) = exp κ cos x −µ
2πI0(κ)
, where 1
κ ∝σ2
(7.2)
The only unknown variable in the distribution is kappa (κ), which is calculated numerically using
scipy.optimize functions. The Von Mises distribution is symmetric, so the skewed quantiles cannot
both influence the algorithm. The distribution is thereby built up based on the largest uncertainty, and
thereby the numerically largest of the two quantiles’ angles (named a in Equation 7.3). Kappa can thus
be calculated based on the fact that the mean (µ) is 0 and cumulative Von Mises distribution function
is equal to 0.9 when integrating from 0 to a, as shown in Equation 7.3.
==PAGE:55==
7.2 Methods
45
0.9 =
∫a
0
f(x | 0, κ)dx, where κ > 0 and a = max(| a10 |, | a90 |)
(7.3)
Equation 7.2 is illustrated within the gaze tracking scenario in Figure 7.6. The intention is to use
the distribution to calculate the integration within the angles from the mean to the target’s corners,
which allows for a probability-type estimation.
Gaze
pi
90%
-pi
10%
Direction
Target
(a) Illustration of a Von Mises model given
the Gaze360 output.
0
pi
-pi
Target
Von Mises Distribution
(b) The Von Mises model calculated based on the maxi-
mum of the angular offsets given by the quantiles to the
gaze direction.
Figure 7.6: Illustrations of how a Von Mises model is used based on gaze direction values as parameters.
7.2.3.1
Method 3a: Based on extended angles
A final experiment was implemented with a minor change to the method using Von Mises distribution.
The small change is related to the angel towards the target, which the integration is based on. The
target angles are in this scenario extended by 30 degrees, so the integration will have a minimum of 60
degrees, if the target’s angles were 0. The extension is based on the assumption that people are able to
see movements within the peripheral field of vision. If a person’s gaze is just outside the target, with a
great confidence, the target might still be within the peripheral field, or even paracentral view, but the
simple Von Mises model will not take this into account.
Figure 7.7: An example of the Von Mises distribution for method 3a. The vertical blue lines are the
angles towards the target.
An example of the Von Mises distrubtion for method 3a shown in Figure 7.7. The vertical lines are
the angles from the gaze direction, from Gaze360, and to the target’s outer edges. In this example it is
clear that the participant is able to see the target.
==PAGE:56==
46
7 Experiment
7.3
Implementation and Tests
The implementation of the methods are written using python 3 on a MacOS operational system. The
neural networks are able to run using the graphic processing unit. However, the cuda implementation
is not able to access the internal GPU of the Macbook Pro. All calculations are thereby run on the
CPU available. The solutions have been implemented using the PyCharm IDE. The implementation
uses several publically available python libraries to create the graphics etc.
7.3.1
Test Data
To test the solutions, test data was gathered based on 3 different test scenarios. The test scenarios
all have the same initial setup, using the same tools as in the paper by Dissing et al. [8]. The setup
is shown in Figure 7.8. The test scenes are filmed using intel Realsense depth camera D435i, but the
depth in the output has not been used in order to scope the project to 2D.
(a) The other side of the scene, where the
camera is placed to record. The camera is
exactly 1m from the yellow and orange tape,
and thus 1.7m from the closest distance.
(b) The view the participants will have when
completing the tasks. Each square of tape is
70cm, and is thereby used to determine how
far a participant is from the camera.
Figure 7.8: The setup for the tests estimating whether people are able to perceive actions on the table
with the containers. The setup is originally created by Dissing et al. [8].
For the first test plan, the subject must always look at the target, and feel able to observe any
changes occurring. The subjects are positioned so they face to the left, front or right, at three different
distances from the camera. This allows for at least 9 different types of video clips, where the result is
assumed for the subject to always see the target. The target is the combined three containers on the
table.
The second test is similar, but the subject must never look at the target. So the expected results
from test 2 is for the subject never to be able to see the containers. The third and final test is a story
line, to understand how the solution works within a false-belief task. The subjects are therefore asked
to place a cube in one container, then have one subject look away, and thereby not see the other subject
==PAGE:57==
7.4 Result
47
moving the cube to a different container. The test plans have all been described in greater detail in
Appendix B.
The first two tests are completed by the same subject, but with or without glasses. Test 1 at the
distance of 310cm have also been completed by two young male participants, who also conducted the
third test. Overall, the test resulted in 23 videos of approximately 15 seconds each.
7.3.1.1
Pre-possessing
To analyse the different videos thoroughly, the videos have been edited. The initial and final 0 −3
seconds have been removed, as these were used to get into or out of position. In addition, each video
has been divided so it only contains one orientation instead of all 3 −4 depending on the test.
The results presented in Section 7.4 only use the videos from test 1 and test 2 where the orientations
are either left, front or right. The clip where the individuals are facing away from the camera have been
removed, as test 1 is not possible from this orientation. The distributions of the test 2 facing away from
the camera is included in Appendix C.
7.4
Result
The data gathered from the test is used to analyse 3 different methods of estimating individuals’ ability
to perceive an object. For every second frame in a test video the script is run once. This section will
present the distributions of the saved results for each method. The results shown below are only an
extraction from all the results, which are presented in Appendix C.
The term probability is used frequently to describe the estimation of how confident the algorithm
is that a person can see the target. As the data is based on a neural network, which in turn has had
a dimensional reduction, the more correct phrase is estimated probability, as the estimation might not
reflect the terminology accurately.
7.4.1
Method 1 Results
The results from method 1 are estimations of how likely people are able to see the target in every
frame. So, for every video in the test data, each detected person within a frame will have an estimated
probability. The general statistics based on these estimations are written in Table 7.1. The median,
min and max values in Table 7.1 are all either 0.0 or 1.0, which is a result of method 1 being binary.
Test
#Estimations
Mean
Median
Min
Max
Test 1
698
0.6
1.0
0.0
1.0
Test 2
774
0.26
0.0
0.0
1.0
Table 7.1: Statistical results from Method 1. The table shows which test data the values are based on
and the number of estimations within each test dataset. In addition, the mean, median, min and max
value of the estimations are shown.
Test 1 is based on the data where the participant looks towards the target in every frame, while test
2 is when the participant never looks at the target. The overall distribution of the results from test 1
and test 2 using method 1 are shown in Figure 7.9.
Figure 7.9 shows that both distributions are quite divided, which is caused by the binary data.
The distribution therefore resembles a Bernoulli Distribution, as it simply has successful or failure
cases. Test 1 has 424 estimations equal to 1.0, while test 2 only has 200. To understand whether the
distributions are statistically different, a Mann-Whitney u-test has been run giving a statistics u-value
==PAGE:58==
48
7 Experiment
Figure 7.9: The results based on method 1 on test 1 and test 2 (with the exception of the participant
facing away from the camera in test 2).
of 1.76 · 105 and a p-value of 5.42 · 10−42. The u-value is the minimum of two u-values calculated for
each distribution, where the u-value is found based on a point-system in a Mann-Whitney u-test [62].
The p-value is below 0.05, which means it is robust to assume that the results from test 1 and test 2
are statistically different.
Figure 7.10: The results from method 1, given the left orientation and different distances and people.
The cases named Emilie are the same test subject as Glasses, but without glasses. The numbers define
the distances, so e.g. _170 is at a distance of 170cm from the camera.
The test data was further divided into different orientations and different distances. The results of
one of these variations is shown in Figure 7.10, which shows the subjects facing left. For test 1 the
results are quite evenly spread between 0 and 1 with an exception of the two cases Emilie_170 and
Glasses_170. The two exceptions are both from a distance of 170cm from the camera, which seems to
estimate that they look at the target more frequently. In comparison, the results for the left orientations
within test 2 are also quite interesting. None of the cases where the subject wears glasses are above 0,
and the remaining cases only have few elements above 0. This shows how accessories, such as glasses,
can cover the face to such a degree that the face landmark cannot be located by the face recognition
algorithm.
7.4.2
Method 2: Mean gaze direction within target bounding box
Like method 1, the general statistical values are calculated given the estimations from method 2. These
values are described in Table 7.2. Unlike method 1, the results are no longer binary as seen in the
==PAGE:59==
7.4 Result
49
maximum values of 0.96 and 0.97. Based on the statistical values presented in Table 7.2 only the mean
vary with 0.16 for test 1 and 0.06 for test 2 in addition to 0.01 difference for the maximum value.
Test
#Estimations
Mean
Median
Min
Max
Test 1
698
0.16
0.0
0.0
0.96
Test 2
774
0.06
0.0
0.0
0.97
Table 7.2: The mean, median, min and max are calculated based on estimations of how probable an
individual can see a target given my method 2. #Estimations are the number of estimations given the
test sets.
The similarity is also reflected in the overall distribution, as both cases have the main portion closer
to 0.0 with a slightly larger tail upwards for test 1.
A Mann-Whitney u-test is used to determine
whether the estimations from test 1 are actually statistically different from test 2. Based on the null
hypothesis that the estimations are from the same distribution, the statistics being a u-value of 2.19·105
and a p-value 5.84 · 10−16. As the p-value is quite a bit less than 0.05, the null hypothesis is rejected
and the estimations from test 1 and test 2 are not from the same distribution. Thus, even though the
distribution in Figure 7.11 seem quite similar, they are not. Based on a threshold of 0.5 test 1 computes
230 estimations above the threshold and test 2 result in 131 estimated probabilities above 0.5.
Figure 7.11: The results based on method 2 on test 1 and test 2 (with the exception of the participant
facing away from the camera in test 2).
An example of an estimation of a frame is included in Figure 7.12. The example demonstrates how
the probability is calculated by taking the average of the heatmap values within the target bounding
box. The values from the heatmap are based on the offset angles from the Gaze360 estimation. Thus,
the algorithm estimates how much of the bounding box the heatmap covers.
The distributions for the individual orientations are shown in Appendix C. Overall, all the trends
seem similar to Figure 7.11 with the results in test 1 being slightly higher than test 2.
7.4.3
Method 3: Von Mises distribution based on angles
The general statistical results for using method 3 are shown in Table 7.3, which, unlike the previous,
results have a larger visible difference between test 1 and test 2. Both the mean and the median reflects
how test 1 are given higher estimations than for test 2. As the median is smaller than the mean in test
1, the majority of the data is closer to 0 and the distribution is not symmetrical.
==PAGE:60==
50
7 Experiment
Figure 7.12: The frame is from the test scenario where the subject does not wear glasses, at a distance
of 240cm from the camera and facing forward. The algorithm run is method 2.
Test
#Estimations
Mean
Median
Min
Max
Test 1
698
0.46
0.35
0.0
1.0
Test 2
774
0.06
3.10 · 10−4
0.0
0.88
Table 7.3: Statistical results for the test data using method 3. The mean, median, min and max describe
the estimations for the given data sets, while #Estimations describe the number of estimated data point
within each set.
Like the previous models, a Mann-Whitney u-test is conducted giving a statistics u-value of 1.08·105
and a p-value of 1.5 · 10−88, proving a statistical difference between the estimations for test 1 and test
2. This discovery is also seen in Figure 7.13, which illustrates the two distributions. A large amount of
the estimations for test 1 are close to 1.0 in comparison to test 2, where the estimations never reach a
result of 1.0 as the maximum value within the estimation is only 0.88. Creating a threshold of 0.5 the
estimations for test 1 result in 309 estimations, while test only result in 9 estimations above 0.5.
Figure 7.13: The results based on method 3 on test 1 and test 2 (with the exception of the participant
facing away from the camera in test 2).
Figure 7.14 focuses on the individual cases when the subject is either directly facing the camera or
facing to the right. When the individual is facing forward, the results for test 2 are mostly below 0.2
==PAGE:61==
7.4 Result
51
while test 1 almost have no values less than 0.2. There is a moderate trend for the cases in test 1 with
glasses to be closer to 0 than the cases without.
Figure 7.14: Distributions from analysis with method 3 when the subject is facing the camera or facing
right.
In addition, for the right orientation, the distribution for test 2 seems similar to the front facing.
However, the same is not the case for test 1. Test 1 for the right orientation is not as confidently close to
the value 1.0, but actually closer to 0.0. One case where the subject is close to the camera and wearing
glasses, Glasses_170, no estimations were found above 0.0.
7.4.3.1
Method 3a: Based on extended angles
The final method implemented is based on the same calculation as method 3, but with the target’s
outer angles extended by 30 degrees. The results reflect this extension, as all the statistical values for
the datasets have enlarged. The maximum value for test 1 is now also 1.0, while the minimum value is
very close to 0.0, but never reaches the exact value. The median is the largest change from method 3
to method 3a, with a percent deviation of 174% for the difference of median for test 1 and a percent
deviation of 499% for test 2.
Test
#Estimations
Mean
Median
Min
Max
Test 1
698
0.75
0.96
4.09 · 10−13
1.0
Test 2
774
0.23
0.15
−1.43 · 10−13
1.0
Table 7.4: Statistical results for the test data using method 3a. The table show close to a 0.0 minimum
estimation within both test datasets, a 1.0 maximum value, and varying means and medians. Test 2
has a few more data points than test 1.
The distribution of the estimated values overall is shown in Figure 7.15, where the majority of the
values are either close to 1.0 and 0.0 for test 1 and test 2 respectively. The Mann-Whitney u-test proves
the distributions to be statistically different with the statistics u-value being 6.42 · 104 and the p-value
==PAGE:62==
52
7 Experiment
1.70 · 10−141, which is less than 0.05. Based on a threshold of 0.5, test 1 results in 539 values above the
threshold and test 2 results in 105 values.
Figure 7.15: The results based on method 3a on test 1 and test 2 (with the exception of the participant
facing away from the camera in test 2).
The right orientation given method 3a is shown in Figure 7.16. Test 1 data is distributed with a
trend towards 1.0, with an exception of Glasses_170, while test 2 has a trend towards 0.0. The case
with Glasses_170 does have a large portion within 0.0, but is quite evenly distributed. The results
from test 2 have moved more towards the middle area in comparison to test 2 for method 3, where it
was closer to the bottom.
Figure 7.16: The detailed analysis when the subject is facing right. The estimations are based on the
implementation of method 3a.
7.4.4
Test 3
The third test dataset created is based on a story telling environment. The videos contain two people
instead of only a single person, and thus test the solution’s ability to distinguish between the people
and estimate their ability to see the target individually. Figure 7.17 includes three frames from a video
where the estimation of whether the people can see the target is based of method 3a.
A set of 8 videos are estimated in total for test 3 for method 3 and 3a, where the participants
were asked to look away facing different orientations, and switch with one another. These videos can
be found using a link in Appendix D. Test 3 ensures that the identification algorithm could recognize
multiple people. The results shown through all the videos prove that the algorithm, in these cases, are
able to recognize two people and give them individual estimations.
Initial results did show identified people being switched or given new identities. These error videos
are also included in Appendix D.
==PAGE:63==
7.5 Summary
53
Figure 7.17: Results from the test using method 3a, where one person is instructed to be facing forward,
but look away the second time the other person moves the cube. The average probability in the upper
left corners of the frames is the average of how much the individual looks at the target based on the
previous frames. The probability value above the participants’ heads is the estimated value in the
frame and the numbers are the persons’ random ID. The lines indicate where Gaze360 estimates that
the subjects are looking. Lastly, the bounding box around the participants’ faces are green when the
estimation is above 0.25 and red when it is below.
7.4.5
Computational Cost
Given the lack of access to a compatible graphics processing unit, the computational cost of running
the methods was expected to be quite large. On average, the computational cost of analysing a video
of approximately 4 seconds takes an average of 5.3 minutes. Of this cost, only 0.3 minutes were used
by Gaze360, and for method 3 and 3a only 0.22 seconds on computing the distribution. This shows
how the true cost ineﬀiciency might not only be due to the lack of a GPU, but that other parts of
the implementations might be at fault. The computational cost is not measured for extracting features
using detectron2, face recognition algorithm, processing of the video and the generation of the output
video and json file. These all contribute to the cost, but the amounts are unknown at this stage. The
precise data for the cost given the different methods is shown in Appendix C.
7.5
Summary
An experiment testing 3 different methods for estimating people’s perception of a specific target have
been implemented and evaluated. The evaluation is based on videos from a setup similar to the work by
Dissing et al. [8]. The overall result showed a greater degree of separation between the videos where the
subject was looking at the target or not. The distributions of the results for all the different parameters
are described in Appendix C. All methods have a Mann-Whitney u-test p-value under 0.05 indicating
a statistical difference between the two tests. The videos showing the estimations for all test datasets,
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Experiment
including test 3, are linked in Appendix D.
The results from the experiments are discussed in Chapter 8, and potential improvements are de-
scribed in Chapter 9.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
Throughout this report various works try to understand how humans perceive the world has been
introduced. This shows how perception cannot simply be estimated within one field of study, but needs
a mixture of various works within cognitive psychology, neuroscience, computer vision, deep learning
etc. The experiment conducted in Chapter 7 emphasises peoples’ use of eye movement to fixate on
attentive stimuli. This chapter discusses how all these fields relate to the experiment and introducees
shortcomings to the implementation based on gaze movements. The results from Chapter 7 are initially
discussed and compared to each other. Then the solution is evaluated in perspective of the research
within cognitive psychology and the additional fields.
8.1
Results from Experiment
Some of the results from Chapter 7 are shown again in Figure 8.1, which allows for a more simple
comparison. This section will first interpret and discuss the results independently for method 1, and
then continuously discuss the methods and compare them to the previously discussed methods.
Figure 8.1: The Figures show 4 implemented methods that estimate how likely a user is to be able to
see a target. Method 3a uses the same implementation as Method 3, but with the outer angle of the
target being extended.
8.1.1
Method 1
The first model is based on neither gaze direction nor target location. This is reflected in the results,
as the estimation does not look like the ideal solution. The distributions for test 1 and test 2 are
statistically different, but the optimal result is having all estimations in test 1 be close to 1.0 and all
estimations from test 2 close to 0.0. In some cases this method does seem quite capable i.e. when the
participants are facing left or right. In these scenarios the results for test 2 are very close to 0.0 as seen
in Figure 7.10 or Appendix C.
Based on the research, this technique might not be as overly simplified as first thought. The preferred
viewing area for humans is within the 30 degrees in front of our face, as described in Section 4.2.1. In the
scenario where the individual is facing away from the target, the nasal portion limits the eye movement
to approximately 60 degrees. E.g. if a person facing 60 degrees to the left and looks straight ahead, the
area of the target will only be visible within the far peripheral view. So, by only including the images
where the user face the camera, one ensures that the target should be within the person’s preferred
viewing area. However, eye movement does allow an individual to move their gaze fixation without
==PAGE:66==
56
8 Discussion
head-movement and thus has the target within the para-central field of vision. When the face is at a
large enough angle so that the algorithm cannot detect the facial features, method 1 will estimate that
the user cannot see the target. However, as eye movement is possible, the target can be within the
user’s field of vision, but method 1 does not take this into account.
Section 4.2.1 describes how people prefer to move their head when looking in a direction larger than
35 degrees to either side, but it is still possible to gain a perception of a target within the peripheral field.
Studies have shown that people are good at interpreting movement in the peripheral field. However, the
far peripheral field does have fewer photoreceptors, so the likelihood of perceiving any details is lower.
In addition, method 1 does not take the location of the target into consideration. In this test, the
target was located in the bottom right corner and thus in the foreground of the image. However, if the
target was not placed in front of the camera, the solution would no longer be viable, as the method has
the assumption that the target of interest is placed close to the camera.
Given the assumption that the target is very close to the camera, and that people will not intention-
ally trick the robot, by only looking at the target with the far corner of their eyes, this simple methods
does seem able to estimate whether a person is able to see the target. However, the test datasets do
include these gaze scenarios where the target is not visible within the preferred viewing area. This is
reflected in the results as method 1 was able to estimate 424 correct in Test 1, which is 60.7% correct.
The results for test 2 show a 74.1% correct estimation at 0.0. Overall, the combined percentage correct
for both test 1 and test 2 is seen to be 67.8% calculated in Equation 8.1
424 + (774 −200)
774 + 698
· 100 = 67.8%
(8.1)
8.1.2
Method 2
To understand the results from method 2, two examples from the estimated probability have been
included in Figure 8.2. The two examples demonstrate how the average heatmap within the target’s
bounding box vary based on the offset angles from the Gaze360 estimation. When the confidence is
small, which results in a large offset, the heatmap becomes more spread. In comparison, when the
confidence is high, the heatmap is much narrower, and therefore do not reach as much of the bounding
box.
Figure 8.2: Two frames from the test scenario where the subject wears glasses, at a distance of 310cm
from the camera and facing left. The algorithm run is method 2.
This is the exact opposite of what the intention is for this solution. If there is a high confidence in
the individual looking at the target object, the resulting estimation should also be higher. This error
is mainly due to the calculation of the heatmap being linear with an intersection always set to 100 at
the 0 angle. The intersection value should decline when the offset is larger to ensure a more reliable
==PAGE:67==
8.1 Results from Experiment
57
distribution. The linear model may simply be too simplistic a method. The photoreceptors inside the
eyes are not distributed like a linear function, but have the density becoming slowly more sparse.
Given the results in Figure 8.1 method 2 is not able to distinguish between the datasets quite as
well. A slight difference might be detectable when the participant is facing the camera. However, the
remaining cases do not differentiate much. Given a threshold of 0.5, only 33.0% cases were correct for
test 1 and 83.1% for test 2. It seems that most of the estimated probabilities are simply 0.0 making
test 2 score higher. Finally, this gives a total correct percentage of 59.3%.
A small experiment, which changes the threshold from 0.5 to 0.25, has shown to make no big
difference. This simply resulted in 1 more correct value for test 1 and 4 less correct values for test 2.
Method 2 is therefore quite distinctly over-simplified as it only estimates a large probability when the
angular offset is large.
Compared to method 1, method 2 seems less capable of predicting people’s perception of the world.
If the linear model was exchanged to a more complex model, the results may have been different.
8.1.3
Method 3
The main concept errors in method 2 are remedied in method 3, as the distribution of estimated
probabilities based on Gaze360 are no longer linear. Having the distribution as a Von Mises distribution
and calculating the probability based on integration, the result cannot be more than 1.0, which allows
for an interpretation of the value as an estimation of the true probability.
Looking at the distribution in Figure 8.1 shows that the estimation is quite good at estimating when
a person is not looking at the target. The method only wrongly estimates 9 values for test 2 thereby
having 98.8% true negatives.
The results for test 1 are okay with a result of 44.3% true positives.
Combined, this results in 73.0% of the estimations being correct. This seems quite promising, though
the estimation for test 1 could be improved.
When looking at the specific orientations and the method’s performance, some of the cases stand
out. Two of these cases are the right orientation with glasses at a distance of 170cm or 310cm from the
camera. Looking at the video, these cases are actually quite understandable. Two frames from them
are shown in Figure 8.3. For both cases it seems as though the subject’s hair and glasses were blocking
the view of the eyes from the camera. So, even if it was a human estimating the same video, they may
not be able to tell whether the subject could see the target either.
Figure 8.3: Two frames from test 1 where the subject wears glasses, at a distance of 170cm and 310cm
from the camera and facing right. The algorithm run is method 3.
So does method 3 estimates whether a person is able to perceive a specific target? In truth, method
3 actually estimate the likelihood of the person fixating their gaze somewhere on the target. The work
mentioned in Chapter 4 concludes that a person is able to perceive objects and movement as far as
within their peripheral field of vision. So in order to imitate this theory, the method can be improved.
==PAGE:68==
58
8 Discussion
One of the frames which method 3 was not able to interpret correctly is seen in Figure 8.4. It seems
as Gaze360 has such a high confidence that the Von Mises distribtion might be quite narrow, and thus
result in a low probability within the targets.
Figure 8.4: A frame from test 1, where the participant is facing forward, at a distance of 170cm from
the camera, not wearing glasses. The estimation is using method 3.
Based on Chapter 4, it is known that the central vision is 2-5 degrees and the para-central is about
18 degrees. It can thereby be assumed that the participant is able to perceive a minimum of 18 degrees
when applying overt attention.
In Figure 8.4 the target is partially within 18 degrees of the gaze
direction given by Gaze360. So can it be assumed that when a user is able to perceive only part of a
target that the full target has been perceived? Or is a view of the full target required?
The question of how much of the target should be visible to the user is dependant on the scenario.
If the target is complex with a lot of small details, the user might need to be able to see everything
within the target. However, if the target is big cubes being rearranged in containers, the assumption of
movements being perceived within the peripheral field of vision could to apply.
8.1.3.1
Method 3a
By extending the target’s outer angles by 30 degrees to each side the method no longer focuses on
estimating whether a person’s gaze is fixated on the target. Now the method estimates whether the
person’s central field of vision is located so that part of the target is within the user’s mid peripheral
view (30 −60 degrees on each side).
Now, looking at the same frame as Figure 8.4 but using method 3a in Figure 8.5. The estimation
of the person was not above 0.5 using method 3, but for method 3a it is now estimated at 100%. As
the participant actually was able to see the target in the frame, this is an improvement.
Overall, when comparing the distribution of method 3 and method 3a from Figure 8.1, method 3a
looks to be able to estimate the data from test 1 with more confidence. The results from test 1 are
77.2% true positive and 86.6% true negative for test 2. Compared to method 3, the true positives for
test 1 have improved quite a lot. Combined, the method estimates 82.1% of the probabilities as being
correct based on the test data.
Based on the performance of the 3 methods, it seems as though method 3a has the most promising
results given the test data, while method 2 has the worst. There are still many shortcomings for all the
methods which are discussed in the rest of this chapter.
==PAGE:69==
8.2 Shortcomings
59
Figure 8.5: The same frame as from Figure 8.4, but using method 3a. The frame is from test 1 where
the participant is facing forward, at a distance of 170cm from the camera, not wearing glasses.
8.1.4
Test data
The test is only conducted with 3 test participants, all at the same location.
In addition, all test
scenarios are only done once. This means that the results might not reflect the actual capabilities of
the implementations. Ideally, the test scenarios should have been conducted with a variety of different
conditions and with more diversity among the participants. Gaze360 is based on a quite diverse dataset.
However, the power of this tool is not fully utilised in the experiment.
8.1.5
Cost
For the implementation to actually be used for human-robot interaction, the response must be within
real-time computation. Currently the computational cost is very large, and the source of this is unknown.
A large percentage of the computational cost is not due to the estimation by gaze360 nor the calculation
of the distribution. It should be possible to optimize the implementation to run faster, but to do this
the true source of the cause needs to be located.
8.2
Shortcomings
Overall, the basic concept of estimating an individual’s perception of the world through a single target
using gaze tracking is narrow. Chapter 3 discusses how peoples’ senses are filtered by attention, which
is then used to create people’s inner perception of the world. Using only vision does not show the
full image, as especially audio also has a large influence on our attention. Section 7.1.2 describes how
people expect the robot to have a theory of mind similar to humans. The participants were actually
quite confident in their assumption of the robot understanding changes of status only using sound.
Even more confident than when the same test was conducted with vision. Thereby, simply knowing the
accurate field of vision a human has, will not completely solve the issue. Even if the solution had 100%
accuracy, there would still be missing interpretations from other senses.
The studies mentioned in Chapter 3 describe how specific tasks influence people’s scanning patterns,
and how selective attention may cause intentional blindness. Unless people are told specifically to keep
an eye on the target, as they were for this experiment, it cannot be assumed that their attention is
actually focused on their vision.
Further experiments are needed to fully understand whether people perceive scenes. I.e. what would
a participant see, if they were told only to track the red cube and ignore the blue cube. Even though
they look at the target, are they able to perceive where the blue cube is? These are all specific questions
==PAGE:70==
60
8 Discussion
related to how this experiment can be tested given the extent of what to perceive the world actually
entails.
The estimation in the conducted experiment is 2 dimensional. However, gaze is actually 3 dimen-
sional. So, if the target was above and behind the user, or a curtain was between the user and the target,
all estimations would fail. The current methods do not have any depth perception, and do therefore
not work in more complex cases.
8.2.1
Kappa angle
The last subject of discussion is the kappa angle, which was mentioned in Section 4.2.2. The kappa
angle varies quite a bit between people with up to 4 degrees differences, which is almost the central
field in itself. This is a large flaw for gaze tracking estimations which are not calibrated, as it proves
impossible to estimate every person’s gaze direction accurately.
However, based on this study, the
central field is only a small area within the peripheral view. The issue at hand is not whether a person’s
gaze is fixated on the target, but rather when the person is able to see and understand the change of
events.
Having people need to calibrate every time they meet a social robot is not practical. The intended
use of this study is to improve human-robot interaction. It would become bothersome to the users if
they would need to calibrate every time they met a new robot. People are able to apply a theory of
mind to a robot, so a robot having a false-belief is not unacceptable and might thereby be preferred to
an accurate estimation.
8.3
Summary
Overall, method 3a showed the best results based on the test data with 82.1% of the estimations
correct given a threshold of 0.5. In comparison, the worst results where produced by method 2 with
only 59.3% being correct. In addition, when the test data was collected, the users were given specific
instructions to look at the target. The assumption that people are able to perceive everything they see
without instructions to focus on the task is naive. For the results to be accurate, multiple assumptions
have been made, including that people are able to perceive rearrangements of cubes within their mid
peripheral field of vision, that they use overt attention, and they are not inattentionally blind towards
rearrangements.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 9
Further Improvements
Many improvements and new algorithms have been considered throughout the process of developing
this work. Some of these improvements might not be large, but focuses on the immediate next steps for
improving the implementation. Other ideas require more work and perhaps even starting from a clean
slate.
9.1
Minor improvements
This section introduces four feasible improvements which would be simple next steps.
9.1.1
Real Time
One of the first improvements is analysing the large computational cost. The large computational cost
makes it expensive to evaluate the solution, as a 4 second video could take about 5 minutes to analyse.
Determining where the bottleneck is and how to remedy it would make testing much easier, and thus
simpler to implement potential small improvements. The intention is also for the analysis to be in real
time, as discussed in Chapter 8.
9.1.2
More Test Data
The second step would be to gather more test data. Some of the test data, as per the frames shown
in Figure 8.3, are not optimal. By having the multiple participants conduct the same test, the results
could be more informative and robust.
In addition, the estimations should also be done by a human. To simply ask a test person to look
at a target is one thing, but this may force the algorithms to live up to an impossible standard, as e.g.
the quality of the image might influence the level of precision. By having humans estimate the same
test data, the implementation can be compared to the human results. The goal is to have the robot as
reliable as a human in predicting what a person experiences.
9.1.3
Estimating field of vision
The third improvement is experimenting with the extended angle, which was an addition in method 3a.
The extension of 30 degrees was based on an assumption of visibility in the peripheral field of vision. It
would be interesting to automatically calculate the optimal angular extension that results in the highest
amount of correct estimations.
However, for this to be feasible, the implementation needs to be faster and more data is required.
The model would need to calculate the optimal angular extension based on one dataset, while the
evaluation would be calculated based on a different dataset. This is to generate an unbiased evaluation
and thus avoid over-fitting.
==PAGE:72==
62
9 Further Improvements
9.1.4
Adding Additional Network
The final improvement is combining Gaze360 with the gaze tracking network Detecting Attended Visual
Targets in Video (DAVTV). DAVTV is described in detail in Appendix E. Unlike Gaze360, DAVTV
estimates a heatmap based on the estimated point of regard. It locates the target through a combination
of a saliency map and gaze direction.
The intent is to implement DAVTV as an extra probability
estimation in addition to Gaze360. The probability of a person looking at the target object is greater
if two separate solutions have the same estimation. However, the opposite is also the case, as shown in
Figure 9.1.
(a) Methood 3a correctly estimate the target to be within the subject’s field of vision.
In
contrast, DAVTV highlights the back wall incorrectly as the point of regard.
(b) DAVTV correctly estimates the blackboard to the left as the point of regard, while method
3a is not as precise.
Figure 9.1: Two examples showing how DAVTV and method 3a are able to estimate the gaze directions
differently.
Figure 9.1 shows how the two neural networks might compliment each other, as one network can
be correct, when the other is not. A technique for comparing the results in a reliable manner needs
to be discovered, which is able to highlight each network’s individual strengths. Based on a couple of
videos using both networks (see Appendix D) it does not seem like one network is more correct than the
other. Gaze360 might be a bit random at times and DAVTV only shows a result when it is sure that
the point of regard is within the frame. The examples in Figure 9.1 are from the implementation of
method 3a and illustrate how both networks are correct in different scenarios. In Figure 9.1a one of the
participants is looking at the yellow door, so DAVTV correctly highlight it. However, the participant
to the right is clearly looking at the target, which DAVTV do not highlight. In comparison, Figure
9.1b shows how method 3a estimates the participant at the right to look at the target, which he is not.
While DAVTV does correctly estimate that the participant looks away.
==PAGE:73==
9.2 Additional Experiments
63
9.2
Additional Experiments
These additional experiments are based on the knowledge gained within the process of creating the
experiment. These changes are quite substantial, and might require starting from scratch.
9.2.1
Analyse the scene using 3D
One of the potentially large flaws is that the world is not 2 dimensional and people’s field of vision is
not circular, but extends more horizontally than vertically. The user might be looking directly towards
the target, but if something is blocking the user’s view, the camera would not be able to tell. E.g. if
user 1 was moving the cube while blocking the view from user 2, user 2 would not be able to see where
the cube was moved to, even if he or she was looking in the correct direction. As the experiment in
Chapter 7 does not take the difference in horizontal and vertical angles into account when generating
the estimations, these might potentially make a big difference.
So, to ensure higher accuracy and less assumptions, a solution should be developed in 3D. The
output from gaze360 is spherical coordinates, which in turn are 3 dimensional. This would allow the
solution to estimate the difference between looking down at the ground and looking straight ahead. The
cameras used are actually also depth cameras, and are thereby able to detect the distance to objects
within 2 m [63].
9.2.2
Sensor Fusion
The final improvement would be to implement sensor fusion. By creating a basic solution that includes
an analysis of the participant’s pose and the audio within the environment, the audio could simply
determine whether a bottom-up salient sound might distract the participant to focus elsewhere. The
robot does have a microphone, so this does seem like a possibility, but would require closer research.
In addition, a simple comparison of other information gained from the images could make a difference.
Including head and hand pose estimation would create a more detailed understanding of the scene.
Chapter 2 mentions how gaze tracking is not necessarily the only feature people base their understanding
of each other on. Hand gestures and head movements also influence humans’ interpretation of other
people’s world view. Hand pose estimation could determine whether a person is pointing, and head
pose could allow more accurate estimations when the eyes are not visible.
The above-mentioned examples result in multiple different estimations based on different data. A
technique called sensor fusion could then be used to compare results. This technique is crucial in e.g.
autonomous vehicles. Sensor fusion uses the advantages and disadvantages within each source of input
to conduct and create a combined and knowledgeable estimation. Autonomous vehicles therefore creates
a perception of the environment the same way people do. Therefore, by utilising sensor fusion could
greatly increase the accuracy of the solution.
9.3
Summary
Overall, four small improvements could be made to gain a greater result.
These include reducing
the computational cost, getting more test data, self-calculating the optimal extension of angle and
comparing the result with a different source. The larger improvements are to implement the solution
in 3D and / or to utilise more sensors than gaze tracking on which to base the estimation.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 10
Evaluation
The project plan and development is briefly discussed in this chapter as the thesis has changed through-
out the process. The initial project plan is included in Figure 10.1 with more details in Appendix A. The
emphasis initially was to create a plug-and-play product, which would preform estimations in real-time.
However, after the first couple of weeks it was evident that the topic was quite broad, and thus
needed more research than expected. In addition, implementing Gaze360 required more work than
expected as some of the functions used were deprecated and did not work on MacOS. About halfway
through the process I contacted different specialists within gaze tracking and perception in order to
gain a better understanding of my knowledge at the time. These meetings resulted in restructuring the
project to focus on what perception is and how an algorithm can estimate it accurately.
Project hand-in:
24 January 2021 
Project start:
24 August 2020
Week 1: Aug. 24 - 30 
Week 2: Aug. 31 - Sep. 6
Week 3: Sep. 7 - 13
Week 4: Sep. 14 - 20
Literature search and
 theoretical background
Implementation of
Exisiting Methods
Week 5: Sep. 21 27 
Week 6: Sep. 28 Oct. 4
Project plan deadline
Week 7: Oct. 5 - 11
Week 17: Dec. 14 - 20
Week 8: Oct. 12 - 18
Week 16: Dec. 7 - 13
Week 15: Nov. 30 - Dec. 6
Week 9: Oct. 19 - 25
Week 10: Oct. 26 - Nov. 1
Week 11: Nov. 2 - 8
Halfway mark
Week 12: Nov. 9 - 15
Week 13: Nov. 16 - 22
Week 14: Nov. 23 - 29
Week 18 Dec. 21 -27
Week 19: Dec.28 - Jan. 3
Week 20: Jan. 4 - 10
Week 21: Jan. 11 - 17
Week 22: Jan. 18 - 24
Finding relevant
material and existing
solutions 
Discussing theory with
supervisor
Specifying and narrow
topic to realistic extend
Allocation of the
essential hardware
Implementation of
the relevant methods
Deﬁne Project Plan
Structure thesis with
sections and
references
Optimization 
of Methods
Implement a
method merging
two existing
technologies 
Write ﬁrst part of
the raport:
introduction and
background
Test Implementations 
and Compare Results
Design test plan
Test methods
real-time on
robot
Evaluate the
results
Setup additional
tests
Additional 
Features
Final 
Changes
Write ﬁnal part of
the report
Print report and
get fellow student
to read and give
feedback
Hand in report
24th of
Code Cleanup 
and Final Tests
Clean up implementation
Design test plan
Test in real-time on robot
Evaluate the results
Write third part of the
report: tests, results, and
discussion
People Recognition
Transfer Learning
Hand Pose Estimation
Write second part of the report:
methods, implementation, and
results
Research additional features
depending on test results. For
example:
Implement additional features 
Figure 10.1: Overview of the process planned for the thesis.
Figure 10.2 shows how the actual process deviated from the original plan. The deadline was by
extended a couple of weeks due to an unexpected delay in receiving student counselling assistance.
Project hand-in:
14 Feburary 2021 
Project start:
24 August 2020
Week 1: Aug. 24 - 30 
Week 2: Aug. 31 - Sep. 6
Week 3: Sep. 7 - 13
Week 4: Sep. 14 - 20
Literature search and
 theoretical background
Implementation of
exisiting methods
Week 5: Sep. 21 27 
Week 6: Sep. 28 Oct. 4
Project plan deadline
Week 7: Oct. 5 - 11
Week 17: Dec. 14 - 20
Week 8: Oct. 12 - 18
Week 16: Dec. 7 - 13
Week 15: Nov. 30 - Dec. 6
Week 9: Oct. 19 - 25
Week 10: Oct. 26 - Nov. 1
Week 11: Nov. 2 - 8
Halfway mark
Week 12: Nov. 9 - 15
Week 13: Nov. 16 - 22
Week 14: Nov. 23 - 29
Week 18 Dec. 21 -27
Week 19: Dec.28 - Jan. 3
Week 20: Jan. 4 - 10
Week 21: Jan. 11 - 17
Week 22: Jan. 18 - 24
Finding relevant material and
existing solutions 
Discussing theory with supervisor
Specifying and narrow topic to
realistic extend
Allocation of the essential hardware
Implementation of the relevant methods
Define and hand-in Project Plan
Structure thesis with sections and
references
Implementation of 
estimating probabilities
Implement method 2
Implement detectron2
Write part of the report:
Computer Vision and
Gaze Tracking
Final 
Changes
Write final part of the
report
Print report and get
fellow student to read
and give feedback
Hand in report 14th of
February 2021
Write 
report
Writting following
chapters:
Week 23: Jan. 25 - 31
Week 24: Feb. 01 - 07
Week 25: Feb. 08 - 14
Retrieve test data 
and results
Clean implementation
Implement the method
1, 3 and 3a
Design test plan
Retrieve test data
Evaluate the results
Write third part of the
report: tests, results,
and discussion
Restructure project
and research
Restructure
report to focus
on research
Implement
saving and
creating videos
Restructure 
weekday
Leave of absence
from student-job
Contact student
counseling
Research
probability
distributions
Scope project
Contact 
specialists
Contact specialist in
gaze estimation  
 (Dan Witzner Hansen)
Contact specialist  in
perception.      
  (Fiona Brid Mulvey)
Seek advice from
other students and
professors
Robot's Conception
of Human Belief
Perspective of the
World
Field of Vision
Implement
distribution
Celebrate
christmas 
Implement basic
distribution
Implement face
recognition
Figure 10.2: Overview of the actual process for this thesis.
Furthermore, this project has allowed me to personally learn how to work when demotivated and how
==PAGE:76==
66
10 Evaluation
to structure days working from home, which was necessary due to the COVID-19 crisis. The importance
of scoping the project and keeping to a timetable is highlighted, even if it means not knowing everything
and simply accepting limited resources. Finally, one of the main skills developed throughout this project
has been the ability to identify and reflect on technical scientific issues. Research within various fields
of study created a greater understanding of the interaction between the different components within
the issue.
If I was starting this project again, I would create a clearer initial scope and focus. The weekdays
would have had a clearer structure by utilising tools such as the online study community, which is
offered by the Student Counselling Service [64].
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 11
Conclusion
People’s cognitive perception of the world is complex as it is created based on people’s senses guided
by attention. Attention is the key component to understanding how humans generate individual per-
spectives as it is guided not only in a bottom-up fashion, but also based on top-down stimuli. Tasks,
emotions, abnormalities, etc. all filter what people experience and notice. So, having peoples’ per-
ception of the world being estimated only through gaze tracking is a simplification, as perception is
subjective.
People are able to estimate each other’s perception and thus understand that they might be different.
Theory of mind is an ability to distinguish and understand when a person has a false belief, which is an
ability which is now being implemented in robots. However, for an implementation of theory of mind
to work, it is essential to know when a person notices a change of status.
Though simple, using gaze tracking, it has been possible to estimate a person’s ability to perceive a
single target with a 82.1% accuracy. This accuracy was achieved by utilising the existing gaze tracking
network Gaze360 in combination with detectron2’s people detection and face recognition software. Then
a Von Mises probability distribution could calculate an estimation of the probability of an individual
having the target within their mid peripheral field of vision. The tests are based on a dataset where the
participants were told to either be able to see the target or not see the target. It would be interesting
to see how the results would vary if people where not specifically told what to look at. So, this thesis is
a solid foundation for discovering how perception of the world is created and an inspiration for further
work, which does seem to have great potential.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Project Plan
Introduction
Research utilizing artificial intelligence to learn social abilities processed by human have evolved rad-
ically during the last decayed. A significant understanding in social skills is the knowledge of every
person having their own perception of the world. This project focus on using face recognition and gaze
estimation to gain an understanding of what individuals see and estimate what they know.
This ability can create a more smooth interaction between person and machine, as the machine will
understand what each individual will need to be informed off and avoid redundant explanations. An
example where such technology can be utilized is in a shop scenario. Say a costumer looks at several
products, but leaves without buying anything. Then when the same customer returns the system will be
able to recognize the person and know which products’ status changes the customer might be interested
in. For instance, if one of the products the customer was previously looking at are now on sale. The
machine will now not simply inform the customer about all products on sale, but only mention the new
additions which it knows the customer might be interested in.
Project Plan
A Project Plan, see in Figure A.1, is created to ensure the desired outcome of the project is reachable
within the given time frame. The plan has taken vacations and other potential unforeseen conflicts into
consideration. The details about the process is described in Subsection A.0.1.
Project hand-in:
24 January 2021 
Project start:
24 August 2020
Week 1: Aug. 24 - 30 
Week 2: Aug. 31 - Sep. 6
Week 3: Sep. 7 - 13
Week 4: Sep. 14 - 20
Literature search and
 theoretical background
Implementation of
Exisiting Methods
Week 5: Sep. 21 27 
Week 6: Sep. 28 Oct. 4
Project plan deadline
Week 7: Oct. 5 - 11
Week 17: Dec. 14 - 20
Week 8: Oct. 12 - 18
Week 16: Dec. 7 - 13
Week 15: Nov. 30 - Dec. 6
Week 9: Oct. 19 - 25
Week 10: Oct. 26 - Nov. 1
Week 11: Nov. 2 - 8
Halfway mark
Week 12: Nov. 9 - 15
Week 13: Nov. 16 - 22
Week 14: Nov. 23 - 29
Week 18 Dec. 21 -27
Week 19: Dec.28 - Jan. 3
Week 20: Jan. 4 - 10
Week 21: Jan. 11 - 17
Week 22: Jan. 18 - 24
Finding relevant
material and existing
solutions 
Discussing theory with
supervisor
Specifying and narrow
topic to realistic extend
Allocation of the
essential hardware
Implementation of
the relevant methods
Deﬁne Project Plan
Structure thesis with
sections and
references
Optimization 
of Methods
Implement a
method merging
two existing
technologies 
Write ﬁrst part of
the raport:
introduction and
background
Test Implementations 
and Compare Results
Design test plan
Test methods
real-time on
robot
Evaluate the
results
Setup additional
tests
Additional 
Features
Final 
Changes
Write ﬁnal part of
the report
Print report and
get fellow student
to read and give
feedback
Hand in report
24th of
Code Cleanup 
and Final Tests
Clean up implementation
Design test plan
Test in real-time on robot
Evaluate the results
Write third part of the
report: tests, results, and
discussion
People Recognition
Transfer Learning
Hand Pose Estimation
Write second part of the report:
methods, implementation, and
results
Research additional features
depending on test results. For
example:
Implement additional features 
Figure A.1: Overview of the process planned for the thesis.
The timeline is a guideline and not the exact process of completing the thesis. Modifications to the
plan will occur as the process will be developed using agile development adding new features in several
iterations.
==PAGE:80==
70
A Project Plan
A.0.1
Details
Throughout the project ad hoc meetings with the supervisor will be held to discuss potential questions
and dilemmas. These will be planed according to the need so that the development can keep as close
to the plan as possible.
As seen in Figure A.1, there is a set of sub-goals to complete the written report throughout the
project plan. This will benefit the final report by ensuring that the material is written with a fresh
perspective and thereby avoid having the report miss crucial considerations.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Test Plan
This plan is designed to test the accuracy of the suggested solutions. The tests will all be recorded and
analysed afterwards using the solution. The setup for all tests will be identical and similar to the setup
created by Dissing et al. mentioned in chapter 2, [8].
Test: One person
This test is to understand how accurate the gaze tracking solution is to estimate whether an individual
is looking at an object or not. The object will be the same for all targets. In the first test the participant
will always be able to see the target object, while the second test the participant will never be able to
see the target.
The following test will result in 6 recordings per. participant, which result a total of 93 different
angles and gaze directions.
Target is Visible
The participant must always be able to see the target while moving around the scene given the param-
eters described in the following list.
• Distance to Camera: 310cm, 240cm and 170cm.
• Body Pose: Facing the left, front, right
• Head Pose: Facing front, up, left, down right (when turned to the right do not look away from
the object and the same the other way).
An example of how to the participant is supposed to move around in the test is described in the
following list.
1. The distance to camera is 1.7m and the participant’s body is facing left.
2. The head moves up, down and right (always looking at the target)
3. The body turns to face the target.
4. The head moves up, left, down, right and strait (always looking at the target)
5. The body turns to face right.
6. The head moves up, down and left (always looking at the target)
The steps are repeated in new recordings for the remaining distances.
==PAGE:82==
72
B Test Plan
Target is not Visible
The participant must never be able to see the target, unlike the previous test. The method of testing is
very similar, however, the participant must never be able to see the target. The parameters therefore
change a bit, as described in the following list of parameters.
• Distance to Camera: 310cm, 240cm and 170cm.
• Body Pose: Facing the left, front, right and back.
• Head Pose: Look up, left, down, right and strait for all body poses, but never looking at the
target.
This can test whether the solution is able to notice a difference from a person being able to see an
action or object, and one not being able to see the target. This is essential for being able to utilize the
solution for estimating people’s perceptions of the world.
Test: Multiple people
The next test mimicking the false-belief tasks mention in Chapter 2, but with a focus on how the person
with a false belief gets it. The tests will all be of first-order belief systems with similar steps. The steps
are described in the following scenario between two subjects A and B.
1. A and B can both see the target.
2. A moves puts a green cube in container 1
3. A turns his back to the camera.
4. B moves the green cube to container 2.
5. A turns to face the camera gain.
The scenarios vary in step 3, given the following four cases:
1. A turns his back to the target and camera.
2. A turns his body to face left and look away from the target.
3. A turns his body to face right and look away from the target.
4. A looks away from the target, but the body is still facing the target.
The reason for testing a story scene is that the solution must track two people, and be able to know
when both people are able to see the target, and when one of them is not. This can show how the
solution is able to improve the current simplified solution implemented in the paper by Dissing et al.
[8].
The test will result in 4 recordings per. participant-pair, with 8 of the same test is conducted, but
the roles for A and B are swapped.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C
Results
Method 1: Facing the Camera
Figure C.1
==PAGE:84==
74
C Results
Method 2: Mean gaze direction within target bounding box
Figure C.2
==PAGE:85==
C Results
75
Method 3: Von Mises distribution based on angles
Figure C.3
==PAGE:86==
76
C Results
Method 3a: Based on extended angles
Figure C.4
==PAGE:87==
C Results
77
Time
Method
Type
Mean
Median
Min
Max
Method 1
Total
315
296
149
782
Method 1
Gaze360
18
17
8, 4
45
Method 2
Total
323
299
148
777
Method 2
Gaze360
18
17
8.4
45
Method 3
Total
315
295
155
777
Method 3
Gaze360
18
17
8.6
44
Method 3
Distribution
0.21
0.19
0.11
0.48
Method 3a
Total
317
294
147
774
Method 3a
Gaze360
18
17
8.3
44
Method 3a
Distribution
0.22
0.21
0.11
0.5
Table C.1: Statistical results for time from analysis of 48 videos.
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX D
Github Code and Videos
Demonstrating Solutions
All the implemented code, the test data and results are accessible through the following Github reposi-
tory.
https://github.com/s153762/Estimating_Peoples_Perception_of_the_World.git
The raw and analysed videos are all uploaded in a folder called Test_Data_Result. The figures shown
in this report is created by using the code in Estimating_individuals_perspectives/Analyse_data/analyse_data.py.
The main code is run through the file Estimating_individuals_perspectives/estimating_individuals_perspectives.py.
For easy access one of the videos from Test 3 analysed using method 3a is uploaded to YouTube
through the following link:
https://youtu.be/94kip8cn4wk
In addition, a video showing the initial errors with face recognition is shown through the following
link:
https://youtu.be/3AOQ5bDbKgI
And finally, an implementation of DAVTV in comparison to method 3a from this solution is shown
in the last link:
https://youtu.be/QcPwwhqfaDg
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX E
Detecting Attended Visual
Targets in Video
Another interesting paper, Detecting Attended Visual Targets in Video, was mentioned in the survey
described in Section 6.1.1 [42]. The network determines the point of regard of people in 2D videos and
images, hence in a third-person view. This network is different as the focus is not only on detecting the
point of regard, but also initially determined whether the gaze target is out of frame [65]. An example
of the results of the network can be seen in Figure E.1. For simplicity, this network will be referred to
as DAVTV.
Figure E.1: Results from [65]. Respectively the four images from left to right: The input, the first
output of the deconvolution, the adjusted heatmap after modulation, and finally the prediction (yellow)
and ground truth (red).
Like Gaze360, described in Section 7.1.1, a suitable dataset for training the network did not exist,
resulting in the creation of the VideoAttentionTarget dataset [65]. The dataset contains 1331 video
sequences of annotated data. It is constructed on various live interviews, sitcoms, reality shows etc.
which are all available on YouTube. The length of a typical video sequence is 1 −80 seconds. The
annotation of the data was created by selecting bounding boxes around each persons’ head and the
coordinates equivalent to gaze target. The dataset ends up having 33, 4% out of frame gaze annotations,
and a total of 164.541 frames.
The network constructed in DAVTV is a bit complex, as it receives three different types of input and
is constructed of three main parts. The architecture is illustrated in Figure E.2. The bottom branch
seen in Figure E.2 is the head conditioning branch. This branch computes a feature map given the
cropped head through a ResNet-50 network (head conv). This is in turn concatenated with the location
of the head, represented in a binary image showing the area of the cropped head’s original position.
Finally, the concatenated head features are processed by a fully connected layer dubbed attention layer.
The main branch in Figure E.2 contains a scene feature map, which also have a ResNet-50 archi-
tecture. The input to the scene convolutional layer is a concatenation of the original image and the
selected head’s position. The scene feature map is then multiplied with the head feature map.
The last branch of the architecture is the recurrent attention prediction module. This branch encodes
the output from the main branch using two convolutional layers. Then it process the encoding using a
convolutional Long Short Term Memory network (CNN-LSTM), followed by four deconvolutional layers
==PAGE:92==
82
E Detecting Attended Visual Targets in Video
Figure E.2: The architecture of DAVTV model from [65].
which samples the features into a full-sized feature map. The feature map created by the deconvolutional
layers can be seen as the second image from the left in Figure E.1. The last step is to modulate the
feature map by a scalar which determines whether the attention is in frame. The scala is calculated
through two convolutional layers and a fully connected layer, seen in the top of Figure E.2. The final
heatmap is thereby the modulated map with a clipping to ensure that no value is less than 0.
Overall the evaluation of the DAVTV model shows state-of-the-art results on three datasets Gaze-
Follow, VideoAttentionTarget, and VideoCoAtt. The preformance has an area under the curve of 0.921,
which is close to the human performance of 0.924. It proves to be well suited to estimate the point
of regard of the people in the image, even when the beholder might have a target outside of the scene
visible in the image.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
Suzana Herculano-Houzel. The human advantage: How our brains became remarkable. 2016.
[2]
Noriaki Mitsunaga et al. “What makes people accept a robot in a social environment-discussion
from six-week study in an oﬀice.” In: 2008 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems. IEEE. 2008, pages 3336–3343. url: https : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org /
stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=4650785.
[3]
Wikipedia contributors. Human factors and ergonomics — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 13-January-2021]. 2021. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Human_factors_and_ergonomics&oldid=997923831.
[4]
Thomas B. Sheridan. “Human–Robot Interaction: Status and Challenges.” In: Human Factors
58.4 (2016). PMID: 27098262, pages 525–532. doi: 10.1177/0018720816644364. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0018720816644364. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720816644364.
[5]
Sean Andrist, Bilge Mutlu, and Adriana Tapus. “Look Like Me: Matching Robot Personality via
Gaze to Increase Motivation.” In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’15. Seoul, Republic of Korea: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2015, pages 3603–3612. isbn: 9781450331456. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702592. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702592.
[6]
Reuben M. Aronson et al. “Eye-Hand Behavior in Human-Robot Shared Manipulation.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. HRI ’18.
Chicago, IL, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, pages 4–13. isbn: 9781450349536.
doi: 10.1145/3171221.3171287. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3171221.3171287.
[7]
H. B. Barua et al. “Let me join you! Real-time F-formation recognition by a socially aware robot.”
In: 2020 29th IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication
(RO-MAN). 2020, pages 371–377. doi: 10.1109/RO-MAN47096.2020.9223469.
[8]
Lasse Dissing and Thomas Bolander. “Implementing Theory of Mind on a Robot Using Dynamic
Epistemic Logic.” In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI). 2020. url: http://www.imm.dtu.dk/~tobo/dissing2020implementing_proceedings.
pdf.
[9]
Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner. “Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining func-
tion of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception.” In: Cognition 13.1 (1983),
pages 103–128. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0010027783900045?
casa_token=5bSl5N3P8nMAAAAA:zu0cPxTbkLcDkYI3MTwOCsvbtBCKnQbF1DZ8-hEFdcKEx84wUILah5yt51IP2aaU
[10]
Chris Frith and Uta Frith. “Theory of mind.” In: Current biology 15.17 (2005), R644–R645.
[11]
Hans van Ditmarsch and Barteld Kooi. “Semantic results for ontic and epistemic change.” In:
Logic and the foundations of game and decision theory (LOFT 7) 3 (2008), pages 87–117.
[12]
Stephen R.H. Langton, Roger J. Watt, and Vicki Bruce. “Do the eyes have it? Cues to the direction
of social attention.” In: Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4.2 (2000), pages 50–59. issn: 1364-6613. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(99)01436-9. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1364661399014369.
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[13]
Grit Hein and Robert T. Knight. “Superior Temporal Sulcus—It’s My Area: Or Is It?” In: Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience 20.12 (2008). PMID: 18457502, pages 2125–2136. doi: 10.1162/jocn.
2008.20148. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2008.20148. url: https://doi.org/10.
1162/jocn.2008.20148.
[14]
Trafton Drew, Melissa L.-H. Võ, and Jeremy M. Wolfe. “The Invisible Gorilla Strikes Again:
Sustained Inattentional Blindness in Expert Observers.” In: Psychological Science 24.9 (2013).
PMID: 23863753, pages 1848–1853. doi: 10.1177/0956797613479386. eprint: https://doi.
org/10.1177/0956797613479386. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613479386.
[15]
Matei Mancas et al. From Human Attention to Computational Attention. Volume 2. Springer,
2016.
[16]
Laurent Itti and Christof Koch. “Computational modelling of visual attention.” In: Nature reviews
neuroscience 2.3 (March 2001), pages 194–203. doi: 10.1038/35058500.
[17]
Fabian Hutmacher. “Why Is There So Much More Research on Vision Than on Any Other Sensory
Modality?” In: Frontiers in Psychology 10 (2019), page 2246. issn: 1664-1078. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2019.02246. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02246.
[18]
Benjamin W Tatler et al. “Yarbus, Eye Movements, and Vision.” In: i-Perception 1.1 (2010).
PMID: 23396904, pages 7–27. doi: 10.1068/i0382. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1068/i0382.
url: https://doi.org/10.1068/i0382.
[19]
Jeremy M Wolfe. “Visual search.” eng. In: Current biology 20.8 (2010), R346–R349. issn: 0960-
9822.
[20]
Rose M. Spielman et al. Psychology. December 2014. url: https://openstax.org/books/
psychology/pages/5-3-vision (visited on January 18, 2021).
[21]
Steven M. LaValle. “Chapter 5: The Physiology of Human Vision.” In: Virtual Reality. 2019,
pages 127–153. url: http://vr.cs.uiuc.edu/.
[22]
MD Linda Lawrence and JD Moonika Jones. Vision After Hemispherectomy, TPO Disconnec-
tion, and Occipital Lobectomy: An Introductory Guide. November 2019. url: https : / / www .
brainrecoveryproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/FINAL-Vision-After-Hemispherectomy-
TPO-Disconnection-and-Occipital-Lobectomy.pdf (visited on January 18, 2021).
[23]
Matei Mancas and Olivier Le Meur. “Applications of saliency models.” In: From Human Attention
to Computational Attention. Springer, 2016, pages 331–377.
[24]
Width of Field of View: A fundamental characteristic of our visual system. CogniFit. url: https:
//www.cognifit.com/science/cognitive-skills/width-field-view.
[25]
Mariani et al. PART XIII: FACTS AND FIGURES CONCERNING THE HUMAN RETINA BY
HELGA KOLB. Stanford University School of Engineering. 1984. url: https://webvision.med.
utah.edu/book/part-xiii-facts-and-figures-concerning-the-human-retina/.
[26]
David Heeger. Perception Lecture Notes: LGN and V1. New York University: Center for Neural
Science. url: https://www.cns.nyu.edu/~david/courses/perception/lecturenotes/V1/
lgn-V1.html.
[27]
Benjamin Thompson et al. “Peripheral vision: Good for biological motion, bad for signal noise
segregation?” In: Journal of Vision 7.10 (2007), pages 12–12. doi: https://doi.org/10.1167/
7.10.12.
[28]
Benjamin Tatler, Dan Hansen, and Jeff Pelz. “Eye Movement Recordings in Natural Settings.” In:
October 2019, pages 549–592. isbn: 978-3-030-20083-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-20085-5_13.
[29]
Dan Hansen and Qiang Ji. “In the Eye of the Beholder: A Survey of Models for Eyes and Gaze.” In:
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 32 (March 2010), pages 478–500.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2009.30.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
85
[30]
Abrah˜ao Rocha Lucena et al. “Visual angles: Article on the importance of Multifocal Intraoc-
ular Lenses Implantation.” In: Rev Bras Oftalmol 77.5 (October 2018), pages 268–271. issn:
0034-7280. url: http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0034-
72802018000500268&nrm=iso.
[31]
Md Zahangir Alom et al. The History Began from AlexNet: A Comprehensive Survey on Deep
Learning Approaches. 2018. arXiv: 1803.01164 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.
01164.
[32]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition.” In: Proceedings of
the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pages 2278–2324. url: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/publis/pdf/
lecun-01a.pdf.
[33]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks.” In: Advances in neural information processing systems. 2012,
pages 1097–1105. url: https://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-
with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks.pdf.
[34]
Justin Johnson. Lecture 10 | Recurrent Neural Networks. Stanford University School of Engineer-
ing. 2017. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6niqTuYFZLQ.
[35]
Afshine Amidi and Shervine Amidi. VIP Cheatsheet: Recurrent Neural Networks. 2018. url:
https://www.kaggle.com/blobs/download/forum- message- attachment- files/16155/
recurrent%20neural%20network.pdf.
[36]
Hongyuan Zhu et al. “XiaoIce Band: A Melody and Arrangement Generation Framework for
Pop Music.” In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery; Data Mining. KDD ’18. London, United Kingdom: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 2018, pages 2837–2846. isbn: 9781450355520. doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220105. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220105.
[37]
S. Seo et al. “Comparative Study of Deep Learning-Based Sentiment Classification.” In: IEEE
Access 8 (2020), pages 6861–6875. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2963426.
[38]
Hien T. Nguyen and Thuan Quoc Nguyen. “A Short Review on Deep Learning for Entity Recog-
nition.” In: Future Data and Security Engineering. Edited by Tran Khanh Dang et al. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2018, pages 261–272. isbn: 978-3-030-03192-3.
[39]
B Carpenter. “Coding chunkers as taggers: Io, bio, bmewo, and bmewo+.” In: LingPipe Blog.
Available at: lingpipe-blog. com/2009/10/14 (2009).
[40]
Yining Wang et al. “A compact and language-sensitive multilingual translation method.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2019,
pages 1213–1223. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1117.pdf.
[41]
Ming Liang and Xiaolin Hu. “Recurrent convolutional neural network for object recognition.” In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2015, pages 3367–
3375. url: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2015/papers/Liang_Recurrent_
Convolutional_Neural_2015_CVPR_paper.pdf.
[42]
Dario Cazzato et al. “When I Look into Your Eyes: A Survey on Computer Vision Contributions
for Human Gaze Estimation and Tracking.” In: Sensors 20.13 (2020), page 3739.
[43]
M. Al-Naser et al. “OGaze: Gaze Prediction in Egocentric Videos for Attentional Object Selec-
tion.” In: 2019 Digital Image Computing: Techniques and Applications (DICTA). 2019, pages 1–8.
doi: 10.1109/DICTA47822.2019.8945893. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/
document/8945893.
[44]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “YOLO9000: better, faster, stronger.” In: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pages 7263–7271.
[45]
Jifeng Dai. Deformable Convolutional Networks. ComputerVisionFoundation Videos. 2017. url:
https:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HRLMSrxw2To.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[46]
Alireza Fathi, Yin Li, and James M Rehg. “Learning to recognize daily actions using gaze.” In:
European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer. 2012, pages 314–327.
[47]
Mengmi Zhang et al. “Deep future gaze: Gaze anticipation on egocentric videos using adversarial
networks.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2017, pages 4372–4381.
[48]
Matthias Kummerer et al. “Understanding Low- and High-Level Contributions to Fixation Pre-
diction.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
October 2017. url: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_iccv_2017/html/Kummerer_
Understanding_Low-_and_ICCV_2017_paper.html.
[49]
M. Cornia et al. “Predicting Human Eye Fixations via an LSTM-Based Saliency Attentive Model.”
In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 27.10 (2018), pages 5142–5154. doi: 10.1109/TIP.
2018.2851672.
[50]
Macario O. Cordel II et al. “Emotion-Aware Human Attention Prediction.” In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2019. url:
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/html/Cordel_Emotion-Aware_Human_
Attention_Prediction_CVPR_2019_paper.html.
[51]
Omer Sumer et al. “Attention Flow: End-to-End Joint Attention Estimation.” In: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). March 2020.
url: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_WACV_2020/html/Sumer_Attention_Flow_
End-to-End_Joint_Attention_Estimation_WACV_2020_paper.html.
[52]
Lifeng Fan et al. “Inferring Shared Attention in Social Scene Videos.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2018.
[53]
Xiaolong Zhou et al. “Two-eye model-based gaze estimation from a Kinect sensor.” In: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2017, pages 1646–1653.
url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7989194.
[54]
Qiong Huang, Ashok Veeraraghavan, and Ashutosh Sabharwal. “TabletGaze: dataset and analysis
for unconstrained appearance-based gaze estimation in mobile tablets.” In: Machine Vision and
Applications 28.5-6 (2017), pages 445–461. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.
1007/s00138-017-0852-4.
[55]
Cristina Palmero et al. Recurrent CNN for 3D Gaze Estimation using Appearance and Shape Cues.
2018. arXiv: 1805.03064 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03064.
[56]
Petr Kellnhofer et al. “Gaze360: Physically Unconstrained Gaze Estimation in the Wild.” In: IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). October 2019. url: http://gaze360.
csail.mit.edu.
[57]
Sam Thellman and Tom Ziemke. “Do You See what I See? Tracking the Perceptual Beliefs of
Robots.” In: iScience 23.10 (2020), page 101625. issn: 2589-0042. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.isci.2020.101625. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2589004220308178.
[58]
Yuxin Wu et al. Detectron2. https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2. 2019.
[59]
D King. “High quality face recognition with deep metric learning, 2017.” In: URL: http://blog.
dlib. net/2017/02/high-quality-face-recognition-with-deep. html (visited on 04/02/2021) (). url:
https://github.com/ageitgey/face_recognition.
[60]
Gary B. Huang et al. Labeled Faces in the Wild: A Database for Studying Face Recognition
in Unconstrained Environments. Technical report 07-49. University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
October 2007. url: http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/lfw/.
[61]
Graham Upton and Ian Cook. von Mises distribution. 2008. doi: 10.1093/acref/9780199541454.
013.1717. url: https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780199541454.
001.0001/acref-9780199541454-e-1717.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[62]
The Scipy community. scipy.stats.mannwhitneyu. 2016. url: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/
scipy-0.18.1/reference/generated/scipy.stats.mannwhitneyu.html.
[63]
Depth Camera D435i. Technical report. Intel RealSense. url: https://www.intelrealsense.
com/depth-camera-d435i/.
[64]
Studenterrådgivningen. Online study community. url: https://srg.dk/en/f%C3%A5-hj%C3%
A6lp/gruppetilbud/online-studief%C3%A6llesskab/.
[65]
Eunji Chong et al. Detecting Attended Visual Targets in Video. 2020. arXiv: 2003.02501 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:98==
88
==PAGE:99==
==PAGE:100==
