==PAGE:1==
Terahertz spectroscopy of
polycrystalline graphene
by
Emil N. Hansen - s154667
Supervisors:
Peter Bøggild
Mads Brandbyge
Jie Ji
Masters Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
February 14, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Abstract
The experimental and theoretical study of graphene is a rapidly expanding ﬁeld of
today’s research. However, lacking behind is eﬃcient methods for characterising
the electrical properties of graphene nanostructures.
Recently, several experi-
ments have been performed using terahertz time domain spectroscopy utilising
the Drude model to predict intrinsic material properties such as the mobility and
carrier density, while the Drude model provides a good method to examine ones
nanostructure it has its ﬂaws and is inaccurate in certain areas. The Drude model
is commonly known to have inaccuracies determining material properties when
the sample has a lack of uniformity showing itself as changes in the conductivity
this may be a result of defects, contamination, grain boundaries or other sources
of defects.
By developing a numerical simulation alongside terahertz time-domain spectroscopy
it is possible to compare the scattering time measured experimentally using the
Drude, or Drude-Smith model to numerical calculations of the scattering time
using the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity. Said comparison is done in multiple
samples of diﬀerent defects, this includes locally p doped graphene, strain induced
potentials in array-like pattern as well as defects on graphene and grain bound-
aries.
Comparison of experiments and numerical work has found that the scattering time
behaves much as predicted by theory and previous experimental work, with the
addition of the added validation from the numerical calculations giving rise to a
higher level of self-assurance when concluding that certain sample structures have
speciﬁc material properties. While it is also discussed that the numerical work re-
mains to be further developed the preliminary work shows high correlation when
compared to experiments, and it would be interesting for additional development
into the simulations to account for higher accuracy such as expanding the simu-
lation dimensions to better capture real experiments alongside a means to easily
compare speciﬁc samples using optical imagery as input for the simulation space.
Page 1 of 88
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Motivation
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Graphene: The Electronic Band Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Polycrystalline Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Drude Model and Boltzmann Transport Theory . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Conductivity with a Numerical Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Methods of Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Methodology
24
3.1
Experimental techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1
α−RuCl3 Design Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.2
Terahertz Time-domain Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Numerical calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.1
Wavepacket simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.2
Initialising Wavepackets with an Applied Electric Field . . .
40
3.2.3
Accuracy, Approximations and Physical Relation
. . . . . .
42
4
Experimental Results & Discussion
47
4.1
Line defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Grain Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
Doped Graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Numerical Results & Discussion
57
5.1
Line-defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Grain Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Doped Graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Polycrystalline graphene: Veselago lensing.
70
7
Conclusion
75
8
Acknowledgement
78
References
79
A Drude-Boltzmann Conductivity Derivation
86
B Taylor Approximation - Order of Accuracy
86
C Terahertz Pulse Data
87
D Matlab Fit
88
==PAGE:4==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
1
Motivation
Graphene remains one of the most fascinating materials in modern age with many
new applications being conceptualised rapidly, however many of these applications
hold high requirements for the graphene at hand such as high quality, doping,
thickness, homogeneity and various types of strain such as blisters, wrinkles or
otherwise. Commonly the quality of graphene would be examined through opti-
cal microscopy[1][2] using techniques such as atomic force microscopy(AFM) or
scanning tunnelling microscopy(STM) with the addition of Raman spectroscopy,
while electric transport properties can be examined using ﬁeld eﬀect(FET) or other
electrical measurements methods which would often contaminate the sample by
touching the sample surface and therefor alter the material properties, these tech-
niques remain commonly used in modern experimental physics as a useful method
of analysing sample quality. Recently it is being discussed if it is suﬃcient to
settle for an adequate result when measuring material properties[3], Bøggild et al
present alternative methods to better determine material properties as a substitute
to FET measurements, this includes Hall-, micro four point probe- and terahertz-
measurements, it is explained how these diﬀerent measurements are highly similar
for high sample uniformity however greatly deviating from each other when the
samples lack uniformity, this is suggested to be as a result of the decreasing do-
main size for polycrystalline graphene which in turn increase the number of charge
carrier scattering events.
Terahertz(THz) time-domain spectroscopy(TDS)[4] has been used to introduce a
way of studying material properties without contacts. THz-TDS is found to be a
solid method for analysing the conductivity of materials utilising electromagnetic
pulses in a frequency range of 0.1 to 20 THz, the method sends a signal through a
reference and a thin sample to be able to determine the transmission function by
comparison of each spectra, however the mathematical model used to determine
the conductance does not include many important material properties, so in an
attempt to capture these properties one applies the Drude model[5]. The Drude
model is made possible due to Paul Drude, who assumed that a charge carrier in
some material under the inﬂuence of an electric ﬁeld is subject to elastic scattering
proportional to some scattering time. This model is considered one of the simplest
possible model for free electron transport and assumes that all carriers are free
and independent, all scattering processes are instantaneous and that scattering
events are isotropic, meaning that it assumes scattering is equally probable in
any direction.
These approximations makes it increasingly hard to apply the
model to some experimental work and extract results with a strong background
for conclusions.
Ideas to increase accuracy of the applied Drude model is to instead use the semi-
classical Boltzmann transport theory[6] which introduces quantum mechanics in
terms of the density of states where the Pauli exclusion principle is included, say-
ing that an electron cannot scatter into an already occupied state and therefor
the model no longer assumes isotropic scattering. While Boltzmann theory still
Page 3 of 88
==PAGE:5==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
remains assumptions in some areas, such as the electrons behaving like indepen-
dent balls making instantaneous collisions, the Boltzmann theory for that reason,
as well as the Drude model, does not fully capturing the preferential scattering in
graphene.
It is found that for THz-TDS measurements the Drude-Smith model[7], an exten-
sion of the phenomenological Drude model using the Drude-Boltzmann conduc-
tivity rather than the Drude conductivity, has found an additional accuracy to
measured material properties, however the model falls short when the measured
sample has a major lack in uniformity, as is the case for polycrystalline graphene,
since the ﬁtted parameters becomes a phenomenological parameter rather than
a measured quantity, this is believed to also be a result of Smiths derivative of
the model being based on microscopic arguments and ﬂawed to a point where it
contradicts itself and an alternative has yet to be properly formalised, however
recent research[8] discuss the problem in Smiths assumptions as he attempt to de-
scribe the scattering as statistically independent by Poisson distributed scattering
events, but shortly after assuming that scattering events are entirely random after
the ﬁrst scattering event which in turn is self contradicting, Keno L. Krewer et
al is attempting to ﬁnd a better understanding for the origin of the Drude-Smith
model in his research.
For this thesis the idea behind contact free measurements through terahertz time-
domain spectroscopy is researched, more precisely how the method can be used to
better predict the decrease in scattering time for polycrystalline graphene of mul-
tiple domains of decreasing domain size. THz-TDS is compared to new numerical
work in an attempt to provide additional agreement of measured scattering time
between the experiments and the Drude-Smith model, not capturing the exact
scattering time of any material, however to provide the foundation for better cap-
turing the diﬀerence between intrinsic and extrinsic material properties with solid
numerical and experimental background to accurately conclude how the domain
size of a sample change the numbers of scattering events.
Page 4 of 88
==PAGE:6==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
2
Background
Graphene was ﬁrstly obtained by microchemical cleavage of graphite in 2004[9] it
has ever since been extensively researched because of its outstanding mechanical,
structural and electronic properties. The reason that graphene has these unique
properties are because of its unusual electronic structure. While charge carriers in
metals and semiconductors are described by Schr¨odinger eﬀective-mass equation,
graphene instead follows the laws of relativistic quantum physics - the mass-less
Dirac equation. In the following section I explain the extraordinary electronic
transport features in graphene and graphene designs that has been proven to
enhance certain properties and later I describe how one can examine the properties
experimentally and compare to simulations.
2.1
Graphene: The Electronic Band Structure
Graphene is a 2-dimensional material of carbon atoms arranged in hexagonal rings
which form a honey-comb lattice as shown in ﬁgure 1a. The carbon atoms bind to
the three carbon neighbours to form in-plane σ-bonds formed from sp2 hybridised
orbitals while the fourth pz-orbital forms the highly delocalised π-orbital with its
electron being free to move. The bonding π- and anti bonding π∗-orbitals form
the valence and conduction bands.
The unit cell of graphene contains two identical carbon atoms which results in two
equivalent atom sub-lattices denoted as A and B, illustrated on ﬁgure 2, which
introduces pseudospin, a new degree of freedom unusual for other materials, which
is the theory that an electron has a probability of being in sublattice A or B. The
low energy linear band structure for graphene is an outcome of the high lattice
symmetry see ﬁgure 1b which is unique for the material graphene.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: a) Illustration of graphenes crystal lattice showing the pi and sigma
orbitals b) the unique bandstructure of graphene, with magniﬁcation of the linear
dispersion relation.
Page 5 of 88
==PAGE:7==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 2: Illustration of the crystal lattice of graphene with the lattice vectors
a1 = a
2(3,
√
3) and a2 = a
2(3, −
√
3), alongside the unit cell being illustrated with
yellow marker showing the sublattice originating from the two carbon atoms inside
the unit cell.
For graphene the valence and conduction band touch each other at six corners
of the hexagonal Brillouin zone and create a zero band gap. Due to symmetry
two out of the six points are diﬀerent and denoted as (K, K′) and introduces
valley degeneracy which explains the two points which are inequivalent only in
the sublattice however otherwise identical. The point where the two bands touch
is called the Dirac point. Since the Fermi energy crosses only at these six points the
charge transport can be understood in terms of mass-less Dirac Fermions, a result
of the unique bandstructure in graphene is the case where positive and negative
energies are closely linked at the Dirac Point which introduces Klein tunnelling, or
the Klein paradox which refers to the process in which an electron may penetrate
a potential barrier if its height, V0, exceeds the electrons rest energy, mc2, and is
most easily explained with reference to the energy-wavenumber dispersion relation,
that for a single relativistic electron of mass m takes the form.
E = ±
√
ℏ2k2c2 + m2c4,
(1)
where E is the energy, k is the wavenumber, ℏis the reduced Planck’s constant
and c is the speed of light in vacuum, with this equation having both a positive and
negative root Dirac famously arrives at the idea of anti-particles, or positrons. If an
electron at some point encounters a potential step, V = V0, then if E −V0 > mc2,
the electron will continue moving with a new positive wavenumber such that E −
V0 = ±
√
ℏ2k2c2 + m2c4. If E −V0 < mc2 , the dispersion relation can be satisﬁed
only if k2 < 0, which results in an imaginary momentum inside the potential and
the wavefunction decays exponentially. However, if the potential is increased even
further so that E −V0 < −mc2 then we have E −V0 = ± −
√
ℏ2k2c2 + m2c4
and k2 > 0, and it is once again possible to propagate inside the potential. As
a result, to this the transmission probability increases with the height of the
potential barrier in contrast to the conventional non-relativistic tunnelling where
the transmission probability decays with increasing barrier height. This relativistic
eﬀect is part of the reason why a suﬃciently large potential, being repulsive for
Page 6 of 88
==PAGE:8==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
electrons is instead attractive for positrons and results in positron states inside
the barrier which align in energy with the electron continuum outside.
The dispersion relation E(k) for graphene is given as a simpliﬁcation of the dis-
persion relation for the nearly free electron model,
E(k) = ℏ2|k|2
2m
(2)
Simpliﬁed to E(k) = ±ℏvF
pk2
x + k2
y near the Dirac points as a result of the mass-
less Dirac Fermions. For the conductance band(+) and the valance band(−) the
Fermi velocity, vF = 1 × 106m/s, for graphene near the Dirac points is constant
as a result of the linear dispersion relation.
In an undoped graphene layer at thermal equilibrium, there are mobile electrons
in the conduction band and the holes in the valence band. The conductivity of
graphene depends on the number of carriers available near the Fermi level, which
is found by calculating the 2D density of states as
g(E) = gsgv|E|
2π(ℏvF)2,
(3)
where gs = gv = 2 take into account the spin and valley degeneracy. In thermal
equilibrium the density of carriers is then calculated as a product of the DOS and
the Fermi-Dirac distribution
f(E) =
1
e
E−µ
kBT + 1
,
(4)
where µ is the chemical potential or the Fermi level. Thus the number of conduct-
ing electrons becomes
n(T) =
Z ∞
0
f(E)g(E)dE.
(5)
While the density of conducting holes is calculated from a similar formula
p(T) =
Z 0
−∞
f(E)g(E)dE.
(6)
The density of state and the band occupation is naively illustrated in ﬁgure 3
Page 7 of 88
==PAGE:9==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 3: Occupation of bands for various doping levels in graphene.
For the case of undoped graphene at room temperature we obtain
n = p = π(kBT)2
6(ℏvF)2 ≈8.1 × 1014m−2 = 8.1 × 1010cm−2
(7)
So from this it is obvious that ideal graphene is not a purely one-type carrier
system and that even when the Fermi level is exactly at the Dirac point there
are still carriers of both types. It is possible to alter which type of charge carrier
that is dominant by introducing an electric ﬁeld or design doped regions. For
suﬃciently large shift of the Fermi level from zero the density of carriers can be
considered as one-type charge carriers.
Charge carrier transport in graphene is governed by an applied electric ﬁeld, due
to the constant velocity of each carrier the only way to have a charge carrier
transport is by aligning the momentum of the carriers with an external applied
electric ﬁeld.
2.2
Polycrystalline Graphene
This section describes the background of three diﬀerent graphene designs which
together provides a means to examine both a high density of grain boundaries,
strain defects and the eﬀect of doping as it aﬀects the carrier density.
First touched upon is the doping. Since graphene can easily be switched between
n- and p-doping using an electrostatic gate or by deposition of a dopant, recon-
ﬁgurable pn junctions can be applied in several ways, one method is to arrange
electrostatic gates at key locations on the sample[10][11]. Due to the nature of
graphene an energy barrier induced by a local pn junction act as a gate-tunable
Page 8 of 88
==PAGE:10==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
electron lens with an eﬀective negative refractive index because of the Klein Tun-
nelling eﬀect. However, this method is generally not very precise, although if it is
possible to increase accuracy and precision this method would introduce a new se-
ries of interesting device functionalities such as pn junctions that allow controllable
ballistic behaviour of the electrons.
For the purpose of examining this behaviour the thesis analyse the eﬀect of
α−RuCl3 used as underlying doping on graphene, α−RuCl3 is known to be useful
as underlying doping to develop p junctions on graphene[12] acting as an accep-
tor. α−RuCl3 is a chemical compound which has been previously proposed as
candidate for a quantum spin liquid(QSL) state[13] by Kitaev when neutron scat-
tering revealed an unusual magnetic spectrum[14][15] for α−RuCl3. Kitaev is a
Russian-American professor of physics at California Institute of Technology and a
permanent member of the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, well known for
his work introducing the quantum phase estimation algorithm and the concepts
of topological quantum computers. A quantum spin liquid state refers to the sit-
uation where each individual spin behaves disordered even for low temperatures
which is diﬀerent from normal ordered spin states which will enter a ferromagnetic
or anti-ferromagnetic phase where interactions between spins cause them to align
into large-scale patterns such as domains, and is referred to as magnetic order.
A material that exhibits QSL states have the capability to protect quantum in-
formation from decoherence and therefore α−RuCl3 would be considered a great
candidate for quantum computing.
This is most interesting, however the eﬀect of QSL is not considered in this the-
sis instead the focus is shifted to the documented eﬀects of α−RuCl3 acting as
an underlying doping on graphene. This is because the doping will signiﬁcantly
alter the charge carrier density as well as work as strong potential barrier where
transmission of electrons through the barrier may resemble optical refraction. Op-
tical refraction is the phenomenon that causes a light ray to bend when it hits
an optical lens surface, or some material acting as a optical lens. Generally one
observe optical refraction when a light ray moves from one medium to another,
such as air into glass. However, for this thesis we observe that refraction occurs
for charge carriers in graphene when they hit the potential barrier induced by the
underlying doping of α−RuCl3. The electrons may behave similar to that of light
ray bending, or refraction, which is entirely dependant on the incident angle along
with the refractive index of both the mediums and as such follows Snell’s law, for
light rays it follows,
sin θ1
sin θ2
= v1
v2
= n2
n1
,
(8)
while electrons can be understood to follow Snell’s law as
sin θ1
sin θ2
== k2
k1
,
(9)
Page 9 of 88
==PAGE:11==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
where theta1,2 is the incident and exit angle respectively, v1,2 is the velocity, n1,2 is
the refractive index of each medium and k1,2 is the Fermi wavenumber(ki = √πni)
which replaces the refractive index, Snell’s law is also illustrated on ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4: Illustration of snell’s law for two materials of diﬀerent refractive index
n.
For light, the refractive index n of a material determines how the refraction occurs,
most interesting is the diﬀerence between a positive and negative refractive, when
light rays become refracted by an interface with a negative refractive index one
observes negative refraction, illustrated on ﬁgure 5, and is deﬁned as materials
that exhibit optical properties opposite to those of glass, air, and other transparent
media.
Figure 5: Illustration of positive and negative refraction.
In 2007 Cheinov et al.[16] proposed the interesting idea that p-n junctions of
graphene can exhibit negative refractive behaviour with electrostatic gates, and
later this phenomenon was observed experimentally[17]. In this thesis, this phe-
nomenon is observed in numerical simulations for a single layer of graphene on
some substrate with α−RuCl3 as underlying doping to develop large potential
barriers acting as a medium with negative refractive index.
Page 10 of 88
==PAGE:12==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
The charge transfer near contact points between α−RuCl3 and graphene results
in a dipole which is heavily dependent on the contact potential diﬀerence be-
tween graphene and substrate this has been researched in great depth in previous
research[18]. Experimental work predicts that it is possible to tune the surface po-
tential at any given area as a function of the substrate thickness or some substrate
between the underlying substrate and graphene, which would allow precise p-n
junction designs on graphene. Additionally, α−RuCl3 has been well characterised
within the THz spectrum in previous work[19] allowing the project to put most
of its focus on other objectives.
Another graphene design we wish to examine is grain boundaries. Grain bound-
aries are the interface between two grains in a polycrystalline material. Commonly
referred to as 2D defects in the crystal structure and tend to decrease the elec-
trical and thermal conductivity of the material[20], Isacsson. A. et al presents an
overview of polycrystalline graphenes material properties, most relevant is proper-
ties such as charge mobility found using the four-point probe measurement tech-
nique for individual grains as well as comparing the individual grain resistance
to the global charge transport properties of polycrystalline graphene, Isacsson.
A. et al reports on numerical and experimental measurements of polycrystalline
graphene sheet resistance as a function of average grain size shown on ﬁgure 6 fol-
lowing the behaviour of the ohmic scalin law, RS = R0
S + ρGB/lG, where RS is the
sheet resistance of the polycrystalline graphene, R0
S is the sheet resistance within
the grains, lG is the average grain size and ρGB is the grain boundary resistance.
Page 11 of 88
==PAGE:13==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 6: Measured values of polycrystalline graphene sheet resistance as a func-
tion of average grain size presented as a summary of experimental work carried
out by independent instances. Reused from Isacsson. A. et al[20]
Isacsson. A. et al discuss that the agreement of R0
S and ρGB amongst the diﬀerent
measured values are somewhat variant for Yagi et al[21] it is suggested that R0
S = 6
kΩ/□and ρGB = 0.7 kΩµm while Yang et al[22] suggest that R0
S = 600 Ω/□and
ρGB = 18 kΩµm. While most measurements agree that RS and lG follows a general
inverse scaling between one another.
The origin of grain boundaries are common in graphene designs and one cause
of grain boundaries has been explained by Nørbygaard. T[23] as the result of
crystallisation when initiated in a cooling melt. Because the crystallisation usually
begins in many independent places simultaneously, as time goes on the crystals will
eventually occupy the entire volume and further growth will be restricted by the
presence of neighbouring crystals. Chances are that at this time the two crystals,
or grains, will be rotated relative to each other and therefore not ﬁt perfectly
together. The boundary between these two grains will consist of atoms arranged
with a lower degree of freedom than found inside the grains as they try to align
with both grain interfaces. The atoms in this boundary region is considered close-
packed and therefore the average volume occupied by an atom in the boundary
will be larger than the volume occupied by an atom in the grain, this is known as
the excess volume and is one of the reasons why grain boundaries exhibit diﬀerent
electrical properties than the grain.
Page 12 of 88
==PAGE:14==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
For the purpose of examining grain boundaries in graphene and with the assis-
tance of C. Coletti an experimental physicist at the center for nanotechnology
innovations at NEST. A design with a high density of grain boundaries is fabri-
cated. The method is using a CVD deterministic seeded growth on copper[24][25]
in which patterned and etched CVD graphene patches are grown on chromium
nucleation seeds to obtain single crystal graphene patches see ﬁgure 7. As the
growth continues the patch growth will be restricted by the neighbouring patches
and form grain boundaries, and due to the high density of seeds there will be
a high density of grain boundaries with grains of relatively small volume. Al-
ternative metallic nucleation seeds has also proven useful for similar growth of
large-crystal graphene[26] resulting in fewer grain boundaries as a result of the
increased domain size. Additionally, is it found in recent research[27] that it is
possible to describe grain boundaries in graphene using theoretical background for
numerical calculations and this is explained in greater details in section 3.2.1.
Figure 7: Seeded array of large crystal graphene[24]
Finally, the last defect examined in this project is strain defects and this has been
explained in detail in previous work[28][29] where it is predicted that because of
strain there will be an increased curvature. Sarah Goler et al found that there is an
increased chemisorpsion of hydrogen near such curvature by examining monolayer
graphene upon hydrogen exposure for various exposure duration, and it was found
that hydrogen adsorption is preferential on locally convex graphene and for that
reason strain defects are predicted to be the cause of charged impurity scattering
eﬀects.
However, it is also predicted from theory that strain defects can be explained as
both a scalar potential and a vector potential[30]. Dawei Zhai et al explains a series
of practical approaches for strain engineering in graphene alongside a theoretical
model that explains that strain can be approximated numerically by introducing
a pseudo-vector potential and a pseudo-magnetic ﬁeld to approximate the carbon-
carbon separation which occurs during strain of suﬃcient small intensity. The
introduction of a pseudo-vector ﬁeld is to approximate the change of hopping
Page 13 of 88
==PAGE:15==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
energy, while the introduction of the scalar potential is to account for the change
in charge density because of the variation of the sample area. By introducing these
two potentials the Hamiltonian for strained graphene was described by Zhai. D.
et al. and this is explained in details in section 3.2.1.
2.3
Drude Model and Boltzmann Transport Theory
The simplest possible model for free electron transport in some material is the
Drude model, however this model does unfortunately not capture graphenes unique
transport properties very well. The model assumes that all carriers are free and
independent, all scattering processes are instantaneous and that all scattering
events are isotropic meaning equal probability of scattering in all directions.
The model is for those reasons considered simple and inaccurate, however it does
describe several aspects of graphene charge transport in a useful way such as
AC-conductance at high frequencies which is associated to measurements such as
terahertz spectroscopy. The group velocity or the drift velocity of the ensemble is
determined from the equation of motion after the ensemble has been exposed to
an external electric ﬁeld E
ma = −eE,
(10)
so the terminal velocity after time t must be
v = v0 −eEt/m,
(11)
it follows that initially after the electrons has been accelerated by an electric ﬁeld
E and provide the ensemble with a group velocity in some direction, then as time
goes on the electrons will occasionally scatter and have their momentum(velocity)
randomised so that after many scatterings the average electron velocity will return
to zero.

v

=

v0

−eE

t

m
= 0 −eEτ
m
(12)
Here, the drift velocity is associated to the proportionality factor µ, vd =

v

= µE
that is the drift mobility, or carrier mobility and τ is the momentum relaxation
time, which in the Drude model is equal to the average time between each collision,
this only remains true if scattering is isotropic exclusively.
The current density then allows us to determine the conductivity using Ohms law
J = nevd = ne2τ
m E = σE
(13)
where the Drude conductivity can be found as
σD = ne2τ
m
= neµ,
(14)
Page 14 of 88
==PAGE:16==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
as a result of µ being the proportionality factor of the drift velocity and electric
ﬁeld. Where n is the carrier density and µ = eτ/m∗is the carrier mobility for
massive charge carriers with eﬀective mass m∗.
It was mentioned that the Drude model assumes the scattering to be isotropic
which generally is not the case, often there are small angle scatterings depending
the situation. For example scattering on charged impurities can be small angle
scattering, depending on how strong the charge is and how large the area of the
charge is. For that reason, the scattering time is composed of many contributions
which are combined using Matthiesen’s rule as
1
τ = 1
τ1
+ 1
τ2
+ ... + 1
τn
.
(15)
Additionally, scattering events may be categories into elastic and inelastic scatter-
ing. Elastic scattering relaxes momentum but conserves the charge carrier energy
while inelastic scatter relaxes both energy and momentum. Elastic scattering may
occur from charged impurity scattering while inelastic scattering is often observed
in electron-electron scattering or phonon scattering.
For this reason, one might look for a model which allows the determination of
carrier mobility and conductivity while attempting to include the complexity of
scattering.
For that reason semiclassical Boltzmann transport theory is often
applied, this theory describes in solid state physics how a non-equilibrium dis-
tribution of electrons evolve over time. In the steady state the derivative of the
distribution function is zero,
∂f
∂t =
∂f
∂t

force +
∂f
∂t

diff +
∂f
∂t

coll = 0,
(16)
where on the right-hand side we ﬁnd a term describing the force, diﬀusion, and col-
lision, which takes transition between diﬀerent k states into account. Boltzmann
theory assume carriers to behave like small independent balls making instanta-
neous collisions however introduces quantum mechanics in the form of density of
state which takes the Pauli exclusions principle into account, which prevents elec-
trons from being scattered into an already occupied state. With this, it is possible
to derive the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity from the Einstein diﬀusion relation
that σ = e2g(EF)·D where D = 1
2τv2
F is the diﬀusion constant, and g(EF) =
2EF
ℏ2πv2
F
is the density of states at the Fermi energy found and the Drude-Boltzmann con-
ductivity is found as,
σDC = e2 2EF
ℏ2πv2
F

· (1
2v2
Fτ) = 2e2
h kFl,
(17)
as well as the sheet-resistance and mobility may be found from the sheet-conductivity
as
R =
1
σDC
(18)
Page 15 of 88
==PAGE:17==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
µ = σDC
ne
(19)
the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity is found to be proportional to τ√n and deriva-
tion of the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity is found in the appendix A.
Throughout this section the word scattering, and scattering relaxation time has
been used at multiple occasions, and to properly understand what this means I
will dedicate the next few paragraphs to a detailed explanation of the nature of
scattering. Scattering, and more precisely electron scattering is the events that
take place when an electron of a velocity is aﬀected by an external force which
alters the velocity, be it in magnitude or direction. These events have already been
categories as either elastic or inelastic covering the nature of energy conservation
through scattering. This can be clearly understood through the idea of one friction
less billiard ball colliding with another, here we observe elastic scattering where
the momentum is relaxed, however the energy is conserved as the moving billiard
ball transfer lost energy to the new billiard ball. This naive explanation holds
true to electrons undergoing elastic scattering events, while inelastic scattering
events may be considered as the situation where the billiard ball fail to collide
with another billiard ball, but instead collides with the side of the table. For
electrons this is the scattering one observes when an electron collides with a large
defect.
Mean free path is the average distance an electron travels between any of these
scattering events and is related to the scattering time as lmfp = vFτ, for that
reason the same contributions apply to the mean free path as for the scattering
time,
l = 1
l1
+ 1
l2
+ ... + 1
ln
,
(20)
Similar to the scattering time we speak of elastic and inelastic mean free paths,
but what matters for the mobility and conductivity of a material is the average
distance over which electrons lose the memory of their momentum, which for the
special case of isotropic scattering is the same as the mean free path. Because
isotropic scattering, often referred to as ballistic transport, which is the rare case
where momentum is preserved and therefore does not contributes to the mean free
path. However, for diﬀusive transport the momentum is not preserved and this in
turn contribute to the mean free path.
Additionally, until now, we have assumed that the scattering time was a constant
number for the entire material. However it is much more convoluted as a result
of the local scattering time throughout a material best determined by individual
scattering times in local, intrinsic areas, originating from all types of sources such
as temperature, sample geometry, defects and contamination which all contribute
to the overall, extrinsic, scattering time. For this reason, it is commonly known
that measurements on a device may ﬁnd diﬀerent material properties depending
Page 16 of 88
==PAGE:18==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
on where on the sample one is measuring, for that reason one will refer to material
properties as intrinsic or extrinsic. Intrinsic being the material properties for a
small region, often restricted to a single domain, or some part of a single domain.
While extrinsic material properties may refer to device properties and is what one
would observe from electrical measurements where the sheet resistance may be
measured. This becomes a broad topic to cover. For now the most important
scattering mechanics aﬀecting graphene will be mentioned in this equation using
Matthiesens rule
1
σ = 1
σci
+ 1
σsr
+
1
σms
+
1
σLA
+
1
σPO
+
1
σcorr
.
(21)
This equation contains the contribution from charged impurity, short range, midgap
states, phonon and corrugation scattering eﬀects. Charged impurities are charges
near the graphene that dope graphene and induce a potential, Short range scatter-
ing are cracks, edges, and vacancies. Midgap scattering is sometimes considered
alongside corrugations, however it is the idea that sometimes certain scattering
is not perturbation, but strong enough to make changes in the density of states.
Phonon scattering are intrinsic lattice vibrations in graphene origination from the
substrate graphene is placed on, this scattering can be avoided by not using a
substrate or a substrate that does not possess these eﬀects. Finally, is the corru-
gation scattering this stems from curvature on graphene which can lead to charge
puddles where the Fermi level exhibit local variations, this can lead to additional
oxygen binding which act as a local doping.
With the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity fresh in memory I will brieﬂy mention
the ways each of these scattering events have been previously observed to aﬀect the
scattering time as well as the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity. Charged impurities
aﬀect the scattering time as
τci ∝
√n
nimp
,
(22)
and aﬀects the Drude-Boltzmann conductance as
σci = Cie
h
n
nimp
.
(23)
Which clearly tells us that for a high density of impurities it is expected that
scattering occurs much more often. Short range scattering aﬀected the scattering
time as such
τsr ∝
EF
4(ℏvF)2 ∝
1
√n,
(24)
and aﬀects the Drude-Boltzmann conductance as
σsr = e2vFτ
ℏ
rn
π.
(25)
Page 17 of 88
==PAGE:19==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Short range scattering is found to be independent of carrier density. midgap states
are a scattering strong enough to create a phase shift of π/2 between incoming
and outgoing wavefunctions, and is aﬀecting the Drude-Boltzmann conductance
as
σms = 2e2
h
n
nimp
ln2(√πnR).
(26)
Finally, both acoustic and optical phonon scatter and corrugation aﬀect the scat-
tering time for charge carriers, however these eﬀects are more lucid and hard to
capture in a precise mathematical expression. It has been proposed that these
vibration in fact originate from surface plasmon polarisation, this will be brieﬂy
discussed later in section 3.1.2.
For many reasons it may be interesting to examine the changes in a materials
electric properties when introduced to an increase in any of these scatterings. For
example doping is extensively used to alter graphenes properties to ﬁt the need
at hand. This still is considered a contamination, however if it is done under
supervision and with a purpose one can increase the intrinsic carrier mobility
drastically, as it is the case that changes to the conductivity which originate from
charged impurities, are directly proportional to the relation between carrier density
and impurity density. So for that reason it becomes apparent that if one dopes
graphene to increase the carrier density however, keeping the density of impurity
constant the conductivity increases and in turn so does the mobility as µ ∝√n.
Ideas of introducing defects to fulﬁll a similar purpose as doping has been consid-
ered, however the scattering introduced as a result of strain and stress in the form
of defects is generally categories as short range scattering and is independent of
the carrier density. Instead this behaves mostly as a destructive element for the
charge carrier transport properties, while this may however be equally as interest-
ing for a design point of view. Precisely designed stress or strain potentials may
introduce deterministic scattering events which are highly favoured to alter the
direction for charge transport. Finally is the idea of corrugations of the substrate,
this would initially look similar to that of stress or strain induced potentials. How-
ever, due to the way this defect introduces puddles where the Fermi level exhibits
local variation this instead has a similar eﬀect as observed from doping.
2.4
Conductivity with a Numerical Approach
For theoretical examination of graphene one may utilise numerical methods that
can be used to study graphene and its interesting properties, and for this reason an
ocean of methods have risen to serve this purpose. This includes Monte Carlo[31],
tight binding[32], density functional theory(DFT)[33] and wavepacket[34] meth-
ods to mention just a few, however tight binding and DFT are currently most
commonly used.
Page 18 of 88
==PAGE:20==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Monte Carlo methods assume that classical mechanics is applicable, and that en-
ergy is a continuous variable and otherwise calculate the transmission of stochas-
tic electron trajectories in a suitable potential landscape, using essential classic
mechanics. For each time iteration the trajectory is reevaluated and taking the
possibility of a sudden change of momentum due to a scattering event or collision
with a boundary and the eﬀects of an external electric ﬁeld. However, often but
not necessarily, entirely neglecting any quantum eﬀects which may occur in the
scattering events.
The tight binding model is the ﬁrst step to introduce the quantum eﬀects to the
system as this method uses an approximate set of wavefunctions based on the
wavefunctions for isolated atoms located at atomic sites, a linear combination of
atomic orbitals(LCAO). Each atom is then tightly bound to its original atom and
they are only allowed to move from one atom to the neighbouring atoms. However,
this method is limited because the basis set is incomplete, since it lacks all the
scattered wave eigenstates in the continuum. The method is considered precise in
the vicinity of the atom but loses precision as the distance from the atom increases.
Finally, the approach used in this thesis is the wavepacket method, in which
one describes the wavefunction by solving the time dependant Schr¨odinger equa-
tion discretized in time and space.
The method has proven useful to charac-
terise electron propagation and scattering including quantum eﬀects using a sim-
ple Hamiltonian[35].
This method is used to describe and investigate various
propagation and scattering behaviours in graphene for this thesis and is therefore
explained in great detail in section 3.2.1.
2.5
Methods of Measurements
For the purpose of being able to capture the physics and material properties
explained so far a wide range of methods of measurement has risen.
This is
important because with the addition of this evasive concept of scattering time and
carrier mobility it becomes relevant to discuss the diﬀerence between intrinsic and
extrinsic mobility. It is obvious that when one mention that some nano device has
a carrier mobility of some number it is unclear what this means, is it the carrier
mobility of the device if you put two contacts on it and let a current travel along
it, or is it the mobility in each grain? It is expected to distinguish the two from
each other as intrinsic and extrinsic properties. Extrinsic being the device overall
properties, while intrinsic is local properties often restricted to a single grain or
at times small parts of a grain. Methods used to characterise and distinguish the
two from each other is, ﬁeld eﬀect transistor(FET), Hall, terahertz time domain
spectroscopy(THz-TDS), (2- or 4)-point probe and further increase accuracy using
the van der Pauw principle.
Page 19 of 88
==PAGE:21==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
(a) Schematic illustration of the FET technique.
(b) Schematic illustration of the four-point probe tech-
nique.
Figure 8: Schematic illustration of a) ﬁeld-eﬀect transistor applied to graphene
and b) four-probe setup.
FET measurements, illustrated on ﬁgure 8a, will examine the extrinsic properties.
FET measurements measures the resistance that a charge carrier encounters from
the source to the drain and in turns allows one to predict the overall quality of the
sample, the method has a handful of nice ideas associated to it, for one it allows
one to determine the charge carrier density by adjusting the electric ﬁeld through
changes in the gate voltage. For large gate and small surface area it is possible to
examine the capacitor equation 27
C = q
VG
= neA
VG
,
(27)
which relate the gate voltage to the carrier density as n = CoxVG/e, where C
A =
Cox × κ(w) →π for large widths w, this size κ(w) is to include the eﬀects of
quantum capacitance which is not further explained in this thesis. Finally, after
measuring the resistance determining the conductivity as G = 1/R it is possible
to ﬁnd the mobility from the slope of the conductivity, if one assumes that there
is electrical homogeneity so that (W/L)G = Gs = σs, by the following equation
µ ≈
1
Cox
L
W
∆G
∆VG
.
(28)
However, since the FET often apply a high gate voltage the electrons often has
such high energies that Klein tunnelling applies for many obstacles which would
otherwise be the case of scattering for other measurements and in turns makes
it hard to compare to other measurements.
Eventually it became known that
the resistance was not comprehensive enough on its own, since it was found that
the resistance would not be comparable to diﬀerent sample shapes.
This lead
Page 20 of 88
==PAGE:22==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
to the idea that a second intrinsic material value, that was not dependant on
the samples geometry, was required for validating these experiments. For this
purpose, Hall measurements[36] came to be. These measurements are identical to
FET measurements, however there is now an applied magnetic ﬁeld which aﬀect
the electrons through the Lorentz force as,
F = q[E + (v × B)]
(29)
From Hall measurements one can ﬁnd the charge carrier density from the ﬁrst
measured value RH = Rxy/B which is the Hall resistance that is derived from the
transverse resistance Rxy and B is the magnetic ﬁeld and the carrier density is
determined as,
n =
1
eRH
(30)
Finally it is possible to ﬁnd the conductivity as σ = L/WRxx where Rxx is the
FET resistance, by taking these two measured values it is possible to determine
the Hall mobility as,
µH = σ
en.
(31)
Hall measurements has been extensively compared to FET measurements to ex-
amine the diﬀerence between the two methods[37] additionally they are compared
to the four-point probe method, the four-point probe technique has proven useful
to detect ultra local(intrinsic) properties.
Four-point probe measurements is an attempt to apply the FET method to a small
area rather than the entire sample, the method uses four probes in close proximity
as two sources and two drains as illustrated on ﬁgure 8b and then measures the
resistance over the much smaller area compared to the FET which would otherwise
measure the entire sample. However, the method has other ﬂaws such as damaging
and contaminate the surface which is not the entirely the same for the FET and
Hall measurements.
Van der Pauw measurements is a principle used to eliminate geometrical correc-
tions. Van der Pauw is a technique commonly used to measure the resistance
and Hall coeﬃcient of a sample by placing four electrodes at the perimeter of the
sample in contrast to the linear four-point probe method. This allows the method
to yield an average resistance of the sample whereas the linear four point probe
technique only yields the resistance in the sensing area. This principle is used to
decrease the error of geometrical complications however, it will not entirely remove
the error as it is found that for highly non uniform samples the van der Pauw still
accumulates some error. Meanwhile Mackenzie. D and his co-workers found it to
be less than the single-conﬁguration alternatives[38], see ﬁgure 9.
Page 21 of 88
==PAGE:23==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 9: Error in calculated mobility for two diﬀerent single-conﬁguration elec-
trical measurements as well as an electrical measurement using the van der Pauw
dual-conﬁguration principle as a function of increasing variation of doping homo-
geneity ∆β[38].
In summary, both Hall and FET measurements hold some errors in terms of in-
creased resistance near contact points, however Hall measurements are considered
more accurate through measuring two intrinsic material values. Multi point mea-
surements attempt to minimise contact resistance while the van der Pauw principle
attempts to minimise geometrical corrections. Additionally, all of the methods re-
quire that the conductivity is uniform across the measured area and is considered
to capture material properties well if used with care and thoughtfully applied on
samples which allows the method to be successful.
Finally, to avoid contamination through contact points the THz-TDS method is
often considered. THz-TDS measurements is an optical measurement method used
to examine a middle ground between intrinsic and extrinsic properties, exciting
the carriers using a THz pulse to oscillate the carriers while being restricted to the
local domain of the THz pulse spot size. For that reason the measured conductivity
is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from what is measured through electrical measurements
such as FET, since THz-TDS measure the material properties within a conﬁned
area which in turn would allow one to maintain a better intuitive idea of which
scattering events is expected to occur. Whereas electrical measurements over the
entire device gives a device mobility which is a result of all scattering events across
the sample. The THz-TDS method is explained in great details in section 3.1.2.
For this thesis, the THz-TDS method is used exclusively as it holds the most
relevant results for comparing to numerical work. Despite the high variance in
the Drude-Smith ﬁtting parameters the results are more easily compared to the
Page 22 of 88
==PAGE:24==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
numerical result because of the dispersive behaviour of the electrons which allows
for a more accurate measurement of scattering eﬀects. However, all data must
be considered with care acknowledging that there should be a discussion of the
problems with settling for an adequate result[3]. It has also been shown on multiple
occasions that from no surprise most of these technique, electrical as well as optical
ﬁnds the same results in material conductivity and mobility for uniform samples.
However, a high variance is found between the methods in non-uniform samples.
The reason this needs to be well understood is because when making large scale
graphene growth, then defects are a common problem due to reasons mentioned
throughout section 2. The origin of these are for various reasons and this thesis
attempts to shine light on the implications associated to grain boundaries, line-
defects as well as the inﬂuence of doping.
Page 23 of 88
==PAGE:25==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
3
Methodology
Throughout the previous sections a large group of methods have been mentioned
to establish an understanding of the challenges associated with extracting the con-
ductivity, as well as mobility for polycrystalline graphene samples. For this thesis
the main methods used are explained in this coming section and categorised as ex-
perimental techniques and numerical calculations. Where numerical calculations
are designed in an attempt to ﬁnd correlation with experimental results as well as
previous ﬁndings.
α−RuCl3 Design Process. A detailed description of the use of crystal dopant
in the form of α−RuCl3 as an underlying doping to locally modify the carrier
density of graphene, with exfoliation, crystal transfer as well as both the optical
and atomic force microscopy instruments explained.
Terahertz Time domain Spectroscopy. An elaborate explanation of the THz-
TDS method with addition of the mathematical model applied to extract the
conductivity and ﬁnally using the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity as ﬁtting model
to predict material properties alongside a discussion of uncertainties associated
with the method.
Numerical Calculations. An overview of the numerical calculations applied
in this thesis to develop a method to predict if such a method can be helpful to
examine microscopic phenomena which is otherwise hard to examine using THz-
TDS, alongside a comprehensive discussion of accuracy.
3.1
Experimental techniques
The following sections will explain all experimental techniques used throughout
this thesis, including the design process of α−RuCl3, optical- and atomic force-
microscopy additionally the measurement method, THz-TDS is also explained in
great details, alongside a description of the Drude and Drude-Smith model used for
ﬁtting to the measured THz-TDS data to extrapolate approximations for material
properties.
3.1.1
α−RuCl3 Design Process
Initially a SiO2 substrate is prepared and exfoliation of α−RuCl3 is done by an
adhesive tape exfoliation method[39], a schematic illustration of the method is
shown on ﬁgure 10.
Page 24 of 88
==PAGE:26==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 10: Schematic illustration of the scotch tape exfoliation method.
The exfoliation method is used to transfer α−RuCl3 ﬂakes of various thickness to
the substrate. This is done by initially cleaning the surface using a plasma cleaner
on the SiO2 substrate to increase the likelihood of a transfer without much residual.
The transfer itself is done by carefully placing the scotch tape on the α−RuCl3
crystal, and transferring the exfoliated α−RuCl3 between diﬀerent sheets of tape
to increase the likelihood for the majority of α−RuCl3 being monolayers or bi-
layers. Finally the tape is applied to the SiO2 substrate and carefully removed
leaving a thin layer on top of the SiO2 substrate.
When a substrate has been prepared with α−RuCl3 exfoliated onto it, graphene is
transferred to the substrate using a PVA lamination transfer process[40], which is
the method of using a commercially available PVA ﬁlm and a hot-roll laminator.
The graphene sample is initially oxidised in DI water at room temperature for at
least 8 hours. The oxidised graphene is then laminated with a the PVA ﬁlm using
the hot-roll laminator. After a 30 s bake on a hot plate at 110 0C the PVA ﬁlm is
mechanically removed taking the graphene ﬁlm along with it. The PVA ﬁlm with
the graphene layer on it is now prepared as a transferable layer ready to be placed
on the substrate with α−RuCl3 already exfoliated on it.
This method has been proven to have low residual doping and this is of most
importance since it has been shown that the doping is highly dependent on a direct
surface contact with the underlying α−RuCl3. Even if the graphene transfer is not
entirely homogeneous the following results may still be of interest since it will still
showcase the doping eﬀect of α−RuCl3 nicely and may even be accompanied by
alternative interesting physics such as focusing lens eﬀects because of npn junctions
occurrences from areas of partial doping.
Optical microscopy is used both before and after the exfoliation to conﬁrm that
α−RuCl3 has been transferred to the substrate and has developed small ﬂakes of
various thickness, this is done using a standard optical microscope which allows
resolutions down to the micrometer level.
Atomic Force Microscopy measurements are performed to present an alterna-
tive method of conﬁrming transfer of graphene[41]. On the contrary to scanning
tunnelling microscopy which requires the sample to be conductive, in 1986 Gerd
Page 25 of 88
==PAGE:27==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Binning, Valvin Quate and Christoph Gerber proposed a new type of microscope[42]
which could overcome this limitation. Instead of measuring tunnelling currents be-
tween a probing tip and sample, the authors suggested measuring the force on an
atomic scale. The method uses a cantilever with a tip attached in one end, as
illustrated on ﬁgure 11 and measures the force applied to the cantilever imposed
by the sample, this is achieved by raster scanning the position of the sample with
respect to the tip and recording the height of the probe along the sample to map
a height proﬁle for the full sample.
Figure 11: Schematic illustration of atomic force microscopy[43].
In the year 1987 Binning et al[44] presented the ﬁrst atomic resolution of graphite.
After this milestone the development of AFM continued at a high pace. Samples
could be characterized by AFM without exposure to radiation.
This method
allows for resolutions on the order of fractions of a nanometer, up to more than a
thousand times better than the optical diﬀraction limit.
In AFM measurements the probing tip is attached to a cantilever-type spring.
In response to the force between tip and sample the cantilever is deﬂected and
images are taken by scanning the sample relative to the probing tip and mapping
the deﬂection of the cantilever or the z-movement of the piezo as a function of
the lateral position. Typically, the spring constant is between 0.001 to 100 N/m
and movement from microns to ≈0.1 ˚A are measured by the deﬂection sensor.
Typically forces between the probing tip and sample range from 10−11 to 10−6 N.
For comparison, the interaction between two covalently bounded atoms is of the
order 10−9 at separations of ≈˚A. Therefore, non-destructive imaging is possible
with these small forces.
Page 26 of 88
==PAGE:28==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
AFM measurements can be done in either contact or non-contact mode. When
the microscope operates in non-contact mode the tip is separated from the sample
between 10 to 100 nm and forces such as van der Waals, electrostatic, magnetic,
or capillary forces can be sensed and give information about surface topography,
charge distribution or magnetic domain wall structure. At a smaller separation
of order ˚A the microscope operate in contact with the sample.
In this mode
ionic repulsion forces allow the surface topography to be measured with high
resolution, under best conditions atomic resolution can be achieved. Additionally,
both frictional forces and elastic or plastic deformations can be detected under
appropriate conditions.
Raman Spectroscopy. Raman spectroscopy is strong tool used for graphene
research[45]. It is used to determine the number and orientation of layers, the
quality and type of edges as well as the eﬀects of perturbations, such as electric
and magnetic ﬁelds, strain, doping, disorder, and functional groups. The Raman
spectrum of graphene was ﬁrst measured in 2006[46] and ever since Raman spec-
troscopy had become one of the most popular techniques for characterization of
disordered and amorphous carbons, fullerenes, nanotubes, diamond, carbon chains
and polyconjugated molecules[47]. Raman are particularly useful for graphene be-
cause the absence of a band gap makes all wavelength of incident radiation reso-
nant, thus the Raman spectrum contains information about both atomic structure
and electronic properties.
The number of layers in graphene in a sample can be determined for all graphene
samples using Raman spectroscopy. Additionally, it can identify unwanted by-
products, structural damage, functional groups, and chemical modiﬁcations intro-
duced during the preparations, processing, or placement of graphene. As a result,
a Raman spectrum is invaluable for quality control.
Raman spectroscopy is used to examine the sample after α−RuCl3 has been ex-
foliated, but before the graphene has been transferred. The purpose is to conﬁrm
that α−RuCl3 have been transferred to the sample before transferring graphene
on to the sample. Raman spectroscopy exposes the sample to some radiation of
a particular wavelength and depending on the crystal lattice the light will refract
diﬀerent and when it is detected it will have a diﬀerent wavelength. This is known
as Raman scattering which happens when light interacts with phonons.
These phonons are important because the light will otherwise scatter unchanged
in energy. However, a fraction will have lost or gained some energy as a result
molecular vibrations, this is known as the Raman shift,
∆¯v =
 1
λ0
+ 1
λ1

(32)
where ∆¯v is the Raman shift, λ0 is the excitation wavelength and λ1 is the Raman
spectrum wavelength. This only occurs if the photons exchanged a part of their
energy with phonons in the material. The Raman shift is highly dependent on
the amplitude of the molecular vibrations. The molecular vibrations are known to
Page 27 of 88
==PAGE:29==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
be signiﬁcant for high frequency vibrations, originating from atoms held together
with strong bonds. Small energy changes is observed for low frequency vibrations,
originating from atoms held together with weak bonds. The Raman spectra that
is the intensity of the scattered light, is plotted for each energy(frequency) of light
and in turn allows us to determine the thickness of α −RuCl3 on the sample.
3.1.2
Terahertz Time-domain Spectroscopy
Previous work[48] shows that intra-band excitation of carriers in graphene with
intense THz pulses has reported a reduction in conductivity of graphene and a
similar eﬀect has been reported for graphene after excitation with ultra-short
pulses using THz-TDS. It is found that graphenes linear intra-band response for
high quality samples is well approximated by the Drude conductivity[49][48] and
that this absorption in the terahertz spectrum can be measured by THz-TDS.
THz-TDS is commonly used to characterise various material properties not lim-
ited to sheet-conductivity, sheet-resistance and mobility[50][3] see equation 17, 18
and 19 which was explained through-out section 2. THz-TDS measurements is
performed by radiating a substrate with a short THz pulse. The pulse is then
measured after transmission using a detection scheme in which one compare the
amplitude and phase. THz-TDS is schematically illustrated on ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12: Schematic conﬁguration of a THz-TDS setup.
Such ultra-short pulse can be generated by having a femtosecond laser pulse travel
through a biased PCS(Photo conductive antenna). The photons which have suf-
ﬁcient high energy can excite electrons to the conduction band of the semicon-
ductor. The biased electric ﬁeld then accelerates these electrons and ultimately
when the electrons recombine, they emit an electromagnetic pulse. Because the
semiconductor has a lot of defects, the recombination rate is high. The shorter the
recombination time, the shorter the electromagnetic pulse. A picosecond pulse has
Page 28 of 88
==PAGE:30==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
a 1012 s−1 frequency content, which is considered broadband, however it is also
possible to obtain ultra-broadband pulses up to the frequency of 20 THz.
The electric ﬁeld of the THz pulse transmission is measured as a function of time.
By dividing the transmission of the pulse in diﬀerent areas of the sample, ˜Efilm(ω),
with the transmission of the pulse through a clean reference point, ˜Esub(ω), the
transmission function can be deduced as
˜Tfilm(ω) =
˜Efilm(ω)
˜Esub(ω)
= |T|eiφ =
˜n + 1
˜n + 1 + Z0σs(ω),
(33)
where ˜Efilm(ω) and ˜Esub(ω) are the Fourier transformations of the transmis-
sions as a function of time and ˜n is the possibly complex index of refraction
for the substrate material.
From each measurement the frequency-dependent
sheet conductivity of graphene is calculated from the transmission function as,
σs(ω) = σs,1(ω) + iσs,2(ω).
In practice the THz-TDS measurements are performed using a commercial THz-
TDS measurement system known as the TOPTICA Teraﬂash Pro system[51].
Each complete THz-TDS measurement consists of several repeated measurements
for each spot. The complete measurement is then the average for all repeated
measurements at the measured spot. Throughout this project, if not otherwise
mentioned, the pulse was repeated 40 times.
The transmission is dependent both on the substrate and the thin-ﬁlm sample.
In general, the pulse can be expected to behave such as it is illustrated on ﬁgure
13. The measured transmission will contain multiple peaks, that originates from
echoes because of internal reﬂection. For each reﬂection, echo, there is a loss of
amplitude due to part of the signal being reﬂected. For analysis, any one of these
peaks can be used to ﬁnd the transmission function, or even a combination of them
all. For this thesis both the direct pulse and the ﬁrst echo is used individually
to obtain higher accuracy. This is because the third echo often have an ampli-
tude so small that the signal-to-noise ratio makes it diﬃcult to extract a useful
conductivity spectrum.
Page 29 of 88
==PAGE:31==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 13: Illustration of the physics occurring within the substrate during trans-
mission.
Expression 33 can be modiﬁed to yield the real and imaginary parts of the surface-
conductivity as
σs,1(ω) = n + 1
Z0d
"
1
|T(ω)|cos(θ) −1
#
(34)
σs,2(ω) = −n + 1
Z0d
"
1
|T(ω)|sin(θ)
#
,
(35)
where Z0 = 376.6 Ωis the vacuum impedance. For many semiconductors the sim-
ple Drude model and Boltzmann transport theory provides a good and simple way
to examine the conductance, explained in details in section 2.3, the conductance
for the Drude-Boltzmann model is given as
ˆσ(ω) = 2e2
h kFl
 
1
1 −iωτ
!
,
(36)
where e is the unit charge, τ is the Drude scattering time and σDC = 2e2
h kFl is
the Drude-Boltzmann conductivity found in section 2 equation 17. However, the
quality of the material is highly important for the model ﬁt, and that can be a
result of scattering being preferential backscattering rather than isotropic, which
is a key assumption made in the Drude model.
For polycrystalline graphene
backscattering is commonly found and this can be captured by discussing the
Page 30 of 88
==PAGE:32==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
length scales, illustrated on ﬁgure 14, starting by considering the diﬀusion length
which is the distance a carrier moves between generation and recombination and
is given as lD ∼
p
D/ω where D = EFµ(2e)−1 is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and ω
is the frequency. For a 1 THz frequency the diﬀusion length becomes lD = 30 nm
and is typical for a sample of µ = 1000 cm2(Vs)−1 and n = 1012 cm−2 while the
mean free path is lmfp = 11 nm[3].
Often graphene has domains in the micro- to millimetre range[52] so it is often
found to be suﬃcient to apply the Drude model to ﬁnd the conductivity. This is
because that when the distance of the boundaries is much larger than the mean
free path and the diﬀusion length, the backscattering will be close to zero and you
obtain Drude behaviour. If the grain boundaries are highly resistive the extrinsic
conductivity can be poor while the intrinsic may still be large. The conductivity
extracted is for that reason considered an excellent estimation of the average sheet
conductivity in that area.
For the case where electrons in a material has a mean free path similar to the
size of the domains in the material, an increased amount of backscattering may
be observed.
Figure 14: Schematic illustration of the carrier diﬀusion length, lD, within a cycle
of the THz ﬁeld, as well as the characteristic dimension of the single-crystalline
domain in a graphene ﬁlm[3].
There is still observed backscattering for graphene with large domains in the case
where the grain boundaries are fully reﬂecting, which will lead to a decrease in
the DC conductivity. For that reason, one can explain the conductivity within
intervals, for the case where the dimension of the single-crystalline domain in a
graphene ﬁlm, lC is much larger than the mean free path, (lC > lmfp), isotropic
scatter dominates and the Drude model is an accurate approximation for the
average conductivity. However, for the case where (lC ≤lmfp) the Drude model no
Page 31 of 88
==PAGE:33==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
longer captures the average conductivity well. This is a result of the preferential
scattering at the grain boundaries hindering the drift of charge carriers over longer
distances, therefor a reduction in the measured conductivity at low frequencies is
found and for that reason the Drude-Smith model[7] is used for systems where
(lC ≤lmfp) and (lD > lmfp ≥lC) in attempt to capture the eﬀects of increased
backscattering. The Drude-Smith model is given as
ˆσ(ω) =
σDC
1 −iωτ
"
1 +
c
1 −iωτ
#
,
(37)
where c is the backscattering parameter which is between −1 and 0, when c = 0 we
ﬁnd that equation 37 becomes the Drude conductivity 36. Additionally it is found
that for the high-frequency limit both the Drude and Drude-Smith model seem
to be comparable, this is believed to be because for the low-frequency limit where
(ωτ < 1, lC > lD, lmfp) carriers scatter multiple times during the cycle, while
for the high-frequency limit (ωτ > 1, lC > lD, lmfp) the carriers are accelerated
quasi-ballistically and is still subject to isotropic scattering.
However, it is important to understand that the Drude-Smith model is phenomeno-
logical, it does not provide any real insight to these microscopical intrinsic me-
chanics or physics we attempt to uncover about preferential backscattering which
is the purpose of this thesis.
However, either one of the Drude-model or the
Drude-Smith model are often used as comparison to the sheet-conductivity found
from equation (34) and (35) by recent research[50][53][54]. By using the Drude
model alongside the Boltzmann transport equation it is possible to investigate in-
teresting properties which can be extracted from both models. This includes the
carrier density(38) and carrier mobility(39) to then be compared to experimental
and numerical work in an attempt to get a better understanding of preferential
backscattering
n = πℏ2
e4v2
F
σ2
DC
τ 2
(38)
µ = σDC
ne .
(39)
The mobility from equation 12, µ = E/

v

, is in its nature the intrinsic mobility
where the electric ﬁeld is considered constant in space, while the drift velocity
may be diﬀerent throughout the sample. For that reason, the locality is deﬁned
by the transport length such as mean free path or diﬀusion length. This mobility
is diﬀerent from the mobility extracted from electrical measurements when the
sample is non-uniform, as well as the mobility and scattering time we extract
from the Drude-Smith model which is considered to not necessarily be the same
as any of these mobilities.
Obviously, these models include errors because of approximation. As previously
explained in section 2.3 alongside the challenges of ﬁtting the scattering time τ to
Page 32 of 88
==PAGE:34==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
a high enough degree of accuracy to be useful for conclusions. For that reason,
some ideas of expanding the model to account for additional scattering eﬀects by
introducing another scattering time has been considered, such as
σ(ω) =
σDC
1 −iωτ1
"
1 +
c
1 −iωτ2
#
.
(40)
However, this is not applied in this project because it is instead investigated if
numerical calculation can provide a similar or better alternative.
The idea of
multiple scattering times is likely to increase accuracy, however when ﬁtting the
Drude or Drude-Smith model there are complications not only with the scattering
time. For systems with a backscattering parameter 0 < c < −1 it is no longer
possible to extract the mobility because the scattering time τ is now a ﬁtting
parameter and no longer the momentum relaxation time. This is what one attempt
to solve in equation 40 by introducing additional scattering eﬀects. From recent
research[5] it is found that the model ﬁts are only suﬃcient accurate when the
grain boundaries are fully reﬂective however for partial reﬂection the scattering
time becomes phenomenological, and the model loses the ability to extract the
mobility and it is signiﬁcantly harder to extrapolate any real information from the
models.
Additionally, when examining graphene using THz-TDS results are sensitive to
the sample topology and small changes may have massive implications. For poly-
crystalline graphene with suﬃcient small domains or using a dielectric substrate
the eﬀects of surface plasmons(SPs) may become overwhelming as has been pre-
viously described in great detail[55]. Surface plasmons are collective delocalized
electron oscillations that occurs at the interface between metal-dielectric or metal-
air interfaces where the sign of the dielectric function changes across the interface.
At low frequencies, such as the THz range, the surface plasmon polarisation(SPP)
dispersion relation reaches the asymptotic limit known as the plasma frequency
which results in rapid oscillations of the electron density in the conducting media
such as graphene. These oscillations are a result of an instability in the dielectric
function of a free electron gas and will be detected in the THz-TDS experiment
because of the electric ﬁeld induced by the SPP and cause artifacts in the gathered
data as a result of this, which in turn makes the ﬁtted model imprecise.
More so, the measurements may also be ﬂawed due to noise Withayachumnanku et
al[56] classify the uncertainties from noise into three subcategories, thermal noise,
which is a result of the charge carriers being accelerated and in turn heating the
sample. Secondly is the laser ﬂuctuation noise which has been well characterised
through analytical models[57] and is found to be almost non-existent if the pulse is
suﬃciently short and the carrier lifetime is in accordance with the frequency range
at hand. Ultimately the noise in a THz-TDS experiment lies with the spectral
resolution, this can be obtained by either decreasing the noise ﬂoor, or increasing
the pulse intensity[58].
Page 33 of 88
==PAGE:35==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
The inaccuracies are brieﬂy examined in the coming paragraphs discussing the
shortcomings of the Drude-Smith model. This is done for two diﬀerent samples.
The ﬁrst sample is graphene on SiO2, referred to as the SiO2 sample, and is ex-
pected to be of good quality, along with graphene on SiO2 doped with α −RuCl3,
referred to as the α −RuCl3 sample, and is expected to contain grains with a
small average size. A schematic illustration of the two samples is shown on ﬁgure
15.
Figure 15: Schematic illustration of A) graphene on SiO2. and B) graphene on
SiO2 doped with α −RuCl3[3]
Both samples are each measured at ten diﬀerent points and standard deviation
error analysis is applied to the extracted Drude-Smith parameters. the experi-
mental set-up follows what is illustrated on ﬁgure 12. The samples are placed at
the focal point to obtain the smallest possible spot size in an attempt to reduce
the number of complications introduced from changing crystal orientation, doping
from some residual, strain defects or thickness variance. Additionally, the quality
of the measurement is highly inﬂuenced by the humidity because water both in
liquid and gas phase has a high absorption coeﬃcient in the terahertz frequency
range and the water dopes graphene and creates hysteresis[59]. For that reason,
the entire set-up is placed within a sealed containment that is pumped full of
nitrogen to decrease the humidity. For every position is 40 spectrums measured
and is averaged over to obtain a better signal-to-noise ratio.
From the measurements it was found that for the SiO2 sample, the Drude-Smith
model generally ﬁts nicely to the measurements and one obtains relative low vari-
ance in extracted properties. The extracted properties using the Drude-Smith
model is found as,
ωD = 0.0045 ± 0.0002
σDC = 4.59 ± 0.24
[mS]
τ = 65.37 ± 13.83
[fs]
c = −4.9 · 10−5 ± 8.7 · 10−5
ns = 28.30 ± 9.59
[1e12cm−2]
µ = 1130.07 ± 409.93
[cm2(Vs)−1]
(41)
Page 34 of 88
==PAGE:36==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
The measurements become increasingly inaccurate for the α −RuCl3 sample. This
is expected to be observed for a sample with highly in-homogeneous coverage and
residue. The extracted Drude-Smith properties is found as,
ωD = 0.0016 ± 0.0002
σDC = 0.30 ± 0.05
[mS]
τ = 164.95 ± 23.72
[fs]
c = −0.81 ± 0.022
ns = 0.55 ± 0.24
[1e12cm−2]
µ = 4235.54 ± 2290.14
[cm2(Vs)−1]
(42)
for an overview of the parameters extracted with the Drude-Smith model for each
point measured each of the extracted properties are illustrated in a bar plot as
can be seen on ﬁgure 16.
Figure 16: Bar plot of ﬁtted Drude model parameters for graphene on SiO2 doped
with α −RuCl3 signiﬁcantly covered with defects and impurities.
It is expected that the mobility is found within the interval of 100 to 5000
cm2(Vs)−1 as it has been previously found by Bøggild et al[3].
It is concern-
ing that the mobility as well as the scattering time has such high variance in both
samples, making it hard to accurately predict the mobility exclusively using the
Drude-Smith model. This variance leaves one unable to conclude anything about
the intrinsic or extrinsic charge transport. This problem was also brieﬂy men-
tioned in section 3.1.2 where it was discussed that for a backscattering parameter,
c deviating from zero the scattering time becomes a ﬁtting parameter rather than
an accurate representation of the scattering time.
Finally, this tells one that if your sample is not of superb quality but instead is
polycrystalline graphene consisting of small domains, then the Drude-Smith model
will be subject to large variance. This then yield an inaccurate picture to a point
Page 35 of 88
==PAGE:37==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
where it is hard to accurately predict any material properties based exclusively on
THz-TDS.
Additionally is required to mention that it was found that there were large ﬁtting
errors in the low frequency range. This is likely a result of a problem with Fourier
transformation of noisy non-periodic data, often this issue present itself when the
windowing for the data analysis is slightly oﬀ. This could be solved by using a
back ground polynomial to correct the error, however this would be a poor solution
and is not considered for this thesis. However the error for the Drude-Smith ﬁts
deserves a brief mention. For many of the Drude-Smith ﬁts there are large ﬁtting
errors and these errors have not been extensively analysed in this thesis, instead
it was chosen to investigate the sample at multiple spots and perform standard
deviation on all points to ﬁnd an average value for the extracted Drude-Smith
properties. However, if one revisit these experiments it would be advantageous to
include the ﬁtting errors in the data analysis.
3.2
Numerical calculations
Here it is brieﬂy explained how the numerical calculations used for this thesis
are put together as well as a brief overview of complications, convergence and
mathematical models which will be useful for comparison to experiments.
3.2.1
Wavepacket simulations
The wavepacket simulation method has been proven to be quantitatively cor-
rect and without making many assumptions prio to solving the time dependant
Schr¨odinger equation[60]. A similar approach has been used by [61][62], and re-
cently used to research strain on graphene sheets[63]. This section describes how
the simulation method is used, along with an experiment used for basic validation
of approximations and ultimately as a tool to increase precision.
The general approach to split operator wavepacket simulations is to replace the
exact propagation with appropriate approximations. This can be achieved by dis-
cretization the time propagation into N time steps of a speciﬁed step size ∆t = t/N
and solving the time dependant Schrodinger equation in each small time increment.
However, some thoughts must be done when choosing these approximations be-
cause the Hamiltonian in general contain terms that do not commute with one
another. One approach is to solve the time dependent Schrodinger equation in
each discrete time step to obtain a second order accurate scheme
Ψ(x, ∆t) ≈e−i ˆT∆t/ℏe−i ˆV ∆t/ℏΨ(x, 0) + O(∆t2).
(43)
However, higher-order accuracy can be achieved easily by rearranging the expo-
nents as the following
Ψ(x, ∆t) ≈e−i ˆV ∆t/2ℏe−i ˆT∆t/ℏe−i ˆV ∆t/2ℏΨ(x, 0) + O(∆t3).
(44)
Page 36 of 88
==PAGE:38==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Which provides a third order accurate scheme, the higher-order of accuracy does
however yield another multiplication of the exponential real-space potential. How-
ever, utilising the split operator method this becomes trivial and may be solved
by solving the potential energy operator in real space, while solving the kinetic
energy operator in Fourier space. The taylor approximation to prove the order of
accuracy is attached in appendix B.
The Hamiltonian describing the low-energy physics in graphene is given by the 2
by 2 matrices
ˆT = vFσ · ˆp
and
ˆV = V (r)ˆσ0 + ∆(r)ˆσz
(45)
ˆH = ˆT + ˆV = vFσ · ˆp + V (r)ˆσ0 + ∆(r)ˆσz,
(46)
where ˆp = −iℏ∇is the momentum operator and V (r) is the real-space poten-
tial, σ = (ˆσx, ˆσy), vF is the Fermi velocity, (ˆσx, ˆσy, ˆσz) are the Pauli matrices and
ˆσ0 the identity matrix, and ∆(r) is a spatially dependent mass term accounting
for opening the bandgap, generally this is zero unless otherwise mentioned. The
wavefunction in graphene is a two-component spinor for the A, B sublattice com-
ponents, and we express the initial wavepacket as Ψ(r, 0) = Ψ(r, 0)χ0 where the
spinor part χ0 = (cA, cB)T should be chosen with care. Applying the split operator
method we obtain
Ψ(x, t) = e−iV (r)t/2ℏe−ivF σ·ˆpt/ℏe−iV (r)t/2ℏΨ(x, 0).
(47)
Now, to further simplify this equation we take the liberty of solving the product
of the last exponential and the wavefunction at t = 0 denoted as ΨV/2(r) =
e−V (r)t/2ℏΨ(r, 0) which we can represent by its Fourier transform:
ΨV/2(r) =
R
dk
(2π)2eik·rΨV/2(k), substituting this we ﬁnd that, because p = ℏk
Ψ(x, t) = e−iV (r)t/2ℏ
Z
dk
(2π)2eik·re−ivF σ·ktΨV/2(k).
(48)
Finally, to be able to compare the simulations to THz-TDS experiments the in-
troduction of an electric ﬁeld is impending, this is done by the introduction of the
velocity gauge where the electric ﬁeld is given as the vector potential E = −∂A/∂t
rather than the scalar potential E = −∇V . The reason for this is that if E is
constant then A is constant which preserves the periodic boundary conditions im-
posed by the Fourier transformation. The time evolution of the vector potential
is then given as
A(t) = A0 −Et,
(49)
and by substituting the momentum with the canonical momentum ˆp −→ˆp+qA(r)
the Hamiltonian for the graphene in constant electric ﬁeld becomes
Page 37 of 88
==PAGE:39==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
ˆH(k, t) = vF(ℏk −qEt) · σ + V (r).
(50)
For approximating the scattering time numerically a naive algorithm was designed
using the expectation value for the velocity,

v

in the x-direction, following the
equation
τ = N
ζ ,
(51)
where N is the number of steps in time with relation to the stepsize and zeta is
the number of scattering events which is determined by change in

v

as
ζ = ζ + 1
,
if
|
 
vn+1

−

vn

| > κ,
(52)
where κ is a user determined tolerance. From this approximation of the scattering
time we are able to predict the intrinsic material properties such as sheet carrier
density which is found from the wavepackets energy utilising
ns = 1
π
 E
vFℏ
2
,
(53)
where E = vFℏk. Which allows us to predict the sheet conductance and in turn
the intrinsic mobility using Boltzmann transport theory as
σs = 2e2
h τvF
√πns
(54)
µ = σs
nse.
(55)
In section 2.2 the idea of a theoretical description of the eﬀects of strain was pre-
sented, this idea is implemented into the numerical calculations as an alternative
Hamiltonian
H = vFσ · (p + τeA) + Φ(r),
(56)
where A = −ℏβ
2ae(ϵxx −ϵyy, −2ϵxy) and Φ(r) = gs(ϵxx + ϵyy) and ϵij is the com-
ponent of the strain tensor describing the deformation geometry which may be
produced by a mechanical deformation modeled with a height proﬁle h(r) that is
centrosymmetric and given as h(r) = h0e−r2/b2 where h0 gives the radial proﬁle,
and b describes the eﬀective radius of the deformation. This gives rise to the
following strain-induced vector and scalar potentials
A(r) = −gvη2
evF
g
r
b

(cos2θ, −sin2θ)
(57)
Φ(r) = gsη2g
r
b

,
(58)
where β ≈3 , gv = βℏvF/2a ≈7eV is the coupling constant η = h0/b describes
the strain strength where h0 and b is the dimensions of the bump or fold and
Page 38 of 88
==PAGE:40==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
ﬁnally g(x) = 2x2e−2x2 is a function used to obtain a Gaussian strain proﬁle. For
the case of a Gaussian fold the equation may be additionally simpliﬁed because
the fold is translationally invariant along ˆy
A(r) = −gvη2
evF
g
x
b

(1, 0)
(59)
Φ(r) = gsη2g
x
b

(60)
The system is then solved by including an exponential term in the real space and
treating V = V0 + Φ(r)
Ψ(x, t) = e−iV (r)t/2ℏe−iA(r)t/2ℏ
Z
dk
(2π)2eik·re−ivF σ·ktΨV/2(k).
(61)
Finally, the last area that is of interest is grain boundaries To further and to
investigate the eﬀects of grain boundaries, the work of recent research[27] is con-
sidered, where the grain boundaries are considered as a scalar potential giving the
following Hamiltonian,
ˆH(k, t)θ(x) = ˆHθ(x) + V (r),
(62)
where
V (r) = ℏvF

wa
wXeiθ(0)
wXe−iθ(0)
wb

δ(x)
(63)
where wa, wb and wX are real dimensionless parameters and
ˆHθ(x) = U(x) =
eiθ(x)/2
0
0
e−iθ(x)/2

.
(64)
The transformed potential is dependant on the phase value θ(0) being assumed
to be localised at the grain boundary when x = 0. The potential is predicted to
behave like a Dirac Delta potential. Finally is it found that the phase value is
speciﬁed to the simple pieces wise function,
θ(x) =





θR
x > d/2
x(θR −θL)/2 + (θL + θR)/2
x ∈[−d/2, d/2]
θL
x < −d/2
and the complete Hamiltonian then becomes H = (Hθ(x) −A(t)) + V (r), where
A(t) is the time-dependant vector potential including the electric ﬁeld mentioned
in section 3.2.1.
Page 39 of 88
==PAGE:41==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
3.2.2
Initialising Wavepackets with an Applied Electric Field
This section quickly describes the thoughts and details of initialising a wavepacket
to be examined and in turn compared to experimental results. A wavepackets is
initialised as a Gaussian wavepacket in 2D as the function
ψ(r, 0) = e−α(y−y0)2e−α(x−x0)2eik0yyeik0xxχ0.
(65)
Where x0 and y0 are the initial position, α is the width of the wavepacket, k0(x,y) =
2π/L(x,y)n where n is some integer and χ0 is the spinor given as χ0 = [−1, eiθ]T,
where θ is the propagation angle with respect to the x-axis. With the initialised
wavepacket the wavepacket propagate by solving the time dependant Schr¨odinger’s
equation as explained in 3.2.1, additionally it is possible to initialise multiple
wavepackets, this provides the advantage that one is able to do simulations at
a higher accuracy in terms of physical relevance, because observing an ensemble
rather than a single wavepacket provides the ability to accurately describe the
wavepacket interaction with an applied electric ﬁeld when each wavepacket has a
diﬀerent initial propagation angle since they will initialise with an average momen-
tum of zero, however the applied ﬁeld will after time accumulate some directional
momentum, the results of this will be brieﬂy mentioned here..
For the case of examining the eﬀects of an applied external electric ﬁeld six
wavepackets are initialised, each with a diﬀerent propagation angle. This is to
better improve the accuracy of measured values, since the idea of measuring a
single wavepacket is naive if one attempts to extract material parameters such as
carrier density, sheet conductance and mobility, having an ensemble of wavepack-
ets also provides the advantage that it is now possible to analyse the expectation
value of the velocity in some direction given as

v

= −i
ℏ[ ˆH, ˆr].
(66)
This allows us to observe the changes of the expectation value when the wavepacket
is aﬀected by an applied external electric ﬁeld or determining if the wavepacket
was subject to scattering. On ﬁgure 17 the expectation value of the velocity in the
x direction is plotted as a function of time when applied to a constant external
electric ﬁeld of 0.0008 V/nm which is considered low intensity, however for the
purpose of showcasing the eﬀects of the applied electric ﬁeld this intensity serves
the purpose perfectly.
Page 40 of 88
==PAGE:42==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 17: Expectation value of the velocity in the x direction as function of time
for six wavepackets with α = 8 · 10−4, n = 20, x0 = y0 = 0 and six diﬀerent
incident angles, with a constant applied external electric ﬁeld of 8 · 10−4 V/nm.
The expectation value quickly converges toward the Fermi velocity. If one were
to plot the same expectation value, however with no applied external electric ﬁeld
the expectation value is constant at zero.
The applied external electric ﬁeld inﬂuences the wavepackets as it would be ex-
pected in experiments as well as simulations. The electrons have a negative charge
and therefor will attempt to align itself with the ﬁeld direction. Noticeable is it
that the expectation value for the velocity does not reach the Fermi velocity re-
gardless of how long the electric ﬁeld is applied. This is because the electrons
moving directly against the electric ﬁeld will not notice the advantage of rotating
and therefor not change direction.
When the simulations are being compared to THz experiments the situation be-
comes nontrivial because the THz pulse duration is generally of 5-10 picoseconds.
While it is possible to simulation the wavepacket for as long as one wants the
wavepacket loses accuracy in time. The probability density of a wavepacket will
disperse in time and eventually it will be impossible to predict anything because
the certainty of its current location is close to zero. This then leaves a problem, the
simulations can still be compared to experiments, however one needs to consider
if the THz pulse should be ﬁtted to the time frame in which the wavepacket is still
localised or if the simulation can only accurately capture the events of small in-
tervals of the pulse. For the purpose of this thesis both options were investigated,
and it was found that there were downsides and upsides to both methods.
Attempting to ﬁt the THz pulse to the simulation caused the expected behaviour
Page 41 of 88
==PAGE:43==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
of the expectation value of the velocity, however the magnitude of the outcome
were far more rapid and brutal than expected due to the pulse being 40 times
faster than the original pulse. Alternatively, using a constant applied electric ﬁeld
as a means to capture the peak of the pulse one obtains a more relaxed response to
the ﬁeld, however there is no relaxation to the equilibrium as it would be expected.
Depending on the situation either method may provide good results, however it is
required to keep this in mind and discuss the implications.
3.2.3
Accuracy, Approximations and Physical Relation
The method is limited by its simplicity and the calculations invites for large matrix
calculations, so if one wish to analyse systems which has applications in mind this
can become computational demanding.
For the purpose of this report I wish to analyse the behaviour of electrons when
exposed to a THz-TDS pulse, which in general last around 5 to 10 ps. To compare
this to numerical work it is used that the Fermi velocity of electrons in graphene is
constant at 1000 nm/ps due to the nature of the linear dispersion characteristic in
graphene. The simulations are designed with periodic boundary conditions which
allows us to simulate large areas if the structure is considered to be periodic,
leaving just the issue of time to be solved as it is predicted that the wavepacket
will delocalise after propagating for too long.
Additionally, the simulation is entirely designed around arbitrary values, however
by inserting these values in respect to the Fermi velocity it allows us to give the
values physical meaning. For example, for a 200 by 200 grid of 100 time steps
with ∆t = 1 we may compare this to a 200 nm by 200 nm grid in the timespan
of 50 fs. For the purpose of convergence in respect to both spacial and temporal
errors the klein tunneling issue is solved where the simulations are compared to
the analytic model for transmission probability for the case of E ≪V0.
Analytically it is possible to derive an expression for the transmission probability[64]
by ﬁnding the wavefunction in any given region, for the case of an npn-junction it
is required to ﬁnd three wavefunction for each of the regions given as
ψ1 = eikyy
"
eikxx
 1
+eiφ

+ re−ikxx

1
−e−iφ
 #
ψ2 = eikyy
"
Aeik′
xx

1
−eiθA

+ Be−ik′
xx

1
+e−iθA
 #
ψ3 = teikyyeikxxAeik′
xx
 1
+eiφ

.
With the assumption that the spinor is continuous in space one obtains a system
of equations as
Page 42 of 88
==PAGE:44==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
1 = −r + A + B
eiφ = re−iφ −AeiθA + Be−iθA
0 = −teikxd + Aeik′
xd + Be−ik′
xd
0 = −teiφeikxd −AeiθAeik′
xd + Be−iθAe−ik′
xd
Where the unknowns A, B, r and t are complex amplitudes which are easiest found
by substituting and isolating r, since this is the only value used for computing the
transmission probability given as
T = 1 −|r|2.
(67)
Isolating r in the system of equations, one obtains
r = −2eiφsin(k′
xd)
sinφ + sinθA
e−ik′xdcos(φ + θA) + eik′xdcos(φ −θA) + 2isin(k′
xd).
(68)
Insert into equation 67 one obtains
T =
cos2φ + cos2θA
cos2φcos2θAcos2(k′
xd) + sin2(k′
xd) + [1 + sinθAsinφ]2,
(69)
where k′
xd = −2πl
p
1 −2ϵ + ϵ2cos2φ with the barrier width l = V0d/(2πℏvF) the
energy ϵ = E/V0 and θA is the incident angle inside the p junction which has the
relation to the initial incident angle as such
Esinφ = −(E −V0)sinθA.
(70)
As mentioned initially the convergence test is examined in the low energy case
(E ≪V0), which has the transmission probability take the simpler form
T =
cos2φ
1 −cos2(k′
xd)sin2φ.
(71)
For the case of the simple npn junction with a constant electric ﬁeld the transmis-
sion probability is found and compared analytically for a stepsize ∆t = 3 as seen
on ﬁgure 18.
Page 43 of 88
==PAGE:45==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
(a)
(b)
Figure 18: a) Transmission probability for the wavepacket when encountering a
potential barrier as a function of incident angle, for when the barrier potential is
greater than the energy of the wavepacket and a constant electric ﬁeld of 0.002
V/nm is applied. Conﬁg: V0 = 5, n = 200, α = 0.01, E/V < 1. b) Transmission
probability for two diﬀerent potential barriers by Allain et al work[64].
The wavepacket is examined with a constant electric ﬁeld of 0.002 V/nm and a
total of eight diﬀerent angles for each diﬀerent time step size, with the ﬁnal time
being 600 regardless of time step size, this will result in the wavepacket to be in
the same position at the end regardless of time step size. Additionally the error
is then the norm squared of the accumulated diﬀerence from the analytical and
numerical transmission probability for all angles and each time step give as
e = |PDAnalytical −PDnumerical|2,
(72)
the convergence is found to follow the expected outcome as seen on ﬁgure 19
Page 44 of 88
==PAGE:46==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 19: Accumulated error for the transmission probability of the wavepacket
when encountering a potential barrier as a function of time step size, for when
the barrier potential is greater than the energy of the wavepacket and a constant
electric ﬁeld of 0.002 V/nm is applied.
Conﬁg: V0 = 5, n = 200, α = 0.01,
E/V < 1.
The result comes with no surprise that, when increasing the time stepsize we
introduce additional errors, one shortcoming of this particular method of proving
convergence is that for suﬃciently large time stepsizes the wavepacket will simply
travel past the barrier without any interaction with the barrier, which will provide
a false result of full transmission, which this particular convergence test does not
do a good job at acknowledging as an error.
Finally, this method is unaﬀected by changes in the spatial domain which may be
seen on ﬁgure 20.
Page 45 of 88
==PAGE:47==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 20: Accumulated error for each time stepsize for various grid sizes, spacial
convergence was examined with the same conﬁguration as temporal convergence.
We notice that for small grids the error is smaller than it is in general, however
this is mostly a result of the grid being so small that the wavepacket occupies
most of the space, which gives an inaccurate image of transmission, however for
suﬃciently large grids we see that the error is constant which indeed shows that
the method is not aﬀected by the grid size, however it is aﬀected by the time
stepsize, so this parameter must be chosen with care. In general the time stepsize
is 3, which corresponds to 1.5fs unless otherwise mentioned, while the grid is
chosen on a case to case basis depending on relevancy.
Page 46 of 88
==PAGE:48==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
4
Experimental Results & Discussion
The samples used for the experiments in this thesis are presented in table form
below,
Sample
Substrate
Dopant
Graphene
Growth
Graphene
Transfer
A
SiO2
non
black magic
CVD growth
unknown
B
Sapphire
non
cupper growth
substrate using
chromium nucleation
seeds[26]
semi-dry
aligned transfer[26]
C
SiO2
α−RuCl3
black magic
CVD growth
PVD
hot laminator
This section presents the ﬁndings from experiments alongside a discussion of causes
and eﬀects of the defect in questioning, this applies for the three sections.
Line defects. In the ﬁrst section of experimental results, it is examined how the
electric transport changes when the graphene sample is highly aﬀected by strain
defects. Focusing on observing the expected suppression of charge transport for
certain sample orientations with respect to the applied electric ﬁeld.
Grain Boundaries. Here it is discussed how the grain boundaries aﬀect charge
transport measured using THz-TDS. Here it is investigated if there is a correlation
between high density of grain boundaries and a low mobility approximated by the
Drude-Smith model.
Doped Graphene. Finally, this section examines charge transport when graphene
is doped by an underlying doping acting as an acceptor. In turn it is expected to
observe a change in carrier density as well as an increase in mobility due to the
underlying doping in question having transparent THz absorption.
4.1
Line defects
A reason for reduced mobility may be defects, such as bumps, or folds as mentioned
in section 1 and further mentioned in section 2.3 due to the nature of scattering
time and mean free path being aﬀected diﬀerent depending on impurities. Such
defects in the form of line-defects in an array-like pattern at various orientations
with respect to an external applied electric ﬁeld is predicted to ﬁnd a suppression
of charge transfer when the electric ﬁeld is perpendicular to the line defects. This
design behaves much like a wire-grid polarizer(WGP). A WGP is the principle
that electrons are free to move along the line defects for an electric ﬁeld parallel to
the line defects, meanwhile electrons are being suppressed when the electric ﬁeld
is perpendicular to the line defects resulting in little reﬂection and so the incident
Page 47 of 88
==PAGE:49==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
wave can pass through the grid. The WGP principle has been commonly used in
many designs where it is used to polarise light, and it is interesting to examine
if it is possible to ﬁnd correlation between WGP and experiments. Additionally,
previous work has reported that out of plane deformations such as wrinkles, rip-
ples, folds, and bumps introduce curvature which has an increased chemisorpsion
of hydrogen[28][29].
To investigate some of these phenomena sample A is used. Initially sample A is
examined through AFM as seen on ﬁgure 21b, where it is observed that there
are line-defects of an average height of 1.5 nm in an array-like pattern with a
separation of ≈1 to 1.5 nm, as can be observed in ﬁgure 21a which shows the
height proﬁle.
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: a) height proﬁle as well as b) AFM image of of sample A with multiple
line defects throughout and in an array-like pattern proﬁle.
This was however not the general sample topology, throughout the sample there
were areas with line defects such as these, but this was not observed everywhere
on the sample. These defects may be a result of cracks, wrinkles, folds, or con-
tamination trapped beneath the graphene. Long line-defects are often observed
in CVD graphene and Wenjuan Zhu et al[65] present similar results where line-
defects much like these were observed because of either a ripple, standing wrinkle
or a folded wrinkle, see ﬁgure 22.
Page 48 of 88
==PAGE:50==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 22: Schematic illustration of three classes of graphene line-defects simple
ripple, standing collapsed wrinkle, folded wrinkle[65]
THz-TDS was performed on sample A placed at the focal point such as illustrated
in section 3.1.2 and illustrated on ﬁgure 12, where the sample is rotated 10 de-
grees after each measurement in the interval of 0 to 180 degrees with the respect
to the applied electric ﬁeld. This is to capture if the scattering time had an angle
dependence with relation to the line-defects and if the WGP eﬀect or increased
chemisorpsion could be captured. The sheet conductivity was determined from
equation 34 and 35. The Drude-Smith model, equation 37, is ﬁtted to the conduc-
tivity and used to analyse the intrinsic sample properties. The conductivity as well
as the Drude-Smith properties are extracted and is shown on ﬁgure 23 for the elec-
tric ﬁeld being 23a perpendicular and 23b parallel to the line-defects of sample A.
The Drude-Smith scattering time measured for each point is shown on a bar plot
in ﬁgure 24. Furthermore, the extracted scattering time from the Drude-Smith ﬁts
were used to predict the Drude-Boltzmann mobility using equation 39 and carrier
density using equation 38 for each point measured and is shown on ﬁgure 25 and
the Drude-Smith backscattering parameter was found as c∗= −0.98 ± 0.01.
(a) 50 degree incident angle
(b) 140 degree incident angle
Figure 23: Sheet conductance for when the electric ﬁeld is a) perpendicular and
b) parallel to the line defects on sample A.
Page 49 of 88
==PAGE:51==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 24: Drude-Smith scattering time τ∗extracted from the THz-TDS measure-
ment, depending on sample orientation with respect to the electric ﬁeld from 0o
to 180o indicated on the x-axis as point measured.
Figure 25: Drude-Smith carrier density n∗and mobility µ∗extracted from the
THz-TDS measurement, depending on sample orientation with respect to the elec-
tric ﬁeld from 0o to 180o indicated on the x-axis as the point measured.
It is found that for diﬀerent sample orientations of sample A the THz-TDS con-
ductivity is slightly altered as well as the Drude-Smith properties. It was found
that the scattering time changed ≈8 fs from the shortest to the longest scatter-
ing time and that the extracted Drude-Smith mobility was suppressed to µ∗= 0
cm2(Vs)−1 when the applied electric ﬁeld was perpendicular to the line-defects,
which correlate well with the predicted WGP eﬀect. It should be mentioned that
the extracted carrier density is out of proportions for some angles, one could spec-
ulate that this is the result of charge impurities acting as n doping resulting in a
higher electron population.
Page 50 of 88
==PAGE:52==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Additional experiments with the goal to investigate out-of-plane defects acting
as charged impurities would be required before being able to formally conclude
that this type of defect aﬀect intrinsic material properties. Therefore, it would
be of the highest interest to investigate this, and a proposal for an experiment
to measure this eﬀect is brieﬂy presented here. By splitting sample, A into two
samples, denoted as sample one and two. Initially one wish to clean sample one in
a plasma etcher to remove organic matter leaving the surface with fewer hydrogen
atoms bound at the surface. Sample two is put into a chamber to be exposed to an
increased density of hydrogen to increase the number of hydrogen binding to the
surface. THz-TDS measurements are then performed on both samples for diﬀerent
orientations and areas of the sample, and it is expected to observe a diﬀerence in
extracted material properties because of an increased density of charge impurities
in sample two.
4.2
Grain Boundaries
For the purpose of examining grain boundaries sample B is used to investigate how
charge carriers behave in a polycrystalline graphene with a small average domain
size. Sample B is designed following the method discussed in 2.2 and shown in
ﬁgure 26b. AFM as well as Raman of sample B is shown on ﬁgure 26.
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: a) Raman spectra and b) AFM image of sample B.
This experiment is based on previous work[66] where it is predicted by Jonas D.
Buron et al that the increased lattice imperfections at the grain boundaries will
increase the electrical resistance. This eﬀect becomes increasingly dominant when
electrons are conﬁned to domains comparable to or smaller than the mean free
path and an increased backscattering will dominate the conductivity dynamics,
this was presented in section 3.1.2.
For that reason, I will analyse this eﬀect
by using the Drude-Smith model on THz-TDS measurements on sample B that
Page 51 of 88
==PAGE:53==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
is expected to contain many grains with a small average grain size and for that
reason it is expected to ﬁnd a suppression of the conductivity. The THz-TDS
conductivity is shown on ﬁgure 27 alongside a ﬁtting of the Drude-Smith model.
Figure 27: Single point measurement of conductivity for graphene with high den-
sity of grain boundaries alongside Drude-Smith ﬁt.
Alongside ﬁgure 27 is a total of ten points of sample B measured to perform
error analysis, this is presented in table form below with the mean value for each
measured property alongside the standard deviation,
τ∗
[fs]
19.32 ± 10.48
n∗
[cm−2]
3071.41 ± 4387.03 · 1012
σ∗dc
[mS]
1.10 ± 0.06
c∗
−0.83 ± 0.08
µ∗
[cm2(V s)−1]
31.67 ± 50.33
From the measurements it is found that the extracted Drude-Smith mobility is
massively decreased to almost vanishing comparable to the ﬁndings by Bøggild
et al[3] that graphene transferred on Si at room temperature is found to have a
measured Drude-Smith mobility averaging at µ = 1931 ± 402 cm2(V s)−1, since
sample B is well documented by C. Coletti it is assumed that the surface is highly
uniform, and has few defects and for that reason the decreased conductivity must
be a result of the small average domain size. Additionally, it is found that that
the errors are quite signiﬁcant, and one can speculate if this is an artifact from
the measurement or a result of the Drude-Smith model simply ﬁtting poorly to
the data.
I believe this to be a result of the shortcomings of the Drude-Smith model since
it explained in section 2.2 as well as recent research by Bøggild et al[3] that grain
boundaries are tied to a decrease in electrical properties in the material. This
Page 52 of 88
==PAGE:54==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
is because there are lattice defects and momentum barriers which gives bound-
ary resistance. The results of a decreased conductivity should not be surprising,
and the large errors is likely to be a result of the inaccuracies associated to the
Drude-Smith model. An alternative reason can be because the measured point
was slightly less inﬂuenced by grain boundaries resulting in a scenario where the
relation between lD, lC and lmfp is slightly diﬀerent throughout the sample.
4.3
Doped Graphene
It has been shown in recent research[67], that for large α −RuCl3 ﬂakes under
graphene there is found a large electron transfer from graphene to α −RuCl3
Zhou. B. et al[67] also argues that the charge transport is signiﬁcantly favoured
near the interface between undoped and doped areas of the sample.
For the
purpose of investigating these claims, as well as α−RuCl3 acting a useful dopant
of graphene which could in turn be useful for pn junction array designs. Sample
C is developed sample C as it is explained in section 3.1.1 and analysed using
THz-TDS measurements with Drude-Smith ﬁts to analyse the behaviour of the
charge carriers.
Initially I examine sample C with optical microscopy[68] before and after graphene
transfer to conﬁrm that there are found ﬂakes of α−RuCl3 as well as a successful
graphene transfer, these optical images are shown on ﬁgure 28. Additionally, it is
possible to distinguish a height diﬀerence of the α−RuCl3 ﬂakes. This should not
inﬂuence the doping once the graphene is transferred since it has been shown that
it is only the ﬁrst two layers of α−RuCl3 which contributes to the doping[69].
However it might inﬂuence the charge transport, since Zhou. B. et al[67] predict
the transport to occur near the interface which is no longer well-deﬁned as a re-
sult of the gradual transition from undoped to a doped region. If it is possible
to conﬁrm that there are large monolayer α−RuCl3 ﬂakes then the interface is
expected to be well-deﬁned and postulate from Zhou. B. and his co-workers can
better be examined. For that reason I examine sample C through Raman spec-
troscopy and the results are shown on ﬁgure 29a. Compared to previous research
the Raman measurements follows what has previously been shown[67] and it is
concluded that α−RuCl3 has been successfully transferred to the substrate and
that there are monolayer ﬂakes throughout the sample. Since it is found that
monolayer α−RuCl3 have a single Raman peak near 300 cm−1, and the second
peak near 300 cm−1 increases in amplitude for larger thickness of the ﬂake. An
illustration of how sample C’s topology is expected to be is shown on ﬁgure 29b.
Page 53 of 88
==PAGE:55==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
(a)
(b)
Figure 28: optical microscopy of sample C a) before graphene being transferred
and b) after graphene transfer, both with large α−RuCl3 ﬂakes.
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: a) Raman spectrum for various areas of sample C providing clear
evidence of multiple α −RuCl3 ﬂakes of various thickness.
b) Illustration of
sample C, with undoped layers and doped layers with either monolayer, bilayer or
otherwise α −RuCl3 acting as underlying doping.
With Sample C design now well explained, I will be using THz-TDS at ten dif-
ferent areas assumed to contain both doped and undoped graphene, to analyse if
the α−RuCl3 inﬂuences the charge transport the Drude-Smith model is ﬁtted to
the THz-TDS conductivity found using equation 34 and 35. The results of said
measurements are shown on ﬁgure 30.
Page 54 of 88
==PAGE:56==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
(a)
(b)
Figure 30: Measured conductivity for a) undoped and b) doped graphene. With
the Drude-smith model ﬁt giving an approximation for intrinsic material proper-
ties.
For the extracted Drude-Smith properties standard error analysis is performed
and is presented in table form below for suspected doped and undoped region,
Undoped
Doped
τ∗
[fs]
59 ± 19.39
164.9 ± 23.72
n∗
[cm−2]
5.89 ± 8.77 · 1012
0.55 ± 0.24 · 1012
σ∗dc
[mS]
0.007 ± 0.02
0.30 ± 0.05
c∗
−0.99 ± 0.01
−0.81 ± 0.02
µ∗
[cm2(V s)−1]
4.406 ± 10.69
4235.54 ± 2290.14
It is expected that for large α−RuCl3 ﬂakes there is a large electron transfer from
graphene to α−RuCl3, which in turn decrease the electron density of graphene in
the 102 to 103 order of magnitude[67][69]. However, from the table it can be seen
that the change in magnitude of carrier density as a result of the electrons being
absorbed by the underlying α−RuCl3 ﬂakes is much smaller than predicted.
However, it was still observed that both the extracted Drude-Smith mobility and
carrier density was observed to follow the predicted increase or decrease respec-
tively when measured on the suspected doped regions. For that reason, it can
be argued that amplitude of the two extracted properties may be slightly wrong
because of poor ﬁtting. The poor quality of the ﬁt is quite apparent to the naked
eye by observing the ﬁt on ﬁgure 30b and because of that the decreased carrier
density as well as increased mobility might be much smaller than what is observed.
However, from a qualitatively standpoint it was found that the intrinsic carrier
density was decreased by the underlying doping of graphene which agrees with
what has been shown in recent research[67][69]. Furthermore, because of the THz-
TDS experiment it is near impossible to determine the exact sample topology at
Page 55 of 88
==PAGE:57==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
the spot measured.
It was for that reason hard to conﬁrm the localization of
charge transport with the postulate by Zhou. B. et al[67].
Finally to sum up the discussion, the results presented here are in strong agreement
with the ﬁndings of previous research[67][69] showcasing that large α−RuCl3 ﬂakes
are a great candidate for doping of graphene.
While it is also observed that
the Drude-Smith model seem to have its issues with properly extracting material
properties for such a sample, it is for that reason interesting if a better model could
be designed to better capture the material properties which emerge from a sample
such as sample C. Additionally, it would be interesting to fur there investigate
the localization of charge transport in such a sample.
This could be done by
having a better idea of the sample topology near the measured area. This can
be obtained in one of two ways, easier by observing the topology of the sample
during THz-TDS measurements or alternatively one could design a sample where
it is much more likely that the area being investigated is relevant. A suggestion
for such a sample would be by designing large areas of high quality graphene on
large homogeneous α −RuCl3 where point of measurement is easily distinguished
between undoped and doped regions. This would yield the opportunity to analyse
if the increased transport is near the interface or inside the doped region, since it
would be possible to easily distinguish between doped and undoped areas.
Page 56 of 88
==PAGE:58==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
5
Numerical Results & Discussion
This section present the ﬁndings of the numerical calculations alongside a discus-
sion of each section’s correlation to previous numerical and experimental work,
the section will touch upon three main areas.
Line-defects. For the purpose of examining how the electric transport changes
when the graphene sample at hand is containing a series of line-defects this sec-
tion will apply a numerical model[30][62] to ﬁnd a correlation between numerical
and experimental results. This section also brieﬂy mentions the eﬀects of charge
impurities.
Grain boundaries. Here it is discussed how the grain boundaries interact with
charge carriers, since it is theoretically predicted that grain boundaries are reason
for preferential scattering. It is interesting to investigate if this act as a charge
impurity or a scalar potential and for this purpose a numerical model[27] is applied
which attempts to capture this behaviour.
Doped graphene. Finally, it is explained how an underlying doping can be used
to heavily inﬂuence the carriers in graphene both in terms of localisation of the
charge transport as well as investigating the inﬂuence of doping to the carrier
density.
5.1
Line-defects
To examining if experiments correlate with theory I investigate if it is possible to
ﬁnd a WGP eﬀect for certain sample orientations in numerical calculations. For
that purpose, I analyse what was previously mentioned in section 3.2.1 as well
as what have been explained recently in recent research[30][62]. It is explained
that it is possible to describe the eﬀects of line-defects by the theoretical model
explained in section 3.2.1 more precisely, by using the extended Hamiltonian in
equation 56, however also presented here,
H = vFσ · (p + τeA) + Φ(r).
(73)
Simulations is done on a 1000 by 1000 nm grid and four line-defects of height
h0 = 10 and width b = 15 with an applied external electric ﬁeld mimicking a THz
pulse with peak intensity of ETHz peak = 5 · 104 V/nm which is considered high
intensity for most THz-TDS experiments. The wavepacket will propagate for a
total of 200 time steps with a stepsize of 1 fs so a total of 200 fs which is considered
ultra-fast. Generally, much faster than any THz pulse which is expected to have
a duration in between 5 to 10 ps. For that reason, the case of a constant electric
ﬁeld is also examined. The simulation is done for two sample orientations as is
illustrated on ﬁgure 31 where the probability density of each of the six wavepackets
are shown in realspace.
Page 57 of 88
==PAGE:59==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Figure 31: Two types of sample orientation which mimics the experiments from
ﬁgure 21 in section 4.1 Line-defects, for a) horizontal line-defects the case where
the electric ﬁeld is parallel to the sample line-defects and vertical line-defects the
case where the electric ﬁeld is orthogonal to the sample line-defects.
Figure 32 shows the expectation value for the velocity in the x direction for an
external electric ﬁeld of a THz-pulse, see appendix C for the exact pulse used.
While ﬁgure 33 is the same expectation value, however applied electric ﬁeld is
constant.
(a)
(b)
Figure 32: Expectation value for the velocity in the x direction for six wavepackets
initialised with α = 8 · 104, n = 20 and at diﬀerent propagation angle and two
sample orientations.
When exposed to an external electric ﬁeld induced by a
THz-pulse in the x-direction for a) horizontal and b) vertical line-defects.
Page 58 of 88
==PAGE:60==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
(a)
(b)
Figure 33: Expectation value for the velocity in the x direction for six wavepackets
initialised with α = 8 · 104, n = 20 and at diﬀerent propagation angle and two
sample orientations.
When exposed to a constant applied electric ﬁeld in the
x-direction for a) horizontal and b) vertical line-defects..
On ﬁgure 32 the expectation value for the velocity is shown to have high oscillations
however a general form is kept, it is clear that the wavepackets are aﬀected by the
THz pulse by being shambled and ﬁnally after some scattering events the ensemble
ﬁnds an equilibrium.
Some issues which were considered when examining the ensemble with an electric
ﬁeld in the form of a THz pulse, was that because the pulse is being forced to
ﬁt a much smaller time window. One can tell that the predicted issue of rapid
direction change has massive complications to the physics relevant. Not only are
there a large number of oscillations due to the wavepacket becoming delocalized
but it is not possible to observe many scattering eﬀects. This is a result of the
wavepackets simply returning to its original propagation angle once the THz pulse
is over and having not met any defects before returning to an equilibrium state,
which gives a false image of the scattering events that would be expected.
So instead, it is investigated how the system behaves to a constant electric ﬁeld
rather than a THz pulse. When a constant electric ﬁeld is applied on the system
the expectation value for the velocity is found and shown on ﬁgure 33.
After
ﬁnding that the simulations held much better precision when the electric ﬁeld was
constant, this was the consider to be the main approach for the coming simulations.
The idea of a 10 ps THz pulse being applied in a 200 fs window was disregarded
for the coming sections.
For the case of the line-defect being parallel with the electric ﬁeld it is calculated
that there is little to no direct scattering, it is instead a slow decrease in velocity.
Page 59 of 88
==PAGE:61==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
This is found out to be because of the wavepackets which initially had a propaga-
tion angle toward the line-defect got slightly altered and no longer collide with the
line-defect directly and this is found by calculating the probability density of the
wavepackets for each timestep. From the probability density it is found that it is
instead a soft impact, which has a much more mild scattering eﬀect. While for the
line defect being perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld there are much more massive
scattering events, which is apparent in the expectation value for the velocity as
full direction changes are observed in ﬁgure 33b. Similar eﬀects has been observed
in previous research[70] where it was found that transport along the line defects
had less resistance than across the line defect as a result of the predicted WGP.
As a mean to analyse the material properties the scattering time is approximated
as explained in equation 51 for a tolerance of κ = 1−1. For both the cases examined
the material properties was predicted and is presented in the table below for the
two diﬀerent sample orientations in relation to the line-defects being horizontal or
vertical.
Horizontal
Vertical
τ
[fs]
2.56
1.50
EF
[meV ]
0.99
0.66
ns
[cm−2]
1.80 · 1012
117 · 1012
σs
[mS]
0.045
0.226
µ
[cm2(V s)−1]
163.04
12.00
From the numerically extracted material properties it is found that there is a
signiﬁcant decrease in the extracted mobility when the applied electric ﬁeld is
perpendicular to the line-defects. This is in direct correlation with the ﬁndings
of the experiments in section 4.1 as well as the work of Marco Grande et al[71]
where it is found that graphene is useful as a wire-grid polarizer after some en-
gineering. Finally, From the experiments alongside the numerical calculations,
there is evidence that line-defects of suﬃcient size are the cause of preferential
scattering, more speciﬁc, a full momentum direction change. This full momen-
tum direction change is observed in the simulations to occur at the line-defects
which caused the carriers to oscillate between line-defects resulting in the expected
WGP eﬀect. However, if the charge transport is parallel to the line-defects, then
the charge transport is mostly unaﬀected by the large number of line-defects. Any
alteration of the charge transport for the case of charge transport parallel to the
line-defects may be the result of charge impurities rather than directly scattering
oﬀthe line-defects.
For this thesis it was not possible to design a sample with suﬃciently accurate
charge impurities to formally examine this experimentally. However, the ﬁndings
from numerical analysis will be mentioned regardless. The case of a charge im-
purities in the graphene sheet becomes a bit more exotic and signiﬁcantly more
lucid as the charge carrier behaviour is ever changing depending on the dimen-
sions of the charge impurity or the incident angle. To showcase the eﬀects of a
Page 60 of 88
==PAGE:62==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
defect induced by a charge impurity the situation with a low angle of impact with
a high intensity charge impurity is showcased. Initially the wavepacket is shown
on ﬁgure 34 for two discrete timesteps, one before impact and one after as well as
the expectation value for the velocity shown on ﬁgure 35 that is considered when
approximating the scattering time.
(a)
(b)
Figure 34: Wavepacket probability density in real space a) after 11 fs and b) after
100 fs. Observed wavepacket interaction with a a series of charge impurities for a
constant electric ﬁeld in the negative x-direction.
Figure 35: Expectation value for the velocity in the x direction for six wavepackets
initialised with α = 8 · 10−4, n = 20 and at diﬀerent propagation angles. When
exposed to a constant applied electric ﬁeld in the negative x-direction with an
intensity of 4 · 10−4 V/nm.
Page 61 of 88
==PAGE:63==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
The material properties was calculated to be EF = 1 meV, ns = 11.5 · 1012
cm−2, σs = 0.087 mS and µ = 47.39 cm2(Vs)−1 when the scattering time was
approximated with a tolerance of k = 10−1 from the expectation value of the
velocity for the ensemble to be 1.8 fs.
It was not possible to experimentally investigate the eﬀect of charge impurities
due to having no point of reference, so while I notice a change in the numer-
ically extracted material properties compared to both line-defects parallel and
perpendicular to the applied electric ﬁeld. There is little background to conclude
on the eﬀect of charge impurities, however the simulations seem to indicate that
charge impurities will be the cause of a signiﬁcant decrease of the measured Drude-
Smith mobility. It would be interesting to investigate this further, some ideas is
to attempt to analyse the charge impurity scattering by exposing sample A to a
vapour which is highly adhesive and as a result we would be able to examine if
these strain defects are subject to chemisorption of hydrogen as was predicted in
previous work[28][29]. Additionally, the simulations could be expanded to include
a diﬀerent type of mathematical model to better approximate line-defects with a
large number of charge impurities attacheh.
5.2
Grain Boundaries
In section 4.2 the eﬀects of grain boundaries were examined experimentally, and
in section 3.2.1 it was mentioned how recent work[27] proposed a way to describe
grain boundaries theoretically through numerical calculations by using the Hamil-
tonian in equation 62, which is also shown here
ˆH(k, t)θ(x) = ˆHθ(x) + V (r).
(74)
The simulations attempts to investigate if there is a correlation between theory
and experiments and numerical calculations is done on a 1000 by 1000 nm grid
with one grain boundary with θR = 30, θL = 0 for two sample orientations with
six identical wavepackets initialised at diﬀerent propagation angles initialised with
α = 8 · 10−4 and n = 20 and a constant external electric ﬁeld in the x-direction
for a total of 200 time steps with a stepsize of 1 fs so a total of 200 fs. The
wavepacket propagation can be seen on ﬁgure 36 which shows the probability
density for two discrete timesteps before and after impact with a single horizontal
grain boundary. The expectation value for the velocity for both a grain boundary
parallel and perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld is shown on ﬁgure 37b.
Page 62 of 88
==PAGE:64==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
(a)
(b)
Figure 36: Wavepacket probability density in real space a) after 11 fs and b) after
100 fs. Observed wavepacket interaction with a grain boundary for a constant
electric ﬁeld in the x-direction.
(a)
(b)
Figure 37: Expectation value for the velocity in the x direction for six wavepack-
ets initialised with 8 · 10−4, n = 20 for a tolerance of κ = 1−1 and at diﬀerent
propagation angle and two sample orientations when exposed to a constant ap-
plied electric ﬁeld in the x-direction for both a) horizontal grain boundary and b)
vertical grain boundary.
From observing the propagation as well as the changes in the expectation value
of the velocity it can be seen that the wavepacket collide with the grain boundary
after ≈50 fs and scattering is observed. The two situations appears to be quite
Page 63 of 88
==PAGE:65==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
similar, despite one of them being a direct collision with a grain boundary and the
other barely interacting with the grain boundary. This is most interesting since it
was considered by the author that a grain boundary would behave similar to that
of a line-defect and ideas of WGP, such as those explained in section 5.1, might
introduce itself. However, this seems to not be the case for grain boundaries.
Additionally, I notice that there is a high transmission rate, however a slight per-
centage is reﬂected in a diﬀerent direction which highly depends on the impact
angle. For the situation where the electric ﬁeld is parallel to the grain boundary
it is found that there is a brief increase in charge carrier transport in the y direc-
tion. This is shown on ﬁgure 38 where the expectation value in the y direction
is showcased for both sample orientations, ﬁgure 38a is the sample for horizontal
grain boundary and ﬁgure 38b has a vertical grain boundary.
(a)
(b)
Figure 38: Expectation value for the velocity in the y direction for six wavepack-
ets initialised with 8 · 10−4, n = 20 for a tolerance of κ = 1−1 and at diﬀerent
propagation angle.
When exposed to a constant applied electric ﬁeld with an
intensity of 0.0004 V/nm for both a) horizontal grain boundary and b) vertical
grain boundary.
This transport is however slowly returning to follow the direction of the constant
applied electric ﬁeld. Finally, the approximated material properties are derived
from these simulations and shown in table form as,
Page 64 of 88
==PAGE:66==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Horizontal
Vertical
τ
[fs]
70
5.714
EF
[meV]
22
12.6
ns
[cm−2]
1.60 · 1014
7.03 · 1013
σs
[mS]
12.42
0.66
µ
[cm2(Vs)−1]
468.36
58.69
The scattering time for the vertical grain boundary is determined using the algo-
rithm discussed earlier in section 3.2.1 with a tolerance of κ = 10−1, more precise
equation 51, however it is kept at 70 fs for the horizontal grain boundary due to
it otherwise being improperly predicted. It is possible to utilise the same algo-
rithm for the horizontal grain boundary, however it is required to add additional
wavepackets and a large simulation area to properly capture enough scattering
events for a reliable approximation of the scattering time and this requires more
computer memory than was accessible at the time of these simulations.
To touch upon the obtained results it is little surprise, much similar to what was
found in section 5.1 the charge carrier transport appears to be favoured in the
sample orientation where the grain boundary is parallel to the electric ﬁeld. In
section 4.2 it was found that the measured Drude-Smith mobility was 31.67±50.33
cm2(Vs)−1 and numerical calculation predict this to be 59.69 cm2(Vs)−1 for grain
boundaries being perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld.
This is considered to be
strong correlation because in the experimental sample it is assumed that the charge
transport had direct collisions with grain boundaries.
With that said, the simulations has its ﬂaws, mostly because it is not likely to
ﬁnd a sample with a single grain boundaries. It is expected to ﬁnd a multitude
of grain boundaries with multiple diﬀerent orientations due to the nature of the
graphene growth explained in section 2.2. For further work on this matter it would
be interesting to upscale the numerical work, to properly simulate a 10 to 20 ps
time interval of electron transport, in a 10 by 10 µm surface area with multiple
grain boundaries at various orientations. This is considered of highest interest by
the author and is believed to be able to propose a method for predicting scattering
times for samples lacking uniformity, when it is known that the sample consists of
multiple domains separated by grain boundaries.
5.3
Doped Graphene
For the purpose of examining the eﬀects of doping to charge transport in graphene.
The method described in 3.2.1 with a scalar potential on the surface, which has
been shown to provide useful predictions to wavepacket behaviour in distorted
graphene[72][73][74]. is used for numerical calculations and the scalar potential is
described as
V (r) =
V0
1 + e
r−ζ
kBT
,
(75)
Page 65 of 88
==PAGE:67==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
where ζ = 2kBT. The numerical calculations will simulate two cases. The ﬁrst
simulations sets out to examine how the charge transport may be observed when
there is a gradual transition from an undoped region to a doped region with an
applied electric ﬁeld attempting to push the carriers into the doped region. This
is an attempt to simulate the charge transport during a THz-TDS measurement
on sample much similar to sample C.
The second case examined is entirely the same as the ﬁrst, however this time the
sample is rotated so that the electric ﬁeld is parallel to the interface between the
undoped- and doped-region. This is in an attempt to investigate the postulate by
Zhou. B. et al[67], which discuss that the transport will prefer to happen near the
interface of a large hole population and electron population.
The numerical calculations is done on a 800 by 800 nm grid for the ﬁrst case
examined, and a 700 by 700 nm grid for the second case. A total of seven identical
wavepackets is initialised at diﬀerent propagation angles with α = 8 · 10−4 and
n = 20 and a constant electric ﬁeld of E = 2 · 10−4 V/nm in the x-direction for a
total of 200 time steps with a time stepsize of 1 fs making it a total of 200 fs.
Initially we will exclusively analyse the ﬁrst case. To best showcase the trajectory
of the wavepacket it is chosen to show the current density, J = ρv, where ρ
is the probability density and v is the velocity, as it pictures the direction of
propagation as well as being highly localised. The current density is measured
in arbitrary units while being proportional to the charge pr area. The current
density of the wavepackets is shown on ﬁgure 39 as well as the the expectation
value of the velocity shown on ﬁgure 40, for two gradual scalar potentials of 39a)
V = 1 and 39b) V = 100.
Page 66 of 88
==PAGE:68==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
(a)
(b)
Figure 39: Summed current density of seven wavepacket after 200 fs for two sam-
ples interacting with a scalar potential of a) V = 1 and b) V = 100 to illustrate
the eﬀect of a lightly and heavily doped region for a wavepacket initialised with
a = 8 · 10−4 and n = 20 at diﬀerent incident angles.
(a)
(b)
Figure 40: Expectation value for the velocity in the x direction for seven wavepack-
ets at diﬀerent propagation angle exposed to a constant applied electric ﬁeld for
a doped region of a) V = 1 and b) V = 100.
It is found and shown on ﬁgure 40 that a higher degree of scattering, in the form
of reﬂection, occurs for the case of a highly doped region. The wavepackets relax
to some equilibrium regardless of the doping level and at which point the material
Page 67 of 88
==PAGE:69==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
properties are calculated and presented in table form below for both V = 1 and
V = 100,
V = 1
V = 100
τ
[fs]
70
70
EF
[meV]
11.58
56.27
ns
[cm−2]
50 · 1012
1203 · 1012
σs
[mS]
7.15
33.5
µ
[cm2(Vs)−1]
809.55
173.77
The scattering time for this calculation is considered to be 70 fs for both cases,
this may yield problems in the calculations of the carrier density as well as mobil-
ity, however it was shown on recent work[75] that ﬁne results were found with a
scattering time approximated at 70 fs.
Moving on I will investigate the second case, more precisely it will be investigated
if the wavepackets prefers to propagate near the interface between the undoped-
and doped-region. This is most easily observed on ﬁgure 41 which present the
probability density of the wavepacket after 200 fs, where the wavepacket is some-
what delocalized, however it is entirely localized around the interface. There is
close to zero probability that one will observe the wavepacket exclusively inside
the doped- or undoped-region.
Figure 41: Wavepacket probability density for the distinct time step t = 130 fs.
For the speciﬁc case of the electric ﬁeld being parallel to the interface between
large population of holes in the form of a scalar vector potential of V = 100 as
well as normal undoped graphene.
Expanding on this I chose to investigate if the doping level would have an impact
to the material properties predicted from numerical calculations, and to showcase
this I present the data gathered for three diﬀerent doping levels for both the electric
ﬁeld being perpendicular and parallel with respect to the interface between the
doped- and undoped-region. This is shown in table form as,
Page 68 of 88
==PAGE:70==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Parallel
Perpendicular
V
τ [fs]
µ [cm2(Vs)−1]
ns [cm−2]
τ [fs]
µ [cm2(Vs)−1]
ns [cm−2]
1
70
882.42
46.6 · 1012
70
4056.41
2.21 · 1012
10
70
1513.00
15.8 · 1012
70
1249.99
23.2 · 1012
100
50
243.71
32.2 · 1012
70
168.21
1284.58 · 1012
For the electric ﬁeld being parallel to the interface, it was found that the charge
transport was only observed near the interface between the doped- and undoped-
region for large doping levels. For both V = 1 and V = 10 the wavepackets would
simply propagate into the doped region or be fully reﬂected resulting in large
preferential scattering. It was observed that the reason for the increased mobility
for a doping level of V = 10 and the electric ﬁeld being parallel to the interface was
a result of the majority of the wavepackets being reﬂected in a way that would
combine the wavepackets. This is shown with the summed current density on
ﬁgure 42. This is interesting because it is found that the calculated mobility will
increase as a function of the doping level before decreasing, indicating that there
is some optimal doping level for charge transport in graphene when the electric
ﬁeld is parallel to the interface of the doped- and undoped-region.
Figure 42: Summed current density of seven wavepackets after 200 fs with an
applied electric ﬁeld parallel to the interface of an undoped- and doped-region(V =
10).
From these calculations it would be extremely interesting to investigate if there is
an optimal doping level for charge transport. Additionally, was the results found
insuﬃcient to conclude on Zhou. B. et al[67] postulate, mostly because it was
found that there was some indication of an increased transport near the interface,
however it is unclear if that was simply a result of the electric ﬁeld being parallel
to the interface so that it was just generally advantageous. For that reason it
would be interesting to apply an electric ﬁeld which was not entirely parallel to
Page 69 of 88
==PAGE:71==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
the interface, but had a slight angle. If the transport is observed to be localized
near the interface regardless of the electric ﬁeld not being parallel then it would
be easier to conﬁrm the postulate of Zhou. B. et al[67].
Finally, a comparison to the experiments in this thesis is made. In the experiments
for p doped graphene it was found that the measured Drude-Smith mobility was
signiﬁcantly increased at certain areas of the sample and this was considered a
result of the doping. From the simulations it was found that for certain situations
there were a signiﬁcant increase in the calculated mobility which is in strong
agreement with the experiments. For that reason it is believed that there is a good
correlation between the simulations and experiments. However, the simulations
seem to have some confusing ﬁndings and the results found should be used with
caution, the idea of a decreasing charge transport for an increased doping level
when the electric ﬁeld is perpendicular to the interface as well as the ideas of
an optimal doping level when the electric ﬁeld is parallel to the interface seems
peculiar. It would therefor be of the highest interests to further investigate these
phenomena and identify if these are ﬂaws, errors or interesting physics. Perhaps
these phenomena draw parallels to some of the eﬀects observed near domain walls.
6
Polycrystalline graphene: Veselago lensing.
Finally as a last mention in this thesis we will view the idea of applied polycrys-
talline graphene where some impurity is seen as a beneﬁt rather than defect, this
becomes the case for the idea of the Veselago lensing phenomenon[16][17][76][77][78].
This is the concept of electrons behaving as waves and therefor electrons follow
the laws of optics and this becomes increasingly interesting because it has been
shown experimentally by John Pendry, an English theoretical physicist known for
his research into creating the ﬁrst practical invisibility cloak as well as being a
professor of theoretical solid state physics at Imperial College London, that the
Veselago lensing eﬀect occurs and it was noted that this eﬀect vastly improved
optical resolution. So for that reason ideas of designing materials utilising this
eﬀect becomes increasingly interesting as it could be the beginning of a new and
better optical resolution or invisibility devices.
This section will discuss how the numerical calculations used for examining mate-
rial properties in polycrystalline graphene can be used to predict Veselago lensing
and be useful as a tool to prepare experiments using α−RuCl3 as doping to induce
the potentials which will act as potentials exhibiting the Veselago lensing eﬀect.
To investigate this the numerical calculations are applied where it is assumed that
it is acceptable to model doping eﬀects as a scalar potential, as it is predicted that
when there is a potential barrier then for the wavepacket to be able to propagate
into the barrier there must be a shift in energy, in the form of
E = E0 −V,
(76)
Page 70 of 88
==PAGE:72==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
where V is the scalar potential. Following the concepts explained in section 2.1
a single wavepacket is initialized with α = 8 · 10−4, n = 20 and an incident angle
of 45 degrees as well as no applied electric ﬁeld.
The doping is mapped as a
scalar potential of V = 1 and V = 100 for the purpose of reaching the two limits
E −V < mc2 and E −V < −mc2 respectively. The wavepacket trajectory is
shown through the summed current density on ﬁgure 43 for a barrier of V = 1
and ﬁgure 44 for a barrier of V = 100.
Figure 43: Normalized current density for 100 time steps of a timestep size of 1.5
fs for a scalar potential of V = 1, colour bar shows the intensity of the current
density as J = ρv. Exponential decay as well as clear indication of sign change
for the wavenumber.
Figure 44: Normalized current density for 100 time steps of a timestep size of 1.5
fs for a scalar potential of V = 100, colour bar shows the intensity of the current
density as J = ρv.
Page 71 of 88
==PAGE:73==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
The wavepackets interaction with the barriers showcase a negative refraction which
is in agreement with previous work[73][74]. For the purpose of conﬁrming if Vese-
lago lensing is also obtained with multiple wavepackets, the same experiment was
examined when initialising multiple wavepackets with diﬀerent propagation angle
to collide with the barrier. It is expected to see the barrier act as a focusing
lens for certain magnitudes when following the limits mentioned before, so for this
purpose the potentials are examined for V = 1 on ﬁgure 45a and V = 10 on ﬁgure
45b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 45: Normalized current density J = ρv for ﬁve wavepackets propagating
with diﬀerent incident angle into the scalar potential of a) V = 1 and b) V = 10
shown as the sum of J over each time step.
From ﬁgure 45 it becomes apparent that this focusing eﬀect seems to be obtained
with current numerical calculations, which in turn tell us that it is possible to
establish an experiment because in section 5.3 it was found that there was a corre-
lation between numerical results and experiments as well as previous research. For
that reason the remainder of this section will discuss the details of an experiment
which is predicted to observe Veselago lensing.
Gil-Ho Lee et al[17] has shown that it is possible to observe negative refractive
behaviour of Dirac fermions in graphene and they use a technique where a npn
junction is designed where the p-doped area is obtained using a top gate which
increases the hole density. However, it would be convenient if it was possible to
observe similar result using α−RuCl3 as an underlying acceptor to design precise
npn junctions instead of a top gate. It is believed that α−RuCl3 will be a suitable
substitute to a top gate as it was found in the comparison between section 5.3 and
4.3 as well as recent research[72] that THz-TDS experiments had a correlation
with the numerical calculations. For that reason it would be expected to observe
Veselago lensing in graphene with npn junctions induced by α−RuCl3.
Page 72 of 88
==PAGE:74==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
First a α−RuCl3 single crystal sample is prepared and exfoliated on to scotch tape
as it has been shown that it is possible to obtain large monolayers of α−RuCl3
using this method, secondly a substrate must be prepared, SiO2 will be a suf-
ﬁcient substrate material as it is commonly used and predicted to cause few to
no implications. The substrate is prepared by cleaning it inside a plasma etch
chamber which will remove any organic contamination. Shortly after cleaning,
the exfoliated α−RuCl3 is transferred on to the prepared substrate, ideally the
sample would quickly have graphene transferred on to it to lessen the likelihood
that some contamination would occur. However it would be wise to observe the
sample through optical microscopy to conﬁrm large monolayer ﬂakes of α−RuCl3
transfer. Final step of the design process is to then transfer graphene on to the
sample, this is done using a PVA hot roll laminator method which has proven
useful to transfer large area graphene on to substrates.
With the design process ﬁnalised it is required to observe the Veselago lensing phe-
nomena, this would most easily be accomplished by using a measurement method
using the van der Pauw principle where it would be possible to measure the current
leakage. It is predicted that there will be a higher leakage for a positive refrac-
tion because of an increasing reﬂection. Additionally, it would be interesting to
investigate if a similar behaviour can be observed using THz-TDS measurements.
A more detailed description of some requirements for measurements to take place
is that, the electron injection must occur near a constriction that is analogous to
a single slit in optic to ensure that the injected electronic waves have a wide angle
distribution which mimics that of a Fraunhofer diﬀraction pattern. Additionally,
the α−RuCl3 ﬂake has to follow the focusing condition n = −b/a where a and b
are distances between injected electrons and the junction for particular points of
reference and is illustrated on ﬁgure 46
Figure 46: Schematic illustration of measurement setup for Veselago lensing for
graphene with npn junction induced by α−RuCl3 as an underlying doping acting
as an acceptor.
Gil-Ho Lee et al[17] used a = 600 nm, b = 720 nm as well as each corner with
a narrow constriction of width w ≈100 nm which met the focusing condition as
n = −1.20, and found that at low temperatures T = 4.2 K the van der Pauw
Page 73 of 88
==PAGE:75==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
contacts had a negative resistivity conﬁrming ballistic behaviour and the mean
free path was estimated to be 1.7 µm it is for that reason expected that during
measuring there will be few scattering eﬀects which would aﬀect the measurements
in a negative way. The suggested experiment is based on the ﬁndings in this project
as well as the ﬁndings of Gil-Ho Lee et al[17], and it is likely possible to establish a
more controlled design process for precise exfoliation of α−RuCl3 to better ensure
the focusing condition is met. However, using the exfoliation method it is highly
likely to ﬁnd a ﬂake which is useful for observing Veselago lensing in graphene with
npn junctions induced by an underlying α−RuCl3 doping however the design is
of highest importance as it has been shown by Shaowen Chen et al[78] that if the
transition from the n doped to the p doped region is gradual then the majority of
electrons are reﬂected, so for that purpose it is extremely potent that the α−RuCl3
used for measuring is homogeneous, this can be accomplished by assuring that the
ﬂake is monolayer through Raman spectroscopy before transferring graphene to
the sample.
Page 74 of 88
==PAGE:76==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
7
Conclusion
To conclude on the work of this thesis I start oﬀby mentioning the limitations of
Drude and Drude-Smith model. It was found that the Drude model, as well as
the Drude-Smith model ﬁtted to THz-TDS measurements throughout this thesis
gave a ﬁne phenomenological understanding of the conductivity in graphene with
large domains(> 200µm). However, for graphene with small domains(< 200µm)
an increased number of errors emerged because of scattering eﬀects introduced by
various eﬀects such as charge impurities, grain boundaries or surface plasmons to
name a few. These eﬀects consequentially caused the Drude-Smith scattering time
to be a ﬁtting parameter and no longer useful for conclusions. It is possible that
these errors are a result of either measurement artefacts, or analysis artefacts. For
that reason, it was examined how this aﬀected three diﬀerent designs commonly
found in any graphene design. This includes doping, line-defects as well as grain
boundaries and it was found that all three of these types of alterations to graphene
had massive inﬂuence on the charge transport, and that the Drude-Smith model
became increasingly inaccurate when the average domain size would decrease.
It is also considered that the substrate had some relevance in the poor ﬁts, since
sample B had a sapphire substrate which have a small resistivity compared to both
sample A and C that had a silicon substrate. The diﬀerent optical properties is
predicted to have some impact on the Drude-Smith ﬁt. This can be an explanation
to the low frequency abnormalities which is observed in the THz-TDS experiments,
which is most apparent in the grain boundary measurements. Additionally, is it
possible that the ﬁtting errors in the low frequencies can be explained by the
windowing of the measured data when used for analysis.
Furthermore, was it found that the uncertainties from the extracted Drude-Smith
scattering time as well as the DC conductivity led to signiﬁcant uncertainties for
the carrier density as well as the mobility which suggests that these properties
should be considered with the greatest caution. This is believed to be a result
of the phenomenological nature of the model for samples with a backscattering
parameter c < 0. This was especially apparent for sample B which had small
grains where it was found that the Drude-Smith mobility was signiﬁcantly smaller
for a backscattering parameter of c = −0.83 ± 0.08 compared to both sample A
and C which both had a similar or larger backscattering parameter. Even though
the Drude-Smith mobility cannot be directly compared to the intrinsic mobility,
the results obtained from sample B still provides a strong qualitative agreement
with the work carried out by Buron and his coworkers in 2014[66] where it was
found that the mobility would be large in graphene with large grain sizes and more
Drude-like. While the mobility of graphene with small grain sizes would be smaller
and follow a Drude-Smith like behaviour. For that reason, it is believed that the
Drude-Smith model can be used for a strong phenomenological background, but
as a tool to predict material properties it is highly inaccurate for graphene of small
domains.
Page 75 of 88
==PAGE:77==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
In section 4.1 it was found that line-defects on graphene in an array-like pattern
had a massive suppression of charge transport for certain sample orientations,
much like a wire-grid polarization eﬀect which is in strong agreement with the
ﬁndings of Marco Grande et al[71]. However, it was unexpected that the Drude-
Smith mobility in its peak only reached µ∗= 0.44 cm2(Vs)−1 for the THz-TDS
measurements on line-defects and it is considered that this is a result of the Drude-
Smith model or the design being poor for charge transport.
Finally, it was observed with THz-TDS measurements of graphene transferred
on to a strong acceptor, α−RuCl3, that graphene became p doped. This is in in
agreement with the ﬁndings of Zhou. B. et al[67] as well as being the ﬁrst time that
this has been shown using THz-TDS. Additionally, is it found that α−RuCl3 is
THz transparent which means that it is possible to design local doping of graphene
for the designs of pp′ junctions by making α−RuCl3 designs and transfer graphene
on top of it. A useful application for this could be ideas using the Veselago lensing
principle for the design of electron focusing devices or ideas of invisibility devices.
Furthermore, it is examined whether numerical calculations in the form of wavepacket
simulations could capture at least some aspects of the microscopic behaviour of
carriers in non-uniform graphene. Wavepacket simulations have the potential to
describe larger sample areas than typical tight-binding and DFT methods, while
making a better approximation to non-trivial quantum phenomena, such as trans-
mission and reﬂection across pn junctions more accurately capturing principles
such as Klein tunnelling.
To examine the eﬀects of line-defects on graphene the numerical calculations at-
tempt to ﬁnd an agreement with the experiments, to understand what happens
to the carriers when the electric is perpendicular to the line-defects. The simu-
lations found strong correlation with the experiments it was found that wire-grid
polarization dominates over the preferential backscattering eﬀect, as also observed
experimentally for sample A.
The results from numerical calculations on grain boundaries is based on the work
of Francesco Romeo et al where it was attempted to design a Hamiltonian which
would account for this higher resistance at the grain boundaries. This is a result
of disorder due to defects in the crystal as well as a momentum mismatch between
the inherent crystal orientation.
Using this method this thesis tried to shine
light on the question of what type of scattering is dominant at grain boundaries,
and from the simulations it was found that there was a surprisingly low degree
of dependence from the incident angle. It was observed that regardless of how
the wavepacket collided with the grain boundary there was a slight loss in the
ensembles average velocity which gives the impression that the grain boundary
acts mostly as a charge impurity defect which would slightly alter the direction of
the wavepacket, but not necessarily preferred as backward scattering. Addressing
this in combination with the experimental ﬁndings it becomes hard to conclude
on this type of defects in graphene. A possible suggestion to why the simulations
do not agree with the ﬁndings in the experimental work may be a result of the
Page 76 of 88
==PAGE:78==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
simplicity, the simulations only include one grain boundary and it is likely more
realistic to simulate a large area with many grain boundaries to better be able
to capture the suppression of the charge transport which was predicted by the
Drude-Smith model and it would be extremely interesting to further investigate
this matter both in terms of upscale but also to investigate the correctness of the
Hamiltonian used for the calculations.
Finally it was investigated how the remote doping by a crystal acceptor on graphene
interacted with charge transport.
For that purpose a doped region was ob-
tained as a scalar potential which had been shown to have good correlation with
experiments[72][73][74].
It was found that when the electric ﬁeld was perpen-
dicular to the doped region the wavepacket would, depending on the size of the
potential(level of doping) either propagate into the doped region with little scat-
tering, or it would be almost fully reﬂected. For the case of a highly doped region
the ﬁndings are almost identical to those of line-defects, however more interest-
ing is it when the electric ﬁeld is parallel to the doped region, because here it
was found that the charge transport occurred mostly near the interface which is
in agreement with the postulate of Zhou. B. et al. It was also found that the
measured mobility was nearly unaﬀected by the doping level when the transport
occurred near the interface. However most interesting was it when it was found
that Veselago lensing was observed for certain potentials, and for this reason it
was examined through the simulations if it would be possible to observe this eﬀect
in the experiments using α−RuCl3 as underlying doping, and based on previous
work as well as theory that predicts that mass-less Dirac fermions may have nega-
tive refraction, it was considered possible to observe Veselago lensing in graphene
doped by an underlying α−RuCl3 and a suggestion for an experiment to observe
this was discussed, with the addition of ideas of observing Veselago lensing for
monolayer ﬂakes of α−RuCl3 acting as underlying doping, but also the suppres-
sion of the same Veselago eﬀect for a gradual transition which would naturally
occur when α−RuCl3 was not monolayer.
Page 77 of 88
==PAGE:79==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
8
Acknowledgement
First and foremost I would like to thank both Peter Bøggild & Mads Brandbyge at
DTU Physics for making this project possible with their expertise and guidance,
their constant and motivating interest in the research kept me inspired and excited
to work on the project, also a special thanks to Jie Ji for her exceptional guidance
and assistance during experimental work.
Additionally I wish to extend my thanks to Camilla Coletti at the center for
nanotechnology innovations @NEST for her sharing the graphene sample used for
examining grain boundaries. As well as Graphenea for providing sample A which
is used for examining the eﬀect of line-defects on graphene
Page 78 of 88
==PAGE:80==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
References
[1] Michael R. Nellist, Yikai Chen, Andreas Mark, Sebastian G¨odrich, Chris-
tian Stelling, Jingjing Jiang, Rakesh Poddar, Chunzeng Li, Ravi Kumar,
Georg Papastavrou, Markus Retsch, Bruce S. Brunschwig, Zhuangqun Huang,
Chengxiang Xiang, and Shannon W. Boettcher. Atomic force microscopy with
nanoelectrode tips for high resolution electrochemical, nanoadhesion and na-
noelectrical imaging. 2017.
[2] 4 - techniques for characterizing the structure and properties of polymer
nanocomposites. Environmentally Friendly Polymer Nanocomposites, pages
74–88, 2013.
[3] Peter Bøggild, David M A Mackenzie, Patrick R Whelan, Dirch H Petersen,
Jonas Due Buron, Amaia Zurutuza, John Gallop, Ling Hao, and Peter U
Jepsen. Mapping the electrical properties of large-area graphene. 2D Mate-
rials, 4(4):042003, sep 2017.
[4] Jens Neu and Charles A. Schmuttenmaer.
Tutorial: An introduction to
terahertz time domain spectroscopy (thz-tds). Journal of Applied Physics,
124(23):231101, 2018.
[5] T. L. Cocker, D. Baillie, M. Buruma, L. V. Titova, R. D. Sydora, F. Marsiglio,
and F. A. Hegmann. Microscopic origin of the drude-smith model. Phys. Rev.
B, 96:205439, Nov 2017.
[6] E. H. Hwang, S. Adam, and S. Das Sarma.
Carrier transport in two-
dimensional graphene layers. Physical Review Letters, 98(18), 2007.
[7] N.V. Smith.
Drude theory and the optical properties of liquid mercury.
Physics Letters. a, 26(26):126–127, 1967.
[8] Keno L. Krewer, Marco Ballabio, and Mischa Bonn. The drude-smith model
for conductivity: de novo derivation and interpretation. 2021.
[9] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V.
Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov. Electric ﬁeld eﬀect in atomically
thin carbon ﬁlms. Science, 306(5696):666–669, 2004.
[10] Jose Caridad, Stephen R. Power, Artsem Shylau, Lene Gammelgaard, Antti-
Pekka Jauho, and Peter Bøggild. Gate electrostatics and quantum capaci-
tance in ballistic graphene device. Physical Review B (condensed Matter and
Materials Physics), 99(19):195408, 2019.
[11] M. F. Craciun, S. Russo, M. Yamamoto, and S. Tarucha. Tuneable electronic
properties in graphene. Nano Today, 6(1):42–60, 2011.
Page 79 of 88
==PAGE:81==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
[12] Sananda Biswas, Ying Li, Stephen M. Winter, Johannes Knolle, and Roser
Valent´ı. Electronic properties of -rucl3 in proximity to graphene. Physical
Review Letters, 123(23):237201, 2019.
[13] A. Banerjee, C. A. Bridges, J. Q. Yan, A. A. Aczel, L. Li, M. B. Stone,
G. E. Granroth, M. D. Lumsden, Y. Yiu, J. Knolle, S. Bhattacharjee, D. L.
Kovrizhin, R. Moessner, D. A. Tennant, D. G. Mandrus, and S. E. Nagler.
Proximate kitaev quantum spin liquid behaviour in a honeycomb magnet.
Nature Materials, 15(7):733–740, 2016.
[14] Arnab Banerjee,
Jiaqiang Yan,
Johannes Knolle,
Craig A. Bridges,
Matthew B. Stone, Mark D. Lumsden, David G. Mandrus, David A. Ten-
nant, Roderich Moessner, and Stephen E. Nagler. Neutron scattering in the
proximate quantum spin liquid -rucl3. Science, 356(6342):1055–1059, 2017.
[15] Seung Hwan Do, Sang Youn Park, Junki Yoshitake, Joji Nasu, Yukitoshi
Motome, Yong Seung Kwon, D. T. Adroja, D. J. Voneshen, Kyoo Kim, T. H.
Jang, J. H. Park, Kwang Yong Choi, and Sungdae Ji. Majorana fermions in
the kitaev quantum spin system -rucl 3. Nature Physics, 13(11):1079–1084,
2017.
[16] Vadim V. Cheianov, Vladimir Fal’ko, and B. L. Altshuler.
The focusing
of electron ﬂow and a veselago lens in graphene p-n junctions.
Science,
315(5816):1252–1255, 2007.
[17] Gil Ho Lee, Geon Hyoung Park, and Hu Jong Lee. Observation of negative
refraction of dirac fermions in graphene.
Nature Physics, 11(11):925–929,
2015.
[18] Yumeng Shi, Xiaochen Dong, Peng Chen, Junling Wang, and Lain Jong
Li. Eﬀective doping of single-layer graphene from underlying sio2 substrates.
Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 79(11):115402,
2009.
[19] S. Reschke, F. Mayr, Zhe Wang, Seung Hwan Do, K. Y. Choi, and
A. Loidl.
Electronic and phonon excitations in -ruc l3.
Physical Review
B, 96(16):165120, 2017.
[20] Andreas Isacsson, Aron W. Cummings, Luciano Colombo, Luigi Colombo,
Jari M. Kinaret, and Stephan Roche. Scaling properties of polycrystalline
graphene: A review. 2d Materials, 4(1):012002, 2017.
[21] Katsunori Yagi, Ayaka Yamada, Kenjiro Hayashi, Naoki Harada, Shintaro
Sato, and Naoki Yokoyama. Dependence of ﬁeld-eﬀect mobility of graphene
grown by thermal chemical vapor deposition on its grain size. Japanese Jour-
nal of Applied Physics, 52(11):110106, 2013.
Page 80 of 88
==PAGE:82==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
[22] Meng Yang, Shinichirou Sasaki, Masato Ohnishi, Ken Suzuki, and Hideo
Miura. Electronic properties and strain sensitivity of cvd-grown graphene
with acetylene. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 55(4):04EP05, 2016.
[23] Thomas Nørbygaard. Studies of grain boundaries in materials subjected to
diﬀusional creep, 2002.
[24] Claudia Backes, Amr M. Abdelkader, Concepci´on Alonso, and Hugo Nolan.
Production and processing of graphene and related materials. 2020.
[25] Qingkai Yu, Luis A. Jauregui, Wei Wu, Robert Colby, Jifa Tian, Zhihua Su,
Helin Cao, Zhihong Liu, Deepak Pandey, Dongguang Wei, Ting Fung Chung,
Peng Peng, Nathan P. Guisinger, Eric A. Stach, Jiming Bao, Shin Shem Pei,
and Yong P. Chen. Control and characterization of individual grains and
grain boundaries in graphene grown by chemical vapour deposition. Nature
Materials, 10(6):443–449, 2011.
[26] Vaidotas Miseikis, Federica Bianco, J´er´emy David, Mauro Gemmi, Vittorio
Pellegrini, Marco Romagnoli, and Camilla Coletti. Deterministic patterned
growth of high-mobility large-crystal graphene: A path towards wafer scale
integration. 2d Materials, 4(2):021004, 2017.
[27] Francesco Romeo and Antonio Di Bartolomeo. Scattering theory of graphene
grain boundaries. Materials, 11(9):1660, 2018.
[28] Deepak Srivastava, Donald W. Brenner, J. David Schall, Kevin D. Ausman,
Min Feng Yu, and Rodney S. Ruoﬀ. Predictions of enhanced chemical reac-
tivity at regions of local conformational strain on carbon nanotubes: Kinky
chemistry. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 103(21):4330–4337, 1999.
[29] Sarah Goler, Camilla Coletti, Valentina Tozzini, Vincenzo Piazza, Torge
Mashoﬀ, Fabio Beltram, Vittorio Pellegrini, and Stefan Heun. Inﬂuence of
graphene curvature on hydrogen adsorption: Toward hydrogen storage de-
vices. Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 117(22):11506–11513, 2013.
[30] Dawei Zhai and Nancy Sandler.
Electron dynamics in strained graphene.
Modern Physics Letters B, 33(28):1930001, 2019.
[31] Hideki Hirai, Hideaki Tsuchiya, Yoshinari Kamakura, Nobuya Mori, and Mat-
suto Ogawa. Electron mobility calculation for graphene on substrates. Journal
of Applied Physics, 116(8):083703, 2014.
[32] R. Logemann, K. J.A. Reijnders, T. Tudorovskiy, M. I. Katsnelson, and
Shengjun Yuan.
Modeling klein tunneling and caustics of electron waves
in graphene. Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics,
91(4):045420, 2015.
Page 81 of 88
==PAGE:83==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
[33] Jin Xiao, Mengqiu Long, Xinmei Li, Hui Xu, Han Huang, and Yongli Gao.
Theoretical prediction of electronic structure and carrier mobility in single-
walled mos2 nanotubes. Scientiﬁc Reports, 4(1):4327, 2014.
[34] G´eza I. M´ark, P´eter Vancs´o, Chanyong Hwang, Philippe Lambin, and
L´aszl´o P. Bir´o. Anisotropic dynamics of charge carriers in graphene. Physical
Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 85(12):125443, 2012.
[35] David E. Fernandes, Manuel Rodrigues, Gabriel Falc˜ao, and M´ario G. Sil-
veirinha. Time evolution of electron waves in graphene superlattices. AIP
Advances, 6(7):075109, 2016.
[36] Department of physics.
[37] Ghazanfar Nazir, Muhammad Farooq Khan, Volodymyr M. Iermolenko, and
Jonghwa Eom. Two- and four-probe ﬁeld-eﬀect and hall mobilities in transi-
tion metal dichalcogenide ﬁeld-eﬀect transistors. Rsc Advances, 6(65):60787–
60793, 2016.
[38] David Mackenzie, Jonas Christian Due Buron, Patrick Rebsdorf Whelan, Jose
Caridad, Martin Bjergfelt, Birong Luo, Abhay Shivayogimath, Anne Lyck
Smitshuysen, Joachim Dahl Thomsen, Tim Booth, Lene Gammelgaard, Jo-
hanna Zultak, Bjarke Sørensen Jessen, Peter Bøggild, and Dirch Hjorth Pe-
tersen. Quality assessment of graphene: Continuity, uniformity, and accuracy
of mobility measurements. Nano Research, 10(10):3596–3605, 2017.
[39] Jakob Bohr. Adhesive tape exfoliation: Why it works for graphene. Epl,
109(5):58004, 2015.
[40] Abhay Shivayogimath, Patrick Rebsdorf Whelan, David M.A. Mackenzie,
Birong Luo, Deping Huang, Da Luo, Meihui Wang, Lene Gammelgaard,
Haofei Shi, Rodney S. Ruoﬀ, Peter Bøggild, and Timothy J. Booth. Do-it-
yourself transfer of large-area graphene using an oﬃce laminator and water.
Chemistry of Materials, 31(7):2328–2336, 2019.
[41] E MEYER. Atomic force microscopy. Progress in Surface Science, 41(1):3–49,
1992.
[42] G. Binnig, C. F. Quate, and Ch. Gerber. Atomic force microscope. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 56:930–933, Mar 1986.
[43] Atomic force microscopy, Dec 2020.
[44] G Binnig, Ch Gerber, E Stoll, T. R Albrecht, and C. F Quate. Atomic reso-
lution with atomic force microscope. Europhysics Letters (EPL), 3(12):1281–
1286, jun 1987.
Page 82 of 88
==PAGE:84==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
[45] Andrea C. Ferrari and Denis M. Basko. Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool
for studying the properties of graphene. Nature Nanotechnology, 8(4):235–
246, 2013.
[46] A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri,
S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth, and A. K. Geim.
Ra-
man spectrum of graphene and graphene layers.
Physical Review Letters,
97(18):187401, 2006.
[47] Andrea C. Ferrari and John Robertson.
Raman spectroscopy in carbons:
From nanotubes to diamond. preface. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 362(1824):2269–
2270, 2004.
[48] Ivan Ivanov, Mischa Bonn, Zolt´an Mics, and Dmitry Turchinovich. Perspec-
tive on terahertz spectroscopy of graphene. Epl, 111(6):67001, 2015.
[49] Callum J. Docherty and Michael B. Johnston.
Terahertz properties of
graphene. Journal of Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, 33(8):797–
815, 2012.
[50] Petr Kuzel and Hynek Nemec. Terahertz spectroscopy of nanomaterials: a
close look at charge-carrier transport. Advanced Optical Materials, 8(3), 2020.
[51] Toptica Photonics. Femtosecond ﬁber, Jun 2020.
[52] Xingyi Wu, Guofang Zhong, Lorenzo D’Arsi´e, Hisashi Sugime, Santiago Es-
conjauregui, Alex W. Robertson, and John Robertson. Growth of continu-
ous monolayer graphene with millimeter-sized domains using industrially safe
conditions. Scientiﬁc Reports, 6(1):21152, 2016.
[53] Jonas D. Buron, Dirch H. Petersen, Peter Boggild, David G. Cooke, Michael
Hilke, Jie Sun, Eric Whiteway, Peter F. Nielsen, Ole Hansen, August Yurgens,
and Peter U. Jepsen.
Graphene conductance uniformity mapping.
Nano
Letters, 12(10):5074–5081, 2012.
[54] D. G. Cooke, A. N. MacDonald, A. Hryciw, J. Wang, Q. Li, A. Meldrum,
and F. A. Hegmann. Transient terahertz conductivity in photoexcited sili-
con nanocrystal ﬁlms. Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials
Physics, 73(19):193311, 2006.
[55] Anatoly V. Zayats, Igor I. Smolyaninov, and Alexei A. Maradudin. Nano-
optics of surface plasmon polaritons. Physics Reports, 408(3-4):131–314, 2005.
[56] W. Withayachumnankul, H. Lin, S. P. Mickan, B. M. Fischer, and D. Abbott.
Analysis of measurement uncertainty in thz-tds. Proceedings of Spie - the
International Society for Optical Engineering, 6593:659326, 2007.
Page 83 of 88
==PAGE:85==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
[57] Lionel Duvillaret, Fr´ed´eric Garet, and Jean Louis Coutaz. A reliable method
for extraction of material parameters in terahertz time-domain spectroscopy.
Ieee Journal on Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 2(3):739–745, 1996.
[58] Jingzhou Xu, Tao Yuan, Samuel Mickan, and X. C. Zhang. Limit of spectral
resolution in terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. Chinese Physics Letters,
20(8):1266–1268, 2003.
[59] Miroslav Bartoˇs´ık, Jindˇrich Mach, Jakub Piastek, David Nezval, Martin
Koneˇcn´y, Vojtˇech ˇSvarc, Klaus Ensslin, and Tom´aˇs ˇSikola. Mechanism and
suppression of physisorbed-water-caused hysteresis in graphene fet sensors.
Acs Sensors, 5(9):2940–2949, 2020.
[60] M. V. Berry and N. L. Balazs. Nonspreading wave packets. American Journal
of Physics, 47(3):264–267, 1979.
[61] Zhigang Sun, Weitao Yang, and Dong H. Zhang. Higher-order split operator
schemes for solving the schr¨odinger equation in the time-dependent wave
packet method: Applications to triatomic reactive scattering calculations.
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 14(6):1827–1845, 2012.
[62] Andrey Chaves, L. Covaci, Kh Yu Rakhimov, G. A. Farias, and F. M. Peeters.
Wave-packet dynamics and valley ﬁlter in strained graphene. Physical Review
B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 82(20):205430, 2010.
[63] Dawei Zhai and Nancy Sandler.
Electron dynamics in strained graphene.
Modern Physics Letters B, 33(28):1930001, 2019.
[64] P. E. Allain and J. N. Fuchs. Klein tunneling in graphene: optics with massless
electrons. European Physical Journal B, 83(3):301–317, 2011.
[65] Wenjuan Zhu, Tony Low, Vasili Perebeinos, Ageeth A. Bol, Yu Zhu, Hugen
Yan, and Jerry Tersoﬀ. Structure and electronic transport in graphene wrin-
kles. 2016.
[66] Jonas Christian Due Buron, Filippo Pizzocchero, Bjarke Sørensen Jessen,
Tim Booth, Peter F. Nielsen, Ole Hansen, Michael Hilke, Eric Whiteway,
Peter Uhd Jepsen, Peter Bøggild, and Dirch Hjorth Petersen. Electrically
continuous graphene from single crystal copper veriﬁed by terahertz conduc-
tance spectroscopy and micro four-point probe. Nano Letters, 14(11):6348–
6355, 2014.
[67] Boyi Zhou, J. Balgley, P. Lampen-Kelley, J-Q Yan, D. G. Mandrus, and
E. A. Henriksen. Evidence for charge transfer and proximate magnetism in
graphene-alpha-rucl3 heterostructures. Physical Review B, 100(16), 2019.
[68] C. J. Roberts, M. C. Davies, S. J.B. Tendler, and P. M. Williams. Scanning
probe microscopy, applications. Encyclopedia of Spectroscopy and Spectrom-
etry, pages 2473–2480, 1999.
Page 84 of 88
==PAGE:86==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
[69] Yiping Wang, Jesse Balgley, Eli Gerber, Mason Gray, Narendra Kumar, Xi-
aobo Lu, Jia Qiang Yan, Arash Fereidouni, Rabindra Basnet, Seok Joon Yun,
Dhavala Suri, Hikari Kitadai, Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Xi Ling,
Jagadeesh Moodera, Young Hee Lee, Hugh O.H. Churchill, Jin Hu, Li Yang,
Eun Ah Kim, David G. Mandrus, Erik A. Henriksen, and Kenneth S. Burch.
Modulation doping via a two-dimensional atomic crystalline acceptor. Nano
Letters, 20(12):8446–8452, 2020.
[70] Wenjuan Zhu, Tony Low, Vasili Perebeinos, Ageeth A. Bol, Yu Zhu, Hugen
Yan, Jerry Tersoﬀ, and Phaedon Avouris. Structure and electronic transport
in graphene wrinkles. Nano Letters, 12(7):3431–3436, 2012.
[71] Marco Grande,
Giuseppe Valerio Bianco,
Maria Antonietta Vincenti,
Domenico De Ceglia, Pio Capezzuto, Michael Scalora, Antonella D’Orazio,
and Giovanni Bruno.
Optically transparent microwave polarizer based on
quasi-metallic graphene. Scientiﬁc Reports, 5(1):17083, 2015.
[72] Qifang Zhao, Jiangbin Gong, and Cord A. M¨uller.
Localization behavior
of dirac particles in disordered graphene superlattices. Physical Review B -
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 85(10):104201, 2012.
[73] Markku J¨a¨askel¨ainen, Marijke Lombard, and Ulrich Z¨ulicke. Refraction in
spacetime. American Journal of Physics, 79(6):672–677, 2011.
[74] V. V. Grigor’ev and V. V. Kabanov. Propagation of a localized wavepacket
in a metamaterial with a negative index of refraction. Journal of Applied
Spectroscopy, 75(2):192–198, 2008.
[75] Morgan A. Brown, Michael S. Crosser, Matthew R. Leyden, Yabing Qi, and
Ethan D. Minot. Measurement of high carrier mobility in graphene in an aque-
ous electrolyte environment. Applied Physics Letters, 109(9):093104, 2016.
[76] F. Libisch, T. Hisch, R. Glattauer, L. A. Chizhova, and J. Burgd¨orfer. Vese-
lago lens and klein collimator in disordered graphene. Journal of Physics
Condensed Matter, 29(11):114002, 2017.
[77] Martin Leder, Christopher Grossert, and Martin Weitz. Veselago lensing with
ultracold atoms in an optical lattice.
Nature Communications, 5(1):3327,
2014.
[78] Shaowen Chen, Zheng Han, Mirza M. Elahi, K. M. Masum Habib, Lei Wang,
Bo Wen, Yuanda Gao, Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, James Hone,
Avik W. Ghosh, and Cory R. Dean. Electron optics with p-n junctions in
ballistic graphene. Science, 353(6307):1522–1525, 2016.
Page 85 of 88
==PAGE:87==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
A
Drude-Boltzmann Conductivity Derivation
The distance between points in k-space is π/L and the number of points with wave
numbers below k in an area of size L is the area of a circle in k-psace divided by
the area occupied by one state
N = 1
4πk2/(π/L)2,
(77)
where 1
4 is to avoid counting identical states. For the case of graphene we have a
fourfold degeneracy as a result of vally and spin degeneracy gs = gv = 2. The den-
sity of state can then be found as the number of states per energy for a conductor
of area L2 as
g(E) = ∂N
∂E = ∂N
∂k
∂k
∂E = gvgs
2πkL2
4π2ℏvF
= gvgsL2 k2
2πE ,
(78)
and the density of state at the Fermi energy EF is,
g(E) = gvgsL2 k2
2πE = gvgsL2 k2
F
2πEF
,
(79)
For this purpose we make use of multiplying with 1 =
E2
F
(ℏvF kF )2 to obtain
g(E) = gvgsL2 k2
2πE = gvgsL2 k2
F
2πEF
E2
F
(ℏvFkF)2 =
2EF
π(ℏvF)2,
(80)
The Einstein diﬀusion constant is found from the mean free path l = vFτ, as the
diﬀusivity meaning how much has the electrons diﬀused after some time, this is
written as
D = l2
2τ = 1
2vFl = 1
2τv2
F
(81)
B
Taylor Approximation - Order of Accuracy
To prove the order of accuracy we Taylor expand and compare e−i∆tTe−i∆tV with
e−i∆t(T+V )
e−i∆tTe−i∆tV =

1 −i∆tT −1
2∆t2T 2
1 −i∆tV −1
2∆t2V 2
= 1 −i∆t(T + V ) −∆t2
2 (T 2 + 2TV + V 2) + O(∆t3)
(82)
We then compare this to the unsplit exponential
e−i∆t(T+V ) = 1 −i∆t(T + V ) −∆t2
2 (T + V )2 + O(∆t3)
= 1 −i∆t(T + V ) −∆t2
2 (T 2 + TV + V T + V 2) + O(∆t3)
(83)
Page 86 of 88
==PAGE:88==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
Since T and V generally do not commute the two expressions diﬀer by
e−i∆tTe−i∆tV = e−i∆t(T+V ) + O([T, V ]∆t2)
(84)
However, if we split the exponential to the symmetric form
e−i∆tTe−i∆tV = e−i∆tT/2e−i∆tV e−i∆tT/2
(85)
We obtain a third order accurate scheme because
e−i∆tT/2e−i∆tV e−i∆tT/2 =

1 −i∆t
2 T −∆t2
8 T 2
1 −i∆tV −∆t2
2 V 2
×

1 −i∆t
2 T −∆t2
8 T 2
+ O(∆t3)
= 1 −i∆t(T + V ) −∆t2
2 (T 2 + TV + V T + V 2) + O(∆t3)
(86)
C
Terahertz Pulse Data
This section present the terahertz pulse used for the numerical calculations, the
pulse is shown on ﬁgure 47
Figure 47: Terahertz pulse presented as the electric ﬁeld intensity as function of
time.
Page 87 of 88
==PAGE:89==
Terahertz spectroscopy of polycrystalline graphene
Masters Thesis
Emil N. Hansen
D
Matlab Fit
The ﬁtting of the Drude-Smith model itself was also examined, two diﬀerent built-
in Matlab ﬁtting models was used to analyse this, it was found that the built-in
Matlab ﬁtting model had little relevance for accuracy. Both ﬁtting models had
similar results, which is compared for each ﬁtted parameter at one particular spot
on the graphene on SiO2 doped with α −RuCl3, below you see the diﬀerence for
each parameter between the two ﬁtting methods,
σ1−DC −σ2−DC = 0
[mS]
τ1 −τ2 = 0.02
[fs]
c1 −c2 = 0.0001
n1−s −n2−s = 0
[1e12cm−2]
µ1 −µ2 = 0.17
[cm2(V s)−1]
(87)
From this it was concluded that the issue did not lie in the ﬁtting method, how-
ever it was underlying to the experiments and the Drude-Smith model itself. As
an attempt to ﬁnd higher accuracy and better predict the carrier mobility the
experimental results are compared to numerical calculations using wavepacket
simulations as will be explained in section 3.2.1 and in turn used to better be able
to conclude on a value for the scattering time, and in turn higher accuracy when
extracting material properties when used alongside THz-TDS.
Page 88 of 88
