==PAGE:1==
Determining the relationship between test
substance concentration and biodegradation
kinetics
2-ethylhexyl-4-methoxycinnamate
Master thesis
by Camilla Høy s154214
Supervisors: Philipp Mayer and Heidi Birch
DTU Environment
Technical University of Denmark
Date 14-02-2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Industrial chemicals are found everywhere in society and are essential ingredients in a wide range
of products. During their life cycle, these chemicals can end up in the environment, where they
can have a negative impact, and it is therefore important to know, how they will behave once in the
environment. The main chemical legislation in EU, which aims at reducing the harm to humans and
the environment through contact with chemicals, is REACH, which places the responsibility on the
chemical industry to register their chemicals, before they are allowed to sell them on the European
marked. One of the properties that should be reported, is the chemicals ability to biodegrade, which
is an important indication of the chemicals potential to accumulate and have long term effects on the
environment.
One category of widely used chemicals is UV-ﬁlters, which can be found both in cosmetics, skincare
products as well as in pharmaceuticals and plastics. Octinoxate is an organic UV-ﬁlter, which can be
found in sunscreens, cosmetics and other toiletries. It is a hydrophobic compound, which is released
to the environment via waste water as well as directly into natural water sources, when the applied
product is washed of.
The aims of this master thesis are to (1) examine the biodegradation kinetics of octinoxate in waste
water efﬂuent and (2) to determine if a change in test concentration inﬂuences these kinetics.
This was done by loading silicone rods in two passive dosing systems to approximately 70% and 14%
of capacity, and using these to generate four test concentrations from close to solubility and covering
two orders of magnitude. Waste water efﬂuent from WWTP Avedøre was used as inoculum for the
biotic systems, while the abiotic systems were made with milliQ water. The four test concentrations
were incubated at 12 °C for 13 days and the content of octinoxate was measured at three sampling
times using GC-MS combined with automated SPME.
The results for the four test concentrations were ﬁtted to a ﬁrst order degradation model in GraphPad
Prism 9 and showed complete degradation of octinoxate during the 13 days test period. Furthermore,
there was a clear indication, that an increase in test concentration resulted in prolonged degradation of
the compound, both by extending the lag phase as well as the half-life. The lag phase ranged from 1.9
days for the lowest test concentration to 2.7 days for the highest, while the half-life ranged from 0.8
days to 3.6 days. The degradation models were connected with some uncertainty, and it is therefore
recommended to run the experiment again with additional sampling times to get more datapoints and
thus better degradation models based on more data.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The experimental work as well as the writing in this master thesis was done by the author at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in the department for Environmental Engineering. The
thesis was produced in the period August 24th 2020 to February 14th 2021 and corresponds with 30
ETCS, which fulﬁls the requirements for a MSc degree in Environmental Engineering.
Acknowledgements
First of all I would like to extend a big thank you to my supervisors professor Philipp Mayer and
researcher Heidi Birch for their guidance, feedback, support and general help throughout this thesis.
A major thank you goes to laboratory technician Hanne Bøggild for all her help with setting up my
analysis method, making the standard samples and running the sample sequences.
Additionally, I would like to thank head of laboratory section Susanne Kruse for helping me prepare
my ﬁlter samples for DNA sequencing, and head of laboratory section Lene Kirstejn Jensen for con-
ducting the plate count for me. Also thank you to Karina Knudsmark Sjøholm for her help with data
treatment and discussion of results during the ﬁrst attempt of my biodegradation experiment, and to
Mette Torsbjerg Møller for introducing me to the oxygen meter.
A special thank you to Thomas Guildal from BIOFOS WWTP Avedøre for being forthcoming, helpful
and allowing me to collect waste water efﬂuent at the plant. My gratitude also goes out to Mie Bech
Lukassen from DNASense for ensuring that my water samples were analysed quickly and the results
got to me in good time before my hand-in date.
Lastly I would like to thank my family and friends for their emotional support during this thesis, when
I didn’t believe in myself and things were piling up. An especial thank you goes out to my fellow
master thesis writers and ofﬁce buddies Karin L¨of Drenck and Emilie Kisbye Bovin for always being
there for discussions and lifting the mood when needed.
Camilla Høy, s154214
Kongens Lyngby, February 14th 2021
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Chemicals in society and how to manage them . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
UV-ﬁlters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Octinoxate - use and challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Properties of octinoxate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Biodegration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Bacteria in WWTP efﬂuent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Difﬁculties when testing hydrophobic chemicals in aqueous solutions
. . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Methods used in biodegradation testing - focusing on passive dosing . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Solid-Phase Microextraction (SPME)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.1
Gas Chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.2
Mass Spectrometry (MS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
11
3.1
Pre-experiment - Loading kinetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Passive dosing systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Pre-cleaning of silicone prior to this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
Cleaning the silicone rods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Loading the silicone rods with octinoxate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.4
Difference in water concentration made with the second passive dosing sys-
tem loaded to ⇠14% capacity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.5
Preparation of stock solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Biodegradation test of octinoxate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
SPME and GC-MS settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.2
Data treatment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Supplemental experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.1
Plate count . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.2
Oxygen measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.3
Filter samples for identiﬁcation of bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Results and discussion
17
4.1
Loading kinetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Difference in water concentration made with the second passive dosing system
. . .
19
4.3
Biodegradation test of octinoxate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.1
Data treatment of MS peak area results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:5==
4.3.2
Biodegradation models for the four concentrations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.3
Evaluation of methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Assessment of waste water efﬂuent from Avedøre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.1
Measurements at WWTP Avedøre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.2
Platecount . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Oxygen measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Bacterial development during the biodegradation experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Conclusion
33
6
References
34
Appendices
i
A List of materials
i
B
Dilution of test concentrations before analysis on GC-MS
ii
C Weight of silicone rods during loading kinetics pre-experiment
iv
D Evaluation of results from the GC-MS
v
E
Oxygen measurements
vii
F
Raw data GC-MS
x
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Chemicals in society and how to manage them
Industrial chemicals can be found everywhere in society and are essential for our way of life. It is
estimated by Danish Environmental Protection Agency (2021) that 30-50,000 industrial chemicals
can be found on the marked in EU, while approximately 20,000 of these are available in Denmark.
Unfortunately, some chemicals can negatively affect either human health, the environment or both,
and since chemicals can end up in the environment due to losses throughout their life cycle, the
assessment and regulation of chemicals is considered a very important issue (Danish Environmental
Protection Agency, 2021; European Commission, 2021a).
Denmark, as all other member states, follows the regulations set by EU, where REACH has been
the main legislation since its implementation in 2007 (European Commission, 2007). The goal of
REACH is to reduce the harm done to human health and the environment by identifying inherent
properties of chemicals early in the process, and to handle all chemicals equally regardless if they are
new or pre-existing to the European market. Furthermore, REACH has placed the responsibility of
proving that a chemical is safe for both humans and the environment on the industry producing said
chemical. If the information demand is not met, the chemical is not allowed on the EU market; the ”no
data no market” principle (Danish Environmental Protection Agency, 2021; European Commission,
2021b). The information should be registered in the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) database,
from where both the public and professionals can access said information and use it to manage and
assess the risks connected to the use of chemicals (European Commission, 2021b).
With the REACH legislation, a safety data sheet needs to be ﬁlled in containing a long list of informa-
tion including identiﬁcation and handling of the chemical, hazard identiﬁcation and exposure control,
physico-chemical properties, toxicology and ecological info, and disposal of the chemical (European
Commission, 2007). One of the ecological properties, that should be investigated for chemicals, is
their ability to biodegrade, since this could indicate that the chemical isn’t expected to accumulate
and have long term negative effects on the environment.
1.2
UV-ﬁlters
One category of chemicals, that is widely used and therefore important to gather information about is
UV-ﬁlters, which can be divided into two categories; the inorganic/physical and the organic/chemical
UV-ﬁlters (Manaia et al., 2013; Serpone et al., 2007).
Inorganic UV-ﬁlters, TiO2 and ZnO, block both UVA and UVB radiation covering the spectrum of
290-400 nm by absorbing, scattering and reﬂecting the light (Serpone et al., 2007). The organic ﬁlters,
often aromatic compounds with a carbonyl group, block either UVA or in most cases UVB radiation
by absorbing the light. Due to their ability to block UV-radiation, the UV-ﬁlters are used as active
ingredient in sunscreen (Manaia et al., 2013; Serpone et al., 2007) to protect the human skin against
the harmful radiation, but also in other products such as cosmetics (Serpone et al., 2007) and in the
1
==PAGE:7==
case of TiO2 products such as plastics, paints and pharmaceuticals (Manaia et al., 2013) to prolong
the life of the products by reducing the photodegradation of the products.
The inorganic UV-ﬁlters cover a broader range of UV radiation and are less likely to cause allergy
or skin irritation, compared to the organic ﬁlters, since they are photostable. However, the inorganic
ﬁlters also tend to be opaque when applied to the skin and form a white ﬁlm due to the size of their
particles, which is undesirable in cosmetics. On the other hand, the organic UV-ﬁlters only cover a
smaller range of UV radiation and can be photodegraded. The inorganic and organic UV-ﬁlters are
therefore often used in combination (Manaia et al., 2013; Serpone et al., 2007).
1.3
Octinoxate - use and challenges
2-ethylhexyl-4-methoxycinnamate, also known as octinoxate among many other synonyms, is an
organic UV-B ﬁlter. It is used as an active ingredient in sunscreen and in other toiletries such as
lotions, hair colour product, shampoo and cosmetics (PubChem, 2020; Campaign for Safe Cosmetics,
2021; Schneider and Lim, 2019)
Octinoxate is approved for use in cosmetics and toiletries worldwide (Campaign for Safe Cosmetics,
2021) and is a widely used active ingredient in especially sunscreen. In a study of Danish sunscreens
by Rastogi (2002) octinoxate was found in 49% of the 75 sunscreen products tested. Furthermore, in
the year 2000 octinoxate was found to be the most commonly used sunscreen ingredient in the US,
and could be found in approximately 90% of all sun lotions (PubChem, 2020).
Since octinoxate is found in many types of personal care products, the compound comes into direct
contact with the skin during use. After application, it is possible for octinoxate to absorb through the
skin (Schneider and Lim, 2019; Mota et al., 2013). Once in the body octinoxate can be found in the
inner layers of stratum corneum (the outermost layer of skin) as well as in urine, blood plasma and
breast milk (Mota et al., 2013). Octinoxate is emitted to the environment mainly via waste water from
both industry and households, but also directly into natural water sources when people go swimming
after application. From households it reaches the waste water by being excreted in its unchanged form
with the urine as well as being washed of skin in the shower or sink. From the industry it is found
in the waste water mainly from producers of cosmetics and sunscreen (Schneider and Lim, 2019;
PubChem, 2020; National Ocean Service, 2020).
Organic UV-ﬁlters such as octinoxate have been found in water sources all over the world, even as
remote as the Arctic, which suggest that the compounds are transported far with the ocean currents
(Schneider and Lim, 2019). In the oceans, the organic UV-ﬁlters have been found to have a negative
impact on marine life, causing e.g. bleaching of corals, impairment of the growth of algae and nega-
tive affect on reproductive systems or offspring of mussels and ﬁsh (National Ocean Service, 2020).
Octinoxate is not the most harmful of the organic UV-ﬁlters, but there is increasing evidence linking
octinoxate to being an endocrine disruptor and having the potential to negatively impact the reproduc-
tive system (National Ocean Service, 2020; Schneider and Lim, 2019; PubChem, 2020; Campaign for
Safe Cosmetics, 2021).
2
==PAGE:8==
1.4
Aim
The aims of this thesis are to (1) examine the biodegradation kinetics of octinoxate in waste water
efﬂuent and (2) to determine if an increase in test concentration delays the biodegradation kinetics
of octinoxate. The biodegradation test was conducted at four concentrations ranging from close to
solubility to two orders of magnitude below solubility.
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
2.1
Properties of octinoxate
Octinoxate (CAS: 5466-77-3/83834-59-7) is a colourless to pale yellow viscous liquid ester (Pub-
Chem, 2020), which structure can be seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1: The chemical structure of the UV-B ﬁlter octinoxate. Source: LGC (2020)
Table 1 presents a selection of octinoxate’s physicochemical properties. These will be further dis-
cussed below.
Table 1: Physiochemical properties of octinoxate at 20-25 °C from different sources: [1] Danish
QSAR Database (2020), [2] ECHA (2020), [3] Sigma-Aldrich (2019), [4] PubChem (2020). The
* indicates an experimental value, all other values are estimated. Italics indicates a reported value
which has been disregarded due to poor methodology
S
BP
Vp
KH
Log
Koc
Log
Log
[mg/L]
[°C]
[Pa]
[atm · m3/mol]
Kow
[L/kg]
Kaw
Koa
4.1E-2 * [2]
3.61E+2 [1]
1.84E-3 [1]
1.78E-6 [1]
5.8 [1]
8.60E+3 [4]
-4.14 [1]
9.94 [1]
4.8-4.9E-2 * [2]
3.82E+2* [2]
3.07E-3 [4]
8.48E-6 [1]
6.1 [3]
8.62E+3 [1]
5.1E-2 * [2]
8.5E-6 [4]
>6* [2]
1.33E+4 [1]
1.43E-1 [1]
3.41E-5 [1]
1.55E-1 [1]
2.0E-1 [3]
2.2-7.5E-1 * [2]
The measured or estimated solubility of octinoxate in water generally varies from 0.04 mg/L to 0.2
mg/L, which indicates that the compound has a poor water solubility. Overall the estimated values
are higher than the experimental with the exception of the experimental value of 0.22-0.75 mg/L.
Generally, experimental data is preferred over estimated data if the experiments are conducted using
proper methodology. One of the four experimental measurements, the value 0.22-0.75 mg/L, has
been disregarded by ECHA (2020), since the method used in the experiment wasn’t suited for poor
water soluble compounds with a solubility <0.01 g/L. The value 0.048-0.049 was produced during
experiments testing the effect of octinoxate on ﬁsh and amphibians, and are therefore not expected
4
==PAGE:10==
to be quite as precise as a measurement produced in an experiment using a method speciﬁcally for
determining solubility. The remaining two experimental values, 0.041 mg/L and 0.051 mg/L, were
both determined from solubility test following OECD 105 using the column elution method as recom-
mended for chemicals with a solubility <100 mg/L (OECD, 1995). However, only the experiment,
which produced the value 0.051 mg/L, was conducted at the preferred temperature of 20 (± 0.5) °C
and this measured solubility is therefore deemed the most reliable. To ease calculations, a solubility
of 0.05 mg/L has been used in this thesis.
Due to the high boiling point and the low vapour pressure, octinoxate is expected to be close to non-
volatile in its pure form. In aqueous solution the Henry’s Law constant, KH, indicates a slow rate
of volatilisation according to Baun et al. (2017). Octinoxate has high values for both logKow and
Koc, indicating a very lipophilic compound (logKow ≥6 (Baun et al., 2017)), which sorbes to organic
material such as soil and fat. The Koc>5000 indicates that octinoxate is immobile in soil, while
logKow ≥4 classiﬁes it as potentially bioaccumulative (Baun et al., 2017). The logKaw and logKoa
indicates an afﬁnity for being in water or sorbed to particles rather than being in air. Overall, if
octinoxate is emitted to the environment, it can be expected to be transported mainly via co-transport
of particles onto which it has sorbed.
When released to the environment, octinoxate have been found to be readily photodegradable in
aqueous solutions. A study using natural sunlight in mid-September in NY, USA found the photolysis
half-life to be between 0.8 and 1.3 hours for the the trans- and cis-isomer. Another study found
octinoxate to be readily biodegradable when using activated sludge. According to this study 78% of
the compound was degraded within 28 days. Octinoxate is on the other hand not readily degradable
by hydrolysis, with half-lives at 20°C found to be >1 year at pH 4, 7 and 9 (PubChem, 2020).
2.2
Biodegration
A chemical’s potential to biodegrade is one of the most important properties in case the compound
ends up in the environment, since biodegradable chemicals aren’t expected to cause the same amount
of long term issues for the environment compared to a persistent one. This is especially the case for
toxic compounds (Pagga, 1997; Jørgensen, 2008). Biodegradability is also important for the chemi-
cals potential to be removed at a WWTP, if the compound ends up in the waste water (Pagga, 1997).
Biodegradation is performed by a wide range of organisms, but especially microbiological organ-
isms such as bacteria and fungi, collectively known as decomposers, are considered environmentally
important (Pagga, 1997; Jørgensen, 2008). These decomposers have evolved the ability to degrade
many natural compounds and use them as energy. Since many anthropogenic compounds are struc-
turally similar to natural compounds and have been present in the environment for many years due
to their use in the industry, they also have the potential to be degraded by the decomposers (Pagga,
1997). However, this is not the case for all compounds, neither natural or industrial, and it is therefore
important to examine if a chemical possesses this potential.
Biodegradation happens most places in the environment, but most actively in aquatic mediums such
5
==PAGE:11==
as surface fresh water and sea water, but also in sediments and soil (Pagga, 1997; Jørgensen, 2008).
These natural degradation processes have been a source of inspiration for WWTPs to biologically
treat waste water under optimised process conditions. To gain knowledge about the biodegradation
processes in different mediums, laboratory tests are an important tool. The results from these tests can
then be used to predict the actual process happening both in the environment and in anthropological
systems to avoid harm from the released chemical (Pagga, 1997).
Biodegradability depend on both the chemical itself, the environmental medium, since different de-
composers are able to degrade different types of compounds, and the conditions in said medium
(Pagga, 1997; Jørgensen, 2008). When testing biodegradation in the laboratory, a number of param-
eters can affect the degradation process. They include, but are not limited to, test concentration of
the chemical, physico-chemical properties such as volatility and solubility, presence of nutrients and
other degradable substances in the test medium, as well as duration and conditions of the test. The
test conditions should be standardised as much as possible within the same type of test. However, the
inoculum containing the decomposers can not be standardised and its composition of microorganisms
will differ greatly depending on the source of medium (Pagga, 1997).
A simple way to conﬁrm biological activity during a test, is to measure a summary parameter such
as oxygen (Pagga, 1997), since decomposers require oxygen to biodegrade a chemical under aerobic
conditions. A decrease in oxygen concentration during the biodegradation test can therefor be an
indication of a biodegradation process in progress.
The biodegradation of a compound can be illustrated with a ﬁrst order degradation model, which
consists of three phases. First the lag phase before the degradation starts in which the bacteria adapt
to the test compound. Then follows the degradation phase; an exponential curve that follows the
degradation of the compound. Lastly is the plateau phase where the degradation has ended Pagga
(1997).
2.2.1
Bacteria in WWTP efﬂuent
The bacteria colonies, which can be found in WWTPs, belong to a wide range of groups, which
provides different abilities such as nitriﬁcation or denitriﬁcation, as well as different required working
conditions such as anaerobic or aerobic conditions. Many of these colonies are utilised during water
treatment but some, of human or animal origin, can also negatively impact the existing bacterial
colonies found in natural water sources such as rivers, when the waste water efﬂuent is discharged
here (Numberger et al., 2019).
A study by Numberger et al. (2019), which characterised the bacterial composition in both inﬂuent
and efﬂuent water from a WWTP in Berlin, Germany using 16S rRNA sequencing found, that the
three most abundant bacterial phyla in the efﬂuent water was: Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes and Fir-
micutes, with Proteobacteria clearly dominating the samples. The study also found, that the bacterial
composition does not vary greatly on the phylum level between WWTPs around the globe, but have
clear differences on the genera level. This difference was expected to be caused by parameters such
6
==PAGE:12==
as pH, temperature and salinity, as well as differences in catchment area for the WWTP and method
used to determine the bacterial composition. However, the two genera Acinetobacter and Arcobac-
ter under the phylum Proteobacteria, were dominant in the composition in studies from all over the
world and are thus likely to be found in WWTPs worldwide (Numberger et al., 2019).
2.3
Difﬁculties when testing hydrophobic chemicals in aqueous solutions
When testing the biodegradability of hydrophobic chemicals in aqueous solution a few challenges
arise due to the chemicals reluctance to be in water. One of these challenges is to be able to produce
predictable and reproducible test concentrations in the system (OECD, 2019; Hammershøj, 2020). It
is also important to consider how the system is designed to account for abiotic losses such as evapo-
ration, if the test system is open, and sorption to solids depending on the test inoculum (Hammershøj,
2020). The main challenge however, is to ensure that the compound is completely dissolved in the test
medium during the test (Mayer et al., 1999; OECD, 2019; Smith et al., 2010). This can be a challenge
if one wishes to follow the guidelines from OECD, since these guidelines typically require an initial
test concentration >1 mg/L, which is higher than the solubility for many hydrophobic compounds.
The chemical would thus be present in un-dissolved state, which would affect the biodegradation and
reduce the reproducibility of the test (Hammershøj, 2020).
2.4
Methods used in biodegradation testing - focusing on passive dosing
According to OECD (2019), there are four different methods which are applicable when it comes to
testing of poorly water soluble compounds in aqueous solutions; (1) direct addition, (2) dispersion
and emulsion, (3) solvents, and (4) generator systems including passive dosing.
(1) Direct addition is, as the name implies, the addition of pure compound into the test medium
combined with mixing to ease and enhance the dissolution of the chemical. This method can pose
challenges, if the test compound has a very low water solubility or if the desired test concentration
is very low. Generally, a weighing of less than 1 mg is deemed to be too uncertain, so very low test
concentrations might require the production of a large volume of stock solution to reach the required
concentration, which can be inconvenient (OECD, 2019).
(2) Dispersion and emulsion is generally not recommended due to the presence of un-dissolved com-
pound in the medium, which can both affect the toxicity of the test chemical as well as complicate the
estimation of the concentration in the medium (OECD, 2019).
(3) Solvent spiking of a test medium is a very commonly used method in biodegradation tests of
hydrophobic organic chemicals (Hammershøj et al., 2020; OECD, 2019). Using a solvent that are
miscible with water, can aid in the dissolution of poorly water soluble chemicals and thus make them
more suitable for mixing with the test medium (OECD, 2019). However, this method can have sev-
eral disadvantages since the solvent itself can affect the test, either by affecting parameters such as
the toxicity of the test compound or by enhancing the growth of biomass leading to an effect on the
biodegradation results. Furthermore, if the test is conducted on a mixture of chemicals, the solvent
can cause preferential dissolution of mixture constituents. Lastly, the use of solvent can risk spiking
7
==PAGE:13==
above the solubility of the poorly water soluble chemical, resulting in the formation of droplets or
crystals of pure compound when the solvent mixture is added to the test medium (Hammershøj et al.,
2020; OECD, 2019).
(4) The last method, generator systems such as passive dosing, needs to follow four criteria; com-
plete dissolution of the test chemical in the test medium, have the ability to maintain a stable and
predictable concentration throughout the test, compensate the test system for losses due to e.g. evap-
oration and sorption, and in no way interfere with the biological activity in the test system (toxicity,
biomass growth etc.) (OECD, 2019).
The foundation for passive dosing was made, when Mayer et al. (1999) examined the possibility of
using partitioning of a hydrophobic chemical from a solid phase, which was placed directly in the
aqueous phase. This was done to avoid the usual application of solvent to the medium to ease the
dissolution of the test chemical. The study suggested two ways to accelerate the equilibrium between
the solid and the aqueous phase; to either reduce the un-stirred boundary layer between the two phases
e.g. by shaking, or to maximise the ratio between the surface area of the solid phase and the volume
of the aqueous phase (Mayer et al., 1999).
Generally, passive dosing works by loading a suitable solid polymer such as silicone with the test
chemical or mixture. The polymer is then inserted into the test medium, where it acts like a donor
from which the hydrophobic compound partitions into the medium (OECD, 2019; Smith et al., 2010).
The method eliminates the use of a solvent, and the drawbacks that follow, and reduces the risk of
un-dissolved compound in the medium (Smith et al., 2010).
Additional advantages of passive dosing include the ability to control the concentration in the test
medium by varying the concentration of the compound in the silicone donor, which also means that
the method is very useful for concentration-response testing. Furthermore, the simplicity and low cost
of the method mean that passive dosing is a very applicable method for aquatic test in small vials and
with many replicates (Smith et al., 2010).
2.5
Solid-Phase Microextraction (SPME)
Solid Phase Microextraction (SPME) was developed in the early 1990’s by professor Janusz Pawliszyn
and his associates at the University of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada (Pawliszyn, 1997; Sparkman et al.,
2011). It is a solvent-free technique, that combines sampling, extraction, concentration and sample in-
troduction into a single step (Sparkman et al., 2011; Ouyang, 2012; Merkle et al., 2015). The method
is useful for organic compounds in solid, aqueous or gaseous matrices, since it can be used both in
aqueous sample or in the headspace above (Sparkman et al., 2011; Pawliszyn, 1997; Merkle et al.,
2015).
Instead of a solvent, SPME uses a ﬁbre made of fused silica or stainless steel coated with a thin layer
of absorbent polymer, most often a silicone. The ﬁbre is attached to a metal rod placed within a
syringe, that can be pushed out with a spring, when sampling is needed (Sparkman et al., 2011).
The extraction process of analytes from the sample works as following: The ﬁbre is exposed to
8
==PAGE:14==
the sample, either in the headspace or the water phase itself, where it extracts and concentrates the
analyte by absorbing it into its coating. The ﬁbre is then transported to the injector of the GC, where
the analyte is thermally desorbed and moved to the beginning of the GC column (Sparkman et al.,
2011).
Advantages of SPME include its ability to give precise and consistent results compared to other
methods. Furthermore, the SPME technique is non-exhaustive and has a low detection limit, which
has been reported to go down to parts-per-trillion (Sparkman et al., 2011). Drawbacks include limited
choice in ﬁbre coating, potential for carry-over between samples and breaking/limited lifetime of the
ﬁbre (Merkle et al., 2015).
2.6
Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)
The GC-MS is separated into two sequential methods; the gas chromatograph (GC) and the mass
spectrometer (MS).
2.6.1
Gas Chromatography
GC was developed by A.T. James and A.J.P. Martin in 1952 (Sparkman et al., 2011). The technology
works by introducing a small sample into a heated inlet on the GC, where the sample is volatilised.
This can be done either by injection or e.g. via thermal desorbtion from a SPME ﬁbre. The sample,
on gas phase, is transported with a neutral carrier gas (also referred to as the mobile phase), such as
helium, hydrogen, argon or nitrogen, through a long, coiled, capillary column coated with a stationary
phase. The different constituents of the sample are separated in the column based on their partitioning
between the mobile and solid phase in the column. The column is situated in an oven, which increases
the temperature at a rate of usually 4-20 °C/min to ensure that sample constituents that are strongly
retained to the stationary phase or have higher boiling points are released from the stationary phase
and emitted from the column. After the column, the now separated sample constituents ﬂow into a
detector or MS (Thermo Fisher, 2020; Woodford, 2019; Sparkman et al., 2011). This method is only
suitable for compounds which can be vaporised without decomposing (Sparkman et al., 2011).
2.6.2
Mass Spectrometry (MS)
MS is a widely used analytical method, which is used within multiple ﬁelds such as chemistry, phar-
macy, medicine and forensic science to quality check food and drugs, and to identify unknown sub-
stances in mixtures (Gross, 2017; Stroobant et al., 2007). It is a very popular method due to its high
sensitivity, low detection limits and speed (Stroobant et al., 2007). Furthermore, it is regarded as a
relatively non-destructive analysis method, since only a very small mass of sample is required for
analysis (Gross, 2017).
A mass spectrometer consists of ﬁve parts. First is a sample inlet, which in the case of GC-MS
is the GC, then follows an ion source, where the sample analytes are made into ions. After that
comes the mass analyser, where the ions are separated based on their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z),
then a detector, which ”counts” the abundance of the separated ions, and lastly a data processing
9
==PAGE:15==
system, which produces and displays the resulting mass spectrum of the analysis (Stroobant et al.,
2007; Gross, 2017). The ion source, mass analyser and detector are all operated under high vacuum
conditions (Gross, 2017), to ensure that the ions will reach the detector without colliding with other
gaseous molecules, which would make the ions lose their charge (Stroobant et al., 2007) and thus
affect their detection.
Since the GC is well-suited to separate different volatile analytes, the GC-MS coupling (Gross, 2017)
is especially efﬁcient for analysis of complex mixtures e.g. like natural samples (Stroobant et al.,
2007) such as waste water, which contains many different compounds.
10
==PAGE:16==
3
Methods
Different experiments have been conducted in this thesis to examine the biodegradation of octinoxate
in waste water efﬂuent inoculumm using passive dosing to produce the initial test concentrations. A
comprehensive list of all materials used in the experiments can be found in Appendix A.
3.1
Pre-experiment - Loading kinetics
In this experiment the loading kinetics of octinoxate into silicone were determined based on weight.
First, three pieces of silicone were cut at approximately half the length of the glass vials. The rods
were weighed (⇠0.3 g each) and placed into separate vials. Approximately ⇠1 g of pure octinoxate
was added with a glass pasteur pipette to each of the three glass vials. The vials were closed and placed
on a rolling bed mixer at ⇠37 rpm and 20 °C. After 1 hour additional octinoxate was added to all three
vials, approximately doubling the mass of the chemical, to ensure an excess amount of chemical in
the vials despite the rods being wiped multiple times through the duration of the experiment.
At different time intervals (1, 3, 5, 7, 24, 29 and 48 hours) the vials were collected from the rolling
bed mixer. The silicone rods were taken out with tweezers, wiped with lint-free tissue to remove
excess chemical and weighed in a clean glass vial to track the chemical uptake into the rods. The rods
were then returned to the vials containing octinoxate and placed back on the rolling bed mixer until
the next weighing.
After 48 hours the experiment was ended and the chemical uptake in the silicone could be plotted as a
function of time. This was done to help estimate the loading time for the loading of the passive dosing
systems in Section 3.2.3. A fully loaded silicone rod should be able to produce a water concentration
close to the solubility level for a compound (Seiler et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2010).
3.2
Passive dosing systems
3.2.1
Pre-cleaning of silicone prior to this thesis
Previous to this thesis, the silicone used for the experiments had been rinsed with demineralised water,
soaked in ethyl acetate (24 hours), ethanol (24 hours) and milliQ water (1 min shaking plus soaking
for 2 and 24 hours). Lastly, it had been dried in an oven at 120 °C and then stored in a plastic bag for
approximately half a year.
3.2.2
Cleaning the silicone rods
Due to the previously thorough cleaning, a lighter cleaning process was deemed adequate before
loading the silicone. First six pieces of silicone were cut to each weigh ⇠10 g. All six rods were then
placed in a glass jar and soaked in ethanol for 24 hours. After draining the ethanol, the rods were
rinsed with milliQ water for 1 min while shaking, and then left to soak in clean milliQ water for 2.5
and 21 hours. Lastly, the milliQ water was drained and the lid-less jar was placed in an oven for 2
hours at 120 °C to dry the silicone rods. This cleaning process was followed twice for two passive
11
==PAGE:17==
dosing systems.
3.2.3
Loading the silicone rods with octinoxate
The six newly cleaned pieces of silicone were inserted into six 50 mL amber glass bottles with septum
caps and approximately 5 g of pure octinoxate were added to each bottle. The bottles were placed
on a rolling bed mixer (⇠40 rpm) at 20°C for 3.5 hours to load the silicone rods to ca. 80% of
their capacity. The 80% had been chosen to get close to the solubility of octinoxate in water but still
low enough to hopefully avoid the formation of droplets of pure undissolved compound. After the
3.5 hours, which had been estimated from the loading kinetics pre-experiment (see Section 4.1), the
two ﬁrst rods were taken out of the bottles with tweezers, wiped off with lint-free tissue and weighed
in a clean bottle. The uptake was much lower than expected and thus deemed insufﬁcient, and the
rods were therefore returned to the loading bottles to load for another hour. After the additional hour,
the uptake was around 70% of the capacity, which was deemed sufﬁcient. The silicone rods were
transferred to six clean 240 mL amber glass bottles with septum caps and rinsed with milliQ water
on the rolling bed mixer during the weekend. After the rinsing was complete, the milliQ water was
discarded and the rods were ready for passive dosing.
The second set of six cleaned silicone rods were loaded using the same 50 mL amber bottles. For this
loading, the goal was to load the silicone rods to ⇠14% of their capacity. This should result in a factor
ﬁve difference between concentrations of water equilibrated with the two different loading systems.
According to the results from the loading kinetics pre-experiment (see Section 4.1) the silicone rods
should load for 19 minutes. However, since the previous loading showed that the coiled silicone took
longer to load compared to the smaller rods used in the pre-experiment, the loading time on the rolling
bed mixer was set to 30 min to ensure sufﬁcient uptake. The actual difference between the two loading
systems is therefore not exactly a factor ﬁve. After loading, the silicone rods were moved to six clean
240 mL amber glass bottles and left over night at room temperature to ensure even distribution of
compound throughout the rods. The silicone rods were then rinsed with milliQ water on the rolling
bed mixer for 2 hours before the rods were ready for passive dosing.
Three bottles from each loading level were used to produce the initial concentration for the biotic test
systems, while the remaining three bottles from each loading were used for the abiotic test systems.
3.2.4
Difference in water concentration made with the second passive dosing system loaded to
⇠14% capacity
The six rods loaded to ⇠14% were tested to establish any differences in the water concentration
they produced. This was done by adding milliQ water to all six 240 mL bottles and letting them reach
equilibrium on a rolling bed mixer for an hour. Afterwards, a factor 40 dilution (375 µL stock to 14.63
mL milliQ) was made in 20 mL vials for all six rods in duplicates (12 vials in total) and analysed on
the GC-MS. Based on the results, the six rods were ranked and paired; one bottle from each pair was
selected to produce biotic and abiotic stock solution respectively.
12
==PAGE:18==
3.2.5
Preparation of stock solution
The day prior to the preparation of the test concentrations for the biodegradation experiment, 120 20
mL amber glass vials were heated in an oven at 120 °C for 2 hours. After the vials were removed
from the oven, they were covered with aluminium foil. Furthermore, 120 septum caps for the vials
were wrapped in aluminium foil and placed in the oven at 80 °C over night. All of this was done to
ensure no presence of bacteria.
A sample of waste water efﬂuent from WWTP Avedøre was collected in three 1 L bottles on Tuesday
24/11-2020 at 08:30 am. At the site the temperature, pH, oxygen concentration and conductivity was
measured using a WTW Multi 3420 digital precision meter. An equal amount of waste water sample
from each of the three bottles was mixed together and 100 mL was transferred to each of the 240
mL bottles selected for biotic test systems. One exception being the bottle with the midmost loaded
silicone from the ⇠14% loaded rods mentioned in Section 3.2.4, which got transferred 150 mL. This
was due to the pair being used for multiple concentration levels and thus needing more stock solution
- see Section 3.3. Similarly was done for the abiotic test system using milliQ water instead of waste
water efﬂuent. All 12 240 mL bottles were then placed on a rolling bed mixer (⇠35 rpm, 20 °C) and
left for at least an hour to reach equilibrium.
3.3
Biodegradation test of octinoxate
A concentration series of four concentrations were prepared in the clean 20 mL amber vials, which
were ﬁlled with 15 mL in total. In total 15 vials were made of each concentration for both the biotic
and abiotic test system - 120 vials in total. This was done to allow triplicates of the test systems to
be analysed at ﬁve sampling times. The highest concentration, L1, was made with the stock solution
from the silicone rods loaded to ⇠70% capacity. The stock solution from the silicone rods loaded to
⇠14% was used for the second highest concentration, L2, and diluted a factor 5 and 25 respectively
for the two lowest concentrations L3 and L4 (see Table 2).
Table 2: Required volume of each stock solution and dilution water for one vial.
Concentration level
Target concentration
70% stock
14% stock
Dilution water
L1
35 µg/L
15 mL
-
-
L2
7 µg/L
-
15 mL
-
L3
1.4 µg/L
-
3 mL
12 mL
L4
0.28 µg/L
-
0.6 mL
14.4 mL
First the dilution water; waste water efﬂuent for the biotic samples and milliQ for the abiotic samples,
was added to the vials with an Eppendorf Multipette Stream automatic pipette and then the stock
solution was added to each vial using gas tight glass syringes. The glass syringes were used due to
the very lipophilic nature of octinoxate. To minimise the risk of contamination of bacteria into the
abiotic test system, the abiotic stock solutions were injected with the syringes before the biotic stock
solutions. Afterwards, the syringes were cleaned by rinsing them ﬁve times with pentane, ethanol and
13
==PAGE:19==
milliQ water respectively, and then leaving them to air-dry. All 120 vials were placed on rolling bed
mixers in a 12 °C incubator until sampling.
At sampling times (2, 6 and 13 days) triplicates of each concentration for both test systems were
removed from the incubator and diluted before being placed on the GC-MS. Due to complete degra-
dation of octinoxate after 13 days (see Section 4.3), the experiment was ended prematurely and the
remaining samples (prepared for day 20 and 23) were instead used to determine the bacteria compo-
sition (see Section 3.4.3).
All samples were diluted down to approximately 0.14 µg/L (only applicable for the initial concen-
tration for the biotic samples, since degradation brought the concentration even further down) - see
Appendix B. The dilutions were made in new 20 mL amber glass vials with septum caps, which were
placed on the GC-MS to measure the content of octinoxate. 10% methanol was added to the remain-
ing sample in the incubation vials, which were then placed at 0°C to cease the bacterial degradation.
The dilution was done to ensure avoidance of overloading the SPME ﬁbre, which happened in the
ﬁrst attempted biodegradation experiment, while the methanol and storage at 0°C were applied to
secure back-up samples in case of issues with the samples run on the GC-MS. Due to the length of
the analysis run-time, the sampling times were split into two, so the two lowest concentrations, L4
and L3, and the two highest concentrations, L2 and L1, were tested on subsequent days. Three blank
samples of milliQ water and two standards of 5 µg/L were included in each analysis sequence to
monitor potential carry over from samples and ﬂuctuation in the GC-MS measurements respectively.
3.3.1
SPME and GC-MS settings
All vials were tested on a GC-MS combined with automated SPME. The settings of these used in this
thesis were as follows:
SPME
Before extraction with the SPME, the vials were incubated in the agitator at 250 rpm for 10 min at 35
°C in shaking intervals of 5 sec on/2 sec off.
The SPME used a PDMS 30 µm ﬁbre to extract the samples from the vials. The sample extraction
time was 30 min while the desorption time into the GC inlet was 10 min. After desorption of each
sample, the ﬁbre was conditioned at 280 °C for 10 min.
GC-MS
The GC inlet was set in splitless mode with an initial temperature of 275 °C. The inlet liner used was
the Agilent 5181-3316I: 900 µL. The oven had an initial temperature of 50 °C, which it held for 10
min, before heating up to 310 °C at a rate of 30 °C/min. The oven held the temperature at 310 °C for
7.5 min before cooling back down to 50 °C. The column used in the GC was the Agilent 122-5562UI,
which measured 60 m x 250 µm x 0.25 µm. Helium was used as carrier gas at 1.2 mL/min.
After the GC, the sample was transferred to the MS in the transfer line at 250 °C.
14
==PAGE:20==
3.3.2
Data treatment
To determine the biodegradation kinetics of octinoxate for the four test concentrations, the GC-MS
data had to be treated. First the integration of the MS peaks were examined and adjusted, to ensure
they covered the correct compound. Then the peak areas were examined for outliers and lastly, the
biotic/abiotic ratio was plotted as a function of time and ﬁtted with a ﬁrst order degradation model in
GraphPad Prism 9. Additionally, the test methods were evaluated based on the results of the blank
and standard samples.
3.4
Supplemental experiments
3.4.1
Plate count
To conﬁrm the presence of bacteria in the waste water efﬂuent and thus its suitability as inoculum for
the biodegradation of octinoxate, a plate count of the bacteria was conducted on the day the water
was collected. The plate count was done using R2A agar medium, the agar plates were incubated
at 20 °C and the colony forming units (CFU) were counted after 24 and 72 hours. Four different
concentrations and a negative control were tested in triplicates.
The R2A agar is a medium recommended for the cultivation of heterotrophic bacteria from treated
portable water. It has a lower nutrient value compared to other types of agar, which stimulates the
stressed or slower growing bacteria often found in treated water, which would otherwise be suppressed
by faster growing bacteria (NEOGEN, 2021; Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc, 2007).
3.4.2
Oxygen measurements
To ensure that aerobic conditions were present in the incubation vials during the biodegradation ex-
periment, the oxygen concentration was measured in all vials before they were diluted and analysed
on the GC-MS.
Initially the vials were placed at 20 °C to ensure a stable and known temperature throughout the
oxygen measurements. After 30 min the temperature was assumed to have stabilised in the vials and
the oxygen was measured in each vial with a PreSens Microx 4 optic oxygen meter using a needle-type
oxygen microsensor with ﬁxed sensor tip. The sensor was injected through the septum of the vials
into the water phase of the sample and left there for ⇠2 min. During this time measurements were
taken until the reading was stable. Between each vial the sensor was lightly rinsed in milliQ water.
3.4.3
Filter samples for identiﬁcation of bacteria
To identify the type of bacteria present in the waste water efﬂuent inoculum and how this compo-
sition changed through the duration of the biodegradation experiment, ﬁlter samples were send to
DNASense in Aalborg for DNA sequencing. The ﬁlter samples included triplicates of waste water
inoculum, duplicates of the four test concentrations after 15 days incubation and a blank sample of
milliQ water.
15
==PAGE:21==
The preparation of the ﬁlter samples was done under close to sterile conditions. A ﬁlter sample was
prepared by pouring the water sample through the suction ﬁlter unit containing a Microsart CN-ﬁlter
(pore size of 0.2 µm). When the entire sample had passed through the ﬁlter, the ﬁlter was rolled up
with tweezers so the sample was facing inward. The ﬁlter was then put into an Eppendorf tube and
stored at -80 °C until shipping to DNASense. During transport, the Eppendorf tubes were placed in a
polystyrene box surrounded with cooler bricks to maintain the temperature.
For the waste water inoculum and the blank sample 80 mL of sample was used for each ﬁlter. Since the
main biodegradation experiment was stopped after 13 days due to full degradation of the compound,
the vials prepared for the two remaining measuring times (20 and 23 days) were used for bacteria
identiﬁcation instead. Triplicates of each concentration were pooled together for one ﬁlter, resulting
in 45 mL sample per ﬁlter and duplicate ﬁlters for each concentration. Overall 12 samples were
shipped to DNASense for DNA sequencing.
16
==PAGE:22==
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Loading kinetics
As mentioned in Section 3.1 the three silicone rods were weighed before being loaded with octinoxate
as well as multiple times during the 48 hours experiment to determine the chemical uptake of octi-
noxate into the silicone. The weight of the three silicone rods at the eight time points can be seen in
Table 9 in Appendix C.
The chemical uptake of octinoxate as g chemical/g silicone could be calculated using the equation:
Chemical uptake = msilicone,t −msilicone,0
msilicone,0
(1)
Where msilicone,t is the weight of the loaded silicone rod at time t, and msilicone,0 is the initial weight of
the silicone rod before loading.
The chemical uptake was plotted as a mean of the three rods for the eight time points in GraphPad
Prism 9 and an exponential plateau model was ﬁtted to the data (Figure 2) to generate an equation for
the chemical uptake as a function of time. The error bars indicate the standard deviation (SD) for the
uptake into the three rods.
Figure 2: Average chemical uptake and SD of octinoxate into three silicone rods over a 48 hour
period ﬁtted to a exponential plateau model in GraphPad Prism 9.
The exponential plateau model uses the equation:
C = CM −(CM −C0) · exp(−k · t)
(2)
Where C0 is the starting concentration in the silicone, CM is the maximum concentration, k is the rate
constant with which the silicone is loaded with octinoxate and t is the time (Motulsky, 2020).
17
==PAGE:23==
As there has been no chemical uptake into the rods at time 0 hours, the model constant C0 was
constricted to 0. The model best ﬁtting the chemical uptake data was then as following:
C = 0.031 −0.031 · exp(−0.47 · t)
(3)
According to the model, the maximum chemical uptake of octinoxate into the silicone is 30.8 mg
octinoxate/g silicone. This corresponds with ⇠3% of the initial weight of the silicone.
The model was used to estimate the loading time for two different concentration levels for two sep-
arate passive dosing systems. In the ﬁrst system, the target was to load the silicone rods to approx-
imately 80% of their capacity. This percentage was chosen to be close to the solubility but still low
enough to presumably avoid the formation of droplets of pure compound when equilibrating the rods
with water. Using the exponential plateau model it was found, that it would take 3.4 hours to load the
silicone rods to 80% of the loading capacity, which corresponds with an uptake of 24.6 mg octinox-
ate/g silicone.
It was decided to aim for a factor ﬁve dilution between the test concentrations, and the second passive
dosing system should therefore be loaded approximately to a ﬁfth of the ﬁrst system. Since the ﬁrst
passive dosing system ended up being loaded to 70% capacity, instead of 80%, the desired loading for
the second passive dosing system was ⇠14% of capacity. This corresponds with 4.3 mg octinoxate/g
silicone, which would take 19 min of loading according to the model.
The difference between the estimated loading time and the actual loading time, which was seen in
the loading of the passive dosing systems (see Section 3.2.3), was attributed to the positioning of the
silicone rods in the loading bottles. In the loading kinetics experiment very small silicone rods were
used, which could lie fully extended in the vials and be evenly coated with octinoxate during the
loading. However, in the loading of the passive dosing systems, the silicone rods were much too long
for the loading bottles and were therefore coiled in the bottles. This caused the length of the rods to
be unevenly coated with octinoxate during loading. It therefore took longer for the silicone to take up
the desired amount of chemical, since a smaller part of the surface was coated with compound, and it
takes time for the compound to distribute throughout the rod.
18
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Difference in water concentration made with the second passive dosing
system
As mentioned in Section 3.2.4, the six silicone rods loaded to approximately 14% of capacity were
analysed to establish if they produced the same water concentration with passive dosing.
Figure 3: Average measured peak area and SD of duplicates of milliQ water equilibrated with the six
silicone rods loaded to ⇠14% of capacity with a factor 40 dilution.
Figure 3 shows the average measured peak area and SD for the duplicate test concentrations from the
six rods.
It can be seen from the ﬁgure, that the average measured peak area for rods no. 2-5 are very similar
and that the SDs for rod 3 and 4 overlap with both rod no. 2 and 5. A big difference in the loading
can be seen for rod no. 1 and 6. Rod no. 1 was loaded to 34% compared to the average of rods no.
2-5, while rod no. 6 was loaded 68% more.
Some of the difference in loading could be due to the time the rods spend in the loading bottles, since
the level of loading almost perfectly follows the order in which the rods were inserted and removed
from the loading bottles. Rod no. 1 spend the most time in the loading bottle before being placed on
the rolling bed mixer, meaning that only the part of the silicone at the very bottom of the bottle was
in contact with octinoxate. The opposite is the case for rod no. 6, which spend the most time in the
loading bottle after rolling, before the rod was transferred to a new bottle. During this wait, the rod
was coated in octinoxate, which had some additional time to absorb into the rod compared to rod no.
1. However, if this really was the main reason behind the big differences in loading, rod no. 2 and 5
should also have been affected by this, and the loading of the six rods should have been spread out
more linearly on Figure 3.
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4: Coiled silicone rods in 50mL amber glass bottles during the loading of the ﬁrst passive
dosing system with octinoxate
Another factor, that could have impacted the loading of the rods, is how the different rods were coiled
in the loading bottles (see Figure 4 for an example). If one was more tightly coiled than the others
or more pressed up against the inside of the bottle instead of being coiled lengthwise, less surface
area of the silicone would be in contact with the octinoxate and loading up to a certain level would
take longer. A solution to this would be to load the silicone rods in bigger glass bottles, instead of
the 50mL bottles used in this experiment. This would result in the rods being less tightly coiled and
more surface area being available for coating with the compound when the bottles were loading on the
rolling bed mixer. Fewer sharp bends in the coiled silicone rods would also allow for better uptake,
since the compound is absorbed better in the unfolded parts of the silicone compared to where it is
squeezed together.
4.3
Biodegradation test of octinoxate
Before degradation models could be made for the four test concentrations, the integrated MS peaks
had to be examined and the peak areas were checked for outliers.
4.3.1
Data treatment of MS peak area results
All GC-MS measurements can be seen in Appendix F.
4.3.1.1
Processing MS peaks
The peak for octinoxate should top at 21.44-46 min in the MS results. It was therefore decided to
cut the peaks of at 21.54 minutes, since all compound should have been eluded at this point. For
most of the peaks, this had no inﬂuence on the measured area, since the peaks topped well before
this threshold. However, for some peaks some of the tail was cut of at the threshold, and some of
the peaks were cut of in the middle. This was mainly the case for the biotic vials tested after 6 and
20
==PAGE:26==
13 days, since most of the compound had been degraded at this point. The measuring of the very
low remaining content was then mixed with background noise, which isn’t as clear at higher test
concentrations. This resulted in no peak at the expected time but instead measured background noise,
which were located a bit later and formed more of a “mountain” than a peak.
Examples of peaks with different sharpness can be seen in Figure 5. Figure 5a shows an example of
a sharp abiotic peak, which topped at 21.44 min. The peak had some tail, which was cut of at 21.54
min, however this action had limited inﬂuence on the peak area due to the height of the peak. All
abiotic samples produced peaks similar to this example, where little to no intervention was needed.
Figure 5b shows an example of a peak of a biotic sample after 6 days incubation. This peak was both
wider compared to the peak in Figure 5a and topped later at 21.48 min. Furthermore, its tail was
both wider and more uneven, and was cut of midway at 21.54 min. The width and unevenness of the
peak were due to the lower content caused by biodegradation, which resulted in an area more than
500 times lower than in Figure 5a. This type of peak was common for the biotic samples during the
experiment, as the octinoxate had been degraded to some extend.
Lastly, Figure 5c shows an example of a biotic sample after 13 days incubation, where the concen-
tration was below detection limit and thus didn’t produce a proper peak. This measurement was very
wide, uneven at the top and didn’t return to the baseline on the graph. It topped after 21.54 min, which
resulted in most of it being cut of at the threshold value. The biotic samples after 13 days incubation,
where almost all octinoxate had been degraded in the vials, were often below the detection limit.
21
==PAGE:27==
(a) MS peak of an abiotic sample of concentration L2 analysed after 6 days.
(b) MS peak of a biotic sample of concentration L4 analysed after 6 days.
(c) Biotic sample of concentration L3 analysed after 13 days measured below the detec-
tion limit for the MS.
Figure 5: Examples of MS peaks with different sharpness during the biodegradation experiment
22
==PAGE:28==
4.3.1.2
Evaluating MS peak areas
The MS produced a peak with corresponding area measurement for two ions connected to octinoxate.
The peak areas of the two ions were quite similar for the ﬁrst time period, but became slightly more
different throughout the experiment. For almost all measurements, the second ion produced the largest
peak area (usually between 105-120% of the ﬁrst ion) and the calculations were therefore done on
this ion.
Since all four test concentrations were measured in triplicates at each sampling time for both the
biotic and abiotic systems, relatively similar measurements were expected between the triplicates.
Especially the abiotic triplicates should produce similar peak areas, while a greater difference between
the biotic triplicates was expected due to differences in the bacterial composition in each vial. During
the data treatment of the measured peak areas, an abiotic measurement was rejected if it differed with
more than a factor 2 compared to the average of the other two abiotic triplicates from that sampling
time. A biotic measurement was removed if it was more than a factor 2 higher than the average of the
abiotic triplicates from that sampling time.
Based on these criteria a total of ﬁve abiotic and one biotic measurements were removed from the
data set of 70 analysed test vials. The abiotic measurements removed were two measurements of
concentration L4, one of concentration L3 and two of concentration L2. The biotic measurement was
of concentration L1. For an in depth description of the removal of the measurements see Appendix
D.
4.3.2
Biodegradation models for the four concentrations
After removing outliers from the MS measurements, the data points for each concentration were plot-
ted in GraphPad Prism 9 as the biotic area for each triplicate divided with the average of the triplicate
abiotic area as a function of time. This showcases the differences between the biotic samples without
the results being affected by ﬂuctuation in the abiotic measurements due to instrument sensitivity and
abiotic loss processes. The data was then ﬁtted using a ﬁrst order degradation model to obtain the
biodegradation kinetics for each of the four concentrations.
The ﬁrst order degradation model was based on the ”plateau followed by one phase decay” model
from GraphPad Prism 9 but had the Plateau constant removed, since octinoxate was completely
removed during the experiment. The ﬁrst order degradation model is based on the equation
Y = IF(X < X0, Y0, Y0 · exp(−K · (X −X0)))
(4)
Where Y is the biotic/abiotic ratio, X is the time, X0 is the time where the degradation begins, Y0 is
biotic/abiotic ratio before degradation begins (should ideally be 1) and K is the rate constant (inverse
unit of X). The model also provides values for the half life, which is calculated as ln(2)/K and has
the same unit as X (Motulsky, 2021).
The time period X < X0, where the biotic/abiotic ratio is Y0 represents the lag phase, the degradation
phase is the exponential curve itself until the degradation has ended and the model follows the plateau
23
==PAGE:29==
phase. To make the best possible model, there should be data points for two different sampling times
for both the lag and plateau phase to conﬁrm their placement. Furthermore, there should be multiple
data points during the degradation phase. Ideally one of these data points should be situated around
50% degradation.
The plotted data points and ﬁtted models for the four test concentrations can be seen in Figure 6,
while the constant values for the ﬁtted models can be seen in Table 3.
(a) Concentration L1
(b) Concentration L2
(c) Concentration L3
(d) Concentration L4
Figure 6: Degradation curves based on triplicates for each of the four octinoxate test concentrations
over a 13 days test period.
24
==PAGE:30==
Table 3: Model values for the ﬁtted ﬁrst order degradation models for the four test concentrations.
Italics showcases values which have been constrained.
Factor
Test concentration
L1
L2
L3
L4
X0 (days)
Unstable, read to 2.7
1.3E-12
2.1
1.9
Y0
1.7
1.0
Unstable, read to 1.6
1.0
K (days−1)
0.19
0.53
0.71
0.87
Half-life (days)
3.6
1.3
0.98
0.80
R2
2.4E-1
2.1E-2
4.3E-2
1.4E-2
For test concentration L1 (Figure 6a) it can be seen, that the ﬁrst order degradation model doesn’t quite
reach the plateau phase, where no octinoxate is left in the samples. This is due to lack of additional
data points around full degradation, since octinoxate was almost completely degraded between 6
and 13 days of incubation, after which the experiment was stopped. This could have been solved
by analysing another set of samples after day 13, to conﬁrm full degradation. Furthermore, the lag
phase, shown as constant Y0 in Table 3, is at 1.7 where it ideally should be 1. This is due to the
biotic measured peak areas for 2 days incubation being higher than the abiotic measurements. This
is accepted however since the difference doesn’t exceed a factor 2, and could potentially be due to
the six rods of this passive dosing system producing different water concentrations, which wasn’t
examined. The model couldn’t pinpoint exactly where the lag phase transitioned into the degradation
phase, but from the Figure 6a it was read to be around 2.7 days.
For concentration L2 (Figure 6b) the model ﬁts quite poorly due to the data points only being between
0.15 biotic/abiotic and 0. In the model, the Y0 was constricted to 1, where the biotic/abiotic ratio
should be at time 0. The ﬁrst data point being 0.15 after 3 days of incubation seems highly unlikely
compared to the other three test concentrations. There are also uncertainties connected to this data
point, since only one abiotic sample measurement was included. Due to the lack of data points before
0.15 biotic/abiotic, the best ﬁtting value for when the lag phase transitions into the degradation phase,
X0 in Table 3 was initially negative, which is impossible. X0 was therefore constricted to being >0,
resulting in a value close to 0, indicating that the bacteria in the waste water efﬂuent didn’t need any
time to adapt to the concentration of octinoxate, which again seems unrealistic compared to the results
for the other test concentrations, which show a clear lag phase.
Test concentration L3 (Figure 6c), like concentration L1, has a lag phase above 1 biotic/abiotic. The
model found the value unstable, but from the ﬁgure it was read to be around 1.6, which is higher
than the ideal 1 biotic/abiotic ratio. The lag phase ended after 2.1 days, which was shorter than for
test concentration L1, indicating that the bacteria are quicker to adapt to the presence of octinoxate at
lower concentrations. Overall it seems like the data generated a quite well ﬁtting model, but due to
the lack of more data points during the degradation phase between 2-6 days of incubation, the model
is still associated with uncertainty.
25
==PAGE:31==
For test concentration L4 (Figure 6d) the lag phase was constricted to Y0 = 1, which ﬁt quite well with
the data points after 2 days of incubation. The lag phase ended after 1.9 days, which again supports
the indication of the bacteria being quicker to adapt to lower concentrations. As for concentration
L3, there is a very abrupt jump between the measurements showing almost no degradation to full
degradation at the next sampling time, which results in uncertainties for the model.
Overall, despite the uncertainty of the four degradation models, it is clear that octinoxate is being
degraded at all four test concentrations and that the degradation is happening quite fast, since it was
fully degraded after 13 days for all test concentrations. In addition, it is clear from the models, that
the initial test concentration plays a role in how fast octinoxate is degraded. This can be seen both
from the duration of the lag phase, X0 in Table 3, which is reduced with the test concentration and
spans from around 2.7 days for concentration L1 to 1.9 days for concentration L4 (concentration L2
not included due to the bad ﬁt of the model). Furthermore, the degradation constant K is smallest for
concentration L1, indicating a ﬂatter degradation curve, compared to the lower concentrations, where
the constant is higher indicating a steeper curve. Lastly, it is supported by the half-lives, where the
lowest test concentration L4 has the shortest half-life of 0.8 days and the highest test concentration
L1 has the longest half-life of 3.6 days.
The uncertainty of the models could be reduced by conducting the experiment once more and in-
cluding additional sampling times, where the degradation was analysed on the GC-MS. One of these
sampling times should be close to the beginning of the incubation, to ensure a data point in the lag
phase of the model. Furthermore, additional analysis should be done between incubation day 2 and 6
to obtain more data points in the middle of the degradation phase. Lastly, the experiment should be
slightly prolonged, at least for the highest concentration L1, to get an additional data point conﬁrming
full degradation of octinoxate.
4.3.2.1
Comparison with literature
A brief literature review was conducted for the degradation of octinoxate, to use for comparison with
the results from the biodegradation experiment made in this thesis.
An overview of three experimental studies of the biodegradability of octinoxate in water are pro-
vided by ECHA (2020). Two of the studies followed the OECD guideline 301F testing for readily
biodegradability, while the third followed ISO guideline 11734:1995 and tested for ultimately anaer-
obic biodegradation. Since the biodegradation experiment in this thesis was made under aerobic
conditions, the third study was not included in the comparison.
The two studies following the OECD guideline, used aerobic conditions, had a test duration of 28
days, an initial concentration of 100 mg/L and estimated the biodegradation based on the oxygen
consumption in the samples. The inoculum in one of the tests was a mix of activated sludge from a
laboratory WWTP, municipal sewage and synthetic waste water. This study found octinoxate to be 70-
80% degraded at the end of the 28 day test period. The second study used fresh activated sludge from
a WWTP in Geneva treating domestic waste water as inoculum, and found 78% degradation after 28
26
==PAGE:32==
days. The results of both studies categorises octinoxate as being readily biodegradable (ECHA, 2020).
The degradation in these experiments took much longer compared to the biodegradation experiment
in this thesis due to the much higher initial test concentration. Furthermore, the inoculum used in the
studies are expected to contain a higher concentration of bacteria, since it was activated sludge from
a WWTP and not the efﬂuent like in this thesis. The studies are thus not directly comparable with
the results from this thesis, but the overall result of octinoxate being readily biodegradable is agreed
upon by both studies and the biodegradation experiment conducted in the thesis.
A study conducted by O’Malley et al. (2021) examined the biodegradation of different organic UV
ﬁlters in surface water samples from a freshwater reservoir in Australia. This reservoir was used for
recreational purposes such as swimming and thus contained traces of UV-ﬁlters used in sunscreen.
The water samples were spiked with a mixture of the UV-ﬁlters up to a concentration of 5 µg/L
and measurements were taken during the six days long test duration. The study found octinoxate to
have a half life of 20 hours for biodegradation (O’Malley et al., 2021). The initial concentration as
well as the half-life in this study corresponds well with the lower test concentrations from this thesis,
despite using different inoculums. The inoculum in the O’Malley et al. (2021) study was fresh surface
water, which possibly contain fewer bacteria compared to the waste water efﬂuent used in this thesis,
however these bacteria are expected to be more used to octinoxate, since the water reservoir was used
for swimming during the summer time and thus directly exposed to octinoxate in sunscreens.
Lastly, Zhang et al. (2021) examined the degradation of octinoxate in river sediment. The study used
river water and sediment from the conﬂuence point of two rivers in China and used a test design
based on OECD guideline 308. A biotic system of river water and sediment was compared to an
abiotic system, where the water and sediment had been autoclaved, to determine the difference of
biodegradation on the collective degradation. A spiked initial concentration of 200 µg/L in the water
phase of the systems yielded a half life of 3.49 days for the biotic system and 7.55 days for the abiotic
system. The degradation in the biotic system was due to both biodegradation as well as other types
of degradation such as photolysis, but the difference between the two systems can be attributed to
the microbes found in the river sediment (Zhang et al., 2021). The inoculum used in the study was
different then in this thesis, but could potential be more used to the presence of octinoxate, if the
rivers were used for swimming. Furthermore, the initial test concentration in the study was higher
compared to the biodegradation experiment in this thesis, but Zhang et al. (2021) reports a half-life
for the biotic system which is very close to the half-life of the highest concentration L1 in this thesis.
The half-life in the study would have been longer, if photolysis of octinoxate had been avoided, which
would complement the results of this thesis even more, despite the different inoculums.
4.3.3
Evaluation of methods
The analysis methods used in this thesis were evaluated based on the blank samples and the standards,
which were analysed with the test samples for every sequence.
The blanks were accepted as blanks, if the measured peak area was <1% of the previously measured
test concentration. Tabel 4 shows that all blank samples measured way below 1% of the peak area
27
==PAGE:33==
measured for the previous sample. This means that all blanks were accepted and that the SPME ﬁbre
was adequately conditioned between samples to avoid carry over between samples.
Table 4: Measured peak area for the blank samples shown in percent of the area of the previously
analysed sample.
Blank placement
Sampling time
Day 2
Day 6
Day 13
After ﬁrst standard
0.05%
0.07%
<0.01%
0.10%
<0.01%
<0.01%
Between test concentrations
0.13%
0.02%
0.01%
0.06%
0.03%
<0.01%
After test concentrations
0.02%
0.04%
0.04%
0.03%
<0.01%
<0.01%
The precision of the standards were tested by dividing the measured peak area for the second standard
with the ﬁrst standard, and can be seen in Table 5 for both of the two ions measured for octinoxate. A
ratio of 100% would mean that the used methods would produce identical measurements. From the
table it can be seen, that the measured area of the two standards can differ quite a bit on some analysis
dates, which indicates that the combined method of SPME and GC-MS doesn’t produce completely
reproducible measurements. Alternatively, the measured difference between the two standards should
stem from the method used to produce the standards.
Table 5: Ratio between the measured peak area for the standards before and after the sequence of test
samples for each measuring day.
Sampling time
Day 2
Day 6
Day 13
Ion 1
70%
123%
101%
82%
44%
96%
Ion 2
62%
131%
102%
85%
44%
98%
4.4
Assessment of waste water efﬂuent from Avedøre
4.4.1
Measurements at WWTP Avedøre
At WWTP Avedøre a few factors were measured in the collected waste water efﬂuent to verify its
suitability as test inoculum - see Table 6.
Table 6: Measurements from WWTP Avedøre taken with Multi 3420 digital precision meter. The
temperature was measured with the pH electrode.
O2 concentration
pH
Temperature
Conductivity
7.61 mg/L
6.95
13.1 °C
2.01 mS/cm
According to (Patel and Vashi, 2015a) the saturation level of dissolved oxygen (DO) in freshwater at
20 °C and 1 atm is 9 mg/L, but the actual level is dependant on e.g. bio-chemical activities. Overall,
28
==PAGE:34==
most living water organisms require an oxygen concentration of about 4 mg/L in water to live (Patel
and Vashi, 2015a). The measured oxygen concentration in the waste water efﬂuent of Avedøre was
below the saturation level but still well above the threshold and there should therefore be plenty of
oxygen present in the water to sustain the growth of bacteria.
According to WHO the pH of drinking water lies in the range 6.5-8.5 (WHO, 2007) and since waste
water mainly consists of used drinking water the pH of waste water is assumed to be similar. The
measured pH in the waste water efﬂuent from WWTP Avedøre lies well within this range, which
indicates good conditions for bacterial growth, since most organisms thrive within pH 6.5-8.5(Patel
and Vashi, 2015b)
The temperature of waste water has seasonal variations. According to Tørsløv et al. (2002) the stan-
dard temperature of waste water efﬂuent from Danish WWTPs is 12 °C, while the temperature of
efﬂuent from WWTP Avedøre has been set as 16 °C in a calculation done for the Danish Environ-
mental Protection Agency. The temperature of the waste water efﬂuent from a WWTP depends on
the receiving water body, since the waste water should have the least possible affect on the water
temperature. An example is WWTP Hillerød, which discharges efﬂuent into two streams. Here the
temperature of the waste water efﬂuent should lie 10 °C from November through May and 21.5
°C from May through November (Hillerød Municipality, 2019). The measured temperature of the
waste water efﬂuent from WWTP Avedøre ﬁts nicely to all of the listed temperatures and are there-
fore deemed suitable for the experiment of the thesis.
4.4.2
Platecount
The platecount was conducted to conﬁrm the presence of bacteria in the waste water efﬂuent sample.
All three negative controls yielded zero CFUs after both 24 and 72 hours, which indicates that no
contamination of the agar plates of bacteria outside the waste water efﬂuent had taken place. The
plate count showed a concentration of 15,782 CFU/mL after 24 hours and 39,844 CFU/mL after 72
hours, with an error of method of 688 for the measurements after 24 hours and 1093 after 72 hours.
There are thus plenty of bacteria present in the waste water efﬂuent and it is therefore deemed suitable
as inoculum for the biodegradation of octinoxate.
4.5
Oxygen measurements
The oxygen concentration was measured in all vials except for concentration L3 and L4 after 2 days
incubation. These were not measured due to time constraint. All oxygen measurements can be seen
in Appendix E.
After 2 days incubation, the oxygen was measured in the vials of concentration L2 and L1 after some
of the sample had been taken out to make dilutions for the GC-MS. This meant that the septa of
the vials had been punctured for about an hour before the oxygen measurements were taken. Since
the puncture was done with a small syringe and the top layer of the septum in the caps are made of
silicone to close puncture holes, it is assumed that almost no oxygen can have gotten into the vials
before the measurements. However to ensure no interference with the oxygen concentrations, the
29
==PAGE:35==
following oxygen measurements (after 6 and 13 days incubation) were all done before sample was
extracted from the vials.
In an attempt to get more precise results, the oxygen concentration was measured twice in each vial
for the measurements of concentration L1 and L2 after 2 days incubation. However, since almost all of
the second measurements were higher than the initial ones (see Table 10 in Appendix E), it indicates
that oxygen had gotten into the vials between measurements due to the slightly bigger hole in the
septum made by the sensor needle. It was therefore decided not to use these second measurements
and to only measure the oxygen concentration once in each vial for the upcoming measurements.
In addition to the concentration in the vials, the oxygen was also measured outside of the vials. This
was done both in the air as well as in a glass of milliQ water in the room. The decimals of the oxygen
measurements varied both from day to day and between multiple measurements taken on the same
day. The oxygen measurements are thus deemed to be more of an indication of the oxygen level
rather than the precise concentration. They are therefore only used to get an indication of reduction
in oxygen concentration due to biological activity and to ensure that aerobic conditions were present
in the vials throughout the experiment.
Due to the variations between the oxygen measurements taken in the room, it was decided to showcase
the oxygen concentration in the biodegradation vials as the difference between the biotic and abiotic
samples over time. The ratio between the oxygen concentration in the biotic and abiotic samples was
calculated as the average of the three biotic measurements over the average of the three abiotic mea-
surements. This ratio was calculated for all four concentrations at the three sampling times and can be
seen in Table 7. From the table it can be seen, that there is a slight reduction in the ratio between the
oxygen concentration in the biotic and abiotic vials for all four test concentrations during the experi-
ment due to biological activity in the biotic vials. Despite the slight reduction in the biotic samples,
there was still plenty of oxygen left in the vials to maintain aerobic conditions if the experiment had
continued.
Table 7: Ratio between the average biotic and abiotic oxygen concentrations measured in the incu-
bation vials for the four test concentrations after 2, 6 and 13 days of incubation before the vials were
used for GC-MS analysis.
Test concentration
2 days
6 days
13 days
L1
102%
94%
86%
L2
101%
100%
89%
L3
-
97%
87%
L4
-
98%
92%
4.6
Bacterial development during the biodegradation experiment
As mentioned in Section 3.4.3 12 water samples were send to DNASense in Aalborg, where the DNA
from the microbial communities were extracted, analysed and reported by Lukassen and Søndergaard
30
==PAGE:36==
(2021). The 25 most abundant genera found across the water samples can be seen in Figure 7.
The blank sample contained DNA from two genera of microbes; Ralstonia and Staphylococcus. The
Ralstonia was present in high concentrations in all water samples except for the waste water efﬂuent,
where it wasn’t one of the 25 most abundant genera, and the L3 samples, where the concentration
was low. According to Lukassen and Søndergaard (2021) the Ralstonia is a known kit contaminator,
which was also found in their negative samples, and its presence should therefore be disregarded.
Staphylococcus was also found in a high concentration in the blank but was not present in most of
the other samples, except in very small concentrations in L1 and in small concentrations in L4. Their
presence in the blank sample indicates, that they could have been on the glassware used for the milliQ
water, since this was touched prior to putting on gloves and Staphylococcus are found on skin and in
mucus membranes of humans (DVFA, 2019).
Figure 7: The 25 most abundant microbial genera found in the water samples analysed by DNASense
(Lukassen and Søndergaard, 2021).
From Figure 7 it can be seen, that the wastewater efﬂuent had a high concentration of Arcobacter,
which are a common genus found in waste water efﬂuent (see Section 2.2.1). However, these bacteria
were not present in the samples containing octinoxate except in very low concentrations in L1 and
L2. This indicates that octinoxate either inhibits these bacteria or that they ran out of substrate. A few
species of the second genera often found in waste water efﬂuent Acinetobacter (see Section 2.2.1)
was also identiﬁed in the waste water efﬂuent sample from WWTP Avedøre, but only in relatively
small concentrations.
31
==PAGE:37==
Some bacteria, that were present in low concentrations in the waste water efﬂuent but seemed to
thrive in concentration L1, were present in medium-high concentrations in L2, at lower concentra-
tions in L3 and in low to no concentrations in L4, were the three genera Malikia, Simplicispira and
f Solimonadaceae OTU 14. This indicates that these three genera are connected to the degradation
of octinoxate. The high bacterial concentration in L1 compared to the low to no concentration in L4
could be explained by how fast the compound was degraded. For concentration L1 plenty of octinox-
ate was still present in the vials after 6 days incubation and was only almost fully degraded after 13
days. Concentration L4 was on the other hand almost fully degraded after 6 days. This means that the
bacteria in the L4 vials had been without substrate for much longer than the bacteria in the L1 vials
and their abundance therefore declined.
It should be noted that almost twice the amount of sample was used for each ﬁlter for the waste water
inoculum (80mL) compared to the test concentrations (45mL) as mentioned in Section 3.4.3. This
resulted for the most part in fewer bacterial reads for the test concentrations compared to the waste
water efﬂuent.
32
==PAGE:38==
5
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to examine the biodegradation kinetics of octinoxate in waste water efﬂuent
and to see if an increase in test concentration changed these kinetics.
First and foremost the results of the biodegradation experiment conducted in the thesis clearly showed,
that octinoxate was easily degraded in the waste water efﬂuent from WWTP Avedøre during the
13 day test period. The results for each of the four test concentrations were ﬁtted to a ﬁrst order
degradation model. Here it could be seen, that an increase in test concentration lead to a prolonged
lag phase, where the bacteria adjusted to the compound, as well as a decrease in the rate constant
K, showing that the degradation itself took longer as well. The half-lives for the four concentrations
supported this, ranging from 0.8 days for the lowest concentration L4 to 3.6 days for the highest
concentration L1.
The biodegradation kinetic results are connected with some uncertainty, due to lack of data points in
the lag phase as well as during the degradation phase itself. To improve the degradation models, the
test should therefore be run again with additional sampling times, especially before 2 days incubation
and between day 2-6. The test could also be prolonged a few days to conﬁrm full degradation of the
highest test concentration L1.
33
==PAGE:39==
6
References
Baun, A., Nyholm, N., and Kusk, O. K. (2017). Environmental Risk Assessment of Chemicals. De-
partment of Environmental Engineering Technical University of Denmark. Course 12237 Chemi-
cals in the Environment.
Campaign for Safe Cosmetics (2021). OCTINOXATE. URL: https://www.safecosmetics.
org/get-the-facts/chemicals-of-concern/octinoxate/, Visited: 2021-01-18.
Danish Environmental Protection Agency (2021).
Regulering af kemikalier.
URL: https:
//mst.dk/kemi/kemikalier/saerligt-for-borgere-om-kemikalier/
regulering/, Visited: 2021-01-14. Ministry of Environment of Denmark.
Danish QSAR Database (2020). Danish QSAR Database - 5466-77-3. URL: https://qsardb.
food.dtu.dk/db/index.html, Visited: 2020-08-27.
DVFA (2019).
Staphylococcus aureus.
URL: https://www.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/
Leksikon/Sider/Staphylococcus-aureus.aspx, Visited: 2021-02-07. Danish Vet-
erinary and Food Administration (DVFA) under the Ministry of Environment and Food.
ECHA (2020). 2-Ethylhexyl trans-4-methoxycinnamate. URL: https://www.echa.europa.
eu/da/web/guest/registration-dossier/-/registered-dossier/15876/
1, Visited: 2020-08-30. European Chemicals Agency.
European Commission (2007). REGULATION (EC) No 1907/2006 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIA-
MENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 18 December 2006. European Parliament and Council.
European Commission (2021a). Chemicals are everywhere. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
environment/chemicals/index_en.htm, Visited: 2021-01-14. European Union.
European Commission (2021b). REACH. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/
chemicals/reach/reach_en.htm, Visited: 2021-01-14. European Union.
Gross, J. H. (2017). Mass spectrometry : a textbook. Springer International Publishing. mainly
Chapter 1 Introduction.
Hammershøj, R. (2020).
Biodegradation Kinetics Testing of Hydrophobic Organic Chemicals in
Mixtures at Low Concentrations. DTU Environment. PhD Thesis.
Hammershøj, R. H., Birch, H., Sjøholm, K. K., and Mayer, P. (2020). Accelerated passive dosing of
hydrophobic complex mixtures - controlling the level and composition in aquatic tests. Environ-
mental Science and Technology, 54(8):4974–4983.
Hillerød Municipality (2019).
Tilladelse til udledning af renset spildevand fra Hillerød Central-
renseanlæg Syd til Pøle ˚A og Havelse ˚A. Permission for Hillerød Centralrenseanlæg Syd from
Hillerød Kommune.
34
==PAGE:40==
Jørgensen, S. (2008). Biodegradation. In Jørgensen, S. E. and Fath, B. D., editors, Encyclopedia of
Ecology, chapter Ecological Processes, pages 366–367. Elsevier B.V.
LGC (2020).
Octinoxate.
URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Octinoxate, Visited: 2020-08-31.
Lukassen, M. B. and Søndergaard, M. T. (2021).
Microbial community analysis — CP767.
DNASense report.
Manaia, E. B., Kaminski, R. C. K., Corrˆea, M. A., and Chiavacci, L. A. (2013). Inorganic UV ﬁlters.
Brazilian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 49:201 – 209.
Mayer, P., Wernsing, J., Tolls, J., De Maagd, P. G. J., and Sijm, D. T. H. M. (1999). Establishing and
controlling dissolved concentrations of hydrophobic organics by partitioning from a solid phase.
Environmental Science and Technology, 33(13):2284–2290.
Merkle, S., Kleeberg, K. K., and Fritsche, J. (2015). Recent developments and applications of solid
phase microextraction (spme) in food and environmental analysis—a review. Chromatography,
2(3):293–381.
Mota, A. d. C. V., de Freitas, Z. M. F., J´unior, E. R., Dellamora-Ortiz, G. M., Santos-Oliveira,
R., Ozzetti, R. A., Vergnanini, A. L., Ribeiro, V. L., Silva, R. S., and dos Santos, E. P. (2013).
In vivo and in vitro evaluation of octyl methoxycinnamate liposomes. International journal of
nanomedicine, 8:4689.
Motulsky, H. J. (2020). Exponential plateau. URL: https://www.graphpad.com/guides/
prism/8/curve-fitting/reg_exponential-plateau.htm, Visited:
2020-09-22.
GraphPad Curve Fitting Guide.
Motulsky, H. J. (2021).
Equation:
Plateau followed by one phase decay.
URL: https:
//www.graphpad.com/guides/prism/8/curve-fitting/reg_exponential_
decay_plateau.htm, Visited: 2021-02-07. GraphPad Curve Fitting Guide.
National Ocean Service (2020).
Skincare Chemicals and Coral Reefs.
URL: https://
oceanservice.noaa.gov/news/sunscreen-corals.html, Visited: 2021-01-18. Na-
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Asministration - U.S. Department of Commerce.
NEOGEN
(2021).
R2A
Agar.
URL:
https://www.neogen.com/solutions/
microbiology/r2a-agar/, Visited: 2021-02-10.
Numberger, D., Ganzert, L., Zoccarato, L., Muehidorfer, K., Sauer, S., Grossart, H.-P., and Green-
wood, A. D. (2019). Characterization of bacterial communities in wastewater with enhanced taxo-
nomic resolution by full-length 16s rrna sequencing. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9.
OECD (1995). Test No. 105: Water Solubility. OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals.
OECD (2019).
Guidance Document on Aquatic Toxicity Testing of Difﬁcult Substances
35
==PAGE:41==
and Mixtures.
URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/content/publication/
0ed2f88e-en.
O’Malley, E., McLachlan, M. S., O’Brien, J. W., Verhagen, R., and Mueller, J. F. (2021). The pres-
ence of selected uv ﬁlters in a freshwater recreational reservoir and fate in controlled experiments.
Science of The Total Environment, 754:142373.
Ouyang, G. (2012). 6 - calibration. In Pawliszyn, J., editor, Handbook of Solid Phase Microextraction,
pages 167–199. Elsevier, Oxford.
Pagga, U. (1997). Testing biodegradability with standardized methods. Chemosphere, 35(12):2953–
2972.
Patel, H. and Vashi, R. (2015a). Do measurements. In Characterization and Treatment of Textile
Wastewater, chapter Characterization of Textile Wastewater, pages 37–38. Elsevier.
Patel, H. and Vashi, R. (2015b). ph. In Characterization and Treatment of Textile Wastewater, chapter
Characterization of Textile Wastewater, pages 28–29. Elsevier.
Pawliszyn, J. (1997). Solid Phase Microextraction: Theory and Practice. Wiley-VCH.
PubChem (2020). 2-Ethylhexyl 4-methoxycinnamate. URL: https://www.lgcstandards.
com/CN/en/2-Ethylhexyl-4-methoxycinnamate/p/DRE-C13342000,
Visited:
2020-11-17.
National Library of Medicine - National Center for Biotechnology Information
(USA).
Rastogi, S. C. (2002). UV ﬁlters in sunscreen products - a survey.
Schneider, S. L. and Lim, H. W. (2019). Review of environmental effects of oxybenzone and other
sunscreen active ingredients. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 80(1):266–271.
Seiler, T.-B., Best, N., Fernqvist, M. M., Hercht, H., Smith, K. E., Braunbeck, T., Mayer, P., and
Hollert, H. (2014). Pah toxicity at aqueous solubility in the ﬁsh embryo test with danio rerio using
passive dosing. Chemosphere, 112:77–84.
Serpone, N., Dondi, D., and Albini, A. (2007). Inorganic and organic uv ﬁlters: Their role and efﬁcacy
in sunscreens and suncare products. Inorganica Chimica Acta, 360(3):794–802.
Sigma-Aldrich
(2019).
SAFETY
DATA
SHEET
-
2-Ethylhexyl
4-methoxycinnamate.
URL:
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/MSDS/retriever.do?country=US&
language=DE&productNumber=78848&brand=SIGMA, Visited: 2020-11-10.
Smith, K. E., Dom, N., Blust, R., and Mayer, P. (2010). Controlling and maintaining exposure of
hydrophobic organic compounds in aquatic toxicity tests by passive dosing. Aquatic Toxicology,
98(1):15–24.
Sparkman, O. D., Penton, Z., and Kitson, F. G. (2011). Gas chromatography and mass spectrometry:
a practical guide. Academic press. Chapter 2.
36
==PAGE:42==
Stroobant, V., De Hoffmann, E., and Hoffmann, E. (2007). Mass spectrometry : principles and
applications. Wiley. Introduction + Chapter 5.
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc (2007).
R2A Agar.
URL: https://assets.fishersci.com/
TFS-Assets/LSG/manuals/IFU112543.pdf, Visited: 2021-02-10.
Thermo
Fisher
(2020).
Gas
Chromatography
Mass
Spectrometry
(GC/MS)
In-
formation.
URL:
https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/
industrial/mass-spectrometry/mass-spectrometry-learning-center/
gas-chromatography-mass-spectrometry-gc-ms-information.html, Visited:
2020-09-25. Thermo Fisher SCIENTIFIC.
Tørsløv, J., Winther-Nielsen, M., Pedersen, F., and Dørge, J. (2002). Udledning af miljøfarlige stoffer
med spildevand. from DHI - Institure for Water and Environment on behalf of Danish Environ-
mental Agency.
WHO (2007).
pH in Drinking-water - Revised background document for development of WHO
Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality. World Health Organization.
Woodford, C. (2019).
Chromatography.
URL: https://www.explainthatstuff.com/
chromatography.html, Visited: 2020-09-25. Explain That Stuff!
Zhang, P., Lu, G., Liu, J., Yan, Z., Dong, H., and Zhou, R. (2021). Biodegradation of 2-ethylhexyl-
4-methoxycinnamate in river sediments and its impact on microbial communities. Journal of En-
vironmental Sciences, 104:307–316.
37
==PAGE:43==
Appendices
A
List of materials
Speciﬁc materials used in the experiments aside from standard laboratory equipment.
• Pre-rinsed silicone (d=3mm)
• 20 mL amber glass vials with septum caps
• 50 mL amber glass bottles with septum caps
• 240 mL amber glass bottles with septum caps
• Pure octinoxate (Sigma Aldrich)
• Ethanol (99.8%, VWR chemicals)
• Pentane (99%, Sigma Aldrich)
• Methanol (99.9%, Sigma Aldrich)
• Rolling bed mixers
• Waste water efﬂuent from WWTP Avedøre, Copenhagen Denmark
• MilliQ water from a Elga Purelab ﬂex water system (Holm & Halby, Denmark)
• Gas tight glass syringes
• Eppendorf Multipette Stream automatic pipette
• Incubators 12°C and 0°C
• GC-MS connected with automated SPME (Agilent Technologies)
• WTW Multi 320 digital precision meter
• PreSens Microx 4 optic oxygen meter
• Needle-type oxygen microsensor with ﬁxed sensor tip
• Suction ﬁlter unit
• Microsart CN-ﬁlter (pore size 0.2 µm)
• Eppendorf tubes
• -80 °C freezer
• Polystyrene box
• Cooler bricks
i
==PAGE:44==
B
Dilution of test concentrations before analysis on GC-MS
The expected solubility of octinoxate was 0.05 mg/L (see Section 2.1).
The silicone rods loaded to ⇠70% of capacity was expected to produce a concentration in equilibrated
water of
L1 = 0.05mg/L · 70% = 0.035mg/L = 35µg/L
The silicone rods loaded to ⇠14% of capacity was expected to produce a concentration in equilibrated
water of
L2 = 0.05mg/L · 14% = 0.007mg/L = 7µg/L
The second lowest concentration, L3, is a factor ﬁve dilution of the L2 concentration, and was ex-
pected to have a concentration of
L3 = 7µg/L
5
= 1.4µg/L
The lowest concentration, L4, is a factor 25 dilution of the L2 concentration, and was expected to
have a concentration of
L4 = 7µg/L
25
= 0.28µg/L
To ensure that the SPME ﬁbre wasn’t overloaded with compound during extraction and to have the
opportunity to measure the octinoxate content in the vials again in case of issues with the GC-MS, it
was decided to dilute all four test concentrations before analysing them on the GC-MS.
The goal concentration for the dilutions, before biodegradation begins to reduce the octinoxate con-
tent, is a factor 2 dilution of the initial L4 concentration
Cdilution = 0.28µg/L
2
= 0.14µg/L
Prior to the ﬁrst sampling time one abiotic vial of the two concentrations L1 and L2 were sacriﬁced to
determine if the dilution would be appropriate. the L1 concentration was diluted 250 times and the L2
concentration was diluted 50 times to reach a concentration around 0.14 µg/L. If the loading of the two
systems really corresponded with 70% and 14%, the two diluted samples should have approximately
the same content of octinoxate. However, the analysis showed a much lower content in L1 compared
to L2, which indicates the L2 concentration were loaded higher than 14%. The measured content was
in a appropriate range for the L2 and the calculated dilutions for concentrations L2-4 was therefore
accepted. However, it was decided to dilute concentration L1 30 times instead of 250 times.
The decided dilutions for each of the four concentrations can be seen in Table 8
ii
==PAGE:45==
Table 8: Dilutions of the four test concentrations before analysis on the GC-MS
Test conc.
Initial target concentration
V from incubated vial
V milliQ water
L1
35 µg/L
500 µL
14.5 mL
L2
7 µg/L
300 µL
14.7 mL
L3
1.4 µg/L
1.5 mL
13.5 mL
L4
0.28 µg/L
7.5 mL
7.5 mL
iii
==PAGE:46==
C
Weight of silicone rods during loading kinetics pre-experiment
Table 9: Weight of the three silicone rods at different time points showing the chemical uptake of
octinoxate into the silicone. The weight at time 0 hours is the weight of the rods before loading with
octinoxate.
Weight of the silicone rods (g)
Sample no.
0 hours
1 hour
3 hours
5 hours
7 hours
24 hours
29 hours
48 hours
Rod no. 1
0.2972
0.3006
0.3020
0.3032
0.3064
0.3060
0.3050
0.3059
Rod no. 2
0.3327
0.3377
0.3400
0.3419
0.3431
0.3431
0.3432
0.3422
Rod no. 3
0.3237
0.3287
0.3329
0.3327
0.3347
0.3346
0.3339
0.3353
iv
==PAGE:47==
D
Evaluation of results from the GC-MS
Evaluation of all measured data, which can be found in Appendix F.
Measurements after 2 days incubation
The abiotic triplicate no. 2 for concentration L4 was removed from the data treatment due to the
measured area for the octinoxate content being more than thrice the size of the average of the two
other triplicates.
Generally the biotic triplicates for the L3 concentration were higher than the abiotic triplicates. The
average of the biotic measurements were not twice the size of the abiotic however, and the differences
are therefore accepted.
Abiotic triplicate no. 2 for concentration L2 produced almost no signal and were considered blank. It
was therefore removed from the data treatment. It is expected, that the error lies in no sample being
transferred from the incubation vial to the vial used for analysis on the GC-MS during dilution of the
sample. Due to the small volume, which should be transferred (300 µL), the error is not likely to have
been spotted. Since one of the abiotic triplicates (no. 1) had already been sacriﬁced to determine the
level of dilution, this error left only one abiotic triplicate (no. 3), which was distinctly higher than all
of the biotic triplicates. The lone triplicate can not be compared to other abiotic triplicates run on the
same day due to differences in test concentration, but compared to abiotic triplicates run after 6 and
13 days of incubation the measured level doesn’t seem unrealistically high. It is unknown why all
biotic measurements were so much lower.
The measurements for all three biotic triplicates for concentration L1 were higher than the remaining
two abiotic triplicates (after one had been sacriﬁced). Since the loading of the silicone rods used
for this passive dosing system wasn’t tested to establish differences, it was not possible to say if this
difference between biotic and abiotic was due to variations in loading. Anyway, the ratio between the
biotic and abiotic triplicates are not high enough to omit the measurements from the data treatment.
Measurements after 6 days incubation
The abiotic triplicate no 2. for concentration L4 was more than thrice the average measurement for
the other two triplicates and was therefore removed before data treatment. The measured area for the
three biotic triplicates vary quite a bit, but since they are all within the same order of magnitude and
clearly degraded compared to the abiotic samples, this difference was accepted and contributed to
differences in the biotic composition in the incubation vials.
The three abiotic triplicates for concentration L3 gave very varied measured areas. Furthermore, they
were so evenly spread, that it was not possible to see if either the highest or the lowest measurement
was an outlier. However, compared to the abiotic measured areas after 2 and 13 days of incubation
it become clear, that the highest measured area was the outlier (triplicate no. 1), and was therefore
removed from the data treatment since it was thrice as high as the average of the remaining two
v
==PAGE:48==
triplicates. The biotic triplicate no. 1 had more than twice the area of the average of the other two
triplicates, but since there had been a clear degradation of the compound in all samples, this was
contributed to biological differences and left in the data set.
Abiotic triplicates for concentration L2 are all relatively similar and are all included. The three biotic
triplicates vary quite a bit but are all accepted due to clear degradation and it was thus assumed that
differences are due to biotic composition.
For concentration L1 the biotic triplicate no. 3 measured an area which was almost thrice the size of
the average of the other biotic triplicates, and more than twice the size of the average of the abiotic
triplicates. This should not be possible and the measurement was therefore omitted from the data
treatment.
Measurements after 13 days incubation
The abiotic triplicates for concentration L4 were quite varied, but since none of them differed from
the average of the other with more than a factor two, they were all accepted. The differences in the
biotic triplicates were once again accepted despite differences.
Nothing to remark for concentration L3.
For concentration L2 the abiotic triplicate no. 2 yielded a measured area approximately 20 times lower
then the average of the other two triplicates and was therefore removed from further calculations.
Nothing to remark for concentration L1.
vi
==PAGE:49==
E
Oxygen measurements
Oxygen measurements in vials for analysis after 2 days
Table 10: Oxygen measurements after 2 days incubation in the vials containing the two highest test
concentrations, which were removed for analysis on the GC-MS. Two measurements were taken in
each vial on this day. The red numbers indicate a higher second measurement compared to the ﬁrst.
The grey column indicate that these second measurements were disregarded in the calculations.
Test concentration
System
Measurement 1
Measurement 2
Average
Ratio Biotic/Abtioc
7.24
7.62
Abiotic
6.83
7.44
7.04
7.20
7.57
7.09
7.45
L1
Biotic
7.14
7.59
7.14
102%
7.40
7.67
Abiotic
7.42
7.78
7.41
7.05
7.26
7.60
7.59
L2
Biotic
7.72
7.43
7.46
101%
vii
==PAGE:50==
Oxygen measurements in vials for analysis after 6 days
Table 11: Oxygen measurements after 6 days incubation in all the vials which were removed for
analysis on the GC-MS.
Test concentration
System
Measurement
Average
Ratio Biotic/Abtioc
L1
Abiotic
8.15
8.11
94%
8.10
8.07
Biotic
7.75
7.60
7.71
7.33
L2
Abiotic
7.60
7.66
100%
7.64
7.73
Biotic
7.43
7.63
7.65
7.81
L3
Abiotic
7.96
8.02
97%
8.00
8.10
Biotic
7.81
7.74
7.66
7.76
L4
Abiotic
7.56
7.72
98%
7.66
7.95
Biotic
7.57
7.54
7.50
7.56
viii
==PAGE:51==
Oxygen measurements in vials for analysis after 13 days
Table 12: Oxygen measurements after 13 days incubation in all the vials which were removed for
analysis on the GC-MS.
Test concentration
System
Measurement
Average
Ratio Biotic/Abtioc
L1
Abiotic
8.07
8.12
86%
8.08
8.20
Biotic
6.48
6.94
6.98
7.36
L2
Abiotic
7.84
7.88
89%
7.76
8.04
Biotic
6.69
7.01
6.98
7.36
L3
Abiotic
8.08
8.11
87%
8.13
8.12
Biotic
7.13
7.05
7.01
7.00
L4
Abiotic
7.61
7.83
92%
7.93
7.95
Biotic
7.24
7.22
7.06
7.35
ix
