==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Data from the Electrically Scanning Microwave Radiometer (ESMR) on-board the Nimbus 5 satellite
have recently been released in swath format. This allows for a new analysis in an attempt to improve the
climate data record of sea ice in the 1970’s. This has been attempted using data from 1974. The data
have been ﬁltered by automatically detecting outliers. Based on a modiﬁed radiative transfer model,
the data have been corrected using the ERA-40 re-analysis. Filtering and correction has improved the
quality of the data, although non-geophysical irregularities and weather patterns still remain. Using a
new method for determining dynamical tie points, daily sea ice concentrations have been determined
for both hemispheres. The sea ice extents have also been determined and compared with records from
OSI SAF. For the northern hemisphere, there is an unexplained discrepancy when comparing the sea
ice extents and concentrations from OSI SAF and ESMR. The error causing the discrepancy has not
been identiﬁed. While the ESMR 1974 data hold great potential, more work with calibration, ﬁlters and
correction is recommended to improve the climate data record.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Rasmus Tage Tonboe and Leif Toudal Pedersen. The hours they
have spent guiding me have greatly improved the quality of this project. I would also like to thank Imke
Sievers, John Andrew Dawson and Andreas Svejgaard Jensen for their investigation of data errors in the
ESMR data set. Lastly, I would like to acknowledge Wiebke Margitta Kolbe’s work of making the ESMR
data set available in it’s current format.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Electrically Scanning Microwave Radiometer
2
2.1
Antenna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Radiometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Other data
5
3.1
ERA-40 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
OSI SAF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Radiative Transfer Model
6
4.1
Model design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5
Filtering
11
5.1
Filtering of data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Filtering of land
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6
Determination of sea ice concentration
13
6.1
Southern hemisphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.2
Northern hemisphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.3
Angular DTP’s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.4
Sea ice extent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.5
Uncertainty estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
7
Correction
17
7.1
Correction study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
Practical implementation
20
9
Results and discussion
24
9.1
Dynamical tie points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
9.2
Sea ice concentration maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
9.3
Sea ice extent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
10 Conclusion
33
ii
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
Since the launch of the ﬁrst satellite in the 1950’s, many improvements have been made in satellite
technology. An increasing number of observational satellites have been launched with ever improving
scientiﬁc instruments, expanding the range of physical parameters that can be measured from space. This
has enabled frequent large scale observations, which are not possible with any other type of measurement.
One important use of this advance in technology is the monitoring of the Earth’s climate. Using
satellites, it is possible to track changes of temperature, sea level and other climate change indicators. If
we wish to determine how our climate is changing, information about it’s former state is necessary. The
earlier the measurements started, the longer the current climate data record will be.
An important climate indicator is the presence of sea ice in the Arctic and Southern Oceans. When
the sea surface temperature (SST) increases, the ice melts, resulting in a larger sea surface area. Water
is heated more than ice as it absorbs more radiation from the sun. The sea surface temperature will then
increase further, enforcing what is known as the ice albedo feedback (Perovich, 2009).
One of the ﬁrst instruments to monitor the extent of sea ice from space was the Electrically Scanning
Microwave Radiometer (ESMR) carried on-board the Nimbus 5 satellite. It was designed to test the
possibility of deriving liquid cloud water content over the oceans, the feasibility of assessing soil moisture,
and determine the diﬀerence in observations between sea ice and open ocean. The measurements covered
the entire globe from 90 ◦N to 90 ◦S.
ESMR was the precursor of later space microwave radiometers such as the Scanning Multichannel
Microwave Radiometer (SMMR) of the Nimbus 7 satellite.
One limitation of ESMR is that it only
measured radiation at 19.35 GHz horizontal polarization, thus providing one dimensional data. It did
however also scan at diﬀerent incidence angles in contrast to other space radiometers. If geophysical
information can be inferred from the incidence angles, it would be possible not only to determine the sea
ice concentration, but also whether the ice is ﬁrst year ice (FYI) or multi year ice (MYI).
The data from ESMR were recently recovered from the original magnetic tape records as Level 1
data1. The recovered data set contains calibrated brightness temperatures for each incidence angle i.e.
in swath format. The released data spans from December 1972 to May 1976. This release allows for new
analysis of the old ESMR data.
The aim of this project is to determine sea ice concentrations and extents based on ESMR brightness
temperatures. By investigating the brightness temperature as a function of incidence angle, the aim is
to determine not only sea ice concentration but also classify the sea ice type. A preliminary literature
study did not ﬁnd any evidence of this being carried out previously.
Using a modiﬁed radiative transfer model (RTM), the data will be corrected for atmospheric eﬀects
such as water vapour. The information needed for the correction is found in the ERA-40 re-analysis
(Uppala et al., 2005). In order to correct with the ERA-40 re-analysis, the data sets require co-location.
This is a time-consuming process, which unfortunately wasn’t completely ﬁnished before the deadline of
this project. Therefore, the analysis is only based on data from 1974.
In order to estimate the sea ice concentrations, a new way of determining dynamical tie points is
developed. The tie points are determined from quantiles of measured brightness temperatures within
chosen geographical areas.
By determining the sea ice concentrations at both hemispheres, the sea ice extent can be estimated.
Few other data sources provide information of the sea ice conditions in the early 1970. The data of ESMR
can therefore provide an important backwards extension of the climate data record of sea ice.
1disc.gsfc.nasa.gov/information/news?title=Nimbus 5 ESMR Level 1 Calibrated Brightness Temperature Data recovered
and released to public
1
==PAGE:5==
2
Electrically Scanning Microwave Radiometer
ESMR was carried on-board the Nimbus 5 satellite launched in 1972. One of the aims of the Nimbus 5
mission was to study and explore geophysical phenomena. The orbit was a circular polar orbit with an 81
degree retrograde inclination. Orbiting at 1112 km, the orbital time was 107 minutes and the distance of
successive equator crossings were 27 degrees longitude. For more information about Nimbus 5 spacecraft
and mission see the Nimbus 5 Users Guide section 1 (Sabatini, 1972).
2.1
Antenna
Two of the main components of ESMR were the microwave antenna and the microwave receiver. The
antenna was a phased array antenna with 103 waveguide elements. Each element was connected to an
electric phase shifter. By varying the relative phase of the elements, the beam direction of the antenna
could be controlled without mechanical movement. Due to the orientation of the antenna, the main beam
direction was always perpendicular to the ﬂight direction. The antenna was able to scan at 78 diﬀerent
angles across track, from 50 degrees left of nadir to 50 degrees right of nadir. Across track is perpendicular
to ﬂight direction and nadir is the point on the Earth’s surface directly between the satellite and the
center of the Earth. Figure 1 shows the geometry and resolution of ESMR. The ﬁgure was originally
made to describe the Temperature Humidity Infrared Radiometer (THIR) subsystem of the Nimbus 5
satellite (Sabatini, 1972) but modiﬁed by Sievers et al. (2020) to match ESMR.
Figure 1: Scanning geometry of ESMR. The white arrow indicates direction of ﬂight - also referred to
as along track direction. Figure credit: Wilheit (1972) with adjustments by Sievers et al. (2020). The
angles are incidence angles.
The ground resolution is best close to nadir at 25 km by 25 km but grows with the scan angle to 45 km
by 160 km at the edge of the swath. Due to the curvature of the Earth, the scan angle diﬀers from the
incidence angle. Table 1 lists the incidence and scan angles for the right half of the swath. The scan
angle is deﬁned at the antenna, while the incidence angle is deﬁned at the Earth’s surface. There are no
beam positions looking directly at nadir.
2
==PAGE:6==
Table 1: Scan angles and corresponding incidence angles of the right half of the swath of ESMR i.e.
looking right of nadir. Beam positions 1-29 are the same scan and incidence angles when looking left of
nadir wrt. ﬂight direction.
Beam
Scan
Incidence
Beam
Scan
Incidence
position
angle [deg]
angle [deg]
position
angle [deg]
angle [deg]
40
0.60
0.70
60
24.10
28.59
41
1.70
1.99
61
25.30
30.05
42
2.90
3.40
62
26.60
31.65
43
4.00
4.69
63
27.90
33.25
44
5.10
5.98
64
29.20
34.87
45
6.30
7.39
65
30.50
36.50
46
7.40
8.68
66
31.80
38.14
47
8.60
10.09
67
33.20
39.92
48
9.70
11.39
68
34.50
41.59
49
10.90
12.80
69
35.90
43.41
50
12.10
14.22
70
37.40
45.38
51
13.20
15.52
71
38.80
47.25
52
14.40
16.94
72
40.30
49.29
53
15.60
18.37
73
41.80
51.36
54
16.80
19.80
74
43.40
53.63
55
18.00
21.23
75
44.90
55.81
56
19.20
22.67
76
46.60
58.37
57
20.40
24.11
77
48.30
61.05
58
21.60
25.56
78
50.00
63.86
59
22.80
27.01
An antenna pattern describes how sensitive the antenna is to radiation coming from diﬀerent direc-
tions. Ideally the antenna pattern is narrow, such that the received radiation is from a small ﬁeld of view.
For a phased array antenna, the antenna pattern diﬀers for each beam position. Unfortunately, only the
antenna patterns for beam positions 1 and 40 are included in the Nimbus 5 User’s Guide (Wilheit, 1972).
Based on these, it appears that the antenna patterns are narrower in the along track direction than in the
across track direction. The along track antenna pattern appears to vary more with beam position than
the across track antenna pattern. If the antenna pattern is wide at the edges of the swath, contributions
from outer space might be included in the measurement.
The combination of a wide swath and an orbital time of 107 minutes resulted in global coverage every
12 hours. During this time the polar regions are covered multiple times. The large swath width leaves no
polar-gap i.e. the entire polar regions are covered. Five beam positions can be removed from each end of
the swath without creating a polar-gap. This can be utilized to omit the pixels with the poorest spatial
resolution if need be.
For more information on the microwave antenna see Section 4 of The Nimbus 5 User’s Guide (Wilheit,
1972).
2.2
Radiometer
A radiometer is a passive remote sensing instrument. It measures incoming radiation, without transmit-
ting any. ESMR was a one channel Dicke radiometer, measuring only at 19.35 GHz horizontal polarization.
Dicke radiometers are equipped with a reference load of a known temperature. This is used to calibrate
the radiometer to ensure correct measurements. The trade oﬀis that a signiﬁcant amount of measurement
time is spent measuring the load, rather than measuring the objects of interest. However, the calibration
is much more reliable. The Dicke load of ESMR was a hot load at 338◦K. Furthermore, the satellite was
equipped with a sky horn measuring the brightness temperature of outer space, which is known to be
2.7 K. The temperature of the hot reference (Dicke load) was measured after every odd scan of all of 78
beam positions, while the cold reference (sky horn) was measured after every even scan of all 78 beam
positions. The integration time at each beam position was 47 ms, resulting in an absolute accuracy of
2 K (Wilheit, 1972).
3
==PAGE:7==
2.3
Data
The ESMR 1974 data set has been retrieved from DMI’s FTP2. It consists of 4155 NetCDF ﬁles, each
containing data from one orbit. An overview of an example ﬁle is shown in Appendix B.
The variables used in this project are the brightness temperature, latitude, longitude and 16 analog
signals. More data is present but unused here, such as measurements of the hot and cold references used
for calibration, satellite altitude, pointing errors and more. More information on these can be found
in Wilheit (1972). Variables from the ERA-40 re-analysis have been added to the data set as will be
described in Section 3.1.
The name of each ﬁle contains information of when the data was recorded. For example, the ﬁle
“Nimbus5-ESMR 1974m0403t014121 DS60 era40.nc” is from an orbit that started at 01:41:21 on 3rd of
April 1974. The ﬁlename is thus used to determine the timestamp of the data. The data of the brightness
temperature, latitude and longitude follow the same structure. The data are stored in matrices of 78
rows by N columns, where N indicates the varying number of successive scan lines. All data in the ﬁrst
row were measured at the ﬁrst beam position, all data in the second row were measured at the second
beam position and so on. The row number can thus be converted to incidence angle. Each element in
the brightness temperature matrix has been measured at the corresponding location in the latitude and
longitude matrices. Thus the ﬁrst element of the brightness temperature matrix has been measured at
the latitude and longitude coordinates stored in the ﬁrst elements of the latitude and longitude matrices
respectively. Figure 2 shows the brightness temperature in the ﬁrst data ﬁle.
Figure 2: Brightness temperatures measured at the ﬁrst orbit in the data set starting 1st of January
03:20. Antarctica is just left of the center, while Greenland is seen both to the far left and the far right.
Warmer temperatures (yellow and green) are measured in the presence of land and sea ice, while colder
temperatures (blue) are measured over open water.
In the left half of the above ﬁgure, the satellite is ﬂying from north to south, from Greenland over
South America and reaching Antarctica around scan line 800. The satellite continues it’s orbit north in
the right half of the ﬁgure, passing western Australia and Asia before returning to Greenland at scan
line 1600. The warmer (yellow and green) brightness temperatures are measured at land and ice, while
the colder (blue) brightness temperatures are measured at sea. The map is somewhat distorted, since
the data at the outermost beam positions have been sampled from larger areas compared to the central
beam positions.
16 analog signals (Analog 0-Analog 15) are stored in each orbital ﬁle. Each of these signals is a vector
with N elements. The Nimbus 5 User’s guide (Wilheit, 1972) does not oﬀer much information on these
signals, other than referring to them as “a set of 16 voltages of engineering interest, each sampled once
per 16 seconds” (Wilheit, 1972). These signals will be used for ﬁltering of the data.
Throughout the year data gaps appear where no data ﬁles are present. The ﬁle “Nimbus5-ESMR 1974m
0209t164138 DS56 era40.nc” is immediately followed by “Nimbus5-ESMR 1974m0212t001146 DS56 era
40.nc” revealing that no data is available on 10th or 11th of February. No other full days are missing,
but some ﬁles only contain data from a small fraction of a full orbit. For more information on ESMR
data including calibration and quality control see GSFC (1975) and Parkinson et al. (1987).
Originally the data was stored on magnetic tapes. Recently, the data was recovered onto magnetic
hard disks, allowing for a new release of the calibrated swath brightness temperatures. Before the recovery,
only gridded data was available. The advantage of swath data is that the measurements are tied to beam
positions and that the time is known for every single measurement. The latter allows for synchronising
the data with other observations, such as the ERA-40 re-analysis.
2ftp://ftp.dmi.dk/
4
==PAGE:8==
3
Other data
3.1
ERA-40
ESMR observed from outside the atmosphere, it therefore measured the total brightness temperatures
from the Earth’s surface and the atmosphere. Since atmospheric eﬀects are not what is investigated in
this study, it is desirable to remove them from the data. This can be done if the state of the atmosphere
is known at the time of measurement. Such information can be found in the ERA-40 re-analysis (Uppala
et al., 2005).
The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) has gathered meteorologi-
cal observations from a range of sources from September 1957 to August 2002.
The sources include
observations from aircrafts, buoys, surface platforms, radiosondes and satellites. The re-analysis used
the assimilated observations to make global forecasts for a large range of meteorological variables using
a numerical weather prediction model. The ERA-40 variables used in this project are SST, two meter
air temperature, 10 meter wind speeds in two directions, total column water vapour (TCWV) and total
column water. The total cloud liquid water (TCLW), is also used. It is determined as the diﬀerence
between the total column water and TCWV.
The temporal resolution of the re-analysis is 6 hours, while the horizontal spatial resolution is 1.125 ◦
latitude by 1.125 ◦degrees longitude.
The ERA-40 variables have been co-located to the ESMR data. Before the co-location the ERA-40
data is interpolated onto a grid with a resolution of 0.25 ◦degrees latitude by 0.25 ◦longitude. For each
of the ESMR measurements the following process is done. Firstly, the nearest time in the ERA-40 data is
found. As the temporal resolution is 6 hours, there will be a maximum of 3 hours diﬀerence between the
ESMR observation and the co-located ERA-40 values. Afterwards, the closest geographical location of
the ERA-40 data is found using nearest neighbors. The co-location was done by Wiebke Margitta Kolbe
at DMI.
The large diﬀerence in temporal resolution might pose problems. ERA-40 is intended to be used to
correct the ESMR data for atmospheric eﬀects. A weather system can move a considerable distance
within a 3 hour time period. Thus certain weather systems might not be in the same location at the
same time within the two data sets. This would cause the “correction” to occur in the wrong place. The
result would be a corrected data set that is worse than the original.
A more recent meteorological re-analysis is presently available with the recent publishing of ERA5
(Hersbach et al., 2020). Both the spatial and temporal resolution has been greatly improved in the new
product. The temporal resolution is hourly and the horizontal spatial resolution is 30 km by 30 km. The
ERA5 re-analysis was released to late to be included in this project.
3.2
OSI SAF
In order to compare the sea ice concentrations and sea ice extents of ESMR with more recent results,
additional data is needed. This is provided by the Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility (OSI
SAF). Two data sets are used for comparisons; one for sea ice concentrations and one for sea ice extent.
The sea ice concentrations are based on brightness temperatures of the 24-channel Special Sensor
Microwave Imager/Sounder (SSMIS) (Tonboe et al., 2017).
Rather than downloading the individual
data ﬁles, the quicklook maps3 are used. These provide a visualisation of the sea ice concentrations of
any given day from 28th of February 2005 to present.
The sea ice extents are also found on the OSI SAF website4. They are based on sea ice concentration
products from the SMMR, Special Sensor Microwave Image (SSM/I) and Special Sensor Microwave
Imager/Sounder (SSMIS) instruments (Lavergne et al., 2020). The data ﬁles are downloaded in NetCDF
format, from which the variables sea ice extent and time are used.
3osisaf-hl.met.no/quicklooks-1prod?
4https://osisaf-hl.met.no/v2p1-sea-ice-index
5
==PAGE:9==
4
Radiative Transfer Model
Brightness temperature Tb is a measure of radiation emitted by an object. It depends on the physical
temperature and the di-electric properties of the object.
Tb = ϵT0 = (1 −r)T0
(1)
where ϵ is the emissivity, r = 1 −ϵ is the reﬂectance and T0 is the physical temperature. The emissivity
depends on the wavelength among other things. As the emissivity is unitless, the unit of brightness
temerature is Kelvin.
For the analysis of brightness temperature data from the SSM/I, Wentz (1997) published a model
to simulate the expected brightness temperatures for open water. This model is a radiative transfer
model (RTM). Wentz’s RTM expresses the top of atmosphere brightness temperature Tb as the sum
of the radiation emitted by the sea surface, the up-welling radiation from the atmosphere Tbu and the
down-welling radiation that is reﬂected by the sea surface.
Tb = Tbu + τ(ϵwTw + (1 −ϵw)(ΩTbd + τTbc))
(2)
where τ is the transmittance through the atmosphere, ϵw is the emmisivity of sea water, Tw is the
water surface temperature, Ωis the reﬂection reduction factor of the sea surface, Tbd is the down-
welling radiation from the atmosphere and Tbc is the cosmic background radiation. At 19.35GHz the
transmittance is strongly inﬂuenced by water in the atmosphere. This model has been expanded and
adapted to match ESMR rather than the SSM/I.
4.1
Model design
Firstly, the model has been expanded to also account for the emission of radiation from sea ice and
reﬂectance of sea ice.
Tb = Tbu + τ(cwϵwTw + cw(1 −ϵw)(ΩTbd + τTbc) + ciϵiTi + ci(1 −ϵi)(Tbd + τTbc))
(3)
where Ti is the ice surface temperature, ci is the sea ice concentration, cw is the open water concen-
tration and ϵi is the sea ice emissivity. The ﬁrst term accounts for the atmospheric up-welling brightness
temperature. The second and third terms are the emissivity of and reﬂection oﬀthe sea surface re-
spectively. The fourth and ﬁfth terms are likewise the emission of and reﬂection oﬀsea ice. Since land
surfaces are not included in this project, the concentration of open water is easily calculated from the
concentration of sea ice (cw = 1 −ci).
Secondly, the SSM/I measured at 7 channels combining four frequencies at two polarisations. One of
the channels was 19.35 GHz horizontal. This is easily simpliﬁed to match the one channel of ESMR, by
omitting redundant equations and constants.
Thirdly, SSM/I measured at a constant incidence angle of 53◦, whereas ESMR measured at 78 diﬀerent
angles. The modiﬁcations made to accommodate these diﬀerences are described below, while the reader
is referred to Wentz (1997) for the parts of the model which have not been modiﬁed for this project.
Surface temperature
When calculating the inﬂuence of TCWV and TCLW, Wentz uses the SST to approximate the air
temperature (equations 17a and 22 in Wentz (1997)). To account for the presence of sea ice, the air
temperature is determined by the two meter temperature T2m in the modiﬁed model rather than the
water temperature Tw.
Atmospheric transmittance
The transmittance depends on the incidence angle θ. As the angle increases, the radiation travels further
through the atmosphere and is thus attenuated more. The RTM is changed such that the transmittance
changes with incidence angle.
Ice emissivity
The emissivity of sea ice depends on both the age of the ice and the incidence angle. A new parameter
is introduced in the model to account for the multi year ice fraction, MF. Thus the emissivity of sea ice
ϵi used in Equation 3 is a weighted average of the emissivities of MYI and FYI.
6
==PAGE:10==
ϵi = MFϵMY I + (1 −MF)ϵF Y I
(4)
The emissivities ϵMY I and ϵF Y I depend on a range of physical properties and are therefore diﬃcult
to model. To obtain realistic values for the RTM, the emissivities have been simulated. The simulations
were done by Rasmus Tonboe using the method and data described in Tonboe (2010). Variables from
ERA-40 were used as input in a thermodynamic model. The output from the thermodynamic model was
then used as input in an emissivity model, thus obtaining emissivities based on weather conditions. Two
simulations were done, one for FYI and one for MYI, both located 75N, 0E. The simulations were run
from September 2000 to June 2001. The outputs are emissivities for 14 diﬀerent incidence angles (0◦,
5◦, 10◦, ..., 65◦) every 6 hours. The average emissivity during the winter is calculated for each angle, for
FYI and MYI respectively. Winter is here deﬁned as 1st of December to 30th of April. The resulting
emissivities are shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Simulated ice emissivities used in the RTM. The simulations were perfomed by Rasmus Tonboe
as described in Tonboe (2010).
The emissivity of FYI is as expected, whereas the emissivity for MYI is somewhat higher than values
found in literature. Parkinson et al. (1987) list usual values of 19.35 GHz nadir-viewing as 0.92 and 0.84
for FYI and MYI respectively. They are both seen to decrease with increasing incidence angle. A look-up
table is created with the 14 emissivities for the two ice types. To obtain emissivities at non-simulated
angles, spline interpolation is used.
Water emissivity
The emissivity of water ϵw is the sum of the specular emissivity, E0, and the wind induced emissivity
Ewind. Both depend on the incidence angle and have been modiﬁed in the RTM. The specular emissivity
can be computed from the Fresnel equations if the polarization, incidence angle and dielectric constant
are known (equation 1.52 in Schanda (1986)). The latter depends on frequency and water temperature.
The Fresnel equation for horizontal polarization is
rI(θ) = (p −cos(θ))2 + q2
(p + cos(θ))2 + q2
(5)
where p and q are abbreviations for
p =
1
√
2[(ε′
r −sin2(θ))1/2 + ε′′2
r + (ε′
r −sin2(θ))]1/2
(6)
q =
1
√
2[(ε′
r −sin2(θ))1/2 + ε′′2
r −(ε′
r −sin2(θ))]1/2
(7)
and rI is the refraction index and ε′
r and ε′′
r are the real and imaginary parts of the water permittivity
respectively. The water permittivity depends on temperature. The values used in this RTM are from
Ulaby et al. (1982) (equation E64a with a reference salinity of 34 psu). At 19.35 GHz horizontal polariza-
tion, there is negligible dependency on water salinity (Wilheit, 1972). As was done for the ice emissivities
a look-up table is created, and the values are interpolated if needed. One complex permittivity is stored
for every degree Celsius between -5 and 50 degrees. The complex water permittivity is shown in Figure
4.
7
==PAGE:11==
Figure 4: The real (blue) and imaginary (red) part of the water permittivity used in the modiﬁed RTM.
The specular emissivity is calculated from the refraction index:
E0 = 1 −|rI|
(8)
The wind induced emissivity Ewind depends on water temperature and the incidence angle (Ulaby
et al., 1982)
Tb = Tb(W = 0) + aW
(9)
where W is the wind speed, Tb(W = 0) is the brightness temperature at zero wind speed and a is the
angular wind coeﬃcient. Combining Equation 9 with Figure 6 of Meissner and Wentz (2012), the wind
induced emissivity at 19.35 GHz horizontal polarisation is found to be:
Ewind = (0.3 + 0.0094 θ) W
Tw
(10)
In the case of an atmosphere with no wind or water, the sea surface emissivity ϵw = E0 + Ewind is
calculated to be 0.44 (at 19.35 GHz nadir). This is in accordance with Parkinson et al. (1987).
A matlab implementation of the RTM made in collaboration with Rasmus Toneboe can be found in
Appendix C.
4.2
Sensitivity analysis
The model sensitivity to input parameters has been investigated. The aim is to reveal how sensitive the
model is to the various inputs. The sensitivity study will be completed twice; once for open water and
once for 100% sea ice.
All variables except one is kept at a reference value. These are listed in Table 2. The reference values for
SST, wind speed, TCWV and TCLW are found by statistical analysis of ERA-40 from 1974 for chosen
geographical areas. The ﬁrst area is all water between 40 ◦N and 60 ◦N. The second area is north of
83 ◦N between 210 ◦E and 340 ◦E. This area is believed to contain MYI based on visual inspections of
the measured brightness temperatures. The emitting layer temperature of sea ice Tel is approximated as
the mean of the 2 meter temperature and the SST.
Table 2: Reference values used for the RTM sensitivity study. Values in parenthesis are expected not to
aﬀect the predicted brightness temperature.
Tw [K]
Wind speed [m/s]
TCLW [mm]
TCWV [mm]
Tel [K]
MF
Open water
279.2
6.43
0.141
24.41
(273.0)
(0)
Sea ice
(271.5)
(5.09)
0.049
5.03
263.96
0.5
Each variable is set to ﬁve diﬀerent values. One is the reference value listed in Table 2. The four
others are found by adding/subtracting ﬁrstly the standard deviation and secondly half the standard
deviation. Initially twice the standard deviation was also used, but it often occurred that this resulted in
values outside the minimum and maximum values found in ERA-40. The wind speed, TCLW and TCWV
are set to a minimum of zero. The model was also tested for sensitivity to two meter temperature, but
this was found to have insigniﬁcant inﬂuence on the predicted brightness temperature.
8
==PAGE:12==
Figure 5 shows the simulated brightness temperature over water. TCWV is seen to have the largest
inﬂuence on measured brightness temperature. The presence of wind, TCWV and TCLW are all seen to
increase the brightness temperature. The only variable that can lower the brightness temperature over
water is the SST. The increase is however of very low magnitude. Thus any atmospheric eﬀects which
are not properly corrected for, will increase the brightness temperature over water.
From Figure 5 it can be seen that the SST has very little inﬂuence on the predicted Tb. The biggest
contributor is seen to be the TCWV. This is to be expected due to the water absorption in the atmosphere
at 19.35GHz.
Figure 5: Sensitivity study of the RTM with 0% sea ice concentration. The input variables are from
ERA-40.
The eﬀects over sea ice (Figure 6) are seen to be smaller than over water. This is in part due to the
lower atmospheric water contents over sea ice. The increasing MYI fraction is seen to lower the simulated
values, while the other variables have the reverse eﬀect. The biggest change is found with emitting layer
temperature.
9
==PAGE:13==
Figure 6: Sensitivity study of the RTM with 100% sea ice concentration. The input variables are from
ERA-40.
From Figures 5 and 6 it can be seen that the brightness temperature decreases as the incidence angle
increases. This is expected from the equations used to build the model.
10
==PAGE:14==
5
Filtering
5.1
Filtering of data
As seen in Figure 7, some of the data ﬁles contain measured brightness temperatures that are expected
to be incorrect. In the top panel (a) a line of highly varying values are seen along the 850th scan line.
The continental area around scan line 1000 in panel b, shows peculiar stripes in the along track direction.
These are strongly present in the continental and sea ice areas, but are only seen vaguely in open water
areas.
In order to remove the unrealistic brightness temperatures, the data set is ﬁltered. Five ﬁlters are
implemented based on the suggestions of Sievers et al. (2020). These are described below. All ﬁlters are
applied simultaneously.
Figure 7: Examples of orbits with unwanted data. a: sudden changes in brightness temperature appear
at the 850th scan line and spots of outliers are seen between scan lines 800-850. b: lines of constant
brightness temperatures are seen over land for certain beam positions. a is from 4th of January 11:56
while b is from 25 of March 08:35.
Temperature bounds
No measured brightness temperature is expected to be lower than 90 K or higher than 300 K. This ﬁlter
detects values outside the given range for each pixel.
Analog signals
The data ﬁles contain 16 analog signals of measured voltages. These are usually relatively smooth, but
occasionally experience sudden spikes. These spikes coincide with errors in the data, such as seen in
Figure 7.a at scan line 850. The analog ﬁlter detects changes in the analog signals. If the change is larger
than 200 V for consecutive values, the associated scan line and surrounding four scan lines of brightness
temperatures are ﬂagged as bad data.
Mean column
The scan lines of bad data do not always coincide with changes in the analog signals. The mean column
ﬁlter is designed to detect change of average brightness temperature of three successive scan lines. If only
two lines were included, coastlines might be wrongly classiﬁed as bad data. The threshold of maximum
change is set to 50 K. If the threshold is surpassed, ﬁve scan lines are removed centered at the three used
to detect the error.
Pixel sum
Some outliers are individual pixels rather than full scan lines. These are detected by calculating the
change in brightness temperature for each beam position for three successive pixels. If the sum of the
changes is higher than 150 K, the full scan lines of the associated pixels are removed.
11
==PAGE:15==
Constant Tb for beam positions The error visible in Figure 7.b occurs in 15 % of the ﬁles. A
constant value of brightness temperature is seen over land and ice. In order to remove these, the constant
Tb ﬁlter is implemented. The ﬁlter detects brightness temperatures that do not change for at least six
consecutive pixels for each beam position. The aﬀected pixels are ﬂagged as erroneous.
5.2
Filtering of land
An ERA-5 land mask is used to remove any data that has been sampled over land. The resolution of
the mask is 0.25 ◦latitude by 0.25 ◦longitude. Each grid cell contains a value between 0 and 1, where 1
indicates that the area in the cell only consists of land, where a value of 0 indicates that the area only
contains water or sea ice. Any value in between indicates the fraction of the area that is covered by land.
The latitude and longitude of the measurements are rounded to a quarter of a degree to ﬁnd the
appropriate cell in the land mask. If the value in the mask is above 0, the measured brightness temperature
is omitted in further analysis. This ﬁlter removes 36.9% of the data. When combined with the other
ﬁlters 38.9% of the 1974 data is removed. I.e. the non-land mask ﬁlters remove 3.2% of ocean data.
These percentages relate to number of pixels, not areas. Figure 8 shows the orbits of Figure 7 after the
ﬁlters are applied. Lastly, as no sea ice is expected around the equator, all measurements between 35◦N
and 52◦S are omitted from further analysis.
Figure 8: The two orbits shown in Figure 7 after ﬁltering. Darkest blue indicates removed data.
12
==PAGE:16==
6
Determination of sea ice concentration
The sea ice concentration can be determined from measured brightness temperatures Tb,obs.
This is
possible due to the large diﬀerence in emissivity between water and sea ice.
cice = Tb,obs −Tb,water
Tb,ice −Tb,water
(11)
where Tb,water and Tb,ice are reference temperatures for water and sea ice respectively. As seen in
Section 4.1 the expected brightness temperatures are much higher for sea ice compared to water. The use
of Equation 11 requires information of the reference temperatures, the so-called tie points. The Nataional
Snow and Ica Data Center (NSIDC) suggests static tie points at 248 K for sea ice and 138.3 K and 135 K
for water at the northern and southern hemispheres respectively. This can however cause errors, if for
instance instrument drift or natural variation occurs. Tonboe et al. (2016) suggests the use of dynamical
tie points (DTPs). These can be used in the following way.
Two areas are chosen. One where the sea ice concentration is known to be 0 % and one where the sea
ice concentration is known to be 100 %. The mean brightness temperature is calculated in each area.
The value calculated over ice is the DTP for sea ice, while the one calculated over water is the DTP
for water. The advantage of DTPs is that natural variation and potential instrument drift in principal
does not aﬀect the resulting sea ice concentration. A complication of this method is that it requires
knowledge of the sea ice concentration before the sea ice concentration is determined. Since no large
scale independent information on sea ice concentration in the early 1970’s has been found, a diﬀerent
approach is implemented here.
6.1
Southern hemisphere
For the southern hemisphere, two geographical areas are selected; one for water and one for sea ice. These
are shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Geographical areas for determination of dynamical tie points of the southern hemisphere. The
areas are determined from visual inspections of the measured brightness temperatures.
The areas are constant throughout the year. While Tonboe et al. (2016) use the mean, this might
not be the best option in this study. Using the mean would include two assumptions. Firstly, the data
is corrected suﬃciently, such that atmospheric conditions will not increase the brightness temperature.
Secondly, the surface in each area is assumed to be of the same type throughout the year. The second
13
==PAGE:17==
assumption does not hold true, due to the low amount of sea ice during summer. To take these doubt-full
assumptions into account, quantiles can be used rather than means. By choosing a low quantile for open
water (e.g. 25 %) the eﬀects of clouds are less likely to aﬀect the DTP of water. By choosing a high
quantile for sea ice (e.g. 95 %), only a small amount of sea ice would need to be present. Thus the tie
point would remain high for longer during spring, when gradually more water is present in the sea ice
area. A minimum tie point can be set, such that the tie point is static during the summer, when no sea
ice is present. 100 % and 0 % are not considered usable quantiles, since potential outliers would then
dominate the tie points.
6.2
Northern hemisphere
Determining the DTPs for the northern hemisphere includes an extra complication due to the presence
of MYI. The advantage of using MYI as tie point is that is it present year-round. The disadvantage of
using only MYI is that its emissivity is lower than that of FYI. This would result in a higher sea ice
concentrations compared to when using FYI as a tie point. When the area of interest is the ice edge, it
is best to use the ice type of the ice edge as tie point. For the majority of the year the ice edge consists
of FYI. It is therefore advantageous to use FYI as tie point whenever possible. Figure 10 shows deﬁned
areas of FYI, MYI and open water for the northern hemisphere. The areas do not change throughout
the year. As for the southern hemisphere, quantiles are used to determine the tie points. The presence
of MYI allows for a DTP for sea ice during the summer when no FYI is present. During spring when
the FYI melts, the tie point in the FYI area will decrease as more open water is present, until eventually
the tie point calculated from the FYI area becomes lower than the tie point of the MYI area. Equation
11 only uses one sea ice tie point to calculate the sea ice concentration. The maximum value of the MYI
and FYI tie points is chosen as the DTP for sea ice. Thus the ice tie point will be of FYI during winter
and MYI during summer.
Figure 10: Geographical areas for dynamical tie points. The areas are determined from visual inspections
of the measured brightness temperatures.
14
==PAGE:18==
6.3
Angular DTP’s
It was initially hoped that the varying incidence angle of ESMR could provide an additional dimension to
the data. If the DTP for each surface type varies with incidence angle, it might be possible to distinguish
between FYI and MYI, thus enabling additional classiﬁcation of the surface type. In order to investigate
this, the DTPs have been determined as described above for the three diﬀerent surface type areas is
Figure 10. The result is shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Dynamical tie points for each incidence angle for the three surface type areas deﬁned in Figure
10. The mean is taken for all days in 1974 for each angle after ﬁltering.
Unfortunately, the tie points are seen to be roughly constant for changing incidence angles. There
will therefore not be created DTPs for each incidence angle. By taking the mean across all angles, more
data is used, providing a more reliable DTP.
An explanation for the lack of angle dependency has been found in the Nimbus 5 data catalog, page
5-5 (GSFC, 1975):
“An empirical calibration has been developed which removes the eﬀect of the lobe structure and
antenna loss, which vary with position, and roughly corrects for angular variations in viewing geometry.”
This calibration appears successful. The calibration was done by applying an empirical linear correction
to the data. The correction is temperature dependent, and it is speculated whether it might have caused
errors in the data, such as seen in Figure 7.b.
6.4
Sea ice extent
The sea ice extent deﬁnes the area that is encompassed by the ice edge. The ice edge is deﬁned as the
line where the sea ice concentration drops below a certain threshold, usually 15%. The sea ice extent
makes for a useful comparison of past and present sea ice conditions. If the sea ice concentrations are
stored in an equal area scalable Earth (EASE) grid5, the sea ice extent can easily be computed. Each
pixel in an EASE grid represents the same size of surface area on Earth. The number of pixels with a sea
ice concentration higher than the threshold are counted. The number of counted pixels are then scaled
by the area of a grid cell in the EASE grid. The resulting area is the sea ice extent.
6.5
Uncertainty estimates
The uncertainties of the sea ice concentration maps depend on the uncertainties of the dynamical tie
points. Following the method in section 3.7 of Parkinson et al. (1987) and assuming independent errors,
the uncertainties of sea ice concentrations dcice are estimated.
dcice =

δTb,obs
Tb,ice −Tb,water
2
+
−(1 −cice)δTb,water
Tb,ice −Tb,water
2
+

−ciceδTb,ice
Tb,ice −Tb,water
21/2
(12)
where δTb,obs, δTb,water and δTb,ice are the errors in Tb,obs, Tb,water and Tb,ice respectively. The errors
in Tb,water and Tb,ice are determined as the standard deviation of the respective DTPs throughout the
5https://nsidc.org/data/ease
15
==PAGE:19==
year. Thus the errors δTb,water and δTb,ice are constant for each hemisphere. The error δTb,obs is listed
as 3 K in Parkinson et al. (1987).
The uncertainty of sea ice extent is based on the uncertainties of sea ice concentrations.
When
determining the upper limit of sea ice extent, the sea ice concentration uncertainty is added to the sea ice
concentration estimate before the pixels with values higher than the sea ice concentration threshold are
counted. Likewise for the lower limit of sea ice extent, the sea ice concentration uncertainty is subtracted
from the sea ice concentration estimate.
The sea ice concentration is given in percentages. The sea ice concentration uncertainty is also given
in percentages. When a sea ice concentration is stated as 50% ± 5%, the reader should understand this
to be a sea ice concentration of 45-55%. This convention will be used throughout the report.
16
==PAGE:20==
7
Correction
As determined in Section 4.2, the measured brightness temperature does not only depend on emissions
from the surface. The atmospheric conditions can inﬂuence the measurements signiﬁcantly and must
be taken into account. A correction scheme is implemented to remove these eﬀects. The aim of the
correction scheme is to remove the atmospheric contributions such that one standard temperature is
obtained for open water and another standard temperature is obtained for ice. In order to correct to a
standard temperature, a correction bias Tb,bias is added to the observed brightness temperature Tb,obs.
The bias is computed as the diﬀerence between the standard temperature Tb,stn and the local ERA-40
simulated brightness temperature, Tb,sim.
Tb,corrected = Tb,obs + Tb,bias = Tb,obs + Tb,stn −Tb,sim
(13)
Both the standard temperature and the simulated temperature are computed with the modiﬁed RTM
described in Section 4.1. The simulation is based on the ERA-40 re-analysis. The multi year fraction is
not corrected for, as no independent data of the age of sea ice is available. The eﬀective ice temperature
is not known, but approximated as the mean of SST and air temperature. It is possible to correct for
the incidence angle. However, as the measurements have been determined angle-independent, this is
not done. By including the incidence angle in both the calculations of standard temperature and the
simulation, potential variations due to incidence angle are preserved.
The standard temperature for open water is determined from a water and wind free atmosphere and
the sea surface temperature and air temperature are set to 273 K. The standard temperature for areas
with sea ice is determined from a water and wind free atmosphere. The standard ice surface temperature
is set to 264 K, while the air temperature is set to 256 K. The standard MYI fraction is set to 0, such that
it is assumed that all sea ice is FYI. This assumption generally holds true for the southern hemisphere, but
only partially for the northern hemisphere. As for the incidence angles, any variation due to diﬀerences
in ice ages are preserved.
Since the correction depends on the surface type, an estimate of the sea ice concentration is needed
before the correction. The correction is therefore an iterative process, where the correction is repeated
with updated estimates of sea ice concentrations. The iterations continue either for a set amount of
iterations, or until some convergence criteria is met.
The ERA-40 simulation is calculated twice for every measured brightness temperature; once for a
water surface and once for a sea ice surface. The sea ice concentration is then used to compute the
weighted average between the two when calculating the correction bias.
Tb,bias = (1 −cice)(Tb,stn,water −Tb,sim,water) + cice(Tb,stn,ice −Tb,sim,ice)
(14)
7.1
Correction study
The correction scheme described above is intended to lower the variation of brightness temperatures in
the ESMR data set. Whether it will be successful depends on the quality of the ERA-40 re-analysis and
the validity of the modiﬁed RTM. This is investigated by comparing the change in standard deviation
before and after the correction is applied. It is not certain that correcting for all variables will provide
the best correction. Diﬀerent combinations of SST, wind speed, TCLW and TCWV are therefore tested.
The correction study is done for a water surface. By choosing only one surface type, the sea ice
concentration will not aﬀect the results of the correction study. The brightness temperature is seen to
vary more over water based on the modiﬁed RTM. The chosen area is all water between 35 ◦N and 45 ◦N.
Every tenth orbit of the data set is included. This is done in order to save computation time, while still
including all seasons. Figure 12 shows the resulting standard deviation of the corrected data for each
combination of the variables to be corrected for.
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 12: Comparison of standard deviations after correction for diﬀerent combinations of variables.
The black line indicates the standard deviation before correction. W is short for wind speed, V is short
for TCWV, L is short for TCLW and SST is short for sea surface temperature. a shows the results after
correcting for a single variable or all four variables. b shows the results of correcting for two variables, c
for three variables. Sub-ﬁgure d compares the best result for each of the three other sub-ﬁgures.
Figure 12.a shows that correcting for any single variable is better than correcting for none at all. It
is better to correct for all four, than for any single one of the variables. From Figure 12.b it can be seen
that the best correction with two variables is the combination of SST and TCWV. This is somewhat
surprising, as SST is expected to have a very low inﬂuence on the brightness temperature based on the
modiﬁed RTM. Figure 12.c shows that the best correction with three variables is that of wind speed,
SST and TCWV. The best results of Figures 12.a-c are compared in Figure 12.d. The best correction
combination is seen to be that of wind, TCWV and SST. There is however very little diﬀerence on
whether the wind speed is included or not. This is not surprising, as the modiﬁed RTM predicts low
brightness temperature dependence on wind speed. Based on Figure 12.d, TCLW will not be included in
the data correction.
The standard deviations are clearly improved by the correction, even if the improvement is small.
From Figure 12, it is not possible to conclude whether the RTM could be modiﬁed further to improve the
correction. The primary limitation is suspected to be the spatial and temporal resolutions of ERA-40.
In general the standard deviations are seen to be lower at the center of the swath and higher at the
edges. This could be due to the changing spatial resolution or the changing thickness of the atmosphere.
18
==PAGE:22==
Figure 13: Result of the correction scheme described above. a shows the measured brightness temper-
atures. b shows the corrected brightness temperatures. c shows the correction bias, i.e. the diﬀerence
between a and b. The orbit began at 1st of January 12:20. All ﬁlters described in Section 5 have been
applied.
Figure 13 shows an example of an orbit that has been corrected. The left panel (a) shows the original
data measured by ESMR. Weather patterns are seen as higher brightness temperatures in the Atlantic
ocean and the Paciﬁc ocean. The center panel shows the corrected brightness temperatures. The right
panel shows the diﬀerence between the original and the corrected data. For an optimal correction, the
variations in brightness temperatures would only depend on the surface type and potentially the incidence
angle. As seen in Figure 13.b this is not the case. West of Europe at 330 ◦E an arc of lower brightness
temperatures are seen. This well-deﬁned shape could indicate that a variable has been corrected for at
the wrong location. The temporal gap between ESMR and ERA-40 of up to 3 hours is enough for weather
systems to move, causing diﬀerences between the measurements and the simulations. This might be what
has happened in the example above.
Figure 13.c shows the correction bias. It is negative in the presence of water and positive over ice.
This will increase the brightness temperature diﬀerence between the two surface types, which is desirable
when computing the sea ice concentration.
19
==PAGE:23==
8
Practical implementation
This section describes the steps of data processing and analysis from start to ﬁnish.
Unless stated
otherwise, the data handling is done in MATLAB2019b. Figure 14 oﬀers a visual representation of the
data processing and analysis.
Figure 14: The 7 steps of data handling. Steps 3 and 4 are repeated as an iterative process as the sea ice
concentration (SIC) estimate depends on the correction.
1. Load data
For each orbital ﬁle, the variables brightness temperature, latitude and longitude are loaded into MAT-
LAB.
2. Filter data
The data of each orbit is ﬁltered as described in Section 5. During ﬁltering, the analog signals are stored
as temporary variables. The ﬁlters all ﬂag bad data based on the original, unﬁltered data set before any
data is removed. Thus, the ﬁlters are applied simultaneously rather than sequentially.
The next two steps are repeated three times as an iterative process.
3. SIC from DTPs
The sea ice concentration is determined based on the ﬁltered data. This is done by calculating the DTPs
for each orbit. For each area type deﬁned in Figures 9 and 10 the quantile brightness temperature is
found. The quantiles used for water and ice are 25 % and 95 % respectively. Constraints are set, such
that the DTPs cannot fall outside certain ranges. If no data is present to base the DTP on, a default
value is set. The ranges and defaults are listed in Table 3. The constraints are based on visual inspection
of the unconstrained DTPs (Figure 15).
20
==PAGE:24==
Table 3: Constraints for the DTP’ calculated for each orbit. The values are based on visual inspection
of Figure 15.
Default
Minimum
Maximum
Northern
hemisphere
Water
FYI
MYI
120 K
-
220 K
100 K
180 K
190 K
140 K
245 K
245 K
Southern
hemisphere
Water
Ice
94 K
235 K
80 K
218 K
115 K
238 K
No default value is set for FYI. In case of missing data the value found for MYI will be used as tie
point for ice for the northern hemisphere. MYI is chosen as the default, since it is more stable throughout
the year.
Figure 15: Dynamical tie points determined for each orbit. Every 7th orbit is shown for clarity. The
DTPs are determined by the .25 and .95 quantiles for water and ice respectively. These tie points were
determined after the second iteration of corrections. The tie point for northern hemisphere sea ice is
determined as the maximum value of the DTPs of MYI and FYI. Constraints are not yet applied in this
ﬁgure.
4. Correction
Based on the sea ice concentration, the ﬁltered data is corrected. The parameters that are corrected for
are the wind speed, TCWV, sea surface temperature, air temperature (two meter temperature) and the
eﬀective ice temperature. The latter is calculated as the mean of the SST and the two meter temperature.
The TCLW is not corrected for, as it has been seen to increase the standard deviation of the brightness
temperatures.
5. Resample onto EASE grid
The data is resampled onto EASE grids. This is done to ease further analysis. The resampling is done in
Python using the pyresample6 library. The new grid consists of 425 by 425 pixels for each hemisphere,
each corresponding to an Earth surface area of 25.067 525 km × 25.067 525 km. The resampling is done
with a nearest neighbor algorithm for each hemisphere for each orbit for each angle. The 5 outermost
beam positions at each side of the swath are omitted. These were shown to have the largest standard
deviations, and can be omitted without creating a polar gap. Afterwards the data is restructured by
taking the mean across all angles for each orbit, and combining the orbits for each day.
If an orbit
spans more than one date, it is allocated to the ﬁrst of the two dates. The resulting data ﬁles for each
hemisphere are daily maps of 425 by 425 pixels containing ﬁltered and corrected brightness temperatures.
6github.com/pytroll/pyresample
21
==PAGE:25==
6. SIC from DTPs
The DTPs are calculated once more before the ﬁnal sea ice concentration is estimated. Since the data
has been restructured, some changes are made in the calculations. Rather than determining the DTPs
for one orbit, a 15-day moving window is used. For any given day, the preceding 7 days and following
7 days are included when determining the DTPs. For the ﬁrst and last week of the year, the moving
window is shortened, to ﬁt the available data.
As each DTP is determined from more data, no default values are needed to replace missing values.
In the case of no DTP being determined, a sea ice concentration map will not be generated for the given
hemisphere on that day. Due to the corrections applied and the moving window, the constraints are
updated with the values listed in Table 4. The unconstrained tie points are shown in Figure 16 for both
hemispheres. The spikes occurring for open water will be discussed later. The minimum constraint of ice
for the southern hemisphere determines the static tie point during winter.
Table 4: Constraints for the 15-day moving window DTPs. The constraints are based on visual inspections
of Figure 16. No default values are set, resulting in missing sea ice concentration maps in the case of
missing data.
Minimum
Maximum
Northern
hemisphere
Water
FYI
MYI
110 K
-
200 K
140 K
260 K
260 K
Southern
hemisphere
Water
Ice
110 K
235K
140 K
250 K
Figure 16: DTPs calculated for the southern (left) and northern (right) hemispheres. The tie points are
determined with a 15-day moving window for each surface type in Figures 9 and 10. The constraints are
not yet applied in this visualization. The dynamical tie point for sea ice is determined as the maximum
value of the tie points for MYI and FYI after the moving window is applied.
7. Sea ice extent
Since the data has been mapped onto an EASE grid, it should be straightforward to calculate the total
sea ice area. Howerver, a complication arises due to the high resolution of the EASE grid; many of the
grid cells are empty. To ﬁll the empty cells, interpolation is done using John D’Errico’s inpaint nans.m-
function7. The function ﬁlls empty values of a matrix based on the users choice of interpolation method.
The inputs to the function are the matrix (data) to be interpolated and a ﬂag for the interpolation
method. After testing each method on a few example maps, the one least likely to wrongly place large
patches of sea ice in the vicinity of weather systems is chosen (method=2).
7https://se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/4551-inpaint_nans
22
==PAGE:26==
The pixels with a sea ice concentration higher than a certain threshold are summed. Afterwards they
are scaled by the pixel area of 25.067 525 km × 25.067 525 km. Two sea ice extent estimates are made;
one with a threshold of 15% and one with a threshold of 30%.
8. Uncertainty estimates
Based on the standard deviations of the tie points for ice and water for each hemisphere, the uncertainties
are determined with Equation 12. The errors based on standard deviations are listed in Table 5. The
upper estimate of the sea ice concentration is the sea ice concentration plus the uncertainty. The lower
estimate is the sea ice concentration minus the uncertainty. The upper and lower estimates of sea ice
concentrations are used for the upper and lower estimates of sea ice extent.
Table 5: Standard deviations used as errors for determining uncertainties.
δTb,water
δTb,ice
Northern hemisphere
4.5 K
8.3 K
Southern hemisphere
5.5 K
1.9 K
23
==PAGE:27==
9
Results and discussion
9.1
Dynamical tie points
The DTPs for both hemispheres have been determined and are shown in Figure 17. There is seen to
be a distinct diﬀerence between the water and sea ice tie points for any given day. The ﬂat line for the
Antarctic ice tie point before 19th of March (day 78) and after 22nd of November (day 326) shows the
static tie point set by the minimum threshold. The dynamic tie point for ice is seen to be relatively stable
for the southern hemisphere, except for a spike at 25th of April (day 95). The spike coincides with one
of several spikes in the DTP for water. For the Arctic, the ice tie point is seen to vary more throughout
the year, as the signature of the ice types changes with the seasons. A sharp change in ice DTP gradient
is seen at 12th of June (day 163), where the tie point changes from being determined by FYI to MYI.
Figure 17: DTPs for both hemispheres after constraints are applied. A 15-day moving average has been
applied.
The tie points for water are seen to be fairly stable for both hemispheres. The only exceptions to this
are the drop at the beginning of the year at the southern hemisphere and occasional large spikes. As
these spikes occur on both hemispheres on the same days, they are expected to be due to errors in the
data. In order to investigate this, the average brightness temperatures have been plotted for each orbit
(Figure 18). The blue dots show the measured data before ﬁltering, while the red dots show the data
after ﬁltering. The ﬁltered data is colder due to the removal of land masses, which have relatively high
brightness temperatures. A moving average is applied, to make comparison with Figure 17 easier.
Spikes in brightness temperatures coincide with spikes in DTP values. It can further be seen that the
ﬁlters are removing some but not all of the unexpectedly high brightness temperatures. To investigate
further, a few example orbits are shown in Figure 19.
24
==PAGE:28==
Figure 18: The average brightness temperature for each orbit. The blue dots show the original data,
while the red dots shows the ﬁltered data. Unexpected spikes are found around days 14, 80-90, 127, 195,
205-220 and 290-300. A moving average is applied for clarity.
Figure 19: a, b, and c are measured brightness temperatures, while d, e, and f are the same orbits after
ﬁltering is applied. Orbits b and c are from days with unexpectedly high brightness temperatures. The
darkest blue areas indicate removed data. Orbit a/f is from 28th of February (day 59) at 23:52, b/e is
from 29th of March (day 78) at 19:36 and c/f is from 14th of August (day 226) at 08:16.
25
==PAGE:29==
Panels a, b, and c in Figure 19 show the measured brightness temperatures on days 59, 78 and 226 of
1974. Panels d, e and f show the same data after ﬁltering is applied. Orbit a/f is included as a reference
of typical brightness temperatures. It can be seen that the open water brightness temperatures in panels
b and c are higher than those in panel a. These coincide with days where the constant Tb for beam
position error occurs. The ﬁlter designed to remove this error does not seem to remove the higher values
over water. The sea ice concentration maps on these days are therefore expected to include errors.
9.2
Sea ice concentration maps
For both hemispheres, daily maps of the sea ice concentration are computed. Firstly, Figure 20 shows the
result of the interpolation scheme for 3rd of October (day 276) where 80 % of the grid cells (not counting
land) were empty. Due to the high resolution of the EASE grid, at least 70 % of each ﬁle consists of
empty grid cells. On average the southern ﬁles are 77 % empty, while the northern ﬁles are 80 % empty.
Figure 20: Interpolation of missing data on 3rd of October.
a shows the sea ice concentration map
before interpolation, where 80 % of the cells in water and ice areas are empty. b shows the result of the
interpolation where 0 % of the cells are empty.
Areas with sparse original data show smooth transitions from sea ice to water after interpolation. In
areas with high original data density, the edges between water and sea ice are seen to be sharper.
A large data gap has been ﬁlled south of Alaska. The smooth transition from low sea ice concentration
to water is created by the interpolation algorithm. It is most likely a weather pattern which has been
interpreted as low sea ice concentration. In general, the maps show many areas at sea with a presence
of low sea ice concentration. These are assumed to be due to atmospheric eﬀects which have not been
properly corrected for.
Figure 21 shows the maximum (a) and minimum (b) sea ice extents for the northern hemisphere in
1974. An area of roughly 80 % sea ice concentration of is found north of Greenland. This area is ﬁlled
with MYI which has a lower emissivity than FYI, which has been used as tie point during the winter.
What appears as a lower sea ice concentration is actually a 100% sea ice concentration of MYI. During
summer (Figure 21.b) MYI is used as tie point, causing an apparent sea ice concentration increase in the
Beaufort Sea.
The maps of the associated uncertainties (Figure 22) also reveal the weather patterns present in
Figure 21. The uncertainties are higher in the surface type area with the higher error. For the northern
hemisphere, the error of the DTP for sea ice is almost twice as large as that of water. This causes areas
with higher brightness temperatures to have higher associated uncertainties. Therefore, weather systems
26
==PAGE:30==
will be associated with higher uncertainties than the surrounding water. The large error is due to the
large variation of the DTP for sea ice throughout the year.
Figure 21: Maximum and minimum sea ice extent for the northern hemisphere in 1974. a is from 9th of
March (day 68) while b is from 17th of September (day 260).
Figure 22: Uncertainties associated with the sea ice concentrations in Figure 21, also for days 68 (a) and
260 (b).
Figure 23 shows the minimum (a) and maximum (b) sea ice extent for the southern hemisphere.
Almost no sea ice is present in autumn, while Antarctica is fully enclosed in sea ice during spring. Figure
24 shows the uncertainties associated with Figure 23. For the southern hemisphere, the uncertainty is
seen to be larger over water than over sea ice. In contrast to the northern hemisphere, the southern
hemisphere has a higher error of water tie point compared to sea ice tie point. The low error for sea
27
==PAGE:31==
ice is due to the static tie point during summer. The uncertainty is lower for southern sea ice than
northern sea ice. The uncertainty at water is the same as for the northern hemisphere during spring.
Weather systems are present in the sea ice concentration maps of the southern hemisphere including the
uncertainty estimates.
Figure 23: Minimum and maximum sea ice extent for the southern hemisphere in 1974. a is from 24th
of February (day 55) while b is from 6th of September (day 249).
Figure 24: Uncertainties associated with the sea ice concentrations in Figure 23, also for days 55 (a) and
249 (b).
During austral winter the Weddell Polynya can be observed as a large gap in the sea ice est of the
Weddell Sea (Figure 23.b). The polynya starts as a bay-like structure in the sea ice as seen in Figure
25.a. It is diﬃcult to pinpoint when the polynya closes oﬀsince the data from 30th of July (day 211)
28
==PAGE:32==
to 15th of August(day 227) are heavily contaminated with errors, but it happens somewhere in between
those dates. During December (Figure 25.b) the ice at the northern edge of the polynya melts, and the
polynya opens to the Southern Ocean. The Polynya has rarely been observed since the measurements of
ESMR.
Figure 25: a: The Weddell Polynya is created as a bay or fjord-like indent in the sea ice. b: During
December the sea ice north of the polynya melts. Panels a and b are from 19th of June (day 170) and
9th of December (day 343) respectively.
9.3
Sea ice extent
When estimating the sea ice extent a threshold of 15% sea ice concentration is usually set. However, due
to the high amount of atmospheric water wrongly classiﬁed as sea ice, a higher threshold is also used.
Figures 26 and 27 show the sea ice extent when thresholds of 15% and 30% are used. The dashed lines
indicate their respective uncertainties.
Figure 26: Sea ice extent for the southern hemisphere, when sea ice concentration thresholds of 15% and
30% are used. The largest spikes coincide with days that are known to contain data errors. The dashed
lines indicate the respective uncertainties.
As expected, the sea ice extent is higher for 15% compared to 30%.
The diﬀerence is roughly
1 −2 × 106 km2 for both hemispheres. The spikes in DTPs coinciding with days of higher brightness
temperatures show sharp increases in sea ice extent for both hemispheres. Sea ice extents of 0 km2 are
29
==PAGE:33==
Figure 27: Sea ice extent for the northern hemisphere, when sea ice concentration thresholds of 15% and
30% are used. The largest spikes coincide with days that are known to contain data errors. The dashed
lines indicate the uncertainties.
seen to occur twice at the southern hemisphere and once at the northern hemisphere. No data were
available on 10th and 11th of February (days 41-42) from DMI’s FTP, and ﬁltering removed all data at
the southern hemisphere on 17th and 18th of July (days 198-199). The true sea ice extent is assumed be
somewhere close to the values in Figures 26 and 27 when anomalistic values are ignored. The uncertainty
interval is seen to be optimistically narrow for the 30 % threshold for both hemispheres. For the southern
hemisphere the average upper uncertainty bound is 0.7 × 106 km2 higher than the best estimate, while
the average lower uncertainty bound is 0.5 × 106 km2 lower than the best estimate. For the northern
hemisphere the upper and lower uncertainty bounds are 0.7 × 106 km2 higher and 0.4 × 106 km2 lower
than the best estimate.
For days aﬀected by unexpectedly high brightness temperatures, the assumed true values are seen to
be lower than the lower limit of probable sea ice extent. This occurs on days 221-227 and 293-301. This
strongly indicates a need for additional data ﬁltering and/or correction.
The sea ice extent for 30% is seen to have a smoother trend than the 15% throughout the year for
both hemispheres. This is likely due to a lower sensitivity to atmospheric water content. A seasonal
signal is clearly seen for both hemispheres. The sea ice extent grows during the local winter, peaks in
early spring, and reaches a minimum in early autumn. For the southern hemisphere a trough is observed
from beginning of September (day 253) to early October (day 282). It is uncertain whether the ice edge
retreated in order to expand again in October or whether it is due to a calibration or measurement error.
No obvious error sources were found during visual inspections of the sea ice concentration maps. The
minimum and maximum sea ice extents can be found in Table 6 including uncertainties.
Table 6: Sea ice extents for the northern and southern hemispheres based on a 30 % sea ice concentration
threshold.
Lower estimate
Best estimate
Upper estimate
Southern hemisphere
Maximum
18.9 × 106 km2
19.5 × 106 km2
20.1 × 106 km2
Minimum
2.5 × 106 km2
2.7 × 106 km2
2.9 × 106 km2
Northern hemisphere
Maximum
11.5 × 106 km2
11.8 × 106 km2
12.1 × 106 km2
Minimum
6.0 × 106 km2
6.2 × 106 km2
6.4 × 106 km2
For comparison with other sea ice extent estimates the 15 % sea ice concentration is used. While the
30 % estimate shows a smother trend and fewer expected outliers, standard procedure is to use 15 %.
Before comparison, the days most aﬀected by errors are removed by ﬁltering. The ﬁlter is based on a
simple least squares ﬁt of the function f(t)
f(t) = a + bt + c sin(2πt) + d cos(2πt)
(15)
where a, b, c, and d are the coeﬃcients to be determined and t is the time measured in years. Due
to the severity of the outliers, the ﬁltering is performed in two steps. The harmonic ﬁt in Equation 15
is determined and compared to the sea ice extents in Figures 26 and 27. If the diﬀerence for any day
30
==PAGE:34==
is greater than 5 × 106 km2, that day is omitted. Afterwards, a new ﬁt with Equation 15 is made and
a new maximum diﬀerence of 1.5 × 106 km2 is enforced. The ﬁltered sea ice extents are shown for both
hemispheres in Figures 28 and 29. The ﬁgures also show the OSI SAF sea ice extents from 1997 and
2020. The OSI SAF sea ice extents are also based on a 15 % sea ice concentration threshold.
Figure 28: Comparison of southern hemisphere sea ice extents based on ESMR data 1974 (blue) and
OSI SAF records of 1997 and 2020 (red and yellow respectively). The blue dashed lines indicate the
uncertainties of the ESMR estimate. 29 % of the days of ESMR are omitted based on ﬁltering with
Equation 15.
For the southern hemisphere (Figure 28), there is seen to be very little change in sea ice extent when
comparing the three estimates from 1974, 1997 and 2020. During autumn and winter, the 1974 estimate
is seen to be slightly higher. It is not known whether this is due to atmospheric eﬀects which have been
wrongly classiﬁed as sea ice.
For the northern hemisphere (Figure 29), there is a large diﬀerence between the sea ice extent esti-
mates. From 1974 to 2020 the maximum sea ice extent appears to have expanded while the minimum
sea ice extent has retreated.
Figure 29: Comparison of northern hemisphere sea ice extents based on ESMR data 1974 (blue) and
OSI SAF records of 1997 and 2020 (red and yellow respectively). The blue dashed lines indicate the
uncertainties of the ESMR estimate. 24 % of the days of ESMR are omitted based on the ﬁltering with
Equation 15.
In order to investigate whether the sea ice extent has been correctly estimated, sea ice concentration
maps by OSI SAF are used for comparison. The sea ice concentrations for the southern hemisphere
(Figures 23 and 30) show highly similar sea ice concentrations for 1974 and 2020. This is in accordance
with the sea ice extents in Figure 28. For the northern hemisphere there is a discrepancy in the evolution
31
==PAGE:35==
of maximum sea ice extent. This can be seen when comparing the sea ice concentrations of Figures 21.a
and 31 (left) with the sea ice extents in Figure 29. The sea ice concentration maps show highly similar sea
ice concentrations, while the sea ice extents diﬀer by 2 × 106 km2. The minimum sea ice extent appears
correct, with signiﬁcantly less sea ice in 2020 compared to 1974. The most likely explanation for this
discrepancy is an error during calculation of the sea ice extent for the northern hemisphere. The error
has unfortunately not been found.
Figure 30: Sea ice concentrations by OSI SAF. The left panel is from 24th of February 2020, and the
right is from 6th of September 2020.
Figure 31: Sea ice concentrations by OSI SAF. The left panel is from 9th of March 2020, and the right
is from 17th of September.
32
==PAGE:36==
10
Conclusion
The ESMR data used in this project has been ﬁltered based on the suggestions by Sievers et al. (2020).
Unfortunately, the data were not fully cleaned as anomalistic values still remained after ﬁltering. Days
with unexpectedly high brightness temperatures were seen to occasionally occur throughout the year.
The ﬁltered data have been corrected using a modiﬁed RTM with the ERA-40 reanalysis.
The
correction improved the data, although the improvement was smaller than intended. This is believed to
be due to the poor temporal and spatial resolution of ERA-40. With the newer release of ERA5, the
correction could prove more successful.
The new method for determining dynamical tie points proved useful in the absence of independent
data on sea ice concentrations. Daily sea ice concentration maps were made for both hemispheres based
on the corrected ESMR data. Atmospheric eﬀects are visible in the sea ice concentration maps and the
associated uncertainty maps. Due to a correction applied to the original data, no angle dependency was
found and the data set has remained one dimensional. It has therefore not been possible to classify the
sea ice types.
Based on a 15 % threshold for sea ice concentration the sea ice extents have been calculated and
compared with more recent data of 1997 and 2020 from OSI SAF records. At the southern hemisphere
very little change is found in sea ice extent. This is determined from comparisons of sea ice concentrations
and sea ice extents. At the northern hemisphere the sea ice extent was estimated to have had a lower
maximum and a higher minimum than 1997 and 2020. However, when maps of sea ice concentrations are
compared, a diﬀerent result is obtained. Based on sea ice concentration maps, the maximum extent is
roughly the same, while the minimum extent has decreased. The reason for the discrepancy is believed
to be a calculation error, which has not yet been identiﬁed.
The uncertainties of the sea ice extents are based on the uncertainty of the dynamical tie points.
These were lower than expected. Smearing eﬀects and interpolation uncertainties were not taking into
account.
More work is needed to create a reliable climate data record from the ESMR data. A study into
removing the calibration for viewing angle is recommended along with using the ERA5 analysis for
corrections rather than ERA-40. Depending on the success of the calibration and correction, additional
ﬁlters might also be necessary.
33
==PAGE:37==
Appendix A
List of acronyms
DMI
Danmarks meteorologiske institut (Meteorological institute of Denmark)
DTP
Dynamical tie point
EASE
Equal area scalable Earth
ECMWF
The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
ESMR
Electrically scanning microwave radiometer
FTP
File Transfer Protocol
FYI
First year ice
MYI
Multi year ice
NetCDF
Network Common Data Form
NSIDC
National Snow and Ice Data Center
OSI SAF
Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility
RTM
Radiative transfer model
SIC
Sea ice concentration
SMMR
Scanning Multichannel microwave radiometer
SSM/I
Special Sensor Microwave Image
SSMIS
Special Sensor Microwave Imager/Sounder
SST
Sea surface temperature
TCLW
Total column liquid water
TCWV
Total column water vapour
THIR
Temperature humidityinfrared radiometer
34
==PAGE:38==
Appendix B
Figure 32: Structure of an ESMR data ﬁle from one orbit. This example is from January 3rd 1974. The
data ﬁles are downloaded from DMI’s FTP. The 15 variables to the right are values from the ERA-40
re-analysis, which have been added to the original data set.
Appendix C
The modiﬁed RTM used for simulating brightness temperatures. Made in collaboration with Rasmus
Tage Tonboe.
1
function Tb=esmr rtm (V,W, L, Ts , Ti , c ice , theta ,MF, t2m)
2 %
”””−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
3 %RTM based on :
4 %Wentz :
a well
c a l i b r a t e d
ocean
algorithm
fo r ssm/ i . JGR 102(C4) ,
8703−8718, 1997
5 %with
modifications
to work at
incidence
angles
between
nadir and 60 deg
and over
sea
i c e
6 %computes the
brightness
temperature
of
the ocean
surface
at 19 GHz
h o r i s o nt a l
p o l a r i s a t i o n
7 %Tb=f (V,W, L, Ts , Ti , c ice , theta ,FM, t2m)
8 %V:
columnar water vapor
[mm]
9 %W:
windspeed over water
[m/ s ] ,
10m
10 %L:
columnar cloud
l i q u i d
water
[mm]
11 %Ts :
sea
surface
temperature
[K] ,
i . e . SST
35
==PAGE:39==
12 %Ti :
i c e
surface
temperature
[K] ,
i . e .
emitting
layer
temperature
13 %c i c e :
i c e
concentration
[0 −1]
14 %theta :
incidence
angle
[ deg ]
15 %MF:
Multi
year
i c e
f r a c t i o n
[0 −1]
16 %t2m :
two meter
a i r
temperature
[K]
used as
a i r
temperature
17 %
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−”””
18
19
thetar =0.0174.∗theta ;
20
21 %i c e
concentration
between 0 and 1
22
c i c e=max( zeros ( s i z e ( c i c e ) ) , c i c e ) ;
23
c i c e=min( ones ( s i z e ( c i c e ) ) , c i c e ) ;
24
25 %multi
year
i c e
f r a c t i o n
between 0 and 1
26 MF=max( zeros ( s i z e (MF) ) ,MF) ;
27 MF=min( ones ( s i z e (MF) ) ,MF) ;
28
29 %simulated
i c e
e m i s s i v i t i e s
( e f i
and e mi )
as
function
of
incidence
angle
(x)
30
x =[0.00 ,
5.00 ,
10.0 ,
15.0 ,
20.0 ,
25.0 ,
30.0 ,
35.0 ,
40.0 ,
45.0 ,
50.0 ,
55.0 ,
60.0 ,
6 5 . 0 ] ;
31
e f y i = [0.910430
0.909988
0.908647
0.906359
0.903037
0.898555
0.892729
0.885306
0.875927
0.864084
0.849024
0.829596
0.803955
0 . 7 6 9 2 7 7 ] ;
32
e myi = [0.884898
0.884562
0.883585
0.881935
0.879519
0.876279
0.871974
0.866485
0.859438
0.850289
0.838340
0.822346
0.800263
0 . 7 6 8 7 5 4 ] ;
33
34 % i n t e r p o l a t e
i c e
e m i s i v i t i e s
35
e i c e f=interp1 (x , e f y i , theta , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
36
e ice m=interp1 (x , e myi , theta , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
37
38 %i c e
e m i s s iv it y
based on multi
year
i c e
f r a c t i o n
39
e i c e=MF∗e ice m+(1−MF) ∗e i c e f ;
40
41 %#table
1:
atmospheric
c o e f f i c i e n t s
f or
19h
42
c0 =240.0E+0;
43
c1 =305.96E−2;
44
c2=−764.41E−4;
45
c3 =885.95E−6;
46
c4=−40.80E−7;
47
c5 =0.60E+0;
48
c6=−0.16E+0;
49
c7=−2.13E−2;
50
a0=11.80E+0;
51
av1=2.23E−3;
52
av2=0.00E−5;
53
54 %#table
2:
water
surface
scattering ,
r e f l e c t e d
downwelling
f o r
19h
55
Xi =0.688;
56
57 % f o r c e
constraint
from eq 18b
58
V(V>48)=48;
59
60 %#eq 18a
61
Tv=273.16+0.8337.∗V−3.029E−5.∗(V. ˆ 3 . 3 3 ) ;
62
36
==PAGE:40==
63 %#eq 22 + 23
64
Tl=(t2m+273.0) . / 2 . 0 ;
65
Al37 =0.208.∗(1 −0.026∗( Tl −283) ) .∗L;
66
Al =0.2858.∗Al37 ;
67
68 %#cosmic background
69
TBC=2.7;
70
71 %#eq17a ( s l i l g h t l y
modified
with 2 meter temperature , t2m)
72
TD=c0+c1 .∗V+c2 ∗(V.ˆ2)+c3 . ∗(V.ˆ3)+c4 ∗(V.ˆ4)+c5 . ∗( t2m−Tv) ;
73 %#eq17b
74
TU=TD+c6+c7 .∗V;
75 %#eq 20
76
A0=(a0 ./TD) . ˆ 1 . 4 ;
77 %#eq 21
78
Av=av1 .∗V+av2 . ∗(V.ˆ2) ;
79
80 %#eq 19 transmitance
through the atmosphere
81
tau=exp (( −1./ cos ( thetar ) ) . ∗(A0+Av+Al ) ) ;
82 %#eq 16a up−welling Tb
83
TBU=TU.∗(1 −tau ) ;
84 %#eq 16b down−welling Tb
85
TBD=TD.∗(1 −tau ) ;
86
87
88 % water
permittivity
as a function
of
temperature ,
Ulaby et
al .
1982 E64a
89
temp=[ −5 , −4 , −3 , −2 , −1 ,0 ,1 ,2 ,3 ,4 ,5 ,6 ,7 ,8 ,9 ,10 ,11 ,12 ,13 ,14 ,15 ,16 ,17 ,18 ,19 ,
20 ,21 ,22 ,23 ,24 ,25 ,26 ,27 ,28 ,29 ,30 ,31 ,32 ,33 ,34 ,35 ,36 ,37 ,38 ,39 ,40 ,41 ,42 ,
43 ,44 ,45 ,46 ,47 ,48 ,49 ,50];
90
91
permre = [ 1 5 . 3 , 1 5 . 9 , 1 6 . 5 , 1 7 . 1 , 1 7 . 8 , 1 8 . 5 , 1 9 . 2 , 2 0 . 0 , 2 0 . 7 , 2 1 . 5 , 2 2 . 3 , 2 3 . 2 , 2 4 . 0 ,
2 4 . 9 , 2 5 . 7 , 2 6 . 6 , 2 7 . 5 , 2 8 . 4 , 2 9 . 3 , 3 0 . 2 , 3 1 . 1 , 3 1 . 9 , 3 2 . 8 , 3 3 . 6 , 3 4 . 5 , 3 5 . 3 , 3 6 . 1 ,
3 6 . 8 , 3 7 . 6 , 3 8 . 3 , 3 9 . 0 , 3 9 . 8 , 4 0 . 4 , 4 1 . 0 , 4 1 . 6 , 4 2 . 2 , 4 2 . 7 , 4 3 . 2 , 4 3 . 6 , 4 4 . 1 , 4 4 . 5 ,
4 4 . 9 , 4 5 . 3 , 4 5 . 7 , 4 6 . 0 , 4 6 . 3 , 4 6 . 7 , 4 7 . 0 , 4 7 . 3 , 4 7 . 6 , 4 7 . 9 , 4 8 . 2 , 4 8 . 4 , 4 8 . 7 , 4 9 . 0 , 4 9 . 3 ] ;
92
permim = [ 2 8 . 0 , 2 8 . 6 , 2 9 . 1 , 2 9 . 7 , 3 0 . 3 , 3 0 . 9 , 3 1 . 4 , 3 1 . 9 , 3 2 . 4 , 3 2 . 9 , 3 3 . 4 , 3 3 . 8 , 3 4 . 2 ,
3 4 . 6 , 3 5 . 0 , 3 5 . 3 , 3 5 . 6 , 3 5 . 9 , 3 6 . 1 , 3 6 . 3 , 3 6 . 4 , 3 6 . 6 , 3 6 . 7 , 3 6 . 7 , 3 6 . 8 , 3 6 . 8 , 3 6 . 7 ,
3 6 . 7 , 3 6 . 6 , 3 6 . 5 , 3 6 . 4 , 3 6 . 3 , 3 6 . 1 , 3 6 . 0 , 3 5 . 8 , 3 5 . 6 , 3 5 . 4 , 3 5 . 2 , 3 4 . 9 , 3 4 . 7 , 3 4 . 5 ,
3 4 . 3 , 3 4 . 0 , 3 3 . 8 , 3 3 . 5 , 3 3 . 3 , 3 3 . 0 , 3 2 . 8 , 3 2 . 5 , 3 2 . 3 , 3 2 . 0 , 3 1 . 7 , 3 1 . 4 , 3 1 . 1 , 3 0 . 8 , 3 0 . 5 ] ;
93
94
95 %#l i n e a r
i n t e r p o l a t i o n
96 %#r e a l
part
of
the water
permittivity
at
19.35GHz,
34psu and temperature
97
e w r=interp1 (temp , permre , Ts−273.15) ;
98
99 %#imag part
of
the water
permittivity
at
19.35GHz,
34psu and temperature
100
e w i=interp1 (temp , permim , Ts−273.15) ;
101
102
103 %#eq . 1 . 5 2
in Schanda :
physical
fundamentals
of
remote
sensing
1986.
104
p=(1/ sqrt (2) ) . ∗( ( ( e w r −sin ( thetar ) .ˆ2) .ˆ2 + e w i .ˆ2) . ˆ 0 . 5 + ( e w r −
sin ( thetar ) .ˆ2) ) . ˆ 0 . 5 ;
105
q=(1/ sqrt (2) ) . ∗( ( ( e w r −sin ( thetar ) .ˆ2) .ˆ2 + e w i .ˆ2) . ˆ 0 . 5 −( e w r −
sin ( thetar ) .ˆ2) ) . ˆ 0 . 5 ;
106
rih =((p −cos ( thetar ) ) .ˆ2 + q .ˆ2) . / ( ( p + cos ( thetar ) ) .ˆ2 + q .ˆ2) ;
107
37
==PAGE:41==
108
E0=(1.0−abs ( rih ) ) ;
109
110 %#Ulaby + Meissner and Wentz 2012
111
Ew=(0.0094.∗theta +0.3) .∗W./ Ts ;
112
113 %#eq 29 sea
surface
slope
variance :
sigma ∗∗2
114
sigma=sqrt (5.22E−3.∗Xi .∗W) ;
115
sigma ( sigma .ˆ2 >0.07)=sqrt (0.07) ;
116
117 %#eq 28
r e f l e c t i o n
reduction
f a c t o r
due to
surface
roughness
118
omega=1.0+6.1.∗( sigma .ˆ2 −68.∗sigma .ˆ6) .∗tau . ˆ 2 ;
119 %#eq 24
120
e m i s s i v i t y=E0+Ew;
121 %#eq 15
122
Tb=TBU+tau .∗((1 −c i c e ) .∗e mi ss iv it y .∗Ts+c i c e .∗e i c e .∗Ti+(1−c i c e ) .∗(1 −
e m i s s i v it y ) . ∗( omega .∗TBD+tau .∗TBC)+c i c e .∗(1 −e i c e ) . ∗(TBD+tau .∗TBC) ) ;
123
124
end
38
==PAGE:42==
References
GSFC (1975). The nimbus 5 data catalog.
Hersbach, H., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., and others, . (2020). The era5 global reanalysis. Quarterly Journal
of the Royal Meteorological Society, 146(730):1999–2049.
Lavergne, T., Aaboe, S., Neuville, A., Sørensen, A., and Eastwood, S. (2020). Product user manual forosi
saf global sea ice concentration. OSI SAF.
Meissner, T. and Wentz, F. (2012). The emissivity of the ocean surface between6 and 90 ghz over a large
range of windspeeds and earth incidence angles. Ieee Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
50(8):3004–3026.
Parkinson, C. L., Comiso, J. C., Zwally, H. J., Cavalieri, D. J., Gloersen, P., and Campbell, W. J. (1987).
Arctic sea ice, 1973-1976: Satellite passive-microwave observations. NASA Special Publications.
Perovich, D. (2009).
The decreasing summer arctic sea ice cover and the ice albedo feedback.
Iop
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 6(6):062010.
Sabatini, R. R. (1972). THE NIMBUS 5 USER’S GUIDE, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center:59–105.
Schanda, E. (1986). Physical Fundamentals of Remote Sensing. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.
Sievers, I., Dawson, J. A., and Jensen, A. S. (2020). Analysing electrically scanning microwave radiometer
data from the nimbus-5 mission.
Tonboe, R., Lavelle, J., Pfeiﬀer, R.-H., and Howe, E. (2017). Product user manual forosi saf global sea
ice concentration. OSI SAF.
Tonboe, R. T. (2010).
The simulated sea ice thermal microwave emission at window and sounding
frequencies. Tellus A, 62(3):333–344.
Tonboe, R. T., Eastwood, S., Lavergne, T., Sørensen, A. M., Rathmann, N., Dybkjær, G., Pedersen,
L. T., Høyer, J. L., and Kern, S. (2016). The eumetsat sea ice concentration climate data record.
Cryosphere, 10(5):2275–2290.
Ulaby, F. T., Moore, R. K., and Fung, A. K. (1982). Microwave Remote Sensing: Radar Remote Sensing
and Surface Scattering and Emission Theory v. 2. Artech House.
Uppala, S. M., K˚allberg, P. W., , and others, . (2005). The era-40 re-analysis. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society, 131(612):2961–3012.
Wentz, F. (1997). A well-calibrated ocean algorithm for special sensor microwave/imager. Oceanographic
Literature Review, 44(12):8703–8718.
Wilheit, T. (1972). The electrically scanning microwave radiometer (esmr) experiment. THE NIMBUS
5 USER’S GUIDE, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center:59–105.
39
