==PAGE:1==
Topic Models for Embedding and Improve-
ment of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
Martin Schjeldrup Jessen
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering,
Department of Applied Math and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
February, 2021
By
Martin Schjeldrup Jessen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Math and Computer Science, Richard Pe-
tersens Plads Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and machine
learning.
Martin Schjeldrup Jessen - s153298
Signature
22nd of February 2021
ii
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
We present an investigation of the feasibility of performing Topic Modelling and Topic
Detection on transcriptions performed by Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), in order
to create an embedding useful for cataloging the data and improving the ASR system.
We use a data set from the Danish parliament hall (Folketinget) to train Latent Dirichlet
Models (LDA) and optimize the number of topics according to chosen evaluation metrics.
The models are then analyzed and applied to a similar data set consisting of Danish
parliament committee meetings transcribed by DanSpeech1.
We perform an investigation of the effect of adding noise to the input data to the topic
model and determine that even small amounts of noise can alter the topic distribution of
a document significantly. We contrast these results to an investigation of the DanSpeech
error rate on selected committee meetings when compared to human transcriptions of
the same meetings. These results showed that the error rate was highly inconsistent
depending on audio quality and the person speaking, but also showed that the error rate
was between 33% to 38% in the best case scenario.
We present the use of proxy-topics to evaluate the performance of the LDA models and
add a downstream Artificial Neural Network, that classifies the documents according to
the committee they originated from, based on their topic distributions. This proxy-topic
committee classification performed better if the data was split into chunks, which proved
an effective way to deal with the scarcity of data. The proxy topic classification had a test
accuracy of 77.3% percent, showing that it is possible to achieve good classification of
proxy-topics even with noisy data. We have also identified a number of ways to make
improvements to the models that may increase the accuracy.
1Danspeech is a start-up with state-of-the-art speech recognition software that performs speech-to-text
transcriptions. One of their models is specialized in transcribing the Danish parliament, which is the model
that will be used in this thesis as the example of how speech-to-text transcriptions can be expected to perform.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resume
Vi præsenterer en undersøgelse af muligheden for at foretage emne-modellering og emne-
genkendelse på transkriptioner fra talegenkendelses-software (ASR), for at lave en indle-
jring der kan være brugbar til at katalogisere transkriptioner og forbedre talegenkendelsen.
Vi bruger et datasæt fra det danske Folketing til at træne Latent Dirichlet Analysis (LDA)
modeller og vi optimerer antallet af emner i modellen efter udvalgte evaluerings-parametrer.
Modellerne bliver herefter anvendt på et lignende datasæt, der består af det danske
Folketings udvalgsmøder transkriberet af Danspeech2.
Vi foretager en undersøgelse af effekten af at tilføje støj til modellen der symboliserer
fejltranskriptioner, og fastslår at selv små mængder støj kan ændre dokumenternes emne-
fordeling signifikant. Vi sammenligner disse resultater med en undersøgelse af DanSpeech’
fejlrate på udvalgsmøderne vurderet ud fra menneskers transkription af de samme møder.
Resultaterne viser at fejlraten er meget varierende og afhænger af lydkvaliteten for møderne
og personen der taler, men også at fejlraten var mellem 33% til 38% i bedste tilfælde.
Vi introducerer brugen af proxy-emner til at evaluere præstationsevnen af LDA modellerne
og tilføjer et kunstigt neuralt netværk (ANN), til at klassificere dokumenterne efter hvilket
udvalg de kommer fra på baggrund af deres emnefordelinger. Denne proxy-emne klas-
sificering viste sig at fungere bedre hvis møderne blev splittet op i dele, på grund af de
små mængder af data tilgængeligt. Proxy-klassifikationen havde en testnøjagtighed på
77.3%, hvilket viser at det er muligt at foretage god klassifikation på støjfyldt data. Vi
har også identificeret et antal måder at forbedre modellen, så den har mulighed for at
præstere endnu bedre.
2Danspeech er et start-up med state-of-the-art talegenkendelses software der laver tale-til-tekst transkrip-
tioner. En af deres modeller er specialiseret i at transkribere Folketinget, hvilket er den model vi benytter i
dette speciale som et eksempel på hvor godt tale-til-tekst kan forventes at fungere.
iv
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Martin Schjeldrup Jessen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU Compute
Lars Kai, Professor and Head of Cognitive Systems at DTU Compute, Supervisor
For his tireless and excellent guidance and intuition, even in these times where Covid19
made meeting and giving that assistance much harder.
Martin Carsten Nielsen, Danspeech Co-founder, Supervisor
For his insight into DanSpeech and especially his invaluable feedback.
Additional acknowledgements
I would like to also thank my beta readers for taking the time out of their days to give
feedback.
And finally a thanks to my parents for their support, their solicited advice and even their
unsolicited advice throughout all the years.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Latent Dirichlet Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Method
6
3.1
Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Preparing the Data Set for LDA modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
LDA Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Classifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
Visualizing the Topic Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.6
Accuracy Testing Method with Levenshtein
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.7
Committee Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Results
17
4.1
Initial Investigation of Word Occurrences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
LDA Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Simulated Noise Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Committee Data Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5
DanSpeech Transcription Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.6
Committee Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Discussion
41
5.1
Model Evaluation and Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
The Modelled Topics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Noise on the Parliament Hall Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.4
Comparing Human and DanSpeech transcriptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5
Training an LDA model on the Committee Meetings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.6
Other uses of Topic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.7
Future investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Conclusion
48
A The Principal Components
51
B The Data Chunks
53
B.1 Chunk Sizes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
B.2 Committee Imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
This thesis will investigate existing machine-learning based methods for classifying tran-
scribed speech-to-text documents according to topics. In the thesis two methods will be
applied in practice to try to conclude if the topics that are generated by the methods em-
bed sufficient amounts of information to be practically useful. The hypothesis is that if
topics can be deduced using these methods, the transcripts can be made searchable
even if the transcription is flawed. The documents that these methods were tested on, is
a custom-made data set made up of parliament subcommittee meetings transcribed with
the DanSpeech1 library for python [1]. This thesis will explore exactly how much error can
be expected in these transcriptions, and how much error can be tolerated in order to still
provide meaningful embeddings of the transcripts.
1.1
Motivation
The motivation for embedding texts in this manner, is that it would allow for the transcripts
to be searched through by topic, even if such topics are not explicitly stated in the tran-
scription text or in a meta-description of the transcript. Embeddings are also useful if the
transcriptions contains mistranscribed words that would otherwise make the documents
searchable by simpler methods such as key-word spotting, thus capturing roughly the
same information in an embedding could significantly increase the usability of speech-to-
text technology.
1.2
Related work
Topic modelling and topic detection is a field with a long history and with many methods.
For the scope of this thesis, some of these methods will be applied directly and some of
these are built upon in this thesis. Others still are good to be aware of in case the topic of
the present thesis should be further continued and investigated in the future.
1.2.1
Latent Semantic Analysis
In 1998 Landauer, T.K., Foltz, P.W. and Laham, D. proposed a method for topic detec-
tion called Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [3]. LSA requires basic data preprocessing to
achieve the best results. The data is subjected to Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
and at this point the least important words can be removed. ”Least important” is deter-
mined by the magnitude of the coefficients. This is similar to the practice of removing
stopwords. The correlations of the remaining words are then re-estimated from the SVD
to reflect correlation topics. This implies that the words are in a k-dimensional space in
which some words are closer than others, but does not give topics. In order to then infer
topics from this type of space representation, one can group clusters of words using any
clustering method.
The drawbacks of this method is that it is linear and is a bag-of-words method. Bag-
of-words means that the order of the words inside a document does not matter, only
the frequency of each words matter, or in other words it does not care about sentence
structure and how close each word appears within a text. They are associated as long
as they are within the same text no matter how far apart. The order of the words can
1DanSpeech is a start-up with state-of-the-art speech recognition software that performs speech-to-text
transcriptions. One of their models is specialized in transcribing the Danish parliament, which is the model
that will be used in this thesis as the example of how speech-to-text transcriptions can be expected to perform.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
1
==PAGE:12==
prove instrumental in predicting the surrounding words. Given that we know any word
in a sentence the probabilities of what the surrounding words will be changes. Methods
without some more local measures do not have any way of capturing such finer details.
Methods that infer word correlation on a more local scale than document-basis are not
”bag-of-words” methods.
Another thing to note about LSA, is that the method has no way of adding new information
without rerunning the whole computation which is impractical in a production setting.
1.2.2
Latent Dirichlet Analysis
Latent Dirichlet Analysis (LDA) for topic detection was first published by David Blei, An-
drew Y. Ng and Michael I Jordan in 2003 [4]. This method was revolutionary when it first
came out, and is one of the most cited articles within machine learning.
The model assumes that the corpora of documents are generated with a variable number
of topics, where each topic can be thought of as a distribution of words. Since each
generated document has a distribution of topics, this implies that if we were to ”generate
a word for the document”, we would first draw a topic at random, and then a word from
that topic. The trick is figuring out the true topics, based on a large corpora similar to
the use-case. Having good topics are the core of the model. This method will be further
explored in the Theory section.
Once the topics have been determined, this model can then assign documents their dis-
tribution of topics, which informs not only which words can be expected in the documents,
but can also be used to catalog the document in various ways. It is important to keep in
mind that these topics are just lists of words and do not inherently have names. Humans
could assign the topics names based on the words included in them, but naming topics
does nothing for the model it just helps with understanding the model.
The drawback of LDA is that it does not handle heavy-tailed vocabularies well, meaning
that if the data set has many words that occur in most of the documents there will be some
topics that almost always occur in documents, or if there are many words that occur once
or twice the information about those word’s relations are limited which makes for worse
topic generation. Those kinds of words are a problem for all topic detection since such
words in general provide less information about relations between words. Additionally
LDA is also a bag-of-words method.
1.2.3
Word2Vec
Word2Vec is a prime example of embedding and it embeds relations between words into
a vector space. That vector space then represents closeness of words and even captures
how words are related to each other. It was first introduced in 2013 by Tomas Mikolov et
al.[5]. It uses the structure of language in documents in order to learn the connections
between words. It has been shown that this produces incredible results where adding and
subtracting the position of words in this space, will have meaningful results. E.g. taking
the vector that goes from ”man” to ”woman” and adding it to ”king” may produce a vector
that points to a coordinate which has the closest neighbour ”queen”. This is not a topic
model, but the word representation from this model has been used to construct a topic
model that is a combination of this and LDA.
This model is still a bag-of-words model that is trained by using skip-grams on a local
scale, for example sentences. This seems simple, but can produce impressive results,
although often harder to interpret than something like LDA, due to Word2Vec having a
multidimensional space were the individual dimensions do not carry specific meanings.
2
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:13==
1.2.4
LDA2Vec
This newer topic model published in 2016 by Christopher Moody [6] combines the LDA
model with the Word2Vec representation of words. In this method the word vectors from
Word2Vec that codify word relations, are combined with a context-vector based on the
document, which is inspired by the LDA model. The Word2Vec vectors representing
words are context-independent, and a given word can only be in one point in the space.
The idea is that a context-vector can be added to take the word into the specific context
of the document. This word-vector and context-vector, is located in a word space similar
to the one that Word2Vec operates in, and by adding the topic-vector to the word vector
the resulting vector points to a point that better reflects the context.
LDA2Vec is trained as an Artificial Neural Network, by optimizing so-called ”pivot words”,
which are words that we can replace in a string of text, to give the sentence a similar but
different meaning.
The results of this is that both context vectors and word vectors are obtained, which poses
unique opportunities for use.
1.2.5
BERT
BERT stands for Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers and is a new
method introduced in 2019 by Jacob Devlin et al[7]. The word bi-directional is actually
misleading, as Transformers have been bi-directional before this. This method is non-
directional, which means it can process the entire string of words at the same time. This
is an improvement to the Transformer structure which in its basic form processes in one
direction at a time.
A BERT in trained through a number of steps, the first of which is masking words in
input sentences of tokenized word, and then train the model in recognizing the masked
words based on the unmasked words. This teaches the BERT basic sentence structure.
Afterwards the BERT is then trained to recognize whether sentences follow one another,
while still using masks. After this the BERT can then be specialized to any number of
tasks.
Since BERT is a very complicated method, based on the already advanced Transformers,
this description is just a brief look into the complexity that the method holds. For this
reason BERT requires huge data sets to train, and vast amounts of computing power.
BERT can be pre-trained through the first steps of learning the basics of language, and
then specialized, which is useful if someone else has published a BERT in the desired
language.
Common uses for BERT include answering questions, translating between languages, for
example to french[8][9], but there are many other possibilities.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Theory
2.1
Latent Dirichlet Analysis
Latent Dirichlet Analysis (LDA) is a generative model that relies on an important assump-
tion about the way documents are constructed. This method assumes that every docu-
ment is generated by randomly determining a number of things:
• The number of words in the document, denoted N. The words are assumed to be
drawn from a Poisson distribution. This step however is not necessary for the model
to function, and LDA still functions on a corpora where the number of words is not
drawn from a Poisson distribution. This is important to keep in mind, since it allows
splitting documents into chunks, which will come in handy.
• The model has a variable number of topics, which are lists of words that commonly
occur together. The next step in generating a document, is determining the topic
distribution, denoted Θ. This denotes which topics are present in the document. As
an example a document might be 50% Topic A and 50% Topic B and 0% percent
Topic C, given a model with 3 topics. These topic distributions are drawn from the
Dirichlet distribution after which the model is named. Each of these topics are a list
of words with attached probabilities of seeing that word within that topic.
• For the last step, we are generating N words by selecting a topic for each word with
the probabilities generated by Θ and then selecting a word from that topic. So for
the example document, each word in the document would have a 50% chance of
coming from Topic A and 40% chance of coming from Topic B, but would only come
from Topic C 10% of the time. Once the topic has been selected, the specific word
is generated from that topic’s list of words. Topic A might be a list of words that are
”word1” with 60% chance, ”word2” with 30% chance and ”word3” with 10% chance.
It should be mentioned that the example is heavily simplified. In practice there will likely
be more than 3 topics, the percentages will not be as even, and there may be many topics
making up a given document. Additionally the topic words are also likely a much longer
list, as all words in the corpora must be represented in at least one topic. We will present
some examples of our model’s topics later on. For now, we know how the documents
are presumed generated, but then the question becomes how do we determine what the
topics are that have generated the documents.
The description of the above random generation relies on two parameters. The first being
the shape of the Dirichlet distribution that selects the topic distributions of a document. A
Dirichlet distribution on a simplex,
p(θ | α) =
Γ
(∑k
i=1 αi
)
∏k
i=1 Γ (αi)
θα1−1
1
· · · θαk−1
k
,
(2.1)
contains a parameter α that is important to the curve of the distribution. If α < 1 it favors
topic distributions with fewer dominant topics and with α > 1 the distribution is more
likely to select multiple dominant topics. The situation where α = 1 the distribution is
uniform and equally likely to select any topic distribution. As such this parameter α must
be decided on a corpora/model basis.
4
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:15==
The second parameter is one that determines the shape of the multinomial distribution
that selects the specific word from a topic, commonly denoted as β.
The complete probability of selecting any given topic distribution and N words,
p(θ, z, w | α, β) = p(θ | α)
N
∏
n=1
p (zn | θ) p (wn | zn, β) ,
(2.2)
is the joint distribution, and the marginal distribution of all words in a document is found
by integrating over the topic distributions, Θ, and summing all, zn;
p(w | α, β) =
∫
p(θ | α)
( N
∏
n=1
∑
zn
p (zn | θ) p (wn | zn, β)
)
dθ
(2.3)
This is dependant on the two parameters α and β, which again are determined outside of
the word generation process. This probability is important, because it tells us how likely a
document is to appear based on the model. The model, of course, needs to have a high
probability of generating the entire corpus, the probability of which is found by multiplying
all the document distributions together:
p(D | α, β) =
M
∏
d=1
∫
p (θd | α)
( Nd
∏
n=1
∑
zdn
p (zdn | θd) p (wdn | zdn, β)
)
dθd
(2.4)
It is useful in this case to assign each topic a title, although the model itself does not do
that. For example if the model produces a list of words related to the medicinal industry,
a human might recognize that and label it ”medical industry”.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
5
==PAGE:16==
3
Method
3.1
Data Set
This thesis explores the possibility of using topic modelling and topic detection to embed
speech-to-text transcripts, focused on the use-case which is the Danish parliament. This
is done by using three data sets consisting of written text originating from speeches held
in the Danish parliament.
1. The first data set contains transcribed speeches from the parliament.
2. The second data set has been produced from audio recordings from committee
meetings using the Danspeech software.
3. The third data set is 10 randomly selected committee meetings that have been man-
ually transcribed by human transcribers from randomly selected audio files from the
same committee meetings as the previous data set.
These three are different in what they contain and therefore serve different purposes within
this thesis as detailed below.
3.1.1
The Parliament Hall
Data set 1 is a large data set called ”The Danish Parliament Corpus 2009 - 2017, v1”
[2]. This is a corpus, that consists of transcribed documents from the Danish parliament
hall (Folketinget).
The set contains 40.6 million words distributed over 314 thousand
speeches. Each meeting usually starts with the first speaker naming the other speak-
ers who will be holding speeches during the meeting, as well as what subject they will be
talk about. Then those people will give their speeches, occasionally taking questions or
comments.
In addition to the plain spoken words, this data set contains metadata. This metadata
contains information on who is speaking, when and where the meeting was held, meeting
number and which number point on the agenda is currently being discussed. Aside from
the metadata in the data format, the meeting speeches themselves has transcriber notes
in parentheses. These transcriber notes takes mainly two forms; when a name occurs
they notes the political party or whenever a title is mentioned they notes who held that
title. Examples of the two types of transcriber notes could for example be:
”Medlemmer af Folketinget Karsten Lauritzen (V), Naser Khader (KF) og Martin Henrik-
sen (DF) har meddelt mig, at de ønsker at stille følgende forespørgsel til integrationsmin-
isteren” and ”Mødet er åbnet. I dag er der følgende anmeldelser: Fødevareministeren
(Eva Kjer Hansen).”
These types of meta-information does not represent natural speech and has therefore
been removed from the data set using regular expressions for the purposes of this the-
sis. This metadata could be useful, since those words are somewhat connected to each
other, and may share topic. E.g. Eva Kjer Hansen is the Minister of Food so if a topic
is food-related they may both be in that topic. Considering that this would never occur
in natural language however, including it would make the training set different from what
would be naturally observed later in verbatim transcriptions. Therefore it would most likely
negatively impact the ability for the model to perform on verbatim transcriptions such as
those produced by DanSpeech.
6
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:17==
When this data set was loaded as a corpus it was split into three parts: The training set, the
validation set and the test set. The training set contained 80% of speeches, the validation
set and test set both contain 10% of the speeches.
When splitting the data set it is important to acknowledge that the daily spoken language
may change over time and so will the debated subjects. This data is collected over the
course of 8 years (2009 - 2017). Since the data set is in chronological order, these subsets
have been created so that for every 10 meetings chronologically one was put into the
validation and test set respectively to ensure that they are balanced with respect to time.
’Shuffling’ the data set, will prevent a non-stationary analysis of the data without later
using their true order. This thesis will not explore how the data set may change over time,
although that is important to know in order to estimate the longevity of a model.
The three data sets are written representations of spoken language that a specific DanSpeech
model has already been trained to handle well. The reason for that is that the training set
used to train the Danspeech neural network has consisted of audio files from the parlia-
ment. As such, the test-case chosen is politicians giving speeches as this is the subject of
both the DanSpeech-model, and the three data sets reflect that by being similar in content.
3.1.2
The Committee Meetings
In addition to the corpora of Danish parliament meetings transcripts, the Danish parliament
also holds committee meetings in which a smaller group, usually led by the appropriate
minister, discusses issues that are specific to a particular committee. These meetings are
uploaded to Folketingets webpage [18] as videos so that the public can watch them.
We have selected five different committees to investigate for this exercises, namely the
Committee of Employment (Beskæftigelsesudvalget), the Committee of Finance (Finan-
sudvalget), the Committee of Defense (Forsvarsudvalget), the Committee of Environment
(Miljøudvalget) and the Committee of Health and Elderly (Sundheds- og Ældreudvalget).
These five Committees will be used to explore how LDA performs on real transcripts from
DanSpeech and because it is reasonable to expect that the vocabulary are somewhat
different between committees, this should show up as differences in the topics distribu-
tions from the LDA model. If it’s possible to distinguish the committees from each other,
that indicates that the topics are able to catch nuances in language between topics. In
this data set the specific committee’s name reflects the context, and it could be beneficial
to create an embedding, where we could tell based on the contents which committee is
which. This could be expanded to not just be about the Danish parliaments committees,
but for now that is the data we have and thus the focus.
We downloaded each of the five committees’ last 100 meetings and converted from video
to raw audio files (.wav). These are then transcribed using DanSpeech and the output
is 500 transcribed text files, one for each meeting. With these files it is then possible to
investigate how using the real transcripts will impact the model’s performance.
This is likely too few meetings to create a good model based on the DanSpeech transcrip-
tions only, but it is more than sufficient to investigate the efficiency of the topic model when
applied to real data, and the efficiency of DanSpeech when compared to the third and final
data set. Notice that this also shows how hard it is to get large collections of audio data,
since these 500 real transcripts are made from ~500GB of videos and around ~50GB
when reduced to just the audio, which is what is needed for the DanSpeech transcription.
3.1.3
Human Transcriptions
The third data set, consists of 5 human transcriptions. This data set serves as a ground
truth for the committee meetings, and as a way to evaluate the DanSpeech data set tran-
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
7
==PAGE:18==
scription accuracy. These transcripts are performed on the committee meetings, tran-
scribing one from each of the committees (Employment,Finance, Defense, Environment
and Health). Which meeting was transcribed from each committee was determined ran-
domly, as to not selectively pick meetings with good quality audio or meetings with clear
speakers without accents etc. This was done in order to truthfully portray the DanSpeech
transcription quality on a representative data set. Of course with only 5 transcripts this
could be a skewed data set, but by random selection it is at least not biased for or against
DanSpeech.
The human transcription transcribes the first hour of each selected meeting, after which
it is cut off at the next natural pause in the meeting. This does mean that the transcrip-
tions vary in word count since it is based on audio time as opposed to number of words.
The speakers have different speech patterns and speak with different speed, and addi-
tionally specific topics have technical terms, some more than others, all influencing the
topic distributions. Additionally if the speakers repeat themselves, as one sometimes do
in natural language, it is noted with brackets so that the repetition can be cut out or left in
at our discretion.
It should be kept in mind that the output from the human transcriptions is not flawless, but
is assumed for now to be negligible compared to the error rate of DanSpeech transcription.
3.2
Preparing the Data Set for LDA modelling
Before performing LDA, it is necessary to carry out some preparatory work in order to
improve the results of the LDA model. The purpose of the preparatory work is to reduce
the complexity of the model in various ways as detailed under each entry.
3.2.1
Removing Stopwords
The first step is removing stopwords from the data. In this context stopwords are words
that will appear in most of the documents. The stopword list used here is the Natural
Language Toolkit (NLTK) [10] list of Danish stopwords. The stopwords are included in text
related to all topics and therefore does not contribute when trying to identify the topics.
These are words such as ’og’ (and), ’i’ (in), ’jeg’ (I), ’det’ (that). If those were included they
would exist in every topic and only serve to needlessly complicate the model, as they are
basic building blocks of language that occur no matter what the subject is.
The regular stopwords of the language are not always enough, since some stop-words
may be context or domain-specific. Corpora of emails may include ”Dear” ”Mr” and ”Ms”
in almost every document, which says little about the topic of the email if it always occurs
and does not have anything to do with the topic.
It could be considered adding more stopwords that are context-specific, since the setting
in which the speeches are held may have some special terms. For example the members
of the Danish parliament use ’hr.’ and ’fru’ when addressing each other and as such may
not tell us much about the topic and declare every meeting opened with the phrase ”Mødet
er åbnet”.
3.2.2
Forming bigrams and trigrams
The next step to preparing the data is forming bigrams and trigrams. This means grouping
n words that commonly appear next to each other and treat them as a single word instead
of n separate words. n can be any number, but for this implementation just bigrams
and trigrams were formed, but it is possible to continue with even higher n. Looking at
the trigrams they were deemed unneccessary, as the trigrams contained phrases such
as ’mødet er åbnet’ (the meeting is opened) which seems like a self-contained context.
8
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:19==
Forming bigrams and trigrams reduces the complexity, due to the connection between
the individual words not needing to be discovered by the model and makes it easier to
later understand the context from the list of words in the topics. Forming bigrams and
trigrams also has the added effect of allowing words to appear in multiple contexts, since
all instances of ’Dansk Folkeparti’ (The Danish People’s Party) will be treated as one
unique word, it allows other instances of ’dansk’ (Danish) to be unrelated, since it is likely
to occur in separate contexts where it might represent the language or the nationality and
not half of a name.
3.2.3
Lemmatizing
Finally the last step, lemmatizating, is the act of reducing words to their base form, so
that the same word does not appear with a number of different endings throughout the
data set. For lemmatization the Lemmy github [11] was used. Again this reduces the
complexity, both because there will be fewer unique words in the model, but also because
the model does not need to figure out the connection between words that are the same
but in different word forms. When lemmatizing there is a chance that some information is
lost if the specific form of the word was important to defining a topic.
Another way to perform this type of reduction is with stemming. Stemming is a method
where the words in the corpora are reduced following rules of the language to reduce
them to a form that is base (e.g. ”If it ends with ’-es’ remove that”), the result of that need
not be a word just a representation of all the forms that stem from that base. In contrast
to stemming, lemmatization depends on a large list of words swap into other words, and
is therefore more work to model.
3.3
LDA Model Evaluation
In topic detection there are a number of ways to evaluate how good topics are. The
question one must ask is what exactly does ”good” mean, and then dependent on that
define the way to measure. This chapter will detail three different methods to measure
how well the topic model perform. These three ways will then be used to evaluate the
different methods used throughout the thesis.
3.3.1
Perplexity
Perplexity is a measure of how likely the observed data is to have been generated by
the model. This is measured by first computing the log-likelihood of the model over the
unseen data as
L(w) = log p(w | Φ, α) =
∑
d
log p (wd | Φ, α) ,
(3.1)
where α is the LDA hyper-parameter and Φ is the topic-matrix. The next step is to then into
account the size of the corpora by using the number of tokens in the corpora calculated
with
perplexity ( test set w) = exp
{
−
L(w)
count of tokens
}
.
(3.2)
The log-likelihood being high indicates the model being good, but when computing the
perplexity, a higher score indicates a worse model. Perplexity is a measure of how ’sur-
prised’ the model is to see this new data it is presented with. If the perplexity is high this
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
9
==PAGE:20==
may be caused by the model being too specialized to the training set or by the model
being too general.
As mentioned, for this measure a previously unseen vocabulary is used. This is because
if the corpus used to measure perplexity is the same one that was used to train the data,
it will not measure if the topic model is good, it will measure how tailored to exactly that
training set the data is. Which is to say it’s a reverse measure of overfitting.
When considering whether this is a good metric, it is worth keeping in mind that while this
is a good measure for model performance, this method has proven to have little to to do
with human interpretation of topic coherence, in fact it sometimes has the opposite effect.
[15]. Meaning that the topics created in a low-perplexity model might not make sense to
a human audience, even if it is the best model in regards to having the highest likelihood
of producing the documents of the corpus.
3.3.2
Coherence
Coherence is a measure of how much a topic makes internal sense in terms of how often
the words in a given topic co-occur in the corpus documents.
As mentioned in the beginning of the section, the end goal is important to keep in mind
when selecting the evaluation method of a topic model. In our case, the end goal is having
models that allow us to determine and catalog the documents based on their topics. The
coherence measures presented above are designed in such a way that they best reflect
the human understanding of what words belong together. This may not necessarily be
the ideal way to evaluate topics for the use of embedding, because we must keep in mind
that the end goal is not for the topics to necessarily make sense. Using coherence as
an evaluation measure, does make it easier to name the resulting topics. However if the
purpose of the topics is to serve as the input of a downstream model and then use that
downstream model’s output as the embedding, then it does not matter if the topics make
sense to humans. The only that would matter is if they produce a good end result. It is
likely that a high coherence will help the next network and it will therefore will be beneficial
to have that measure going forward.
There are a number of different ways to measure coherence.
Umass Coherence
This measure of coherence is the simplest of the three listed here. It was introduced by
David Mimno [13] in 2011. When investigating whether a topic is coherent, the occurrence
of words in the topic in document, should mean that other words from that same topic
also have a high probability of occurring. That’s exactly what this checks. The simplest
measure of coherence is then that we count how many times does a given word from the
topic occur alongside another, divided by the total number of times the word occurs, for
all the words in the topic,
CUMass =
2
N · (N −1)
N
∑
i=2
i−1
∑
j=1
log P (wi, wj) + ϵ
P (wj)
,
(3.3)
where ϵ is a very small number that makes sure we never take the log of 0. N is the
number of words in the topic.
This method is often used on the original corpus that was used for training the LDA model.
As such it might be biased, but at the same time that ensures that the coherence is based
10
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:21==
on words from the right context. An external corpus may have the same words or different
words with the same spelling and therefore score the coherence wrong. For example
”dansk” (Danish) might have a very different connotation and appear in different context
in a political setting than in the grade-school subject of the same name.
UCI Coherence
UCI was proposed in 2010 by David Newman [14]. UCI introduces the Pointwise Mutual
Information (PMI), which is a measure of how much words co-occur compared to how
much each of the words occur. The overall structure of this measure is still the same, in
that the logarithm is taken and the score for each word in the topic is compared to all other
words. The formula can be written as
CUCI =
2
N · (N −1)
N−1
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=i+1
PMI (wi, wj) ,
(3.4)
where PMI is defined
PMI (wi, wj) = log P (wi, wj) + ϵ
P (wi) · P (wj),
(3.5)
with N being the number of topics, and epsilon ensures the logarithm of zero is never
attempted computed.
UCI scores are often computed using an external corpus which makes it an extrinsic
method. Sliding window means that word co-occurrences are counted by considering n
words from a document at a time and all words within that are considered co-occurring. A
sliding window is very explicitly not bag-of-words since it consider the closeness of words
within a document. For the external corpora large public corpora such as Wikipedia or
The Gutenberg Library can be considered for this. Corpora similar to the training data set
for the LDA model can be considered, but the coherence does not have to be about that
specific kind of data, because coherence is word connections in general, which is better
represented by for example Wikipedia.
Coherence V
This method introduces a measure that uses Normalized Pointwise Mutual Information
(NPMI)
vij = NPMI (wi, wj)γ =


log P(wi,wj)+ϵ
P(wi)·P(wj)
−log (P (wi, wj) + ϵ)


γ
,
(3.6)
where ϵ ensures the logarithm of zero does not occur. γ controls how much high values
are allowed impact the average.
Similarly to before, the NPMI is inserted into the formula structure of Equation 3.3 and
3.4,
Cv =
2
N · (N −1)
N−1
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=i+1
NPMI (wi, wj) ,
(3.7)
to normalize by the average of all the word pairings in the topic. Using NPMI has proved
to perform better then using PMI. [17]
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
11
==PAGE:22==
3.4
Classifier
As an additional way to evaluate the LDA models, we propose using the output as the
basis for a classifier. Data set 1 which contains the parliament hall speeches, includes the
name of the person speaking. There are 390 different speakers in the data set. Assuming
that each individual speaker alwyas talks about the same kind of subject using the same
words, we propose that a classifier network may be able to predict the speaker based on
the topic distribution of a given speech. That is to say that after the topic distribution of
a speech have been determined by the LDA model, those topic distributions can then be
used to train a classification network, to determine the speaker. The validation and test
set are created as described in the section ”Data set” to be chronologically invariant and
randomly selected. The classification results quantify the extent to which speakers can
be identified based on the LDA model output. The speaker serves as a proxy-topic and
correctly identifying the speakers implies that the model has captured something inherent
in the data relating to detecting the proxy-topics, which stand in for the real topics.
3.4.1
Neural Network Design
A Fully Connected Neural Network (FCNN) is a network of nodes that connect inputs
and outputs through layers of weights. This method is the simplest Neural Network that
can be imagined and can easily be expanded in width and depth. It is a general model,
and for more specialized tasks other more complicated architectures architectures can be
used that perform better. For this classification task we will be using a Fully Connected
Neural Network, since the problem is straight forward. The optimizer will be the Adam
optimizer, which was chosen in large part due to the AdaGrad component which handles
sparse gradients well. We can expect the gradients to be somewhat sparse due to topic
distributions being assumed chosen from a dirichlet distribution. AdaGrad is one of two
optimizer methods that were combined in Adam. The other part is Root Mean Square
Propagation, which is good if there is noise in the data that causes the optimal parameters
to change, which can be expected because the data that will be used for proxy-topic
classfication will be ASR transcripts, which may contain mistranscribed words.
3.4.2
Architecture
The table on the right shows the simple architec-
ture used as the classifier network. Note that FC
Layer denotes a Fully Connected Layer with a
dropout of 20% and ReLu denotes Rectified Lin-
ear Unit. It could be worth considering a Leaky
Relu instead, since this prevents neurons from
’dying’ by getting a slope of zero and then hav-
ing a gradient of zero. Note also is that the input
is of variable size, so number of topics in the LDA
model will determine the number of inputs to the
ClassNet.
ClassNet
FC layer
ntopicsx500
ReLU
FC layer
500x390
ReLU
FC layer
390x390
Softmax
A classification network must be trained for any instance of an LDA model that is evalu-
ated, since LDA model topics may be different due to random initialization and are in no
particular order.
3.4.3
Simulating Noisy Data
The use-case for the LDA model to create embedding, by applying it to transcribed data
from DanSpeech. The transcripts generated by DanSpeech will contain transcription er-
rors. These errors can be words that are mistranscribed, so the transcript contains an-
other similarly sounding word, or the words can be split in the wrong places. Some words
12
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:23==
may also be background noise that was interpreted as words, or some words may not be
picked up if the volume is too low for some words or sentences and thus not triggering
DanSpeech transcription activation. To simulate how the model would perform on noisy
data, in order to determine feasibility, simulated errors can be introduced on the otherwise
error-free parliament hall data set.
In order to do this, we first need to define what our model for noise is. In this case noise will
be simulated by setting a percentage chance for any word in a document to be swapped
randomly for another word in the observed vocabulary. Words from the vocabulary will all
have equal chance of being swapped in. The chance that any given word will be swapped
out for another word, will be called the ”Noise percentage”. This method is crude, since it
does not account for whether some words have a higher chance of being misinterpreted
as certain other words and it always keeps the number of words constant, which we also
cannot assume will be the case for the DanSpeech transcriptions, since it is possible to
imagine that two words get misheard as one, or that some do not get transcribed. However
the method should still give insight into the robustness of the model and how and when it
fails.
We considered that the noise-words from ASR does not have to be from the training set
vocabulary, but such words would not have any impact on the assigned topics, since
they were not observed in the training set for the topic model. This is because previ-
ously unseen words do not belong to a topic. In those cases the topic distribution for that
document would simply be based on less words. The assumption that the swapped in
noise-words are from the vocabulary represents the worst case of errors, that they are
misleading words, since if they were from outside they would instead just cause the topic
distributions to be based on fewer words.
A more elaborate model could be constructed if one considered what sounds and words
often get switched are mistaken when the intelligibility is low. For the purpose of this
experiment this model should be sufficient to get an idea of how noise affects the results.
3.5
Visualizing the Topic Space
3.5.1
The Topic Space
Following the training of an LDA model, all documents can be assigned a distribution of
topics that they contain. One can then imagine that all those documents are placed in a
multi-dimensional space, with dimension for each topic in the model. The position of each
document on each axis is equal to how much of that specific topic the document contains.
In the ideal scenario, and for the training data, those topics are a Dirichlet distribution, and
they add up to 1. This, however, only happens if all words in the documents belong to a
topic. There is a possibility that not all the words are in the LDA model if they did not occur
in the training data for the model. When this happens, no topic can be assigned to the
word. It was considered calculating and explicitly adding a topic of ”Unseen words” after
the LDA model had output the real topics, for the purposes of helping the visualisation
and later models, but it is already implicit, in that the other topics do not add up to 1. The
remaining missing part, is the ”unseen words” topic. This implicit topic is then an implicit
measure of how alien a new speech is and if the number of unseen words is high this may
call for an investigation.
3.5.2
Principal Component Analysis
One way to reduce a high-dimensional space to a lower-dimensional one is by Principal
Component Analysis (PCA), in which the directions that explains the greatest variance
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
13
==PAGE:24==
are found by figuring out which line in this multidimensional space has the least squared
distance to all the points. This line is the direction of the first principal component and
will explain most variance in the data. This is then repeated with determining a second
Principal Component that makes a plane with the line that was found, so that all the points
have the smallest squared distance to the plane created. This could be repeated for any
number of principal components up to the maximum of the number dimensions in the
space.
3.5.3
t-distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding
Another way to visualize high-dimensional data sets in a low-dimensional graph is by the
use of t-SNE. As introduced in 2008 by Hinton and Maaten[16]. This method reduces the
data points to fewer dimensions much like the PCA, but the t-SNE attempts to retain the
clustering of the data, by moving it around instead of just projecting it.
This works by randomly placing the points from the high-dimensional space in the low-
dimensional space and then moving them with the following step-based algorithm. In
each step a point is moved based on its proximity to the other points in the original high-
dimension space. As such, points that are close in the high-dimensional space congregate
in the low-dimensional space. Likewise points that are far apart in the high-dimensional
space try to be far apart. This method preserves the clusters of points from the high-
dimensional space, as well as possible, in the low-dimensional space.
The steps in this process starts with calculating the similarity between a point, pi, and
all other points in the original high-dimensional space. The similarity to another point is
calculated as the probability of the point pi choosing the other point as its neighbor if the
chance of each point getting picked were defined as the probability density of a normal
distribution centered on the point pi, where the probability density is measuring a distance
away from the center, equal to the distance between the two points. This is then scaled
so that all the probabilities add up to one. This probability is
pj|i =
exp
(
−∥xi −xj∥2 /2σ2
i
)
∑
k̸=i exp
(
−∥xi −xk∥2 /2σ2
i
),
(3.8)
where the xi denotes locations of the points, and σi is the variance on the Gaussian.
Because a point’s attraction/repulsion to itself does not matter, it is set to zero.
A similar measure is introduced for the similarity for the positions of the points in the lower-
dimensional space. This time however, the distance measure is the Student t-distribution,
but the procedure is the same. The similarity is therefore defined as
qi|j =
(
1 + ∥yi −yj∥2)−1
∑
k̸=l
(
1 + ∥yk −yl∥2)−1 ,
(3.9)
where the yi denote the positions of the points in the low-dimensional space. The reason
the Student’s t-distribution is used here, as opposed to the Gaussian is to alleviate the
Crowding problem, which is a paradox that makes it impossible to preserve all the dis-
tances in the high-dimensional space because of the lack of dimensions to explain it in
the low-dimensional space.
14
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:25==
The points are then placed in the low-dimensional space on randomly assigned positions.
The second similarity measure can then be used to create a matrix with the similarity
measure between all the points in the low-dimensional space, like the matrix that was
made for the high-dimensional space. The points in the low-dimensional space are then
moved according to gradient descent in order to make the second matrix as similar to the
first one as possible.
3.6
Accuracy Testing Method with Levenshtein
The matter of how much accuracy can be expected from Danspeech transcriptions can
be tested by comparing Danspeech transcriptions from a number of speeches from com-
mittee meetings with human transcripts.
For this experiment the five committee meetings, one from each of the five committees
(Employment, Finance, Defense, Environment, Health and Elderly), where randomly se-
lected. Each of these where transcribed by both a human transcriber and Danspeech.
The matter of how to compare and check for errors requires some considerations. If
one checks word for word, two words being transcribed as one would offset the rest of
the document resulting in 100% error for the remainder of the document. Additionally the
speakers in the audios have a tendency to repeat words (e.g. ”...and and that is ...”) which
human transcriptions do not catch because the sentence clearly only means for one ”and”
to occur, while Danspeech will write it verbatim. Therefore a word by word comparison is
not viable.
3.6.1
Levenshtein
The method that was determined to be the best way to quantify the error rate, is a modified
Levenshtein distance. Levenshtein distance is normally a measure of how far a given
word or string is from another word or string, measured in the number of changes it takes
to get from one string to the other. A change can take one of three forms:
1. Removal, in which a symbol is removed.
2. Adding, in which a symbol is added
3. Altering, in which a symbol is changed from one into another.
This means that the Levenshtein distance from ’abc’ to ’abc’ is 0, since there are no
changes needed. The distance to ’abbc’ is 1, since one of the b’s must be deleted, the
distance to ’ac’ is 1 since a ’b’ needs to be added. The distance to ’adc’ is 1 since the ’d’
must be changed into ’b’.
3.6.2
Modified Levenshtein
The further a transcribed word is from the original word, the worse it is transcribed, which
the original Levenshtein would pick up. However in our case we would rather know if a
word is wrong and it does not matter ”how wrong” it is. For example ’sejl’ (sail) and ’segl’
(seal/sickle) sounds and are spelled similarly with only a one-letter difference, but would
likely be in separate topics. Due to this, a change needs to be made to the Levenshtein
algorithm. Additionally if the original method were to be used, the matrices involved in the
computation would take up too much memory ( 25GB), as the Levenshtein matrix is n by
m, where n is the danspeech transcription length and m is the human transcription length.
The alteration that we make to the method is to make a dictionary for the words in the
whole corpora and assign each word an ID number that is considered a single symbol.
The Levenshtein distance will then be the number of changes that need to be made to
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
15
==PAGE:26==
the sequence of words, with each ID considered a single symbol. When this change is
implemented the resulting distance will be a measure of how many words need to be
deleted, added or changed to go from one transcript to the other.
3.7
Committee Classification
In order to determine the viability of classifying the speeches into the committees they are
from, the method from Section 3.4 will be reused with some small adjustments. Instead of
using the speakers as proxy-topics, we will instead use the committees as proxy-topics,
which is likely a far better representation of proxy-topics.
Since the committee data set is different from the parliament hall data set, there is no
guarantee that the model that was best for the parliament hall , is also the best for this
data set. It is different documents and they are likely more specific in what they talk about
in committees. One can imagine that the model needs to be more general in order to
handle another data set than it was specifically trained on. In order to investigate this
we can repeat the search for the optimal number of topics that we performed for the
parliament data on the committee data set.
First the speeches are turned into distributions of topics by using LDA. The LDA model
used is the one that was trained on parliament data. The reason for this is that LDA
requires a large amount of data to perform well, and the parliament corpora of 251402 is
a much more appropriate number of documents than 500, as more data is always better
and 500 might be too small.
The next step is to make a simple classifier net-
work like the one before.
The FC layers have
20% dropout to help regularisation. The differ-
ence is that now there are 5 classes, which are
the 5 committees, instead of the 390 speakers.
This changes the output size of the network. Ex-
cept for that, the architecture is the same as in
Section 3.4.
ClassNetCommittee
FC layer
ntopicsx500
ReLU
FC layer
500x390
ReLU
FC layer
390x5
Softmax
The transcripts are also split into chunks of a variable amount of words, each of which
have the same label as the committee they came from. The network are then trained
using the chunks and the accuracy determined. This was done using different chunk
sizes to be able to see how the chunk size influences the accuracy.
There are two main reasons that the data should be split into chunks:
1. Embedding on a more local level is an important thing to be able to do. Splitting the
meetings into smaller chunk will test the feasibility of different sizes of chunks.
2. The second reason is that the data set is small. Splitting the data into chunks will
allow for a larger validation and test set while also getting more than the 14 meetings
in each category in the training data.
16
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
4.1
Initial Investigation of Word Occurrences
Stopwords are words that provide no context about the topic of a document. English has
some words that will always be stopwords and so does Danish. The Natural Language
Toolkit (NLTK[10]) includes a list of Danish stopwords which was removed before the LDA
model was trained.
To investigate whether there are words that occur in most topics regardless of context,
we investigated how many words occur in how many documents.
Figure 4.1 shows the graph of the number of unique words that occur in a least the given
amount documents. This visualizes what fraction of words would be cut if a given fraction
documents was deemed a cut-off. It can be seen that when the stopwords have been
removed most words occur in only a few documents and very few words are represented
in the majority of the documents. In fact the rapid decrease at the start makes it hard to
determine what exactly is going on in the graph and it can be split into two parts. This
graph shows that the words occur in a sparse amount of documents.
Figure 4.1: This figure shows the fraction of the total amount of unique words that occur
in a given fraction of documents. The scale of the graph is linear on both axes, which
shows that by far the most words occur in only very few documents, with only a handful
of words occurring in a large number of documents.
Figure 4.2 displays the graph from 20% onward showing how many words are in a high
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
17
==PAGE:28==
fraction of the documents. Here it is clear that the number of words that can be considered
to be added to the list of stopwords based on being present in almost every document is
at worst 10 words. These words are so few and a good cut-off is difficult to define that the
list of stopwords has been kept to the NLTK list for simplicity.
Figure 4.2: This figure shows the number of total unique words that occur in a given
fraction of documents, with the x-axis starting at 0.2. This graph shows that only 10
words occur in 20% of the documents and only one word occurs in more than half of the
documents.
Figure 4.3 displays the number of words that occur in 1-4 documents. The number of
words that only occur in a single document is 37.8% of the total words. These words are
words that add no information about other words, because they only are in one document.
As such they can only be assigned according to what words they occur with in that one
document which may have any number of topics. This means that more than a third of
the words in the corpus are only assigned into topics by a single document they appear
in. It is detrimental to the model to have many of these rare words, but they should not
necessarily be removed since they are assigned to a topic based on what words they
occur alongside in that single document.
4.2
LDA Model Results
4.2.1
Optimal number of topics in LDA
When creating LDA models one of the most important decisions is how many topics the
model should have. If there are too few topics, then the model may not be sufficiently
selective when learning the topics. This is caused by words be shared between topics
or many topics going into all documents. If the number of topics is too high, the model
18
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: This figure shows the fraction of unique words that occur in exactly the given
amount of documents. The graph shows that the number of words that only occur in a
single document 37.8%, and that just over half the words occur in 3 or less documents.
may lose some of the implicit connections between words and overfit to the documents of
the training set. The previously described evaluation metrics will be used to quantify how
different numbers of topics influence the models, and to figure out the optimal number of
topics according to the different measurements.
For each number of topics, four LDA-models were trained on the training set and after-
wards all the evaluation measurement were performed on each of them. Different models
are trained in this way because an LDA model has random initialization and we want an
estimate of the variance this causes. The average classification accuracy is what appears
on the plots together with the standard deviation calculated for the four measurements.
In Figure 4.4, we see perplexity as a function of the number of topics. This measure
shows that the models have decreasing perplexity score until 30 topics, after which it
sharply increases. Below 30 topics a very small standard deviation of around 40 was
observed, and afterwards the standard deviation also sharply increased, meaning that
suddenly 4 different LDA models would produce significantly different results, when the
models produced similar results at fewer topics.
In Figure 4.5, we see the coherence as a function of the number of topics. Coherence is
here calculated using CV from Equation 3.6. We see that the coherence actually has a
broad peak at around 17-36 topics and that the standard deviation is quite large making
it difficult to discern a top. This does however imply that the peaking range is a good
number of topics for the given corpus according to the coherence.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4: This graph shows the perplexity score of the models’ topics as a function of
the number of topics. It shows that the perplexity score decreases with the number of
topics, until the model contains 30 topics after which it increases. The standard deviation
is low until the number of topics is 30 and then afterwards it suddenly increases a lot.
Figure 4.6 presents another method of finding an optimal point on the validation set. It can
be seen that the classifier network has the highest accuracy from around 24-40 topics,
after which it begins to decline. Since this is the range at which the classifier had the best
accuracy based on the generated topics from the LDA model, that suggests that this is
the range at which the topics may be the most useful for determining the speaker. This
range is not dissimilar from the range which the coherence and perplexity model found
optimal.
The dip at the high number of topics was speculated to be due to the fact that the model
does not train for long enough as the number of inputs grow and the model becomes more
complicated. It was possible that the reason the accuracy starts going down at around 30
topics in Figure 4.6 is actually because the model has not yet found the optimal weights.
That however does not seem to be the case, since it was investigated by adding more
iteration and observing the results, and they remained largely unchanged. From this result
it seems the best classification accuracy according to this evaluation metric is at 23 topics.
It can also be seen that above this number of topics the LDA and/or the classifier begins
overfitting.
The standard deviation on graph in Figure 4.6 only represents the variance from different
LDA models and random initialization of the ANN. The parts of the data set that was
selected to be validation and test set, was the same throughout all topics and iterations.
To investigate if the data holds inherent bias an additional test was performed, were the
validation and test set was changed for every model. In Figure 4.7 the validation accuracy
of the classification network can be seen, when the LDA model is applied to these random
validation sets. This gives an idea of how much the data varies and what the uncertainty
might be. As we can see there is some difference although the general shape seems to
20
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.5: This graph shows the coherence score, calculated using Cv, as a function of
the number of topics. The graph shows that the coherence is highest in the 17-36 range
with no clear indication of the peak.
Figure 4.6: This shows the validation accuracy of the parliament speaker classifier at
different numbers of topics. This graph is made using a static training and validation set.
This shows that the classifier has a very broad peak ranging from 24-42 topics.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: The validation accuracy of the parliament speaker classifier at different num-
bers of topics. This graph is made using four random training and validation sets, one
for each LDA model. This graph shows that the classifier has a peak ranging from 21-33
topics, with the highest average at 27 topics.
be roughly the same. The peak is easier to make out in this one at ∼27 topics.
Keep in mind that the only changes between Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7 is which held-
out validation set was used which seemed to have changed the outcome. The validation
set therefore seems to have held a bias and this new plot better accounts for all the
variances that might occur when performing this classification experiment, and plot with
static validation set only accounts for variance in the models.
Based on these three evaluation metrics the number of topics was chosen to be 27, and
going forward the LDA models used was the 4 that was trained with 27 topics unless
otherwise specified.
4.2.2
Topic examples
Having developed the LDA models using the training corpus a number of topics have
been created. These topics tell us something about the data set that they came from and
give some insight into how the method works on this type of data. The topics are sorted in
descending order, so ’largest’ ones have the lowest topic-number. Large is here defined
in terms of the amount of tokenized words from the corpora they explain.
In order to try to show the topics created by the LDA model and which of the words included
in the topics is the most significant in defining the topic, a number of plots have been made
to illustrate this. The way to understand the plots in this section is that for each topic a
22
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:33==
list of the 30 words with the highest corpora occurrence, explained by that given topic, is
shown. The red bar shows how much of a specific word’s occurrence is explained with
the given topic, and if there is a blue bar as well, it means that the word belongs to at
least one other topic as well that represents the remaining instances of that word in the
corpora. The blue bar goes up to the total number of occurrences of that specific word in
the entire corpora.
As mentioned LDA topics can be assigned a title by a human in order to interpret what
relates the words of a given topic. In this section a few examples will be given of some
specific topics, some of the more notable topics as well as what we have named all the
topics.
The first notable thing is that the two topics containing the most tokens, contain a com-
bined amount of 54.4% of the tokenized words. This means that slightly over half the
words in the entire corpus is contained within the two first topics. These two topics can be
seen in Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.9 and are both diffuse. The first topic seems to contain
words that relate to how one feels about a subject. A title for this topic could be ”Opin-
ion descriptors”, which is the one we have chosen based on the fact that many of the
words are words that can be used to describe how one feels about a proposal ”se” (see),
”sige” (say), ”kunne” (could), ”synes” (think), ”altså” (that is), ”forbeholde” (reserve), ”tro”
(believe), ”mene” (mean/hold the opinion), ”enig” (agree). This topic occurs no matter
the number of topics, and is likely just a feature of the data set being based on people
discussing opinions. If the number of topics is lowered this topic will include words that
do not fit that title such as ”minister” (minister), ”regering” (government) now whether they
are entities that have opinions or whether they are in the topic for other reasons is hard
to say. The second topic is the most diffuse topic by far and does not fit neatly under any
title. It contains many words that seem to fit anywhere, because they fit most contexts as
they are basic context-in-variate terms used in language. This can be seen by almost all
of the words in topic having a blue bar indicating that in addition to being in that topic, the
words are also in another topic. An example of this is the word ”kunne” (could) which is
split between Topic 1 and Topic 2, that together explain all the occurrences of that word.
The remaining topics are much clearer in regards to what the theme is. The 6th topic can
be seen in Figure 4.10 has been titled ”Relational politics”. That title is based on the fact
that these words are all related to countries/entities and the relations with those. Other
topic titles could most likely also apply to this topic. Subjectively it feels like this topic is
coherent in that there is a title that all of this fits neatly into. The process used for this
topic is the way the vast majority of topics look and are assigned names.
Additionally it can be seen that the Danish political party ”Dansk Folkeparti” has not be-
come a bigram despite being a named entity, whereas ”Islamisk Stat (Islamic state/ISIS)”
has become one. This is due to the fact that when ”Islamisk” shows up in the text, it
is usually next to ”Stat”. Of course this means that the bigrams can miss connections,
because it is based on occurrence and not made manually.
The last topic that we have chosen to highlight is topic 8 which we have given the nickname
“Giving the floor”. Topic 8 contains many names of persons, titles and names of political
parties. Like topic 6 the words contained in topic 8 are kind of uniform and intuitively one
can sense that the words may form a kind of topic.
When we investigated the data set and played around with the input to the topic model, we
have discovered that topic 8 disappears from the model if the first speech of each meeting
is removed. Looking closer into this phenomenon it is not strange that this happens since
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.8: A topic from the LDA model, that has been assigned the label ”Opinion de-
scriptors”. It shows words related to expressing or forming opinions.
24
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.9: The second largest topic from the LDA model. It has been labelled ”Filler”. It
shows words that are diffuse in theme and fit into most subjects.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.10: A topic from the LDA model, that could be described with the label ”Rela-
tions in politics”. A label which is assigned by a human. It contains words that related to
countries, groups of countries and relations to countries. This topic is representative for
the remaining topics that are not featured in the in how coherent it is and how the words
are represented from the title.
26
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.11: A topic from the LDA model, that could be described with the label ”Giving the
floor”. It shows words that are either people (Named entities) or related to the formalities
around giving the floor to someone else.
at the beginning of each meeting the agenda and the members who are listed as speakers,
are read aloud. What we see is not surprising but rather confidence-building because
it shows that the model picks up the repeated text of a rather fixed form with a limited
vocabulary and makes it a topic.
This last topic we will highlight for being different is the one named ”Giving the floor” seen
in Figure 4.11. Topic 8 contains many names of persons, titles and names of political
parties. Like topic 6 the words contained in topic 8 intuitively form a kind of topic. The
other part of this topic is the words said when the floor is given to one of these named
persons. For example ”tak” (thanks), ”næste” (next), ”værsgo” (go ahead/here you go)
etc.
The complete list of topics and names can be seen if Table 4.1.
4.3
Simulated Noise Results
In this section the results for the simulated noise, as described in Section 3.4.2 ”Simulat-
ing Noisy Data” will be presented. Keep in mind that this noise is simulated as random
substitution of words from the vocabulary with a fixed chance of happening.
In Figure 4.12 the accuracy as a function of noise can be seen. This graph shows that as
noise is introduced the accuracy starts going down immediately. This means that there is
no specific point where the data suddenly becomes too noisy to classify the speakers, but
that it is a continuous degradation. It can be seen that the classification error goes from
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
27
==PAGE:38==
Topic 1
Topic 2
Topic 3
Topic 4
Title
Opinionrelated
Filler
Legislation
Political Groups
Word %
39.7%
14.7%
6.9%
5.6%
Topic 5
Topic 6
Topic 7
Topic 8
Title
Financing
International
Cases/Decisions
Give the Floor
Word %
3.5%
2.6%
2.5%
2%
Topic 9
Topic 10
Topic 11
Topic 12
Title
Proposals
Payment/Tax
Economy
Welfare
Word %
1.9%
1.8%
1.8%
1.6%
Topic 13
Topic 14
Topic 15
Topic 16
Title
Healthcare
Immigration
Questions
Traffic/Crime
Word %
1.6%
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
Topic 17
Topic 18
Topic 19
Topic 20
Title
Deals/plans
Democracy
Children/Education
Business/Labor
Word %
1.5%
1.2%
1%
1%
Topic 21
Topic 22
Topic 23
Topic 24
Title
Men
Minister
Farming/Produce
Citizens/The public
Word %
0.9%
0.9%
0.7%
0.7%
Topic 25
Topic 26
Topic 27
Title
Employment
Voting
Women
Word %
0.6%
0.5%
0.3%
Table 4.1: This table shows the titles of each of the 27 topics as determined by the intuitive
connection between the words in the topics. It also contains the percentage of the total
number of tokenized words of the entire training corpus that is explained by that topic.
The topics are ordered so that the first topics are the ones that explain the largest amount
of tokenized words. Note that the percentage of tokenized words does not refer to unique
words, but how many occurrences of words it explains.
28
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.12: The classification accuracy of the classification of speakers as a function of
the percentage of words replaced with random words from the training vocabulary. This
shows that the accuracy starts decreasing immediately and steadily until it reaches 2.7%
accuracy, which is the percentage of the speeches given by the most frequent speaker.
the observed at 27 topics, to the topic distributions providing no information since they are
based documents that are 100% noise. At a noise of 100% replacement the accuracy is
0.0276 ± 0.0043. This number is not quite random guessing, because of the imbalance in
number of speeches. Completely random would be an accuracy of
1
390 = 0.0026. This is
due to the unbalanced data set with the Chairman holding 2.7% of the speeches. For that
reason the learns to assign every speech to Mogens Lykketoft, who was the chairman
from 2011 to 2015 which is likely why he is so over-represented in the data set (The data
set was from 2009-2017).
4.3.1
Further Investigations of Noise
The problem of classifying the data according to speakers is one way to quantify the
impact of noise on the quality of the model. Another is to look at the change in distances
for each individual speech in the multi-dimensional topic space caused by noise. This
topic space has the same number of dimensions as there are topics in the model.
Distance Testing
First it must be established how much noise impacts the model. This is done by intro-
ducing the random noise we have previously used where words are randomly swapped
for other words in the vocabulary. It will then be used to measure the distance that a
document moves through the topic space as a result of this noise. This means that ev-
ery document’s original position will be noted, and the position after adding noise. The
distance moved will be calculated using the 2-norm.
In order get something meaningful to compare the change in distance to, the distances
between the average topic distribution of each speaker was also computed. Meaning that
all speeches made by a single speaker will have some average topic distribution, and that
average topic distribution will be the center of the speakers cluster in this multidimensional
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.13: This shows the distance a speech is moved away from its original position
in the topic space by the given per-word replacement rate (noise percentage). This can
be compared against the average distance of speakers’ center of mass and the standard
deviation of that value. The distance between speakers’ center of mass is calculated at
no noise and is considered independent of the noise. It can be seen that the distance
moved is similar in size to the distance to the nearest neighbour even with just 4% noise.
space. Each speaker’s center of mass will then have a distance to each of the other
speakers’ center of mass. These distances can be calculated between all 390 and sorted
so the nearest neighbor distance for each speaker is found. The average nearest neighbor
distance will be plotted alongside the distance that each document moves when noise is
introduced. The nearest neighbor distance will be without noise, as its purpose is to be
compared to the increasing distances the speeches move when more noise is introduced.
Again, the reason speakers are considered for this, is because the speakers are used as
a proxy-topics to represent some inherent subjects in the documents.
In Figure 4.13 it can be seen that at just 4% noise the distance the speeches move, is the
same size as the minimum average distance between speakers. This show that speeches
in worst case can go from being the center of one speakers speeches to the center of a
different speaker and be classified as the wrong speaker. It can also be seen that the
scale at which the noise affects the data is on roughly the same scale as the distance
between nearest neighbours when the word replacement rate is at only 2%. It should
of course be noted that this is the smallest distance in a 27-dimensional space with 390
speakers and 251402 total speeches among them. So the smallest distance is unlikely to
be the direction the noise takes the data point, but it does give an idea of why the classifier
seems as unstable as it is.
PCA Results
PCA was performed on the data. Principal Component 1 is what captures the most vari-
ance, Principal component 2 is the one that captures the second most. In our case the
30
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.14: This plot shows the topic dis-
tributions of the speeches of the three first
speakers in the data set projected onto the
first two principal components. The dispar-
ity between the amount of speeches held
by blue and then red and green shows how
some speakers have very few speeches,
while others have many. It should be noted
that speaker 0 is Mogens Lykketoft, the
speaker with most speeches in the entire
data set.
Figure 4.15: The topic distributions of the
speeches of speakers 3 to 5 projected
onto the principal components.
These
speeches are overlapping and the area that
each speaker appear in is almost identical.
The only difference between them is that
speaker 4 does not use the negative part
of the second principal component much.
Which means that they will be impossible
to classify unless other missing dimensions
provide more information.
variance they each explained was 8.9% and 6.5% respectively. That means that we
should still expect much of the variance in the data to be lost, since the remaining 84.6%
could not be represented in just two dimensions.
The results can be seen for the three first speakers in Figure 4.14 and for the three next
speakers in 4.15. As can be seen the speeches of each speaker all share the same are.
There can be a couple of explanations for this, the first being that these speeches would
have been more separated given more dimensions. The other is that the space may just
not be large enough and speakers not distinct enough that the data forms clusters of each
speakers’ speeches.
4.3.2
t-SNE Results on Parliament Hall Meetings
t-SNE was performed on the data, but due to the large number of speakers and speeches
they were split up into smaller groups featuring all speeches from the noted speakers. The
reduction in dimensions goes from 27 dimensions to just 2, so they can be visualized.
In Figure 4.16 the t-SNE transformation of all speeches given by 8 randomly selected
speakers and for 10 other random speakers in Figure 4.17. What we observe is that oc-
casionally t-SNE clusters speeches of a single color separately as seen with speaker 45
in Figure 4.16. The pattern with clear delimitations seems to occur for speakers that do a
noticeable fraction of formal talking using a rather restricted vocabulary, such as ministers
and others who have formalities they have to carry out. This includes in particular Mogens
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.16: The topic distributions of all parliament speeches of 8 random speakers
transformed by t-SNE. The t-SNE was run only on the topic distributions of the included
speeches. It can be seen that while many of them are clustered in certain places, those
clusters often have large overlaps. The exception is speaker 45 whose speeches are
separated from the rest in clusters, due to him being a minister.
Figure 4.17: The topic distributions of all parliament speeches of the 10 random speakers
transformed by t-SNE. The t-SNE was run only on the topic distributions of the included
speeches. It shows that the speeches are clustered, but with large overlaps with other
clusters. This further shows how classification will be difficult.
32
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:43==
Lykketoft who for 4 of the 8 years the data set spans was chairman of the Danish parlia-
ment. Separate clusters are rare occurrences as most speakers generally overlap with
each other, making one big cluster, where some parts of the big cluster will have more
of one color. For example speaker 59 in Figure 4.17 mostly occurs in the lower left of
the cluster, but occasionally occurs throughout the whole plot. It also shares the lower left
area with many other colors. If we were classifying using this, we might notice the amount
of blue in that area, and call them all speaker 59, resulting in a huge error rate because
of the amount of speaker 106, 158, 239 and 251 in that area. This is low-dimensional
representation of high-dimensional data so we may be missing some information, but this
at least tells us that the classifying task is not trivial, although some specific speakers,
the ministers and the chairman, may be easier to classify both because their speeches
contain certain formalities with a limited vocabulary and because they are also the ones
who hold the most speeches at the Danish parliament.
4.4
Committee Data Results
4.4.1
Topic distributions of the Transcripts
Applying the LDA model to the data from the committee meetings, each document is as-
signed a topic distribution. This topic distribution can be visualized as in Figure 4.18a.
From this it can be seen that the first topic is dominant and contains between 24% to 52%
of the tokens for all the transcripts, while the higher numbered topics are much more rarely
used. To get a visualization of the topics more rarely used the data can be normalized as
can be seen Figure 4.18b. Here is it easier to see how the different topics vary between
documents and committees. The topics getting assigned also seems to match our expec-
tation with for example topic 25, which was named ”Employment” getting assigned more
than average in the Employment committee, occasionally in the Finance committee, and
almost not at all throughout the Defense, Environment and Health committees. Likewise
Topic 13 named Healthcare, showed up more in the Health Committee. Topic 5 named
”Finance” showed up more in the Finance Committee, although it appeared across all
kinds of transcripts as it was the 5th largest topic in the parliament hall data.
4.4.2
PCA on Committee Meetings
In order to investigate the meetings from the committees, 10 meetings from each com-
mittee were selected. Each meeting was given topic distributions and then PCA was
performed on those topic distributions. This yields the results seen in Figure 4.19, where
it can be seen that the topics are somewhat grouped within each committee, and that the
principal components are better for separating some committees than others.
4.4.3
Comparing Human and and DanSpeech transcriptions with PCA
We can compare the position of the DanSpeech transcriptions to the position of each of
the human transcriptions in the topic space. To do this we project both the human tran-
scriptions and the Danspeech transcriptions onto the principal components of the PCA.
This can be seen in Figure 4.20. For this PCA the same principal components as in Figure
4.19 was used, to maintain the sense of scale and positions of the documents, since the
principal components are dependant on the points the PCA is performed on. Although
the scale is the same in the PCA, it should be noted that the scale in the graph is NOT the
same, since the human transcriptions would be too close to the DanSpeech transcriptions
to give an indication of the distance.
4.5
DanSpeech Transcription Accuracy
To understand how much transcription-noise impact the topic distributions of the speeches,
we performed a number of investigations presented below.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
33
==PAGE:44==
(a) This shows the LDA-assigned topics dis-
tributions for the DanSpeech transcriptions
of the committee data. Each row is a single
document and each column is the topic of
that number. The color shows what fraction
of the topics distribution is that specific topic.
This plot features the 10 meetings from each
committee that were selected randomly to
be transcribed by humans. It can be seen
that similarly to the parliament data, the top-
ics with the lowest topic numbers explains
the largest number of tokenized words. The
percentage of how many tokens there are in
the topics, matches with the parliament hall
speeches with a few exceptions, suggesting
that the language is similar.
(b) The LDA-assigned topics distributions
for the DanSpeech transcriptions of the
committee data. This features the 10 meet-
ings from each committee that were se-
lected randomly.
The normalisation was
performed vertically so that summing over
each topic adds up to 0, essentially showing
which documents have more and less than
the average assigned of that given topic.
This shows how the different committees
have certain topics that occur with higher
percentages than the average, for example
the encircled topic 25 named ”employment”,
is more than averagely assigned for the Em-
ployment Committee meetings.
34
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:45==
4.5.1
Levenshtein Distances
Already before applying Levenshtein to the transcripts, it can be seen that something is
off with one of the DanSpeech transcriptions, because has about three times as many
words as the human transcription. The human transcriber commented after transcribing
that even they had trouble understanding it, due to the audio quality and the fact that
there is a jutlander with a heavy accent doing a lot of the talking. After reviewing the
audio file, not only is that true, but there is also a lot of background noise that gets picked
up by the microphone and those two factors are likely the reason that there are so many
words transcribed by DanSpeech. Since there are only five randomly chosen transcribed
samples, it is hard to ascertain how much of a problem this is generally in the committee
meetings. For the purposes of figuring out how much error can generally be expected we
will focus on the meetings that do not suffer from those issues and keep in mind that the
DanSpeech transcription quality may suffer in cases where the audio is bad.
Employment
Finance
Defense
Environment
Health
Human transcript length
3473
7515
4097
3300
10880
DanSpeech transcript length
9175
9992
4015
3035
10161
Levenshtein Distance
7423
5193
1362
1157
4049
Percentage error
214%
69.1%
33.2%
35.1%
37.2%
Percentage correct
19.1%
48.0%
66.1%
61.9%
60.2%
Table 4.2: This table shows length of the DanSpeech and human transcripts from a sin-
gle committee meeting from each of the five committees and the Levenshtein distance
between the human transcript and the DanSpeech transcript. The table also shows the
percentage error in the transcription relative to the length of the human transcript and what
percentage of the DanSpeech transcript was correct relative to the DanSpeech transcrip-
tion. These do not sum up to 100% because they are relative to different transcripts. This
is all based on tokenized words, meaning spelling and similar words do not matter. This
shows that the error rates that can be expected from transcriptions has high variance.
In table 4.2 we can see how the different transcriptions fare when comparing them us-
ing the Levenshtein Distance. Of course the Levenshtein needs to be compared to the
length of the transcription to gauge the accuracy of the transcription. The percentage er-
ror is calculated with the human error as the true answer meaning that it is calculated as:
percErr =
LevenshteinDistance
HumanTranscriptionLength · 100%. This results in the Employment transcription
error percentage being higher than 100%, because there is more than twice the number of
words. The ”Percentage correct” is a measure of the number of words from the transcript
that was unchanged when comparing to the human transcript. This is based on percent-
age compared to the DanSpeech transcription length, which is why it does not add up to
100% with the percentage error: percUsed = DanSpeechTranscriptionLength−LevenshteinDistance
DanSpeechTranscriptionLength
·
100%
What can be seen in the table is that three of the five committee meetings transcribed,
Defense, Environment and Health, share almost the same error rates and percentage of
correct words used from the DanSpeech transcript. This seems to indicate that this is the
error rate that can be expected under good circumstances when the audio transcribed
is good. If it is not good audio or a troublesome accent, then the resulting transcriptions
cause transcriptions with higher error rate.
4.5.2
Comparison
Having a crude measure of what noise does to our ability to distinguish speakers from
one another, and a decent measure of how much error DanSpeech transcriptions have
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
35
==PAGE:46==
in both good and bad audio conditions, we can compare the two. We can do this by
looking at the noise percentage achieved from the DanSpeech accurracy test, which was
around 33.2%-37.2% for good cases. When looking at Figure 4.13 we can see that at
that noise level the smallest distance between speakers is smaller than the distance a
speech moves when subjected to random noise by a word replacement rate of 4. As
such classifying speakers based on the transcriptions is going to be very challenging and
unreliable. It is worth noting that speakers can be expected to lie close to each other in
the topic space simply because there are so many of them and they talk about the same
topics. Additionally the smallest average distance between speakers indicates that most
are grouped up, but that some deviate from that tendency. This will be investigated later.
For now the conclusion is that identifying individual speakers on the transcribed speeches
for DanSpeech will likely produce significantly worse results than doing it based on the true
speeches in the parliament. However the next task is not identifying individual speakers,
but rather to determine which committee each speech belongs to, which is a simpler task.
4.6
Committee Classification
We have then attempted to classify danspeech transcripts of committee meetings, using
the same topic model that was trained on the parliament hall data set.
4.6.1
Optimal Number of Topics
Figure 4.21 shows that the accuracy is highest at 23 topics, which has a validation accu-
racy of 73%±15.6%. Naturally this value is not valid since it was picked for being largest
in a landscape that has some significant standard deviation, and these models should
be rerun on test sets. Doing this gives 67%±3.2%, which is lower than the validation. It
must be noted that these accuracy numbers are based on a training set that has 90 data
points in each classification category and a validation and test set of 5 meetings from
each category making it a total validation set size of 25. This mean that the increments
for the validation accuracy is 4%, making this wildly random as can also be seen from the
standard error at the peak at 23 topics. Going forward the model’s number of topics will
be kept at 27 despite these results suggesting the optimal number may be 23 topics.
4.6.2
Splitting into Chunks
In Figure 4.22 it can be seen how the validation accuracy is affected by changing the
chunk size. The first thing to notice is that at the higher chunk sizes of 1200-1800 words
the classification network performs better than the version that does not use chunks.The
other thing to notice is that the drop from having percentages around 50-60% is sudden.
It happens from 200 to 160 words per chunks, and at 180 it can be seen that it is at
40% (Which is better than random guessing) but it has dropped drastically and has a high
uncertainty. From 160 words per chunk and lower the result is exactly as good as random
guessing.
At each chunksize 5% of the chunks were set aside as validation set and 5% as test
set. The amount of chunks in each data set can be seen in Appendix Table B.1. As
the meetings are not equally long, the remaining chunks of the longer meeting types have
been removed so all committees have the exact same number of chunks. The percentage
of the total text made up by each type of committee meeting can be seen in Appendix Table
B.2.
36
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.19: These plots show the results of a PCA performed on the LDA-assigned topics
for the DanSpeech transcriptions of the committee data. This features 10 meetings from
each committee that was selected randomly. Notice that comparing a principal component
to itself results in a line, thus instead a histogram better showcases the data for showing
how the data lies on that single principal component. It can be seen that the speeches
are clustered and that they each have some axis that separates them. The top left of the
plots were left out as they are reflections of the ones shown.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.20: The PCA performed on the LDA-assigned topics both for the DanSpeech
transcriptions of the committee data, and for the human transcriptions of those same
meetings. The DanSpeech transcriptions are symbolized by circles and the human tran-
scription an x in the same color. The principal components in this plot are the same as
the one in Figure 4.19, but the scale is changed because the distances would otherwise
be too small visually. These plots show that the distance that these topics move in the
topic space does not make it unfeasible to classify the DanSpeech transcriptions due to
noise, although it impacts the classification accuracy that can be expected negatively.
38
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.21: The accuracy of the DanSpeech transcription classifier network as a function
of the number of topics in the LDA. The classification network was trained 4 times for each
data point to calculate the error, where each time used a differently initialized LDA model
trained on the parliament hall data set. The optimal number is hard to determine, due to
the uncertainty and the broadness of the peak.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.22: This shows the accuracy of the transcription classifier network classifying
based on the committee meeting’s topic distribution given by the LDA model. The ac-
curacy is shown at varying chunk size of the DanSpeech transcripts of the committee
meetings. The network was trained 4 times for each data point on a differently initialized
LDA model to calculate the error. The LDA model has 27 topics and was trained on the
parliament data. The network is unable to classify with chunk sizes of less than 180 and
has high variance at 180 words per chunk. At higher chunk sizes the classifier using
chunks performs better than the classifier that was not using word chunks at all.
40
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:51==
5
Discussion
5.1
Model Evaluation and Generation
5.1.1
Perplexity
The perplexity graph in Figure 4.4 is quite interesting for a number of reasons. In gen-
eral it is expected that the perplexity decreases with the number of topics as long as the
training corpora is representative of the held-out set for measuring perplexity and the ad-
ditional topics reflect the general usage of the topics, as opposed to becoming specific to
the training documents. This expected improvement is seen until 30 topics, after which
the perplexity rapidly increases. This suggests that at that point the model becomes too
specific.
Based on the standard deviations increasing at around 33 topics we can see that there
seems to be a number of different ways that the model becomes too specific to the training
data. Ways that all generate different perplexities when applied to a held-out data set
based on whether the overfitting fits that held-out set. Another thing that can be gathered
from the standard deviations, is that as long as the training set is the same and the number
of topics is under 33, the different randomly initialized LDA models will all converge to
roughly the same perplexity on a held-out validation set. However one cannot conclude
that this would be the case if different parts of the data set was chosen as the held-out
data set, which might be an interesting test to perform. Such an experiment would show
how much perplexity variance there is with different the parliament hall training sets.
The perplexity suggests that the number of topics needs to be set at 30 topics.
5.1.2
Coherence
Out of the three evaluation metrics, the coherence is the one that best measures how well
the topics of the model makes sense to humans. This measure, seen in Figure 4.5 has
its peak at 24. There is one point at 30 topics that has an oddly low standard deviation,
but considering there are only 4 measurements for each number of topics, that is likely
just a coincidence that those 4 measurements happened to be very close.
The perplexity implied that this the model would overfit on the training set at higher than
30 topics, and since coherence is measured on the training set, coherence will not cap-
ture that. Even so the coherence score also goes down at the same time the perplexity
increases, so we need not choose between them. Considering that the resulting LDA
model would be used on the committee data set, which is assumed similar, it still may be
slightly different, so we want to avoid a model that is too specific. This means we should
err on the side of less topics when choosing based on coherence and perplexity score.
5.1.3
Classification
The classification of speakers is the custom metric of these three. It is geared towards
topic detection with the assumption that classifying speakers may be somewhat similar
to classifying subjects and committees. That assumption seems logical, but there is no
guarantee it is true. The other idea with this metric is as a feasibility test to learn whether
LDA topics can be used to classify. We can see that although the capability when it comes
to classifying speakers are not impressive, the task can be expected to be quite difficult
as the speakers are expected to be very similar and there are so many of them.
The classification validation accuracy peaked at 27 topics, and roughly the same be-
haviour as the coherence metric. Again we notice that the standard deviations are unreli-
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
41
==PAGE:52==
able because of there being only 4 measurements for each point. However the standard
deviation still shows us that the peak may be at another value than 27. It could easily be
another number of topics that is the true peak found by repeated testing.
Considering that the data was quite unbalanced, with one speaker having 2.7% of the
speeches, it could be considered adding weights to the loss function to balance it out.
5.1.4
Selecting the Number of Topics
The perplexity, coherence and the classification all roughly agreed on the number of topics
being in the 24-30 range. The number of topics was chosen at the highest classification
accuracy because it was in between the top for the other two. It can be argued that
since the perplexity shows that 30 topics is safe from overfitting as measured on the
validation set, the data that better reflects the use-case is still committee data and thus
the parameters of the model should be held slightly more general. Another thing to note
is that all of these metrics were measured with increments of 3. It could be possible to
obtain small improvements in the metrics and to the model, if repeated testing was done
with varying held-out test set and smaller increments in the area 20-33 topics to find the
best number of topics.
5.2
The Modelled Topics
The modelled topics explored in this report are mostly as expected and intended, with
a few exceptions and concerns. The fact that most of the corpus ends up in two topics
is not necessarily cause for alarm on it’s own. The contents of Topic 1 and especially
Topic 2 indicate that these are words that can occur in many context and do not have
specific contexts that they belong to in the parliament. The high word percentage of Topic
1 is understandable, since a politician’s job is to form opinion and those are words that
indicate an opinion. Topic 2 contains generic words that are not specific to one topic. Most
of the words of Topic 2 occurs partially in that topic but also in one or more others. Many
of them are there because they do not to define any one particular context, but rather are
words that can occur in any context. They could be indicative of a certain speaker based
on their speech pattern, but the words do not give clues to what the speaker is talking
about, just how they do it.
Many of the words in Topic 2 are good candidates to be considered stopwords (’derfor’
(for that reason), ’kunne’ (could), ’både’ (both)), as their inclusion may be detrimental to
the models ability to recognize topics in the later stages. But while the words may not give
clues to any specific topic, having the LDA model create topic to catch those kind words is
certainly beneficial, so the model can apply this filler-topic instead of letting those words
pollute the coherence of other topics.
From the Topics it is clear that the model has identified real categories successfully. A
human faced with these topics distributions, is able to get a clear image of what type of
document would be made from most of them, and how the words in each document are
related.
5.3
Noise on the Parliament Hall Data
The fact that the highest test accuracy immediately begins decreasing as even a small
amount of noise was introduced, implies that the data is not well-separated with clearly
defined borders, but that the speakers’ clusters overlaps in the topic space. This is seen
in the PCA and t-SNE as well. Although those plots cannot show the 27 dimensions the
model has. Still the PCA and t-SNE indicates that the problem of identifying individual
speakers was going to be near impossible with the LDA model as the base.
42
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.13 emphasizes the same point, by showing that even with minimal noise of
around ∼4% the noise would already be in the order of magnitude to change the position
in the topic space from one speaker’s center of mass to another. This noise percentage
is later shown to be far smaller than DanSpeech produces, and is in general an unrea-
sonably small noise percentage to expect from ASR. The noise is simulated in a way that
may not be completely accurate and logical, because some words are more likely to be
swapped with specific other words that sound similar. A more sophisticated noise model,
may produce words outside the vocabulary, which would reduce the effect of errors by
having them not move the speech in a random direction, but just leave the speech’s po-
sition in the topic space based on less words. Even so, all the results point in the same
direction; that classifying speakers is an almost impossible problem.
This was one of two driving factors in getting a data set that better reflects the embedding
we are aiming for, because the fact that the speakers are hard to separate is a problem,
but the real problem is that speakers do not accurately represent themes and topics. Each
speaker may speak about roughly the same thing if they are spokesperson on a specific
subject, but many other speakers will be spokespeople on those same topics and many
cover multiple subjects and types of proposals through their time in parliament. At the
end of the day the task is not to capture a persons speech pattern, but rather identify what
subject they are talking about.
5.4
Comparing Human and DanSpeech transcriptions
The committee meetings transcribed with DanSpeech, are meant to convey how using
this LDA model trained on parliament data, would perform when applied to DanSpeech
transcriptions. Seeing the distributions of the LDA topics from the committee meetings in
Figure 4.18a and 4.18b, reveals that the two data sets may be slightly different in content.
This can be seen from the fact that the topic distribution differ slightly between the par-
liament data and the committee data. The topic distribution for the large topics are very
much alike, but a difference can be noticed in some of the smaller topics. It is expected
that it is in topics with small word percentages that the topics can change order in which is
the largest, especially since some of the topics’ assigned names coincide with the names
of the committees. These topics and committees (Finance, Employment and Health) all
go above the percentage of tokenized words they were assigned in the parliament set,
which is logical. Those are expected to be important for the classification, and count as a
pseudo-classification already in their own right.
There are some topics that are never assigned to committee meetings. Topic 26 makes
up 0.8% of the words in the parliament data added together, so it is not all that surprising
they it does not occur in the transcripts even though the last Topic 27 does. Presumably
there are women present in these committee meetings that occasionally get named even
if DanSpeech has some troubles understanding named entities. Most of the few times
Topic 27 ”women” is assigned it is usually because of the use of ”fru (mrs.)” (Lemmatized
to ”frue” in the LDA model). Topics that are never assigned provide no information about
the documents for a classifier.
Another thing to notice is that topic 15 ”Questions” continuously obtains higher distribu-
tions rates for the committee data than for the parliament data. This likely has nothing to
do with the specific committees, but rather the fact that they are committees. Which is to
say that this is an area where it can be seen that the parliament hall data is not completely
representative of the committee data, because members of committees talk more about
asking and answering questions. Of course the data set cannot be expected to be com-
pletely representative, but the hope is that they are close enough and that the words are
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
43
==PAGE:54==
connected in the same ways, since those connections are what an LDA model describes.
The fact that the question topic is assigned more for committees should not hinder the
classification.
5.4.1
Quality of the DanSpeech Transcription
The Levenshtein distances and the length of the transcriptions gives a lot of information
about the level of accuracy that can be expected from the DanSpeech transcriptions. In
both the Employment committee and the Finance committee transcription, the discrep-
ancy seems to in large part be caused by the fact that the DanSpeech transcription has
picked up too many words. In contrast the good DanSpeech transcriptions are within 10%
of the word count of the human transcripts. The most likely reason for this is the way that
DanSpeech’ speaker activation function works, which is currently a volume threshold that
needs to be exceeded in order to start transcribing. This means that if the audio features
a loud background that exceeds the volume threshold the transcription would begin even
though no speaking is going on. Reading through the transcripts seems to confirm this
theory, as the extra words are groups of very short hard sounding word added in between
actual speakers. Some examples of these background sentences are ”tak for tak” and
nonsense words such as ”eks” and ”sfor” occurring where there is no speech in the audio.
These specific examples are taken from the employment transcription. Additionally an-
other cause of error is the opposite of that, where a speaker is cut off because their volume
is too low and the transcription stops transcribing them mid-sentence. This is interesting
as it seems to shed some light on how to improve the DanSpeech algorithm. One way
to handle this kind of error could be to introduce normalization of speaking volume into
the DanSpeech algorithm. If something like this was implemented, the DanSpeech al-
gorithm might consistently be around the 30-40% error rate they display in the Defense,
Environment and Health transcription, which is low for automatic Danish transcriptions.
If, despite these transcription errors the embedding still functions, that would really high-
light the usefulness, because searching for a specific word in the text would have a chance
of failing because it is mistranscribed. Searching for a topic in the embedding however
may still be possible from the context of the content.
Naturally errors occur in the human transcripts as well, but considering the scale of error
we assume it is on a much smaller scale than the ∼33%, which is the lowest observed
error rate.
5.4.2
The Committee Topic Space
Based on the visualizations of the Committee meetings in the topic space in Figure 4.19
and Figure 4.20, we can see that the committees seem to be separate clusters in the topic
space. As can be seen in the histograms the groups are largely located in the same areas
on each principal component, and it is close to impossible to distinguish the groups based
a single principal component. However when using multiple principal components it be-
comes much easier. The Employment committee can be isolated based on the 3rd and
4th principal component. The Defense committee can be somewhat isolated based on
the 1st and 2nd principal component. Not all of the committees are that clearly separated
in these four principal components, but they are at least localized in certain areas, even if
they overlap with other clusters. Which should be enough to get a good accuracy in rec-
ognizing the committees. Notice that this is also data with greatly reduced dimensionality,
so they may be even easier to separate than it appears here.
From the comparison between the DanSpeech transcripts and the human transcripts, it
can be seen that the changes to the positions of the topic space is small for most of the
transcriptions, but considering the overlap there is between the clusters, having better
44
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:55==
accuracy would surely help the classification of committees. This because we assume
that the errors resulting from mistranscribed words, pushes it in a random direction, and
therefore is most likely to be harmful, although there is a small chance it could theoret-
ically be randomly helpful. Considering the small size of the observed changes in the
documents it does not seem to be a large issue even when the error percentage is high.
This is likely due to the fact that words that are not in the vocabulary, do not move the
topic distribution for the data because the unknown words are disregarded. Previously
unseen words make the amount of words that the topic distribution is based on smaller.
This causes the model to be more resilient to the transcription errors DanSpeech makes,
than the error simulation by random replacement suggests.
Additionally it can be seen that the transcriptions that are the farthest away is by far the
Employment transcriptions, which also had by far the largest Levenshtein distance error,
but even with the 214% percentage error compared to the human transcript and 33% of
the words transcribed being the actual words in the text, even then it is still in the right place
on the Principal Components although the distance the meeting transcripts are moved in
the topic space could cause misclassification.
5.5
Training an LDA model on the Committee Meetings
The LDA model that most of this thesis is built on, is trained on one data set and then
used on another. This is generally not the most ideal way to use LDA, even though in this
case it works to a satisfactory degree.
There are a couple of reasons for choosing to train on data from one source only to then
use the model on another set of data. The first reason is the lack of data from the commit-
tee meetings. There is however a way to maybe get around this by splitting the committee
meetings into smaller chunks of for example 200 words and making each chunk a docu-
ment for the purposes of training the LDA model on the committee transcripts. With this
method documents would of course become smaller, but by doing that, the proximity of
words in a document would matter more and thus additional information could be gleaned
from it that previously would not be possible due to the bag-of-words nature of the model.
The second reason for not using DanSpeech the committee transcripts to train an LDA
model, is that as proven the DanSpeech transcriptions have errors, and if we assume
those errors to be random, then training on those would add that random noise an addi-
tional time. It would cause the LDA model to have learned the topics based on a data set
with random errors. It would also be added when assigning topics to the noisy DanSpeech
transcriptions as normal. The errors are of course not completely random, and we can
imagine that instead there could be systematic errors in the DanSpeech transcription like
mistranscribing a word the same way every time (E.g. Transcribing ”LAN (LAN)” as ”Land
(Land)”). If that is the case then having the wrong word in the topic model might actually be
beneficial result-wise, or at least not harmful. Although the topic model would not reflect
”true” relations between words, it would reflect the relations in DanSpeech transcriptions.
It does however seem like a stretch to imagine it has a beneficial effect, and on top of that
we have observed that many of the words mistranscribed are nonsense words that do not
mean anything at all.
The human transcription data set are the same speeches transcribed as committee meet-
ings DanSpeech has transcribed, but without the transcription errors. This data set is
even smaller than the DanSpeech transcriptions of the committee meetings, as human
transcriptions are costly and take a lot of time to make. For that reason it cannot be trained
on. Notice also that the transcribed speeches would need to be different from ones that
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
45
==PAGE:56==
are in the DanSpeech data set for testing purposes. Otherwise the experiment with clas-
sifying the DanSpeech transcriptions would use a topic model that is trained on the same
data that later on is to be classified.
5.5.1
Classifying the Committee Meetings
Performing the classification of committee meetings, it quickly became clear that the net-
work would benefit from a larger data set because, this would certainly have produced a
more reliable and likely better results. Still the results were promising with a test accu-
racy of 67%±3.2% for 23 topics. This shows that it is possible to classify the meetings,
although it does not say much about at exactly what number of topics the model performs
best.
The idea behind the experiment, was to test whether the same amount of topics as was
used in the parliament data set to identify speakers, would also be the best solution here.
It is a bit unclear if that is the case when looking at the validation accuracy. It could be
that a smaller amount of topics is better based on these networks still performing well at
lower numbers of topics than for the speaker classification on parliament data. We was
decided to continue with the 27 topic LDA models in the last experiment where there were
more data. This is because it showed the best results on the metrics, although it must be
kept in mind that those metrics were for the parliament hall data set, so it may have some
value to measure the evaluation metrics, especially perplexity, for the models on this new
transcription data set.
5.5.2
Classifying the Chunks of Committee Meetings
Classifying based chunks, rather than classifying entire meetings proved promising. It
showed that despite the topic distributions being based on less words, the fact that there
was more data in the training set improved the accuracy. That means that it is feasible to
classify smaller chunks, and as long as they do not become too small, having those extra
‘documents’ is a benefit. Larger chunk sizes than 1800 words may be even better, as the
graph had not yet peaked. The chunk sizes will eventually decrease as the documents
become the whole DanSpeech meeting transcript, which was shown to perform worse due
to insufficient data points. Splitting the data into chunks cannot make up for having more
data, but as the data needed for this is hard to acquire, this solution performs sufficiently
well that the additional data may not be needed, depending on the desired accuracy. The
limit to how small the chunks can be, also became clear. The practical uses of having
chunks smaller than 200 words is limited as 200 words seems precise enough for em-
bedding and transcription improvement purposes. To give an idea of how few words 200
words are, this subsection is exactly 200 words.
5.5.3
Feasibility of Transcript Classification
The results from transcripts classification show that the committees can be classified from
the DanSpeech transcripts relatively well as long as the data set is not too small. This
is important for embedding purposes. This suggests a potential to build embedding into
DanSpeech, so that when many audio files are transcribed, it would be possible to search
for the a specific subject. If you want to find something about defense in the parliament
data, which is not labeled this could be used to find the places that defense is discussed
even without them explicitly saying ”Forsvar (defense)”, but simply by other topic words
that often come up in those contexts like ”base (base)” and ”F16 (F16)” the network will
figure it out. It is possible that this could be improved upon by splitting the documents
into chunks, in order to give an even more specific idea of where speakers talk about a
given subject in a longer transcription. This would be useful since meetings can be hours
long and may deal with multiple topics. The embedding would then be able to tell exactly
which chunks are related with that specific topic.
46
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:57==
5.6
Other uses of Topic Models
The models developed could be very helpful for both improving the transcripts, by telling
the DanSpeech transcription network which topics are prevalent in a specific document
and what words are then more likely to occur. This allows the algorithm to use that to go
back and reevaluate words that the transcription network was uncertain about with added
knowledge of the LDA model. The LDA model is a model of how likely words are to occur
with the topics that the given document was assigned, so if words are severely out of place
and a similar word has a much higher probability of occurring in the given topics it can be
swapped out. If such a method were to be implemented it would of course need to allow
for a certain chance that words never before seen in a context has a non-zero chance of
being there. For example if we imagine an example where the document was assigned
100% to be the topic with the human-assigned label ”Employment”. If DanSpeech then
transcribed the named entity ”Jesper”, and the LDA model had never seen that semi-rare
name in that context during the training of the LDA model, then the model would say that
”Jesper” had a zero percent chance of occurring because it is not on the list of words in
that topic, which obviously is not true. The inclusion of a clause that ensures that no words
have 0% chance would be beneficial. Named entities and rare words are always hard to
handle, but adding a clause such as this would alleviate some of the problem. The words
that this should help with, should be the words that DanSpeech has a low confidence in
the correctness of.
5.7
Future investigations
This project covers a lot of different topics, methods and investigation results. This chapter
will go over the results that might be worth looking more into and other methods that could
be used to further shed light on the topics.
5.7.1
Replacing LDA with other Methods
The method used in this project is LDA, which is an entirely global model. Which is to say
that it looks purely on the contents of an entire document. It could be interesting to delve
into some methods that takes a local approach as well. There are a few candidates that
come to mind, depending on how the local part of the method should be included.
LDA2Vec is an obvious candidate that may improve the topic modelling of the modelling
and especially the ability of the model to suggest corrections to already transcribed text
from DanSpeech and thus improving the algorithm.
Another way to make a more comprehensive model could be to train a BERT and use it to
model topics or suggest corrections. Training it to understand Danish would of course be
a requirement for the pre-training, unless a pre-trained model could be accessed. Such
Danish BERTs have started to appear as recently as June 2020 [19][20].
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
47
==PAGE:58==
6
Conclusion
We trained an LDA topic model on speeches from the Danish parliament unsupervised. In
order to test whether the LDA model captures inherent connections in the language per-
taining to the use-case of the parliament data, a proxy-test was set up by classifying sim-
ilar committee meetings, which achieved a classification test accuracy of 77.3% on word
chunks of 1800 words. The version that classified entire committee meetings achieved a
test accuracy of 67%, which was lower due to being based on a smaller amount of data.
When building the LDA model, the optimal number of topics was determined according
to the evaluation metrics of perplexity score, coherence score and a metric of proxy-topic
classification accuracy. The proxy-topic detection showed how well a neural network could
classify speeches based on the topic distributions that the LDA model provided. These
three metrics all suggested that the ideal number of topics was in the broad range 21-30
topics and based on the peaks 27 topics were chosen for the model.
We showed that the topics could be perceived coherent from a human perspective even
though the LDA model can work perfectly well without looking meaningful to humans.
We also showed that the NLTK list of stopwords from Natural Language Toolkit seemed
sufficient for the data set, although a few additions could have been considered.
We also performed an investigation into how errors impact the data set as well as the ability
to classify speakers, and determined that with a simple word replacement simulation of
noise in the data, that an error percentage of as little as 4% could severely hinder the ability
to classify speakers based on speeches given, which was one of the evaluation metric for
the model. We conclude that speakers also could not fully represent topics, as speakers
talk about the same topics and their personal language use is not detectable, and what
is detectable is the degree to whih the speakers use formalities. This was the motivation
to continue with the committee meetings, which far better represent how language differs
based on the subject.
Additionally experiments were carried out to determine the degree to which errors can be
expected in Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), which for DanSpeech was found to be
33%-38% of words in the best case scenario and far worse in scenarios where speech
intelligibility was low or there was background noise. This experiment was based on few
data points and requires more data before a clear conclusion can be drawn. Because the
errors from DanSpeech were fed into in the topic model and we have showed that the
model works anyway, we can conclude that the LDA model is not made ineffective by the
fact that transcription errors have changed a third of the words or more.
48
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1] Martin Carsten Nielsen and Rasmus Arpe Fogh Jensen, supervised by Professor Lars Kai
Hansen.
Danspeech.
https://danspeech.github.io/danspeech/html/danspeech.html
[2] Dorte Haltrup Hansen. (2018).
The Danish Parliament Corpus 2009 - 2017, v1.
[https://repository.clarin.dk/repository/xmlui/handle/20.500.12115/8]
[3] T.K. Landauer, P.W. Foltz and D. Laham, (1998).
An introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse processes, 25(2-3), pp.259-284.
//www.researchgate.net/publication/200045222_An_Introduction_to_Latent_Semantic_Analysis.
[4] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng and Michael I. Jordan (2003)
An Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis . Journal of Machine Learning Research 3 (2003)
993-1022
https://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume3/blei03a/blei03a.pdf
[5] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado and Jeffrey Dean, (2013).
Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space
https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.
[6] Christopher Moody (2016).
Mixing Dirichlet Topic Models and Word Embeddings to Make lda2vec
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1605.02019v1.pdf.
[7] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova (2019).
BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf.
[8] Louis Martin, Benjamin Muller, Pedro Javier Ortiz, Suárez, Yoann Dupont, Laurent Romary,
Éric Villemonte de la Clergerie, Djamé Seddah, Benoît Sagot, (2020).
CamemBERT: a Tasty French Language Model
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.03894v3.pdf.
[9] Hang Le, Loïc Vial, Jibril Frej, Vincent Segonne, Maximin Coavoux, Benjamin Lecouteux,
Alexandre Allauzen, Benoît Crabbé, Laurent Besacier, Didier Schwab (2020).
FlauBERT: Unsupervised Language Model Pre-training for French
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1912.05372v4.pdf.
[10] Natural Language Toolkit.
https://www.nltk.org/
[11] Søren Kristiansen. (2011).
Lemmy.
https://github.com/sorenlind/lemmy.
[12] Micheal Röder, Andreas Both and Alexander Hinneburg (2015)
Exploring
the
Space
of
Topic
Coherence
Measures
https://svn.aksw.org/papers/2015/WSDM_Topic_Evaluation/public.pdf
[13] David Mimno, Hanna M. Wallach, Edmund Talley, Miriam Leenders and Andrew McCallum
(2011)
Optimizing Semantic Coherence in Topic Models
http://dirichlet.net/pdf/mimno11optimizing.pdf
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
49
==PAGE:60==
[14] David Newman, Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, and Timothy Baldwin (2010)
Automatic Evaluation of Topic Coherence
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220817098_Automatic_Evaluation_of_Topic_Coherence
[15] Jonatan Chang and Jordan Boyd-Graber. (2009).
Reading Tea Leaves: How Humans Interpret Topic Models
http://users.umiacs.umd.edu/ jbg/docs/nips2009-rtl.pdf
[16] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. (2018).
Visualizing Data using t-SNE.
https://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume9/vandermaaten08a/vandermaaten08a.pdf
[17] N. Aletras and M. Stevenson. (2013)
Evaluating topic coherence using distributional semantics. In Proc. of the 10th Int. Conf. on
Computational Semantics (IWCS’13), pages 13–22, 2013
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-0102.pdf
[18] Folketinget TV.
https://www.ft.dk/aktuelt/webtv
[19] Jens Dahl Møllerhøj (2019) BotXO has trained the most advanced Danish BERT model to
date
https://www.botxo.ai/en/blog/danish-bert-model/
[20] BotXOBERT.
https://github.com/botxo/nordic_bert
50
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:61==
A
The Principal Components
The principal components of the parliament hall data can be visualised as a bar plot,
showing how much impact each of the topics have on the first and second principal com-
ponents.
Figure A.1: This plot shows Principal Component 1, and shows the impact of each topic
on the first principal component.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.2: This plot shows Principal Component 2, and shows the impact of each topic
on the second principal component.
52
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
==PAGE:63==
B
The Data Chunks
B.1
Chunk Sizes
This table shows how many chunks the data set is split into at different chunk sizes. the
committees do not contain the same amount of words on average. Some committees
hold meetings that contain more words.
Chunk Size
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Chunk amount
13172
6712
4561
3483
2833
2416
2091
1866
1696
Table B.1: This table shows the amount of chunks in the entire data set is split into, at a
given chunk size. It shows that even choosing chunk sizes of 1800 still gives many times
the original amount of documents, which was 100.
B.2
Committee Imbalance
This table shows how the committees do not contain the same amount of words on aver-
age. Some committees hold meetings that contain more words.
Committee
Employment
Finance
Defense
Environment
Health
Words Percentage
16.9%
18.2%
18.8%
23.9%
22.1%
Table B.2: The Percentage of words from the DanSpeech transcript corpus that comes
from each of the five committees. This difference is due to some committees’ meetings
on average contain more words than others in the transcribed speech. When splitting into
chunks that could unbalance the data set because chunks are based on length.
Topic Models for Embedding and Improvement of Speech-to-Text Transcriptions
53
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
