==PAGE:1==
 
Master thesis 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
by new forming technologies 
 
 
 
Emil Schock Jonsson 
s134161 
DTU Mechanical Engineering 
21-02-2021 
 
Supervisors: 
Chris Valentin Nielsen 
Marcel Moghadam 
Konstantinos Poulios 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
February 2021 
==PAGE:2==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
Abstract 
 
This paper studies new sheet-bulk forming production processes to form a lightweight symmetric 
gear out of sheet metal to demonstrate the theory in numerical simulations and lab experiments. Only 
the fundamental geometry of the gear is the aim, not the gear teeth and axle interface. The motivation 
behind this study is to analyze the production methods to achieve symmetry in the design of the gear, 
which improves the ability to handle load while maintaining a low weigh. By applying the new sheet-
bulk forming methods, the disadvantages with conventual methods, such as metal casting and -
cutting, are avoided. 
The theory involves qualitative analysis, analytical models, and numerical simulations of the main 
processes in the process chain for producing the symmetric lightweight gear of sheet metal: Deep 
drawing, corner sharpening, shear forging, and upsetting. The symmetric gear design was going to be 
achieved by drawing a cup, sharpen the corners, shearing the sidewall and offsetting the bottom wall 
to the middle of the sidewall, and upsetting the sidewall. The asymmetrical U-sharped cross section 
of the deep drawn cup was going to be formed to a symmetrical H-shaped double cup, which is the 
fundamental geometry of the gear. Simulations of a generic load case showed that the U-shaped 
design had a skewed elastic deformation with a magnitude, that was 1.4 times larger than the H-
shaped design, which made the H-shaped design superior due to a symmetrical deformation and a 
larger contact of the gear tooth. The formed shape and geometry, punch force, failure modes and 
defects were studied, and the theory was used to improve the processes, which were simulated. The 
experimental setup was designed to test the theory with a small suppress placed in a press. The tools 
were designed to the subpress and consisted of a punch assembly; a punch combined with a spring-
loaded counter punch and a structural plate, and a die assembly; a cylindrical die, back punches, and 
a structural plate. Some parts were used for multiple processes, and some were unique to the process. 
The results from the experiments showed that processes were successful in forming the fundamental 
geometry of the gear, but there were some unwanted deformations and small defects. The deep 
drawing process formed a flat circular blank to a cup with 7-17 % difference in the sidewall thickness, 
which was acceptable. The corner sharpening process produced a fully formed sharp corners, and the 
sidewalls was almost fully formed. The shear forging had a clean sharp cut in the sidewall and offset 
the bottom wall of the cup upwards by 4 mm with a 0.1 mm accuracy on average. A minor crack 
formation was discovered on the other side of the offset bottom wall, and it was assumed to be caused 
by the material flow of the process. There was not discovered a sinking defect that was supported by 
the theory, but a ring-shaped thickening was formed on the offset bottom wall, which the simulations 
did not show. The upsetting process formed the sidewall to a certain degree, where the upper part of 
the sidewall was almost fully formed, and the bottom part was less formed. The degree by which the 
sidewall was formed was limited by the max. punch force of the press, but the difference between the 
top- and bottom part of the sidewall was caused by a tool concept with an unbalanced material flow, 
that was a simplification of the original concept with a balanced flow. An additional minor crack 
formation was observed in one of the inside corners of the H-shaped cup, which was assumed to be 
caused by the simplified tool concept, as well. 
 
==PAGE:3==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
Preface 
 
 
This report investigates how new sheet-bulk forming production processes can be applied to form a 
lightweight symmetric gear out of sheet metal. The aim is to analyze the processes and form the 
fundamental geometry of the gear, without gear teeth and interface for the axle. Lab experiments are 
made to investigate the processes, where DTU Lyngby has provided a lab with a 15-ton press, deep 
drawing tools, a subpress, sheet metal and manufacturing of tools designed for the lab experiments. 
The supervisors at DTU Lyngby provided guidance with the theoretical material, simulations, and 
practical knowledge in the lab. DTU Lyngby and the involved personal is thanked for their 
contribution to the project. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
Nomenclature 
 
 
bottom wall ― the horizontal disc-shaped wall in the bottom of the gear/cup 
middle wall ― the horizontal disc-shaped wall in the middle of the gear/cup 
sidewall ― the vertical cylindrical wall on the periphery of the gear/cup 
min. ― minimum 
max. ― maximum 
𝑡𝑐 ― middle wall thickness 
𝑡𝑢 ― upper sidewall thickness 
𝑡𝑙 ― lower sidewall thickness 
𝑡0 ― depth of cut in shear forging  
ℎ0 ― initial cup height 
ℎ1 ― final cup/gear height 
ℎ𝑢 ― upper sidewall inner height 
ℎ𝑙 ― lower sidewall inner height 
𝑟𝑖 ― inner radius 
𝑟𝑜 ― outer radius 
𝜎𝑒𝑞 ― equivalent/yield stress 
𝜀𝑒𝑞 ― equivalent stress 
mm ― millimeter 
kN ― kilonewton 
MPa ― megapascal 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
List of content 
 
 
Abstract 
Preface 
Nomenclature 
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
1 
2. Problem definition 
 
 
 
3 
 
2.1 Problem statement 
 
 
3 
 
2.2 Problem delineation 
 
 
3 
3. Background 
 
 
 
5 
3.1 Symmetric gear 
 
 
5 
3.2 Process chain 
 
 
6 
4. Theoretical model and numerical simulation 
 
8 
4.1 Deep drawing with a tractrix die 
 
8 
4.2 Corner sharpening of cup  
 
10 
4.3 Shear forging of cup bottom wall 
 
14 
4.4 Upsetting of cup sidewall  
 
19 
4.5 Load case analysis 
 
 
22 
5. Experimental setup and procedure 
 
 
29 
 
5.1 Sheet material 
 
 
29 
 
5.2 Equipment 
 
 
30 
 
5.3 Tool design and construction 
 
31 
 
5.4 Experimental procedure   
 
37 
 
6. Experimental results and analysis 
 
 
44 
 
6.1 Tensile test 
 
 
44 
6.2 Deep drawing 
 
 
46 
6.3 Corner sharpening 
 
 
48 
6.4 Shear forging 
 
 
52 
6.5 Upsetting  
 
 
55 
7. Discussion of results 
 
 
 
58 
 
7.1 Sources of error 
 
 
58 
 
7.2 Discussion 
 
 
59 
8. Conclusion  
 
 
 
62 
9. Further investigation 
 
 
 
64 
10. Appendix  
 
 
 
66 
 
==PAGE:6==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
Gears are a vital part of many mechanical systems in products that are important for many peoples’ 
lives daily. Lightweight gears are often found in mobile products as in transportation, where weight 
is minimized for better performance and reduced energy consumption. Regulations on emissions from 
governments and competition between companies push for better efficiency of transportation 
vehicles, and markets demand it at the lowest price. The evolution of the combustion engine to meet 
emission legislation has developed smaller and smaller engines with the same power output, and the 
development of automobile components are focusing on efficiency. Electric cars have made an entry 
in society, and their battery pack is often heavy to meet the customers’ demand of large range between 
charging. Cars are safer than ever, but some of the cost is paid in extra material to strengthen load 
carrying elements, which increases the total weight of the vehicle. Lightweight components as gears, 
fits well with the current climate in the automobile industry, but it is highly useful in other industries, 
as well, where the combination of high loads and weight is a design criterion, as in aviation and 
aerospace. 
Conventional production methods of gears include metal casting and -cutting. The two production 
methods can produce relatively complex shapes, as lightweight gears wheels, which have made them 
the process of choice for many gear manufactures. The disadvantage with casting of different kind is, 
that they can have long process time, due to cooling time and heat treatment of workpieces afterwards. 
Metal cutting or machining can have long process time, as well, and the material waste is high. The 
cutting processes create tool wear due to high contact stresses with the workpiece, and high-grade 
tool materials are needed, which are expensive. The disadvantages have driven the developments of 
alternative production process and designs: Multi-component gearwheels are designed, where the 
gear is divided in two parts; the gear body and the gear teeth in a ring, which are joined together with 
a press fit. The gear body can either be made of a single bended piece of sheet metal or multiple flat 
layers with cutouts to save weight, Tim Benkert et al 2017 and 2018. A resent method is additive 
manufacturing by 3D-metal printing, which can produce very complex shapes, but the production 
time is long, and internal stresses tend to generate during the build process. 3D-metal printing is 
mainly used in prototyping as repeatability is an issue, Ester et al 2019. Complex methods are 
proposed, as multistage sheet-bulk forming process using oscillating tools to improve process 
efficiency in manufacturing of asymmetric gears, Behrens et al 2019. 
The report will investigate new sheet-bulk forming processes, that achieves a symmetric gear design. 
It is processes where conventional bulk forming methods are applied to sheet metal, and the forming 
is done cold. The specific process that is responsible for the symmetric shape is called shear forging, 
which forms a standard U-shaped cup into a H-shaped cup. It is a recent developed method that 
combines cutting and shearing, and it can be described as continuously metal cutting, where the ‘chip’ 
is formed, as well. The method is an attempt to reduce forging load and tool pressure, which is smaller 
than half the plasticity coefficient. The method is not without side effects, and the most prominent 
one is the sinking defect. It can be avoided when the ratio of the depth of cut of the tool is larger than 
a critical value, which is depending on the inner corner radius on the cup, Wang et al 2019. The 
smaller the radius, the larger chance of a successful shear forging. Deep drawing is the most common 
process to make a cup out of sheet metal, and its corner radius is often large to avoid bottom fracture. 
==PAGE:7==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
2 
 
The cup’s corner needs to be sharp in order for the shear forging to work properly, which introduces 
the forming method, corner sharpening. There are many ways to sharpen a corner of a cup, and the 
chosen method involve upsetting. The process is commonly used in bulk forming, but when it is 
applied to the edge of the sheet metal, then the risks of odd behavior increase, and it demands high 
levels of control of the process. Upsetting is also the method by which the gear teeth are formed, 
which is a subject that is not included in the report, but the method is investigated with a more 
simplistic tool geometry, as a benchmark for further studies. 
 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
3 
 
2. Problem definition 
 
 
2.1 Problem statement 
 
There are advantages to manufacturing lightweight gear wheels with forming methods in a 
combination with sheet metal over the conventional methods of metal casting and cutting. The most 
important advantages are less tool wear, less production time and material saving. The conventional 
sheet forming methods that are used to this date produce asymmetric designs, which have negative 
consequences for the deformation of the gear wheel under load. New production methods that use 
sheet-bulk forming methods have been formulated to achieve a more symmetric design, while 
maintaining the benefits of conventional sheet forming. 
How are the sheet-bulk forming production processes analyzed to form a lightweight symmetric gear 
out of sheet metal? 
 
Sub statements: 
❖ How are the production processes analyzed theoretically? 
o Which analytical models are applied? 
o Which numerical models are applied? 
❖ How is the new gear design analyzed? 
❖ How are the production processes analyzed experimentally? 
o How is the experimental setup designed? 
▪ How are the tools designed? 
o How are the experiments conducted? 
❖ How are the results evaluated? 
 
 
2.2 Problem delineation 
 
In this report, it has not been investigated how to form gear teeth on the gear wheel because the focus 
was on the four main processes in the process chain of the gear, and gear teeth was a distinguishable 
part of the fourth process, which there was not time to investigate. Gear teeth has the purpose of being 
the contact surface between two gear wheels, and they have high and precise requirements of stiffness 
and hardness to be able to function properly. There are certain standards and formulas used when 
designing the shape of a gear tooth, and they consider, e.g., the specific load requirements and gear 
life under certain conditions. The gear teeth are often designed for a specific application, and the tooth 
shape matches the demands of the application. The rest of the construction of gear wheels has the 
purpose of transferring the forces from the gear tooth to the axel in the center of the gear wheel. It is 
not investigated how the axel-to-gear interface should be produced, as it is application dependent as 
==PAGE:9==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
4 
 
well. The shape and the material of the gear wheel construction determine whether it can deliver the 
required load, and there are multiple ways to achieve this. The differences in design purpose between 
the gear teeth and the rest of the construction of the gear wheel made it possible to separate the 
investigation of the production processes of each part. 
The individual processes in the report can be important parts of a process chain optimized for mass 
production, but this is not investigated because the requirements are different from those of a pilot 
project, which the project would be described as. In a mass production, the production time and 
scalability of the processes, among other factors, are in focus, and it requires almost the same 
equipment, materials, and conditions in a mass production. The final process investigated in the 
report, upsetting, was not done with a double flow direction, which would have been used in a mass 
production. It would either require a double ram press or a subpress that could produce a balanced 
forward- and backward flow on a single ram press, and neither was possible due to the financial 
constraints and the timeframe of the project. The most common material used in gear wheels is steel, 
but aluminum is used in this report because the lower forces required to form the material made it 
easier to work with the equipment available. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
5 
 
3. Background 
 
 
The chapter introduces the design of the symmetric gear wheel that is achieve through new sheet-
bulk forming production methods in section 3.1. All the production methods are presented in section 
3.2, and they are arranged in a process chain. 
 
 
3.1 Symmetric gear 
 
The design of gears is many and diverse, but symmetry is often essential to their function in 
complicated systems, where the balance of forces and the weight of the gear are crucial. Asymmetrical 
gears can work in systems of axles and gears, but in many cases, they are inefficient and a 
compromise. Nearly every design that is rooted in reality, has compromises and they are often a 
product of its application and/or the production method. The application for the lightweight gear is 
not specifically defined in the report, and its utility is assumed to be broad in applications where 
performance characteristics combine strength and weight saving at same time. The design is mainly 
limited by the sheet metal and the production processes. 
 
Fig. 3.1 – 3D rendering of symmetric gear wheel with a cutout 
The current vision for the gear is modelled in Fig. 3.1, where the profile of the cross section forms an 
H-shape, and the middle wall is centered on the sidewall. On the outside of the sidewall there are 
room for different types and sizes of gear teeth, while the sidewall preserves a certain thickness and 
rigidity. The gear teeth are formed with the same processes used in the forming of the rest of the 
geometry. In the center of the middle wall, a hole is made for an axle, where there are opportunities 
for many different types of interfaces, and different production methods to achieve it. A punch of the 
desired interface could shear through the middle wall in the center, while the middle wall was 
supported from the other side. It would work best for low thicknesses of the middle wall. Given its 
symmetrical H-shape, the stresses are assumed to distribute symmetrically and the elastic 
deformations will too. 
==PAGE:11==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
6 
 
 
Fig. 3.2 – 3D rendering of the fundamental geometry of gear wheel with a cutout 
The process presented in report will form a sheet metal into the fundamental geometry of the gear 
wheel in Fig. 3.2, without the teeth on the outside of the sidewall and the hole for axle in the center. 
The lower sidewall thickness is slightly lower than the upper, and it is the main compromise of the 
design in terms of shape, which is caused by the production processes. 
 
 
3.2 Process chain 
 
The sheet-bulk forming process, which are investigated in the report, are conventional bulk forming 
methods applied on sheet metal. The main classes in metal forming from DIN 8582, Merklein et al 
2012: 
1) Compressive forming 
2) Combined tensile and compressive forming 
3) Tensile forming 
4) Forming by bending 
5) Forming by shearing 
In the project, 1) compressive forming will be used by closed-die-forming, 2) combined tensile and 
compressive forming by deep drawing, and 5) shearing in a combination with forging.  
 
Fig. 3.2 – Process chain to produce symmetric geometry 
The process chain in Fig. 3.2 is a modified version of a process chain from Þorleifsson et al 2020, 
and it contains the processes needed to form the fundamental geometry of the gear. The first process 
is deep drawing a cup with a circular blank of the sheet metal. The process is common starting point 
for many process chains for many different products. Deep drawn cups have typically a less regular 
top part due to planar anisotropy, which is not suitable for next processes. The top part is cut off with 
a turning process, where a cylinder is inserted in the cup to support the sidewall, as it is tightened. 
After the cutting process, the top surface of the sidewall is flat, and the bottom part is regular with a 
rounding from the deep drawing punch. The radius on the rounding is reduced in the corner 
sharpening process, by upsetting the sidewall from the top, and increasing its thickness. The thicker 
sidewall is necessary for the shear forging process, where some of the sidewall is sheared to offset 
Deep drawing 
a cup
Cutting top 
off the cup
Corner 
sharpening
Shear forging 
of cup
Upsetting of 
cup sidewall
==PAGE:12==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
7 
 
the bottom wall to the middle of the sidewall and changing the cross section of the U-shape to the H-
shape. In the last process in the process chain, the sidewall is upset to a straight horizontal wall. The 
gear teeth would be formed in the upsetting process, as well, but it is not a part of the report. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
8 
 
4. Theoretical model and numerical simulation 
 
 
In this chapter, calculations and simulations are described to analyze the processes with their effect 
on the workpiece to achieve the desired shape. The typical failure modes associated with each process 
is outlined, and methods to avoid them are discussed. In section 4.1, the process of deep drawing of 
a cup with a tractrix die is analyzed. In sections 4.2-4.4, the next three process, corner sharpening, 
shear forging, and upsetting, are analyzed with numerical simulations because they are specialized. 
In section 4.5, a typical load case simulation was done of the final geometry of the gear and alternative 
geometries with the purpose of comparing stresses and deformation. 
 
4.1 Deep drawing with a tractrix die 
 
The first process in the process chain of forming the symmetric gear is the deep drawing of a circular 
blank of sheet metal to form a cup. In this section the characteristics of the process will be discussed 
as well as how it effects the resulting geometry of the cup. A tractrix die was used instead of a 
conventional die, which is explained in subsection 5.4.4, and calculations of punch force for tractrix 
dies are uncommon and will not be attempted in this section. 
 
Fig. 4.1 – Stress distribution in different parts of the deep drawn cup, Bay et al 2020 p. 195. 
In deep drawing, the thickness can be difficult to control precisely due to different stresses in different 
parts of the cup in Fig. 4.1. The bottom wall of the cup is under balanced biaxial stretching where the 
radial stress, 𝜎𝑟, and hoop stress, 𝜎𝜃, are equal. In the sidewall of the cup, the radial stress is nearly 
the same as in the bottom wall, but the hoop stress decreases. On drawing die the sheet only 
experiences radial stress, and the thickness grows as the flange are being drawn to a smaller radius. 
The thinnest point on the cup is the bottom wall due to high stress, and the thickness will increase in 
the height direction of the cup. The inner rounding was assumed to be close to the rounding of the 
==PAGE:14==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
9 
 
deep drawing punch, at a radius 𝑟𝑖= 5 mm, and the outside radius would be close to 𝑟𝑜= 7 mm 
given the sheet thickness of 2 mm. 
 
Fig. 4.2 – Deep drawing process tractrix die without blank holder, Bay et al 2020 p. 185. 
The tractrix die is named after the curve of the same name, which is the die profile seen from a cross-
sectional view in Fig. 4.2. The die is deeper than a conventional deep drawing die, making the stroke 
longer, and a longer punch is needed. The longer stroke subpresses radial changes, as described above, 
in the cup, which conventional dies are subjected to. Each die is specially designed for a specific 
blank diameter, and in this report 𝐷0 = 75 mm. With the punch diameter, 𝑑𝑝= 35.72 mm, and sheet 
thickness, which is equal to the blank thickness, 𝑡0 = 2, the drawing ratio, 𝛽, and the relation 𝑑𝑝/𝑡0 
can be calculated: 
 𝛽= 𝐷0
𝑑𝑝
= 75.00 mm
35.72 mm ≈2.10 
𝑑𝑝
𝑡0
= 35.72 mm
2.00 mm = 17.86 
 
Fig. 4.3 – A process window in deep drawing in tractrix die Bay et al 2020, p. 185. 
The process in Fig. 4.3 is material dependent and is not necessarily representing the chosen sheet 
material in the report, Alu 1050A. If the drawing ratio becomes too large, the bottom wall will fracture 
==PAGE:15==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
10 
 
and if it becomes too low, the bottom will fold and dent. The 
𝑑𝑝
𝑡0-ratio can only become too large and 
if it does, the top edge will fold. The development of ‘ears’, which are irregularities on the top of the 
cup are caused by planar anisotropy in the sheet material. 
 
Fig. 4.4 – Geometry of cup after deep drawing with nominal dimensions. 
The geometry of the cup after the deep drawing process and with the top cut off was assumed to be 
as in Fig. 4.4. The height of cup was controllable to the tolerance of the turning process that was used, 
and it was set to ℎ= 20 mm ± 1 mm, Appendix: E. 
 
 
4.2 Corner sharpening of cup 
 
In this section, the process to reduce the inside and outside corner radius will be analyzed. The goal 
was to find and test the method in a numerical simulation that reduced the inner cup radius, 𝑟𝑖, to the 
chosen punch radius, 𝑟𝑖= 𝑟𝑝, and reduced the outer cup radius to a minimum, 𝑟𝑜→0. 
 
Fig. 4.5 – Geometry of cup after deep drawing, Þorleifsson et al 2020 p. 6. 
There were considered different methods to sharpen the corners: In the Fig 4.5, a cross section of the 
process was illustrated where the cup material was pushed into the corner of the matrix while a 
==PAGE:16==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
11 
 
counter punch pushed bottom of the cup down against the bottom of the matrix. The inside corner 
was assumed to be 𝑟𝑖= 0.5 mm and the outside radius was 𝑟𝑜= 𝑟𝑚= 2.5 mm, where 𝑟𝑚 was the 
rounding radius of the die. The simulations in Þorleifsson et al 2020 p. 6, showed that the corner 
formed nicely, although it was not pushed all the way into the corner in the matrix, and the radii were 
thus larger than specified above. On that basis it was not considered to be an ideal method to pursue. 
 
Fig. 4.6 – Geometry of cup after deep drawing, João et al 2019 p. 6. 
In João et al 2019, the method of sheet-bulk forming was used to sharpen the corner by increasing 
the cup wall thickness with a combined bending and upsetting process. There are different failure 
modes associated with using sheet-bulk forging on a long and slender cup wall. In Fig 4.6 (a), the 
ideal process is illustrated with homogeneous thickening of the cup wall to fill up the gap to the die. 
The typical failure modes were buckling in Fig 4.6 (b) and folding in Fig 4.6 (c). Buckling typically 
occurs when the cup ratio between the die gap thickness and the cup wall thickness becomes too 
large, and folding can occur after buckling has begun or because of inhomogeneous thickening. 
 
Fig. 4.7 – Geometry of cup after deep drawing João et al 2019, p. 6. 
The use of a hydraulic die pressure on the outside of the cup in Fig. 4.7 (a) could prevent the failure 
modes discussed above, but the die design would need to be complex because of high demands for 
sealing. The conventional die design in Fig. 4.7 (b) had rigid parts and a gap between it and the outside 
of the cup wall. This design was prone to the failure modes mentioned above, but despite this the 
requirements for the design was much lower compared with the hydraulic die. 
The geometry of the cup after deep drawing in Fig. 4.4 and the geometry of the tools were modelled 
in the software LS Dyna that was used in the all of the process simulation. The software was highly 
==PAGE:17==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
12 
 
able to deal with the plastic deformation that was required in the simulations because of the many 
parameters that was programable. 
 
Fig. 4.8 – Beginning (left) and end (right) of corner sharpening process simulation. 
The simulation of the corner sharpening process in Fig. 4.8 was the last version where the geometry 
and the mesh had been optimized. Earlier versions were made with the time in mind to efficiently 
design the tools for the experiments. Because of axis of symmetry the analysis of all processes could 
be made in 2D, which reduced the number of elements and computational time substantially. The 
punch (green), the counter punch (blue), and the die (yellow) were assumed rigid, and the meshes 
were coarse: 1-2 mm in element size but finer in the R0.5 rounding on the counterpunch. The cup 
(brown) was meshed with an element size of 0.1 mm for better resolution of the material behavior 
through the process and the final shape. The cup material followed the Hollomon curve 𝜎𝑒𝑞=
𝐶𝜀𝑒𝑞𝑛= 113.7𝜀𝑒𝑞0.04 obtained from the tensile test results in section 6.1. The friction in the contacts 
followed Coulomb’s static friction model and was chosen as 𝜇𝑠= 0.1 and the dynamic friction 𝜇𝑑=
0. The punch was programmed to move downwards with a velocity of 𝑣𝑝= 0.1 mm/𝑠, at punch 
travel 𝑋= 10 mm, to be certain that the process was complete. The force of the counter punch was 
chosen to be delivered by a spring. The movement of the counter punch simulated the spring with a 
spring rate 𝑆𝑅= 1,150 N/mm, acting on the counter punch. The starting position for the counter 
punch was 5 mm from the bottom of the cup, which meant, theoretically, that the deformation of the 
spring would start at punch travel 𝑋= 5 mm. However, the simulation showed that the bottom of the 
cup bended upwards and pushed against the counter punch starting from around 𝑋= 1.5 mm, and 
the counter punch would realistically push back with a force equal to the deformation of the spring. 
It was simplified to a linear increasing force curve from counter punch force 𝐹𝑐𝑝= 0 at 𝑋= 0 to 
𝐹𝑐𝑝= 𝑆𝑅∙(𝑋−5) = 5750 𝑁 for 𝑋= 10 mm. The counter punch force was 𝐹𝑐𝑝≈3,301 𝑁 for 𝑋=
7.87 mm, where the shape of the cup was complete in Fig. 4.8 (right). 
Fig. 4.8 shows that the cup formed homogeneously from a height of ℎ0 = 20 mm to ℎ1 = 12.13 mm. 
The inside and the outside corner was closed without signs of folding or other failure modes. The 
bottom wall was reasonably flat while keeping its original thickness, but it had a slightly bulged 
==PAGE:18==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
13 
 
shape, which indicated that the counter punch force was not ideal. When the simulation ran past 𝑋=
7.87 mm, the bottom wall became flatter due to a combination of thickening and increasing counter 
punch force. Through several simulations, it was found that the max. increase in sidewall thickness 
that avoided failure modes as buckling and folding was 30% from 2.0 to 2.6 mm. 
 
Fig. 4.9 – Corner sharpening simulation at punch travel 𝑋= 4.0 mm. 
Up until halfway through the process, the general wall thickness remained relatively uniform, and the 
deformation could be described as majorly bending. In the second half of the process, the sidewall 
bended slightly and rested against the die on Fig. 4.9, and the thickness started to increase and transit 
to the upsetting phase. At punch travel 𝑋= 7.0 mm, the sidewall had been upset to the max. 
thickness, 𝑡1 = 2.6 mm, but the corners were not sharp yet. From 𝑋= 7.0 mm to 𝑋= 7.87 mm, the 
cup material flowed into the inside and outside corner simultaneously without indication of folding, 
making the corners sharp and filling the last vacant space in the matrix. To push beyond 𝑋=
7.87 mm, lead to thickening of the bottom wall, as the punch overpowered the counterpunch.  
==PAGE:19==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
14 
 
 
Fig. 4.10 – Punch force in corner sharpening simulation. 
The punch force data in Fig. 4.10 was extracted from the simulation and plotted as a function of the 
punch travel in Excel. The curve rose relatively linearly with minor fluctuations through the first part 
of the process between 𝑋= 0 mm to 𝑋= 4.0 mm, where the sheet was pronominally subjected to 
bending deformation. In the second part of the process, the sheet thickness increased in the sidewall 
by upsetting between 𝑋= 4.0 mm to the end. At 𝑋≈7.0 mm there was an abrupt rise in the punch 
force from 𝐹𝑝= 40 kN, and it rose exponentially as the final wall thickness, 𝑡1, was reached, and 
material flowed into the corners. When the outside corner of the cup filled, the counter punch pressed 
the bottom wall down against the matrix. The max. punch force 𝐹𝑝,𝑚𝑎𝑥= 209 kN was reached at 𝑋=
7.87 mm. 
 
 
4.3 Shear forging of cup sidewall 
 
In this section, the process methods that will make the gear design symmetric will be described and 
applied in a simulation of the process. To achieve symmetry in the cross-sectional plane of the 
sharpened cup shape in Fig. 4.8 (right), the bottom wall must be moved to the middle of the sidewall 
to form an H-shaped cup. The forming method of the shear forging is used in Wang et al 2019 to 
move the bottom wall of a cup with sharp corners. The process is a combination of shearing, in which 
metal is separated between the two cutting tools, and metal cutting, in which the bottom wall is 
essentially the chip. The chip is continuous through the process, and material will move from inside 
of the sidewall to the middle wall. 
==PAGE:20==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
15 
 
 
  
(a)  
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
Fig. 4.11 – The two methods that shear forging is combined of (a, b) and the tool concept (c), Wang et al 2019. 
In shearing in Fig. 4.11 (a), the shear deformation takes place on the line between A and B on the 
cutting edges on the tools. In metal cutting, the shear deformation takes place in the shearing zone 
AB in Fig. 4.11 (b). In Fig. 4.11 (c), the tool concept is illustrated with the punch as the cutting tool, 
the counter punch as the tool that provides the back pressure on the middle wall, and the die that 
supports the sidewall and the top of the cup in this example. The counter punch pushes with a small 
force, 𝐹𝑏, compared with the punch force, against the middle wall to avoid irregular deformation. 
Assuming volume constancy of the workpiece, then the removed material from the sidewalls is 
transported to the middle wall and contributes to an unavoidable thickening. 
The failure mode most associated with shear forging is the generation of sinking of the upper surface 
of the middle wall at the corner with the sidewall. Sinking occurs around the corner of the counter 
punch due to shortage of material if the corner radius is too large. 
 
Fig. 4.12 – Shear forging process window with sinking, Wang et al 2019. 
The material model differed from Fig. 4.12, but it served as an early predicter of the risk of sinking 
occurring in the simulations and later in the experiments. The ratio between the back pressure from 
the counter punch and the material constant, 𝐶, in this report was estimated to be 
𝑝𝑏
𝐶= 0.025 at punch 
travel 𝑋= 0 mm, and 
𝑝𝑏
𝐶= 0.058 at the end of the process 𝑋= 3.7 mm, which is within or slightly 
over the range 0.005-0.05 in Wang et al 2019. The coefficient of friction with the punch, 𝜇𝑝, and the 
sheet thickness of the bottom wall, 𝑡𝑐0, was estimated to be the same. The ratio between the depth of 
cut and the sheet thickness of the bottom wall is 
𝑡0
𝑡𝑐0 = tan(𝜑), where 𝜑 is the cutting angle in Fig 
4.11 (c). The minimum 
𝑡0
𝑡𝑐0-ratio to avoid sinking is given by Wang et al 2019: 
𝑡0
𝑡𝑐0
= 0.068 ∙𝑟𝑐𝑝+ 0.22   for 𝑟𝑐𝑝< 3.2 mm 
==PAGE:21==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
16 
 
𝑡0
𝑡𝑐0
= 0.560   when 𝑟𝑐𝑝= 0.5 mm 
It was decided to investigate the relation between the depth of cut, 𝑡0, and the sinking failure mode 
for 𝑡0 = {0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.3} mm, which gave the ratios, 
𝑡0
𝑡𝑐0 = {0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.65}, that were within the 
process window of the shear forging process in Fig. 4.12.  
 
 
Fig. 4.13 – Beginning (left) and end (right) of shear forging simulation at depth of cut 𝑡0 = 0.6 mm. 
In Fig. 4.13 the punch (yellow) and the counter punch (blue) were assumed rigid and moving 
downwards. The die (green) was static and assumed rigid, and the meshes were similar to the corner 
sharpening simulation in section 4.2. The back punch (brown) was static and assumed rigid, but it 
was meshed with element size 0.2 mm to have a small element size R0.1 on its rounding, without a 
too large difference in element size. The cup (red) was meshed with element size 0.1 mm because the 
previous process showed the utility for the same element size. The friction model for the contacts 
between the workpiece and the tools was unchained from the previous process. The punch was moved 
downwards at 𝑋= 5 mm with a velocity 𝑣𝑝= 0,1 mm/s. The counter punch simulated the same 
spring rate as the corner sharpening process, but it was adjusted to the new punch travel. In subsection 
5.2.3, it was explained that the punch and counterpunch were reused from the corner sharpening 
process, which meant that the deformation of the spring started where the previous process stopped. 
The counter punch force curve in the shear forging simulation was 𝐹𝑐𝑝= 3,301 N at 𝑋= 0 to 𝐹𝑐𝑝=
𝑆𝑅∙𝑋+ 3,301 N = 9,051 N at 𝑋= 5 mm. The counter punch force was 𝐹𝑐𝑝= 7,556 N at 𝑋=
3.7 mm, where the cup shape was complete in Fig. 4.13. 
Fig. 4.13 shows that the shearing of the cup material, with a reduction to the depth of cut 𝑡0 =
0.6 mm, was a clean cut and moved the bottom 4.0 mm. The inner lower wall that had been sheared 
was vertically straight, and the bottom of the wall was horizontally straight. There was no significant 
sinking effect visible throughout the process and beyond to 𝑋= 5 mm. The middle wall, the bottom 
wall before the process, was thickened by 10.0% from 𝑡𝑐0 = 2.00 mm to max. 𝑡𝑐1 = 2.20 mm at 
𝑋= 3.70 mm, which increased with the punch travel. The height of the cup was increased to ℎ1 =
12.4 mm. 
==PAGE:22==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
17 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.14 – Shear forging simulation at 𝑡0 = 0.8 mm (left) and 𝑡0 = 1.0 mm (right). 
Fig. 4.14 shows a similar clean cut in the shearing of the cup material for both depth of cut 𝑡0 =
0.8 mm and 𝑡0 = 1.0 mm. The inside of the lower wall was vertically straight, and the middle wall 
was horizontally straight in both depths of cut. The sinking effect was not visible though the process 
and beyond the punch travel of 𝑋= 3.70 mm. The middle wall thickened 12.5% to 𝑡1 = 2.25 mm 
with lower sidewall thickness 𝑡𝑐0 = 0.8 mm, and 12% to 𝑡𝑐1 = 2.30 mm with a lower sidewall 
thickness 𝑡0 = 1.0 mm. 
 
Fig. 4.15 – Shear forging simulation at depth of cut 𝑡0 = 1.3 mm. 
Fig. 4.15 shows a less clean cut in the shearing of the inner sidewall with a depth of cut 𝑡0 = 1.3 mm, 
compared with the simulations with smaller depth of cut. The inner lower wall is less vertically 
straight, and the bottom of the wall is not horizontally straight compared with the other simulations. 
The lower sidewall is slightly bent or curled, and the outside wall is not in contact with the die. It was 
assumed that the deformation was cause by a combination of shear and compression instead of only 
pure shear, and the compression made the sidewall curl. The sinking effect was not present through 
the process, and it did not occur beyond 𝑋= 3.7 mm. The thickening of the middle wall was 19.5% 
to 𝑡𝑐= 2.39 mm, which increased with the punch travel. 
The shear forging simulations showed that shearing of the cup material was a clean cut, especially 
for the smaller depths of cut. The lower sidewall was vertically straight with the smaller depth of cut, 
but the with 𝑡0 = 1.3 mm it was slightly bent due to an assumed instability caused by a stiffness that 
==PAGE:23==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
18 
 
was too low. The sinking defect was only present in earlier less refined versions of the simulations in 
𝑡0 = 0.6 mm, but not in the final versions in this report. The thickening of the middle wall increased 
with smaller reduced thickness, which supported the theory of volume constancy; material that was 
removed from the sidewall increased the thickness of the middle wall. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.16 – Punch force with different lower wall thickness, 𝑡𝑙, in shear forging simulation. 
The punch force is plotted on Fig. 4.16 for the four depths of cut and shows a drastic rise in the first 
0.5 mm of the punch travel. The max. value, in the middle of the distribution, is reached within 1 
mm punch travel: 𝐹𝑝,𝑚𝑎𝑥≈{60, 70, 80, 95} kN at 𝑋= {0.5, 0.5, 0.25, 1.0} mm. The punch force 
levels out and follows approximately a slightly decreasing linear curve until the end of the process. 
The punch force increases with the increase in the depth of cut, 𝑡0. The larger depth of cut, 𝑡0, the 
longer the shear deformation line in Fig. 4.11 becomes when the sheet thickness of the middle wall, 
𝑡𝑐, is the same. The larger deformation zone around the shear deformation line requires more 
pressure to become plastic, and the punch force rises as a result. The linearly decreasing punch 
force over the time of the process can be explained by the linearly increasing counter punch force 
that improves the cutting process by stabilization. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
19 
 
4.4 Upsetting of sidewall 
 
The last process in the process chain to form the symmetric gear is the upsetting of the sidewall in 
the H-shaped cup, from the shear forging process, to increase stiffness and eventually form gear 
teeth. This section and the rest of the report will only focus on the upsetting of the sidewall to a 
horizontally straight wall without gear teeth. The simpler design of the gear in this report compared 
to the finished design is an important benchmark, which must be successfully reached to continue 
with more complicated designs. 
 
Fig. 4.17 – Upsetting process- and tool concept of H-shaped cup 7. Þorleifsson et al 2020. 
In Fig. 4.17, the symmetric tool concept is illustrated with the upsetting punch (1), the counter 
punch that provides the pressure on the middle wall (2), the H-shaped cup (3), and the die (4) that 
supports the sidewall. The concept was found to be the optimal method to increase the sidewall 
thickness as it had a symmetrical approach to the symmetrical H-shaped cup. To realize the tool 
concept, it would either require a double ram press or a balanced forward and backward flow on a 
single ram press, Nielsen et al 2020. The equipment that was available for this project was a single 
ram press, and with the limitations of the project in terms of funding and time, it was not possible to 
use a balanced forward and backward flow subpress. The optimal solution within the limitations of 
the project was a single flow process in which only the top punch and counter punch was travelling 
downwards, and the bottom punch and counter punch was stationary. In this way, the bottom parts 
became parts of the matrix along with the die, and they could be treated as such in the simulations 
of the process. Treating the bottom part of the tool as a matrix, it was shaped to the desired 
geometry of the final upset H-shaped cup. The changes to the tool concept would undoubtedly 
influence the material flow, and the representation of the original process in Fig. 4.17 is discussed 
in section 7.2. 
==PAGE:25==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
20 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.18 – Beginning (left), halfway (middle), and end (right) of upsetting simulation with lower wall 
thickness 𝑡𝑙= 2.8 mm. 
In Fig. 4.18, the punch (yellow), the counter punch (orange), and the matrix (blue) were assumed 
rigid. The matrix was stationary, and the punch and counter punch moved downwards. The R0.5 
rounding on the matrix was designed to increase the symmetry. The cup (red) was meshed with 
element size of 0.1 mm like the previous simulations, and the friction and material model was 
unchained. The punch was moved downwards 𝑋= 4 mm with a velocity 𝑣𝑝= 0.1 mm/s. The 
counter punch simulated the spring rate as the previous processes, but a unique punch was designed 
for the process, which meant, theoretically, that the counter punch started from 𝐹𝑐𝑝= 0 𝑁 at 𝑋= 0, 
and ended at 𝐹𝑐𝑝= 𝑆𝑅∙𝑋= 4,600 𝑁 at 𝑋= 4 mm. The counter punch force was 𝐹𝑐𝑝= 4,255 𝑁 at 
𝑋= 3.70 mm, where the cup shape was complete in Fig. 4.18 (right). 
In the upsetting simulation, the sidewall thickness was increased with 0.8 mm, which was an ~31% 
increase from the upper sidewall thickness 𝑡𝑢= 2.6 mm, almost the same increase in the corner 
sharpening simulation in section 4.2 that showed to be successful. For the lower sidewall thickness, 
𝑡𝑙= 2.0 mm, the increase was 40%, and that was acceptable due to the added stiffness of the middle 
wall that prevented buckling in Fig. 4.18 (middle). The upper wall was the first to fully form, and 
afterwards the lower wall started to form, where the flow of material was slightly downwards. It 
resulted in an outside corner on the lower wall in Fig. 4.18 (right) that was not fully formed, but it 
was acceptable for the single flow process. In an early version of the corner sharpening simulation, 
the cup height was mistakenly modelled to be ℎ0 = 22 mm instead of ℎ0 = 20 mm, and thus the 
volume of the cup was too large compared with reality. The earlier versions of the upsetting 
simulation were made with this error built in, and the 0.8 mm increase in sidewall thickness created 
the equal height of the upper and lower wall, ℎ𝑢= ℎ𝑙= 4 mm. The error was found and corrected in 
the simulation in Fig. 4.18 (left); it showed a difference in the height of the upper and lower wall, 
ℎ𝑢= 2.6 ≠ℎ𝑙. The error was unfortunately found too late, and the parts for the upsetting tool was 
already made with the error. It was expected that the experimental result would show difference 
between the height of the upper and lower wall as well. It was a result of only upsetting in one 
direction, which could have been avoided by upsetting in two directions, and the error would have 
been limited to a reduction in the total height of the sidewall, ℎ1. The produced cup would 
==PAGE:26==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
21 
 
theoretically not become as symmetrical as planned with the given dimensions of the tools and the 
cup, but it would be solved by changing the cup height after deep drawing to ℎ0 = 22 mm, which 
was not done in this report. The upsetting simulation was only done for 𝑡𝑙= 2.8 mm. 
 
Fig. 4.19 – Punch force in upsetting simulation. 
The punch force in the upsetting simulation in Fig. 4.19 rose quickly to 40 kN where it became 
more constant. At the punch travel 𝑋= 0.6 mm, the outliers started and by 𝑋= 2.0 mm it was hard 
to distinguish the valid data points from the outliers. A cautious guess based on the upsetting of the 
corner sharpening simulation punch force plot on Fig. 4.10 would be that the force would increase 
approximating a linear curve and near the end abruptly increase exponentially. It cannot be 
supported by the upsetting plot given by the number of outliers. 
The max. punch force is calculated by hand because of the uncertainty of reading Fig. 4.19. The 
punch force was expected to peak at the end of the stroke where the area of the deformed material 
was largest as it reached the inner diameter of the die, 𝑑𝑑= 42.52 mm. In the calculation, the 
difference in wall thickness between the lower and upper sidewall is neglected. The smaller 
thickness of the lower sidewall is treated as being equal to the thicker upper sidewall, which is 
considered a conservative approach. The diameter of the counter punch was 𝑑𝑐𝑝= 35.72 mm, and 
the area at the end of the process can be calculated: 
𝐴1 = 𝜋((𝑑𝑑
2 )
2
−(𝑑𝑐𝑝
2 )
2
) = 𝜋((42.52 mm
2
)
2
−(35.72 mm
2
)
2
) ≈418 mm2 
The sidewall height after shear forging was approx. ℎ0 = 12.4 mm, and after upsetting it was ℎ1 =
8.6 mm. The strain in the height direction is: 
𝜀ℎ= ln (ℎ1
ℎ0
) = ln ( 8.6 mm
12.4 mm) ≈−0.366 
In uniaxial compression, the equivalent strain is 𝜀𝑒𝑞= |𝜀ℎ| = 0.366, and the equivalent stress is 
found from the material model used in the simulations: 
==PAGE:27==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
22 
 
𝜎𝑒𝑞= 113.7𝜀𝑒𝑞0.04 = 113.7 ∙0.3660.04 ≈109 MPa 
The max. punch force in the end of the stroke: 
𝐹𝑝= 𝜎𝑒𝑞𝐴1 ≈45,638 𝑁≈45.6 kN 
In reality, the punch force would be larger due to strain hardening that would increase the 𝜀𝑒𝑞. The 
punch force 𝐹𝑝→∞ when the die is filled. 
 
 
4.5 Load case analysis 
 
In this section, three different gear designs were analyzed in terms of stresses and deformation when 
applied with a typical load case. The first design was of the almost symmetric gear from the upsetting 
process. The second design was of the fully symmetric gear after a milling process. The third design 
was of the current asymmetric gear. The gear models were done in Solid Works, and the FE-analyses 
were done in Ansys Workbench that is a suitable software for linear elastic analyses. 
 
Fig. 4.20 – Gear model mesh. 
The three models were meshed with tetrahedron elements in a resolution factor of 5 on a scale from 
1-7, where 7 is the finest mesh, and the element order was quadratic. The mesh size was decreased 
on the 0.5 mm rounding inside the corner at the cup wall because stresses were expected to build up 
there, and the corner geometry would be more precise. The material was chosen as Alu 1050A. 
==PAGE:28==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
23 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.21 – Gear model applied a distributed load and fixed support. 
In Fig. 4.21 the models had a single gear tooth where a 250 N load was uniformly distributed on its 
contact surface, and the direction was normal to the surface. The load was chosen so that there was 
at least a safety factor of 2, to exceed the yield stress of the material. The models had a 10 mm bore 
in the center for an axle where a fixed support was applied to the interior surface of the bore.  
 
4.5.1 Gear from upsetting 
 
 
Fig. 4.22 – Cross section of the geometry of the gear after upsetting. 
==PAGE:29==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
24 
 
The geometry of the gear after the upsetting process in Fig. 4.22 was an H-shaped cup with a slightly 
asymmetric wall thickness, as the lower wall thickness was reduced by 0.6 mm compared to the upper 
wall thickness. The inner wall height was the same at the top and bottom at 4 mm (before the error 
was found in the height of the cup in the corner sharpening simulation that did not make them equal), 
and the middle wall had an assumed thickness of 2 mm. The outer diameter of 42.52 mm was the 
same in the model for each type of gear design. 
 
 
Fig. 4.23 – Von Mises stress of loaded gear from upsetting. 
The max. von Mises stress in the gear from the upsetting process in Fig. 4.23 was 𝜎𝑚𝑎𝑥≈36.1 MPa. 
The highest stresses were located the interior surface of the center bore, that was fixed supported. The 
stresses decreased radially outwards to the wall but increased again in the gear tooth, where the load 
was applied. The stress scale was kept the same in the following plots to compare the stress levels. 
 
Fig. 4.24 – Total deformation of loaded gear from upsetting. 
==PAGE:30==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
25 
 
The max. total deformation of the loaded gear from the upsetting process in Fig. 4.24 was ∆𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥≈
0.010 mm, which was located at the tip of the gear tooth. The deformation decreased radially towards 
the center, and the tooth deformed uniformly. The deformation scale was kept the same in the 
following plots to compare the deformation levels. 
 
4.5.2 Symmetric gear 
 
 
Fig. 4.25 – Geometry of the symmetric gear. 
The geometry of the symmetric gear in Fig. 4.25 was an H-shaped cup with uniform wall thickness 
of 3.4 mm, which means that material was added to model compared with the slightly asymmetric 
model in subsection 4.5.2. It was considered a conservative approach as the symmetric model was 
assumed to be stiffer overall than the slightly asymmetric model. The inner wall height and 
thickness of the middle wall was the same as the almost symmetric model from upsetting in Fig. 
4.22. 
 
Fig. 4.26 – Von Mises stress of symmetric gear. 
The max. von Mises stress in the symmetric gear in Fig. 4.26 was 𝜎𝑚𝑎𝑥≈36.2 MPa, which was a 
marginally 0.3% higher than the model from upsetting in Fig. 4.23. The marginal difference might 
be within the uncertainty of the analysis and indicate similarity in the models regarding high stresses. 
==PAGE:31==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
26 
 
The stress distribution was visually very similar in the two models, and the difference was likely 
caused by a minor difference in the mesh. 
 
Fig. 4.27 – Total deformation of symmetric gear. 
The max. total deformation of the symmetric gear in Fig. 4.27 was ∆𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥≈0.011 mm, which was 
10% higher than the model from upsetting in Fig. 4.24. The distribution of the deformation was 
similar to the slightly asymmetric model but slightly more concentrated in the tip of the gear tooth. 
This could be explained by minor difference in the mesh. The deformation of the gear tooth was 
completely symmetric. 
 
4.5.3 Asymmetric gear 
 
 
Fig. 4.28 – Geometry of the asymmetric gear. 
The geometry of the asymmetric gear in Fig. 4.28 was a U-shaped cup with a wall thickness of 3.4 
mm. The inner wall height was 8 mm, and the thickness of the bottom wall was the same as the 
slightly asymmetric model in Fig. 4.22. 
  
==PAGE:32==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
27 
 
 
Fig. 4.29 – Von Mises stress of asymmetric gear. 
The max. von Mises stress in the asymmetric gear in Fig. 4.29 was 𝜎𝑚𝑎𝑥≈36.5 MPa, which was 
1.1% higher than the model from upsetting in Fig. 4.23. The stress distribution was similar to the 
other two models, only with a slightly higher stress at the center bore. The difference might be within 
the uncertainty of the analysis, but it could be caused by a slight skewness of stress distribution in the 
asymmetric model compared with the model from upsetting. 
 
Fig. 4.30 – Total deformation of asymmetric gear. 
The max. total deformation of the asymmetric gear in Fig. 4.30 was ∆𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥≈0,024 mm, which was 
140,0% higher than the model from upsetting in Fig. 4.24. The distribution of the deformation was 
very different from the two other models in Fig. 4.24 and Fig. 4.27: The max. deformation was located 
at one corner of the gear tooth and at two places at the edge of the wall on both sides of the gear tooth. 
The deformation of the gear tooth was skew as well as the deformation of the rest of the model. It 
==PAGE:33==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
28 
 
was considered to be a consequence of the asymmetric U-shaped gear, which had twice as long an 
inner wall height than the H-shaped gear. 
 
4.5.4 Findings 
 
In this section, the three models of the gear with different geometries were applied with the same 
uniformly distributed load over the contact surface of the gear tooth. The model from the upsetting 
process, in subsection 4.5.1, had similar max. von Mises stress values, max. total deformation, and 
distribution as the symmetrical model in subsection 4.5.2. The asymmetrical model in subsection 
4.5.3 had about the same max. von Mises stress value and distribution as the gear model from 
upsetting, but the max. total deformation value was almost 1.4 times larger than the gear model from 
upsetting, and the deformation distribution was skewed in the gear tooth and in the rest of the model. 
The gear design from upsetting, which was produced by the processes presented in this report, 
behaved almost identical in terms of von Mises stress and had similar gear tooth deflection as the 
symmetric gear design, which was produced by a milling process. It is not clear whether the 
magnitude of the deflection was unwanted, but the deflection was symmetric in both designs, which 
was due to the H-shaped cross section of the gear. The current asymmetric gear design showed similar 
von Mises stresses and distribution as the gear design from upsetting, but the deformation was 
significantly higher and skewed in the gear tooth and in the rest of the gear, which was due to the U-
shaped cross section of the gear. The skewed deformation of the tooth was unwanted because less of 
the tooth would be in contact with the opponent tooth, leading to higher contact stresses, higher wear, 
and reduced gear life compared with a symmetric deflection. Despite of that, the gear tooth deflection 
in the gear from upsetting was expected to remain symmetric due to the H-shaped cross section. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
29 
 
5. Experimental setup and procedure 
 
 
This chapter contains a description of the equipment used in the experiments, the design process of 
the tools, and the procedure by which the experiments were conducted. 
5.1 Sheet material 
 
The chosen sheet material for the experiments was aluminum 1050A (EN AW-1050A), which is the 
most common and purest alloy with 99.5% aluminum. The material was chosen for its low yield 
strength at about 85 MPa and a tensile strength between 105 and 145 MPa with an min. elongation 
at 4% [11]. It is a soft material and easy to work with, as the requirement for the tools would be 
low.  
 
 
Fig. 5.1 – Sheet strip and circular blank for deep drawing. 
The sheet came as a large 2 mm thick plate and was sheared to rectangular strips. The strips were 
sheared with a circular disc cutter and using a press as punch force. The result was circular blanks 
with Ø75, and sharp edges were filed with a handheld metal file. 
 
==PAGE:35==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
30 
 
5.2 Equipment 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.2 –Press (left), interface (right). 
The press in Fig 5.2 which was a 15-ton servo mechanical press by IPU from 2019, was used in the 
experiments to deliver the downward motion of the punch. The press had a total travel of 500 mm 
from 25 mm to the top plane to 100 mm from the bottom plane. The control panel in Fig. 5.2 regulated 
the movement of the pressure shoe. If a new position were typed in to the “Position”-tab in the 
“Control”-section, the press would move the pressure shoe to the given position at the specified speed 
without exceeding the specified max. force. The max. force was limited to 155 kN but could deliver 
up to 200 kN in certain situations, and the min. speed was limited to 0.1 mm/s. In the “Status”-section, 
the parameters were monitored in real time, which helped determine whether the process was 
proceeding as intended. 
 
 
Fig. 5.3 – Large subpress with deep drawing tools (left), small subpress (right). 
The subpresses in Fig. 5.3 were used to mount and position the tools with precision. The large 
subpress was specially made for the already existing deep drawing tools. The height of the subpress 
allowed me to mount either a shorter conventional deep drawing die or a higher tractrix die, which 
also required longer punches. The smaller subpress was made with flexible use in mind with many 
==PAGE:36==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
31 
 
different mounting and guide holes for the tools and was chosen for those reasons to be used in the 
other experiments. It was commonly used in sheet bending experiments, among others. It measured 
132.6 mm between the top and bottom plate, which put some tight height constraints on the tools. 
The subpresses had light load springs to push back the top plate when the pressure shoe moved 
upwards. Oppositely, in the experiments where the pressure shoe moved downwards, the springs 
would counteract the press and increase the punch force slightly. The theoretical spring constant had 
an accuracy of ±10%, and it was therefore tested in the experiments. 
 
5.3 Tool design and construction 
 
This section is a discussion of the design process of the tools used in the experiments of the four 
processes of the investigation: Deep drawing (DD), corner sharpening (CS), shear forging (SF), and 
upsetting (Up). 
 
5.3.1 Deep drawing 
The experimental setup in Fig. 5.3 was already manufactured and ready to use in the lab. There were 
both a conventional die, tractrix die, and punches made for 1 mm sheets. 
 
Fig. 5.4 – DD punch. 
A new DD punch in Fig. 5.4 was made for deep drawing with a sheet thickness of 2 mm in the 
conventional die. The punch had a diameter of Ø35.72 with a 5 mm rounding. It was polished on the 
cylindrical surface as well as on the rounding to reduce friction between it and the sheet material. It 
had a thread to screw it together with the upper part of the subpress. The punch was designed for a 
conventional deep drawing die with blank holders. However, it was later used with a tractrix die, 
which is explained in the subsection 5.4.4. 
The tools for the next three experiments were made for the smaller subpress described in the section 
5.2. 
 
==PAGE:37==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
32 
 
5.3.2 Corner sharpening 
The design of the CS tools was inspired by João et al 2019 and supported by the simulations described 
in section 4.2. The fundamental parts in the design for the process were a punch, a counter punch, 
and a die. The punch should deliver the full force of the press, and the die should receive the force. 
Both parts should be connected with the subpress. The counter punch should deliver a force to the 
bottom of the cup, independently of the punch, as the process went along. In Joao’s investigation the 
solution was a hydraulic piston working at constant 15 kN. In the project, the force was chosen to be 
delivered by a spring to minimize the complexity of the design and chance of failure. The spring 
should be connected to the subpress for the press to compress the spring. 
 
Fig. 5.5 – CS process and counter punch travel. 
The working principle of the punch and the spring-loaded counter punch for the CS process can be 
seen in Fig. 5.5. The deformation of the spring was found to be ~2.5 mm from the CS simulations 
in section 4.2. The counterpunch was resting on the punch when the spring was unloaded but was 
engaged when the counter punch hits the bottom of the die. The top of the punch and bottom of the 
die was separated into support plates to make it possible to assemble the punch assembly and to be 
able to disassemble the die assembly to free the cup more easily. This design feature also had some 
apparent advantages for the manufacturing of the parts and material selection, which is elaborated 
on in subsection 5.3.5. 
The tool dimensions were customized to the dimensions of the cup after deep drawing with 𝐷𝑖=
35.72 mm, ℎ= 20 mm, and an assumed thickness 𝑡= 2 mm. The tools were divided into a punch 
and a die assembly that were screwed to the top and the bottom of the subpress, respectively. 
==PAGE:38==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
33 
 
 
Fig. 5.6 – CS punch assembly. 
The CS punch assembly in Fig. 5.6 consisted of four parts: The CS counter punch (1), the CS punch 
(2), the CS punch plate (3), and a spring (4). The punch and the plate were screwed together, and the 
counter punch was free to slide inside. The counter punch that was spring loaded with a theoretical 
spring factor of 1150 N/mm could move relative to the punch at a travel of 7 mm before it hit the 
plate. The punch pushed on the top of the cup wall while the counter punch pushed down on bottom 
of the cup. 
The surface of the counter punch that was in contact with the cup had high geometrical accuracy 
because it shaped the inside geometry of the cup. The punch had a small rounding of 0.5 mm on the 
bottom edge, corresponding to the same rounding on the inside corner of the cup after the process. 
The punch had a tighter sliding fit (H7/g6) with counter punch on the thicker top part than on the 
thinner bottom part in order to make a stable and precise steering of the counter punch. As both parts 
were or were close to be in contact in most of their length, they were depending on the geometrical 
accuracy and were prone to geometrical errors. The counter punch was remanufactured with a small 
reduction in diameter in Counter punch 2, Appendix: F, to account for a build-up in the tolerance 
chain together with production errors with dimensions outside tolerances. The surfaces of contact on 
the two parts were measured with a 3D coordinate measuring machine by a skilled operator to get the 
accurate geometrical dimensions. It was decided only to make changes to the counter punch that 
accounted for the errors on both parts. 
On the top of the punch plate, there were two threaded mounting holes to screw the assembly to the 
top of the subpress. Closer to the center, there were two smaller positioning holes at Ø6 to use as 
guide pins. However, the Ø6 guide pins in the lab fit neither the holes on the plate nor the subpress, 
and they were therefore not used. The lack of guide pins meant that the punch assembly would have 
less positioning control radially because it would be difficult to achieve the same accuracy without 
guide pins. This was a potential source of error, which could produce a slight uneven thickness of the 
cup wall. 
==PAGE:39==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
34 
 
 
Fig. 5.7 – CS die assembly. 
The CS die assembly in Fig. 5.7 consisted of two parts screwed together: the CS die (1) and the CS 
die plate (2). Both parts were in contact with the cup, which placed certain demands on their 
geometrical accuracy and surface. The inner surface of the die had a tight cylindric tolerance, and the 
plate had tight flatness tolerance on the surface of contact with the cup. The flatness tolerance reduced 
the split line between the two parts as well as insured a good contact surface. The split line between 
the two parts was kept to a minimum by having sharp edges on the bottom of the die and by screwing 
the parts together. The subsidence in the die plate, where die was placed in, had the purpose of the 
guiding the die to the center of the die plate. There was a tight clearance fit (H7/h6) between the die 
and the subsidence, which could be assembled manually. The bottom of the die plate, which was in 
contact with the subpress, had a tight flatness tolerance. A center positioning stump on the bottom of 
die plate fitted tightly together (H7/h6) with the center positioning hole on the subpress, visible in Fig 
5.3. 
Both parts were load carrying and required to be stiff to reduce their elastic deformations during the 
process. It was solved by making the parts as thick as possible while maintaining room for assembly. 
The subpress dictated the total height of the assembly to be no more than 132 mm including the 20 
mm high DD cup. The subsidence in the plate had the potential to become load carrying if the die 
expanded radially and hit it. It depended on the actual gap between the parts which was in the interval 
(0; 0.049) mm. There are pictures of the manufactured corner sharpening parts and -assemblies in 
Appendix: F. 
 
5.3.3 Shear forging 
The CS punch assembly in Fig. 5.6 was reused in this process to save design and production time, 
while maintaining a proven design and parts. It was possible because the SF forming method was 
similar the CS forming method with regards to the punch, and there was enough travel in the spring-
loaded counter punch mechanism to complete the process. 
==PAGE:40==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
35 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.8 – SF die assembly (left), profile of SF back punch (right). 
The SF die assembly in Fig. 5.8 consisted of three parts: the CS die (1), the SF die plate (2), and the 
SF back punch (3). The CS die was reused because the outer diameter of the cup remained the same. 
The design of the SF die plate was identical to the CS die plate apart from a subsidence in the plate 
to hold the back punch and center it in the die. Only the widest top part of the back punch, seen in 
Fig. 5.8, would be in contact with the cup, which minimized the friction along the vertical wall to 1 
mm in length. Four back punches were made with different diameters of the top part, Ø36.92, Ø37.32, 
Ø37.72 and Ø38.32, which corresponded to the depths of cut 𝑡0 = {0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.3} 𝑚𝑚 in the 
sidewall. All four back punches had a 0.1 mm rounding that was critical to the cutting operation of 
the punch into the bottom of the cup. 
The top surface of the back punch, which was in contact with the cup, had a tight flatness tolerance. 
The same flatness tolerance was on the bottom surface of the back punch and on the top of the die 
plate. There were tight concentric tolerances on the back punch together with the subsidence it sat in 
to center the back punch accurately in the die. There are pictures of the manufactured shear forging 
parts and -assemblies in Appendix: G. 
 
5.3.4 Upsetting 
In this process, the Up punch kept its overall design, but the outer diameter was increased from 
Ø40.92 to Ø42.52 to increase cup wall thickness by 0.8 mm. The difference between the two inner 
diameters in the SF H-cup after the shear forging process would remain the same. The tool was made 
with the error that was made in the simulation and that overestimated the height and the volume of 
the cup, which was described in the section 4.4. The CS counter punch and spring was reused in the 
Up punch assembly. With the height of the counter punch being the same, the height of the Up punch 
was increased to match the top cup wall height on the shear forging H-shaped cup. The corrected 
height in the simulations showed a ~4 mm travel of the counter punch and additionally ~1.5 mm 
lower inner height of the upper sidewall than previously anticipated. It meant a total counterpunch 
travel of 5.5 mm in the process, which was within 7 mm available. 
==PAGE:41==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
36 
 
 
Fig. 5.9 – Up die assembly. 
In the Up die assembly in Fig. 5.9, the inner diameter of Up die (1) was increased to Ø42.52 but 
otherwise kept its overall design. The Up back punches (3) were redesigned to be assembled with the 
CS die plate (2) and formed the lower geometry of the Up H-cup together with the die. The diameters 
of the top part of the back punches remained the same: Ø36.92, Ø37.32, Ø37.72 and Ø38.32. The 
rounding was increased from 0.1 mm to 0.5, which would be equal to the rounding on the CS counter 
punch. The Up H-cup would be formed almost symmetrical apart from the difference in wall 
thickness. 
The tolerances on the slightly redesigned punch and die remained in the same tolerance classes, 
because the functions of the contacts remained the same. The tolerances on the Up back punch were 
comparable to the SF back punch, e.g., the bottom was in contact with the die plate and had a tight 
flatness tolerance. The largest diameter on the back punch had a tight clearance fit (H7/h6) with the 
die which could be assembled manually. The tolerance on the smaller diameter was a 
constrained/tight sliding fit (nom./g6) because it would allow the SF H-cup to slide into its place on 
the back punch. There was a tight concentric tolerance between the two diametric tolerances on the 
back punch in order to center the cup in the die and increase uniformity of the wall thickness. There 
are pictures of the manufactured upsetting parts and -assemblies in Appendix: H. 
For the three processes, CS, SF, and Up, it was assumed that the cup would remain in the die after 
the process when the punch went back to its original position. The dies were disassembled from the 
die plates, and the cup could be nocked free carefully with a hammer. Back punches, which might 
still be attached to the cups, could be removed carefully with a small mandrel. None of the tools for 
the three processes were polished because of financial and time restraints, but it was not estimated to 
have a significant impact on the results. There are pictures of the manufactured parts and assemblies 
in Appendix: E-H. 
 
5.3.5 Tool material 
The choice of material for the tools depended on the sheet material, Alu 1050A, used in the 
experiments. It gave the opportunity to choose from a larger collection of tool materials than if the 
sheet material was steel. The manufacturing workshop at DTU had experience with steels from 
Udeholm, and the materials were chosen from their catalog. The tool parts were divided into process 
parts that were in direct contact with the sheet material as punches and dies and structural parts that 
==PAGE:42==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
37 
 
supported the process parts and connected them to the subpress as plates. The material of the process 
parts should have excellent mechanical properties to withstand high loads without significant 
deflection. The material should have a high hardness and at the same time have good machinability. 
Impax Supreme fulfilled the requirements and was suitable for forming processes with a yield 
strength of 900 MPa and a hardness of 325 HB. The structural parts should have good mechanical 
properties, although lower requirements than the process parts. The machineability was important for 
the precision of the structural parts, e.g., to center the process parts in the punch and die assembly. 
UBH11 was chosen because of its typical application as punch and die holders, and with a yield 
strength of 340 MPa it was strong enough to withstand the compressive stresses of the processes [12]. 
 
 
5.4 Experimental procedure 
 
This section describes the experimental methods and procedures applied to test the theoretical models 
of the four processes of the investigation (deep drawing, corner sharpening, shear forging, and 
upsetting) and other tests. 
 
5.4.1 Tensile test 
The aim of the tensile test was to test the stress/strain relation of the chosen sheet material, Alu 1050A, 
and build an approximate mathematical model to use in the simulations. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.10 – Test strip of sheet material (left), setup for tensile test with extensometers (right). 
The tensile test in Fig. 5.10 was made with the press pulling four identical test strips of the sheet 
material in the length direction. The test strips were Type H test pieces in DIN 50125:2009-07. 
Although the sheet material was considered anisotropic, the tensile test was only done in the direction 
of the sheet that it was rolled. The difference in the result of the test considering anisotropy was 
determined to be less significant compared to the chosen test method. 
==PAGE:43==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
38 
 
The elongation of the test strips was measured in the length and width with Epsilon extensometers. 
The elongation in the thickness was later calculated assuming volume constancy. The start length of 
the extensometer in the length direction was 80 mm, which was suitable for the strips. Before a tensile 
test, the extensometers were reset by hand with a max. error of 0.1 mm from the start length. The 
strips were pulled to the point of fracture, while the data from the extensometers was logged and 
saved in a folder in Excel spreadsheet format. 
5.4.2 Punch centering 
It was important to position the punch as close to the center of the die as possible. This served two 
purposes: to make sure that the punch did not hit the edge of the die and that the processes investigated 
were represented accurately compared to the theoretical models in the simulations. In the subsection 
5.2.2, it was discussed that the lack of guide pins would make it more difficult to position the punch 
in the center of the die. To account for the lack of guide pins the procedure for centering the punch 
became an iterative process. The centering of the punch was done before the experiments. To ensure 
that the punch did not hit the edge of the die, the screws that tightened the punch assembly to the 
upper part of the subpress were loosened slightly. The punch was driven down to the edge of the die, 
and the distance between the punch and die was carefully assessed visually from two views with 90° 
between them. This allowed centering of the punch in the radial plane of the die. The punch was 
moved down in the die and there was made observations of any sound indicating contact. There was 
not observed any sounds, which indicated that the punch was somewhere within the tolerance window 
of the loose fitting between the punch and the CS die. The outer tolerance of the punch was 
𝑓7: {−0.025
−0.050, and the tolerance of the CS die was 𝐻7:{+0.025
0.000 , which resulted in a theoretical max. 
radial off-center disposition of 0,038 mm. This error margin was a potential source of error, but it 
was not expected to become significant for the experimental results. 
 
5.4.3 Deep drawing 
The Ø75 blanks were in the first attempts placed in the conventional deep drawing die with a constant 
radius. The blank holder was only designed to hold a 1 mm blank because the blank force was 
controlled by a gap between it and the sheet. With the 2 mm blanks, the blank holder was in direct 
contact with the blanks from the start, and the blank force was the same as the tightening force of the 
blank holder. 
 
Fig. 5.11 – Conventional drawn cup with bottom fracture. 
==PAGE:44==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
39 
 
The tightening force was difficult to control, and as a result in Fig. 5.11 bottom fracture occurred on 
every run with different tightening force. Instead of improving the blank holder on the conventional 
die, it was changed to a tractrix die without blank holder. The tractrix die produced cups immediately, 
without indication of any type of fracture at a punch speed of 1 mm/s. The geometry of the cups was 
visibly most precise at the bottom and became less precise nearer the top where ‘ears’ appeared. By 
unscrewing the punch slightly in the top part of the subpress, the punch became effective longer, and 
the ‘ears’ decreased in size. However, the longer the punch became, the more skew the top became, 
with a small angle, presumably because of reduced radial stiffness of the punch because less of its 
thread was engaged. 
 
Fig. 5.12 – Deep drawn cup with long punch (left) and short punch (right). 
The optimum result in Fig. 5.12 was achieved by matching the length of the tractrix punch for 1 mm 
blanks. There was also done a test without inserting a blank in order to capture only the contribution 
from the springs on the subpress, which was subtracted from the results. The punch force for the 
experiment was logged by the program and saved in a folder in the Excel spreadsheet format. The 
irregular top parts of the cups were cut off at a height of 20 mm by a milling machine to keep the 
straight walls and make the edges sharp. 
The lubrication used in the first runs was a thin paraffin oil. After some runs a screeching sound 
developed from the process. The lubrication was changed to a thicker brown oil named Rhenus SF 
125 A, and the screeching disappeared. It was not determined where the screeching was coming from 
because there was neither visibly wear nor scratches on the cups with paraffin oil lubrication. The 
Rhenus oil was manufactured to work at higher loads compared with paraffin oil, which could be an 
indication of high friction forces, presumably between the die and the sheet. The lack of radial 
stiffness of the punch could play a role in the screeching as a slightly skewed punch would reduce the 
distance to the die in one side of the die, increasing the friction on this side. If the friction forces 
exceeded the shear strength of the paraffin oil, there would be metal to metal contact on that side, 
which could lead to vibrations and sound. There was not a measurement of the vibrations because the 
Rhenus oil stopped the screeching sound, and the cups were visibly identical to the cups made with 
the paraffin oil. 
 
5.4.4 Corner sharpening 
From the simulations the max. punch force was 𝐹𝑝,𝑚𝑎𝑥= 209 𝑘𝑁 at 𝑋= 7.87 mm travel, which 
was ~35% over the max. punch force of the press at 155 kN. 
==PAGE:45==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
40 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.13 – Counter punch stuck in cup (left), dent in counter punch. 
As a first test run the punch force was maxed out at 155 kN. The result was that the counter punch 
was stuck in the bottom of the cup, and the cup was stuck in the CS die, as seen in Fig. 5.13. 
Unfortunately, in the process of freeing the cup, the die plate was bent, and a small dent was notched 
in the middle of the counter punch, also seen in Fig. 5.13. The counter punch was still effective 
because the stresses and deformation in the bottom of the cup were relatively low compared to near 
the wall of the cup. The die plate was remade and replaced. It was observed that small pieces of 
aluminum debris were stuck on the inside of the die, which was removed by using caustic soda.  
It was learned that there was a high degree of stickiness between the aluminum in the cup and the 
steel tools, and the higher punch force was, the stronger this stickiness became. The procedure for the 
corner sharpening was made with a degree of caution to make sure that the cup had the acceptable 
cup geometry with a manageable stickiness. Therefore, the procedure was depending on the punch 
travel rather than the punch force. In this way the corner of the cups would incrementally increase its 
sharpness, and the punch pressure would incrementally increase as well as the stickiness. A measure 
for a successful cup geometry was determined to be: relatively straight walls, a closed rounding on 
the inside corner of the cup, and a small enough rounding leaving a larger diameter of flat area on the 
bottom of the cup than the largest diameter of the back punches, Ø38.32, used the next experiment, 
shear forging. 
With the given objectives, the procedure started by moving the punch incrementally down at a 
distance of 𝑋 from a known position at the edge of the die. The simulations in section 4.2 showed a 
fully formed sharp cup with a height of ℎ1 = ~12.5 mm, from a start height at ℎ0 = 20 mm, equal 
to a punch travel of 𝑋 ≈ ~7.5 mm. Within the range of 0 mm ≤𝑋 ≤ ~7 mm, the punch force was 
expected to rise at a predictable pace. Beyond 𝑋= 7 mm, the die would suddenly fill up and the 
punch force would quickly rise to 155 kN or more. The punch speed was at its minimum at 0.5 mm/s. 
With a slow speed the punch was able to stop quickly if the punch force hit the max. value, which 
was chosen to be 100 kN. Another advantage of a slow punch speed was the high number data points. 
The tests were done at 𝑋= {2.5, 3.5, 4.5, 5, 5.5, 6} mm, in the following steps: 
1. Write X on the cup or note it. 
2. Place cup in counter punch. 
3. Stop punch at the edge of the CS die (2 mm to deformation). 
4. Adjust punch travel on monitor to X+2 in negative direction. 
==PAGE:46==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
41 
 
5. Adjust punch speed to 0,5 mm/s. 
6. Start press, notice punch force rise at 2 mm travel. 
7. Press stops at X+2, save punch force data. 
8. Measure cup height and bottom flat diameter. 
At 𝑋= 4.5 mm, the bottom flat diameter was larger than Ø38.32 mm. At 𝑋= 5.5 mm, the cup height 
was ℎ1 = ~14.5 mm, and the punch force was about 60 kN, which created an acceptable stickiness 
of the cup in the die to free it easily. Finally, 𝑋= 7.5 mm was tested to improve the cup geometry, 
and the punch force peaked at ∼90 kN, making the corner of the cup sharper, although not 
completely sharp, meaning that the max. punch travel was not reached yet. The stickiness was making 
it difficult to free the cup at 𝑋= 6.0 mm. The optimal punch travel was decided to be 𝑋= 5.5 mm, 
as the cup’s geometry was acceptable for the next experiment, shear forging, and the process was 
suitable for repetition when a large number of cups needed to be produced for the next experiments. 
Later, the experiment was resumed to improve the corner sharpness at 𝑋= {6.5, 7.0} mm. At 𝑋=
6.5 mm, the inside corner began to form around the R0.5 rounding on the counter punch, and the 
outside corner was approx. R0.5. At 𝑋= 7.0 mm, the cup height was ℎ1 = ~13.0 mm, the inside 
corner was fully formed, and the outside corner was completely sharp. On both cups there were signs 
of the material flowing upwards in the gap between the punch and the counter punch. A test without 
inserting a cup was also done to capture the contribution from the springs on the subpress. The same 
subpress was used in the final two experiments, and therefore it was not necessary to repeat the test. 
It was only possible to free the cup when the die was not screwed to the die plate, and it followed the 
punch upwards with the cup inside. The die with the cup inside could be removed from the punch 
with two aluminum crowbars. This maneuver was not always easy because there was little room to 
between the die and the punch to get the crowbars in. The die was tilted slightly and was momentarily 
stuck and needed a correction from the opposite side, and the maneuver was sometimes time 
consuming. Once the die with cup inside was freed, the cup was hammered out of the die with a 
hammer with a strong rubber plastic on the contact area. A large mandrel was used to strike the top 
of the walls. Later a method was developed to push the cup out with press, as explained in subsection 
5.4.5. The lubrication used in this experiment, Gardolube L 6250 by Chemetall, was specially made 
to work in cold forming processes of metals and worked exceptionally well for the forming of 
aluminum sheets. The solution was a white watery dispersion of polymers, and it was mixed 
according to product instructions: 80 g Gardolube/100 mL demineralized water. When applied to the 
metal, it left a corrosion prove film that stuck to the metal once the liquid evaporated, Appendix: B. 
The lubrication was also applied to the tools and the cups on areas of contact and used in the following 
experiments as well. 
 
5.4.5 Shear forging 
The experiment was conducted similarly to the previous, corner sharpening, but for another reason 
than controlling the punch pressure. The punch was again positioned at the edge of the die and moved 
downwards from this position at increments to reach the target of moving the bottom 4 mm towards 
the middle of the cup. It was important to meet this geometric requirement for the next experiment, 
==PAGE:47==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
42 
 
upsetting. It was done with the four back punches discussed in subsection 5.3.4. The simulations 
showed a rapid rise in punch force with max. value short after contact with the cup: 
Max. punch force with Ø36.92 back punch: 𝐹𝑝,𝑚𝑖𝑛≈60 kN at 𝑋= 0.5 mm  
Max. punch force with Ø38.32 back punch: 𝐹𝑝,𝑚𝑎𝑥≈95 kN at 𝑋= 1.0 mm 
The theoretical punch forces were high, and there was no apparent way to manage the punch force. 
Therefore, the sticking effect was expected to be significant and increasing the larger the diameter of 
the back punch was. To start the experiment, the counter punch with smallest diameter, Ø36.92, was 
chosen. The simulations showed that the distance of moving the bottom of the cup was approx. not 
dependent on the counter punch diameter. Therefore, the Ø36.92 back punch was only used to find 
the punch travel 𝑋 that moved the bottom 4 mm toward the middle of the cup. The simulations showed 
that a punch travel of 𝑋= 3.75 mm would give the desired result. There was expected to be a 1 mm 
distance from the edge of the die to the top of the cup wall. The tests were done at 𝑋= {3,4,5} mm, 
in similar steps to the corner sharpening experiment and at the same punch speed, 𝑣𝑝= 0.5 mm/𝑠. 
At 𝑋= 5 mm, the bottom of cup was moved closest to 4 mm. The max. punch pressure for these tests 
were close to the punch pressure predicted by the simulations, and the stickiness was strong, but it 
was possible to free the H-cups without considerable difficulty. The back punches with larger 
diameters were tested afterwards at 𝑋= 5. The punch press rose as predicted by the simulations, but 
it did not reach 100 kN. The max. punch pressure stabilized around 90 kN, which resulted in a 
manageable stickiness. The back punches were still inside the H-cup after it was freed and was 
carefully removed by using a small mandrel. 
 
5.4.6 Upsetting 
In this experiment, the approach in terms of limiting the punch force was replicated from the previous 
experiments, and experiences were drawn from the corner sharpening process, which also involved 
upsetting. The simulation of the process from section 4.4 could not predict the max. punch force, and 
the analytical calculation resulted in 45.6 kN, but it was expected that the punch force 𝐹𝑝→∞, when 
the die was filled at 𝑋= 3.7 mm. The stickiness was expected to be high, and in the first test the 
punch was moved incrementally down in attempt to control it and asses the shape of the cup along 
the way. The punch travel was tested with the smallest Ø36.92 back punch because it was the only 
geometry that was simulated. The tests were done at approx. 𝑋= {2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 3.6} mm from a side 
wall height starting at ℎ0 =∼13.5 mm, at the punch speed 𝑣𝑝= 0.5 mm/s. At 𝑋= 2.5 mm, the 
punch force was stopped at 100 kN, but the cup was able to be freed, and the experiment continued. 
As the punch moved further down, the lower sidewall, especially, was increasingly forming. At 𝑋=
3.5 mm, the punch force was 140 kN, and in the last run the press stopped at 𝑋= 3.6 mm because 
the max. force limit of the press, 155 kN, was reached. At the highest punch forces the lubrication 
was pressed out of the assembly lines in the die, which could be caused by the fact that the die was 
not screwed to the die plate. 
==PAGE:48==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
43 
 
It was the last experiment in this report and in terms of the timeline of the project, and the experience 
from the previous experiments were brought into the picture to maximize the result of this. The 
lubricant was an important part of the process, especially in the freeing of the H-cup. The stickiness 
was reduced with the increased usage of paraffin oil on every surface in the contact between the H-
cup and the tools, and it made it possible to free the cup at high punch pressure without too many 
difficulties. The die, which tended to get stuck on the punch because it was slightly tilted by the 
aluminum crowbars, glided off more easily than in previous experiments. In previous experiments, 
the cups were hammered out of the die, but it became increasingly hard work with higher punch 
forces. It was decided to develop a method to eject the cups out of the die with the press. The die was 
placed on a cylindrically formed part from a deep drawing blank holder, and it was pushed out in the 
opposite direction of the process with a suitable flat punch, Appendix: A. Over time, the sharp corner 
at the bottom of the CS die, used in the corner sharpening and shear forging experiment, was observed 
to be deteriorating and inflict scratches on the side of the cup when pushed out in the process direction, 
which did not happen with this method. The method did have the advantage of only having to 
overcome the high static friction once and then being able to transit to the lower dynamic friction, as 
opposed to hammering, which deals with the static friction in every hammer blow. It was 
simultaneously assumed to decrease the stresses in the cup and the associated effects on the cups 
shape and metallurgy. The method was applied to the corner sharpening and shear forging process as 
a final experiment to create unity of conditions in the method by which the results were achieved. 
When the H-cup was punched out of the die, the back punch was still inside of it, and it could in some 
instances be lifted out with bare hands, and in other instances various clamps, mandrels, and a magnet 
from a magnet stand were found useful.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
44 
 
6. Results and analysis 
 
 
The results from the experiments are presented and analyzed in this chapter. The results include the 
tensile test and the cups that were formed in the four different processes: Deep drawing, corner 
sharpening, shear forging, and upsetting. 
 
 
6.1 Tensile test 
 
 
Fig. 6.1 – Tensile test specimens. 
In Fig. 6.1, the four tensile test specimens are shown with fracture marks. The specimens were 
notched to obtain a large stress strain ratio on the left-hand side of the forming limit diagram in tension 
forming, Bay et al 2020, p. 170. 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
45 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.2 – Stress and strain-plot of tensile tests. 
The four stress-strain-curves in Fig. 6.2 are calculated from the data from the four tensile tests and 
has been added power regression trendlines with equations. The stress is only plotted in the plastic 
region from the identified yield stress to the tensile stress. The yield stress was identified as the 
transition point between the linear elastic part of the ‘curve’ and the curved plastic part of the ‘curve’. 
The tensile stress was identified as the maximum point on the graph. 
 
Table. 6.1 – Average material constants from the four trendline equations in Fig. 6.2. 
The Hollomon curve for the sheet material from the constants in Table. 6.1: 
𝜎𝑒𝑞= 𝐶𝜀𝑒𝑞𝑛= 113.7𝜀𝑒𝑞0.04 [MPa] 
The max. spread of the strength coefficient, 𝐶, is ∆𝐶= 113.68 −111.10 = 2.58, which is 2.3% of 
the average value. The max. spread of the strain hardening exponent, 𝑛, is 𝑛= 0.0397 −0.0369 =
0.0028, which is 7.1% of the average value. The spread of the strength coefficient, 𝐶, is small and 
acceptable, and the spread of the strain hardening exponent, 𝑛, is significant but is generated by ~1% 
difference in tensile stress. 
 
 
 
Tensile test
C
n
Test 1
111.10
0.0369
Test 2
114.25
0.0394
Test 3
114.66
0.0409
Test 4
114.72
0.0416
Avg.
113.68
0.0397
==PAGE:51==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
46 
 
6.2 Deep drawing 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.2 – Cup from deep drawing (right) and with the top cut off (left). 
The deep drawing cup on Fig 6.2 (right) had an irregular top part with a minor ‘ears’ that were caused 
by the planar anisotropy in the sheet material, and they were not suitable for the next process, corner 
sharpening. The top part was cut off at ℎ= 20 mm with a turning process in Fig. 6.2 and left the 
regular bottom part with a flat top surface on the sidewall. A cylinder was inserted in the cup to 
support the sidewall under tightening in the turning process. 
 
 
Table. 6.2 – Average blank thickness and diameter with measuring tolerance and equipment. 
Measurement equipment 
Micrometer screw 2: Mitutoyo (flat contact) 
Micrometer screw 3: Ambrose Shardlow & Co 53M (flat contact) 
Each value in Table 6.2 is an average of four measurements around the blank with 45° between them 
for four blanks. The measurement uncertainty is half of the max. deviation between five 
measurements on the same location. The measuring tolerance was done on every measurement to 
experimentally find a reasonable tolerance. The measuring tolerances of the thickness was not ±0 
but simply outside the measuring range. The measuring method and uncertainty was replicated on the 
cups from all the experiments. All measurements were made in a temperature-controlled room at 20 
°C and with calibrated equipment. 
Blank [mm]
1
2
3
4
Avg.
Tol. +/-
Equipment
t
1.966
1.965
1.964
1.967
1.965
0.000 Micro. screw 2
d
75.15
75.14
75.16
75.13
75.14
0.01 Micro. screw 3
==PAGE:52==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
47 
 
The average blank thickness of 1.965 mm was only ~2% smaller than the expected 2 mm, and it was 
stable across the four measured blanks. 
 
 
Table. 6.3 – Measurements of two deep drawing cups with measurement uncertainty and equipment. 
Measurement equipment 
Height gauge: Mitutoyo (flat contact) 
Micrometer screw 1: Mahr 40AS (sharp contact) 
Micrometer screw 2: Mitutoyo (flat contact) 
Optic sensor: DeMeet220 
Each value of the deep drawing cups in Table 6.3 is an average of four measurements around the cup 
with 90° between them for two cups. “Side” refers to the sidewall, and “bottom” refers to bottom 
wall. 
The stated tolerance for the cup height of the deep drawn cup was ±0.1 mm, Appendix: E, which cup 
1 in Table. 6.3 violates, but the measuring tolerance of ±0.02 mm makes it difficult to determine. In 
the corner sharpening simulation, the outer diameter was 𝑟𝑜= 7 mm, and cup 1 and 2 showed a 
slightly larger radius. The cause might be a higher corner thickness than the estimated 2 mm. 
Unfortunately, it was not possible to measure the corner thickness with the equipment available, but 
it could be estimated to be between the thickness of the bottom edge and the middle sidewall. The 
thickness of the cup walls is similar, and the wall is thinnest in the bottom center and increases further 
up the cup wall. The largest strains in deep drawing are in the middle of the cup in the contact with 
the punch, which explain that the smallest wall thickness was in the center. The upper sidewall 
thickness is between 21-25% larger than the bottom center and 7-17% larger than the middle sidewall, 
which is significant. The bottom wall thickness is larger than the blank thickness, and the cup only 
increases in thickness in deep drawing. The thickening of the top part of the cup in deep drawing 
discussed in section 4.1 seems to present due to the larger thickness in the upper sidewall compared 
to the bottom center.  
DD-cup [mm]
1
2
Tol. +/-
Equipment
h
20.12
19.98
0.02 Height gauge
R(out)
7.4259
7.0534
0.0049 Optic sensor
t(side, upper)
2.39
2.56
0.01 Micro. screw 1
t(side, middle)
2.23
2.19
0.01 Micro. screw 1
t(bottom, center)
1.980
1.972
0.001 Micro. screw 2
t(bottom, edge)
2.051
2.040
0.002 Micro. screw 2
==PAGE:53==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
48 
 
 
Fig. 6.3 – Plot of the punch force as a function of the travel in deep drawing. 
The contribution from the springs on the large subpress, Fig. 5.3, was subtracted from the punch force 
data on Fig. 6.3. The punch force was plotted with punch travel 𝑋= ~80 mm, to complete the 
drawing through the tractrix die. The punch force rises linearly in the first 15 to 20 mm as the punch 
bends the blank down towards the die surface. The punch force levels off and becomes nearly constant 
at 𝐹𝑝= ~10 kN between 𝑋= (30; 60) mm, as the blanks were bend over the tractrix curved die 
surface. Between 𝑋= (60; 71 mm), the punch force decreases linearly, and that could indicate that 
the bottom part of the cup is leaving the die. Between 𝑋= (72; 75) mm, the punch force rises quickly 
to the max. 𝐹𝑝= ~16 kN, and that could indicate that the thicker top part of cup was slightly ironed 
between the punch and the die.  
 
 
6.3 Corner sharpening 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.4 – Topside of corner sharpening cup (top) and underside (bottom). 
==PAGE:54==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
49 
 
The two cups from the corner sharpening experiment on Fig. 6.4 was compressed with different punch 
travel. The cup with a sharp outer corner had the longest punch travel with a straight and almost fully 
formed sidewall, a fully formed inner corner and a flat bottom wall. The cup with a less sharp outer 
corner was less formed with shorter punch travel, but it was chosen as the cup to use in the other 
experiments, because it was easier to ‘mass produce’. Both cups had a sign of folding or uncomplete 
forming with a recess on the outside of the sidewall, and the sharper cup had a smaller recess than the 
less sharp cup. The inside edge on the top of the sharp cup showed signs of material beginning to 
flow up between the punch and counterpunch, which was assumed to be a consequence of the high 
punch force and the characteristics of the sheet material, Alu 1050A. 
 
Fig. 6.5 – Cross section of less sharp corner sharpening cup. 
The cup from corner sharpening in Fig. 6.5 was carefully cut through the middle and grinded to reveal 
the flow directions in the material. The material flow was primarily in the direction of the surface of 
the sheet and homogeneous, which was highly desirable for the next processes. The sidewall was 
mostly filled out, but the slightly twisted shape indicate that it was not fully complete. The bottom 
wall was bend upwards, which is an indication that the counter punch force was too low to withstand 
upward bending forces in the bottom wall created by radial inwards flows of material to the center of 
the cup. The cup with a sharp outer corner had a flatter bottom wall due to higher counter punch force. 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
50 
 
 
 
Table. 6.4 – Measurements of three corner sharpening cups with measurement uncertainty and equipment. 
Measurement equipment 
Height gauge: Mitutoyo (flat contact) 
Micrometer screw 1: Mahr 40AS (sharp contact) 
Micrometer screw 2: Mitutoyo (flat contact) 
Optic sensor: DeMeet220 
Two of the values in Table. 6.4, “1” and “2” are the Less sharp cup in Fig. 6.4. The Sharp cup in Fig. 
6.4 had a sharp outer corner, and the min. distance to the theoretical sharp corner was 𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑛.𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡. = 0. 
The measuring tolerances of the sidewall was not ±0 but simply outside the measuring range. 
The heights of the cups 1 and 2 are almost the same due to the position-controlled punch travel, and 
the sharp cup was lower due to a lower position. The height of the sharp cup was 0.8 mm from the 
simulation in Fig. 4.8., which could indicate that the process was close to be complete. The minimum 
distance to the theoretical corner for cup 1 and 2 was ~0.4 mm to completion, and the sharp cup was 
not measured with the optic sensor, because it was visibly sharp. The sidewall thickness was close 
but slightly over the 𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒= 2.6 mm from the simulations, which was due to a combination of the 
plus tolerance on the inner diameter on the die and a reduced inner diameter on the counter punch to 
account for production errors and tolerance buildup. The thickness of the bottom center is ~0.2 mm 
larger than the bottom edge, which could indicate a too low counter punch force. The difference was 
reduced to ~0.1 mm in the sharp cup, where the counter punch force was higher. 
CS-cup [mm]
1
2
Sharp
Tol. +/-
Equipment
h
13.49
13.46
12.81
0.02 Height gauge
R(min. dist.)
0.4495
0.3886
0.0000
0.0048 Optic sensor
t(side)
2.65
2.65
2.69
0.00 Micro. screw 1
t(bottom, center)
2.080
2.073
2.110
0.002 Micro. screw 2
t(bottom, edge)
1.84
1.81
1.99
0.02 Micro. screw 1
==PAGE:56==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
51 
 
 
Fig. 6.6 – Plot of the punch force as a function of the travel in corner sharpening with the simulation. 
The contribution from the springs on the small subpress was subtracted from the punch force data in 
Fig. 6.6. The data is from the cup with a sharp outer corner, that is, the cup that was compressed the 
most. The punch travel was estimated to be 𝑋= 7.2 mm from the difference in height from deep 
drawing to corner sharpening. The punch force followed the simulation in the beginning of the 
process where the cup wall was primarily subjected to bending deformation, and the punch force was 
approximately linear. In the second part of the process, the upsetting of the side wall was taking place, 
and the punch force rose as a result. The curve rises before and more gradually than in the simulation, 
which seems to be a more realistic representation of the process than the abrupt simulation curve. The 
process was stopped at 𝐹𝑝= 145 kN, which was 10 kN from the limit of the press, but the outer 
corner was sharp, and material started to flow out of the matrix. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
52 
 
6.4 Shear forging 
 
 
Fig. 6.7 – Topside of shear forging cup (top) and underside (bottom). 
The H-shaped cups from shear forging in Fig. 6.7 were made with four different depths of cut, 𝑡0, 
with the four different back punch diameters. The cuts were sharp in all models, and the sidewalls 
were straight, even the thinnest sidewall with 𝑡0 = 1.3 mm, even though the simulation predicted 
them to be curled and irregular. The R0.1 mm rounding on the back punches could clearly be seen 
on the inside corner on the underside of the cup. The inside corner on the upside of the cup was less 
formed, and a ring of thickened material was visible and could be felt with a finger. 
 
Fig. 6.7 – Cross section of shear forging cup 
(the cup is upside down from the process’ point of view). 
==PAGE:58==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
53 
 
The cross section of the shear forging cup in Fig. 6.7 was created in the same way as the corner 
sharpening cup in Fig. 6.5. In shear forging, the main plastic deformation was in the shear zone, 
marked with a red square. The cutting of the inner sidewall was clean, and the material flowed to 
the middle wall. Some of the material flow turned to the surface and could have created the small 
crack formation in the upper surface of the middle wall at the inside corner, marked with a yellow 
circle. The punch force and the rounding of the counter punch could have had influence on the 
crack formation as well. The curved flow direction on the lower sidewall originates from the flow 
direction in the corner of the corner sharpening cup in Fig. 6.5. The middle wall was flatter than the 
corner sharpening cup, and the counter punch force was acceptable. 
 
 
Table. 6.5 – Measurements of five shear forging cups with measurement uncertainty and equipment. 
Measurement equipment 
Height gauge: Mitutoyo (flat contact) 
Micrometer screw 1: Mahr 40AS (sharp contact) 
Dial gauge: Sylvac (round contact) 
Two of the measured cups in Table. 6.5, “1” and “2”, had the same depth of cut, 𝑡0 = 0.6 mm. 
“Upper” and “lower” refer to the upper and lower sidewall in the H-shaped cup from the shear 
forging experiment, and “middle” refers to the middle wall. “Halfway” refers to half the radial 
distance from the center to the sidewall. “Edge” refers to thinnest point of the bottom wall at the 
corner with the sidewall. The measuring tolerances of the bottom wall were not ±0 but were simply 
outside the measuring range. 
Cup 1 and 2 in Table. 6.5 was measured to be almost the same, which suggests a stable process with 
the depth of cut 𝑡0 = 0.6 mm. The benchmark of the lower wall height ℎ𝑙= 4 mm was achieved 
with an average of ~3.9 mm and ~0.1 mm accuracy, which was acceptable for the next process, 
upsetting. The upper sidewall thickness was almost equal and the same height as in corner sharpening. 
SF-cup [mm]
t 0=0.6(1) t 0=0.6(2)
t 0=0.8
t 0=1.0
t 0=1.3
Tol. +/-
Equipment
h(total)
13.59
13.62
13.31
13.49
13.40
0.02 Height gauge
h(upper)
7.161
7.208
7.071
6.969
6.867
0.027 Dial gauge
h(lower)
3.953
3.893
3.896
3.934
3.878
0.013 Dial gauge
t(side, upper)
2.65
2.67
2.67
2.66
3.70
0.01 Micro. screw 1
t(side, lower)
2.06
2.03
1.84
1.64
1.34
0.01 Micro. screw 1
t(middle, center)
2.22
2.25
2.35
2.46
2.58
0.00 Micro. screw 1
t(middle, halfway)
2.29
2.32
2.47
2.59
2.65
0.00 Micro. screw 1
t(middle, edge)
2.15
2.15
2.20
2.38
2.51
0.01 Micro. screw 1
==PAGE:59==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
54 
 
The lower wall thickness was very close to be the same as the upper wall thickness minus the depth 
of cut. It was uncertain whether the measurements of the bottom thickness could reveal a sinking of 
the upper surface. Comparing to the corner sharpening cups, 1 and 2, the difference between the 
middle center and edge was ~0.2 mm, and in the shear forging cup the difference was reduced, 
presumably caused by the increased counter punch force. The thickness of the middle wall was 
concentrated in a ring at half the radial distance between the center and the side wall. The difference 
in thickness between the thickened ring was ~0.2 mm, compared with the bottom edge. This could 
indicate a minor sinking, but the magnitude is uncertain because of the similarity with the corner 
sharpening cup. The general thickening of the bottom was significant, which increases with the depth 
of cut. Notice that with depth of cut 𝑡0 = 1.3 mm, which was ~50% of the wall thickness, the bottom 
wall thickness became almost as thick as the upper sidewall at 𝑡𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟= ~2.6 mm. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.8 – Plot of the punch force as a function of the travel in shear forging with the simulation with 
different depths of cut, 𝑡0. 
The contribution from the springs on the small subpress was subtracted from the punch force data on 
Fig. 6.8. The punch travel was calculated by the lower wall height minus the difference in the average 
total height from the corner sharpening cups. In the first phase of the process, the punch force builds 
up to the max. force slower than the simulation. The max. punch force is comparable with the 
simulations, and both are increasing with the depth of cut. In the experiments, the max. punch force 
is reached later in the process than in the simulations, except 𝑡0 = 1.0 mm which both constant high 
force at 𝑋≈1 mm. The cause of the slower buildup phase for the punch force and in the experiment 
compared to the simulation is not known. 
==PAGE:60==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
55 
 
6.5 Upsetting 
 
 
Fig. 6.9 – Topside of upsetting cup (top) and underside (bottom). 
The cups from upsetting in Fig. 6.9 had the same sign of folding or incomplete forming of the outside 
of the sidewall, and it was determined to originate from the corner sharpening experiment. The walls 
were straight, and the corners were almost sharp. The inside edge on the top wall had the same sign 
of material flowing up between the punch and counterpunch as the sharp cup in corner sharpening. 
The top side of the middle wall had the same thickened ring as the shear forging cups, but it was 
slightly transformed. The inside corner with the sidewall was more irregular with small cracks. The 
underside corner was visibly fully formed from R0.1 to R0.5, which is an important design feature 
for reducing stresses in the corner of the gear. The inside wall showed similar signs of not being fully 
formed as the outside wall. The underside of the middle wall was flatter than the topside, but the 
reverse pattern of the topside could be seen and felt with a finger. 
 
 
Fig. 6.10 – Cross section of shear forging cup. 
==PAGE:61==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
56 
 
The cross section of the shear forging cup in Fig. 6.10 was created in the same way as the corner 
sharpening cup in Fig. 6.5. The material flow was less clear compared to the corner sharpening and 
shear forging. This could have been caused by the upsetting of the sidewall where the flow might 
have been in the radial direction, which was blurred by the previous horizontal flow in the side wall. 
On the inside corner on the top of the sidewall there were two small crack formations, marked with 
a red square. The cracks were likely the crack from the shear forging process, Fig. 6.7, and the other 
was created by the upsetting process. The sidewalls were almost filled, and the lower inside corner 
formed around the back punch rounding. The upper inside corner was less complete and with a 
crack formation. The bottom wall was flat, and the counter punch force was acceptable. 
 
 
Table. 6.6 – Measurements of five upsetting cups with measurement uncertainty and equipment. 
Measurement equipment 
Micrometer screw 1: Mahr 40AS (sharp contact) 
Micrometer screw 2: Mitutoyo (flat contact) 
Dial gauge: Sylvac (round contact) 
Two of the measured cups in Table. 6.6, “1” and “2”, had the same lower wall thickness, 𝑡𝑙=
2.8 mm. “Upper” and “lower” refer to the upper and lower sidewall in the H-shaped cup from the 
upsetting experiment. “Halfway” refers to half the radial distance from the center to the sidewall. 
“Edge” refers to the edge of the bottom wall at the corner with the sidewall. 
The measurements of the cup 1 and 2 from upsetting in Table 6.6 was close, which indicates a stable 
process. In this experiment, the punch travel was limited by the max. punch force of the press, 𝐹𝑝=
155 kN, and not by the position of the pressure shoe. The consistency in the height of cup 1 and 2 is 
profound, without positional control of the punch. The aim was to maximize the punch and counter 
punch force to fill out the die, rather than an aim of a partial symmetric cup, caused by the error in 
the height of the cup found in the corner sharpening simulation. The upper wall height decreases, the 
smaller the lower sidewall thickness, 𝑡𝑙, gets, and the total cup height decreases as well. The lower 
Up-cup [mm]
t l=2.8(1)
t l=2.8(2)
t l=2.6
t l=2.4
t l=2.1
Tol. +/-
Equipment
h(total)
9.955
9.938
9.856
9.811
9.681
0.001 Micro. screw 2
h(upper)
3.670
3.715
3.458
3.320
3.021
0.018 Dial gauge
h(lower)
4.014
4.010
4.015
3.978
3.979
0.009 Dial gauge
t(side, upper)
3.51
3.48
3.49
3.54
3.50
0.01 Micro. screw 1
t(side, lower)
2.75
2.80
2.67
2.48
2.16
0.01 Micro. screw 1
t(middle, center)
2.28
2.31
2.42
2.52
2.74
0.00 Micro. screw 1
t(middle, halfway)
2.36
2.41
2.47
2.59
2.80
0.01 Micro. screw 1
t(middle, edge)
2.21
2.18
2.29
2.61
2.62
0.01 Micro. screw 1
==PAGE:62==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
57 
 
wall height is consistently ~4 mm because the bottom parts of the upsetting tools, matrix, was 
stationary. The upper and lower wall thickness is close to the nominal dimensions of the tool, and the 
difference could be a combination of the tolerances of the tools, and the degree of how much the 
workpiece was formed. The measurement of the bottom wall showed similar characteristics as the 
thickened ring. The average bottom thickness had increased from the shear forging cup, and 
thickening was therefore present in the process, but it was only an average ~0.1 mm, and counter 
punch force was effective to reduce it. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.11 – Plot of the punch force as a function of the travel in upsetting with the simulation with different 
lower sidewall thickness, 𝑡𝑙. 
The contribution from the springs on the small subpress was subtracted from the punch force data 
on Fig. 6.11. A simulation was only done of the cup with lower sidewall thickness, 𝑡𝑙= 0.6, and it 
is not comparable with the number of outliers. They were plotted together to show that there is a 
vague similarity. The punch travel was adjusted according to the reduction in height between the 
shear forging cup and the upsetting cup. The force curve is an approximately linear curve in three 
intervals, which correlate with the simulations: In the punch travel interval 𝑋= (0; 1), the curve 
increases slowly, as the sidewall is almost straight and expands radially. In the interval 𝑋= (0; 1), 
the upper sidewall is primarily thickening, and the lower sidewall less so. By 𝑋= 3, the upper 
sidewall has almost been fully upset, and the lower sidewall thickness is rapidly increasing, and, 
lastly, the corners are filled with material. Each phase in the process requires more energy than the 
last one because more material plasticly deform, and the punch force increases as a result. 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
58 
 
7. Discussion of results 
 
 
7.1 Sources of error and uncertainty 
 
The experiments were conducted with an attempt to reduce or eliminate sources of error that were 
known beforehand, learned during or afterwards. The identified sources of error are pointed out in 
this section, and it is discussed how they were eliminated. Some sources were not able to be 
eliminated, so their impact on the result were reduced. A few sources errors could not be eliminated 
or reduced, and their impact on the result is discussed. The uncertainty of the result is discussed, and 
unknown contributions to the results are identified. 
The springs on the large subpress in the deep drawing experiment and the small subpress in the rest 
of the experiments, Fig. 5.3, was a source of error, which grew linearly with the punch travel, as the 
springs were compressed. The contribution was measured and subtracted for the punch force data of 
the press. It could be done with high accuracy because of the high frequency and large amount of 
datapoints collected. The spring that acted on the counter punch contributed to the counter punch 
force in the experiments, and not were in the simulations: In the simulation, the punch force and the 
counter punch force were separate, because it was specified as the pressure on the contact surface of 
the punch. In the experiment, the punch force was the force the press produced to maintain the 
velocity and position of the pressure shoe pushing on the small subpress. The subpress contained both 
the punch and counter punch, and thus the punch force was a combination of both. It was relevant for 
corner sharpening, shear forging and upsetting. The contribution from the spring on the counter punch 
was not subtracted from the punch force because of the uncertainty of the precise compression. 
The freeing of the cup or workpiece from the punch and the die was optimized with the freeing 
method, Appendix: A, and it was estimated to have a neglectable influence on the condition of the 
cups. The main issue was that the pressure shoe was not fixed to the subpress, and the press could not 
pull the punch and counter punch out of cup and the die. The springs on the subpress were not strong 
enough to overcome the static friction that had been building up in the processes between the tools 
and cup. The friction between counter punch and the cup was overcome with the use of different 
kinds of lubrication and more of it, and the die with the cup inside was freed from the counter punch 
with less force from the Alu crowbars than in the early tests. The friction between the die and the cup 
was overcome with by letting the press push on the back of the cup in the opposite direction of the 
process. The press only had to overcome static friction once, and the accumulation of stresses was 
lower with the press rather than by using a hammer, which was done previously. 
The surfaces of the tools that were in direct contact with the workpiece were not polished because it 
was not certain whether the forming methods would produce positive results. The result was a rougher 
surface than a polished surface and a much rougher surface on the die used in the corner sharpening 
and shear forging experiment. The soft sheet material, Alu 1050A, created a certain stickiness and 
high friction forces with the tools. The assumed coefficient of friction in the simulations, 𝜇𝑠= 0.1 
𝜇𝑑= 0, was determined to be too low, and the punch force in simulations should be higher, and the 
friction was not measured. 
==PAGE:64==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
59 
 
1-2 cups were made for every process in the lab, and later they were all measured at the same time. 
There was an unknown uncertainty in comparing two cups from different processes rather than 
comparing measurements of the same cup after each process. All dimensions on the cup before the 
process could potentially have an influence on the result, but as upsetting is a part of the corner 
sharpening and upsetting process some of the differences were reduced. The punch was position-
controlled from the control panel, and all cups were deformed to roughly to the same height. The 
thickness would be the same by assuming volume constancy. Some statistical uncertainty was caused 
by only having 1-2 cups representing a process. Ideally, 5-10 cups of each process and subprocess 
would be sufficient to reduce the statistical uncertainty to a minimum. It would have resulted in a 
production of 50-100 cups, and afterwards measuring the same 5-8 dimensions for each cup presented 
in the tables in chapter 6. It was not done in this report because the method of freeing of the cup with 
the press was developed late in the project. 
 
 
7.2 Discussion 
 
The first production process that was analyzed experimentally was deep drawing a cup with an 
existing tractrix die. The advantages with the die design were that it reduced radial changes in the 
cup, compared with a conventional die. The produced cup had small ‘ears’ on the top of sidewall due 
to planar anisotropy, but it did not encounter any of the failure modes described in section 4.1: folds 
at the cup edge or at the bottom, or bottom dents and fractures. The top part of the cup was cut off by 
a turning process, which made the top surface flat, and the height could be controlled with relatively 
high precision. The thickness of the top and the middle of the sidewall varied with 7-17%, which was 
not assumed to have a significant effect on the next process, corner sharpening, in which the sidewall 
was upset radially. It was determined that there was less or no necessity for ironing of the sidewall, 
but it would have created a more predictable geometry for modelling in the corner sharpening 
simulation. The plot of the punch force in Fig. 6.3 showed a sudden increase in force near the end of 
the process, which was caused by a squeezing of the thicker top part through the gap between the 
punch and the die. It was suspected of being the cause of the screeching sound that developed during 
the deep drawing experiment mentioned in subsection 5.4.3. 
The corner sharpening experiment produced essentially two types of cup: The Sharp cup and Less 
sharp cup. The Less sharp cup was the first to cup to be produced, and its goal was to have a sharp 
enough corner to work with the next process, shear forging, and to be easy and fast to produce. The 
sharpness of the corners depended on the punch travel that upset the sidewall. The Less sharp cup 
had a bottom outer corner that was ~0.4 mm from being sharp, and the inside corner was close to 
being developed. The sidewall was ~1.4 mm from being upset fully, according to the simulation, and 
it was reasonable straight as the picture of the cross section showed in Fig. 6.5. The counter punch 
force was too small to flatten bottom wall out, because the spring-loaded counter punch was depended 
on the punch travel. A spring with a higher spring rate would have improved the flatness of the Less 
sharp cup but would have less travel. The spring that was used in all experiments had 7 mm of travel, 
==PAGE:65==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
60 
 
which proved to be excessive for corner sharpening, but the extra travel was used in shear forging. 
The sharp cup was made with the goal of maximizing the sharpness of the corner. It had a completely 
sharp outer bottom corner, and the inner corner was fully formed with the punch diameter R0.5. The 
cup was formed with longer punch travel and a larger counter punch force, and the result was a flat 
bottom wall. Both cups had thickening in the bottom wall concentrated in the center, and the sharp 
cup had a smaller difference in thickness with the larger counter punch force. Both cups had a recess 
around the cup, which was either a sign of folding or incomplete forming, judging from Fig. 6.5. 
Folding would occur if the gap between the punch and die was too large, but the simulations showed 
no sign of folding with a 0.6 mm gap, and the deep drawing cup had a sidewall thickness larger than 
2 mm. The simulations showed that the cup was fully formed at an additional ~0.7 mm of punch 
travel in Fig. 4.8, and the punch force was ~60 kN from the simulation in Fig. 6.6, and it was assumed 
to be the reason for the recess. In Fig. 6.6 the punch force increased at a lower punch travel than the 
simulation, and a contributing factor could be a higher friction in the experiment than in the 
simulation. 
The less sharp cup was used in the shear forging experiment where the aim was to move the bottom 
wall 4 mm towards the middle of the sidewall. The results were promising; the cut was clean, and the 
lower inside corner formed around the R0.1 radius on the back punch as the simulations predicted. 
The lower sidewalls that were cut were straight after the process for all depths of cut, and the bottom 
wall, which previously bended upward, was flattened out by the increased punch force. The same 
punch and counter punch were used in the experiment as well as in corner sharpening so that the 
spring started with a pretention. The bottom was moved close to the 4 mm with ~0.1 mm accuracy, 
which was important for the next experiment, upsetting, because it was the height of the of the back 
punch. A large degree of thickening of the bottom wall was expected from the simulation, but the 
character of it was unexpected. The thickened material was concentrated in a ring at half the radial 
distance between the center of the bottom wall and the sidewall. The local thickening was fed by the 
material flow from the lower sidewall to the middle wall, and it was assumed that the inner radial 
stress from the material in the center of the bottom wall stopped the flow halfway, and the only way 
for the material was upwards. The counter punch reduced the local thickening with a large part of its 
force because it was assumed to be one of its few contact points. The sinking of the upside surface 
was not assumed to be occurring, and the difference in thickness from bottom edge and bottom center 
was almost the same in the cup from corner sharpening. A crack formation was observed on the upper 
inside corner in Fig. 6.7 and could be formed by material flow from the lower sidewall that diverged 
towards the upper surface of the middle wall. Because the thickness increases slightly at the upper 
inside corner, it was assumed to be a contact point for the counter punch rounding. The sharp contact 
could have increased the stress in the shearing zone beyond the tensile stress, and the area would be 
prone to local fractures. The punch force in Fig. 6.8 increased slower than the simulations predicted, 
and the reason is not known. 
The upsetting experimental setup was designed with a single flow process rather than the original 
double flow concept in Fig. 4.17 in section 4.4. The lack of a subpress that could deliver a balanced 
forward and backward flow meant that the process was unbalanced. This is likely to have influenced 
the process and the material flow with relation to which the simulation in Fig. 4.18 showed slightly 
==PAGE:66==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
61 
 
uneven forming of the sidewall between the top and the bottom. The top was formed more than the 
lower sidewall because the matrix at the bottom was stationary. In the picture of the cross section in 
Fig. 6.10, the upper sidewall appears to be filled to a larger degree than the lower sidewall, and the 
flow directions sems more blurred in the upper sidewall, which could indicate more radial flow in the 
upper sidewall. The difference in thickness between the upper and lower sidewall means that the 
upper sidewall increases in thickness faster than the lower side, which is a factor to consider even if 
the sidewalls was upset from both sides.  
 
Fig. 7.1 – Upsetting simulation at 𝑋= 2 mm from Fig. 4.18. 
The upsetting simulation Fig. 7.1 is half way through the process when a small discontinuity appears 
in the mesh in the upper inside corner, which is marked with a green circle. It looks like a small crack 
formation, but it was resolved in the next frame of the timeline in the simulation, and it could be a 
small folding failure mode. In Fig. 6.10, a crack can also be observed in the upper inside corner, and 
it could have been a result of the unbalanced process. As the flow of the process only is top down, 
the middle wall is pressed against the back punch, matrix (blue) in Fig. 7.1, and reaction forces 
develop in the upper inside corner, and they could potentially start the small crack formation. The 
other crack formation on Fig. 6.10, which is located ~1 mm on the upper surface of the middle wall, 
would be from the previous process, shear forging. The reversed situation was on the lower side of 
the middle wall, where the corner radius was increased from R0.1 to R0.5 and it was fully formed. 
The error in the height in the early versions of the corner sharpening simulation increased the volume 
of the cup, and the dimensions for the upsetting tools were made with the same error. With a lower 
cup volume in the experiment, the upper wall was upset to a lower height than the lower sidewall 
ℎ𝑙= ~4 mm. The height of the upper wall decreased with the lower volume because the tool design 
did not account for volume changes of the lower sidewall. The thickening was more constant across 
the middle wall than with the cup from shear forging, and the thickness was still concentrated in a 
ring. The punch force in Fig. 6.11 was not comparable to the inconclusive simulation data, but there 
was some semblance. The four punch force plots were relatively similar to each other because of the 
small difference in lower wall thickness, and the main difference was the punch travel. 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
62 
 
8. Conclusion 
 
 
In this report, new sheet-bulk production methods were analyzed with the purpose of forming a 
lightweight symmetric gear wheel by using sheet metal. The forming of the gear teeth was not 
included in the report. The symmetry of the gear wheel was important for the deformation of the 
fundamental geometry and gear tooth, which were directly linked to the performance of the gear 
wheels. The sheet-bulk forming methods implied advantages to the conventional methods of forming 
lightweight gears such as: less production time, less tool wear, material saving compared with metal 
cutting, and less production time than metal casting. The new forming methods would produce an 
almost symmetric gear wheel construction with a H-shaped design with a small difference in 
thickness between the upper and lower sidewall. Numerical simulations in section 4.5 showed that 
when a distributed force was applied on the gear tooth, the almost symmetric design had similar 
symmetric deflection compared with a fully symmetric design, representing the production methods 
of metal casting and cutting. The H-shaped design was superior to the U-shaped design, representing 
conventional sheet forming methods, because of the symmetric deflection, which was more 
appropriate for the gear tooth contact. 
The main processes in the process chain involved in producing the fundamental geometry of a 
symmetric gear wheel included: Deep drawing a cup, corner sharpening by upsetting the sidewall, 
shear forging the bottom wall upwards, and upsetting the sidewalls further to a vertical die wall, 
instead of gear teeth. A qualitative analysis was made of deep drawing with a tractrix die in section 
4.1, which was designed to reduce radial changes in the cup wall. The experiment was done with an 
already existing setup, and the results showed a 7-17% difference in the sidewall thickness, which 
was acceptable because the sidewall was going to be increased radially in the next process, corner 
sharpening. Special tools were designed and manufactured for the corner sharpening experiment, and 
numerous simulations of the process found the theoretically optimal geometry, in section 4.2, to upset 
the sidewall from ~2 mm to 2.6 mm. The results of the corner sharpening experiment were two types 
of cups with different corner sharpness: The sharp cup had a sharp outer corner and a fully formed 
inner corner, and the less sharp cup was generally less formed with a slightly curved bottom wall 
because the counter punch force was too low due to the too low spring rate of the spring acting on the 
counter punch. Both cups had a ring of recess on the outside of the sidewall that indicated incomplete 
forming, which was unwanted.  
In the shear forging experiment, four similar back punches were designed and manufactured to be 
placed in the die to create four depths of cut, 𝑡0 = {0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.3} mm, in the sidewall, to 
investigate the sinking of the middle wall in the H-shaped cup. The results did not show sinking but 
thickening concentrated in a ring on the middle wall, and the smallest depth of cut, 𝑡0 = 0.6 mm, 
created the least thickening while maintaining most of the sidewall thickness. The goal of moving the 
bottom wall of the cup 4 mm upwards was reached with 0.1 mm accuracy, which was acceptable for 
fitting the tool used for upsetting. The cut of the back punches was sharp and clean, and it showed 
high potential for achieving symmetry in the gear. A small crack formation was observed 1 mm from 
the sidewall, which would be unwanted in the gear, as it could potentially grow under load. In the 
upsetting experiment, a wider punch and die was designed and manufactured to produce the upper 
wall thickness 𝑡𝑢= 3.4 mm as well as four new back punches that were made to produce the lower 
==PAGE:68==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
63 
 
wall thicknesses 𝑡𝑙= {2.8, 2.6, 2.4, 2.1} mm. 𝑡𝑙= 2.8 mm was prefered because the sidewall 
thickness should be maximized for teeth forming while maintaining sidewall rigidity. The bottom 
parts were stationary, which made it only a forward flow process and not a 1:1 representation of the 
original balanced forward and backward concept in Fig. 4.17. The result of the process was that the 
top sidewall was almost formed, the lower sidewall was less formed, the lower inside corner was fully 
formed, and the upper inside corner was less formed with a small new crack formation. The inner and 
upper sidewall heights were not symmetric due to the modelling error in the early simulations, 
explained in section 4.4. However, it was assumed to be difficult to achieve symmetric wall heights 
with precision and a complete forming at the same time. The unbalanced upsetting process was able 
to upset the sidewall to a certain degree, but the unwanted side effects made it less suitable for 
achieving symmetry. 
The four sheet forming processes investigated in the report showed that they could be used to form a 
2 mm thick aluminum sheet metal to the fundamental geometry of a lightweight gear with an almost 
symmetrical design. The H-shaped cross section was achieved with processes without the 
disadvantages of metal casting and cutting, and the performance of the resulting gear was very similar. 
In the experiments there were observed some small-scale failure modes and undesirable forming in 
the cups, which would be unacceptable in a gear. The potential of the four sheet forming production 
methods to form a lightweight gear wheel of sheet metal is concluded to be present, and they need to 
be developed further to decrease unwanted side effects of the processes. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
64 
 
9. Further investigations 
 
 
There were subjects that were not investigated in the duration of the project, which would contribute 
to the investigation of analysing the sheet-bulk forming methods to form a symmetric lightweight 
gear wheel. The purpose of the simulations was initially to be an important piece of the design process 
of the tools in which concepts and geometries were tested before they were made into technical 
drawings and manufactured. When the tools were manufactured, the simulations were repurposed to 
increase the precision for comparison with the results. The simulations were improved to a certain 
degree, but the model from the previous process simulation was not loaded, which would give an 
indication of the accumulative strain hardening. The tools for the experiments were unknowingly 
designed for a deep drawn cup height ℎ0 = 22 mm instead of ℎ0 = 20 mm because of the modelling 
error in the early corner sharpening simulation, and it would be interesting to achieve a symmetric 
sidewall height ℎ𝑢= ℎ𝑖= 4 mm in upsetting with ℎ0 = 22 mm. The counter punch was slightly 
damaged during the early test in Fig. 5.13, and the inner surface of the die was rough because it was 
drilled, and the bottom inside edge was damaged. Replacing, especially, the die would lower the 
friction in corner sharpening and shear forging, and the cups could be ejected from the die in the 
direction of the process without being scratched by the edges. A method for ejecting the cup out of 
the die with the punch could be developed. 
The unwanted side effects of the four processes, e.g., incomplete forming and crack formations, 
should be minimized, and the cup in corner sharpening was assumed to be not fully formed. A spring 
with a larger spring rate was requested in the corner sharpening tool because the spring travel was 
small. The small crack formation in shear forging should be investigated further in depth. The new 
crack in upsetting was assumed to be caused by the simplified forward flow process rather than the 
original balanced forward- and backwards flow concept, which was worth investigating. Instead of a 
rigid matrix, the lower tool could incorporate a spring-loaded back punch like the counter punch. 
However, the differences in thickness growth rate between the upper and lower sidewall must be 
considered, due to the differences in initial thickness, which is important when investigating how to 
form gear teeth. The material, Alu 1050A, proved to be largely adequate to the equipment available, 
but the material tended to flow in between small gaps in the tools at high punch force, and a harder 
material was assumed to be less likely to behave like that. The hardness on the sidewall of the 
produced cups could be measured in different places to analyse the distribution of strain hardening. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
65 
 
10. References 
 
 
1. Tim Benkert et al 2017: “Multi-component lightweight gearwheels with deep-drawn wheel 
body for automotive applications” – Tim Benkert, Maria Hiller and Wolfram Volk 
 
2. Tim Benkert et al 2018: ”A holistic approach to lightweight design of multi-component 
gearwheels” –  Tim Benkert, Maria Hiller and Wolfram Volk 
 
3. Ester et al 2019: “The Additive Advantage – How 3-D Printing is Changing the Powder 
Metal Performance Game” – Matthew Ester 
 
4. Behrens et al 2019: “New Multistage Sheet-Bulk Metal Forming Process Using Oscillating 
Tools” – Bernd-Arno Behrens, Sven Hübner, Philipp Müller, Hans-Bernward Besserer, 
Gregory Gerstein, Sergej Koch and Daniel Rosenbusch 
 
5. Wang et al 2019: “Application of flow model in metal cutting to cold forging of tubular 
products” – Z.G. Wang, T. Hakoyama, Y. Endo, K. Osakada 
 
6. Merklein et al 2012: “Bulk forming of sheet metal” – M. Merklein, J. M. Allwood, B. A. 
Behrens, A. Brosius, H. Hagenah, K. Kuzman, K. Mori, A.E. Tekkaya, A. Weckenmann 
 
7. Þorleifsson et al 2020: “Simulation of sheet-bulk forming of lightweight gears” – Sigurþór 
Árni Þorleifsson and Úlfar Arinbjarnar 
 
8. Bay et al 2020: “Compendium for 41730 Industrial forming of metals” – Niels Bay, 
modified by Chris Valentin Nielsen 
 
9. João et al 2019: “Process Limits of Sheet-Bulk Forming” – João Pedro Grosa Magrinho 
 
10. Nielsen et al 2020: “41730d Cold forging: Tool design and dimensioning” (slides) – Chris 
Valentin Nielsen, 41730 Industrial forming of metals Fall 20, DTU 
 
11. www.alumeco.dk 
 
12. www.udeholm.dk 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
66 
 
11. Appendix 
 
 
Content 
 
Appendix A: Freeing of cup method 
 
 
p. 67 
Appendix B: Lubrication  
 
 
p. 69 
Appendix C: Pictures of measurement equipment 
 
p. 72 
Appendix D: Pictures of tools 
 
 
p. 73 
Appendix E: Technical drawing – Deep Drawing cup  
p. 76 
Appendix F: Technical drawing – Conor sharpening tools 
p. 77 
Appendix G: Technical drawing – Shear forging tools  
p. 84 
Appendix H: Technical drawing – Upsetting tools 
 
p. 90 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
67 
 
Appendix A: Freeing of the cup method 
 
 
 
 
Left: Die follows the punch up, Right: Die with the cup inside freed with Alu crowbars 
 
 
Left: Blank holder part with hollow space, Right: Die with the cup placed on the blank holder part 
 
 
 
Left: Punch through the die, Right: Cup inside blank holder part 
 
==PAGE:73==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
68 
 
 
 
 
Left: Freed cup from corner sharpening, Right: Freed cup with back punch inside from shear forging 
 
The punch was only in direct contact with the underside of the cup from corner sharpening, and it 
was otherwise in contact with the back punches inside the cup from shear forging and upsetting. The 
forces delivered to the cup through the back punches was small compared to the forces in the actual 
processes, and it was assumed that no plastic deformation would come from it. The corner sharpening 
had the highest potential to create high contact stresses with the punch, but the punch surface was 
large and flat, and could distributed the forces over a large part of the underside of the cup. No visible 
marks were visible on the underside of the cup. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
69 
 
Appendix B: Lubrication 
 
==PAGE:75==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
70 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
71 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
72 
 
Appendix C: Pictures of measurement equipment 
 
 
 
 
Left: Optic sensor – DeMeet 220 (www.aurotek.com.tw), Right: Height gauge – Mitutoyo 
 
 
Left: Dial gauge – Sylvac, Right: Micrometer screw 1 – Mahr 40AS 
 
 
 
Left: Micrometer screw 2 – Mitutoyo, Right: Micrometer screw 3 – Ambrose Shardlow & Co 53M 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
73 
 
Appendix D: Pictures of tools 
 
 
 
 
Left: Corner sharpening- and shear forging assembly, Right: Upsetting assembly 
 
 
Left: Corner sharpening- and shear forging punch assembly, Right: Upsetting assembly punch assembly 
 
 
Left: Punch assembly without plate, Right: Spring 
==PAGE:79==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
74 
 
 
 
 
Left: Corner sharpening die assembly, Middle: Shear forging die assembly, Right: Upsetting die assembly 
 
 
Left: Shear forging die assembly without die, Right: Shear forging back punches 
 
Right: Upsetting back punches forging back punches 
 
Rough surface on die 
==PAGE:80==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
75 
 
 
 
Left: Rough surface on counter punch, Right: Dent in counter punch and scratches  
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
76 
 
Appendix E: Technical drawing – Deep Drawing cup 
 
==PAGE:82==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
77 
 
Appendix F: Technical drawing – Corner sharpening tools 
 
==PAGE:83==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
78 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
79 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
80 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
81 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
82 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
83 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
84 
 
Appendix G: Technical drawing – Shear Forging tools 
 
==PAGE:90==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
85 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
86 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
87 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
88 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
89 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
90 
 
 
Appendix H: Technical drawing – Upsetting tools 
 
==PAGE:96==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
91 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
92 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
93 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
94 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
95 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
Emil Schock Jonsson 
Analysis of new lightweight gear design and manufacturing 
21-02-2021
 
by new forming technologies 
96 
 
 
