==PAGE:1==
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for
the development of Energy Service Company
(ESCO) markets
Master Thesis
DTU Sustainable Energy
Department of DTU Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service
Company (ESCO) markets
Master Thesis
February, 2021
By
Gianmaria Bilato
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of DTU Management, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Gianmaria Bilato - 181732
Signature
Date
ii
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
21/02/2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Despite the growing interest in reducing GHG emissions and increasing EE on the part of
governments and international agencies, the results obtained are not sufficient to achieve
the goals of the Paris Agreement. A solution to promote further financing and enhance
the uptake of EE measures could be provided by Energy Service Companies.
Nowadays, there are few energy markets in which ESCOs have been able to grow and
establish themselves as an valid alternative to traditional EE investments. However, future
investments toward EE could lead to a global ESCO market growth of about 6 times by
2040. For this reason, the most common barriers that have impeded the growth and
spread of the ESCO market have been identified through a literature review, interviews,
discussions, and the use of a questionnaire. Through the analysis of the questionnaire
results, it was identified that the cooperation between public and private entities with the
aim of identifying, promoting, financing, building and managing EE projects is the most
important driver for the ESCO development in both developed and developing ESCO
markets. The creation of national and international ESCO associations, the formation
of super ESCOs, the dissemination of insurance packages and example projects, the
adoption of O&M standards, the digitisation of ESCOs, and the presence of national and
international funds are also important drivers to foster the creation of a developed ESCO
market.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, a special thanks goes to my main supervisor, Henrik Klinge Jacobsen,
who took time out of his busy schedule, to support both the research and development of
this thesis.
Secondly, I would like to express my gratitude to Federico Antonio Canu and Søren Lütken
for the help provided during the past months to investigate the world of energy efficiency
and ESCOs, and supported me with advice and ideas until the last minute.
I would also like to thank the 11 experts who responded to the questionnaire and Morten
Sondergaard, vice president of Danish Energy Management. who provided the basis
for the design of questionnaire and useful information about ESCO activity in multiple
countries.
iv
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
ESCO
Energy efficiency company
EPC
Energy performance contract
EE
Energy efficiency
M&V
Measurement and Verification
O&M
Operation and Maintenance
TPF
Third-party financing
GHG
Greenhouse gas emissions
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Methodology
5
1.1
Litterature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Questionnaire design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
The role of ESCOs in promoting energy efficiency
11
2.1
The spread of EE and the problem related with it . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
How ESCOs can overcome some of the barriers for EE
. . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3
Energy Performance Contracting (EPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
Financing models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.5
Energy savings insurance and credit risk guarantee
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.6
Super ESCO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3
Developed ESCO markets and success factors
31
3.1
The Chinese market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.2
The US market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.3
The European market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4
Analysis and Results
41
4.1
Market analysis of ESCOs around the world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2
Future energy consumption of developing markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3
ESCO market barriers in developing markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.4
Survey analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5
Discussion
65
5.1
Recommendations for the ESCO development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6
Conclusions
73
6.1
Limitations and future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A Appendix
79
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
The greenest electron is the one not generated
In the 2015 Paris Agreement, 196 Parties agreed to limit climate change to less than 2
degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, and make efforts to keep the temperature
increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius. EE is one of the most cost-efficient ways of reducing
GHG emissions and is essential to meet the objectives of the Paris Agreement while of-
fering many economy-wide benefits ([50]) including lower individual electricity bills, the
creation of new jobs, and the stabilization of energy prices ([37]). However these are
not the only benefits of energy efficiency: lower energy consumption leads to lower in-
vestments in national energy capacity and greater energy independence, better working
conditions, update machines and technology, development of local economics, and re-
duced risk of utility service disruptions. EE is also the key to ensuring access to energy
globally, especially in emerging economies, where 654 million people remain without ac-
cess to electricity ([34]).
As highlighted in Figure 1, EE gains since 2000 prevented a 12% increase in energy
consumption than would otherwise have been the case in 2017 IEA2019. However, pre-
vious improvements in EE growth rates have been slowing down globally, and total EE
investments are not on track to deliver the needed savings.
Figure 1: Energy Efficiency trend from 2000 until 2017 [29]. The vertical axis represents
the percentage increase, considering the year 2000 as year 0, of the growth of GDP and
energy use with and without the use of energy efficiency.
Most EE investments continue to be self-financed, e.g. through households’ savings or
companies’ balance sheets and these types of finance are unable to deliver the needed
investment growth. At the same time, the growth of the world’s population and the im-
provement of living conditions will pose an additional challenge to the fight against climate
change. EE has an important role to ensure sustainable growth of all economies, espe-
cially the developing ones. Therefore, new policies supporting alternative finance mech-
anisms and business models are necessary to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement
([33]).
A solution to promote financing and enhance the uptake of EE measures could be pro-
vided by Energy Service Companies (ESCOs). ESCOs design, install and/or finance EE
projects through a contractual agreement, usually an energy performance contract (EPC),
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
1
==PAGE:12==
with the energy-using customer. A business model which can provide the needed invest-
ments to substantially scale up growth rates in EE ([33]).
While the ESCO activities in the already mature and developed markets have kept growing
during the past 20 years, it continues to be limited in many countries by different typologies
of barriers and very often the investments in this particular business model are considered
excessively risky. In addition, awareness of ESCO services remains ignored or poorly
known in most countries and few are the examples of markets where ESCOs have found
opportunities for rapid growth and expansion ([43]). It is, therefore, crucial to understand
which drivers and barriers are facilitating and constraining ESCOs to develop and thrive
to unleash the potential for investments in EE.
For these reasons, this thesis focuses on investigating the following research question:
• How can ESCO market development be best supported in developing and emerging
economies with underdeveloped ESCO presence?
In order to answer this research question, the following sub-questions needed to be an-
swered and were formulated to guide the analysis:
• How have the ESCO barriers changed in the past years and did it have an impact
on the market growth?
• Which are the most significant barriers, sub-types of barriers, success factors and
supporting legislation for the development of ESCO market?
• Which initiatives relevant for developing countries with underdeveloped ESCO pres-
ence can be implemented and lead to ESCO market development?
In order to answer the above questions, in Chapter 1, a specific review of the methodol-
ogy is described. The main parts of this paragraph are the review of the most relevant
literature, highlights of interviews and conferences I attended, and the design of the ques-
tionnaire. The specific questionnaire has been created and sent to ESCO associations
and experts part of the Global ESCO Network, initiated by the UNEP DTU Partnership
([22]). The questionnaire is focused on understanding the most important policy and reg-
ulatory barriers that are preventing the development of the ESCO market. Although the
first form also contained other types of barriers, in order to reduce the response time and
achieve a better level of accuracy, it was decided to limit the questionnaire to this specific
barrier category.
Chapter 2 provides a snapshot of the latest trends on the global EE investment. Two
economic theories are explored to understand the reasons behind the slow adoption of
EE measures and the limited decrease in energy consumption. In the same chapter, an
introduction to ESCOs and their background is provided. The entire process of an EPC
contract, from development through completion, is described for the two most common
types of EPC contracts: Share and Guaranteed Energy Savings, along with their ad-
vantages, disadvantages and their differences. For completeness of information, other
lesser-used forms of ESCO contracts and financing options are also described. Finally,
the possible insurance packages available and the advantages of establishing super ES-
COs are presented. This chapter therefore provides the basis for the reader to understand
the world of ESCOs and their operation.
In the third chapter, the global ESCO market trends over the past years are analyzed. By
consulting [31], information is provided on the progress of ESCOs in different markets, the
ratio between public and private interventions, the distribution of different contract types,
2
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:13==
and the distribution between industrial, residential, and non-residential sectors in different
countries. A specific review has been conducted on the history of the most successful
ESCO markets, respectively the Chinese, American and European markets, their recent
developments, and the main drivers that have enabled their growth.
The thesis then follows providing a projection of the average size of the ESCO market until
2040. The projection was created comparing historical data of the global ESCO market
size and future energy efficiency investments proposed by [35]. Two scenarios are cre-
ated, a more conservative one, in which ESCOs continue to play a marginal role, and a
more optimistic one, in which ESCOs succeed in establishing themselves as a viable solu-
tion for implementing EE measures. Political interest, private adoption of EE technologies
along with the removal of market barriers will be the key to determining their success and
adoption. In the same Chapter, an analysis of the world’s future population and economic
growth is conducted in relation to energy consumption. This is to demonstrate the critical
importance of expanding EE and the role of ESCOs in these markets as well.
From the literature and interviews, all the barriers that have impeded the development of
ESCOs in different sectors have been extracted. These were categorized into a list and
divided into four different categories. A more specific analysis is conducted regarding the
policy and legislative barriers that characterize the ESCO market. Through the question-
naire results it was possible to understand which ones most influence this market and
their importance. In addition, comments and advice are drawn directly from the markets
in which ESCO associations and experts operate.
Concrete recommendations on how to address and resolve the different types of barriers
are provided in the conclusions. This has been possible by investigating what are the main
success factors in different ESCO markets. It has also been possible to list for importance
the legislation that need to be implemented to support the operation of ESCOs at national
and international level. The thesis therefore aims to provide concrete ideas and solutions
for all emerging markets to develop a healthy energy efficiency market through the use of
public and private ESCOs.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:15==
1
Methodology
The ESCO world is far from easy and uniform to understand: definitions change from state
to state, barriers applied to different market conditions affect its development in different
ways, public and private stimuli change in quantity and quality. While in some countries the
ESCO market has exploded in the past years, in others it cannot get out of its embryonic
phase, or worse, it is decreasing. Therefore, many steps were needed to summarize the
barriers and incentives that influence this market, and many times subsequent revisions
have been made.
An intense review of the literature has been carried out, together with conferences and
private interviews with companies directly active in the field, to gain a deep understanding
of the national and international EE trends, the status of ESCO development and of its
most relevant markets.
The strengths of the winners and the weaknesses of the losers have been extracted from
different markets and used to create a form, as robust as possible, to investigate the
policy and regulatory barriers for the development of ESCOs. However, generalization,
as always, reduces the quality of analysis but allows the reader to gain a general picture
of the world situation. For this reason, two levels were analyzed in parallel, the world and
selected national ESCO market trends. The aim is thus to provide a general global picture
of the ESCO market and with national analysis provide the specifics of the most salient
factors that affect the market.
All these observations have allowed, through several revisions, the formulation of pre-
cise questions resulting in a questionnaire which has been circulated to and answered by
ESCO practitioners, associations and companies, allowing, at least in part, to get a fresh
look at this growing and increasingly interesting market. Analyzing similarities and analo-
gies between different countries and structuring the information from the respondents has
enabled the thesis to provide concrete recommendations on how ESCO markets in de-
veloping countries can be supported in order to efficiently and effectively increase EE
worldwide.
The creation of the questionnaire was not easy. It took a long time, many changes were
made and details discussed with many stakeholders. In fact, it led to the realization of how
difficult it is to enclose such a large and complex topic in a relatively short questionnaire,
balancing the space between open and closed questions, not putting too much burden
on the respondents to avoid fatigue and potentially avoid completing the questionnaire,
without neglecting fundamental aspects, and leaving a space dedicated to the participants
to express their perspectives.
Thanks to the Global ESCO Network created by the Copenhagen Centre for EE (C2E2)
and the UNEP DTU Partnership (a part of the Technical University of Denmark), func-
tioning as co-supervisors for this thesis, a sufficient number of ESCO companies and
associations was reached in order to obtain accurate information on which to base my
research.
In this section all the steps that allowed the creation of the questionnaire are presented,
it provides the approach of the review of the ESCO literature, a summary of the most im-
portant information gathered from the interviews and conferences in which I participated,
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
5
==PAGE:16==
and a full description of the questionnaire , pointing out question by question the purpose
of my research.
1.1
Litterature review
Reports and official statements helped understand the global trends toward EE and its role
within the carbon neutrality plan for several countries around the world. Globally, there is
a strong interest in energy improvement and consumption reduction, and this trend seems
to be projected to grow in the coming years.
Once the global perspective toward EE was captured, an in-depth analysis of the ESCO
market was conducted. There have been many ESCO initiatives and progress from the
adoption of the first ESCOs to the present day, and there will likely be many changes
and developments in the coming years. While reports at the national or regional level are
updated quite frequently, it is difficult and complex to get an idea of the future global ESCO
market and how individual markets will evolve. At the same time, data at the global level
does not always include all countries and almost always the information is not updated as
often as the national reports. The purpose of the methodology review is precisely to link
the pieces globally starting with the most up-to-date reports, creating a general idea of the
state of maturity of this market, and to gather barrier and drivers that have characterized
the ESCO market in the past.
[39] provides a good introduction to the world of EE and ESCOs, including an introduction
to EPC contracts and ESCO association, the different financing options available, the
services offered by ESCOs, the role of M&V, and a market report of a multitude of countries
around the world. [49] collect articles from ESCO experts and practitioners, including
regional and national ESCO associations, to ”provide a comprehensive guide on issues
to consider when opting to include EE in the revision of NDCs”. These articles provide
insights into experiences and best practices for the operation of ESCOs to foster their
adoption of EE projects. Some ideas and concepts have been collected and used for
further analysis and discussion. On the other side, [32] collects the latest data on the
national market revenue and its growth during the years, breaking it down by the types of
contracts used, by the proportion of public and private sector, and by end-use sector.
Barriers and drivers related to the European ESCO market have been gathered from [7],
[8], [51], [4], [6], and [11]. The latest JRC report ([7]) is based on a European survey [44]
to monitor the ESCO market situation in the different EU states. The survey investigates
the types of ESCO affiliation, the size of the overall energy services, the latest overall mar-
ket trend and the current ESCO size, the ownership of ESCOs, the typical ESCO/EPC
clients, the technology implemented, the average size of the investments, duration and
energy savings of ESCO projects, the type of contract used, the main drivers and recom-
mendations for the ESCO market, and the most relevant barriers encountered in different
nations. Through [13], it was possible to access historical data on EE projects in the Eu-
ropean Union, with associated payback times and avoidance costs for various upgrades
in buildings and industries.
[12] investigates the investment trends for the US ESCO history from 1990 to 2017 through
an econometric analysis, decomposing the main market drivers. The results obtained fail
to explain with analytical precision which were the most important drivers for growth, and
discusses later other qualitative elements may be relevant but were not considered within
his research.
[57] examines the status of the ESCO market in China, the policies that drive it and their
evolution. [28] also provides a comprehensive overview of Chinese ESCO market and
6
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:17==
how the experience gained in this market can be a success factor for other emerging
technologies. The latest announcements of Chinese President Xi Jinping and [41] make
clear the prospects in the coming years for the EE and renewable energy markets in
China. [43] describes the main barriers that ESCOs encounter in developing countries
and the mechanism to accelerate the diffusion of EE in these markets, while [46] and [49]
describes the role of Super ESCOs in unlocking market barriers in developing ESCO mar-
kets. The same topic is addressed by [47], extrapolating concepts from natural sciences,
economics, psychology, innovation studies and sociology to ”to highlight key issues and
challenges, to indicate how different approaches can provide complementary insights and
to suggest a way forward”.
These studies have proven to be very excellent for understanding the operation of ESCOs
and EPC contracts, how these particular ways of doing business differ from other EE
services, the various types of contracts and their pros and cons, the different types of
funding that can be obtained and more generally the barriers that ESCOs face every day
when working directly in the field. All these excellent insights into the recommendations
and barriers in the literature have been used for the creation and refinement of the form.
[35] collects and analyses different scenarios for the future trend of EE investments. This
is important in understanding the possible role of ESCOs in this market and the different
growth perspectives in developing and developed ESCO markets. A specific analysis of
world population trends, more specifically, that of developing countries was conducted us-
ing data offered by [53]. [25] data were used instead to calculate the correlation between
GDP and energy use. This was the key to understanding why it is essential to expand the
ESCO market in developing countries to limit their future carbon emissions.
1.2
Interviews
The interviews served me to explore what are the crucial issues for the development of
ESCOs by people who actively participate in this market. For this reason, a series of
questions were agreed upon by me and my supervisor in order to deal with as many
issues as possible, specifically trying to understand what the issues that ESCOs have to
solve practically.
The first interview was conducted with Morten Sondergaard, vice president of Danish En-
ergy Management (DEM). The interview served to clarify critical points about how ESCOs
operate and the issues they face. The questions asked during the interviews are attached
in the appendix and the answered are summarized in Paragraph 4.4.11.
Another set of interviews, less formal but repeated throughout, was with the thesis super-
visors from UNEP DTU: Søren Lütken and Federico Antonio Canu. This semi-structured
interviews, a mixed of open and closed question, helped gather the most current ESCO
content and the continued revision of the thesis.
A number of interesting ideas were found during the interviews and helped to better model
the form. Their help was also crucial in the final drafting of the questionnaire and its
dissemination to ESCO associations and experts. The participants in The Global ESCO
Network have been contacted to answer the questionnaire and provide information and
ideas disseminated in different ESCO markets. In any case, a part of the questions have
been omitted in the questionnaire due to time constraints, and will be addressed in the
market analysis.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
7
==PAGE:18==
1.3
Questionnaire design
The creation of the questionnaire was accomplished through a diligent literature review
and from various interviews and conferences I attended, which provided the basis of the
questions on the form. The main barriers and drivers for ESCO development were ex-
tracted from [39], the latest [7], and [43]. The survey [44] was used as a starting point for
the creation of the questionnaire.
All the barriers for the different states have been extracted from the literature into a list
of barriers per country, and those that were similar in nature although formulated slightly
different have been merged. Unlike the survey used by [44], where only generic categories
are present, in the first draft of the questionnaire each category contains specific barriers.
The categories were initially similar to those in the European report and then reduced in
number to simplify the survey.
Once the most common typologies of barriers within different ESCO markets were iden-
tified, they were divided into four categories:
• Policy and regulatory
• Business and technical
• Financial
• Knowledge and inexperience
Figure 1.1: Scale utilized for each barrier in the survey.
Each of the barriers within the categories has been categorized on a scale of 1 to 5, where
1 indicates it has no importance for the development of the ESCO market and 5 is of great
importance. It was also possible to specify that a specific barrier or driver is not relevant to
the market conditions in which the ESCO company/association operates. For each barrier
category, an open-ended question was provided to allow respondents to propose barriers
not included in the questionnaire, leaving it up to the reader to express themselves in their
own words.
After sending the draft to experts in the ESCO and EE field, their feedback was utilized
for the improvement of the survey. It was decided to limit the questionnaire focus on
researching a specific barrier category. This was due to the excessive length of the ques-
tionnaire and response time. That would have limited the amounts of respondents, and
caused the collection of inaccurate and overly general information.
In the final version, the focus is narrowed to the analysis of specific policy and regulatory
barriers. The reason was dictated by the fact that this type of barrier is encountered across
all ESCO markets, and plays a critical role in the development of ESCO business and the
adoption of EPC contracts. However, this section has been enlarged and some barriers
from other categories have been added as they are directly related to policy barriers. The
final questionnaire contains 10 barriers, namely:
• Specific legislation for public procurement, tendering and/or auctions
• Energy sector reforms to reduce energy price distortion
8
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:19==
• Definition of specific energy savings target for public and private buildings
• Creation of specific legislation for the operation of ESCOs and the formulation of
EPC contracts
• Clear tax regulations for ESCOs and EPC contracts
• Restrictions on contract duration for contracts with public sector entities
• Public incentives aimed at EE projects directly or indirectly
• Cooperation between public and private entities with the aim of identifying, promot-
ing, financing, building and managing EE projects
• National promotion of EE measures and/or energy auditing
• Low continuity in institutional programs and planning.
At the end of the ranked matrix, two open questions could be used by the respondent
to state which is the most important piece of legislation to implement, retain or remove
in order to benefit the ESCO sector the most, and whether other drivers are found that
were not previously considered. These open-ended responses are useful for better un-
derstanding the issues within the legislative framework, leaving the respondent with more
room for expression. Recommendations and advice from experts and ESCO associations
are collected in Chapter 4.4.
1.3.1
Limitations of the questionnaire
The first limitation of the questionnaire to consider is certainly that it is limited to a specific
type of barrier, and that this, while found to be crucial through the preliminary scoping of
literature, interviews and questionnaires, is not the only one influencing the ESCO market.
Furthermore, the specific barriers within this category have been generalized by several
national and international reports as seen above. In addition, it must be remembered that
responses are derived in different countries with different legislation and market condi-
tions.
Other potential weaknesses are related to the use of a questionnaire itself including faulty
sampling and non-response errors, biased questionnaire design and wording, and faulty
interpretation of result ([42]). In fact, although the questionnaire was used to analyze
a specific type of barrier, this may be of lesser importance when analyzed in relation
to the other types. On the other hand, the questionnaire is addressed to experts and
ESCO associations that do not represent the total number of stakeholders included in EE
projects.
Using a matrix scaled system for barriers also may not be accurate enough to obtain
analytical data. In fact, it depends on personal experience how these questions are an-
swered. Therefore, this must be taken into account when analyzing the results. As of
now, there are only a finite number of ESCO associations and experts within the Global
ESCO Network, and this limited the search to their sphere of experience and work.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:21==
2
The role of ESCOs in promoting energy
efficiency
As stated in the Introduction, EE is one of the most important approaches to reduce carbon
emissions and to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement. In fact, the world’s major
economies are looking for new tools to reduce the energy consumption of their buildings
and industries and to mitigate climate changes. At the national level, many individual
states have started planning and implementing actions to achieve these goals, including,
although only to a limited extent, EE measures.
In the United States, the election of Joe Biden represents a reversal of direction on en-
ergy transition and climate change with respect to the previous administration. One of
Biden’s key political points is, in fact, the fight against climate change, and he proposes
the achievement of economy-wide net-zero emissions no later than 2050, and an invest-
ment of 400 billion dollars in support of renewable energy and innovation ([1]) within the 9
key elements of his plan for a clean energy future. At the same time, a stimulus package
of 1.8 trillion euros was approved in Europe to counter the post-Covid-19 economic cri-
sis in the financial framework 2021-2027. Within this stimulus package, the fight against
climate change obtains 30% of European funds, the highest share ever of the European
budget, and states the goal of achieving carbon neutrality in 2050 ([18]).
Looking at the trend in the Asian continent, according to the latest official statements of
Chinese President Xi Jinping during the last UN meeting in New York, China sets the goal
of being carbon neutral in 2060 and reach the peak of emissions before 2030. This decla-
ration finds fundamental importance in the production of energy from renewable sources
and the improvement of the country’s EE, This is aligned with the official position of the
Chinese government expressed in the latest ”13th five-year plan for economical and social
development of the people’s republic of China” ([41]).
While the importance of EE is continuously reiterated by countries, global organizations,
and global agreements, the trend of investment in EE has remained stagnant in recent
years, with 2020 the year with the lowest investment in the last 5 years (Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: Global EE investments from 2015 to 2020 ([35]).
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
11
==PAGE:22==
2.1
The spread of EE and the problem related with it
EE is one of the most cost-efficient ways of reducing GHG emissions while offering many
economy-wide benefits ([50]) including lower individual electricity bills, the creation of new
jobs, and the stabilization of energy prices ([37]). However these are not the only benefits
of EE: lower energy consumption leads to lower investments in national energy capac-
ity and greater energy independence, updated machines and technology, better working
conditions, development of local economics, and reduced risk of utility service disruptions.
Despite the benefits related to EE, its growth trend does not seem to be in line with those
predicted and its diffusion does not seem to follow the rapid expansion expected. To
provide an answer to this phenomenon, references can be made to the scientific literature
that has identified several factors, both internal and external to the EE market, that block
and prevent the adoption of EE technologies.
Two major types of issues arise from the literature and several studies have been con-
ducted in the past: the first problem, called the EE gap or energy paradox, is related to
the fact that although EE measures involve explicit benefits and are economically and
financially advantageous, the full potential of EE is not fully exploited. The second is the
so-called ”Rebound effect”, i.e. improvements in EE are partially reduced due to the fact
that savings lead to an increase in consumption.
2.1.1
The EE gap
Even if several affordable and accessible technological options to reduce energy costs
and polluting emissions exists in the market, there are issues related to their diffusion, as
these are not adopted by individuals in the way it would be expected. These observations
led to the introduction of the concept of the EE gap, the difference between the theoretical
optimal level of investment in EE, and the actual level of investment.
The first time the term was used by Hirst and Brown in 1990 ([26]). Two main typologies
of barriers to explain the EE gap and the EE market failure are identified in their theory:
structural and behavior barriers. The structural barriers are related to the activities of
public and private entities, and are usually beyond the control of the individual energy
end user, while behavioral barriers arise from the end user’s decision-making process
related to energy consumption.
Table 2.1: Structural and behaviour barrier identified by [26]
Structural barriers
Distortion in fuel prices
Uncertainty about future fuel prices
Limited access to capital
Government fiscal and regulatory policies
Codes and standards
Supply infrastructure limitations
Behavioral barriers
Attitudes toward EE
Perceived risk of energy-efficiency investments
Information gaps
Misplaced incentives
Distortion in fuel prices
The price of fuels does not take into account externalities, such as the environmental and
human health cost of utilizing fossil fuels to produce electricity. It also fails to account for
macroeconomic issues such as fuel import dependence on other countries and foreign
balance-of-payments implications.
12
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:23==
Uncertainty about future fuel price
In the past, wars and economic interests have resulted in huge fluctuations in fuel prices.
Consider, for example, the oil crises of the 1970s and 1980s and the recent 2020 oil
war between Russia and Saudi Arabia. These factors strongly influence the interest in
the need to increase the EE of a nation or private users. In addition, new legislation may
place greater uncertainty on the price of fossil fuels, such as removing incentives for fossil
fuels or imposing a carbon tax on the most polluting fuels.
Limited access to capital
EE measures usually have higher capital investments than less efficient technologies.
The price is amortized in the long term through energy savings, and even though the in-
vestment in EE measures might perform better from a financial perspective throughout
its lifetime, the initial costs might be more difficult to bear for that part of the population
with limited access to capital and for industries with limited internal investment budgets.
In addition, consumers in all sectors implicitly use high discount rates in making trade-
offs between a higher initial investment and lower operating costs. Very high discount
rates lead to a ”payback gap”, i.e. the difference between investment criteria for EE ver-
sus investments for energy production. For instance, Stadelmann [48] analyzed different
implicit discount rate for household appliances.
Table 2.2: Implicit discount rate [26]
Category
Implicit discount rate
Space heating
2% - 36%
Air conditioning
3% - 29%
Refrigerators
39% - 300%
Lighting
7% - 182%
Automobiles
2% - 45%
Thermal insulation
10% - 32%
Water heating
24% - 243%
This proves that consumers are not willing to carry out EE measures if they are not ac-
companied by very high rates of return on the initial investment.
Government fiscal and regulatory policies
Governments seem to be more focused on subsidizing power generation rather than EE,
in the area of research and development but also through tax exemptions to encourage
their development and adoption.
Codes and standards
Codes and standards are not seen as a barrier but rather as a tool for change. Exam-
ples include the EE standard for electric motor manufacturing and new building insulation
standards. However, these changes tend to be slow due to bureaucracy and can be
dominated by vested interests, not maximizing the potential for efficient technologies.
Supply infrastructure limitations
The availability of energy-efficient technologies is not always accessible in all countries
and may be driven by local incentives. In addition, the availability of some fuels is deter-
mined by national infrastructure, e.g., pipelines for transporting methane and natural gas,
and the availability of resources.
Attitudes toward EE
There is little information about the benefits and opportunities offered by EE. This bar-
rier seems to be less prominent within developed countries than in developing countries.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
13
==PAGE:24==
However, EE seems to gain more significance in recent years given the increased general
awareness of climate change and during major energy crises.
Perceived risk of EE investments
Investments in EE are often considered excessively risky given the high initial investment
and the uncertainty associated with future energy savings. Another problem is related
to the uncertainty caused by the installation of new technologies that could temporarily
affect the operation of companies and suspend production.
Information gaps
There is always little information about the benefits of installing new and better-performing
technologies. In addition, the absence of technical and economic viability data increases
the perceived risks of EE projects and the reluctance of adopting these technologies. In
addition, energy and electricity are not a tangible object and the avoided cost is difficult to
demonstrate, especially in the residential sector. For instance, some information seems
to be perceived as more important, as the fuel consumption of cars, while others, like
the installation of a better performing boiler, are more difficult to quantify and marginally
considered.
Misplaced incentives
The final decision on the purchase of energy technologies often does not fall on rational
decision, analyzing the complete life cycle of the product, but more simply on the mini-
mization of initial costs. For example in the residential sector, the decision of installing a
more efficient water heater in a new building is often left to engineers or builders, who will
look for technologies that are already widely used and have a lower initial cost to increase
the attractiveness of the investment. This effectively limits the decision-making power of
the end user, who often has to rely on intermediaries who favor cheaper choices in the
short term rather than the long term.
The topic has been continuously addressed since then and different authors have pro-
posed a different explanation to the EE gap. In 1997, Weber [52] proposed a different
way to catalogue the different barriers utilizing the barrier approach to give an overview
of the different area of problems within EE.
• Institutional barriers: related to politics and public institutions.
• Obstacles conditioned by the market: market barriers or market failure.
• Organisational barriers: barriers within organisations, especially within firms.
• Behavioural barriers: barriers inside individuals
Linares [40] also identifies problems both related to market failure and behavioural aspects
like low energy prices hidden costs, transaction costs, uncertainty and irreversibility, infor-
mation failures, bounded rationality, slowness of technological diffusion, principal–agent
problem, capital markets imperfections, heterogeneity of consumers, divergence with so-
cial discount rates.
All the literature seems to agree that a gap exists between EE measures implemented
and the EE potential, which is not fully exploited. In this context, [38] identifies 5 different
notions of EE market potential, each associated with a unique definition:
• the economists’ economic potential, which can be achieved by removing market
failure.
• the technologists’ economic potential, which can be achieved by eliminating high
discount rates due to uncertainties, overcome inertia, and excessive risk aversion.
14
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:25==
• the hypothetical potential, which can be achieved by the complete adoption of all
the most efficient technologies.
• the narrow social, which can be achieved by instituting all available programs to
encourage EE that meet an appropriate cost-benefit standard.
• true social optimum, which can be achieved when considering environmental exter-
nalities.
Figure 2.2: Representation of the different levels of EE potential by[38]
2.1.2
The rebound effect
The rebound effect is an economic theory according to which the expected gains from
installing new EE technologies are not always achieved. Taking the installation of a new,
more efficient boiler in a home as an example. Let’s assume that this new boiler is 30%
more energy efficient than the previous one, and therefore an equal reduction in energy
consumption would be expected. However, when examining the recorded consumption
there is only a 15% reduction compared to before. In this case, a rebound effect of 50%
is seen and this can be due to various factors, such as the increased use of the boiler.
The rebound effect can be divided into 5 distinct degrees:
• RE<0: the savings are higher than the expected savings.
• RE=O: the expected savings exactly match the actual savings.
• 0<RE<1: the actual savings are lower than the expected one, even if the energy
output is still positive.
• RE=1: the rebound effect is 100%, meaning that the new energy consumption is
equal to the previous one.
• RE>1: the rebound effect is greater than the previous consumption. This is also
defined as the Jevons paradox
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
15
==PAGE:26==
The paradox of Jevons happens when the technologies installed do not bring the desired
EE gains, resulting instead in higher consumption of resources or energy than in the past.
This phenomenon was first observed by economist William Stanley Jevons in 1865 when
he noted that despite the increase in efficiency in the use of coal, the demand for this
material was continually increasing. This study has been the basis for much modern
economic theory regarding the rebound effects of EE. [40] identifies three main reasons to
fully explain the rebound effect, that mainly depends on the price and income elasticity, on
the substitution effect, and the peculiar productive framework of the country considered:
• Direct or price effect: when the EE for the creation of a good or service improves,
its cost decreases. This implies that, if the demand curve is price-elastic, its use
directly increases.
• Indirect or income effect: when the EE of a product or service increases, its cost
decreases, leaving more purchasing power for other goods or services for the con-
sumer. This can therefore result in an indirect increase in total energy consumption.
• Macroeconomic effects: the decrease in energy prices can also cause a reduction
in the cost of other goods, favoring those sectors that are more energy-intensive.
This can also stimulate economic growth, and thus individual savings can translate
into an overall increase in energy needs.
The rebound effect seems to be less prominent in developed countries, ranging from 10%
to 40% depending on the device considered ([23]). A more detailed representation of the
rebound effect for different appliances is shown in Table 2.3. Part of the rebound can be
considered as some services were not used before.
Table 2.3: Rebound effect for different appliances [23]
Device
Rebound effect
Space heating
10% - 30%
Space cooling
0% - 50%
Water heating
10% - 40%
Residential lighting
5% - 12%
Home appliances
0%
Automobiles
10% - 30%
However, the rebound effect seems to be more pronounced in developing countries ([2],[45]),
arising up to 200% for lighting and cooking. Although a rebound effect may be greater
than expected, this, especially in developing countries, should by no means be consid-
ered as a reason to limit EE. In fact, it can increase people’s quality of life and access to
previously unavailable services, accelerate a country’s economic growth, and empower
people to use financial surpluses for other goods or services.
2.2
How ESCOs can overcome some of the barriers for EE
ESCOs could play a pivotal role in mitigating carbon dioxide emissions in future years and
achieving some of the global Sustainable Development Goals.
16
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.3: Sustainable Development Goals addressed by ESCOs and EE.
The concept of ESCO was born in the 1970s following the oil crisis that began with the
embargo by members of the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries ([56]).
The exponential rise in oil prices of almost 300% in less than a year created oil supply
issues around the world, highlighting the importance of energy independence and, con-
sequently, the importance of EE in public and private buildings and companies. A few
years later, in 1979, a second oil crisis hit global markets.
In this terrain of uncertain oil supply and significant price increases, EE and ESCOs found
fertile ground to begin their development, lowering the level of energy needed by compa-
nies, decreasing import dependency on foreign countries and providing economic savings
for their customers. Once again, the increase in energy prices after the year 2000 has
brought renewed interest by public authorities in reducing energy consumption and pro-
moting EE measures ([15]). The EE market, as the interest for ESCOs activity, seems to
be driven by economic factors and changes in the price of energy sources.
ESCOs could serve as a valuable solution to reduce the EE gap and different barriers
related to the diffusion of EE technologies mentioned in Chapter 2.1.1. In fact, ESCOs
allow energy improvements to be achieved in a smart way. For instance, high upfront
costs for EE projects are one of the most common barrier faced and are especially im-
portant for that part of the population and industry with limited access to funds. In this
case, ESCOs can provide, through the use of specific energy contracts, the entire initial
investment for EE projects, not relying on personal or company financial resources. This
gives any customer the opportunity to install EE technologies and reduce energy waste,
although this type of intervention is limited by the minimum level of investment required
by the ESCO and it is not widespread in precisely those countries with a greater EE gap.
ESCOs also provide a guided approach for the implementation of EE technologies, assist-
ing customers to unlock the potential of EE measures. In particular, ESCOs connect the
gap between the custumer and energy suppliers, consultancy and engineering, financing
and subsides, installers, and suppliers. This brings the world of EE closer to the end cus-
tomer, without the need for specialised knowledge and shortening the time invested of the
EE customers. Furthermore, ESCOs tend to create projects in collaboration with public
and private entities to validate their credibility within the market. These projects and the
resulting visibility, if properly exploited, not only validates ESCOs within the EE market as
a viable alternative but also allows for the creation of examples that can be replicated in
the future by new customers.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.4: The ESCO links the client and the different EE players.
The advantages of employing an ESCO for EE are numerous and range from techno-
logical and specialist support to accurate measurements of energy consumption, from
customer savings to a specific and accurate analysis of energy consumption, from ex-
perience and support in the field to the training of specialized energy experts within the
company. This could lead to mitigation of perceived customer risk and eliminate the irra-
tional behavior often encountered in the EE market.
ESCOs provide a specific contract for the entire duration of the project, called Energy
Performance Contract, in which the savings are guaranteed for a predetermined period
of time. This specific contract allows the final customer to obtain a clear understanding
of costs and opportunities, and could eliminate those transactions and hidden costs that
might occur.
EPC contract is the most widespread worldwide, but there are others commonly used,
like build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT), contract energy management (chauffage), facility
management project, and consultancy and technical guarantee. In the following section, a
more specific analysis of the EPC contracts, the available insurance options, the different
financing options and an explanation of Super ESCOs will be carried out.
2.3
Energy Performance Contracting (EPC)
EPC contracts, in theory, make it easier and faster to reduce energy consumption in the
residential, non-residential and tertiary sectors, in the public and private sphere. The
only EE market in which ESCOs do not operate is the transport market, although this is
theoretically possible.
Some of the most common projects contracted through EPC contracts involve lighting
replacement and lighting control system, industrial energy processes, chillers replace-
ment or absorption cooling, boiler replacement or combined heat and power (CHP), en-
velopment improvement measures (i.e wall insulation, solar gain minimization, district
heating and cooling), and renewable energies (i.e wind turbine micro-generation, micro-
hydropower, etc).
18
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:29==
For the formulation of an EPC contract several steps are required, which are essential
to ensure the success of the project and a common agreement that can satisfy both the
ESCO and the client. A graphical visualization of the EPC phases is provided in Figure
2.5.
Figure 2.5: Graphical visualization of an EE project using a generic EPC contract [27].
The first phase of EE begins with an assessment of the company and/or building, the
identification of unnecessary energy waste and inefficiency, and a plan of possible EE
improvement measures. The first stage is also composed of a feasibility study, in which
the historical consumption and operation costs are traced. The possible available tech-
nologies are analyzed to maximize EE, taking into account the needs of the customer
while minimizing the duration of the contract and maximizing the savings obtained.
The installed technologies must be adapted to the current regulations of the customer’s
systems, definition of the interventions to comply and subsequent guarantee of compli-
ance with the requirements. Normally for feasibility calculations under free energy market
conditions, the future energy and operational costs are adjusted taking into account the
average annual inflation of the country.
After defining the type of intervention of the ESCO and agreeing with the final client, the
ESCO or the client must take over the financing risk of the project. This is the most
common type of financing and the choice depends on the type of contract stipulated.
There are alternative financing methods for EPC contracts and these are summarised in
the paragraph 2.4.
When the contract is signed and the funds are collected, the EPC officially starts with the
implementation of EE measures. The implementation of the new technologies must be
carried out without disturbing the productivity and services of the company in the shortest
possible time. This process is particularly complicated when the buildings or companies
operate continuously 8760 hours per year (for example hospitals that have to provide year-
round care services to patients or electricity producers whose income is directly related
to the hours of operation [39]).
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.6: Graphical visualization of an EE project using a generic EPC contract
After completing the installation, the savings for the customer starts immediately. The
new energy and operational cost is now composed by three shares:
• The reduced energy costs for the client.
• The energy savings which are used to pay for the ESCO services.
• The remaining energy savings.
The price that the customer pays is composed of the first two terms while the third cor-
responds to the actual savings obtained until the end of the contract. It should also be
noted that, with the use of less energy-intensive technologies, some of the incremental
costs due to energy price inflation are also avoided.
The energy savings that are used to pay for the EE projects are composed of the cost
and implementation of the new technologies and EE measures, and the repayment of the
loan considering the interest rate and the ESCO profit.
The overall payback time depends on several factors, the main ones are the type of tech-
nology implemented, the price of the energy source, the percentage of energy savings
achievable and the specifications required by the customer. However, depending on the
project, the average duration can last from 3 to a maximum of 20 years.
During this phase very important are the M&V of energy savings. These measurements
must be as economical as possible while still ensuring robust reliability in order not to
increase the payback time of the project and, at the same time, be able to demonstrate to
the customer the actual energy and cost savings. For instance, the International Perfor-
mance Measurement and Verification Protocol (IPMVP®) is a collection of best practices
available today to verify the results of EE projects for buildings and industrial facilities.
It was established in the 1990s in the United States as a measurement and verification
20
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:31==
protocol and then adapted to international standards.
All the different activities during the EE project might be carried out directly by the ESCO
or by third-party companies, sub-contracted some of the phases, where the ESCO still
remains responsible. Once the contract has been concluded, all energy savings will be
passed on directly to the customer. Although the O&M is now no longer the responsibility
of the ESCO, but of the customer and therefore the actual savings will be lower.
As introduced in the previous section, there are many types of contracts that ESCOs can
enter into with their clients. The choice of contract depends on the nation in which they
operate, their history of EE projects and market conditions. EPC contracts are divided
into Shared and Guaranteed energy savings and their operation will be analyzed more
specifically in the following paragraphs. Both model contracts guarantee the business
case, the difference lies in which actor (the ESCO or the client) takes the financial risk of
the project. It is therefore important to examine specifically how these contracts work.
2.3.1
Shared Savings Model
One of the most popular contract types used by ESCOs is shared savings. This type of
contract is among the most used in China, India and Chile, among other developing coun-
tries ([32]). The shared savings model is based on the sharing of savings, as the client
”retrocedes” to the company only the agreed percentage of savings, while the remaining
savings are attributed to the client. The ESCO, through the payment of obtained savings,
will pay for the implementation of the project and the fixed repayment of the bank loan.
In this specific contract, the ESCO takes both the performance and credit risk, but the
client too takes a part of the performance risk as its savings are correlated to the agreed
percentage of savings. That is why commonly the ESCO prefers to take the credit risk
or to be linked with a TPF, that could still come from the customer itself. However, this
contract can lead small and medium ESCOs to over-indebtedness problems and therefore
force them not to implement many several EE projects at the same time due to high debt
ratios.
This is also the reason why financiers are more inclined to provide loans when larger
ESCOs with more capital are involved ([39]), especially in developing countries where
financial risks are higher. Experience in the US shows that lenders tend to require a
variety of credit enhancements for this type of financing, such as bonding or insurance
([19]). A more specific review of the possible insurance packages will be carried out in
Section 2.11 to better understand how these packages can mitigate the risks taken by
ESCOs. The scheme and operation of this contract are shown in Figure 2.7.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.7: Shared Savings Model
This concept works optimally where the price of energy remains stable or increases over
the time of the contract as seen in case (1) of Figure 2.7. In case (2) of Figure 2.7, the
actual prices are higher than the stipulated ceiling and therefore the return on the project
is higher than projected, the consumer pays no more for the project and extra energy
savings and profit can be extracted from the project ([19]). On the contrary, if the price
of energy decreases and the expected new energy cost is higher than the baseline case
(case 3 on Figure 2.7), the savings are no longer sufficient to repay the project costs and
some or all of the ESCO’s profit is removed from the graph. This is significantly important
for contracts with wide time horizons, as EPC contracts often are.
Figure 2.8: Guaranteed Savings Model
Many ESCOs that have utilized this energy-saving model have suffered great economic
22
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:33==
problems in the past and many have declared bankruptcy with past energy crises. How-
ever, nowadays, it is possible to stipulate a contract in a single energy price: if the actual
prices are lower than the stipulated floor value, the consumer has a windfall profit which
compensates the lower return of the project.
A problem that might arise is that ESCOs could manipulate the estimate of savings by
lowering it and thus receive more from the ”excess savings”. It, therefore, becomes crucial
to perform the correct measurements of the actual savings by the ESCO and the client
to avoid trust issues between the two parties. This function can also be performed by
third-party companies, certified and specialized in measuring and verifying the results of
EE. Once the contract is concluded, all the savings will be automatically transferred to the
client.
As stated before, developing countries tend to prefer this type of energy-saving model
over others. The shared savings concept is a good introductory model in developing mar-
kets because customers assume no financial risk as the ESCO is responsible to repay the
loan and interest for the entire duration of the contract. However, while in more developed
markets, the feasibility of financing is assessed according to objective criteria based on
profitability, in smaller/less developed ESCO markets this does not always apply. The
national bank system will rather loan capital to well known and established companies
with historical balance sheets rather than new investment opportunities, which are often
considered too risky ([43]). Therefore ESCOs, especially new and smaller ones, enter-
ing these markets must look for alternative solutions to receive liquidity to finance their
projects.
One possibility may be the search for funds from the state apparatus, although these are
not always available when there is not a strong national interest in EE. This is especially
true for developing countries with budgetary constraints. In case of lack of funding from
national entities, the presence of international funds becomes essential to ensure the fi-
nancing of EE projects. There have been many international initiatives in the past by the
World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), the Global environment facility (GEF), among other
multilateral financial agencies such as the European Bank of Reconstruction and Devel-
opment (EBRD) and the World Bank ([39]). However, the results have not always had the
same impact: while some have been very positive, others have not stimulated the market
sufficiently and the growth of these markets has never started. In fact, the World Bank
has been criticized in the past for implementing shared savings in developing economies
where other contracts might have been more successful. The reason is that it is difficult
in the long term for small companies to expand due to becoming highly leveraged and
unable to contract further debt for new projects.
The presence of international funds is essential for the emergence of this new market but
not sufficient to guarantee the growth of it. If the success of example projects financed
by national or international funds is essential to attract public and private funding in order
to accelerate the development of EE and increase the credibility of EPC contracts, other
internal and external market barriers still deeply influence the market conditions.
2.3.2
Guaranteed Savings Model
While the Shared Savings Model focuses on the monetary savings, the Guaranteed Sav-
ings Model ensures the level of energy savings. This contract eliminates one of the prob-
lems found in EPC shared savings contracts where the economic viability of EE projects
depends on the future price of energy. In Canada and the US, the primary instigator in
the development of guaranteed savings was precisely the drop in the price of energy and
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
23
==PAGE:34==
the consequent extension of payback periods ([39]).
Figure 2.9: Guaranteed Savings Model
The guaranteed savings model guarantees to the final client a minimum level of savings
against fees that can be fixed, variable or mixed. The model assures that the value of the
energy savings would pay the customer’s debt service obligation, on the condition that the
price of energy does not fall below a stipulated price. If the savings exceed expectations,
these will be divided according to a stable proportion between the ESCO and the client
(case (2) of Figure 2.10). An alternative solution is to utilize the extra-ordinary savings to
shorten the payback time of the contract. In the case of higher consumption (i.e. savings
lower than those guaranteed) as shown in case (3) of Figure 2.10, the ESCO share of
savings is cut. Compensation is also provided for the client if the savings are lower than
the debt service to cover for it. M&V is essential during the total duration of the contract
as they are directly related to the energy savings of the project.
24
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.10: Guaranteed Savings Model
While the ESCO assumes the technological and performance risk in the installation and
maintenance of the technologies, the end customer assumes the credit risk of the project
through TPF or using its private equity for the project, as shown in Figure 2.9. It is, there-
fore, more difficult to apply this type of contract in developing countries that do not have
a well-developed banking structure or where a lack of knowledge about the economic
feasibility of EE projects is evident. However, this model can be successful in developing
markets as it removes the issue of ESCOs obtaining funding and removing these costs
from their balance sheet ([9]).
2.3.3
Other contracting models
For the sake of completeness, this paragraph will describe the other types of contracts
that ESCOs can use for EE projects and their main characteristics.
Other contracts are used in the ESCO world although these are often limited in number
and used in specific national markets. These are build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT),
contract energy management (Chauffage), facility management project, and consultancy
and technical guarantee.
During a BOOT contract, the ESCO is building, owning, and operating newly installed
technology for a specified period of time. At the end of the contractual obligations, own-
ership is transferred to the customer. BOOT schemes are becoming an increasingly pop-
ular means of financing CHP projects in Europe ([19]). Energy Supply Contracting, or
Chauffage in french, is a typical European model that consists of the ESCO providing an
energy service, which may come from fossil or renewable sources to a customer ([8]).
The ESCO becomes an energy service provider that buys final energy products (i.e elec-
tricity, natural gas, oil, coal) and sells to the customer useful energy like Domestic Hot
Water (DHW), vapor, thermal oil, compressed air, combined heat and power, thermal so-
lar. The operation is easy, the outflow is measured with a meter and the customer pays
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
25
==PAGE:36==
for it. To reduce utility bills for the-end user, the ESCO integrate efficiency equipment
using cheaper fuels or RE to supply the energy needed.
ESCO can also oversee the construction and renovation of buildings, manage relation-
ships with contractors, control space allocation and maintain facility project budgets. Other
ESCO can provide private consultancy and technical guarantee for EE projects. Larger
ESCOs can use different types of contracts or provide specific advice and expertise re-
lated to different efficiency projects.
2.4
Financing models
This section will list the possible funding methods for ESCOs projects. The most typical is
definitely conventional loans through a lending institution which is stipulated by the ESCO
or the ESCO client depending on the contract stipulated. However, financing can also
come from other parties rather than these common ones.
Other types of TPF are i.e. bonds, debt securities issued by companies, but also by
public bodies, which give the holder the right to repayment for any amount of money lent
to the issuer plus accrued interest. TPF is especially attractive if the owner qualifies for
tax-exempt financing. Different kind of bonds exists, like the General Obligation Bond,
secured by a pledge of a government agency’s full faith, credit and taxing power, Special
Assessment and Mello Roos Bonds, issued to fund projects conferring a benefit on a
defined group of properties, and Revenue Bond, which is secured by a specified source
of revenue or revenue stream and can be adapted to EPC contracts ([39]).
Another common source of funding for ESCO projects is lease-based. Finance lease is
”an agreement where the lessor receives lease payments to cover its ownership costs.
The lessee is responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes” ([20]). This financing
method, because of the abatement risk, carries higher interest rates than other financing
mechanisms ([39]). Different kind of lease exists and depends on the shareholders and
financial mechanism involved. Examples of this are Municipal Lease, Master Leases,
Certificate of Partecipation (COPs), and Lease Revenue Bond.
2.5
Energy savings insurance and credit risk guarantee
In order to increase the security of EE interventions, it is possible to stipulate insurance
on the energy savings generated by EE projects. These tools are particularly useful for
emerging economies where mistrust and lack of credibility of EE interventions carried by
ESCO are present.
As seen earlier, local banks and investors in developing countries tend to be skeptical of
ESCOs with a relatively short history and small balance sheet. Very often TPF is not avail-
able or only the most remunerative projects are accepted, leaving ESCOs to do cherry-
picking and not allow them to complete long-term and multiple contracts. Implementing
specific insurance in banks’ financing plans for EE is a powerful tool that could allow to
overcome certain financial and credibility barriers in the marketplace.
Two main insurance products at the moment available are credit and technical risk insur-
ance. The two insurance products are based on the savings guaranteed model seen in
Paragraph 2.9.
When stipulating credit risk insurance (Figure 2.11), the insurance company cover losses
if the client default on its credit. In this scenario, the insurance assumes the credit risk of
the project and the ESCO pays a premium to the insurance company. Therefore, the total
profit of the ESCO diminishes by the fee paid to the insurance. However, in uncertain
26
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:37==
markets, where the risk of client default is higher, this insurance product can mitigate the
financial risk undertaken by ESCOs.
Figure 2.11: Credit Risk Insurance Model[33]
The technical risk insurance (Figure 2.12) ensures that the minimum energy savings are
reached by implemented technologies. In this case, the savings are guaranteed by the
insurance company that will assume the technical risk of the project. Again, the ESCO
pays a premium fee to the insurance company and its overall profit will be then reduced.
However, this model will increase the trust in the EE results and the number of projects
undertaken by ESCOs.
Figure 2.12: Technical Risk Insurance Model [33]
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
27
==PAGE:38==
2.6
Super ESCO
Figure 2.13: An illustrative model of a Super ESCO [46]
Super ESCOs, or public ESCOs, are public entities owned and capitalized by state gov-
ernment and managed by the country’s EE agency. These entities are entrusted to be the
connection point between the state and private ESCOs. In fact, very often it is the Super
ESCO itself that contracts part or all of projects to private ESCOs preferring, as most of
the emerging markets, the shared savings model.
Super ESCOs enable the development of private ESCOs, providing several advantages
to them: first, facilitating financing through banks or financial institutions by being a gov-
ernment entity and having the ability to access lower interest rates than private ESCOs
could. The introduction of performance-based payments allows the super ESCO to re-
duce the high transition costs of typical EE projects and ensures the accountability of
equipment suppliers and contractors.
Another advantage is that public ESCOs can contribute to the reduction of public en-
ergy consumption through private ESCO.In fact, private ESCOs are able to carry out EE
projects within the public administration that would otherwise be difficult to access and
where the process might be very slow without the support of a public ESCO. This is a
great facilitator for the development of private ESCOs within the EE market considering
that the public energy sector is the largest energy consumer in most of the countries.
The main benefits have been summarized by [46]:
• Identify energy-savings opportunities in public facilities;
• Design technical solutions (that is, EE measures ranging from simple equipment
replacement to complex systems-based approaches) and specifications;
• Aggregate the demand for EE measures, entering into ESPCs (shared or guaran-
teed savings contracts through pay-as-you-save [PAYS] schemes) with end users
(municipalities, public building authorities, etc.);
• Conduct joint (with end users) or independent MV of energy savings;
• Recover its investments from end users’ monetized energy savings, as realized
through PAYS schemes;
28
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:39==
• Operate and maintain the equipment and systems for a few years, the entire period
of the ESPC, or the entire lifetime of the equipment (as agreed with the end user).
Some successful Super ESCOs have been implemented from the early 1990s (U.S. Fed-
eral Energy Management Program) to the early 2000s (Belgium’s FEDESCO, Croatia’s
HEP ESCO, and Fakai in China’s Hebei Province), to more recently established Super
ESCOs like India’s EE Services Limited (EESL), Armenia’s Renewable Resources and
EE Fund (R2E2 Fund), the Etihad ESCO in Saudi Arabia, and the Saudi Arabia’s Tarshid
([46]).
However, some critical points were examined by [49], such as the possibility of super
ESCOs limiting, rather than encouraging, the development of private ESCOs. This can
happen after the super ESCO has gained enough experience to implement EE projects
itself, instead of delegating them to third ESCO. In fact, this would mean an increase in the
profit generated for the Super ESCO and eliminate private ESCOs competition. However,
shifting the financial risk of the projects directly to the super ESCO, which would otherwise
receive the guaranteed savings from the private ESCO, would increase the risk of the
Super ESCO business.
As [49] suggested, therefore, the government should carefully monitor this issue that may
arise, as in the case of Etihad ESCO and EESL in recent years. Indeed, the objective
of super ESCOs should be to unlock public energy potential and facilitate the growth of
the private ESCO market and not to maximize their own profit. It is, therefore, important
that super ESCOs have an exit strategy after establishing a self-sufficient private ESCO
market.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
29
==PAGE:40==
30
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:41==
3
Developed ESCO markets and success
factors
This chapter examines the current state of the ESCO market in the more mature markets
and provides a regression on what the main incentives have been for its development.
The latest [32] report is extremely useful as it provides an up-to-date view of the main
markets and their trends. It not only allows you to visualize which ESCO markets are the
most developed, but also to understand which sectors are most engaged, the revenue
share by public and private sectors, and by contract type.
As shown in the graph 3.1, most of the ESCO annual market size can be referred to three
main geographical entities: China, Europe and the United States of America. These
will be considered, from now on, as developed ESCO market. Although there are other
markets that are considered developed outside of the previous three ESCO markets, for
simplicity the other markets will be refereed as developing/underdeveloped ESCO mar-
ket. Most of these developing ESCO markets are also very often located in developing
economies.
Figure 3.1: Annual ESCO market size in billion USD in 2015, 206, 2018 [32].
The ESCO market has kept growing steadily from 2015 by 8% to 28.6 billion dollars in
2017. A lot of its growth has taken place in China, which is the biggest ESCO market
in the world and growing at the highest rate of 11% to nearly 17 billion USD ([31]). The
second largest market for ESCOs by revenue is in the United States. Again, the trend
shows an increase from 6.6 to 7.6 billion dollars in the period 2015-2017, with a growth
rate of 7,6%. Europe has also been on a steadily increase for the last decade, with the
same trend confirmed in the same time period (Figure 3.1). However, it remains relatively
small compared to the Chinese and US markets. The rest of the world considered in the
IEA report accounts for the 5,2% of the total annual revenue and its potential remains
largely unexplored. The limited market size of ESCO in these countries is mostly due to a
series of financial, economical, political and market barriers, that are inhibiting its growth.
When analyzing the sectors from which the ESCO revenue comes from, there are sub-
stantial differences in the composition between public and private projects as seen in
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
31
==PAGE:42==
Table 3.1. Consulting [32], the greatest share of projects are found in the private sector,
accounting for 46% of the total, while public accounts for 39%. Anyway, that is heavily
affected by the Chinese market that, accounting for the 58% of the total market value, has
a 9:1 ratio between private and public revenues. That trend is similar in other emerging
ESCO markets, such as India, Thailand, Brazil, and Mexico, while the US, the Canadian
and the European market mostly consists of public revenue. This, as will be described
later, is due to specific legislation that has favored one or the other market in the past.
Table 3.1: ESCO revenue share by public and private revenue [32]
Country
Public sector
Private sector
Japan
38%
62%
China
10%
90%
Brazil
43%
57%
Canada
90%
10%
EU
80%
20%
US
85%
15%
Korea
15%
85%
India
1%
99%
Thailand
0%
100%
Mexico
20%
80%
The preference for the type of contract also varies depending on the country and the
maturity of the ESCO market analyzed as seen in Table 3.2. In fact, more mature and
developed ESCO markets, as the US, European and Korean, prefer guaranteed over
shared savings. On the other hand, developing countries where the ESCO market is
still immature tend to prefer the shared savings model. That is because of the financial
implication of the two different models as seen in sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2. The Chinese
market is an exception, as it is considered the largest ESCO market, but contracts are
divided exactly in half between Guaranteed and Shared Savings. That said, a lack of data
has to be considered for emerging economics as it is not always easy to get accurate and
complete data when there are no precise regulations on identifying ESCOs and energy
contracts.
Table 3.2: ESCO revenue share by contract type [32]
Country
Guaranteed savings
Shared savings
Energy supply contract
Japan
10%
36%
54%
China
50%
50%
0%
Canada
100%
0%
0%
EU
50%
20%
30%
US
99%
1%
0%
Korea
95%
5%
0%
India
10%
90%
0%
Thailand
77%
17%
6%
Germany
14%
0%
86%
Chile
40%
60%
0%
Some similarities and difference between countries can also be seen in terms of the sector
where ESCOs are involved. For example, the US, European, Japanese, and Canadian
32
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:43==
markets prefer to perform EE upgrades to non-residential buildings. Other markets, such
as China, Mexico, India, and Thailand tend to perform upgrades in the industrial sector.
Table 3.3: ESCO revenue share by end user [32]
Country
Industry
Residential buildings
Non-residential buildings
Japan
30%
0%
70%
China
55%
0%
45%
Brazil
4%
37%
59%
Canada
0%
0%
100%
EU
20%
0%
80%
US
0%
10%
90%
Korea
75%
25%
0%
India
100%
0%
0%
Thailand
60%
5%
35%
Mexico
70%
0%
30%
It is therefore evident that the world of ESCOs is anything but homogeneous and each
market has its own intrinsic characteristics. A more in-depth research has been conducted
within the Chinese, United States and European market to get a better overview of the
history and evolution of these particularly successful ESCO markets and what the main
factors have favored their development.
3.1
The Chinese market
The first successful Chinese ESCO companies adapting EPC contracts were firstly cre-
ated in 1997, in Beijing Municipality, Shandong Province and Liaoning Provinces. These
companies were supported by national and international banks and governments, and
their success attracted more player to the market. Since 2005, as analyzed by [57], the
ESCO market has kept rapidly growing and is now is, as seen in the Figure 3.1, the biggest
and fastest-growing ESCO market in the world.
Table 3.4: Development trends in China’s ESCO market [57]
2005
2010
2015
2017
2019
Number of ESCOs
80+
782
5246
6137
6547
Employment (persons)
16.000
180.000
607.000
685.000
761.000
Revenue (bn RMB)
1,3
83,6
312,7
414,8
522,2
Investment (bn RMB)
1,3
28,8
104
111,2
114,2
In 2003 the Second Energy Conservation Project of the World Bank and Chinese Gov-
ernment launched the development of ESCA, the official Chinese ESCO association that
regulates ESCO and provides funds for EE projects in the country.
Many financial incentives have been granted to Chinese ESCOs. The Chinese govern-
ment has fostered the development of private ESCOs by exempting companies from cor-
porate taxes for the first 3 years and a 50% reduction for the following three years. VAT
and sales taxes have been eliminated and at the same time, ESCOs could receive national
and international funds. Also, a more favorable accounting system has been created to
increase ESCOs credit line and therefore complete more projects ([41]).
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
33
==PAGE:44==
The great success of ESCOs project in China is also due to the very short payback time of
the EPC contracts. In fact, the contract period of about 75% of the projects is less than 5
years and the average payback time of 71% of the projects is less than 3 years ([28]). This
has allowed ESCOs to grow rapidly, make more profits, and implement projects quickly,
thus increasing interest from banks and external funds to invest in EE projects.
Another reason for the increased focus on EE is attributed to the great competitiveness of
Chinese industries. The minimization of energy required for energy-intensive industries
allows to gain an advantage in a very competitive market, allowing Chinese industries to
sell their products and/or services at a lower price.
Every 5 years the Chinese government issues an official document regarding the na-
tional economic, social, urban, industrial and environmental objectives to be achieved. A
specific target for energy reduction has been set during the last ”13th five-year plan for
economical and social development of the people’s republic of China” (2016-2020). The
target is clear: decrease the GPD per energy unit by 15% and limit the total energy con-
sumption to 5 billion tons of coal by the end of 2020 [41]. The plan is not only to increase
the efficiency in buildings, but also to raise EE standards in the six major energy-intensive
industries – the electric power, iron and steel, building materials, chemical, petroleum and
petrochemical, and nonferrous metals industries of the 500 largest energy-intensive con-
sumers.
All the above reasons have pushed more private competitors to enter the market and pro-
vide a good explanation for the exponential growth seen over the past 20 years. Although,
most of the largest and most inefficient heavy industries have already been upgraded and
it will therefore be difficult to achieve the same size of improvements as in the past. In
any case, China will continue to be the biggest market for efficiency gains in the years to
come ([36]).
3.2
The US market
The U.S. market is the first market where ESCOs have been able to spread and expand
consistently since the 1990s, after the deregulation of the US energy market and the oil
price crisis in 1986. The energy market deregulation has allowed American ESCOs to
act as an intermediary between energy producers and utility companies at the local level,
giving the end-user the ability to decide the energy supplier at a specific rate.
In the same period, the uncertainly of energy prices drove ESCOs to transition from the
shared savings model towards the guaranteed saving model, accounting nowadays for
85% of the total signed contracts. As shown in Figure 3.2, the ESCO revenue in nominal
US dollars has been steadily increasing since 1990.
34
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.2: US ESCO revenue from 1990 until 2017 [49]
The largest area of ESCO intervention since its inception has been in the public sector,
and, as stated before, 90% of the US ESCO revenue comes from the public sector ([31]),
why government mandates and deferred maintenance are the two main market drivers.
The larger share of it is composed of intervention in federal, state and local government
buildings, university and colleges as seen in Figure 3.3. The fastest-growing market share
for ESCO is between state and local government buildings interventions. These grew
more than nine folds, from 1990 to 2017, reaching 6.2 billion US dollars in the period
2012- 2017, second only per total market revenue to the university and college with 7.3
billion US dollars in the same period.
Figure 3.3: US ESCO revenue share [49]
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
35
==PAGE:46==
The most typical ESCO projects by number of EE measures is lighting retrofits since it is
nearly always included in buildings renovation. Other common projects are energy man-
agement systems, boiler and chiller replacements, variable speed drives, high-efficiency
motors, insulation and weather proofing, new water heaters, piping, steam traps, pumps
and priming systems, motion sensors, cooling towers, and water conservation. While
lighting measures are single component improvements, projects now have expanded to
more systematic approaches, including retrofits to every building system, and have also
extended to water conservation and non-energy benefits. This is confirmed by the trend
in the number of interventions per project, which sees for each subcategory present in
Figure 3.4, an increase in number from 1990 to 2017 ([49]).
Figure 3.4: Average number of measures by project [49].
3.3
The European market
The first company that can be defined as an ESCO dates back to the nineteenth century
in France where Compagnie Générale de Chauffe (CGC) was the first company working
with a guaranteed savings contract. It took more than a century before this new energy
savings model had become widespread in Europe when in the 1980s the first ESCO
companies entered the Western European market and the Eastern European ten years
later.
The ESCO market in Europe, as seen in figure 3.1, has been steadily growing in the last
36
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:47==
years but within it, states are growing at different speeds while others are now facing a
recession. That said, the European ESCO market size is still relatively small compared
to the market leaders, China and the US.
Every three years, a JRC Science for policy report is published to update the current
market situation and the strengths and weaknesses of the European Union ESCO market
and each state within it. The growth and maturity have continued or even increased
slightly between 2015-2018 but the market situation is very different when comparing
different countries. The ESCO market in Belgium, Croatia, Denmark, Slovenia and Italy
is growing very fast, and Austria, Belgium, Germany, Italy and the UK are considered the
most developed one. On the other hand, Sweden has seen a rapid decline in the ESCO
market since 2015 ([7]).
The main reason for the decreased in the Sweden ESCO market from the latest [7] is the
lack of long-term experience of the early EPC projects, especially those implemented in
early 2000. Another reason for the decrease in the market is the lack of trust from the
customers.
Although within the European Union there are regulations and proposals valid for all coun-
tries, state conditions are not always the same with regard to EE. As state in [7], ”mature
markets are found to be more resilient to negative impacts (such as the financial crisis)
whilst relatively large improvements in policy development and implementation appear to
have limited impact in less mature markets”. This means that it is important to create
a strong foundation for private ESCOs to grow on their own. Legislative intervention is,
therefore, necessary once a mature, autonomous market is established to increase its
growth.
Important recommendations for policies and market barriers have been collected in the
latest [7] report from the most successful European ESCO market.
• Crucial role of EE, energy savings benefits and co-benefits awareness.
• Political commitment to the area of EE.
• Successful model contracts and/or ESCO guidelines.
• Appropriate and targeted information dissemination.
• Creation of ESCO associations and facilitators to replicate success factors and as
a reference point for the different stakeholders.
• Use of successful projects as examples for replication purposes.
• Removal of administrative or regulatory barriers through specific legislation.
• Further legislation and market transformation tools.
As for the US ESCO market, most of the ESCO revenue comes from the public sector and
it is mostly focused on non-residential buildings. The industry sector counts only for 20%
of the total revenue of the European ESCOs, following the same trend of US, Canada and
Japan. EPC contracts are extended to almost all the sectors, excluding transport, with
most of the EPC being guaranteed savings ([31]).
The de-risking EE Platform (DEEP) contains useful information of over 7500 projects in
EE projects in buildings and over 9200 in the industry sector. Within the European Union,
as shown in Figure 3.5, the mean payback time for buildings is 5 years with a median
avoidance cost of 3.1 Eurocent/KWh. Lightning improvement is the category with the
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
37
==PAGE:48==
lowest return time but with the lowest avoidance cost while integrated renovation is the
one with the highest return time but with the highest avoidance cost. The same observa-
tion is made in the United States and many other countries because replacing old bulbs
can greatly reduce energy costs. For industries (Figure 4.4) the simple average payback
time is 3.4 years whit a median avoidance cost of 2.7 Eurocent/KWh within which motors
is the one with the highest payback time and avoidance cost. This represents an excel-
lent opportunity for ESCOs to increase European EE as about half of Europe’s energy
consumption is due to these engines ([17]).
Figure 3.5: Distribution of payback time and avoidance cost per measure on 10 %,
25%,50%, and 90th percentiles for buildings[13]
Figure 3.6: Distribution of payback time and and avoidance cost per measure on 10 %,
25%,50%, and 90th percentiles for industries [13]
38
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:49==
Summarizing, this chapter has analyzed and presented the performance of the global
ESCO market, its main developed markets, their history and the most important drivers
that have enabled their development, and providing up-to-date information on their cur-
rent state. There are reciprocities in developing countries and more developed markets,
such as the choice of contracts, the preference for interventions in specific sectors, and
different shares between the public and private sector. In addition, the importance of
the establishment of strong policies for ESCO market development in developed ESCO
markets has been highlighted.
As seen in section 3.1, the largest and fastest-growing ESCO market is in China. Multiple
reasons have been presented for the success and rapid growth of the Chinese ESCO mar-
ket, the biggest factor being governmental support and commitment to decrease energy-
consumption of industries and buildings in the country.
However, the rapid growth in EE is expected to slow down in the decade 2020 - 2030
to about half of the previous decade. This is due to the fact that almost all of the state’s
largest private energy consumers have been optimized. The spread of EE measures
within smaller private industries, driven by high corporate competitiveness and the pro-
motion of EE potential, leaves less room for improvement within the private market. To
achieve the carbon neutrality goals enunciated by the Chinese President, Mr Xi, EE
projects and technologies must continue to expand in both public and private markets.
The Chinese market is an excellent example for all developing economies on how reg-
ulation and government incentives can be used to reduce national energy consumption.
Especially when production will be shifted to countries with cheaper labor, China’s ESCO
market plans and experience can provide great support towards more sustainable growth
in emerging countries.
In contrast to the United States or Europe however, only a small part is attributed to the
public sector, where the Chinese state could tap into this market to stimulate the ESCO
market growth and help to reach carbon neutrality by 2060.
The general European ESCO market is far away from its full potential and specific legis-
lation, and public and private support is fundamental to achieve it in the years to come.
A green economic stimulus including measures directed towards EE to counteract the ef-
fects of Covid-19 on the European economy could be great news for ESCOs, and provide
needed funding to grow the market further and at greater speeds.
To further develop this market it is necessary to continue to invest in the improvement of
non-residential public buildings but at the same time to significantly increase the private
ESCO market in the coming years. As shown in Figure 4.4, EE projects in the industry
sector can provide short payback time with high avoidance cost compared to buildings
and this potential is only partially exploited.
A further effort should be dedicated to the still underdeveloped ESCO market countries to
decrease energy consumption and waste and facilitate the transition to a zero-emission
Europe. However, this must necessarily pass through an awareness of the advantages
of EE on the part of states and the involvement of private actors. The important recom-
mendations listed in Chapter 3.3 by the [7] must therefore be embraced by member states
and applied to the particular conditions of each state
The same can be considered about the US market, where only a small part of the revenue
comes from private projects. Interesting ideas could be taken from the Chinese market
which has managed to increase this market share impressively in the past, such as tax
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
39
==PAGE:50==
exceptions, increased ESCO credit lines, creation of dedicated funds, adapted to the
European and US context. In any case, with respect to all of the more mature markets,
it can be seen that a strong administration and policies related to incentives is one of the
common and most prominent drivers.
40
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:51==
4
Analysis and Results
With an overview of the functioning of ESCOs to overcome barriers related to bridging the
EE gap and worldwide trends of the most important markets being established, this sec-
tion provides an analysis of the possible future global development of the ESCO industry
and its role in emerging economies. These countries will play an increasingly important
role in the world economy and their energy use will grow with it. It is therefore of primary
importance to facilitate the creation of well-functioning ESCOs and maximize their contri-
bution to these new markets. For this reason, a collection of barriers that have hindered
the growth of the ESCO market in both mature and emerging ESCO markets has been
created. The last section provides an analysis of the results obtained from the question-
naire, leaving a specific section for each of the ESCO markets.
4.1
Market analysis of ESCOs around the world
To understand what could be the size of the ESCO market in the coming years, it is impor-
tant to analyze firstly the future trends towards the global investment in EE. In particular,
IEA’s ”Sustainable Recovery” [35] report, analyzes the projection for EE investment until
2040. Two scenarios are considered relevant for the evaluation of the necessary invest-
ment: the Stated Policies Scenario and the Sustainable Development Scenario.
In the first scenario, the Covid-19 crisis is brought under control in 2021 and the world
economy returns to the levels of the previous year. In the same scenario, all of the policy
intentions and goals that were announced are realized. In the second scenario, greater
attention is focused on climate change and achieving the Paris Agreement, prompting
nations and countries to invest more funds towards EE. Figure 4.1 shows the average
investments in EE in the period 2015-2019 and those required for the two scenarios up
to 2040.
Figure 4.1: Average annual investment in the period 2015-2040 for the two scenario.[35]
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
41
==PAGE:52==
According to [35], investments for EE will continue to increase in the future, but at different
rates depending on the scenario. To achieve the objectives of the Paris Agreement a total
of 13815 billion USD in EE investments is needed over the period 2020-2040, around
4400 billion more than in the Stated Policies Scenario. This means an annual increase of
approximately 4 times the average funds invested over the 2015-2019 period.
Comparing the ESCO market size with the total global investments for EE, an approximate
1 to 10 ratio has been calculated, with an increase of about 1% per year. In other words,
the total ESCO market share is worth around 10% of the global EE investment and this
percentage appears to be increasing. Looking at global ESCO market trends (Figure 3.1),
it would appear that the development of ESCOs has kept increasing during the last years
in the main ESCO markets and remained limited in the other markets. In particular, during
the period of stagnant investment in EE (Figure 2.1), the ESCO market size has continued
to increase, faster in the Chinese market and slower in the US and Europe, and remained
stable in other markets.
The fact that the ESCO market is growing in those developed market, in contrast to overall
EE investments, may indicate that innovative ESCO financing solutions are successful
in overcoming EE barriers and that the share of EE improvements by ESCOs can be
expected to increase further in the future if the right conditions are made available.
It must be kept in mind that the availability of global data on the ESCO market size is
limited and not easy to capture in all countries. In order to predict a possible estimate
of the value of the ESCO market in future years, two scenarios have been created. In
the first, a more conservative scenario, the global ESCO market continues to encompass
10% of total energy investments in the Stated Policies Scenario, while in the second, a
more optimistic scenario, the use of ESCOs continues to grow as a viable alternative for
simplifying EE projects in both developed and developing countries, reaching 20% of the
total EE investments in the Sustainable Development Scenario. This allows the creation
of a range, given by the difference between the two scenarios, within which the possible
ESCO market lies in the future 20 years.
As showed in Figure 4.2, the possible annual ESCO market is between $36.4 billion and
$104.2 billion over the 2020-2030 period and between $53.7 and $161.8 billion over the
2031-2040 period. The big difference between the two values will depend on the removal
of the barriers that have prevented their development in the past and through the spread
of this particular method of implementing EE services even in underdeveloped ESCO
markets.
42
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.2: Potential ESCO market size in billion USD in the period 2020-2030 and 2031-
2040.
In fact, the ESCO revenues in developing ESCO markets is extremely low compared to
the Chinese, US and European ([31]). This market share corresponds to 5.2% of the
total ESCO market, counting for 1.5 billion USD per year, and its potential remains mostly
unexplored [31]. However, the amount of energy savings that can be achieved in these
countries is considerable, considering that this part of the market represents 72% of the
people in the world and 42% of the total GDP in 2017, where a substantial increase in
access to electricity, economic growth and increased living conditions is taking place, with
expected rapid increase in energy demand and consumption. It is therefore of primary
importance to collect data and information to understand the current situation and how to
leapfrog towards EE pathways.
Figure 4.3: Comparison between share of the ESCO revenue and total GDP in 2017
([55],[31])
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
43
==PAGE:54==
Considering again the small revenue share of ESCOs in emerging markets and the rapid
GDP growth in recent years of many of the same countries, a phenomenon similar to the
growth of EE investments and ESCO market in China could be seen in many parts of the
world in the next 20 years.
4.2
Future energy consumption of developing markets
Developing countries represent in the future years one of the biggest challenges in the
fight against climate change, poverty reduction and access to energy.
On the other
hand, these countries also represent an enormous opportunity for the development of
EE projects and the deployment of renewable energy sources.
When considering world population growth projections, most of the new 1.5 billion people
in 2050 will come from the Asian, excluding China, and African continents. In fact, ac-
cording to data published by [53], there will be 800 million more Africans and 600 million
more Asians than in 2020. That represents an increase of more than 20% of the current
total population in 2020 and this enormous new number of people, linked to substantial
growth in GDP and energy consumption expected on the same continents, will be one of
the most important challenges in the fight against climate change.
Figure 4.4: Projections of the world population until 2050 by the [53]
As stated, not only will the number of people increase by a considerable amount, but
nominal GDP will also grow significantly. The GDP projections for Africa from the latest
IEA reports considers that it will reach between 17 and 25 trillions USD by 2040. That
would mean an annual GDP per capita between 8,173 USD and 12,019 USD. China
and India, whose population will account for about half of Asia’s population by 2040, will
also continue to grow, with GDP expected to increase from 17,762 USD and 7,517 USD
respectively in 2020 to 33,421 USD and 18,500 USD respectively in 2040 ([25]). This
represents an increase of GDP per capita of 188% for China and a 246% for India. A
similar trend in GDP growth can be expected from the rest of the Asian continent, i.e. the
other half of the population not belonging to these two countries.
This increase in both the world’s population and GDP per capita will certainly lead to an
increase in energy consumption, as there is a direct correlation between GDP and energy
use.
44
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:55==
Energyusepercapita = 1, 3054 ∗(GDPpercapita) + 1376
The relationship between the two variables is linear, or rather, each dollar increase in GDP
corresponds to a 1.30 increase in KWh per year as it is shown in the equation above. This
line can be seen in Figure 4.5, along with the GDP/energy use ratio for different countries,
while the size of the circles represents the size of the population. Below the red line, it
is possible to see the countries that best use their resources to create domestic product
compared to energy use. Above, on the contrary, are the countries that use more energy
to create their gross domestic product. Either way, the more GDP per person increases,
the more the error of the prediction increases. In fact, it is possible to notice that the more
the GDP per person increases, the more the countries move away from the prediction
line.
This can be explained by external factors as the climatic conditions but also by the spread
of focus on EE. Having said that, when considering energy use in a climate change context
and CO2 emissions, there is also a difference in the primary energy used, and not only
the efficiency of its utilization. Iceland as an example, although having a higher ratio
between GDP and energy use, generates 85% of its energy from renewable sources and
the remaining 15% from fossil sources ([24]).
Figure 4.5: Use of energy per capita per country related to GDP per capita with regression
line.
GDP growth and improved living conditions are directly correlated to an increase in energy
consumption per capita, even if this increase will be strongly modified by the presence or
absence of incentives and initiatives for EE improvements. ESCOs, therefore, given their
rapid development during China’s GDP growth over the last 20 years, and their success at
delivering EE improvements in the public sector in the US and Europe, could find similar
conditions in many new African and Asian states if sufficiently supported. It is important
then to analyze the main barriers that have prevented the establishment of ESCO mar-
kets in the past and to collect valuable experiences to provide concrete solutions towards
creating a robust marketplace for ESCOs and accelerate its market growth.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
45
==PAGE:56==
4.3
ESCO market barriers in developing markets
As seen in the IEA’s most recent report ([32]), the ESCO markets outside the EU, US
and China garner only a small portion of the world’s revenue. Given the projections for
population, GDP, and energy usage growth, this could change substantially in the coming
years. It is therefore essential to understand the barriers that have hindered the growth
of the ESCO market in the past.
In this paragraph, the most common and important barriers that hinder the establishment
and development of ESCOs will be summarized and grouped together. In this category
belongs states with very different political, economic and financial conformations and it
must remember that not all the barriers are present in all the markets, even if similarities
were found in developing ESCO markets.
The objective is not to analyze the specific situation at a national level, but to group the
common barriers that have blocked the development of ESCOs in the past in both de-
veloping and developed ESCO markets. As said, some similarities between barriers are
found in most developing ESCO markets and has been divided into four categories seen
in Figure 4.6: policy and regulatory, business and technical, financial, and knowledge
and experience. The categorization of barriers allows better visualization of the issues
and their related area of interest.
Figure 4.6: Most common barriers per category
One of the most important barriers stemmed directly from the lack of ESCO-friendly leg-
islation: ESCOs very often find themselves operating in a deregulated environment and
that increases the cost and time of a project significantly.
In addition, the very definition of an ESCO is often ambiguous and sometimes there are
laws that prevent the stipulation of EPC contracts. If the definition of ESCO itself is not
well established, it is difficult to understand which EE companies are actually ESCOs and
which are not. However that is not the only problem related to this barrier category: the
lack of specific regulation directly increases the transaction costs for EE projects as it
lengthens the time, resources, and therefore costs associated with the project develop-
ment, implementation, operation and maintenance, verification and quantification of en-
46
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:57==
ergy savings. It also makes it very difficult to acquire reliable data on the national ESCO
market performance as in Sweden ([7]).
There are not always concrete national policies for EE and reduction of energy waste in
public administration, as seen against more developed markets where the topic is com-
monly more addressed. Globally, it has been estimated by [30] that only 35% of the share
of total final energy used is subject to mandatory policies and regulations. This means
that most of the consumption is not regulated by laws and it is left to the users, private
and public, to inform themselves and individually carry out projects to improve EE. This,
therefore, results in a slower transition to the use of EE technologies and increases the
EE gap due to the irrational behaviour and market failures found within the EE market.
Other problems related to the legislative framework has been found in the tax regulation
within specific developing ESCO markets. Having clear legislation to regulate taxation
is not only important to simplify the operation of the ESCO and EPC contracts, but also
allows the possibility to create mechanisms to promote ESCOs projects and interventions
through partial or total tax exemption. Taxation problem has characterized the Chilean,
Colombian and Slovenian ESCO market, all countries where ESCOs struggle to operate
and grow.
Different business and technical barriers have been found in multiple ESCO markets. In
Croatia, the poor condition of the facilities makes the implementation of EE projects more
difficult. This is due to the fact that many of the secondary benefits obtained from the
implementation of EE technologies are difficult to quantify in economic terms. In Italy and
the United States, the shortage of equipment and skills are factors that prevent energy
improvement projects. In Bulgaria instead, the small size of the supply prevents ESCO to
conclude tenders for EE projects ([7]). In India problems have been encountered related
to the spatial limitation of ESCO in the territory, thus failing to work at the national level
but only focusing on certain areas ([39]).
One of the biggest threat encountered in the business and technical area is the risk of non-
payment by the customer. This is especially relevant in the early stages of stabilisation of
ESCOs in a new market. Failure of projects could be disastrous for small and medium-
sized ESCOs, leading to their bankruptcy while decreasing the overall confidence in the
ESCO business model. This risk is minimized when the client is a government agency
where its existence and stability can be guaranteed, compared to private customers. How-
ever, in cases of countries with extremely unstable policies or possible government coups
this risk is increased.
Additional problems for the ESCO business activity are correlated to the political, social
and economical stability of some developing countries as highlighted during the interview
with DEM. This is directly linked to a higher risk of private entities default, failure of EPC
contracts, lack of trust for EE projects, and higher interest rates for ESCO credit. This
also reduces available funds from the government towards EE investments.
As stated, this problem mostly concerns ESCOs when the client is a private individual,
especially in developing ESCO markets. The risk is further increased when the duration
of projects is extended over long periods, forcing ESCOs to focus only on interventions
with the highest cost avoidance and the lowest payback time. Despite this, the majority
of contracts in developing ESCO markets are still usually concluded with private clients
as shown in Table 3.1.
Some of the financial challenges that ESCOs in developing ESCO market have to deal
with has already been described in section 2.6. The lack of ESCO capability on finance
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
47
==PAGE:58==
and co-finance projects linked to the lack of incentive schemes and other appropriate
forms of financing highly hinders the rapid expansion of the ESCO market. This is the
case in Bulgaria, Colombia, Estonia, Germany, Kenya, Latvia, Mexico, and Portugal ([7],
[39]). Sometimes, as in Poland [39], the funds and incentives directed to the ESCO mar-
ket are too small compared to the market itself, creating fierce competition between the
market participants and leaving some of the EE potential untapped. All these factors are
preventing ESCOs from investing time and resources in EE projects in those countries.
Lack of familiarity on the part of the banking system with EE projects conducted by ES-
COs also often results in higher interest rates for loans, decreasing the competitiveness of
these projects and even the inability for ESCOs to obtain loans from financial institutions.
Another crucial financial barrier has been found in the energy cost. Countries in which
the price of energy is high is certainly one of the factors that in the past has favored the
development of companies that implement energy savings, while in countries with low
energy price the same technologies are considered of secondary importance and often a
high-risk investment like in France, Germany, Latvia, New Zeland, Norway, and Poland
([7], [39]).
In addition, in some countries, the price of energy is not regulated according to the rules
of the free market but is disrupted by internal factors such as fuel subsidies for oil, natural
gas, coal and electricity produced with the previous fuels. Fossil fuel subsidies, together
with the high volatility of energy prices and the failure to account for externalities, make EE
projects more challenging financially. As seen in Paragraph 2.3.1, the typical EPC contract
in a developing ESCO market is the Shared Savings Model, and the ESCO is responsible
for the debt repayment. Especially considering EPC contracts with high pay-back time, it
is difficult to guarantee the minimum savings requirements if a floor value is not stipulated,
external financing becomes much more difficult and the customer confidence decreases.
The last barrier groups all those issues regarding the lack of knowledge and experience
regarding the benefits of EE and the services offered by ESCOs. Very often, private
customers and government are not aware of the waste and inefficiencies of using old
technology or coatings in buildings and industries. In addition, the lack of promotion of
EE measures by the public administration makes its dissemination and credibility more
difficult. This is especially relevant for developing economics where managers are more
concerned about improving areas of production rather than engaging in EE measures.
When this awareness does exist, however, additional problems can arise from the cus-
tomers’ own implementation of EE projects. This can often lead to higher-than-expected
costs as the client must bear the cost of financing, spending time and money researching
the best technologies, hiring third-party companies to install the technologies, and assum-
ing the full financial and technical risk of the project. Diminishing the general interest in
undertaking EE projects.
Campaigns and example projects in the past years have often served to raise awareness
of EE among the population. This is critical because this barrier often interferes with the
consolidation of other barriers related to the financial and legislative areas. Even once a
sufficient level of knowledge has been reached, the lack of experts capable of carrying
out this type of project can still slow down or block its development, as seen in Italy and
the United States. This barrier category is one of the most common in the ESCO markets
analyzed and can be found in Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Estonia, Latvia, Netherlands,
Romania, Slovakia, and the UK.
48
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:59==
4.4
Survey analysis
As seen in the previous paragraph, policies and legislation are of vital importance for
the development of the ESCO market, to unlock the potential of ESCO associations and
Super ESCOs, and to reduce the cost and time of EPC contracts. For this reason, the
survey focused on this specific type of barrier and asked directly associations and experts
operating in different ESCO markets what were the most important legislations to ensure
better operation of ESCO.
In the first part, an overall analysis of the most important barriers and drivers of different
national and international markets was carried out. This allowed understanding what ac-
tually are the most important legislation to promote the birth and development of ESCOs.
A more specific analysis of the most important legislative barriers for each market is done
in continuation providing additional insights to allow for final conclusions and recommen-
dations of the thesis for unlocking the ESCO market.
As can be seen from Figure 4.7 and 4.8, the scores for each category were collected from
10 associations that responded to the survey. Two different experts within Federesco
responded to the questionnaire, with slightly different results for the barriers considered.
When the value is 0, it means that the legislation has not been implemented in the specific
market where the ESCO association operates or that no answer has been provided. The
green line, on the other hand, represents the average score for each barrier. To find
the average score for each barrier, the sum of all scores was divided by the number of
responses. In case the value was zero, this was not counted in the operation.
Figure 4.7: Survey results
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.8: Survey results
It can be noticed that all the different barriers seems to be highly relevant for the respon-
dent of the survey, but not all barriers are equally important for each association, and
therefore ESCO market. This reiterates the importance that policy and regulatory barriers
actually have in the ESCO market and that different political, economic and financial con-
figurations make each ESCO market different. It should also be noted that only 6 of 11
responders were able to assess the importance of the national promotion of EE measures
and/or energy audit. In any case, when an answer is provided, its importance remains
relatively high.
A specific review and analysis were conducted for each of the responses received from
the various ESCO associations. The analysis includes a description of the association
and the market(s) in which it operates, a description of the legislation that most influences
the operation of ESCOs, and an additional breakdown, if applicable, of the legislation that
needs to be removed or implemented in these markets.
4.4.1
National Association of Energy Service Companies (NAESCO)
NAESCO is the U.S. national association of ESCOs dedicated to modernizing infrastruc-
ture through EPC contracts.
As reiterated earlier in Paragraph 3.2 and confirmed by NAESCO President Timothy Un-
ruh, dedicated legislation for ESCOs and EPC contracts already exists within the U.S.
marketplace at the state and federal level. This proves to be a prerequisite for the op-
eration and development of ESCOs in mature markets. NAESCO association works to
correct problems in the legislation when they exist. This task is crucial for an already
advanced market, as seen valid also for the European Union, to allow the ESCO activity
and its development.
This association also aims to promote legislation that promotes EE: for example, in 2020,
the Open Back Better act was promoted by the association, a stimulus funding for EE and
retrofit projects in schools, medical facilities, government buildings, educational institu-
tions, libraries, and more ([10]). This is in line with past EE policies: new stimuli towards
50
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:61==
EE in public buildings may prove to be a winning strategy against the post-coupled eco-
nomic and labor crisis.
One need for ESC success is clear in the responses: ”Top leadership support for EPC
is critical for our success”. This, again, stresses the importance of attention by political
entities and the country’s largest energy consumers to EE measures.
Figure 4.9: Survey results for NAESCO
As shown in Picture 4.9, the most important legislation for ESCO success by NAESCO
is determined by strong cooperation between the public and private entities involved in
the process of increasing EE, a clear tax regulation, and specific legislation for public
procurement, tendering and/or auctions.
4.4.2
Federesco
Federesco is a non-profit association that pursues the purpose of promoting among public
and private operators in Italy. As seen before, the ESCO market in Italy is one of the most
mature and successful in the European Union. Two responses were received from two
separate experts within Federesco and both results will be shown below and analyzed.
Federsco identifies the need for a greater market opening for ESCOs, providing the pos-
sibility of interventions on buildings and strengthening the public-private partnerships. As
seen in Picture 3.5, the projects in buildings with the lowest simple payback time are
lighting and heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) plant and that could offer an
opportunity for ESCO to increase their business. However, more expensive measures like
building fabric measures and integrated renovation of buildings have a high simple pay-
back time of up to more than 30 years and this projects provide only a small increase over
the avoidance cost per measure. That means that ESCO might prefer cherry-picking only
the interventions with the smallest payback time, leaving the landscape of the categories
with the highest payback time unchanged.
Federesco also promotes the development of green building codes for all sectors. In the
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
51
==PAGE:62==
industrial sector, however, the differences between payback time and avoided cost are
smaller. It is, therefore, easier to promote more comprehensive efficiency measures once
the reliability of the data has been demonstrated and its use in the private market has
been promoted.
Figure 4.10: First survey results for Federesco
As shown above, in Picture 4.10, the most important legislation to enable ESCO success
in Italy are related to the continuation of institutional program and planning, cooperation
between public and private actors, availability of different incentives for EE projects, clear
tax regulation, creation of specific legislation for ESCO and EPC contracts, the definition
of specific energy targets, and energy reforms to reduce energy price distortion.
Figure 4.11: Second survey results for Federesco
52
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:63==
For the second survey result, some similarities and differences can be encountered. The
two respondents seems to agree on the necessity of public incentives aimed at EE projects
as one of the greatest driver for the Italian ESCO market. On the other hand, many of
the barriers that had assumed a very high importance in the first response received a
score of 3, i.e., moderately important, in the second response. These barriers were low
continuity in institutional program and planning, cooperation between public and private
actors, clear tax regulation for ESCOs and EPC contracts, creation of specific legislation
for ESCO and EPC contracts, and the definition of specific energy targets.
4.4.3
BELESCO
BELESCO, the Belgian ESCO Association, groups the major stakeholders of the Belgian
energy services, energy performance contracting (EPC) and energy supply contracting
(ESC) sector and related areas like Third Party Financing (TPF) and measurement and
verification (MV) ([5]).
One of the barriers present in the Belgium ESCO market is that the subsidies exist for
technology rather than performance and/or tailored EE projects. That means that EPC
has sometimes a competitive disadvantage and is preferred to carry out these projects
in house rather than rely on an ESCO. This, as shown before, does not always allow
companies or buildings to carry out EE processes containing more than one intervention
at the same time, limiting interventions to only those technologies that are incentivized.
One of the necessary interventions within the legislative framework is the obligation for
(certain) public authorities to use EPC or at least consider and compare it to other alter-
natives. This would facilitate the spread of EPC contracts in the Belgium EE market.
Another problem identified concerns the ambiguities related to Eurostat rules related to
the off-balance solutions. At present time, EPC contracts with guaranteed savings mech-
anism need to be fully reimbursed by savings, in order for EPC contracts to be fully off-
balance for public authorities. This, as already seen in section 2.9 for the guaranteed sav-
ings model, can lead to small or medium-sized ESCOs experiencing over-indebtedness
problems, reducing the potential number of interventions carried out at the same time and
limiting business growth. This legislation could be improved by replacing it with the rule
that the amount of equivalent savings to the guaranteed savings can be off-balance.
One barrier that is preventing this specific ESCO market is the competition with private
EPC project facilitators by public One-stop-Shops, that tend to become themselves project
facilitators rather than market facilitators. By doing it at least partially themselves, rather
than outsourcing project facilitation to the private sector, they hinder the private facilitator
market and thus the ESCO market development that they were supposed to to stimulate
in the first place.
One of the major driver identified by BELESCO for the ESCO success is the digitiza-
tion of the ESCO facilitation and ESCO procurement/management processes. The same
importance was emphasized in the IEA report [33], i.e. the use of smart meters in build-
ings, increased penetration of active energy management systems in the industry, and
advancements in remote monitoring platforms.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.12: Survey results for BELESCO
As shown in Figure 4.12, the main driver for the development of ESCO in the Belgium
ESCO market is again the cooperation between public and private authorities and the
definition of specific energy savings target for public and private buildings.
4.4.4
Alliance for EE
Alliance for EE is an ESCO association located in Bulgaria with the intend of promoting
and expanding the sector of EE within its country. Bulgaria has still a relatively small
ESCO market and has been considered immature [7], although there is a national ESCO
association, support for facilitators, and the EU Code of Conduct covers the market.
The biggest challenge faced by this association and its members is the exclusion of ESCO
as a viable mechanism in Bulgarian grant programs. This is often the case when lack
of knowledge is present at the state level about the possibility of using ESCOs for EE
projects. In addition, there is no specialized financial infrastructure, capable of serving
the ESCO industry and climate change response.
This barrier is confirmed by the latest [7] report, which identifies ambiguity in the legislative
framework and lack of appropriate forms of financing as two of the most important barriers
still present in this market.
54
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.13: Survey results for Allaiance for EE
As shown above, in Picture 4.13, the most important legislation to enable ESCO success
is again the cooperation between the public and private entities, the presence of public
incentives aimed at EE projects, clear tax regulations for ESCOs and EPC contracts, the
creation of specific legislation for the operation of ESCOs and the formulation of EPC
contracts, and energy sector reforms to reduce price distortion.
4.4.5
Associação Portuguesa das Empresas de Serviços de Energia
(APESE)
APESE is a non-profit association, created in 2011 to promote the development and struc-
turing of the energy services market in Portugal. It represents and defends the interests
of ESE, Empresas de Serviços de Energia, which in turn promotes the efficient use of
energy ([3]). The Portuguese ESCO market is defined as still immature by the [7] report,
and only a small increase has been registered from 2015.
In this case, the open-ended responses were not answered, but the most critical aspects
for the success of the Portuguese market can be seen in Figure 4.14.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
55
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.14: Survey results for APESE
The restrictions of the contract duration are one of the most critical barriers in the regu-
lative framework in Portugal. At the same time, the energy sector reforms and specific
legislation for public procurement, tendering, and/or auction are also identified as the most
important factors in the legislative framework.
4.4.6
Asia-Pacific ESCO Industry Alliance (APEIA)
APEIA is an ESCO platform instituted in 2018 where different ESCO associations lo-
cated in the Asian-Pacific region can communicate, share experiences and initiatives.
The APEIA includes the following associations:
• Alliance for an Energy Efficient Economy (AEEE), India
• China Energy Conservation Association (EMCA), China
• Japan Association of Energy Service Companies (JAESCO), Japan
• Korea Association of ESCO (KAESCO), Korea
• Malaysia Association of Energy Service Companies (MAESCO), Malaysia
• Philippine EE Alliance Inc. (PE2), Philippines
• Sustainable Energy Association of Singapore (SEAS), Singapore
• Taiwan Energy Service Association (TESA), Taiwan
• Thai ESCO Association, Thailand
Alexander Ablaza, CEO, Climargy and Co-chair at Asia-Pacific ESCO Industry Alliance,
affirms that ”it is safe to say that all ESCO markets in Asia-Pacific, regardless of mar-
ket maturity, continue to have serious policy, financing and market gaps that need to be
bridged. Most Asia-Pacific ESCO markets complain that the support given by their respec-
tive governments is either inadequate or has been scaled down through time.” In some
56
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:67==
markets such as the Philippines, renewable energy projects are granted a much more
favorable tax incentive package than EE and ESCO-implemented projects. However, in
markets such as China, Japan and Korea, new policies have revoked or terminated ESCO
incentives such as project subsidies or tax-based incentives.
In general, the following improvements are needed for the future development of the coun-
tries grouped by APEIA:
• ESCO regulatory framework improvement.
• Fiscal incentives for ESCOs (aside from building owners) and for ESCO-financed
project investments.
• Removal of foreign ownership restrictions for ESCOs and EE projects.
• Enabling public procurement of ESCO performance contracts and PPP transactions
for EE projects.
Figure 4.15
One of the most critical factors for the development of ESCO in the Asian-Pacific ESCO
industry is the low continuity in institutional programs and planning. Across some devel-
oping countries in Asia, the ESCO market development has been supported directly and
indirectly in pocket, isolated efforts by ADB, World Bank, IFC, UNDP, UNIDO, UNEP, AFD
and USAID. There however has been almost no effort to maintain or follow-through the
pioneer assistance. Moreover, ESCO markets are unable to grow if human resources
are not developed correspondingly.
The costs associated with training and certifying
ESCO professionals will need to be bridged for most small and medium-sized ESCOs.
Professional training programs will include capacities related to MV, level III audits, and
negotiating performance contracts.
Other important drivers for the development of the Asian-Pacific is the cooperation be-
tween public and private entities and the creation of specific legislation for public procure-
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
57
==PAGE:68==
ment, tendering and/or auction. Specific legislation that has been recognized as relevant
and beneficial to the ESCO market is the broader EE and conservation laws such as the
one in the Philippines institutionalizes and strengthens the ESCO regulatory framework.
Similar attempts are occurring in Indonesia and Malaysia as they updated their previous
energy conservation laws.
More generally, some critical points for the development of the ESCO market have been
identified within the questionnaire:
• ESCOs should gain better debt financing terms: lower collateral requirements, lower
or no equity requirements, lower interest pricing, longer tenors.
• ESCOs should gain access to off-balance sheet project equity from super-ESCOs
or fund-like equity vehicles.
• The extended delays in the phase-out of energy subsidies by several governments
either delay investment decisions in ESCO-led projects or sometimes beg the critical
requirement of viability gap funding from governmental or developmental sources
to make ESCO or PPP (public-private partnership) projects commercially viable for
private sector investments.
4.4.7
Econoler
Econoler is an international consulting firm with 35 years of experience in the design,
implementation, evaluation and financing of EE and renewable energy programs and
projects ([14]).
A recommendation that would improve the growth of the ESCO market would be the
introduction of mandatory M&V by third parties in order to increase the reliability of the
results obtained and the trust between the ESCO and the final customer. Pierre Langlois,
President of Econoler, finds that public procurement for ESCOs to be the legislation most
conducive to the development of private ESCOs. In addition, a lack of adapted financing
mechanism for private sector end-users was identified as one of the main barriers for the
ESCO market.
58
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.16
.
From the survey results, the most critical point for the development of ESCOs is the need
for cleat tax regulation for ESCOs and EPC contracts: often Econoler encounters a lack of
clarity on sales tax and income tax treatment in the countries where it operates. The other
most important drivers identified are the creation of specific legislation for the operation
of ESCOs and the formulation of EPC contracts and the creation of specific legislation for
public procurement, tendering and/or auctions. In fact, the legislation most conducive to
the development of private ESCOs is, according to Econoler, the public procurement of
ESCOs.
4.4.8
Asociación Mexicana de Empresas de Eficiencia Energética
(AMENEER)
The ”Asociación Mexicana de Empresas de Eficiencia Energética” (Mexican Association
of EE Companies) brings together companies dedicated to installing energy monitoring
and control systems in commercial, residential, industrial and governmental buildings.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.17
All of the barriers identified in the survey play a key role in this association’s activity in the
Mexican ESCO market. In particular, the element that was considered most important
appears to be the national promotion of EE measures.
4.4.9
Asociación Nacional de Empresas de Servicios Energéticos
(ANESE)
ANESE is the Spanish ESCO national association with the objective to structure the ESCO
market thourgh its non-profit business platform.
According to ANESE, the political and governmental role must be placed at the forefront
to facilitate the Spanish market growth ESCO. In particular, ANESE identifies three pieces
of legislation that would benefit the Spanish ESCO market the most: the creation of guar-
antee funds and EE bonds, the annual planification of subsidiaries programs, and the
promotion of ESCO companies intervention within public institutions. In addition, accord-
ing to APESE, public institutions are focusing more on energy production from renewable
sources to achieve the targets of the European green deal and EE is assuming a role of
secondary importance.
60
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.18
Most of the barriers identified play a key role within the Spanish ESCO market. Those
that received the highest value are low continuity in institutional programs and planning,
national promotion of EE measures and/or energy auditing, cooperation between public
and private entities with the aim of identifying, promoting, financing, building and manag-
ing EE projects, public incentives aimed at EE projects directly or indirectly, definition of
specific energy savings target for public and private buildings, and specific legislation for
public procurement, tendering and/or auctions, Currently, no clear laws exist for the tax-
ation of EPC contracts, and more generally for the activity of ESCOs and the formulation
of EPC contracts.
4.4.10
ESCOROM
ESCOROM is a non-governmental organization founded in 2015 by an initiative group
consisting of both companies and independent consultants. ESCOROM represents Ro-
manian ESCOs with experience in design, execution, supply of equipment, operation,
maintenance, monitoring, verification of results and financing of EE projects through EPC
[16].
As for the Spanish ESCO market, the need to create specific funds directed towards
energy EE and in particular the activity of ESCOs is insisted upon. In fact one of the
most important drivers has been recognized in the RO Energy Efficiency Development
Fund. Furthermore, there does not seem to be specific legislation for the regulation of
taxation and, more generally, for the activity of ESCOs and EPC contracts. In particular,
the importance of having an EPC framework Contract and specific EPC provisions in the
tax code is stressed.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.19
One of the most important barriers is the discontinuity of EE programs in the Romanian
market. This does not allow long-term planning for ESCO activity and increases its un-
certainty. Another critical barrier for the development of this particular ESCO market is
the cooperation between public and private entities with the aim of identifying, promoting,
financing, building and managing EE projects.
4.4.11
Interview with DEM
The interview with DEM was an important point in the writing of the thesis and in the
creation of the questionnaire. It was in fact useful to get a direct feedback on the length
of the form and on which were the most interesting points to analyze. Moreover, it was
possible to obtain important information on the concrete problems that this company faces
daily in its work.
From the interview, it was made clear that DEM prefers to work with public rather than
private clients, and the particular reason is that this client is defined as more secure.
Very often in developing ESCO market, there is a risk of non-payment by the user or
bankruptcy, and this prompts caution in terms of end-customer selection. This can cause
financial problems for the ESCO and lead to the failure of the EE project. This can have
a snowball effect by further scaring off the various stakeholders and reduce the reliability
of these types of projects in the markets themselves.
The most important barrier identified by DEM is the knowledge of ESCOs and EPC con-
tracts, along with the benefits of EE projects. This, as shown in Chapter 4.3, appears to
be one of the most common barriers to different markets independent of maturity level. In
fact, even in more mature markets, the same issue has been found in the literature.
Problems of lack of knowledge about ESCOs and the advantages of EE also create and
influence other barriers, including the financial ones faced by DEM in developing markets.
In addition, the banking system in these countries seems not to be interested in financing
ESCO projects, preferring to lend money to customers with a high reputation and credit
history rather than in the technical and economic fundamentals of EE projects.
DEM stated to prefers working in those countries with a high cost of energy, which allows
a shorter duration of contracts and a greater benefit to the customer. Furthermore, pref-
62
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:73==
erence is given to those markets where the price of raw materials, including oil and gas,
are not influenced by strong incentives and therefore their price is high. This is due to the
fact that it again allows a greater advantage for EE projects but also because, if the price
of raw materials respects the market price, the possibility of price distortion in the future
is minimized.
An important issue for DEM’s expansion into new ESCO markets is related to the require-
ments for obtaining a license to operate in these markets. This actively demonstrates
that fulfilling the national standards necessary to obtain a license, but also fulfilling social
responsibilities such as the exploitation of youth labor, and the possibility of open tenders
for subcontracting projects.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
63
==PAGE:74==
64
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:75==
5
Discussion
In the previous chapters, an analysis of ESCO activity and the main types of contracts
to conduct EE projects has been provided. The different characteristics, strengths and
weaknesses of EPC have been outlined, along with complementary solutions, such as
insurance coverage, alternative methods of financing and the creation of Super ESCOs,
which facilitate and simplify their operation. A description of the most successful ESCO
markets and their history has also been provided, along with the most important features
that characterize them and the most important interventions that have facilitated their
development. From these markets, important recommendations can be gathered as to
which are the most important barriers to be eliminated and which are the drivers that have
most enabled ESCO market development.
Once the background was provided to the reader, the analysis turned to the growth po-
tential of the EE market and the role of ESCOs within it. The size of the ESCO business
could grow up to 6 times in 2040 if properly supported. Its market size will depend on
the adoption of this business model in still undeveloped ESCO markets and continued
promotion within those already developed.
After that, a regression line was calculated for the ratio GDP, energy use per capita to
understand the correlation between the two variables. Having established a direct cor-
relation between the two, and considering the expected growth of the world population
and the future economic rise of emerging economies, the importance of these new en-
ergy markets and the need for ESCO market development in the coming years has been
highlighted.
The most important barriers that prevent ESCOs from establishing and growing in devel-
oped and developing ESCO markets were gathered from the literature. Common barriers
were found in several ESCO markets as shown in Figure 4.6 and grouped according to
four different barrier typologies. Through the analysis of the results of the questionnaire,
an in-depth examination of the specific importance of legislative barriers was conducted
and valuable information was gathered on the barriers and solutions of several particular
ESCO markets. Once these answers were obtained, the main research question of this
thesis could be answered:
• How can ESCO market development be best supported in developing and emerging
economies with underdeveloped ESCO presence?
A set of recommendations will be provided in the next paragraph that can be used by
countries with an emerging or stalled ESCO market. The recommendations address the
most common and influential barriers encountered in the ESCO markets in Section 4.3
and 4.4.
5.1
Recommendations for the ESCO development
As seen in Paragraph 4.3, multiple barriers are preventing the establishment of ESCO
companies and decreasing the potential for ESCO market growth. Although not all bar-
riers presented in Figure 4.6 are peculiar of each developing ESCO market, most, if not
all, were found in the early stages in the establishment of the ESCO industry. The greater
the number of barriers in the market, the more difficult it is to ensure the success of this
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
65
==PAGE:76==
market in future years. Besides, not all barriers, as seen for the legislative framework, but
valid for other categories as well, have the same importance within the marketplace.
While some barriers are specific to undeveloped or early-stage ESCO markets, some
interesting examples and ideas of how these have been overcome can be found from the
literature and the survey result. Solutions have been reported for each category although
some barriers within categories are directly correlated and sometimes one solution can
solve several barriers in different categories at the same time.
Through the use of the survey, it was possible to understand which, within different mar-
kets with different levels of maturity, are the most important legislative barriers to foster
the development of the ESCO market. While it was possible to group the most important
legislation from the literature, a direct comparison with ESCO associations and experts
provided better accuracy in assessing the importance of different legislations.
One of the main limitations of the questionnaire, the subjectivity of the respondent, must
also be remembered. In fact, it was noted that, within the same Federesco association,
the two responses analyzed gave slightly different results. For this reason, the average
value of the answers received was used, in order to provide greater objectivity with respect
to the relative importance of each barrier analyzed in the questionnaire.
The most important regulation for ESCO markets where extracted from the survey results
and are ordered and presented for importance in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Most important legislation for the development of a mature ESCO market.
It is important to notice that all the barriers have received a score higher than 3, indicat-
ing that legislative frameworks are fundamental for the development of ESCOs in all the
markets analyzed. This is in agreement with the literature review and the analysis of the
history of the most important ESCO markets. Globally, only 35% of the share of total final
energy used is subject to mandatory policies and regulations, leaving most of the market
deregulated leads to unnecessary waste and inefficiency which in most cases could lead
to savings for the users themselves. That demonstrates that there is ample room for new
legislation and regulations regarding energy standards. Strong legislative intervention is
66
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:77==
a consequence of significant diffusion within political offices of the actual long-term bene-
fits of EE projects, but as seen in the previous Chapter, it is also one of the most common
barriers that ESCOs face in different markets.
Although all of the barriers listed are relevant for further analysis, some barriers should be
addressed before others. The three main legislations that the government should focus
on are the following:
• Cooperation between public and private entities with the aim of identifying, promot-
ing, financing, building and managing EE projects.
• Specific legislation for public procurement, tendering and/or auctions.
• Clear tax regulations for ESCOs and EPC contracts.
The only legislative barrier that seems not to be highly addressed in most ESCO markets
is the national promotion of EE measures. This could explain why, from the survey results,
the barrier that is most important for ESCO development is exactly the cooperation be-
tween public and private entities with the aim of identifying, promoting, financing, building
and managing EE projects. In fact, 8 of the 11 associations stated that cooperation is very
important to the performance of ESCO activities. While for Federesco and Econolor, this
represents a slightly less significant barrier. On the other hand, APESE, the Portuguese
ESCO association, stated that this cooperation does not yet exist.
As seen before, the political interest and intervention are necessary to achieve a devel-
oped ESCO market and sustain its growth. This is in line with the European and US
markets, where most contracts are stipulated with public users and where cooperation
is therefore a crucial factor. It is interesting to note that cooperation between public and
private entities is also considered fundamental in the ESCO markets in Asia, where most
contracts are stipulated between ESCOs and private users. This can be explained pre-
cisely by the fact that the public sector is only relatively tapped by ESCOs activity, but
government support and interest in EE is also key in developing the relationship between
ESCOs and private customers in industries and buildings
The second most important barrier extracted from the survey is the need for specific leg-
islation for public procurement, tendering, and/or auction. 6 out of 11 associations stated
this barrier with a higher score, i.e., that its presence is very important to the operation of
ESCOs business. This is in agreement with the literature review, having found challenges
and difficulties with public procurement in Croatia, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Ireland,
Israel, and Italy. Better legislation would allow mitigating barriers present in other cate-
gories. For example, it would reduce the high transition costs associated with EE projects
by cutting red tape and thus the costs and time associated with them.
The third most important element is clear tax regulations for ESCOs and EPC contracts.
This, from the literature review, is a common barrier in both developed and underdevel-
oped ESCO markets. The non-regulation of taxes for EPC contracts creates problems
in accounting and makes it inaccessible, or more difficult, for international and domes-
tic ESCOs to enter these markets. It also prevents the possibility of creating incentives
through the exemption of tax payment during ESCO projects. This financial incentive has
precisely been one of the drivers that has prompted the proliferation of ESCO activity in
the Chinese market.
All other barriers scored above average and therefore remain fundamental in the develop-
ment and support of ESCO activity. It is crucial to assess their relative importance to each
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
67
==PAGE:78==
specific market analysed and to understand how these specific policies can be adapted
and implemented to existing legislation.
Proposed solutions to the barriers present in the other three categories analyzed in Chap-
ter 4.3 are investigated. These proposed solutions are grouped and shown in Figure 5.2.
It should be noted that some solutions are repeated in multiple categories, such as the
presence of ESCO and Super ESCO associations. This is due to the fact that these en-
tities, if properly implemented, can address several barriers present in different areas at
the same time.
Figure 5.2: Proposed barrier solutions
As seen from Chapter 2.6, most of the contracts stipulated by ESCOs with clients in de-
veloping markets are utilizing the Shared Savings Model. This type of contract is more
suitable for ESCO development in these countries as it allows ESCOs to establish them-
selves in markets where it is not possible to obtain loans directly from banks. However,
this type of contract should not be encouraged in the long term, especially in those coun-
tries where there have been large variations in energy prices. This has been the cause
of bankruptcy for some ESCOs in the US and Canada.
The energy savings, and therefore the monetary savings, are shared between the ESCO
and the client and that implies that a correct measure of the energy savings is crucial to
establish trust between the parties involved. In order to increase the project’s reliability,
it is essential that developing ESCO markets adopt well structured and known interna-
tional verification and measurements protocol. Although, as reviewed by [54], in the early
stages of ESCO establishment it is recommended to use simpler measurements, such as
deemed savings. This was done successively by an Indian Super ESCO, EE Services
Limited, for lighting projects. While ESCO in developed ESCO markets can offer addi-
tional verification and measurements to further increase the trust between the parties.
This same function can be left to independent third-party companies in case the lack of
68
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:79==
trust among stakeholders is still existing.
The role of ESCO association is important when developing ESCO markets and can pro-
vide several benefits in the business, technical and financial area. As [39] analyses,
”ESCO associations can play an important role in jump starting and/or maintaining an
EPC market in a country”.
These associations often provide training, technical assistance and consulting services to
their members. In addition, national and international ESCO association can simplify the
communication between their members and the different ESCOs, advising on the best
strategies to improve their effectiveness without affecting their costs. The organization
of specific meetings between the ESCO members is important to exchange ideas and
discuss financial and market issues for specific ESCO sectors and regions.
These associations are also the point of contact between national ESCOs, suppliers of
the EE technologies, and research institutions. At the same time, ESCO associations
can encourage the digitization process by using web pages to encapsulate contacts and
information useful for its members to form collaborations. This information facilitate the
contact between ESCOs and different stakeholders, and, at least in part, the digitization
process which was also emphasized by BELESCO.
ESCO associations can also facilitate the connection between individual ESCOs and the
financial sector. These associations can provide advice to facilitate the financing process,
recommend specific lines of credit, and provide greater certainty on the evaluation of EE
projects. That is especially important for small and medium-sized ESCOs without a credit
history and that operates with the guaranteed model scheme. Those ESCOs, that may
find it impossible to obtain low-interest loans, might be able to obtain enough credit if
supported by an association that guarantees and validates projects.
An additional need is the presence of qualified personnel and this can be provided through
the network created by ESCO associations, and through the creation of technical institutes
and university courses specialized in the education of these experts. ESCO associations
can provide a central role in sharing experience and knowledge with new members re-
garding specific market issues, and certifying ESCO professionals that could work in direct
collaboration with the ESCO association and Super ESCO. This would also increase the
awareness and level of knowledge within the population on the subject of EE and the ben-
efits derived from it. Publicity campaigns and seminars can also be used to engage local
energy managers and senior managers on the potential benefits of EE, on the specifics
of EPC contracts and national/regional topics of interest to relevant stakeholders.
As seen, ESCO associations have key importance in breaking down different market bar-
riers, sharing experience, drafting contracts, and seeking funding is an important tool to
help develop new ESCO markets. The creation of the world’s first ESCO association,
the Global ESCO Network, should further facilitate the dissemination of good practice in
developing ESCo markets. In particular, this association provides a platform place where
different professionals and actors from the ESCO world can meet and share experiences,
problems and solutions.
On the other hand, Super ESCOs can provide additional benefits beyond those previously
listed. Public ESCO can simplify the connection between public and private entities, EE
project funding and the other benefits analyzed in 2.13. In particular, Super ESCOs could
play a key role in unlocking the potential for EE within the public sector, which to date has
remained relatively limited in emerging ESCO markets. These public based ESCO can
also guarantee technical support to private ESCOs and decrease the perceived risk of
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
69
==PAGE:80==
investment in EE and ESCO projects. As seen, these problems have often been encoun-
tered in developing ESCO markets and are preventing the expansion of national ESCO
markets. International communication between Super ESCOs is an additional important
element: Super ESCO from mature markets could help Super ESCOs in undeveloped
markets to stimulate the development of the ESCO business, i.e the demonstration of
bankability of ESCOs in new markets.
If this were to be simplified, larger markets could offer concrete help for the development
of ESCO companies in markets that are still immature, finding opportunities for expan-
sion in markets that have not yet been explored and have enormous potential. As seen
during the interview with DEM, there must be a political interest in allowing international
companies into the local ESCO market, otherwise, it becomes impossible for foreign ES-
COs to operate in these markets. Successful Super ESCOs have been found in all ESCO
markets that are considered mature such as the US, Belgium, Croatia, and China.
To conclude, Super ESCOs have the task of facilitating and promoting the development
of EE in the public and private sector, although while being under the direct control and
attention of the government that ensure Super ESCOs do not monopolize the EE market.
Another key point for the development of markets is represented by the energy market and
its regulations. As seen in the U.S. and in states of the European Union the deregulation of
the energy market has provided an enormous market opportunity for ESCOs, especially
within the private sector. The deregulation creates a high competition among energy
producers and allows ESCOs to enter this network as an intermediary, buying energy
and providing services through an Energy Supply contract while minimizing costs through
increasingly efficient technologies. In addition, it is important to reduce the incentives for
fossil fuels, both for emerging markets and for those already mature, as not only allows
greater economic competitiveness between renewable and fossil fuels, but would allow
ESCO to be able to reduce the time of contracts and increase interest in forms of EE. In
any case, the decision-making power that individual ESCOs have on these policy issues
remains very limited. Again, the role of ESCO associations and Super ESCOs can be
central to the communication and collaboration between ESCOs and the government to
address specific market barriers.
The introduction and spread of insurance packages within EPC contracts could be crucial
in developing ESCO markets and could increase the dissemination of EPC contracts in
the already mature ones. Although the insurance premium directly increases costs, and
therefore the simple pay-back time of the EE project, it has been demonstrated that these
costs do not affect extensively the feasibility of ESCO projects. Indeed, a project was car-
ried out by the Danish government in collaboration with Fiorello H. La Guardia Foundation
to analyze financial barriers and their mitigation through the insurance of energy savings
in Mexico. All scenarios analysed by [21] are financially sustainable, despite the use of
external funds and the presence of insurance premiums, even in the scenario where only
85% of the savings are achieved. Similar conditions can be encountered in other devel-
oping ESCO markets and should be supported. However, these insurance packages are
not present in most of the markets analyzed, and there is still not enough interest on the
part of institutions to create them.
Insurance packages that protect energy investment can reduce the risk of non-payment
and default by EPC customers.
Very often this is of crucial importance to small and
medium-sized ESCOs who may declare bankruptcy if some of their clients default. In-
corporating insurance packages to cover EPC contracts could also bring a reduction in
costs associated with loans. In fact, shifting the financial risk from ESCOs to insurance
70
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:81==
companies would make the loans less risky, thus allowing to lower interest rates. In any
case, the banking system of emerging countries is often not confident towards EE in-
vestments and especially EPC contracts. For this reason, international collaboration is
extremely important in financing and demonstrating the economic return of EE projects
and unlock interest in the ESCO business.
An excellent alternative could be the use of domestic and international funds, incentives
and grants. National funds and incentives, as reviewed in Paragraph 2.6 and 4.1, provide
a major stimulus towards EE in the public market, as seen in the US and Europe, and in the
private sector, as seen in the Chinese market. While international funds have not always
led to the success of ESCOs at the national level, these are essential for demonstrating
the economic and financial viability of EPC contracts. However, these funds alone are not
sufficient to create a self-sustaining ESCO market and additional steps must be taken. In
fact, as shown in the survey results, these are placed as the sixth most important driver,
although its overall score remains high.
It is also important that the public administration uses its properties as example projects for
the demonstration of EE results through ESCOs. The same process can also be carried
out through the support of Super ESCOs, strengthening public-private participation. This
can consolidate the credibility for future EE projects, increasing awareness of the possible
savings in economic but also environmental terms to private customers.
The tracking of energy consumption by the public administration and the largest national
energy consumer through increased digitization could prove successful. These measures
would increase awareness of the energy consumption, help identifying energy waste and
facilitate the performance comparison of similar buildings or industries, providing addi-
tional strength to the development of ESCOs. It may also lay the initial groundwork for
the creation of Super ESCOs once there is a realization at the state level of the potential
of ESCO services and inefficiencies in public buildings.
These are some of the solutions that could solve the stalled ESCO activity in some mar-
kets. It is necessary to carefully analyze each individual market and cautiously evaluate
which are the best initiatives to undertake, assessing the impact and implications of each.
The spread of knowledge of the economic and non-economic benefits of EE and the
simplifications offered by ESCO services must be managed and supported by legislation
and public initiatives to create a strong foundation for the development and growth of the
ESCO market.
It should be noted that as successful as ESCOs are in addressing some of the EE-related
barriers, some limitations remain related to their activities. First and foremost is certainly
the requirement for minimum project size. In fact, if an ESCO can implement EE measures
on a large home residence, energy-intensive industries, or large non-residential buildings,
the high transition costs do not allow to carry out EE projects in more targeted areas, e.g.
in single houses or small industries. These EE improvements could be carried out only
through the presence of incentives to specific technologies. It should also be noted that
ESCOs, in order to minimize payback time, especially in conditions with increased risk of
failure in developing ESCO markets, tend to prefer only those measures with high payback
and not to maximize total EE. This is a missed opportunity, as the payback time of more
economically attractive measures can reduce the payback time of other measures, when
considered within the same project.
Therefore, although ESCOs are a viable alternative for financing and deploying EE tech-
nologies and projects, other solutions, such as incentives towards specific technologies,
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
71
==PAGE:82==
must continue to be supported.
72
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:83==
6
Conclusions
EE is one of the most effective ways of reducing GHG emissions and fight climate changes.
At the same time, EE can offer multiple benefits such as the reduced dependence on for-
eign fuels, mitigation of energy crises, and improved standards and living conditions.
Although interest from major economies is growing in the topic, this does not appear
to be enough and additional measures need to be considered. At the same time, the
international trend for EE improvements seems to be declining and the EE investments
have remained stagnant during the past year. Analyzing the trend of the world growth
population and energy consumption per capita, it can be further understood the extent
of the changes towards which we go. The most recent Covid-19 provoked an additional
reduction in the funds for EE projects, which could take us further away from the objectives
stipulated in the Paris Agreement. But, as Winston Churchill said, ”never let a good crisis
go to waste”.
ESCOs in this uncertain environment could revive global EE efforts and play a key role in
the fight against climate change and in fulfilling the goals of the Paris Agreement. ESCO
activity can also counter some of the inherent barriers towards EE and reduce the EE gap.
As analyzed, the overall ESCO market size has been growing over the last few years in
the major ESCO markets. The growth and development of the ESCO market in countries
outside of China, the United States, and Europe remains limited, and its potential is not
exploited due to numerous market barriers. According to projections based on increased
funding and investment towards EE, the total annual size of the ESCO market has been
estimated to be between $36.4 and $104.2 billion over the period 2020-2030 and between
$53.7 and $161.8 billion over the period 2031-2040. In order to exploit the maximum
ESCO potential, the spread of ESCO activities needs to continue to grow in the public and
private sectors of the developed ESCO markets, and market barriers must be addressed
in the developing ones. For this reason, the most important barriers that have impeded
in the past the development of ESCO markets have been identified and analyzed.
Despite the different economic, political, and financial national situation, some common
barriers were extracted from the literature, interviews and conferences, and categorized
according to barrier type. Each common barrier has been contextualised, and its impli-
cations and the markets in which they were found have been described. Four different
category barriers were identified: policy and regulatory, business and technical, financial,
and knowledge and experience.
Specifically, a questionnaire was created and sent out to ESCO associations and experts
to understand the importance of regulatory and policy barriers, and to obtain specific rec-
ommendations from different ESCO markets. Policy and regulatory barriers are common
in most ESCO markets and play a key role in the evolution of the markets analyzed.
After the analysis of the results, the most important drivers for the development of an
ESCO market are the cooperation between public and private entities with the aim of
identifying, promoting, financing, building and managing EE projects, the creation of spe-
cific legislation for public procurement, tendering and/or auctions, and the implementation
of clear tax regulations for ESCOs and EPC contracts. However, all the barriers inside the
survey obtained a high value and only few are the legislation that has not implemented
in the ESCO markets analyzed. That suggests that legislative barriers are fundamental
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
73
==PAGE:84==
to any ESCO market, regardless of its level of maturity and development. Strong political
commitment thus appears to be one of the main drivers for ESCOs success in developed
and developing ESCO markets.
A list of proposed solutions to eliminate the most common barriers from the other cat-
egories analyzed was also created. The creation of national and international ESCO
associations, the formation of super ESCOs, the dissemination of insurance packages
and example projects, the adoption of O&M standards, the digitisation of ESCOs, and
the presence of national and international funds are just some of the drivers to foster the
creation of a sustainable ESCO market and to ensure its success.
6.1
Limitations and future work
The world of ESCOs is complex and uneven. It is not possible to access the latest data
for all countries, especially when the ESCO market is still underdeveloped in developing
countries. In addition, each national situation remains unique, and although efforts have
been made to generalize the topic as much as possible and provide ”universal” guidelines,
national and local situations are very often found to be distant. For each specific market,
the barriers and possible solutions proposed should be considered, and verified at the
national level as to how to adapt and make them work, considering the peculiarities of the
market analyzed.
The result obtained was satisfactory and I hope that, in the future, others will take my work
as an example to expand the spectrum of answers and to further investigate the role and
possibilities of ESCO activity within EE markets in developing countries.
Now that it is available what the most common barriers are within different ESCO markets,
it would be interesting to analyze the importance of each as done for legislative barriers.
In particular, regarding the lack of financing options and awareness of the energy savings.
This could provide additional guidance on the importance of these topics for developing
the ESCO market. It would also be interesting to expand the network created by The
Global ESCO Network, so that more feedback and data can be received for analysis.
74
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
9 Key Elements of Joe Biden’s Plan for a Clean Energy Revolution | Joe Biden for
President: Official Campaign Website. 2020. URL: https://joebiden.com/9- key-
elements-of-joe-bidens-plan-for-a-clean-energy-revolution/ (visited on 12/13/2020).
[2]
Miklós Antal and Jeroen C.J.M. Van den Bergh. “Re-spending rebound: A macro-
level assessment for OECD countries and emerging economies”. In: Energy Policy
68 (May 2014), pp. 585–590. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2013.11.016.
[3]
APESE. APESE - Associação Portuguesa das Empresas de Serviços de Energia |
Apese. URL: http://www.apese.pt/pt/sobre-nos (visited on 01/14/2021).
[4]
Michele Bassi. “Analysis and evolution of the Energy Service Companies’ Italian
market”. 2016.
[5]
Belesco. Belesco - Mission. URL: https://www.belesco.be/about-belesco/mission
(visited on 01/13/2021).
[6]
Paolo Bertoldi and Benigna Boza-Kiss. “Analysis of barriers and drivers for the de-
velopment of the ESCO markets in Europe”. In: Energy Policy 107.April (2017),
pp. 345–355. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2017 . 04 . 023. URL: http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2017.04.023.
[7]
Paolo Bertoldi and Benigna Boza-Kiss. Energy Service Market in the EU. Joint Re-
search Centre (JRC); European Commission, 2019. ISBN: 9789276130932. DOI:
10.2760/768. URL: https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/
JRC118815/jrc118815.pdf.
[8]
Paolo Bertoldi, Silvia Rezessy, and Edward Vine. “Energy service companies in
European countries: Current status and a strategy to foster their development”. In:
Energy Policy 34.14 (Sept. 2005), pp. 1818–1832. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/
j.enpol.2005.01.010.
[9]
Paolo Bertoldi, Silvia Rezessy, and Edward Vine. “Energy service companies in
European countries: Current status and a strategy to foster their development”. In:
Energy Policy 34.14 (Sept. 2006), pp. 1818–1832. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/
j.enpol.2005.01.010.
[10]
Lisa Blunt Rochester. “H.R.7303 - 116th Congress (2019-2020): Open Back Better
Act of 2020”. In: (2020). URL: https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-
bill/7303/text.
[11]
Benigna Boza-Kiss, Paolo Bertoldi, and Marina Economidou. Energy Service Com-
panies in the EU. 2017, p. 218. ISBN: 9789279714757. DOI: 10.2760/12258.
[12]
Juan Pablo Carvallo et al. “Evaluating project level investment trends for the U.S.
ESCO industry: 1990–2017”. In: Energy Policy 130.June 2018 (2019), pp. 139–161.
ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2019.03.061. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2019.03.061.
[13]
DEEP. De-risking Energy Efficiency Platform. 2020. URL: https://deep.eefig.eu/
(visited on 12/15/2020).
[14]
Econoler. About us - Econoler. URL: https://econoler.com/en/about- econoler/
(visited on 01/14/2021).
[15]
Jennifer Ellis. “Energy Service companies (ESCOs) in Developing Countries”. In:
(IISD), International Institute for Sustainable Development May (2010).
[16]
ESCOROM. Asociatia ESCOROM a Societatilor de Servicii Energetice din Roma-
nia. URL: https://escorom.ro/ (visited on 02/21/2021).
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
75
==PAGE:86==
[17]
European Commission. Electric motors. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/energy-
climate- change- environment/standards- tools- and- labels/products- labelling- rules-
and- requirements/energy- label- and- ecodesign/energy- efficient- products/electric-
motors%7B%5C_%7Den (visited on 01/12/2021).
[18]
European Commission. Recovery plan for Europe. Nov. 2020. URL: https://ec.
europa.eu/info/strategy/recovery-plan-europe%7B%5C_%7Den (visited on 12/13/2020).
[19]
Transport European Commission - DG JRC Directorate C - Energy and Climate.
Energy Performance Contracting. URL: https://e3p.jrc.ec.europa.eu/articles/energy-
performance-contracting (visited on 12/09/2020).
[20]
Finance leasing financial definition. URL: https://financial-dictionary.thefreedictionary.
com/Finance+leasing (visited on 12/15/2020).
[21]
H Fiorello. Energy Savings Insurance: A Design. Tech. rep. 2014. URL: https://ens.
dk/sites/ens.dk/files/energistyrelsen/Nyheder/design%7B%5C_%7Dof%7B%5C_
%7Dan%7B%5C_%7Denergy%7B%5C_%7Dsavings%7B%5C_%7Dinsurance%7B%
5C_%7Dinstrument%7B%5C_%7D-%7B%5C_%7Dfinal%7B%5C_%7D2.pdf.
[22]
Global ESCO Network. URL: https://globalesconetwork.unepdtu.org/ (visited on
01/28/2021).
[23]
Frank Gottron. “Energy Efficiency and the Rebound Effect: Does Increasing Effi-
ciency Decrease Demand?” In: Congressional Research Service (2001), pp. 18–
19.
[24]
Government of Iceland, Ministry of industries, and innovation. Energy. URL: https:
//www.government.is/topics/business-and-industry/energy/ (visited on 01/08/2021).
[25]
Y. Guillemette and D. Turner. The Long View: Scenarios for the World Economy to
2060. 2018. URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/the-long-view%7B%5C_
%7Db4f4e03e-en (visited on 01/09/2021).
[26]
Eric Hirst and Marilyn Brown. “Closing the efficiency gap: barriers to the efficient use
of energy”. In: Resources, Conservation and Recycling 3.4 (June 1990), pp. 267–
281. ISSN: 09213449. DOI: 10.1016/0921-3449(90)90023-W.
[27]
Jason Hoyle. (PDF) Performance-based potential for residential energy efficiency.
URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317434086%7B%5C_%7DPerformance-
based%7B%5C_%7Dpotential%7B%5C_%7Dfor%7B%5C_%7Dresidential%7B%5C_
%7Denergy%7B%5C_%7Defficiency (visited on 02/10/2021).
[28]
Hyun-Chan CHo. “China Energy Service Company ( ESCO ) Market Study”. In: IFC
China ().
[29]
IEA. Energy Efficiency 2018 - Analysis and outlooks to 2040. URL: https://www.
iea.org/reports/energy-efficiency-2018%7B%5C#%7D.
[30]
IEA. Energy Efficiency Indicators. 2020. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-
efficiency-indicators (visited on 01/07/2021).
[31]
IEA. Energy Service Companies (ESCOs). 2018. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/
energy-service-companies-escos-2%7B%5C#%7Dabstract (visited on 12/09/2020).
[32]
IEA. Energy Service Companies (ESCOs). 2018. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/
energy-service-companies-escos-2.
[33]
IEA. ESCO contracts – Energy Service Companies (ESCOs). 2018. URL: https:
//www.iea.org/reports/energy-service-companies-escos-2/esco-contracts (visited on
12/09/2020).
[34]
IEA. Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency. 2019. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/
multiple-benefits-of-energy-efficiency/energy-savings%7B%5C#%7Dabstract (visited
on 12/10/2020).
[35]
IEA. “Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report.” In: World En-
ergy Outlook (2020), p. 185. URL: https://webstore.iea.org/download/direct/4022?
76
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:87==
fileName=Energy%7B%5C_%7DTechnology%7B%5C_%7DPerspectives%7B%5C_
%7D2020%7B%5C_%7D-%7B%5C_%7DSpecial%7B%5C_%7DReport%7B%5C_
%7Don%7B%5C_%7DClean%7B%5C_%7DEnergy%7B%5C_%7DInnovation.pdf.
[36]
IEA. “World Energy Outlook 2020”. In: (2020), pp. 23–28.
[37]
International Energy Agency. Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency. 2019. URL:
https : / / www . iea . org / reports / multiple - benefits - of - energy - efficiency (visited on
12/09/2020).
[38]
Adam B. Jaffe and Robert N. Stavins. “The energy-efficiency gap - What does it
mean?” In: Energy Policy 22.10 (Oct. 1994), pp. 804–810. ISSN: 03014215. DOI:
10.1016/0301-4215(94)90138-4.
[39]
Pierre. Langlois and Shirley J. Hansen. World ESCO outlook. 2012, p. 512. ISBN:
9781466558144. URL: https://www.crcpress.com/World-ESCO-Outlook/Langlois-
Hansen/p/book/9781466558144.
[40]
Pedro Linares and Xavier Labandeira. “Energy efficiency: Economics and policy”.
In: Journal of Economic Surveys 24.3 (July 2010), pp. 573–592. ISSN: 09500804.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-6419.2009.00609.x. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1467-
6419.2009.00609.x.
[41]
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China National Energy Adminis-
tration, Translated by Compilation and Translation Bureau. “The 13th Five-Year
Plan for Economic and Social Development of the People’S Republic of China”. In:
(2016), p. 97–99. URL: http://en.ndrc.gov.cn/newsrelease/201612/P020161207645765233498.
pdf.
[42]
A. Oppenheim. “Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measurement”. In:
Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology 4.5 (Dec. 1994), pp. 371–372.
ISSN: 10529284. DOI: 10.1002/casp.2450040506. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.
1002/casp.2450040506.
[43]
J. P. Painuly et al. “Promoting energy efficiency financing and ESCOs in developing
countries: Mechanisms and barriers”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 11.6 (2002),
pp. 659–665. ISSN: 09596526. DOI: 10.1016/S0959-6526(02)00111-7.
[44]
Paolo Bertoldi. European ESCO Market Survey 2018. 2018. URL: https://ec.europa.
eu/eusurvey/runner/ESCOMarketSurvey2018 (visited on 12/13/2020).
[45]
Joyashree Roy. “The rebound effect: Some empirical evidence from India”. In: En-
ergy Policy 28.6-7 (June 2000), pp. 433–438. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10 . 1016 /
S0301-4215(00)00027-6.
[46]
Ashok Sarkar and Sarah Moin. “Transforming Energy Efficiency Markets in De-
veloping Countries: The Emerging Possibilities of Super ESCOs”. In: World Bank
Group (2018).
[47]
Steve Sorrell. “Reducing energy demand: A review of issues, challenges and ap-
proaches”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 47 (2015), pp. 74–82.
ISSN: 18790690. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.002. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.rser.2015.03.002.
[48]
Stadelmann and Marcel. Mind the gap? : Critically reviewing the energy efficiency
gap with empirical evidence. Tech. rep. 2017.
[49]
The Global ESCO Network. Incorporating Energy Service Companies in Nationally
Determined Contributions. 2020. ISBN: 9788793458932.
[50]
UNEP. The Emissions Gap Report 2016. United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), 2016. ISBN: 9789280736175.
[51]
Edward Vine. “An international survey of the energy service company ESCO indus-
try”. In: Energy Policy 33.5 (2005), pp. 691–704. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/j.
enpol.2003.09.014.
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
77
==PAGE:88==
[52]
Lukas Weber. Some reflections on barriers to the efficient use of energy. Aug. 1997.
DOI: 10.1016/S0301-4215(97)00084-0.
[53]
Wittgenstein Centre Human Capital Data Explorer. URL: http://dataexplorer.wittgensteincentre.
org/wcde-v2/ (visited on 01/07/2021).
[54]
World Bank. Fostering the Development of ESCO markets for energy efficiency.
Tech. rep.
[55]
World Bank. World Bank Open Data. URL: https://data.worldbank.org/ (visited on
01/29/2021).
[56]
Ming Yang. “Energy service company and financial market development: experi-
ences of the Global Environment Facility”. In: Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies
for Global Change 21.5 (2014), pp. 663–676. ISSN: 15731596. DOI: 10 . 1007 /
s11027-014-9603-2. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-9603-2.
[57]
Xianli Zhu. “China’s Remarkable Success in Developing ESCOs: Current Status
,Policy Drivers ,and Prospects”. In: (2020).
78
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
==PAGE:89==
A
Appendix
Question for Danish Energy Management, Morten Søndergaard
• Can you describe your role in the Energy Service Company (ESCO) and Energy
Performance Contract (EPC) operations of Danish Energy Management?
• Can you describe the most common ESCO activities DEM is involved in terms of
countries and technologies, and summarize how the ESCO EPC operations work?
• Do you mostly work within the public sector or the private sector? If both, how would
you describe the main differences, if any, in working with them?
• What would you say are the main barriers for the development of ESCOs in Denmark
and the other countries DEM is involved in (legislation, access to finance, political
commitments, technical capacity, or other), are there common aspects, or are the
barriers very country specific?
• Can you give examples on how you might (have to) adjust your contract model due
to regulations or other barriers?
• What would you say are the main parameters that pose risks to the financial via-
bility of existing ESCO projects? e.g. potential unexpected changes in regulation,
economic recession leading to decrease in production and energy consumption or
other.
• What would you say are the main parameters that pose risks to the financial viability
of future ESCO projects in the pipeline? E.g. Uncertain continued government
support for energy efficiency, expected low energy prices, or other
• Do changing energy prices influence your ESCO operations, or do you usually have
contractual agreements that guard against changing prices on energy? How is the
energy price calculated in EPC for the future years?
• Do you use different general contractual agreements that expose the ESCO and
clients to different kinds of risks? Can you describe the main features of these
different contractual options, and what central parameters they guard the ESCO
and client against?
• Has the Covid pandemic had any impacts on some key parameters that influence
the current feasibility of operating ESCOs, or the expectations for future ESCO in-
vestments? E.g. reduction in energy consumption, lower any prices, access to
finance or other?
• Finally, the UNEP DTU Partnership is planning to create a database listing specific
countries’ regulatory frameworks that are inhibiting and inducing for ESCO devel-
opment. Would you say this kind of initiative would be helpful to promote ESCO
development worldwide, or do you think the main barrier for ESCO development is
something else, and the database should therefore provide different kind of infor-
mation?
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
79
==PAGE:90==
Policy and regulatory barriers for the 
development of ESCOs
The Global ESCO Network is collecting data from ESCO associations to map the most important 
barriers and drivers that influence the growth and success of ESCOs. The results from the collected 
information will be used to draw reccomendations for the accelleration and expansion of ESCO 
markets worldwide.  
Your specific responses will remain confidential and your personal data will be handled correctly, 
according to the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). We would highly 
appreaciate you consent to be contacted for follow up questions if found relevant. You are able to 
opt out if you prefer not to. 
* Required
Organizational information
Please fill in the form below and provide answers to the questions on page 2.  
We will share the resulting report with you when ready.
Name * 
1.
 
Organization name * 
2.
 
Email address * 
3.
 
1/22/2021
English (United Kingd… 
==PAGE:91==
Country where you are involved * 
4.
 
I agree to be contacted on future occasions for the sole purpose of this analysis. * 
5.
Yes
No
1/22/2021
==PAGE:92==
ESCo barriers and drivers
In this section you will be asked to specify the importance of the main legislative, financial, technical and 
market barriers and drives. 
All specific barriers and drivers are catalogued on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 indicates it has no 
importance for the development of the ESCO market and 5 is of great importance. It is also possible to 
specify that a specific barrier or driver is not relevant to the market conditions in which your association 
operates. 
In addition an open question is provided if some particularly important feature has not been previously 
identify for the development of the ESCO market. 
1/22/2021
==PAGE:93==
1 -
Unimportan
t
2 - Of little
importance
3 -
Moderately
important
4 -
Important
5 - Very
important
Has not
been
implemente
d
Specific legislation for
public procurement,
tendering and/or
auctions
Energy sector reforms
to reduce energy price
distortion
Definition of specific
energy savings target
for public and private
buildings
Creation of specific
legislation for the
operation of ESCOs and
the formulation of EPC
contracts
Clear tax regulations for
ESCOs and EPC
contracts
Restrictions on contract
duration for contracts
with public sector
entities
Public incentives aimed
at EE projects directly
or indirectly
Cooperation between
public and private
entities with the aim of
identifying, promoting,
financing, building and
managing EE projects
National promotion of
EE measures and/or
energy auditing
How important are the following policy and regulatory aspects for the development 
of the ESCo market in which you operate?
6.
1/22/2021
==PAGE:94==
Questo contenuto non è stato creato né approvato da Microsoft. I dati che invii verranno recapitati al proprietario del modulo.
Microsoft Forms
1 -
Unimportan
t
2 - Of little
importance
3 -
Moderately
important
4 -
Important
5 - Very
important
Has not
been
implemente
d
Low continuity in
institutional programs
and planning
What piece of legislation would you like to implement, retain or remove in order to 
benefit the ESCO sector the most?
7.
 
Are there other main drivers you see as more relevant, or have any other comments?
8.
 
1/22/2021
==PAGE:95==
Regulatory framework and barriers critical for the development of Energy Service Company (ESCO)
markets
85
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
