==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA in the Early Design Phase 
MASTER THESIS, FEBRUARY 2021 
NICOLAJ HOSTRUP LANGKJÆR 
 
 
 
Photo: C.F. Møller Architects / Nikolaj Jakobsen 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Title Page 
 
English project title 
 
Life Cycle Assessment in the Early Design Phase 
 
Author 
 
Nicolaj Hostrup Langkjær, S146680 
Project type 
 
Master Thesis 
ECTS 
 
35 
Project period 
 
01/09/2020 – 22/02/2021 
University 
 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
Department 
 
Department of Civil Engineering 
Study Programme 
 
Architectural Engineering (M.Sc.) 
Supervisor 
 
Kristoffer Negendahl, Assistant Professor 
Collaborative partner 
 
C.F. Møller Architects 
Collaborative partner supervisor 
 
Rob Marsh, Head of Sustainability 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Preface 
 
This master thesis concludes 5,5 years of studies in Architectural Engineering at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis was conducted at the Department of Civil Engineering and 
in collaboration with C.F. Møller Architects. 
 
I would like to thank my supervisor at DTU, Kristoffer Negendahl, for assisting and guiding me 
throughout the process. Rob Marsh at C.F. Møller Architects for engaging deeply into all phases of 
the project, from defining the problem to the final evaluation of the results. Christine Collin from 
Rambøll and Katrine Juul from BIG for elevating the project with deep insights into the complex 
matters of life cycle assessments in practice. 
 
I would also like to thank the people at BUILD, especially Cristian Grau Sørensen, for providing me 
with an early access to work with the import functionalities in LCAByg 5.0 and Simone Bruhn for 
helping me understand the new version of LCAByg. This accelerated the project immensely.
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Abstract 
 
The building and construction sector is a significant contributor to green house gas emissions. 
Globally, 39 % of all CO2 emission are related to the building industry (World Green Building Council, 
2021). 28 % comes from emissions related to operational energy demands, such as heating, cooling, 
ventilation, and lighting. 11 % comes from emissions related to embodied energy demands, such as 
production and waste management of construction products. Studies show, that in modern buildings, 
emissions related to embodied energy demands are 2-4 times higher than the ones related to 
operational demands (Zimmermann, Andersen, Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir, 2020). LCA is a framework 
for examining the environmental impact from a building’s life cycle. A building’s design is most 
responsive to modifications in the early design phase, due to the low level of detail, which makes 
changes inexpensive compared to changes in later phases of the design. 
 
The overall goal with this thesis is to enable investigations of environmental impact from the life 
cycle of buildings in the early design phases. To reach the overall goal, two sub-goals were defined. 
One was to create a better workflow enabling LCA calculation in the early design phase. Another 
goal was to develop better tools to assist the workflow. To define what “better” workflow and 
“better” tools are, a thorough analysis of the current environment was conducted. Background 
research of the LCA framework, theory about early design phase intervention, a literature review, 
three in-depth interviews with key stakeholders from the Danish building industry and a deep dive 
into the practical issues of the early design phase workflow defined the basis for developing a tool 
that functions as a dynamic integration of the design tool, Rhinoceros, the visual programming 
language, Grasshopper and the LCA calculation tool, LCAByg 5.0. 
 
Four different application of the tool is presented and developed to create a feasible, viable and 
desirable product to assist the workflow in the early design phase. Application case 1 is developed 
to assess the environmental impact on parametrical mass models in the earliest phases of a building 
design, where many parameters are still undecided. Application case 2 and 3 are developed 
specifically for investigating the environmental impact on single construction elements and single 
products in construction element. The last application was developed as part of a competition project 
at C.F. Møller Architects and supports the workflow in the detailed design phase. All four application 
cases included the integration tool and automates the process from design model to calculation 
model. 
 
The tool and the four application cases were carefully evaluated and were considered acceptable 
with respect to speed, precision, and flexibility for implementation in the early design phase 
workflow. It is concluded that the goals of creating better workflows, assisted by better tools for 
utilizing LCA in the early design phase were achieved.
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Table of Content 
1. 
Introduction 
2 
1.1. 
Goal and scope 
6 
1.2. 
Research process and reading guide 
7 
2. 
Background 
8 
2.1. 
LCA framework 
9 
2.2. 
Certification and regulation 
14 
2.3. 
Early design – What? When? And How? 
16 
2.4. 
Literature review 
20 
3. 
Methodology 
23 
3.1. 
General research methodology 
24 
3.2. 
Empathize and Define 
26 
3.3. 
Ideate and Prototype 
28 
3.4. 
Testing 
32 
4. 
Results 
33 
4.1. 
Defining user needs and challenges – Interview with stakeholders 
34 
4.2. 
The early design phase approach at C.F. Møller Architects 
43 
4.3. 
The integration tool – Connecting design tool with LCA tool 
48 
4.4. 
Application of the tool 
55 
4.5. 
Evaluation of tool and applications cases 
82 
5. 
Discussion 
87 
5.1. 
The results 
88 
5.2. 
The methodology 
90 
6. 
Conclusion 
92 
References 
95 
Appendix 
98 
Appendix A: Interview 1 – Christin Collin, Rambøll 
98 
Appendix B: Interview 1 – Katrine Juul, BIG 
108 
Appendix C: Interview 1 – Rob Marsh, C.F. Møller 
114 
Appendix D: Interview 2 – Christin Collin, Rambøll 
117 
Appendix E: Interview 2 – Katrine Juul, BIG 
119 
Appendix F: Interview 2 – Rob Marsh, C.F. Møller 
121 
Appendix G: Predefined construction elements developed for application case 1 
123 
==PAGE:6==
2 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  
INTRODUCTION 
==PAGE:7==
3 
 
Global warming is one of the most pressing global issues in modern time. The latest data released 
by Copernicus Climate Change Service (Copernicus Europe Eyes on Earth, 2021) reveals that 2020 
tied the record-breaking year, 2016, for warmest year ever recorded globally and the last decade 
(2011-2020) as the warmest decade ever recorded. In Europe, 2020 was the warmest year ever 
recorded (Copernicus Europe Eyes on Earth, 2021). Furthermore, the data shows that atmospheric 
carbon dioxide continues to increase to a global average of approximately 413,1 ppm and have 
increased an average 2,32 ppm/year since 2010 (Copernicus Europe Eyes on Earth, 2021). The 
consequences of global warming are well described and includes melting ice, rising seas, extreme 
weather, shifting rainfall, etc. The consequences are severe and have an impact on human health 
and a heavy cost on the society and economy (European Comission, 2020). 
 
In September 2015, at COP21 in Paris, parties to the UNFCCC reached a legally binding agreement 
to act on global warming. In 2021 the Paris Agreement have been ratified by 190 parties, including 
all member states of the European Union (United Nations Climate Change, 2021). The central aim 
for the Paris agreement is to: “Keep a global temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees 
Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even 
further to 1.5 degrees Celsius” (United Nations Climate Change, 2021). 
 
The European Union adapted the first nationally determined contribution (NDC) in 2018 with a 
commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emission by 40 % in 2030 compared to 1990 levels 
(European Comission, 2021). In December 2020, the European Council agreed to update the NDC 
to a commitment of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 55 % in 2030 compared to 1990 levels 
(European Comission, 2021). In December 2019, the Danish Parliament agreed on a national climate 
act relating to the NDC defined by the EU. The Danish climate act ensures that Denmark works to 
reduce greenhouse gas emission by 70 % in 2030 compared to 1990 levels and that Denmark 
reaches net-zero emission by 2050 (Energistyrelsen, 2021). 
 
Reducing the greenhouse gas emissions is a joint effort and requires actions from lawmakers and 
all industries in private and public businesses. The building and construction sector are, globally, 
responsible for 39 % of all CO2 emissions (World Green Building Council, 2021). 28 % comes from 
operational emissions related to energy used to heat, cool, ventilate and light buildings. 11 % are 
from embodied emissions from energy demands for production and waste management of 
construction products. In Denmark, 30 % of all CO2 emission comes from buildings and construction 
(Regeringens Klimapartnerskaber - Bygge- og anlægssektoren, 2020). 20 % from operational 
demanding emissions and 10 % from embodied emissions. Furthermore, 35 % of all waste produced 
in Denmark comes from the constructions sector (Regeringens Klimapartnerskaber - Bygge- og 
anlægssektoren, 2020).  
 
==PAGE:8==
4 
 
  
Figure 1.1.: CO2 emission related to the building sector globally and in Denmark 
 
With these numbers in mind, the most apparent solution would be, to act on lowering the emissions 
related to operational energy demands in the construction sector. Over the last 60 years, the energy 
demand for building operations have been lowered from approximately 350 kWh/m2/year (Sonne, 
2019) to 30-40 kWh/m2/year depending on building type (Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2021). 
This have been achieved by the introducing energy frames in the national building code, BR18. A 
study conducted by SBI on the environmental impact from 60 different buildings constructed from 
2013-2021 (Zimmermann, Andersen, Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir, 2020) showed that the environmental 
impact from embodied carbon emission where 2-4 times higher than the operational demanding 
emissions. 
 
There are different frameworks for investigating the emission from embodied energy demand. A 
widely recognized framework is Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). In LCA, the environmental impact from 
a product’s or service’s full life cycle is investigated. A European standard, EN15643-2 (CEN, 2011; 
CEN, 2008), for conducting LCA on buildings have been developed and specifically describes how 
emissions from both operational and embodied energy demands are included in the framework. 
 
It is only in recent years that embodied carbon emission have gained attention. This could be due 
to the increasing demand for sustainability certification on buildings, but also due to political pressure 
and pressure from the industry professionals. The most extensively used sustainability certification, 
with LCA requirements included, in Denmark, is the DGNB certification system (Dansk Byggeindustri, 
2021). Furthermore, a new voluntary sustainability class (FBK) was introduced in spring 2020 as an 
addition to the danish national building regulation, BR18, and includes LCA requirements (Trafik-, 
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2020). The proposed plan is to test FBK through 2022, where it is to be 
evaluated whether the class should be implemented as a mandatory part of BR18 (Trafik-, Bygge- 
og Boligstyrelsen, 2020). 
 
Conducting LCA is a complex matter. Detailed data about material quantities included in a building 
and representative environmental impact data is needed to carry out a LCA on a building. With 
==PAGE:9==
5 
 
current practice, LCA is primarily carried out once the construction is finalised and all data is 
specified. With sustainability certification and potentially building regulations looking to define 
boundaries for environmental impact from buildings, the attention to optimising workflows and tools 
for LCA has increased.  
 
Negendahl (2016) states that: “There is a consensus amongst researchers that decisions in the early 
design stage have large impact on the final design outcome.”  (Negendahl, 2016). He describes 
design changes as measured in terms of cost. He argues that changes to the design are not equally 
expensive during all phases in a construction project. In figure 1.2., a simplified diagram of the cost 
of change is presented. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.2.: Design changes and cost 
 
In the beginning of a project, many design parameters are uncertain and changes rapidly. The cost 
of making changes is inexpensive. The further the project develops, the more detailed the building 
design gets. When a project enters more detailed phases, it will be time consuming and thus 
expensive to change parameters such as building geometry, façade design, etc. 
 
Negendahl (2016) mentions that, decisions are made with limited resources in the early design 
phase. In the early design phases, the building design is typically driven by a team of architects. He 
argues that this can be avoided by including building performance tools and simulation experts on 
the design team in the early design phases. The dynamics and workflows of the early design phases 
are further examined in the sections “2. Background” and “4. Results”. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
6 
 
1.1. 
Goal and scope 
 
The aim of this thesis is to enable investigation of environmental impacts from a building’s life cycle 
in the early design phase. The early design phase is found relevant because of the potential for 
making a cost-effective workflow. Informing about the environmental impact consequences of 
different design iterations will potentially lead to making decision that lowers the environmental 
impact from buildings. If boundaries for environmental impact are to be implemented in regulations 
in the coming years, it will further strengthen the need for environmental impact assessments in the 
early design phase. 
 
The background for the thesis is based on previous research of LCA in the early design phase and 
in the implementation of building performance tools in the early design phase. Negendahl (2016) 
investigated the potentials of BPS in the early design phase. Marsh (2015) developed simple LCA-
profiles for materials and later (Marsh, Rasmussen, & Birgisdóttir, 2018) developed a simplified 
spreadsheet-based tool for early design phase assessments. Kanafani et. Al (2019) developed a 
catalogue of environmental impact from different materials and implemented predefined 
constructions in a LCA calculation tool. Hollberg (2016) developed a dynamic LCA calculation tool 
designed to work with a design tool relevant for the early design phase. 
 
The goal of this thesis is: 
 
1. To create a better workflow that enables relevant stakeholders to utilize LCA in the early 
design phase. 
 
2. To develop better tools that assists the workflow and operates as a dynamic connection 
between a design tool and a LCA calculation tool. 
 
Conducting LCA calculations is complex because of the extensive amount of relevant environmental 
impact data from materials that is needed. Thus, creating a workflow/tool that works for practitioners 
in the entire world exceeds the boundaries of this thesis. The scope of this thesis is limited to focus 
on the Danish building industry and building project based in Denmark. Furthermore, the primary 
focus was to develop a workflow/tool that informs about emissions related to embodied energy 
demands. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
7 
 
1.2. 
Research process and reading guide 
 
The research process for this thesis was divided into two main phases. In phase 1, a background 
research was conducted to understand the current state. First, a background research of the LCA 
framework, a literature study and an assessment of relevant tools were conducted. Next a user-
need analysis and an analysis of the early design workflow in practice was carried out. The results 
from the first phase led to defining which tools to include and what workflows needed to be designed 
or optimised in phase 2. In phase 2, a tool and four application of a dynamic integration tool were 
designed to create a better workflow for LCA in the early design phase. Figure 1.3., displays a simple 
diagram of the research process for this thesis. 
 
 
Figure 1.3.: Research process divided into two main phases. 
 
In chapter “3. Methodology” the overall research method is presented and the methodology for each 
research phase is also presented is this chapter. Findings from the first part of research phase 1, 
with the literature study and investigation of relevant tools is presented in chapter “2. Background”. 
The results from the user-needs analysis and early design phase analysis, together with the defined 
criteria for phase 2, is presented in the first part of chapter “4. Results”. The tool and applications 
of the tool is presented in the last part of chapter “4. Results”. The results and research methods 
used in this thesis is discussed in the last chapter, “5. Discussion”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
8 
 
2. Background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
BACKGROUND 
==PAGE:13==
9 
 
In this chapter, the background research, is presented. First, the LCA framework in general and for 
buildings, with standard working method, system boundaries and impact categories are described. 
Next, the relevant regulation and certification is examined. Following, theories used to describe the 
integration of building performance simulation tools (BPS tools) in the early design phase is 
presented. And finally, a literature review of most recent state-of-the-art research within LCA in the 
early design phase is conducted.  
 
2.1. 
LCA framework 
 
In the following section, the method for LCA on buildings is described. First, a general overview of 
the LCA framework and principles is presented. Next, the phase-divisions and impacts categories 
are described. In this section, it will also be specified which phases and impact categories are 
relevant when working with LCA on buildings. 
 
2.1.1. 
General framework 
 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is an international standardized method for quantifying environmental 
impact of products or services (European Commission - Joint Research Centre - Institute for 
Environment and Sustainability, 2010). LCA can assist in identifying the opportunities to improve a 
product’s or service’s environmental impact. It can also be used as a method to inform decision 
makers on a strategic level, e.g., optimising product development, setting priorities and redesigning 
processes. The general LCA framework, presented in ISO 14040, is divided into four phases (CEN, 
2008) and presented in figure 2.1.  
 
 
Figure 2.1.: The four phases in the LCA framework. Figure: (CEN, 2008) 
 
In the goal and scope phase, the boundaries of the LCA are defined. The level of detail can vary 
significantly depending on the intended use of the LCA. The defined goal and scope will have an 
impact on how to conduct the next three phases (CEN, 2008). 
==PAGE:14==
10 
 
In the second phase of the LCA framework, a life cycle inventory (LCI) analysis is performed. The 
LCI is an inventory of the input and output of data of the system. In this phase, the data necessary 
to fulfil the goal, defined in the first phase, is gathered (CEN, 2008). 
 
In the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA), additional information is provided to assess the results 
from LCI (CEN, 2008). This is done to better understand the environmental significance. 
 
In the last phases, the interpretation phase, the results of the two previous phases are summarized 
and discussed. The content provided in this phase serves as a basis for conclusions and 
recommendations for decisions makers (CEN, 2008). 
 
The diagram presented in figure 2.1. has bidirectional links in each phase. This implies that LCA is 
an iterative process. The interpretation phase has bidirectional links to all phases, implying that an 
interpretation of the results should encourage the LCA practitioner to revisit decision made in all 
previous phases. The iterative process is described further in the ILCD handbook: “The work on an 
LCA is a systematic process, which involves iterations: Some issues cannot be addressed initially, or 
only touched on. However, they will be addressed, improved, or revised in typically 2 to 3 iterations 
of almost any LCI or LCA study.” (European Commission - Joint Research Centre - Institute for 
Environment and Sustainability, 2010). 
 
2.1.2. 
LCA framework for buildings 
 
ISO 14044 (CEN, 2008) and ISO 14040 (CEN, 2008) are developed to create a standardised general 
framework for environmental impact assessments for all products and services. A European 
standard, specific for sustainability management on buildings, have also been developed. EN15643-
2 (CEN, 2011) describes the general framework for the assessments of environmental performance. 
Furthermore, EN15978 (CEN, 2012) describes the calculation method for environmental performance 
of buildings and EN15804 (CEN, 2013) describes the core rules for environmental product 
declarations (EPD). 
The framework for conducting LCA on buildings is described in EN15978 (CEN, 2012) and is 
presented in figure 2.2. 
 
==PAGE:15==
11 
 
 
Figure 2.2.: Framework for LCA on buildings defined EN 15798. Figure: (CEN, 2012) 
 
It is important to define the functional equivalence, reference study period (RSP) and system 
boundaries in the beginning of the project. The functional equivalence is described as “the required 
technical characteristics and functionalities of the building” (CEN, 2012). Comparisons of results 
obtained in any stage of the design process can only be made based on functional equivalency. EN 
15798 states that, the functional equivalent must include:  
 
- 
Building type 
- 
Technical or functional requirement 
- 
Pattern of use 
- 
Service life 
==PAGE:16==
12 
 
Assessments are carried out based on a reference study period (RSP). Typically, the RSP is 
determined by the purpose of the LCA defined by regulations, certifications, or requirement from 
clients and also depends on the type of building. 
 
The system boundary defines the processes that must be included in the assessment. In EN15798 
(CEN, 2012) these are defined and presented here in table 2.1. 
 
Table 2.1.: System boundary defined in EN15978 (CEN, 2012). 
Product 
Construction 
Use 
End of life 
Benefits 
and 
loads 
beyond 
the 
system 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Raw material supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Construction 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
Demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Recovery and recycling 
potential 
 
The system boundary is divided into five phases and further divided into subphases:  
 
- 
Product (A1-A3) 
- 
Construction (A4-A5) 
- 
Use (B1-B7) 
- 
End of life (C1-C3) 
- 
Benefits and loads beyond the system (D) 
 
In regulation and certification frameworks with LCA included, only a limited number of the processes 
presented in table 2.1. is included. This is further examined in the following section. 
Calculations of the environmental impact is relatively simple. For each phase presented in table 2.1., 
two data inputs are important. First, is the gross amount of each product and secondly is the 
environmental impact indicators and resource use indicators. The calculation routine presented in 
EN15798 (CEN, 2012) is then to multiply each product gross amount with the environmental 
indicators per unit gross amount. The environmental impact indicators and resource use indicators 
are presented in table 2.2. and table 2.3. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
13 
 
Table 2.2.: Environmental impact indicators. Table from EN 15798: (CEN, 2012) 
Indicator 
Unit 
Global Warming Potential (GWP) 
Kg CO2 eq 
Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer (ODP) 
Kg CFC 11 eq 
Acidification potential of land and water (AP) 
Kg SO2- eq 
Eutrophication potential (EP) 
Kg (PO4)3- eq 
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone photochemical oxidant (POCP) 
Kg Ethene eq 
Abiotic Resource Depletion Potential for Elements (ADPE) 
Kg Sb eq 
Abiotic Resource Depletion Potential of fossil fuels (ADPF) 
MJ, net calorific value 
 
Table 2.3.: Resource use indicators. Table from EN 15798: (CEN, 2012) 
Indicator 
Unit 
Use of renewable primary energy excluding energy resources used as raw 
materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding energy resources used as raw 
materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
Use of secondary material 
kg 
Use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
Use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
Net use of fresh water 
M3 
 
The environmental impact indicators and resource use indicators included in a LCA also depends on 
the scope of the study. Certifications and regulations often only include a limited number of the 
indicators to assess the buildings environmental impact. This is further explained in the following 
section. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
14 
 
2.2. 
Certification and regulation 
 
Conducting LCA is a resource heavy discipline and will thus only be conducted in projects where it 
is required. Either by law, in a national building regulation, or if the project is to be certified with a 
sustainability certification that includes LCA requirements. 
The scope of this thesis is limited to a danish context. In the following section the LCA framework 
for DGNB-DK (DK-GBC, 2020) and the voluntary sustainability class (FBK) in the Danish building 
regulation (BR18) (Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2020) is described. 
 
2.2.1. 
System Boundaries 
 
In 2020, a new version of DGNB-System DK (DK-GBC, 2020) for new buildings and renovations were 
released. The new version includes a synergy with the requirements for LCA in FBK (Trafik-, Bygge- 
og Boligstyrelsen, 2020). An overview of the phases from EN15978 (CEN, 2012) included in DGNB 
and FBK is presented in table 2.4. 
 
Table 2.4.: Phases included in DGNB-DK 2020 and FBK. Green: Included, Sand: Extra DGNB credit, Blue: Must 
be considered 
 
Phase 
Description 
FBK 
DGNB 
Product 
A1 
Raw material supply 
 
 
A2 
Transport 
 
 
A3 
Manufacturing 
 
 
Construction 
A4 
Transport 
 
+5 credits 
A5 
Construction 
 
+5 credits 
Use 
B1 
Use 
 
 
B2 
Maintenance 
 
 
B3 
Repair 
 
 
B4 
Replacement 
 
 
B5 
Refurbishment 
 
 
B6 
Operational energy use 
 
 
B7 
Operational water use 
 
 
End of Life 
C1 
Demolition 
 
 
C2 
Transport 
 
 
C3 
Waste processing 
 
 
C4 
Disposal 
 
 
Benefits and 
loads beyond 
the system 
D 
Recovery and recycling 
potential 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
15 
 
The green colour, in table 2.4., indicates that the phase is mandatory to fulfil the requirements. The 
sand colour in the construction phase indicates that it is possible to achieve extra credits, in the 
DGNB-DK 2020 framework if a calculation for these phases is performed. In Indicator 3.2 in category 
“ENV 1.1 – Life Cycle Assessment” in DGNB-DK 2020 it is described that an included calculation of 
phase A4 and A5 will be rewarded with 5 extra credits per phase (DK-GBC, 2020), making it 
potentially 10 extra credits if a LCA is performed according to the requirements in FBK. 
 
2.2.2. 
Impact categories 
 
The requirements for documentation of the results from a LCA in FBK and DGNB are different. The 
DGNB system is based on a credit system. Better solutions are rewarded with more credits, which 
eventually leads to a higher certification standard. This also applies for the LCA category, where 
credits are awarded based on reference values. The reference values in the DGNB system are 
presented in table 2.5. 
 
Table 2.5.: Impact categories, reference value and credits in DGNB-DK 2020. (DK-GBC, 2020) 
 
GWP 
POCP 
AP 
EP 
ADPf 
PEtot 
Unit 
Kg CO2 eq / 
(m2*year) 
Kg Ethene eq 
/ (m2*year) 
Kg SO2- eq / 
(m2*year) 
Kg (PO4)3- eq 
/ (m2*year) 
MJ 
/ 
(m2*year) 
kWh 
/ 
(m2*year) 
Reference 
9,191 
4,72E-03 
2,33E-02 
3,15E-03 
9,37E+01 
3,87E+01 
Weighting 
40 % 
10 % 
10 % 
10 % 
15 % 
10 % 
75 credits 
0,80 
0,70 
0,07 
0,70 
0,80 
0,70 
45 credits 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 credits 
1,5 
1,7 
1,7 
1,7 
1,5 
1,7 
 
The credits described in table 2.5., are awarded as a relation between the final LCA results and the 
reference value. Indicator 3.1 in “ENV 1.1 – Life Cycle Assessment” describes that up to 30 additional 
credits can be awarded, as a climate-bonus, if the results in the GWP category are up to 50 % less 
than the reference value (DK-GBC, 2020). 
 
In FBK it is required to document the impact categories presented in table 2.6. There are no 
requirements for a defined reference value or maximum values and no additional credits will be 
awarded for buildings with low environmental impact. 
 
==PAGE:20==
16 
 
Table 2.6.: Environmental impact categories that are required to be documented in FBK. 
Impact category 
Unit 
GWP 
Kg CO2 eq / (m2*year) 
ODP 
Kg CFC 11 eq / (m2*year) 
POCP 
Kg Ethene eq / (m2*year) 
AP 
Kg SO2- eq / (m2*year) 
EP 
Kg (PO4)3- eq / (m2*year) 
ADPf 
MJ / (m2*year) 
ADPe 
Kg Sb eq / (m2*year) 
PEtot 
kWh / (m2*year) 
SFtot 
kWh / (m2*year) 
 
The Danish construction sectors climate partnership, who delivered a list of recommendations on 
how to lower the carbon emission to the Danish government in March 2020 (Regeringens 
Klimapartnerskaber - Bygge- og anlægssektoren, 2020), proposed to use a requirement level value 
of maximum 8,5 Kg CO2 eq / (m2*year) in FBK and 12 Kg CO2 eq / (m2*year) in BR18. These values 
have not been implemented and there are thus still no regulatory requirements for environmental 
impact from buildings in Denmark. 
 
2.2.3. 
Documentation 
 
Another indicator in category “ENV 1.1 – Life Cycle Assessment” in DGNB-DK 2020 describing the 
synergy, is indicator 1.2. It is described, that performing the documentation for LCA in accordance 
with the requirements stated in FBK, the project is awarded with 10 extra DGNB credits (DK-GBC, 
2020). Ultimately this implies, that conduction LCA for a DGNB project in accordance with the 
requirements in FBK, can provide 20 credits in DGNB’s category “ENV 1.1 – Life Cycle Assessment”. 
 
In FBK it is required to hand in documentation for the calculated LCA twice. One before handing in 
the building application and one when the completion of the construction is reported (Trafik-, Bygge- 
og Boligstyrelsen, 2020).  
 
It is not mandatory in, DGNB-DK 2020, to do LCA documentation twice. But to obtain the extra 
credits, it is required. Since the requirements declares that LCA is to be carried out in the later 
phases of the building design, a “traditional LCA workflow” is defined as a workflow that is fitted to 
the later stages of the project. In chapter “4. Results”, a user-need analysis examines the challenges 
of the traditional workflow for LCA with three stakeholders in the Danish building industry. 
 
2.3. 
Early design – What? When? And How? 
 
The possibility to impact the building design is highest in the early design phase because changes 
to the design are inexpensive compared to later phases. In the following section, it will be examined 
==PAGE:21==
17 
 
what early design phase means, and how to approach early design. First a definition of the design 
phases is presented, and the early design phases are identified. And secondly, the methods and 
theories for working with implementation of technical knowledge in the early design phases are 
presented. 
 
2.3.1. 
The design phases – ABR18 
 
The services being provided in the different phases of a construction project provides an insight on 
where to intervene when impacting the outcome of the building. ABR18 is a description of the terms 
of service for consultancy work in the danish building industry. In ABR18, the main phases of a 
building project are described in §11 (ABR18, 2018) and presented in figure 2.4. 
 
 
Figure 2.4.: Main phases defined in ABR18 (ABR18, 2018) 
 
In the program phase, the client and consultant define the project and develops a goal and scope 
of the project. In the proposal phase, the building designer generates a proposal on how to solve 
the project within the scope defined in the program phase. In the detailed design phase, the proposal 
is approved by the client and the project is made ready for the construction phase. This includes 
technical drawings for construction work, final calculation, and final decision on materials, etc. In 
the construction phase, the construction of the building is being executed. The final phase is the use 
phase, where the building is put into operation. The main phases can be subdivided to sub-phases. 
 
In this thesis, the early design phase should be understood as the program and proposal phase. In 
a competition proposal, the building designer will often not have any impact on the program, as this 
is developed by the client. The client is typically assisted by a professional (architect, engineer, etc.) 
in developing the program. 
 
2.3.2. 
Integrated design – Process, tools, and models 
 
Negendahl (2015) describes the 3 most typical collaborative arrangements in the early design 
phases: 
 
1. The engineer as an assistant to the architect 
2. The hybrid practitioner 
3. The engineer as a partner to the architect 
 
The engineer as an assistant to the architect, can be described as “the classic” approach. The 
engineer assists the architect with calculation and consultancy on technical matters, but there are 
==PAGE:22==
18 
 
no integration of the engineer in in the core design team. The hybrid practitioner is where the 
building designer acts as both engineer and architect. The hybrid practitioner acts a core part of the 
design team and possesses knowledge within both disciplines. The engineer as a partner to the 
architect works as described in the integrated design process, where engineers are part of the design 
team. In figure 2.5. different domains of integrations for building designers are presented. 
 
 
Figure 2.5.: Three different integration domains. Figure: (Negendahl, 2015) 
 
The integration domain is divided into three different domain areas: Human domain, tool domain 
and model domain. A method for integration in the human domain is the integrated design process. 
The tool and model integration are also examined by Negendahl (2015) and he highlights the 
integrated dynamic model to achieve integration in the tool and model domain. 
 
2.3.2.1. 
Integrated design process 
 
The integrated design process, developed by the IEA Solar Heating and Cooling Programme, Task 
23 (Löhnert et. Al., 2003), is targeting the early design phase and presents the design team as a 
collaborating team of architects, engineers, contractors, and other relevant professionals. The 
integrated design process uses an iterative cyclic thinking where the teams investigate several 
alternative solutions in detail and only pick the best performing solutions to enter the next design 
iteration. 
 
 
Figure 2.6.: The integrated design process 
 
Negendahl (2016) states that the shortcoming of using IDP is to find a rational approach of selecting 
the initial design solutions to investigate. He also mentioned the further developed performance-
==PAGE:23==
19 
 
based approach to the integrated design process, proposed by Petersen et. Al. (2011). The 
performance-based approach assists the design team in finding and improving solutions that meets 
the design criteria. The performance-based approach minimizes the investigation options to only 
focusing on solutions that meets the criteria and thereby optimizes the solution space by disregarding 
irrelevant solutions. 
 
The shortcomings of the performance-based approach are described as the integration of design 
and simulation environments and a process related issue described as the need of a simulation 
specialist explaining the results of simulations and the building designer’s ability to accept and make 
use of simulation results as decision support (Negendahl, 2016). The performance-based approach 
only vaguely considers the criteria of architectural quality since this is seen as a qualitative parameter 
and found difficult to quantify in a performance solution space. 
 
The integrated design process is to be used as a method to limit the solution space to only viable 
options. By using the performance-based approach, the design team is assisted in defining the 
boundaries for the solution space. It is undefined how the qualitative measures should be handled 
within the integrated design process and will not be further examined in this thesis. The integrated 
design process mainly focusses on the human domain integration.  
 
2.3.2.2. 
Integrated dynamic model 
 
In the three domains (human, tool, model), the tool and model domain can be coupled. Negendahl 
(2016) describes the integrated dynamic model as composed by three dynamically coupled model 
domains. The integrated dynamic model is presented in figure 2.7. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.7.: Integrated Dynamic Model. Figure: (Negendahl, 2015) 
 
The geometry model generated in the design tool is coupled with the BPS environment and the 
calculation model through a visual programming language (VPL) that creates a data model. The data 
model generated in the VPL translates the geometry model to a calculation model. The reasoning 
behind using a VPL as the connecting link is, according to Negendahl (2016), that flexible and 
useable middleware is the key to model interoperability. It is important to note that all three model 
domains (geometry, data, and calculation) in figure 2.7. are bidirectionally linked, implying that data 
are transferred between the models in both directions. 
==PAGE:24==
20 
 
2.4. 
Literature review 
 
Developing methods and tools to approach LCA in the early design is not a novel thought. A literature 
review is conducted to investigate the existing research in the field of LCA in early design phase. As 
stated previously, the scope of this thesis is limited to a Danish context, thus some of the methods 
reviewed have a danish context perspective. Working with environmental assessments and LCA in 
the early design phase is a complex matter. This is mainly due to the paradox of working within a 
data-heavy discipline and the fact that very few parameters are fixed in the early phases of a design. 
Thus, most of the research conducted in this field, suggest working with simplifications, assumptions, 
or integrated models. 
 
Marsh (2015) proposes the use of LCA-profiles for different construction elements (Walls, slab, etc.). 
Through statistical analysis he narrows down eight impact categories to three selected categories 
that shows highly significant correlation with the five remaining categories. He argues that by 
creating LCA-profiles for building elements, building professional can use these in an early design 
phase to indicate the environmental impact for different construction elements with the same 
functional equivalence. Marsh (2015) argues that the database with LCA-profiles could be 
implemented in CAD and BIM tools in the future.  
 
Such an import comes closer to reality when looking at the research conducted by Marsh et. Al. 
(2018), where a spreadsheet-based tool was developed. The spreadsheet-based tool proposed by 
Marsh et. Al. (2018) is based on the idea of having a database with LCA-profiles and generating a 
simple calculation of a building geometry by inputting a few parameters. The database must be 
maintained and updated to stay relevant for building professional to use it. 
 
The LCA-profile method is also proposed by Kanafani et. Al. (2019), who presents a catalogue with 
different construction elements and their corresponding environmental impact based on the impact 
categories, GWP and total primary energy. In the catalogue, each construction element, is divided 
in to three different functional layers. They present LCA-profiles for 5 categories of construction 
elements: slabs, façades, interior walls, roofs, and windows. Kanafani et. Al. (2019) emphasizes that 
the responsibility of only comparing functional equivalent solutions lies on the practitioner. 
 
The research from Kanafani et. Al. (2019) was made in combination with a new beta version of the 
LCA calculation tool targeting the danish building sector, LCAByg 4.0 (Beta version). An example 
catalogue of predefined construction elements was developed for the beta version. All environmental 
impact data in LCAByg 4.0 is from the German database Ökobau (Federal Institute for Research on 
Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development, 2020). 
 
Hollberg (2016) proposes a design tool integrated LCA tool using what he calls “early BIM”, making 
use of the previously defined integrated dynamic modelling approach. The key element to the 
proposed method is that the model is parametrically defined. Meaning, that geometry, materials, 
building services and boundary conditions can be varied quickly. The parametrically set-up is 
==PAGE:25==
21 
 
integrated in the VPL, Grasshopper. Hollberg (2016), also explains that the calculation of both 
operational and embodied carbon is fully integrated in the grasshopper environment. Thus, avoiding 
the need for import or export to other tools. In the proposed method/tool, Hollberg (2016) explains 
that the handling of data is based on a “databank” where the data is divided into physical, 
environmental and reference service life. The environmental data used in the “databank” is from the 
German database Ökobau (Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial 
Development, 2020) and EPD’s that comply with EN15804 (CEN, 2013).  
 
The construction element library approach used in LCAByg 4.0 can be compared with Hollberg (2016) 
approach of creating a databank. Similar for both approaches is the centralized database approach. 
The LCAByg tool is a free tool from Denmark developed by SBI and is targeting the danish building 
industry. The idea is to make it less complicated for LCA practitioners to perform LCA. LCAByg and 
all included databases is maintained by SBI. It is not clarified by Hollberg (2016) who is responsible 
for the maintenance of the proposed databank. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
22 
 
2.4.1. 
Possible LCA calculation tools for the early design phase 
 
Three different LCA calculation tools have been identified as being possibly relevant for utilizing early 
phase LCA in a danish context. The three tools are: LCAByg 5.0 (BUILD, 2020), Caala (CAALA, 2020) 
and OneClick LCA (BIONOVA, 2020). LCAByg 5.0 is a newer version of the LCAByg 4.0 Beta version 
from the literature study. CAALA is the product of the research presented from Hollberg (2016). 
OneClick LCA is included due to the extensive functionalities and simplified approach to LCA. The 
tools and their features are presented in table 2.7. 
 
Table 2.7.: Tools for LCA calculations on buildings. 
 
LCAByg 5.0 
CAALA 
OneClick LCA 
Compliance with 
EN15978 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Compliance with 
DGNB-DK 2020 
Yes 
Danish version of DGNB 
not included. 
DGNB-DK: Yes 
But not the 2020 
version yet. 
Compliance with FBK 
Yes 
LCAByg-file is required 
LCAByg-file is required 
Data import function 
JSON-files 
Sketchup and Rhino 
(Grasshopper) via plug-
ins 
 
Revit and ArchiCAD via 
gbXML import 
Revit, IES-VE, Tekla via 
plug-ins 
 
Excel/CSV, IFC, gbXML, 
XML, JSON.. 
Data export function 
Excel 
PDF report 
PDF 
eLCA 
gbXML 
Excel 
Excel 
Word report (expert 
licence only) 
Price 
Free 
Price example: 
 
1 pro user with 5 
projects for 1 year: 
3288-3888 euro 
 
1 expert user with 5 
projects for 1 year: 
3648-4248 euro 
Price examples: 
 
1 starter user with 
additional early design 
calculations for 1 year: 
1380 euro 
 
1 expert user with 
additional early design 
calculations for 1 year: 
3480 euro 
 
==PAGE:27==
23 
 
3. Methodology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
METHODOLOGY 
==PAGE:28==
24 
 
In this chapter, the methods used in this thesis is described. First, the general research methodology 
is explained. Secondly each step in the general research methodology is explained in detail. This 
includes the approach to analysing the needs from stakeholders, the analysis of an early design 
phase workflow, the approach to the development of a tool and the methods used to evaluate the 
proposed result. 
 
3.1. 
General research methodology 
 
The general research methodology follows the internationally recognized methodology, CDIO, 
developed as a framework for engineering education programs. The initiative was first defined by 
MIT’s Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1997 to determine the knowledge and skills 
graduated engineers should possess  (MIT, 2021). CDIO is an abbreviation of: Conceive, Design, 
Implement and Operate. In the first step, conceive, the boundaries for the project are defined. 
Research about customer needs, available technology, regulations, and business strategies is 
conducted. The next step is design. Here the project is developed on a conceptual level. Plans, 
drawings, algorithm, tool, etc. are developed. Following the design step, is the implementation. Here 
the project transforms into an actual product or service and is being tested and validated. The last 
step is the operation step. Here the product/service that has been implemented is delivering the 
intended value. The operation step also includes maintaining the product. The product of this thesis 
has not been put into operation before the delivery of the thesis, thus the operation step in CDIO is 
disregarded. 
 
 
Figure 3.1.: The innovation sweet spot 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
25 
 
For the three steps, conceive, design, and implement (CDI), the design thinking approach was used. 
The design thinking approach is a human-centred problem-solving method that leads to radical 
innovation in terms of feasibility, desirability, and viability (figure 3.1.) (Efeoglu, Møller, Boer, & 
Série, 2014). Many schools of thought exist with the design thinking approach. This thesis will base 
the approach on Brown’s design thinking approach, which is described as three overlapping spaces: 
Inspiration, ideation, and implementation (Efeoglu, Møller, Boer, & Série, 2014) and The d.school at 
Stanford University’s approach, which have defined five phases in the design thinking framework: 
Empathize, define, ideate, prototype and test (Meinel & Leifer, 2011). These steps will be used as 
the guiding principle in developing the results in this thesis. In figure 3.2. the general research 
framework for this thesis, including CDIO and design thinking is outlined.  
 
 
Figure 3.2.: The general research framework. CDIO and Design Thinking. 
 
The design thinking approach, presented in figure 3.2., is a non-linear approach to solving complex 
problems. The approach involves both convergent and divergent thinking. The first phase, 
empathize, is a deep dive into understanding the user, the environment, and the professional 
challenges. In this phase a divergent thinking principle is applied to expand the knowledge about 
the research area. Moving towards the next step, define, a more convergent thinking principle is 
applied. Here the understanding of the problem is qualified, and the knowledge gained from the 
analysis conducted in the previous step is narrowed down to a specific problem definition. In the 
==PAGE:30==
26 
 
following phase, divergent thinking is used again. The ideation phase is used to explore possible 
solutions for the problem defined in the previous phase. Next, a prototyping phase is initiated, where 
a more convergent thinking principle is being used. The ideas developed in the previous phase is 
being put into physical representation. The prototypes can be anything from actual products to 
services, experiences, and processes. The prototype and ideation phase are linked as an iterative 
cycle, where the prototype development process generates new ideas to solve the problems. The 
last phase in the design thinking principle is the test phase. In this phase, the prototype is being 
evaluated from a list of criteria. The test phase delivers feedback to a new ideation phase and 
possibly also a redefinition of the problem. Within each of the steps defined in figure 3.2., different 
research methods are being used. These are further explained in the following. 
 
3.2. 
Empathize and Define 
 
To define the problem, a thorough analysis of user needs, challenges, current practice, and 
professional insights is conducted. First a literature review of relevant research within LCA in the 
early design phase was conducted, secondly three interviews with industry professionals from 
leading companies within the field of sustainable architecture in Denmark was conducted. Finally, 
the current design workflow is mapped, to understand the context and business proposition. 
 
3.2.1. 
Literature review - LCA and tools in early design stages 
 
A literature review was conducted throughout the project to gain knowledge about methods, tools, 
workflows, and early design phase building performance integration. The most relevant existing 
research and tools are reviewed and presented in chapter “2. Background”, to provide an overview 
of current state of the art approaches to LCA in the early design phase in a Danish context. 
 
3.2.2. 
Interviews - Analysing user needs and challenges of LCA in the early 
design phase  
 
The design thinking approach is a human-centred approach. It is thus important to gain knowledge 
from the intended user to understand the problem. To do so, interviews with three industry 
professionals from leading danish architectural and engineering companies were conducted. They 
were chosen based on their key role in engaging with LCA in practice and in research. The three 
people are: 
 
- 
Christine Colin, Chief Consultant Sustainable Buildings, Rambøll 
- 
Katrine Juul, Senior Architect and DGNB Consultant, Bjarke Ingels Group (BIG) 
- 
Rob Marsh, Head of Sustainability, C.F. Møller Architects 
 
The interview method was semi-structured, using the same question template for all three interviews 
with 3 main topics, but allowing the interviewee to bring up new ideas and topics. The three main 
topics that was researched was: 
==PAGE:31==
27 
 
 
- 
LCA in general – Importance and current practice 
- 
LCA in the early design phase – Importance and current practice 
- 
LCA tools – Description and evaluation of current practice 
 
The length of the interviews ranges from 30-70 minutes. This is mainly due to semi-structured 
interview method, were some answers from the interviewee lead to sub-questions that were not 
part of the template questions, thus making the interview longer. One interview, with Christine 
Collin, was conducted in person at Rambøll’s headquarter in Copenhagen. The two other interviews 
were conducted in online meetings via Microsoft Teams. All three interviews were recorded and 
transcribed and can be found in full length in appendix A, B and C. The interviews were conducted 
in Danish. Citation from the interviews have been translated to English by the author of this thesis. 
The interviews were analysed using a deductive thematical analysis approach. The deductive 
approach involves looking at the interviews with preconceived themes based on theory and 
knowledge. The thematical analyses is divided into six steps:  
 
- 
Familiarization 
- 
Coding 
- 
Generating themes 
- 
Reviewing themes 
- 
Defining and naming themes 
- 
Present results 
 
These six steps were carried out for each interview. The findings were organized in a spreadsheet 
and divided in themes. This provided an overview of the findings. The findings from the interviews 
resulted in defining the needs and challenges and is presented as the first part of section “4. Results”. 
 
3.2.3. 
Mapping the early design process 
 
The next step in the research phase, was to analyse the early design process. C.F. Møller Architects, 
who are the collaborative partner on this thesis, were used as case study. The early design process 
used at C.F. Møller was analysed. A presentation about the workflow, typical timelines in a project 
and general early design strategies, was provided by Head of LAB at C.F. Møller Copenhagen, Thue 
Borgen Hasløv. The presentation was provided in PowerPoint-format and two specific diagrams 
describing the early design phase is used to define the early design phase workflow at C.F. Møller. 
In the early design phase analysis, the software tools that are used in current practice are also 
identified. The analysis resulted in a definition of intervention areas and criteria for the development 
of a tool/method for early design phase LCA and is presented in Chapter “4. Results”. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
28 
 
3.3. 
Ideate and Prototype 
 
The first phase led to defining the challenges needed to be solved, user needs to fulfil and tools to 
be included in the development of a workflow for early design phase LCA. The development of the 
results in this thesis took place through ideation and prototyping. The ideation happened through 
brainstorming, prioritising the ideas, and then testing them in the prototype. In the follow section 
the prototype method and tools included in the prototyping are described. 
 
3.3.1. 
LCAByg 
 
The background research conducted in the first phase of this thesis led to defining which LCA 
calculation tool to include in the development of the workflow. The analysis and findings are 
described in chapter “4. Results”. 
LCAByg 5.0 is used as the LCA software in this thesis. LCAByg 5.0 was released on October 19th, 
2020 together with a user manual “Brugervejledning til LCAByg 5.0” referred to as “the user manual” 
(BUILD, 2020). In the first release, there were no possible import options like in the previous version 
of the software (version 3.2.). On October 23rd, 2020, an early access to work with the planned 
import functionalities were granted from BUILD. Together with the early access to work with the 
import option, a guide was also provided by BUILD, “Json guide for LCAByg version 5.0” referred to 
as “the Json guide” (Sørensen & Bruhn, 2020).  
 
 
Figure 3.3.: The LCAByg 5.0 user manual and the Json guide. 
 
The user manual (Jørgensen, et al., 2020) was used to understand the software’s functionalities and 
how these could be used to develop an early design phase integration. The Json guide (Sørensen & 
==PAGE:33==
29 
 
Bruhn, 2020) provided a detailed description of how to construct files for import of data in LCAByg 
5.0 and was used to understand the integration environment in LCAByg 5.0. 
 
3.3.2. 
Integration of design and calculation tools 
 
The integrated dynamic model approach (presented in chapter “2. Background”) was used to 
develop a tool and workflow for early design phase LCA. Rhinoceros (McNeel & Associates, 2020) is 
used as the design tool and Grasshopper as the VPL to connect with the LCA calculation tool. The 
primary reason for selecting these tools was found from the user needs and mapping of the early 
design workflow at C.F. Møller.  
 
For the development of an integration tool, three Grasshopper plug-ins were used: JSwan 
(Heumann, 2020), Threejs (Harvey, 2019) and Human (Heumann, 2018). The JSwan plug-in is used 
to create Json-files templates and the Threejs plug-in is used to automatically save Json-files in a 
defined folder. Human is used for frontend development of the tool. 
 
Four different applications of the integration tool were developed to accommodate the early design 
phase LCA workflow. Figure 3.4. shows how the tools and application cases should be understood. 
In table 3.1. a detailed overview of the four application cases if provided. 
 
 
Figure 3.5.: The integration tool applied to four different cases 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
30 
 
Table 3.1.: The application cases with core function, data sources and grasshopper plug-ins. 
 
Application case 
1 
Application case 
2 
Application case 
3 
Application case 
4 
Core function 
Parametric mass 
model variation 
study 
Construction 
variations study 
Product variations 
study 
Spreadsheet 
integration 
Material data 
LCAByg predefined 
constructions 
LCAByg predefined 
constructions 
LCAByg predefined 
products 
LCAByg predefined 
products 
Material impact 
Data source 
Ökobau 2020 
(Federal Institute 
for Research on 
Building, Urban 
Affairs and Spatial 
Development, 
2020) 
Ökobau 2020 
(Federal Institute 
for Research on 
Building, Urban 
Affairs and Spatial 
Development, 
2020) 
Ökobau 2020 
(Federal Institute 
for Research on 
Building, Urban 
Affairs and Spatial 
Development, 
2020) 
Ökobau 2020 
(Federal Institute 
for Research on 
Building, Urban 
Affairs and Spatial 
Development, 
2020) 
Grasshopper 
Plug-ins 
JSwan 
Threejs 
Human 
JSwan 
Threejs 
Human 
JSwan 
Threejs 
Human 
JSwan 
Threejs 
Human 
External input 
CSV-file from 
BUILD containing 
predefined 
construction 
names and IDs 
CSV-file from 
BUILD containing 
predefined 
construction 
names and IDs 
CSV-file from 
BUILD containing 
predefined product 
names and IDs 
CSV-file from 
BUILD containing 
predefined product 
names and IDs 
 
Application case 1 
 
Application case 2 is developed with Grasshopper as Front- and Backend. In application case 1, a 
“shoebox” model is used to simplify the digital building representations and the building layout is 
defined parametrically in grasshopper, drawing inspiration from the research by Hollberg (2016) and 
Marsh, Rasmussen, & Birgisdóttir (2018). The application case is developed to conduct mass model 
variation studies. To simplify the data entry, a library of predefined construction elements was 
developed together with architects from C.F. Møller and resembles typical construction elements. 
 
Application case 2 
 
Application case 2 is developed with Grasshopper as the Front- and Backend for making variations 
studies on a construction element. A construction element is defined as a bundle of construction 
products. The predefined constructions library is loaded into Grasshopper with an excel reader 
component. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
31 
 
Application case 3 
 
Application case 3 is like case 2. Grasshopper functions as the Front- and backend for making 
variation studies. The difference is that case 3 is developed to make variation studies on single 
products within a construction. In case 3 it is the predefined library of products from LCAByg 5.0 
that is imported. 
 
Application case 4 
 
Application case 4 accommodates the transition from early design phase to a more detailed design 
phase. The core functionalities of the integration are based on the same integration tool as in 
application case 1, 2 and 3. Instead of importing the predefined construction/product library into 
Grasshopper, they are imported and selected in the software dRofus (dRofus, 2020). dRofus is used 
to manage the bill of quantity data from Revit models. Thus, making it suitable for detailed design. 
An excel-reader plug-in is used in Grasshopper to read the data exported from dRofus. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
32 
 
3.4. 
Testing 
 
The last phase in the design thinking approach is the testing phase. During the development phase, 
the tool and application cases were constantly tested with a rapid prototyping approach. In the 
iterative prototype-testing approach, Rob Marsh, and architect from C.F. Møller was closely involved, 
consulting on challenges and how the functionalities could be optimised for the early design phase. 
Finally, the proposed workflow, with the tools and application cases, were presented to three 
industry professional and evaluated to validate the proposed approach the LCA in the early design 
phase. 
 
3.4.1. 
Evaluating the results 
 
The tool and application cases were first evaluated by relating to the challenges and criteria defined 
in the user need and early design phase workflow analysis. All challenges were listed in a table and 
colour coded to define if the challenge is solved. Furthermore, the criteria defined from the early 
design phase workflow analysis were also listed in a table and each application case is colour coded 
to whether the criteria are fulfilled for a specific design loop.  
 
Three structured interviews were conducted with the same three people who had been interviewed 
for the user-need research:  
 
- 
Christine Colin, Chief Consultant Sustainable Buildings, Rambøll 
- 
Katrine Juul, Senior Architect and DGNB Consultant, Bjarke Ingels Group (BIG) 
- 
Rob Marsh, Head of Sustainability, C.F. Møller Architects 
 
When the interviews were conducted, findings from the user need analysis and the proposed 
workflow to solve the challenges was presented. Then a thorough step-by-step walk through the 
applications cases was conducted. During the presentation of the application cases, the interviewees 
were able to ask questions about the functionalities. After the presentation, they were asked to 
evaluate the proposed workflow and tools within four categories. The evaluation was a qualitative 
evaluation. The four evaluation categories were: 
 
- 
Speed - The ability to test several design iterations 
- 
Precision - Data 
- 
Flexibility - The ability to adjust to a specific project 
 
The four categories were decided based on the findings in the user need analysis. All three 
presentations and interviews were conducted and recorded in online meeting with Microsoft Teams. 
The interviews were transcribed. The interviews were conducted in Danish and can be found in 
appendix D, E and F. The results from the evaluation are presented in the last part of chapter “4. 
Results”. Citation from the interviews have been translated to English by the author of this thesis. 
The findings and methods are discussed in section “5. Discussion”. 
==PAGE:37==
33 
 
4. Results 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
RESULTS 
==PAGE:38==
34 
 
In this chapter, the results are presented. First the findings from user need analysis are presented. 
Next, the early design process analysis, at C.F. Møller Architects, is described. Following, is a 
presentation of the developed tool and the four application of the tool to support the early design 
phase workflow. Each application case is presented individually, with a detailed description showing 
the process and architecture of the application. Finally, the evaluation of the results is presented.   
 
4.1. 
Defining user needs and challenges – Interview with stakeholders 
 
Christine Collin from Rambøll represents one of the largest consulting engineering companies in 
Scandinavia, Katrine Juul from BIG and Rob Marsh from C.F. Møller architects represents some of 
the largest Danish architecture companies. Through a thematical analysis, seven themes were 
defined for the 3 interviews: 
 
- 
The general importance of LCA in the building industry 
- 
LCA in regulations/certifications  
- 
Current workflow and challenges of current practice  
- 
Tools 
- 
Data 
- 
LCA in the early design phase 
 
In the following sections, each theme will outline the importance and highlight the challenges that 
arise when LCA is put into practice at large companies in the Danish building industry. A summary 
of the findings is provided in the end of this section. 
 
4.1.1. 
General importance of LCA 
 
The three interviewees were asked why it is important to focus on LCA. Marsh and Collin both states 
that the overall importance of LCA is due to the fact that operational energy have been lowered and 
do not have as large an impact as earlier. Collin states that it is essential to start looking at the full 
value-chain and making informed choices.  
 
“Essential step to take from the fact that now we have looked at energy consumption in the buildings, 
which has also been the source of the largest emissions in our construction to that we now open up 
and look at the entire value chain of our buildings. It is essential for us to make the informed 
choices.”  (Appendix A) 
 
The fact that the operational energy demand has been lowered is also acknowledged by Marsh as a 
key factor to the importance of LCA.  
 
“This is important because operation energy has been greatly reduced. It does not make sense to 
tighten operating energy further in BR18.” … “New buildings use more energy to produce materials 
than heating. So that is the background of the importance.”  (Appendix C) 
==PAGE:39==
35 
 
 
Marsh speaks about how operational energy demands have been tighten in the Danish building 
regulation, BR18, and pinpoints that the by-product of tightening the operational energy demands 
is that new buildings use more energy to produce materials than to operate the building. Juul talks 
about the involvement in many international projects where many of them needs to be certified.  
 
“They are booming right now and they pretty much all need to be certified in relation to the green 
standard they have over there.” … “After that comes the LCA part, so it also makes a lot of sense 
wherever you are in the world.” (Appendix B) 
 
Juul expresses that, at BIG, projects in China are “booming” and almost all these projects need to 
be certified in with a green building standard. She mentions that the content of the different 
certifications differs depending on the national or regional challenges, but LCA always plays an 
important role in many of these international green building certifications. 
 
4.1.2. 
LCA in regulations/certification 
 
In chapter “2. Background”, it was stated that the construction sectors climate partnership, 
established by the Danish government, proposed the introduction of a requirement level value of 
maximum 8,5 Kg CO2 eq / (m2*year) in FBK and 12 Kg CO2 eq / (m2*year) in the national building 
regulation (BR18). All three interviewees were positive towards including carbon budgets in the 
regulation. Both Marsh and Colin agrees with the climate partnerships proposal on implementing a 
requirement level for environmental impact. Colin proposes to regulate on CO2 emission instead of 
kWh.  
 
“In fact, one should have a regulation that instead of measuring on kWh, it should measure on CO2." 
(Appendix A)  
 
Marsh proposes a similar approach on how to regulate. He proposes to include the energy framework 
as part of the LCA and in the end having only one requirement value based on environmental impact. 
 
“It should be the other way around. The energy framework was to be part of the LCA. It does not 
have to be two separate things.” (Appendix C) 
 
Juul expresses that it would be “Fantastic if that happened” (Appendix B), to the question on 
whether LCA should be mandatory in the danish building regulation. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
36 
 
4.1.3. 
Current workflow and challenges 
 
The workflow for current practice LCA at the three companies are different. Marsh explains how LCA 
is only carried out after final construction. 
 
“As it is now, the only thing that happens is that LCA is made on finished constructions. It is the 
workflow, and it happens after we have modelled.” (Appendix C) 
 
Juul also explains LCA only being carried out in the later stages of the project. She mentions that 
the LCA workflow at BIG starts in the detailed design phase with extraction of data from 3D-model. 
 
“The LCA calculations need a lot of data, and a lot of the data can be extracted from our Revit 
models when we enter the detailed design phases” (Appendix B) 
 
Although both Juul and Marsh explains that there is no workflow for performing LCA in earlier phases, 
Colin mentions that LCA is being used “Throughout the whole process” (Appendix A) at Rambøll. 
When Colin mentions “the whole process”, this does not necessarily relate to the early sketching 
and proposal phases. This is backed up Colin herself when she mentions that: 
 
“Typically, a text is written in the competition stating that we will make LCAs continuously if we win. 
But I have not yet been allowed to do an LCA in competition. I know there are many of our architects 
who would like to do LCA but have a very hard time with it. Often it is the time that is the problem.” 
(Appendix A) 
 
Here, Colin underlines that the existing workflow for working with and performing LCA is only suited 
for the detailed design, just like Marsh and Juul, and that it is time consuming. In integrated design 
process, the design team on a competition project often consists of architects, landscape architects, 
engineers, contractors, and other relevant stakeholders. This is not always the case though and 
Colin points out that the academically described integrated design process is not working as she 
thought it would. 
 
“But my problem is that I am not invited into the design phase. I do not know what to do. I would 
like to join. But in a way, it's hard to be invited into that engine room.”  … ” The integrated design 
process that I learned about at University, I did not think I saw anything of it. It may well be that it 
existed with them internally, but I am not a part of it.” (Appendix A) 
 
Colin explains how Rambøll, as a consulting engineering firm with an inhouse architectural office, 
does not work with integrated design process within the office. She mentions the possibility of the 
integrated design process working within the teams internally. 
 
==PAGE:41==
37 
 
4.1.4. 
Tools 
 
Both Marsh, Colin and Juul mentions that Revit models are used in the detailed design phase. In the 
detailed design phase, quantity data for construction elements (Façade, slabs, windows, interior 
wall, etc.) are handled by extracting it from the Revit models. The three companies have different 
approaches on how the data is extracted from the models. Juul explains that before extracting the 
data, they use a script to make the BIM models “Stupid” again. 
 
“Some scripts have been made so we can make the model stupid again so we just get a wall out.” 
… “We have a building component journal, so we have a type number on the wall itself and we also 
have a type number of it inside LCAByg and then we have all the layers that are in that wall inside 
LCAByg.” (Appendix B) 
 
“Stupid”, she explains, means that all elements in the Revit model are converted into generic objects 
instead of containing information. The quantities are then extracted from the “stupid models” and 
an ID, from a building elements library, is appointed to the generic objects. The ID’s in the library 
corresponds to an ID inside LCAByg 3.2 where the materials in the element are specified. At Rambøll, 
Colin explains, the workflow consists of extracting data from Revit models by using schedules. The 
quantities are managed in a standardizes spreadsheet which is linked up with a material library. 
 
“Extracts schedules from Revit and copies directly to an excel sheet which is linked to LCAByg.” 
(Appendix A) 
 
Marsh explains that in most project it is the spreadsheet, developed by SBI prior to LCAByg, that 
been used to conduct LCA. It is only recently that LCAByg have been used to carry out LCA. 
 
“Most projects have used the excel spreadsheet that SBI made before LCAByg. But it is exclusively 
LCAByg you need in DK to get DGNB.” … ”Revit / dRofus. And then there are the scripts we have in 
the competition department to extract areas and lengths, etc.” (Appendix C) 
 
C.F. Møller is not using any import tools to LCAByg 3.2, thus all data entry is handled manually. 
Marsh highlights the manual data entry as one of the challenges with LCAByg. 
 
All three interviewees mention OneClick LCA as an LCA calculation tool that is being used or 
considered being used. Juul explains that: 
 
“We use LCAByg (3.2.) and then we use OneClick LCA, on the international projects.”. (Appendix B) 
 
Marsh have been working with OneClick LCA at his previous position at Arkitema and have chosen 
not to introduce the tool at C.F. Møller. This is mainly due to the data transparency issues and  
modelling technique being used: 
==PAGE:42==
38 
 
“I've been looking at OneClick LCA when I was in Arkitema. We agreed that the tool was not usable 
because one does not know what is going on inside it. There is a lot of black box.” … ” The way we 
model in Revit, where we do not divide our building parts into the individual materials, OneClick 
cannot handle it because there is not enough data in the individual layers.” (Appendix C) 
 
Collin explains OneClick LCA is used internationally in Rambøll. She also mentions that people who 
are working with the tool have varying attitudes towards it. 
 
“The rest of Rambøll (internationally) primarily uses OneClick LCA, with varying attitudes towards it. 
Some are very happy with it and others are extremely annoyed at it. It has a lot to do with black 
box.” (Appendix A) 
 
Juul explains that since their company have many international projects, a tool that works globally 
is required. 
 
Our company has a tenth of our projects abroad, which is why we need a tool that works globally. 
(Appendix B) 
 
In table 4.1. the tools being used in current practice at the three different companies is presented. 
 
Table 4.1.: Tools used to assist the LCA workflow at three companies.  
 
Design tool 
Bill of quantities 
LCA tool 
Rambøll 
Revit 
Revit schedules 
Excel  
LCAByg 3.2. 
OneClick LCA 
BIG 
Revit 
Script for Revit 
Excel 
LCAByg 3.2. 
OneClick LCA 
C.F. Møller 
Revit 
 
Excel  
DRofus 
Grasshopper Scripts 
LCAByg 3.2. 
Spreadsheet from 
SBI 
 
4.1.5. 
Data 
 
The current data handling practice also varies a bit from company to company. Collin explains that 
both generic data from the German Ökobau database (Federal Institute for Research on Building, 
Urban Affairs and Spatial Development, 2020) and more specific data from EPDs is being used.  
 
“We primarily use Ökobau data because it is located inside LCAByg. Then we use EPDs. Priority order 
depends on the design phase.” (Appendix A) 
 
==PAGE:43==
39 
 
Juul explains that when it is possible, EPDs are being used at BIG and states that more and more 
are being produced. 
 
“I would say that from when I started 2 years ago until today, there are many more companies that 
know what an EPD is, every time we go out and see if we need an EPD, on this product, because 
we have an intend to use the products in that construction.” (Appendix B) 
 
Marsh explains that LCAByg’s data transparency is a good thing and makes it possible to use the 
data that is already located inside the software, which is from Ökobau (Federal Institute for Research 
on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development, 2020). 
 
“I think LCAByg is transparent. For every single material you choose, you can see the Ökobau data 
with a URL link.” (Appendix C) 
 
Another matter when looking at the data is what system boundaries/phases that should be included 
in the LCA study. All three interviewees mentions that the A phases (A1-A3) are most important 
because the emissions are the largest and are happening here and now. 
 
“The A phases are clearly the most important because it is now and here that the emissions happen. 
But we have a huge problem when we only use the A phases. These are the bio-based materials.” 
(Appendix A) 
 
Collin explains there is an issue with only using the A-phases. This favours the bio-based materials 
in an incomparable manner. Juul also explains that only using A1-A3 speaks for people who needs 
to sell now and here. She empathizes the importance of the operation phase. 
 
“The operation phase means a lot more, and if you only talk into A1-A3, then you talk into all that 
money people who build to sell the next day.” (Appendix B) 
 
As explained earlier, LCA is typically only conducted if a building needs to be certified. It is thus 
important to look at what phases are included in the certifications or regulations. This is also 
acknowledged by Juul. 
 
“DGNB and BREEAM actually have some good phases included, BREEAM has a more phases than 
DGNB has, there is also something with transport and such.” (Appendix B) 
 
4.1.6. 
The importance and challenges of LCA in the early design phase 
 
The technical requirements for competition projects have been growing extensively over the last 
decades. This is explained by Marsh, who also points out that the number of technical requirements 
will only grow further in the future. 
==PAGE:44==
40 
 
 
” I can imagine that within the next 5 years, there will be high demands on LCA documentation in 
the competition. We have competitions where we are required to do DGNB screening and LCA 
analysis as part of the process in the competition” (Appendix C) 
 
According to Marsh, it is important to focus on LCA in the early design phase because more and 
more competition project briefs include some level of LCA requirement. Juul also acknowledges this.  
 
“Yes, I think it does, which is because we can go out and tell the client our carbon footprint on our 
buildings in the concept phase.” (Appendix B) 
 
Juul explains LCA in the early design phase as a client-centric importance. By implementing 
knowledge about the embodied carbon impact, she points out that the client can be involved in 
choosing materials based on other parameters than aesthetics. In the end it is the client who chooses 
what to build, therefore it is important to involve the client. Collin also recognizes the importance of 
LCA in the early design phase. 
 
“I think it is relevant. This is where you draw the big lines. It is very relevant to choose to build in 
concrete or steel or wood.” … “So I really think it has its justification in the early design. What is 
difficult is that you do not know much about your design.” (Appendix A) 
 
Collin specifies one of the main challenges when working with LCA in the early design phase. The 
paradox of design uncertainty and a data-heavy discipline. Marsh addresses this issue. 
 
I believe that the majority of LCA results are from geometric conditions with how many meters, 
square meters you have of different materials and if you get accurate data about the individual 
building parts at square meter level and make different assumptions, then you can get an accurate 
enough result. (Appendix C) 
 
Marsh believes that relevant LCA calculations for use in the early design phase can be generated 
from having accurate quantity data on the different building parts and combining it with 
assumptions. Collin explains that Rambøll addresses the early design phase LCA by working with a 
“boxplot method”. The method starts with generic data and works toward more specific data. E.g., 
start by comparing generic data from different types of wood with generic data from different types 
of concrete. Then use generic data comparing different types of wood. And finally compare on a 
product level with EPDs 
 
“In the early design phases, we work more with pulling out a lot of data, both generic and EPD and 
then made boxplots, which show the variation.” (Appendix A) 
 
==PAGE:45==
41 
 
Marsh highlights that speed is one of the most important parameters when working with LCA in the 
early design phase. 
 
“Speed is the most important thing in the early stages.” … “So if you can make some solutions where 
you automate the process as much as possible, then it is a great advantage. If it goes faster, then 
you can make more calculations.” (Appendix C) 
 
4.1.7. 
Classification of challenges and needs 
 
From the findings in the interviews with Collin, Juul and Marsh, a list of challenges and needs that 
occur when working with LCA in the early design phase was derived. The challenges were prioritised 
with a status of either high, medium, or low. The high, medium, and low rating-system of the 
challenges were proposed by the author of this thesis and reflects the interviewees’ point-of-view 
on the challenges. The challenges and needs are presented in table 4.2. 
 
Table 4.2.: Classification of challenges and needs when working with LCA in early design. 
 
Tools 
Data 
Workflow 
High 
Current practise = Revit 
models. Rhino is used at CFM 
and BIG for early phase. 
Detailed data for an 
unspecific building design 
Manual data entry in LCA 
tools 
LCAByg is the only tool used 
for Danish projects 
Including same phases as in 
DGNB 
Time consuming to make 
LCA = LCA only carried out 
in later phases 
Medium 
Different approaches to the 
extraction of bill of quantities 
Data transparency 
Different workflows in early 
phase and detailed design 
phase 
Low 
User Interface 
Using EPDs in early phase 
Reporting 
 
Maintenance of databases 
 
 
 
4.1.8. 
Summary of findings 
 
Collin and Marsh explained that the importance of LCA is mainly because it does not make sense to 
tighten the buildings regulations further with regards to operational energy demand. They both 
agree that it is now important to look at embodied energy and make an impact over the whole life 
cycle of the building. Juul further explains that the demand for green building certifications is 
increasing all over the world and many of these include LCA as part of the certification system. It is 
clear, from the interviews, that all three participants, who represents large key stakeholder in the 
danish building industry are ready for LCA requirements to be a mandatory part of the danish 
building regulations. 
 
==PAGE:46==
42 
 
With the current practice and tools being used in the three companies, the workflow is tailored to 
conducting LCA in detailed design phases or after construction competition. The tools being used 
currently are: Revit models, data extraction through schedules in Revit and either LCAByg 3.2 or 
OneClick LCA to calculate the environmental impact. At BIG and Rambøll, they ease up the process 
by having a link from the extracted model data and LCAByg 3.2. BIG is working with a building 
element journal, similar to the approach of Marsh, Rasmussen, & Birgisdóttir (2018), Kanafani et. 
Al. (2019) and Hollberg (2016) mentioned in the literature review. Rambøll uses a similar approach, 
but with a material library instead of buildings element journal. They use a standardized spreadsheet 
which is linked to a material library and to LCAByg 3.2. All interviewees agree that more phases then 
A1-A3 must be included to get a full picture. In general, they all had a positive attitude towards the 
phases included in DGNB-DK 2020 (A1-A3, B4, B6, C3, C4).  
 
Both Collin, Juul and Marsh agrees that LCA in the early design phase is important. The two main 
reasons being: 1) That clients are informed and potentially chooses materials with lower 
environmental impact and 2) more and more projects require some form of LCA requirements 
already in the competitions phase. One of the challenges is the paradox of LCA requiring a large 
amount of specific data, while the design of the building is uncertain. Marsh highlighted some of the 
important characteristic of potentially including LCA in the early design phase. He specifically 
mentions that making use of assumptions for the material data and having relatively accurate 
quantity data could be a solution. He also explains that the most important parameter in the early 
design phase is speed. Speed should here be understood as the ability to calculate several different 
design iterations quickly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
43 
 
4.2. 
The early design phase approach at C.F. Møller Architects 
 
Developing a workflow that utilizes LCA in the early design phase, requires a deep understanding of 
the early design phase process in practice. This is acquired by analysing the workflow and tools 
being used at C.F. Møller Architects. 
 
4.2.1. 
Workflow and tools at C.F. Møller Architects – Theory and practice 
 
C.F. Møller Architects is divided into different departments and have created C.F. Møller LAB, which 
is a unit working only with competition projects. There is a LAB at the headquarter in Aarhus and 
one at the Copenhagen branch of the company. Since C.F. Møller LAB only focuses on competition 
projects, it was decided to examine the workflow at this department to understand the dynamics of 
the early design phase. 
 
 
Figure 4.1.: The C.F. Møller Architects LAB unit and connection to branches 
 
The theoretical background for the development of architectural competition and early phase design 
activities at C.F. Møller Architects’ LAB is a version of the Innovation Funnel described by 
Wheelwright & Clark (1992). With this approach, many solutions to a given architectural problem 
are generated at the start of the project. The number of solutions is then narrowed down, based on 
design criteria, such that only one design is taken forward at the end of the process. In figure 4.2., 
the innovation funnel process is presented in a simple diagram. The “narrow down process” is here 
shown as filters. The filters are design criteria defined by the design team or the project brief.  
 
==PAGE:48==
44 
 
 
Figure 4.2.: The innovation funnel 
 
To dig further down in the workflow at C.F. Møller LAB, a diagram of the workflow was investigated. 
The diagram is from a presentation provided by Head of LAB, Thue Hasløv and is displayed in figure 
4.3. 
 
 
Figure 4.3.: C.F. Møller Architects’ LAB workflow 
 
The diagram in figure 4.3. shows a process moving forward from program analysis to final project 
delivery. In the beginning of the process, massing studies, program analysis and context analysis 
are conducted in a design loop. Findings from the context analysis and program studies impacts the 
outcome of the massing concept studies and findings from the massing studies have an impact on 
the outcome of the program and context studies. It is an iterative design loop with rapid prototyping 
and testing of models. The next step presented in figure 4.3, is a design loop with façade concepts 
development, plan development and landscape development. Findings from the first design loop 
have an impact on the façade concept development. The façade concept and plan development also 
function as an iterative design loop where changes affect each discipline bidirectionally. The final 
step in figure 4.3. is the development of a 3D model, section studies and final plan development. 
Since competition project typically does not require delivery of a detailed BIM models, the 3D models 
are often developed specifically for renderings. Above the workflow diagram in figure 4.3., is the 
==PAGE:49==
45 
 
tools that are used in C.F. Møller LAB presented. They use Rhinoceros for all model development 
(2D and 3D), Grasshopper for technical analysis and geometry generation in massing studies, façade 
concepts and plans and Adobe programs such as Photoshop, InDesign and Illustrator for production 
of presentation material. 
 
 
Figure 4.4.: The theoretical and practical design process at C.F. Møller LAB 
 
The theoretical innovations funnel approach and the practical workflow presented in figure 4.3. can 
be compared with the integrated design process approach presented in section “2. Background”. In 
figure 4.4., the practical workflow and the theoretical background is presented together with the 
integrated design process and the three design loops identified in the workflow at C.F. Møller LAB is 
highlighted. The timeframe for a competition project varies depending on the type of competition. 
In figure 4.5., a timeline from a competition project at C.F. Møller LAB is presented. 
 
==PAGE:50==
46 
 
 
Figure 4.5.: Timeline for a competition project at C.F. Møller Architects 
 
In the presented timeline, in figure 4.5., the competition project runs for approximately 2 months 
from program analysis to final delivery. A box highlights the area in which the design is still under 
development. In the presented project, the time of design development runs for approximately 1.5 
months. The last half months is used for production of final delivery material. If the program analysis 
time is not counted as a part of the concept development phase, the time of design intervention is 
down to 1 month for the project in figure 4.5.  
 
As mentioned, the timeframe for a competition project varies from project to project. According to 
Marsh, competition timeframes last 2-6 months and the timeframe for design-changes is 1-5 months. 
Collin and Marsh mentioned in the user-need interviews, that it could take up to 50-100 hours to 
conduct a full LCA (Appendix A and C). With only 1-5 months available to impact the design, a 
working week of 37 hours and a workflow that encourages constant design modifications within 
each iterative design loop presented in figure 4.4., it is not possible conduct LCA with the current 
tools and workflows. 
 
4.2.2. 
Definition of criteria for early design phase integration 
 
The user need analysis conducted with Collin, Juul and Marsh focuses primarily on desirability but 
also examined feasibility and viability matters. Feasibility, when examining the tools that were used 
in current practice and viability when investigating the importance of LCA and the LCA workflow 
used in the different companies. With a deep dive into C.F. Møller LAB’s workflow, criteria for 
feasibility and viability measures for the development of a tool and workflow for LCA in the early 
design phase can be defined. 
 
==PAGE:51==
47 
 
 
Figure 4.6.: Viability and Feasibility 
 
To develop a viable method for LCA in the early design phase, it was found important to adapt to 
current practice early design development. It was found that C.F. Møller LAB uses three design loops. 
The first is centred around massing studies, the next is centred around façade studies and the last 
involves sections, final plan development and 3D model generated for renderings. 
 
A tool to support decisions within each design loop and to be used in the solution-filtering process 
when transferring from one phase to another in the design process, was found to be viable solution. 
To develop such a tool a list of criteria to accommodate the process of each design loop was 
developed and presented in table 4.3. 
 
Table 4.3.: Criteria for the three design loops 
 
Design loop 1 
Design loop 2 
Design loop 3 
Type of model 
Mass model concepts 
(Shoebox model) 
Variation study of a 
construction element 
(façade) 
Variation study of a 
construction element 
(sections) 
Time 
Several iterations within 
1 week 
Several iterations within 
1 week 
Several iterations within 
1 week 
Technology (tools) 
Rhinoceros + 
Grasshopper 
Rhinoceros + 
Grasshopper 
Rhinoceros + 
Grasshopper 
 
By fulfilling the criteria defined in table 4.3., the tool and workflow is expected to be able to work as 
an integrated part of the existing workflow and thus fulfilling the viability and feasibility criteria in 
the innovation sweet spot model presented with figure 4.6. The criteria defined in table 4.3. is used 
for evaluation of the results. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
48 
 
4.3. 
The integration tool – Connecting design tool with LCA tool 
 
An important requirement for choosing the LCA calculation tool used for further development in this 
thesis, was the integration possibilities and that the tool could be fitted to the requirements for LCA 
in Denmark. It was found from the background research that LCA in Denmark is typically based on 
the approach described in DGNB-DK 2020 and FBK. In DGNB-DK 2020 it is mentioned that the 
calculation file, that needs to be handed in, can be a LCAByg-file (DK-GBC, 2020), while in FBK it is 
mandatory to deliver a LCAByg-file (Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2020). Although the data-
import possibilities may seem limited in LCAByg 5.0 compared with other tools, the JSON file import, 
can be described as a flexible integration format. Furthermore, the findings from the interviews 
conducted in the user-need analysis with industry professionals showed that LCAByg was the only 
relevant LCA tool used when carrying out LCA on projects in Denmark. It was decided to work with 
the latest version of LCAByg. Version 5.0 was released on October 19th 2020. Since then, updated 
versions with bug-fixes and additional functionalities have been released. 
 
The investigation of the early design phase at C.F. Møller Architects showed that Rhinoceros and the 
VPL, Grasshopper already was an integrated part of the workflow. Thus, developing a tool based on 
these software solutions was considered a feasible solution for the tool to be an integrated part of 
the workflow. The result is an integrated dynamic tool. The tool is developed with Grasshopper as 
front- and backend and have a high degree of flexibility allowing for different applications of the tool 
to be fitted to different phases in the design development. In Grasshopper a data-model is 
generated, and the data is translated to LCAByg 5.0 readable data. 
 
LCAByg 5.0 has a built-in library of predefined products and constructions. All predefined products 
are based on data from the German Ökobau database (Federal Institute for Research on Building, 
Urban Affairs and Spatial Development, 2020). To understand the structure behind the integration 
tool and the predefined library, an explanation of the LCAByg structure is provided. In figure 4.7. 
the LCAByg interface is shown. The data is divided into four hierarchical categories: 
 
- 
Construction element (Bygningsdel) 
- 
Construction (Konstruktioner) 
- 
Product (Byggevare) 
- 
Phase (Faser) 
 
==PAGE:53==
49 
 
 
Figure 4.7.: LCAByg 5.0 interface 
 
A construction element consists of several constructions. A construction should be understood as a 
bundle of products and finally, product consists of phases with environmental impact data. In the 
LCAByg 5.0 user manual (BUILD, 2020) it is described that a construction element should be 
understood as several functional layers. The idea of creating functional layers is, that one layer can 
be varied while the others are maintained. E.g., for an external facade element, the façade cladding 
is one functional layer that can be varied while the structural/insulation- and internal cladding layer 
is kept fixed. A table describing the layer structure for each element is presented in table 4.4. 
 
Table 4.4.: The LCAByg construction layer structure. Table from: (BUILD, 2020) 
Group 
1. Layer  
2. Layer  
3. Layer  
Drain 
- 
- 
- 
Balconies 
Balcony floor 
Fastening 
Railing 
Other 
 
 
 
Slab 
Floors 
Slab 
Ceilings 
Electrical systems 
- 
- 
- 
Foundations 
Foundations 
- 
- 
Interior walls 
Interior cladding side 1 
Construction 
Interior cladding side 2 
Columns and beams 
Columns / beams 
Fire protection 
- 
Roof 
Roofing 
Construction 
Ceilings 
Terrain slab 
Floors 
Slab 
Substrate 
Stairs and ramps 
Stairs / ramps 
Step surface 
Protection 
Outdoor area 
- 
- 
- 
Water 
- 
- 
- 
Heat 
- 
- 
- 
Ventilation 
Supply systems 
Distribution 
Consumption plant 
Windows, doors and 
glass facades 
Profiles 
Glazing 
Sun protection 
Exterior walls 
Interior cladding 
Construction/Insulation 
Exterior cladding 
==PAGE:54==
50 
 
Only predefined constructions and products from LCAByg 5.0 is used. The predefined constructions 
embedded in LCAByg 5.0 are all created after conservative measures. Insulation thicknesses are 
based on BR18 U-values (BUILD, 2020). Since the library consist of many solutions for different 
application it is important to assess which layers fits each other. The predefined library in LCAByg 
5.0 is a continuation of the work developed for LCAByg 4.0 beta version. The predefined 
constructions library consists of 396 different constructions which are bundles of products from the 
product library. The predefined product library consists of 466 different products. All libraries were 
provided in CSV-file format by BUILD. 
 
The process flow including the tools used for the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool is presented figure 4.7. 
 
 
Figure 4.7.: A simple process diagram of the flow in the integration tool 
 
All input parameters are defined in grasshopper. The type of input parameters varies depending on 
which application of the tool is used. This will be further explained. When the input parameters are 
defined, Json-files are automatically generated from a template created with the grasshopper plug-
in JSwan. Another Grasshopper plug-in, Threejs, is used to automatically save the Json files in a 
defined folder. A LCAByg 5.0 case is created in LCAByg’s engine.yaml file, as described in the Json 
guide (Sørensen & Bruhn, 2020). The data in the LCAByg 5.0 case is defined by the Json files that 
are generated from the template in Grasshopper. The LCAByg case appears in the tap “Open new” 
inside LCAByg 5.0. In figure 4.8. the link between the engine.yaml, LCAByg 5.0 and the json files is 
presented. 
==PAGE:55==
51 
 
 
Figure 4.8.: Left: The LCAByg cases are created in the engine.yaml file (backend of integration). Middle: 
LCAByg 5.0 cases are generated in the “open new”-tap in LCAByg interface. Right: A LCAByg case is based 
on data from a folder of Json-files. 
 
The core engine of the integration tool can be divided into two main functionalities. The first one is 
the Json-file template that takes simple inputs and structures the data as explained in the Json guide 
from BUILD (BUILD, 2020). The second one is the automated Json-file to LCAByg case folder export. 
In figure 4.9., the Json-file template functionality is presented. 
 
 
Figure 4.9.: The Json-file template 
 
The template follows the node and edge structure described in the Json-guide (BUILD, 2020). A 
category, element or construction is generated by creating a node. Edges are used to create the 
content of the node. Each time a node or an edge is constructed, they are marked with a unique ID 
==PAGE:56==
52 
 
following the UUID-form and are generated from: https://www.uuidgenerator.net/ as described in 
the Json-guide (BUILD, 2020). Thus, making it possible to reference to the nodes and edges.  
 
An example of the node/edge structure: A non-loadbearing interior wall is created as a node. From 
the LCAByg 5.0 layer-structure, a construction element consists of 1-3 layers of constructions. The 
constructions included in the non-loadbearing wall is referred to the node as edges. The construction 
can either be a predefined construction from the LCAByg 5.0 library or it can be constructed from 
the predefined product library in LCAByg 5.0. In figure 4.10., the node-edge reference is explained. 
 
 
Figure 4.10.: The json file structure with node and edge references 
 
It is the nodes and edges that is created as templates in Grasshopper. The amount of input 
parameters for the nodes and edges have been simplified by keeping some of the input parameters 
fixed. The input parameters that must be defined for applications of the tool are presented in table 
4.4. 
 
Table 4.4.: Input parameters for the json templates in Grasshopper 
Template 
Node 
Edge 
Input 
Type 
Input 
Type 
Category 
ID 
UUID 
 
Category ID 
UUID 
Element ID 
UUID 
Element 
ID 
UUID 
ID 
UUID 
Category Name 
String 
Construction ID 
UUID 
 
Amount 
Numeric 
Construction 
ID 
UUID 
ID 
UUID 
Name 
String 
Amount 
Numeric 
Unit 
‘KG’, ‘M’, ‘M2’, 
‘M3’ or ‘Pcs’ 
Unit 
‘KG’, ‘M’, ‘M2’, 
‘M3’ or ‘Pcs’ 
Layer 
1, 2 or 3 
Lifespan 
Numeric 
 
Product ID 
UUID 
 
==PAGE:57==
53 
 
The other main functionality of the integration tool is the automated saving process of the Json-files 
to the correct folder, referring to a specific LCAByg case. A component from the Grasshopper plugin, 
Threejs, is used to generate the Json-file. The input for this component is a folder path directory, a 
file name and data generated from the output of the template. When all three input parameters are 
defined, a Json-file with the given name is automatically saved in the defined folder path directory. 
The folder path and file name are kept fixed. Each time an input parameter is changed, the output 
will be saved directly into folder name and overwrite a previous version of the file. In figure 4.11, 
the automated file saving component with input is presented. 
 
 
Figure 4.11.: The automatic Json-file saving component 
 
In figure 4.12., a diagram shows an example of an application of the tool. The diagram shows the 
process of creating a construction element with 1 construction layer from Grasshopper to LCAByg. 
Picture 1 shows the Grasshopper canvas where the Json-template and the automatic file-saving is 
highlighted in a red box. Picture 2 shows that the files are saved in a folder that connects with the 
LCAByg case. In the example in figure 4.12., Json-files carries information to create a construction 
element. In picture 4 the LCAByg 5.0 interface is displayed and the data input from Grasshopper 
appears in the LCAByg model. Picture 2 and 3 only shows the back-end process. In practice it is only 
Grasshopper and LCAByg that are used as frontend. Each time a change is made in grasshopper, 
the Json-files are overwritten with new data and the LCAByg case can be updated by opening the 
case again inside LCAByg 5.0. 
==PAGE:58==
54 
 
 
Figure 4.12.: 1: Grasshopper with the json-file template and automatic json-file saving. 2: A construction 
json files is saved in a LCAByg 5.0 case folder. 3: The json-file is automatically structured for import through 
the template structure in Grasshopper. 4: Data is automatically transferred to LCAByg by opening the case.  
==PAGE:59==
55 
 
4.4. 
Application of the tool 
 
The goal for this thesis included developing a better workflow for LCA in the early design phase and 
tools to assist the workflow. The LCAByg 5.0 integration tool described in the previous section was 
applied to four different cases to show how the tool can enable the utilization of LCA in the early 
design phase. The attributes for the four application cases was defined from the research on the 
early design phase process at C.F. Møller LAB. Application case 1, 2 and 3 focuses primarily on the 
early design phase were the building design is uncertain and changes rapidly. Application case 4 is 
designed for the detailed design phases and is developed to bridge the gap between early phase 
and detailed design phase LCA workflow. In figure 4.14., the 4 applications cases are presented in 
relation to the ABR18 main phases. The green LCAByg 5.0 logo implies that the utilization of LCA is 
enabled for each phase with the 4 application cases.   
 
 
Figure 4.14.: The four application cases in relation to ABR18 main phases 
 
The criteria that were defined from the analysis of the C.F. Møller LAB workflow included developing 
two types of analysis to accommodate the workflow: A mass model variation study and an element 
variation study. Application case 1 is a mass model variation study with the LCAByg 5.0 integration 
tool. Application case 2 and 3 are both variation studies. Case 2 is a variation study of the predefined 
constructions in the LCAByg 5.0 library and case 3 is a variation study of the predefined products in 
LCAByg 5.0. Figure 4.15. shows how the application cases are related to the early design phase 
workflow. 
 
 
Figure 4.15.: Application case 1, 2 and 3 in the C.F. Møller LAB workflow 
==PAGE:60==
56 
 
4.4.1. 
Application case 1 – Parametrical mass model 
 
The first application case focuses on the first design loop in the early design phase, where mass 
model studies are conducted. With a few simple inputs parameters, it is possible to create a 
preliminary building design and import all quantities and material data to LCAByg 5.0, using the 
integration tool. In figure 4.16. an overview of the processes and tool included in application case 1 
is presented. 
 
 
Figure 4.16.: Process overview in application case 1 
 
The application case uses Grasshopper as frontend and includes 5 steps: 
 
1. Select correct Json-file directory 
2. Select building information data 
3. Create the building design from a number of parameters 
4. Select construction element types 
5. Open LCAByg with the building model 
 
In step 3, the geometry is decided and calculated and in step 4, each construction element type is 
decided, generating the material properties for the construction elements. Figure 4.17. explains the 
frontend and the 5-steps in the grasshopper canvas. 
==PAGE:61==
57 
 
 
Figure 4.17.: The 5 frontend steps. 1: File location, 2: Building information, 3: Geometry and quantities, 4: 
Selecting constructions elements 5: Open the model in LCAByg 5.0 
 
The frontend is designed to be simple and limit the input parameters. The backend of the application 
case is more complex. In Rhinoceros, a simple 3D shoebox model is created. The shoebox model 
data is then transferred into Grasshopper by placing it on layer in the Rhino layer structure called 
“Volumes”. A component from the Grasshopper plug-in, Human, is used to reference the geometry 
by layer. Inside Grasshopper, the referenced geometry is used to create a building design with 
primary constructions and a visual feedback is generated in the Rhino interface. Figure 4.18. shows 
an example of a shoebox geometry and figure 4.19. shows how the shoebox models in transferred 
into Grasshopper and the visual feedback of the construction is generated in rhino. 
 
 
Figure 4.18.: A shoebox geometry 
==PAGE:62==
58 
 
 
 
Figure 4.19.: Shoebox model transferred to Grasshopper 
 
In DGNB it is described in indicator “1.1 - LCA in the early planning phase”, that early phase models 
can be constructed as a simple model with load-bearing structures and climate-screen only: 
“A simpler model that includes the most important building parts, including all load-bearing elements 
and the climate screen. A simpler model for the early stages can possibly be built from the example 
catalogue in LCAByg.” (DK-GBC, 2020) 
In application case 1, the following construction were included: 
 
- 
Slabs 
- 
Slab towards ground 
- 
Roof 
- 
Façade walls 
- 
Interior loadbearing wall 
- 
Interior non-loadbearing wall 
- 
Windows 
- 
Columns 
- 
Beams 
- 
Foundation 
 
These constructions were found relevant when comparing with other studies. In SBI’s study on 
Climate Impact from 60 buildings (Zimmermann, Andersen, Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir, 2020), only 
stairs, ramps, balconies, and technical installations are further included. It was decided not to include 
these, since it was difficult to estimate on a shoebox model and the study (Zimmermann, Andersen, 
Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir, 2020) showed that impact generated from these construction elements 
==PAGE:63==
59 
 
were low compared to the rest of the building. In some of the 60 cases, the technical installation 
(Drainage, water, heating, ventilation, and cooling) accounted for up to 10 % of the building. 
 
For the parametrically generated model, 8 parameters were defined as varying. Once a parameter 
is altered, the building design changes responsively. The parameters are presented in table 4.5. 
 
Table 4.5.: Varying parameters for the shoebox model 
Parameter 
Unit 
Range 
Façade opening 
% 
20-80 
Floor height 
m 
2-10 
Structural grid spacing 
m 
4-10 
Columns 
Boolean 
True/false 
Beams 
Boolean 
True/false 
Interior walls 
Boolean 
True/false 
Structural walls 
% 
0-100 
Interior walls 
% 
Few, Moderate, Many (Minergie, 
2014) 
 
Inside the component generating the geometry, a quantity calculator is embedded. All construction 
elements are automatically measured in the correct unit according to the input in LCAByg 5.0. The 
units are presented in table 4.6.  
 
Table 4.6.: Unit for each construction element 
Construction element 
Measured Unit 
Slabs 
M2 
Slab towards ground 
M2 
Roof 
M2 
Façade walls 
M2 
Interior loadbearing wall 
M2 
Interior non-loadbearing wall 
M2 
Windows 
M2 
Columns 
M 
Beams 
M 
Foundation 
M 
 
The LCAByg integration tool is used to create the Json-templates for the included constructions. The 
construction element quantities are transferred to the correct construction element input in the Json-
file template structure. In figure 4.20., the geometry generation and quantity calculation workflow 
presented. 
 
==PAGE:64==
60 
 
 
Figure 4.20.: The backend process for generating parametrical geometry and measuring the elements 
 
For each construction element in the model, a construction type must be defined. To simplify the 
input, a library of construction elements was developed. The library was developed together with 
Rob Marsh, C.F. Møller, and resembles typical construction elements used in projects. The 
construction elements are defined from the LCAByg 5.0-layer structure and only uses the LCAByg 
predefined construction library. The construction elements were divided in typical elements for 
residential buildings and offices. Table 4.7. presents an overview of the number of predefined 
construction elements created for each category construction. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
61 
 
Table 4.7.: Number of predefined construction elements for each construction type. 
Construction element 
Residential 
Office 
Slabs 
3 
8 
Slab towards ground 
3 
4 
Roof 
6 
8 
Façade walls 
11 
7 
Interior loadbearing wall 
7 
7 
Interior non-loadbearing wall 
4 
6 
Windows 
4 
4 
Columns 
 
3 
Beams 
 
3 
Foundation 
3 
3 
 
The library of construction elements was embedded in Grasshopper and an overview providing 
detailed information of each element was saved in a spreadsheet. The library of construction 
elements can be found in appendix G. In figure 4.21., the selection of the construction elements is 
displayed. Each construction element has a dropdown menu with the construction element library. 
The construction element is selected from the dropdown menu and the UUID’s identifying the correct 
LCAByg constructions and products is automatically generated and transferred to the Json-file 
template. The process is presented in figure 4.21. The excel spreadsheet is not a part of the backend. 
It only serves as an overview of the construction element library. 
 
==PAGE:66==
62 
 
 
Figure 4.21.: Selecting construction element types 
 
Once the first 4 steps in applications case 1, is carried out, the final step is to import all the data 
from the model in Grasshopper to LCAByg 5.0. By using the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool, this step 
is carried automatically. LCAByg 5.0 can be opened by pressing “true” in the last step on the 
grasshopper canvas and the mass model is opened in LCAByg by selecting the mass model in the 
“Open new” tab. This is showed in figure 4.22. 
 
==PAGE:67==
63 
 
 
Figure 4.22.: The final step in application case 1: Opening the model in LCAByg 5.0. 
 
All data defined in the Grasshopper model, is now presented in the “Bygningsmodel”-tap in LCAByg. 
The construction elements are found in the tap “Bygningsdel”. The construction type that was chosen 
is in the tap “Konstruktioner”. The quantity from the model is displayed when selecting the 
construction. Figure 4.23., presents a detailed overview of the model in LCAByg 5.0.  
==PAGE:68==
64 
 
 
Figure 4.23.: The shoebox model in LCAByg 5.0 and the relation to the predefined construction library 
 
Results can be reviewed in the results tap and be downloaded from LCAByg in spreadsheet format 
and used as presentation material to filter through different solutions. If a parameter is changed 
inside Grasshopper, the model is updated in LCAByg by selecting the “Open new” tab and selecting 
the LCAByg case again. New models are generated quickly and there is no time lack when importing 
new models. The only time lack existing in the workflow is the time it takes for the practitioner to 
select input parameters and construction types. 
 
Reflections 
 
It is important to note that if application case 1 is used for comparative LCA studies, the functional 
equivalence must be assured. There is no built-in functionality showing technical functionalities such 
as U-values, fire resistance parameters and static attributes. U-values for all constructions were 
assumed to live up to the standards defined in BR18, since this is explained in the LCAByg 5.0 guide 
(BUILD, 2020). Application case 1 only focusses on embodied carbon from the materials used in the 
==PAGE:69==
65 
 
building and do not have any built-in functionality for assessing the operational energy demand for 
the chosen building design. The operational energy demand is a central part of LCA on buildings and 
the materials chosen in the model will naturally have an impact on the operational energy demand. 
 
Application case 1 was considered a minimum viable product to assess the environmental impact 
from materials in a building. A future development of the application case would be to implement a 
functionality presenting functional equivalence parameters and an operational energy calculation. 
The application case does not include the assessment of basements. The addition of basement could 
be done parametrically and the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool could be used to create Json-file 
templates for basement components. It was decided that as a minimum viable product, the shoebox 
model without basement would be considered acceptable. 
 
It was decided not to include installations in application case 1. A proposal was made for a 
representative GWP impact value for installations by Zimmermann, Andersen, Kanafani, & 
Birgisdóttir (2020). For a 50-year reference study period the median value for 60 buildings cases 
was: 0,46 Kg-CO2-EQ/m2/year and for a reference study period the impact was: 0,45 Kg-CO2-
EQ/m2/year. In further development of the case, these values could simply be added post-
calculation. 
 
4.4.2. 
Application case 2 – Variation study of construction element  
 
Application case 2 is designed to focus on the second and third design loop in the early design phase, 
were façade strategies, plan and sections are created. It is typically in these design loops that 
decisions regarding materials for the different construction elements are decided. Application case 
2 is constructed to create simple variation study and only have few input parameters. Figure 4.24. 
presents an overview of the processes and tools included in application case 2. 
 
 
Figure 4.24.: Process overview in application case 2 
 
==PAGE:70==
66 
 
 
The Application case is designed with a grasshopper frontend and includes four simple steps. The 
four steps are also presented in figure 4.25. 
 
1. Select construction element category 
2. Select the quantity that is to be examined 
3. Select the constructions included in the building element (LCAByg 5.0 3-layer structure) 
4. Open the model in LCAByg 5.0 
 
 
Figure 4.25.: The 4 frontend steps. 1: Select category, 2: Select amount, 3: Select constructions from 
LCAByg library, 4: Open the model in LCAByg 5.0 
 
Applications case 2 is designed only to assess one construction element and is not linked to a 
geometry model. Quantity data is handled manually. Step 1 is to choose the category from the 
dropdown menu. The categories are the same as an in LCAByg 5.0 (figure 4.26.). 
 
==PAGE:71==
67 
 
 
Figure 4.26.: LCAByg 5.0 categories embedded in application case 2 
 
The dropdown menu with categories is connected to a custom component that is developed to filter 
the 396 predefined LCAByg constructions and only select the relevant constructions for the selected 
category. Figure 4.27. shows the process of filtering the predefined constructions. The library with 
396 predefined constructions is a CSV file loaded into the filtering component.  
 
==PAGE:72==
68 
 
 
Figure 4.27.: Selecting the category filters the constructions and only shows the relevant constructions to 
select from in step 3 
 
Step 3 is to select either 1, 2 or 3 layers of construction depending on the category. The layer-
structure follows the LCAByg 5.0 functional layer structure presented previously. Figure 4.28. 
displays how the construction layer selection relates to the LCAByg 5.0 model input. 
 
 
Figure 4.28.: Selecting the 3 construction layers and relation to LCAByg 5.0. 
==PAGE:73==
69 
 
The final step in the process in application case 2 is to open the model in LCAByg. The LCAByg 5.0 
integration tool is used to transfer the data to LCAByg automatically. LCAByg 5.0 is opened by 
pressing “true” in the last step on the grasshopper canvas and the model is opened in LCAByg by 
selecting “Bygningsdel 1” in case in the “Open new” tab. This is presented in figure 4.29. 
 
 
Figure 4.29.: Opening the application case 2 model in LCAByg 5.0 
 
The results are now ready to be reviewed and downloaded from LCAByg in spreadsheet format. 
Testing a new variation of the construction element is done quickly by changing one of the layers in 
step 3 in the grasshopper front-end. The LCAByg model is updated by opening “Bygningsdel 1” 
again. 
 
An example of a variation study could be to examine the environmental impact from 3 different 
façade cladding solutions. In Grasshopper step 1, “Ydervægge” is selected. In step 2, it is decided 
to examine 1 m2 façade wall. In step 3 the functional layers are selected. It is known from table x 
that the functional layers defined by LCAByg (BUILD, 2020) in a façade wall is: 
 
1. Interior cladding 
2. Structural and insulation layer 
3. Exterior cladding 
==PAGE:74==
70 
 
 
By keeping layer 1 and 2 fixed, it is possible to examine environmental impact only from different 
façade cladding solutions. 
 
Reflections 
 
It is important to note that if application case 2 is used for comparative LCA studies, the functional 
equivalence must be assured. There is no built-in functionality showing technical functionalities such 
as U-values, fire resistance parameters and static attributes. U-values for all constructions were 
assumed to live up to the standards defined in BR18, since this is explained in the LCAByg 5.0 guide 
(BUILD, 2020). Application case 2 only focusses on embodied environmental impact from the 
materials used in the building and disregards the operational energy. The operational energy 
demand is a central part of LCA on buildings and the materials chosen in the model will naturally 
have an impact on the operational energy demand.  
 
4.4.3. 
Application case 3 –Variation study of construction products 
 
Application case 3 is similar to case 2 and is designed to focus on the second and third design loop 
in the early design phase, were façade strategies, plans and sections are created. Application case 
3 is also designed as a variation study. The difference from application 2 is that application case 3 
focuses on variation studies on product level. The application case only includes products from 
LCAByg’s predefined product library. Figure 4.30 presents an overview of the processes and tools 
included in application case 3. 
 
 
Figure 4.30.: Process overview in application case 3 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
71 
 
The Application case is once again designed with a grasshopper frontend and include 3 main 
steps: 
 
1. Defining the construction  
2. Defining the products included in the construction 
3. Open the model in LCAByg 5.0 
 
Step 1, includes 5 sub-steps: 
 
1. Selecting construction category 
2. Selecting the quantity to be examined 
3. Name the construction 
4. Defining the unit 
5. Defining the construction layer 
 
Step 2, includes 4 sub-steps for each product: 
 
1. Selecting the product from LCAByg’s predefined product library 
2. Selecting the quantity of product 
3. Selecting the unit 
4. Selecting the reference service period of the product 
 
In figure 4.31., the 3-main steps and the 5 and 4 sub-steps for application case 3 is presented. 
The inputs for the two sub-steps processes are listed in table 4.8. and 4.9. 
 
==PAGE:76==
72 
 
 
Figure 4.31.: The 3 front-end main steps: 1: Define construction, 2: Define Product, 3: Open model in 
LCAByg.  
Step 1 sub-steps: 1: Select category, 2: Select amount, 3: Name construction, 4: Define unit for 
construction, 5: Define LCAByg layer.  
Step 2 sub-steps: 1: Select product, 2: Select amount, 3: Select Unit, 4: Define reference service period for 
the product 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
73 
 
Table 4.8.: Input for defining construction 
 
Input 
Input type 
Step 1 
Category 
LCAByg category from dropdown 
menu 
Step 2 
Amount 
Numerical 
Step 3 
Name 
String 
Step 4 
Unit 
‘KG’, ‘M’, ‘M2’, ‘M3’ or ‘Pcs’ 
Step 5 
Layer 
1, 2 or 3 
 
Table 4.9.: Input for defining products 
 
Input 
Input type 
Step 1 
Product 
LCAByg category from dropdown 
menu 
Step 2 
Amount 
Numerical 
Step 3 
Unit 
‘KG’, ‘M’, ‘M2’, ‘M3’ or ‘Pcs’ 
Step 4 
Reference service period 
Numerical 
 
A construction in LCAByg 5.0 is defined as a bundle of products. In application case 1 and 2, 
predefined construction from the LCAByg 5.0 library was used. In the predefined constructions, the 
bundles of products are already embedded. Application case 3 is designed to examine one 
construction and alter the bundle of products inside the construction. Figure 4.32. shows how the 
categories and products from LCAByg are implemented in application case 3. 
 
 
Figure 4.32.: LCAByg categories and products  
==PAGE:78==
74 
 
When the construction is defined, a unit is selected. This is the unit that the construction is measured 
in. E.g. a façade wall would be measured in m2 and a beam would be measured in meter. When 
defining the products embedded in the construction another unit is selected. This is the unit for the 
quantity of product. It is important to understand that the product unit is related to the construction 
unit. The product unit should be understood as: How much product per construction. An example 
for understanding how the construction and product units is related is presented: 
 
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡= 𝑚3
𝑚2 
 
300 𝑚𝑚 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝑤𝑜𝑜𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= 0,3 𝑚3 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝑤𝑜𝑜𝑙
1 𝑚2 𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙
 
 
The example illustrates that the product unit is used to define the thickness of mineral wool. 
 
 
Figure 4.33.: The product unit is related to the construction unit 
 
The construction, product and category process flows are presented in figure 4.34. The top picture 
shows the Grasshopper frontend. The middle picture is the backend, where the LCAByg 5.0 
integration tool with the Json-file templates is displayed. The bottom picture is the LCAByg interface, 
which shows that a building element in the selected category, a construction defined from the input 
and a product defined from the input is created in the LCAByg 5.0 model. 
==PAGE:79==
75 
 
 
Figure 4.34.: The Grasshopper frontend, Grasshopper Backend with Json templates and the inputs to 
LCAByg building model. 
==PAGE:80==
76 
 
The final step in the 3-step front-end process in application case 3 is to open the model in LCAByg. 
The LCAByg 5.0 integration tool is used to transfer the data to LCAByg automatically. LCAByg 5.0 
can be opened by pressing “true” in the last step on the grasshopper canvas and the model is opened 
in LCAByg by selecting the “Bygningsdel 2” in case in the “Open new” tab. 
 
The results can now be reviewed and downloaded from LCAByg in a spreadsheet format. Testing a 
new variation of the construction can be done quickly by changing one of the products or the product 
attributes in the Grasshopper frontend. The LCAByg model is updated by opening “Bygningsdel 2” 
again. 
 
An example of a variation study with application case 3, could be to examine the environmental 
impact from 2 different insulation products in layer 2 (structural/insulation layer) in a façade wall. 
The construction is defined by selecting the “Yddervægge” category, selecting “1” in the amount 
input, selecting m2 as the unit, naming the construction and selecting layer 2. All the products 
embedded in the layer with amounts, units and reference service life are then defined defined. If all 
products kept fixed and only the insulation product is changed, it is possible to examine the 
environmental impact only from the different insulation material solutions.  
 
Reflections 
 
It is important to note that if application case 3 is used for comparative LCA studies, the functional 
equivalence must be assured. There is no built-in functionality showing technical attributes such as 
U-values, fire resistance parameters and static attributes.  
 
As proposed in the example of variation study on product level, it is important that the practitioner 
examines the thermal conductivity of the 2 insulation materials and makes sure that the material 
amount input for the 2 different products will result in the same thermal properties. Application case 
3 only focusses on embodied environmental impact from the materials used in the building and 
disregards the operational energy. The operational energy demand is a central part of LCA on 
buildings and the materials chosen in the model will naturally have an impact on the operational 
energy demand. 
 
4.4.4. 
Application case 4 – Excel spreadsheet import 
 
Application case 4 is different from the first three, as it is not specifically targeted to the early design 
phase as the first three application cases are. Application case 4 is a biproduct of competition project 
at C.F. Møller. The competition project and stakeholders engaged in the project is anonymised due 
to confidentiality concerns.  
 
The project required the team involved to present a strong digital collaborative strategy for the 
whole building process, including processes related to sustainability. It was decided by the team to 
use the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool developed in this thesis, to show that the team was able to 
==PAGE:81==
77 
 
integrate 3D models and LCA calculations. In the competition project, it was required to hand-in a 
Revit model, representing a part of the building, to show the collaboration between different 
stakeholders through the model. The Revit model was designed with generic objects and dRofus 
(dRofus, 2020) was used to manage all material data for the Revit model.  
 
A report template is created in dRofus and an excel spreadsheet with relevant and structured data 
is extracted from dRofus. Data is loaded into Grasshopper through an excel-reader component. In 
grasshopper, a similar backend structure as the one presented in application case 3, was created 
and the data is transferred to LCAByg 5.0 with the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool. Figure 4.35. presents 
an overview of the processes included in application case 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.35.: Process overview in application case 4 
 
Application case 4 is designed with a grasshopper frontend and have 4 main steps in the frontend: 
 
1. Load the excel spreadsheet from dRofus 
2. Press “true” to write data from excel to Grasshopper 
3. Select the construction elements for the different categories 
4. Open the model in LCAByg 5.0 
 
==PAGE:82==
78 
 
 
Figure 4.36: The 4 frontend steps. 1: Select excel file, 2: Press “true”, 3: Select the construction elements 
for each category, 4: Open the model in LCAByg 
 
Before going through the steps in the frontend presented in figure 4.36., a data extract (the input 
for step 1 in the frontend) from dRofus is generated. As mentioned, the Grasshopper backend was 
constructed similarly to application case 3, with the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool included. The same 
input for product and construction must be defined. The input was removed from the Grasshopper 
frontend and implemented as input in dRofus. The amount of construction, e.g. square meter of an 
interior wall, is calculated automatically from the generic objects in the Revit model. The practitioner 
defines the product attributes for the generic objects in dRofus manually. LCAByg 5.0 predefined 
product library was used to define the products in the model. In figure 4.37, a process overview of 
the dRofus data extract and Grasshopper import functionality is displayed. 
 
==PAGE:83==
79 
 
 
Figure 4.37.: A report from a template is generated from dRofus and loaded into Grasshopper. The 
construction elements in the report are selected for each LCAByg category. 
 
In figure 4.38 the connection of the backend developed for application case 4, the information 
derived from the dRofus data extract and the connection to LCAByg 5.0 is presented. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
80 
 
 
Figure 4.38.: Connection of dRofus information, the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool backend and the LCAByg 5.0 
calculation model 
 
The final step in the four step Grasshopper frontend process is to open the building model in LCAByg 
5.0. by pressing “true” in the last step on the grasshopper canvas. The model is opened in LCAByg 
by selecting “Project” in the “Open new” tab. 
 
In the competition project, an example with only one construction element was created, to show 
the potential of the integration between BIM models and a LCA tool. The construction element that 
was transferred from Revit, over dRofus and Grasshopper to LCAByg 5.0 was an interior non-
loadbearing wall. The LCAByg 5.0 building model with the construction element is presented in figure 
4.39. 
==PAGE:85==
81 
 
 
 
Figure 4.39.: Building model with on construction element imported to LCAByg 5.0 
 
The results can now be reviewed and downloaded from LCAByg in spreadsheet format. If changes 
are made in the inputs in DRofus, a new data extract must be generated and loaded into 
Grasshopper. After it is loaded into Grasshopper, the model can be updated in LCAByg by “Project” 
in the “Open new” tap again. 
 
Reflections 
 
Application case 4 only focusses on the transfer of material data including bill of quantities and 
material attributes from a Revit model to LCAByg 5.0 with the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool that was 
developed for this thesis. For a full LCA study, operational energy demand must be entered manually 
in the “Bygning og drift” tap in LCAByg 5.0. DGNB-DK 2020 and FBK requires the results from a 
BE18 calculation as input in the operational energy (Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2020).  
 
Furthermore, phase A4 (transport to construction) and A5 (construction) must be included to 
conduct a full LCA in accordance with the requirements in FBK (Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 
2020). There is no embedded functionality for checking whether the quantities are correct. It is 
highly recommended to check for errors in the bill of quantities before publishing any results using 
application case 4. Further development of application case 4, would be to include the import of 
data from EPDs for products used in the actual construction. 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
82 
 
4.5. 
Evaluation of tool and applications cases  
 
In the previous section, a tool and 4 applications of the tool were presented. The tool functions as 
an integration between Grasshopper and LCAByg 5.0. The applications of the tool display the many 
implementation possibilities and thus, the great flexibility of the tool. As mentioned previously, the 
goal for the development of the tool and application cases was to cover as many as the needs, fulfil 
criteria and solve the challenges defined in the user needs analysis and early design phase analysis.  
 
In the following sections, the tool’s, and applications’ ability to cover the criteria, needs and solve 
challenges are presented. First a presentation of what exact challenges/criteria each applications 
case and the tool are covering is presented. Next the tool and application cases are evaluated by 
Collin, Juul and Marsh.  
 
4.5.1. 
Solving challenges and fulfilling needs 
 
In section 4.1.7., the challenges and needs for working with LCA in the early design phase were 
presented and defined with a status of either high, medium, or low. An assessment of whether the 
identified challenges are solved with the developed tool and application cases is presented in table 
4.10. The green colour implies that the challenge is solved. The sand colour means that part of the 
challenge is solve. The red colour indicates that the challenge is not solved. 
 
Table 4.10.: Assessment of challenges solved. Green = Solved. Sand = Partly solved. Red = Not solved. 
 
Tools 
Data 
Workflow 
High 
Rhino is used at CFM and 
BIG for early phase. Current 
practise = Revit models. 
Detailed data for an 
unspecific building design 
Manual data entry in LCA 
tools 
LCAByg is the only tool used 
for Danish projects 
Including same phases as in 
DGNB 
Time consuming to make 
LCA = LCA only carried out 
in later phases 
Medium 
Different approaches to the 
extraction of bill of quantities 
Data transparency 
Different workflows in early 
phase and detailed design 
phase 
Low 
User Interface 
Using EPDs in early phase 
Reporting 
 
Maintenance of databases 
 
 
Application case 1 integrated a parametric model with Rhino. Thus, solving the challenge of Revit 
not being used in the early design phase. All three interviewees mentioned that LCAByg was the 
desired LCA calculation tool for Danish project. The scope of this thesis is limited to LCA in a Danish 
context, thus fulfilling the need for the LCA tool. Each interviewee mentioned a different approach 
to the extraction of quantity data from models. In application case 1 the quantity data is calculated 
automatically, and one does not need to engage with a bill of quantity. This solves the challenges 
==PAGE:87==
83 
 
with extraction of quantity data. A simple user interface in the Grasshopper front-end was developed. 
Thus, solving the challenges of handling input data in a simple way. The user interface was only 
developed for the application cases and not for the actual tool. Creating a simple user experience 
with the tool itself would allow for a solved challenged regarding user interface.  
 
Within the data category in table 4.10, two challenges were prioritised as “high”. The first was the 
paradox of defining specific data for construction elements while the building design is still uncertain. 
With application case 1, it is possible to change the building design and create several iterations 
within a very short time. By using LCAByg’s predefined construction library to create a library of 
finished construction elements and implementing them in the Grasshopper frontend, it was possible 
to use data representing typical constructions with a high degree of detail. This solves the challenge 
of working with unspecified building design and a high-level data precision. Using LCAByg and the 
predefined libraries allows for the use of the same system boundaries as required in DGNB. All 
predefined products in LCAByg have a waste-scenario included. This allows for early phase 
assessments to be close the precision of LCA in detailed phases. Thus, solving the challenge of which 
phases to include and bridging the gap between early phase and detailed phase LCA. Using LCAByg’s 
predefined libraries also allows for full transparency. Each product is linked up with a phase, that 
contains an URL-link to the exact product and phase that is being used from Ökobau. It is thus 
possible to create a full overview of the material inventory, even in the early design phase. This 
solves the issue of data transparency. Two challenges where categorised as “low”. The 
implementation of EPDs in the early design phase was not developed. The development of such 
functionality will be reflected in chapter “5. Discussion”. The other challenge was the maintenance 
of libraries. By using LCAByg predefined products constructions, the responsibility for maintenance 
of the libraries is taken away from the practitioner and handled by the software developer, in this 
case BUILD. For application case 1, a library of predefined construction elements was developed to 
simplify the input parameters. This library needs to be updated if new construction element types 
are added. The challenge is thus only partly solved. 
 
In the workflow category in table 4.10., time consuming processes and manual data entry were 
defined as high priority challenges. The LCAByg integration tool and application cases solves these 
two challenges. Application case 1 allows for several iterations of geometry or construction element 
data to be examined in very limited time. Application case 2 and 3 allows for the examination of 
different construction and products and thus opens for quickly iterating variation studies in LCAByg 
5.0. Application case 4 solves the challenge of bridging the gap between early design phase and 
detailed design phase. It is the same tool that is used to create the connection in all four application 
cases. The last challenge, which was categorised as “low”, is the reporting issues. It was mentioned 
by Juul and Collin, that the post-processing of results is important to communicate message 
(Appendix A and B) and use the results for decision making. The reporting challenge is not solved. 
It was only considered a minor challenge because Collin and Juul explained the reporting depends 
on the company. Each company will have a different style of communicating the results. Thus, 
developing a generic reporting format was found unnecessary. 
 
==PAGE:88==
84 
 
In table 4.11., the criteria defined from the analysis of the early design workflow at C.F. Møller LAB 
is presented. Next to each criterion, the four application cases (AC) are listed with a green, sand, or 
red colour. Green means that the application case meets the criteria, sand that it partly meets the 
criteria and red indicates that the application case does not meet the criteria in the design loop. 
 
Table 4.11.: Criteria defined from the early design phase workflow analysis. 
 
Design loop 1 
AC 
Design loop 2 
AC 
Design loop 3 
AC 
Type of model 
analysis 
Massing 
concepts 
AC1 
Variation study 
of a building 
part (façade) 
AC1 
Variation study 
of a building 
part (sections) 
AC1 
AC2 
AC2 
AC2 
AC3 
AC3 
AC3 
AC4 
AC4 
AC4 
Time 
Several 
iterations 
within 1 week 
AC1 
Several 
iterations 
within 1 week 
AC1 
Several 
iterations 
within 1 week 
AC1 
AC2 
AC2 
AC2 
AC3 
AC3 
AC3 
AC4 
AC4 
AC4 
Technology 
(tools) 
Rhinoceros + 
Grasshopper 
AC1 
Rhinoceros + 
Grasshopper 
AC1 
Rhinoceros + 
Grasshopper 
AC1 
AC2 
AC2 
AC2 
AC3 
AC3 
AC3 
AC4 
AC4 
AC4 
 
The assessments presented in table 4.11. shows that with all four application cases, all criteria for 
the three design loops in the early design phase are met. Application case 1 solves design loop 1’s 
model requirement and application case 2 and 3 solves the variation study requirement in design 
loop 2 and 3. Application case 1 was defined as partly meeting the criteria in design loop 2 and 3. 
The application was not specifically developed to assess a single building part, but by keeping all 
construction elements fixed and changing one, it is possible to assess the impact from single 
construction elements of a whole building in the early design phase. Application case 4 was not 
developed for the early design phase and does not meet the requirements for any model type. With 
Application case 1-3 it is possible to examine several iterations within a short amount of time, thus 
meeting the requirement of being able to test several iterations within a week. With application case 
4 new iterations can also be generated quickly, because all model data entry is happening 
automatically. The challenge lies within the work prior to using application case 4. All four cases 
were developed in Grasshopper, thus all fulfilling the technology requirement defined in table 4.11. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
85 
 
4.5.2. 
Validating the functionalities of the tool and application cases 
 
The tool and application cases were presented for the three interviewees Christine Collin, Rambøll, 
Katrine Juul, BIG and Rob Marsh, C.F. Møller Architects. The evaluation was conducted as a 
structured interview and was conducted after a presentation of the four application cases. They were 
asked to evaluate the presented material in three categories: 
 
- 
Speed - The ability to test several iterations quickly with the proposed application cases. 
- 
Precision - The approach to data management in the application cases. In all four cases, 
predefined libraries from LCAByg 5.0 were used. 
- 
Flexibility - The ability to easily change parameters and tailor the tool and application to a 
specific project. 
 
In the following section, key points highlighted by the interviewees for each category is presented. 
 
Speed 
 
All three interviewees evaluated the application cases as acceptable with respects to speed or the 
ability to test several iterations within a design process. Collin mentions that “I think it looked really 
fast” (Appendix D). She raised concerns about time related to iterating through more complex 
geometries than the shoebox model presented. Juul mentioned that application case 1-3 looks 
promising because of the ability to iterate through solution in less than one day: “In the first phases, 
it is super important, especially in the competition phase, that you can do this in a few days. It 
should preferably be maximum one day of sparring per. Iteration.” (Appendix E). Marsh expressed 
that the speed was indeed acceptable because the previous alternative was not to do the early phase 
mass model analysis. “You do not do those types of analyses because it is too slow on an entire 
building.” (Appendix F). Collin and Marsh both mentioned that application case 2 and 3 conducting 
variation studies are probably the same or better with respect to speed. “Then the question is 
whether you can do it just as quickly inside LCA - I'm not sure you can” (Appendix D). “Construction 
element analysis - It must be the same or faster.” (Appendix F) For the application case 4, Collin 
mentioned that the time-consuming processes still lies ahead of the application. “With the part that 
works with the slightly more detailed part, I also think a bit that the big work is ahead of the LCA 
module here” (Appendix D). Marsh stated that application case 4, developed for the detailed design 
phase will have an advantage on speed because the approach is more systematic. “Then you also 
have the opportunity to have better systematics about it.” … “Yes, it definitely has an advantage on 
speed” (Appendix F).  
 
Precision 
 
All three interviewees evaluated the application cases to work with a high degree of precision and 
was found relevant for the early phases. Collin mentioned that: “The handling of data, I would say, 
is almost as accurate as it can get.”  (Appendix D). She expresses a concern about the quantity data 
==PAGE:90==
86 
 
handling. “It is more on the model quantities not in material or the LCA data, but the quantities I 
would check.” (Appendix D). Marsh explains that it is as accurate as working with LCAByg directly 
and mentions that the data approach was more accurate than what can be expected in the early 
design phase: “Yes, it is, or more precisely” (Appendix F). Juul indicated that the data management 
approach was acceptable for the early design phases. She also mentioned that it could, in some 
competition projects, be desirable to use other products than the ones included in LCAByg, to make 
the project stand-out. “But in a competition, you also want to stand out.” (Appendix E). Marsh 
expressed the same concern but targeted his concern to application case 4. For the detailed design 
phase, he said, it should be possible to adjust the standard constructions. “What I think you do is 
that you take some solution you have used before and then you make an adjustment.” (Appendix 
F). 
 
Flexibility 
 
Collin, Juul and Marsh all highlighted that because the application cases and the tool was developed 
in Grasshopper, the flexibility was evaluated to be high. Marsh states that: “(Flexibility is) High 
because it is possible to make adjustments, but that is the whole advantage of Grasshopper in the 
way that you can make those adjustments to the project as needed” (Appendix F). Collin: “I really 
like the Grasshopper format, because you can also change it yourself, if you are sitting with 
something specific, it then requires that you have some knowledge in Grasshopper.” (Appendix D). 
Juul also expressed that Grasshopper is a good format for flexibility, but she addresses a concern as 
to whether some parameters in the application cases are too open. “It's cool that it's Grasshopper 
because you can change a lot. I would just be afraid that some users did not make sense of it, so 
there must also be something that is locked.” (Appendix E). This raises a question of who the 
practitioner of the applications cases and the tool is designed for. In chapter “1. Introduction”, it 
was described how an engineer is an integrated part of the design team in the integrated design 
process approach. For the use of the application cases, it is proposed to have extensive knowledge 
about LCA.  Colin raised a concern regarding the simplicity of the building model, on the matter of 
speed. Marsh mentions that: “It is significantly easier to go from a shoebox and up in complexity 
than it is if you made a very complex model and then needed to simplify it.”… “The problem with a 
lot of software development is that it starts too complex and then you never finish.” (Appendix F). 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
87 
 
5. Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
DISCUSSION 
==PAGE:92==
88 
 
The previous chapter presented the findings from a user-need and early design phase analysis, a 
tool including four application cases of the tool and finally an evaluation of the results. In the 
following chapter, the results and research methods are discussed. First, the properties of the tool 
and application cases, the limitations and potential for further development is discussed. And 
secondly, the research methods being used in this thesis is discussed.  
 
5.1. 
The results 
 
The result of this thesis is a tool that functions as an integration between the VPL, Grasshopper, and 
LCA calculation tool, LCAByg 5.0. LCAByg is designed specifically for use in the Danish building 
industry, thus limiting the tools functionality to work only with projects based in Denmark. This 
limitation was already stated in the scope of the thesis, outlining that the research will be conducted 
based on LCA in the early design phase on Danish projects. The findings from the user-need analysis, 
showed that some of the stakeholders also had a desire of creating a tool that works with projects 
based outside Denmark. Juul, mentioned that only 10 % or less of the project in BIG are based in 
Denmark (Appendix B). She stated that when LCA is conducted on projects based in Denmark, 
LCAByg is the tool that is being used. Stating that the tool and the application cases that were 
developed in this thesis, fulfil the entire needs for LCA in the early design phase in the Danish 
building industry can be discussed. If the scope of the thesis is considered, it is argued that the tool 
does fulfil the needs, since it is designed for early phase LCA on danish projects. This leads to the 
conclusion that the tool and application cases does fulfil the needs for LCA in early design on Danish 
projects but does not necessarily fulfil the need from Danish companies if the Company’s core 
business is based outside Denmark. 
 
The tool and the four application cases were developed to only include predefined LCAByg libraries 
for constructions and materials. Juul stated that in some competition projects it would be desirable 
to stand out using a product different from the competitors (Appendix E). She argued that, if 
stakeholders are to only use the LCAByg database of products, nobody would be able to stand out. 
In an article brought in the Danish online media, Altinget, senior researcher from BUILD, Harpa 
Birgisdóttir, states that a study comparing the environmental impact data from four EPDs (wood, 
steel, fibercement and concrete) with the environmental impact data of the same materials from the 
LCAByg library of products, only deviated 1-4 % (Birgisdóttir, 2021). Thus, implying that the LCAByg 
library already covers 96-99 % of the data in its current form. 
 
The Json-file import structure in LCAByg 5.0 allows for import of data for customised products 
(EPDs). A fifth prototype application case for the import of custom products was developed but was 
not finalised and included in the results of the thesis due to a lower priority compared to the other 
functionalities of the tool and application cases. Furthermore, with the release of an updated version 
of LCAByg in February 2021, LCAByg 5.1.0.6., the import of EPDs from EPD Denmark is integrated 
as an embedded functionality in the tool (BUILD, 2020). For future development of the tool and 
application cases developed in this thesis, it would be desirable to investigate the possibility of 
including the EPDs from EPD Denmark and other relevant EPD databases. Moreover, the final 
development of the prototype for importing custom products would allow for connecting with other 
==PAGE:93==
89 
 
EPD databases and potentially all digital development for management of environmental impact 
data. Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen in Denmark is currently investigating the possibility for 
developing digital material- and building passports (Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019). Results 
from a study conducted at the Department of Civil Engineering at DTU showed that respondents 
from the Danish building industry suggested linking data from EPDs to a material passport 
(Bjerregaard & Negendahl, 2021). If material passports, in the future, should include EPD data, it 
would be desirable to link a custom product import to the application cases developed in this thesis. 
 
The tool and the four application cases were developed as a one-way integration with LCAByg 5.0. 
Environmental impact results for the building model, is found inside the LCAByg 5.0 interface. There 
is no built-in feedback loop of the results from LCAByg 5.0 back to Grasshopper. This is a limitation 
of the tool. Negendahl (2015) describes how the integrated dynamic model approach can utilize BPS 
tools in the early decision phase and thus make a basis for consequences-based decisions. The 
integrated dynamic model features, according to Negendahl’s (2015) description, a feedback loop 
from the BPS tool to the VPL environment. Feeding back the results from a BPS tool allows for the 
integration of visual feedback in the design environment, making the consequences of changing 
parameters more apparent to the designer. Furthermore, a result feedback loop would also enable 
the possibility of creating parametrical optimisation cases for the building model. With Negendahl’s 
definition it could be argued whether the tool developed in this thesis is an integrated dynamic 
model. The missing feedback loop in the tool and application cases should be found in the limited 
functionalities of LCAByg 5.0. The only possibility to extract the environmental impact results data 
is from a spreadsheet downloaded from the “Resultater”-tap in the LCAByg interface. It would be 
possible to manually extract result data from LCAByg 5.0 and load the spreadsheet data back into 
Grasshopper. But, because this loop would be handled manually, it would not allow for the 
development of optimisation cases. Furthermore, it was found impractical and adverse to integrate 
a manual feedback loop as it was quicker to simply read of the results in the downloaded spreadsheet 
or from the “Resultater”-tap in LCAByg 5.0.  
 
Future development of the tool and application cases includes investigating the creation of a 
feedback loop and developing the application cases to function fully as integrated dynamic models. 
Some of the responsibility for the development of the feedback loop is placed on the developer of 
LCAByg 5.0, BUILD. A proposal for the developer could be to integrate a headless result saving 
function. Saving the results without interacting with the LCAByg 5.0 interface could potentially 
activate the missing feedback loop. And thus, enable the tools ability to function as a fully integrated 
dynamic model. This would also allow for optimisation models to be created. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
90 
 
5.2. 
The methodology 
 
The general research method is based on the design thinking approach and supports the overall 
project process approach presented in chapter “1. Introduction”. Here it was explained that the 
strategy was to divide the project into two phases. First, a background research phase including a 
thorough user-centric analysis and secondly, a design/development phase with criteria defined from 
the findings in phase 1. The reason for choosing this strategy was to develop a user-centric product. 
 
The user need analysis is based on a semi-structured interview method with 3 stakeholders from 
industry leading companies in the Danish building sector. The semi-structured interview method 
allows for a flexible interview where the interviewer and interviewee can go off-script and explore 
different views on a topic and allow for a deep dive into certain areas of interest. Thus, generating 
a high degree of detailed information. It can be argued that the semi-structured interview method 
makes it difficult to compare answers, because the interviewees will lead the interview in different 
directions. Furthermore, the semi-structured interview method is time consuming. It requires prober 
planning and involves open-ended questions. The post-interview transcription is also time 
consuming. The time aspect played a relevant role in this thesis, as that was one of the reasons for 
only interviewing 3 stakeholders. 
 
A central discussion topic is whether the chosen stakeholders represent the point-of-view for the 
relevant Danish building industry stakeholders in general. All three stakeholder are employed in large 
companies with a large revenue stream, many resources and potentially a high degree of 
development within the research area of this thesis. This could potentially raise a question of 
reliability. It could be questioned whether smaller businesses will have the same perspective on 
user-needs as the three stakeholders interviewed in this thesis. The interview with the three 
stakeholders showed that they all had different needs and approaches to LCA and the design 
process. Thus, including a larger group of stakeholders from the danish building industry would have 
created a more generalised point-of-view and potentially impacted the results of this thesis. A more 
generalised point-of-view could have been achieved by conducting more interviews, either following 
a structured interview method, or making user-surveys. It is unsure to whether this approach would 
have led to the development of the proposed results because the deep dive into the issues and 
challenges would have been less explored. A conclusion to the discussion is that the goal is achieved, 
but further developments of the tool and application cases would include testing the prototypes with 
other stakeholders in the Danish building industry and smaller businesses. This would generate a 
more holistic perspective on the results and potentially lead to a better product. 
 
Another question of reliability that must be raised is whether the scope of the thesis predefines the 
choice of tools used for the development. It could be argued that selecting a “Danish building 
industry”-scope predetermines that LCAByg will be used as the LCA calculation tool. It was important 
for the author of this thesis to use a proper approach to selecting tools and thus not predetermining 
LCAByg as the LCA calculation tool to use. The literature review pointed towards the use of LCAByg. 
The results from the stakeholder interviews also pointed towards selecting LCAByg. And finally, the 
sustainability certification that was examined, DGNB, and the voluntary sustainability class, FBK, 
==PAGE:95==
91 
 
pointed towards the use of LCAByg. It was evaluated that a proper selecting process disables the 
reliability issues. 
 
Finally, a discussion of the evaluation and validation methods of the tool and application cases is 
important to raise. From the user need analysis and analysis of the early design process, a list of 
challenges and criteria for the development phase was defined. The tool and application cases were 
evaluated based on the ability to successfully solve the challenges and include the defined criteria. 
Furthermore, the tool and application cases were validated within three important success criteria. 
The validation was based on a structured interview method. All evaluation and validations of the tool 
was based on qualitative analysis. It could be argued that the tool and application cases lack further 
quantitative validation and that this could impact the final evaluation. Further development of tool 
would include validation methods such as a prober integration test set-up.  
 
Berger-Vieweg (2020) presents the development of a similar simplified early phase LCA tool, also 
developed with Rhino and Grasshopper. In the evaluation of accuracy, he compares the 
environmental impact results from the early phase LCA tool and final LCA cases. For further 
development and validation of application case 1, this validation method is proposed. 
 
When the tool and application cases were evaluated with the interviewees, Collin raised a concern 
on whether the quantities are correct in application case 1. Application case 1 is based on early 
design phase mass models and includes automatic calculation of the models bill of quantity. A study 
validating that these quantities are imported correctly would also further strengthen the tool. A 
method could be to do a manual entry in LCAByg and compare it with the automated process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
92 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
CONCLUSSION 
==PAGE:97==
93 
 
The aim of this thesis was to enable investigations of environmental impact from the life cycle of 
buildings in the early design phases. In the early design phase, many parameters are undecided, 
and design changes happens constantly. When the building design enters more detailed phases, 
changes to the design are time consuming because of the high level of detail and are thus expensive. 
It was decided to use LCA for environmental impact assessment framework. Two goals were defined. 
One was to create better workflows, and another was to create better tools to assist the workflow. 
The proposal for a better workflow with better tools should ultimately utilize LCA in the early design 
phase. A scope was defined and included only the Danish building industry and danish projects. 
 
The research was divided into two phases. The first phase included a research of the current 
environment workflow and tools used for LCA and an examination of the early design phase 
workflow. Findings from a literature review and three in-depth interviews with industry professionals, 
from leading companies in the Danish building industry, showed that there was a strong desire for 
implementing LCA in the early design phases to inform clients and meet technical requirements in 
more detailed phases of the design. The results highlighted a list of challenges when working with 
LCA. The challenges were used as the guiding principle for what needed to be solved in the second 
research phase. Furthermore, the findings pointed towards using LCAByg as the LCA calculation tool 
to engage with in the further development of tool and workflow.  
 
Findings from an analysis of the early design workflow at C.F. Møller Architects showed that a typical 
competition project consists of three design loops with several iterative processes embedded in each 
design loop. To develop a viable and feasible workflow for LCA in the early design phase, it needed 
to be tailored specifically to the existing early design workflow. That meant using current practise 
and tools. The findings showed that Rhinoceros and Grasshopper was the primary tools used for 
early design phase modelling. 
 
The second research phase included the development of a tool to assist the early design phase 
workflow. The tool is a dynamic coupling of Grasshopper and LCAByg 5.0. With the tool, it is possible 
to automatically transfer data from a model in Grasshopper to a calculation model in LCAByg 5.0. 
Using Grasshopper as a middleware connection also allowed for coupling Rhino geometries and thus 
automate processes from design model to calculation model. To reach the goal of creating better 
workflow and tools, four application cases of the tool was developed. The boundaries of the cases 
were directly derived from the challenges identified from the stakeholder interviews and criteria 
defined from the early design phases analysis. All application cases were developed as Grasshopper 
scripts and included the LCAByg integration tool. 
 
Application case 1 was developed as a mass model study case. A simple shoebox model is defined 
in Grasshopper with a range of parameters to be altered. The library of predefined constructions 
from LCAByg 5.0 was embedded in the application case and it is possible to select construction types 
in Grasshopper. Once the building is defined in Grasshopper, all data is automatically transferred to 
LCAByg 5.0 and results are previewed in the LCAByg 5.0 interface. Application case 1 was developed 
specifically to assist the first design loop in the early design phase, where mass models are 
investigated in relation to context and program. Application case 2 and 3 were developed to assist 
==PAGE:98==
94 
 
the examination of single construction elements. With application case 2 it is possible to investigate 
the environmental impact from a single construction element using a functional-layer based 
approach. The application case is not coupled to a geometry model, thus inputting quantities is 
handled manually. Application case 3 was developed to examine the environmental impact from a 
single product in a construction. Application case 2 and 3 were developed specifically to assist the 
workflow in the design loop 2 and 3, where a building design becomes more detailed and façade, 
section and plans studies are carried out. Application case 4 was developed for a competition project 
at C.F. Møller architect and shows the high degree flexibility in the LCAByg 5.0 integration tool. 
Application case 4 showed that the tool could also be used for more detailed design phases with 
Revit models. Application case 4 proved that the developed tool solves the challenges identified in 
the gap between early design phase and detailed design phase modelling practice and workflow. 
 
The tool and the four application cases were carefully evaluated through the defined challenges and 
criteria defined in research phase 1. It is concluded that all challenges prioritised as “high” and 
“medium” were solved and all criteria for the early design phase workflow were met. Thus, solving 
the challenge of creating a desirable, feasible and viable product. Some of the challenges with lower 
priority were not solved. The use of EPD data was not developed and it was chosen not to focus on 
the reporting of results. A presentation of the workflow, with the application cases were conducted 
for the stakeholders who were interviewed in the first research phase. As part of the validation of 
the proposed tool and application cases, all three stakeholders evaluated the tool and application 
cases as acceptable with respect to speed, precision, and flexibility for the early design phase. Thus, 
further validating the feasibility and viability and the product. 
 
It is concluded that the goals of creating a better workflow, assisted by better tools for utilizing LCA 
in the early design phase were achieved and thus enables the overall aim of examining 
environmental impact from a building’s full life cycle in the early design phase. 
 
Further development of the application cases and the tool includes further validation studies, such 
as prober integration tests and comparative studies of environmental impact results from final LCA 
and early design phase LCA conducted with the application cases. Furthermore, the development of 
EPD data import in the early design phase is proposed. And finally, it is proposed to investigate the 
possibilities of developing a feedback loop from LCAByg back to Grasshopper for the application 
cases to function fully as integrated dynamic models. 
==PAGE:99==
95 
 
References 
ABR18. (2018). ALMINDELIGE BETINGELSER FOR RÅDGIVNING OG BISTAND I BYGGE- OG 
ANLÆGSSEKTOREN. ABR18. 
Berger Vieweg, L. J. (2020). Analysing embodied and operational carbon footprint of early stage 
building designs. DTU. 
BIONOVA. (2020). OneClick LCA. Retrieved from: https://www.oneclicklca.com/ 
Birgisdóttir, H. (2021). Seniorforsker om CO2-belastning: Der skal introduceres en ny disciplin i 
byggeriet. Retrieved from: Altinget: https://www.altinget.dk/artikel/seniorforsker-der-kan-
hentes-store-co2-reduktioner-i-byggebranchen 
Bjerregaard, L., & Negendahl, K. (2021). Udbud 2 - Materialepas og Bygningspas. Kongens 
Lyngby: Department of Civil Engineering, DTU. (MORE AUTHORS AND NOT 
PUBLISHED YET) 
BUILD. (October 2020). LCAByg (5.0). BUILD. Retrieved from: https://www.lcabyg.dk/download-
program 
CEN. (September 2008). Environmental Management - Life Cycle Assesment - Principles and 
framework (ISO 14040:2006). EN ISO 14040. 
CEN. (September 2008). Environmental Management - Life Cycle Assessment - Requirement and 
guidelines. EN ISO 14044. 
CEN. (March 2011). Sustainability of Construction Works - Assessment of Buildings - Part 2: 
Framework for the assessment of environmental performance. EN 15643-2. 
CEN. (2012). Sustainability of construction works - Assessment of environmental performance of 
buildings - Calculation method. EN 15978. 
CEN. (2013). Sustainability of construction works - Environmental product declaration - Core rules 
for the product category of construction product. EN 15804. 
Copernicus Europe Eyes on Earth. (January 2021). Copernicus: 2020 warmest year on record for 
Europe; globally, 2020 ties with 2016 for warmest year recorded. Retrieved from: 
Copernicus Climate Change Service: https://climate.copernicus.eu/copernicus-2020-
warmest-year-record-europe-globally-2020-ties-2016-warmest-year-recorded 
CAALA. (2020). CAALA. Retrieved from: https://caala.de/ 
Dansk Byggeindustri. (February 2021). Bæredygtighed: DGNB. Retrieved from: DGNB: 
https://www.danskbyggeindustri.dk/baeredygtighed/dgnb/ 
DK-GBC. (2020). DGNB-System Denmark. Bæredygtighedscertificering af Nybyggeri og omfattende 
renoveringer. 
dRofus. (2020). dRofus (2.5). Retrieved from: https://www.drofus.com/en/download 
Efeoglu, A., Møller, C., Boer, H., & Série, M. (2014). DESIGN THINKING: CHARACTERISTICS AND 
PROMISES.  
Energistyrelsen. (February 2021). Energi- og Klimapolitik: Fakta om dansk energi- og klimapolitik: 
Dansk klimapolitik. Retrieved from: Dansk klimapolitik: 
https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energi-klimapolitik/fakta-om-dansk-energi-
klimapolitik/dansk-klimapolitik 
==PAGE:100==
96 
 
European Comission. (February 2020). European Comission: Energy, Climate Change, 
Environment: Climate Action: Climate Change. Retrieved from: Climate change 
consequences: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/change/consequences_en 
European Comission. (February 2021). European Commission: Energy, Climate change, 
Environment: Climate Action: EU Action: International action on climate change: Climate 
negotiations. Retrieved from: Paris Agreement: 
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris_en 
European Commission - Joint Research Centre - Institute for Environment and Sustainability. 
(2010). International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook - General guide 
for Life Cycle Assessment - Detailed guidance. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the 
European Union. 
Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development. (2020). 
Ökobaudat. Retrieved from: Sustainable constructions information portal: 
https://www.oekobaudat.de/en.html 
Harvey, M. (2019). ThreejsExporter. Github. Retrieved from: https://github.com/meliharvey 
Heumann, A. (2018). Human. Food4rhino. Retrieved from: 
https://www.food4rhino.com/app/human 
Heumann, A. (2020). JSwan 1.2. Food4rhino. Retrieved from: 
https://www.food4rhino.com/app/jswan 
Hollberg, A. (2016). Parametric Life Cycle Assessment - Introducing a time efficient method. 
Weimar: Weimar: Fakultät Architektur und Urbanistik der Bauhaus-Universität. 
Jørgensen, E. B., Kanafani, K., Zimmermann, R. K., Sørensen, C. G., Birgisdóttir, H., & Rasmussen, 
F. N. (2020). Brugervejledning til LCAbyg version 5.0. Copenhagen: BUILD - Institut for 
Byggeri, By og Miljø, Aalborg Universitet. 
Kanafani, K., Zimmermann, R. K., Birgisdóttir, H., & Rasmussen, F. N. (2019). LCA i tidlig 
bygningsdesign. Copenhagen: Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, Aalborg Universitet. 
Löhnert, G., et. al. (2003). Task 23 - Optimization of Solar Energy Use in Large Buildings - Subtask 
B - Design Process Guidelines . Berlin: International Energy Agency. Solar Heating and 
Cooling Programme. 
Marsh, R. (2015). LCA profiles for building components: strategies for the early design process. 
Building Research & Information. 
Marsh, R., Rasmussen, F. N., & Birgisdóttir, H. (2018). Embodied Carbon Tool for Architects and 
Clients Early in the Design Process. Springer International Publishing. 
McNeel, R., & Associates. (2020). Rhinoceros 6. Retrieved from: https://www.rhino3d.com/ 
Meinel, C., & Leifer, L. (2011). Design Thinking: Understand - Improve - Apply. I C. Meinel, & L. 
Leifer, Design Thinking: Understand - Improve - Apply (s. 14-17). Springer. 
Minergie. (2014). Berechnung der Grauen Energie bei MINERGIE-A®, MINERGIE-ECO®, 
MINERGIE-P-ECO® UND MINERGIE-A-ECO® BAUTEN. St. Gallen: Zertifizierungsstelle 
MINERGIE-ECO®. Retrieved from: 
https://www.minergie.ch/media/berechnung_graue_energie_online_2014.pdf 
MIT. (2021). CDIO. Retrieved from: Educational Transformation through Technology at MIT: 
http://web.mit.edu/edtech/casestudies/cdio.html 
==PAGE:101==
97 
 
Negendahl, K. (2015). Building performance simulation in the early design stage: An introduction 
to integrated dynamic models. Automation in Construction. 
Negendahl, K. (2016). Consequence Based Design. An approach for integrating computational 
collaborative. Kongens Lyngby: Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil 
Engineering. 
Regeringens Klimapartnerskaber - Bygge- og anlægssektoren. (2020). Anbefalinger til regeringen 
fra Klimapartnerskabet for bygge- og anlægssektoren. Copenhagen: DI Byggeri. 
Sonne, F. H. (11. Oktober 2019). Byggeindustrien er en gigantisk byrde for klimaet: Hvordan gør vi 
den grønnere? Videnskab.dk. 
Sørensen, C. G., & Bruhn, S. (2020). Json guide for LCAbyg version 5.0. Copenhagen: BUILD - 
Institut for Byggeri, By og Miljø, Aalborg Universitet. 
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. (December 2019). 5. Mere bæredygtigt byggeri gennem 
digitalisering. Retrieved from: Byggeriet Digitalisering: 
https://byggerietsdigitalisering.dk/Mere-baeredygtigt-byggeri-gennem-digitalisering/Intro# 
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. (2020). Krav. Retrieved from: Livscyklusvurdering - bygningens 
samlede klimapåvirkning: https://baeredygtighedsklasse.dk/5-Krav-og-
vejledning/Livscyklusvurdering---bygningens-samlede-klimapaavirkning# 
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. (2020). Test og dokumentation af klassen. Retrieved from: Test 
og dokumentation af klassen: https://baeredygtighedsklasse.dk/3-Test-af-
klassen/Introside#test-og-dokumentation-af-klassen 
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. (February 2021). Bygningsreglement (BR18). Retrieved from: 
Energiforbrug (§ 250 - § 298): https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/11/Krav 
United Nations Climate Change. (February 2021). Process and meetings: The Paris Agreement. 
Retrieved from: Key aspects of the Paris Agreement: https://cop23.unfccc.int/process-and-
meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement/key-aspects-of-the-paris-agreement 
United Nations Climate Change. (February 2021). Process and Meetings: The Paris Agreement. 
Retrieved from: Paris Agreement - Status of Ratification: 
https://cop23.unfccc.int/process/the-paris-agreement/status-of-ratification 
Wheelwright, S. C. (1992). Revolutionizing Product Development: Quantum Leaps in Speed, 
Efficiency and Quality. New York: Free Press. 
World Green Building Council. (February 2021). Home: Advancing Net Zero: Embodied carbon call 
to action report. Retrieved from: Bringing Embodied Carbon Upfront: 
https://www.worldgbc.org/embodied-carbon 
Zimmermann, R. K., Andersen, C. E., Kanafani, K., & Birgisdóttir, H. (2020). Klimapåvirkning fra 60 
bygninger. Kongens Lyngby: Polyteknisk Boghandel og Forlag ApS. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
98 
 
Appendix 
Appendix A: Interview 1 – Christin Collin, Rambøll 
 
Interview  
Christine Collin, Senior Bæredygtighedskonsulent, Rambøll 
 
Introduktion 
Stilling, rolle, uddannelse, tidligere arbejde? 
Jeg hedder Christine Collin. Jeg har været i Rambøll i 3,5 år og sidder i bæredygtig, commisioning 
og indeklima. Ca. 50 % af afdelingen sidder med bæredygtighed. Vi har et certificeringsteam, der 
primært laver DGNB/LEED/Svanemærke og bæredygtighedsledelse fra start til slut i projekter og 
bygherrerådgivning. Mit team hedder life cycle engineering. Der laver vi livscyklus analyser og 
totaløkonomiske beregninger. Der har vi fokus på både LCA og LCC til certificeringsprojekter. Det 
kan også være variant studier hvor man sammenligner materiale eller bygningsdele fra konkurrence 
fase, i løbet af designfasen. Også i renoveringsprojekter. Det er meget bredt. Vi rådgiver også 
materialeproducenter i hvordan de gør sig gældende i certificeringsmarkedet. Vi laver også EPDer. 
Mange af dem der sidder i mit team har også et ben over i certificeringsteamet. Vi har et behov for 
at folk har en bred forståelse for bæredygtigt byggeri generelt. Men vi har også behov for folk der 
hardcore kan sidde og nørde ned i tal og have den rigtig metodiske forståelse når man skal lave en 
LCA. Det sidste team vi har i bæredygtigt, det er to upcoming teams. Det ene går på urbane 
projekter. Byområde certificering, blandt andet klimaplaner. Det er andet er social bæredygtighed, 
med post occupancy evaluation. Bæredygtig adfærds games og gamification. Det er rammen for 
hvor jeg sidder i Rambøll. Jeg sidder i Rambøll DK byggeri division. Før jeg kom til Rambøll sad jeg 
i et mindre rådgivende ingeniør firma på 15 mand og der var jeg konstruktions ingeniør. Der sad jeg 
8 måneder og projekterede beton og stål og fik der mit første DGNB projekt.  
Har du konstruktion som speciale? 
Jeg har en bachelor i byggeteknologi. Men var på udveksling og opdagede i München at der var 
noget der hed livscyklus vurderinger i 2013. Så kom jeg tilbage til DK og skulle skrive mit 
bachelorprojekt og fik fat i Peter Andreas Sattrup, som i dag er formand for Danske Ark, men han 
var på DTU dengang. Han syntes det var spændende med livscyklusvurderinger. Jeg var rundt og 
lave interviews om hvordan livscyklusvurderinger kunne bruges i de tidlige designfaser sammen med 
BIM. Jeg interviewede Lendager, En til En arkitekter og vandkunsten. På kandidat skiftet jeg til 
Architectural Engineering. Det var hele tiden planen, der fandtes bare ikke en bachelor da jeg 
startede på DTU. Her havde jeg integreret design fag, var igen på udveksling og fokusere på 
arkitektfag og skrev et speciale om et tool til tidlig design, som var parametrisk modellering af 
rammekonstruktioner, kombineret med konstruktionsberegninger på hvad skete der når du ændrede 
tværsnittet og når du ændre på forskellige parametre. Det gav et feedback på bæreevne og CO2 
udledning. Så man kunne bruge det real-time med arkitekten. Hvis du laver denne design ændring, 
så sket der sådan og sådan.  
 
 
==PAGE:103==
99 
 
Hvad var LCA beregningsmotoren i det? 
Der var ikke rigtig en LCA beregningsmotor i det. Ideen var at det skulle kobles på et script en anden 
havde lavet. Aleksander popovich. Han lavede på en boksmodel. Men jeg havde 
rammer/konstruktionsdelen. Så jeg kunne ikke bruge hans. Så jeg endte med at angive i kilo stål 
eller kilo beton og så lavede jeg LCA-beregningen ved siden af. Fordi det lykkedes aldrig at integrere 
alle de ting jeg havde gang i på det halve år. Men ideen var at vise en koalition mellem mængde og 
CO2 udledningen. Det fungerede som et fint pejlemærke til det tidlige design. Da jeg blev 
færdiguddannet i 2016 var der ikke nogen der syntes at konstruktionsingeniører og bæredygtighed 
det rimede på hinanden, så derfor fik jeg først job som konstruktionsingeniør var der i et halvt år 
ca. Så kom der et jobopslag i Rambøll om at de søgte en der vidste noget om materialer, 
bæredygtighed og LCA. Så har jeg været her siden. I 3,5 år. Det har så udviklet sig nu til at vi er et 
helt team der sidder og laver de her ting.  
Hvor mange sidder i i teamet? 
Fra jeg blev ansat i Rambøll i 2017, der var vi 3,5 fuldtidsmedarbejdere til bæredygtighed generelt. 
Hvad med internationalt? Og er der et sammenarbejde? 
Der har også været nogen internationalt. Vi begyndte at få sammenarbejde med dem i løbet af 
2018. Og sider da har vi haft en tæt sammenarbejde grundet nogle store internationale 
digitaliseringsprojekter i Rambøll. Nu er vi næsten 18 i Danmark. I forhold til livcyklusvurderings 
delen, kan man sige at jeg har hele tiden været her, men det første år brugte jeg næsten alt min 
tid på certificeringer. Det var meget få livscyklusvurderinger vi lavede på det tidspunkt. Jeg deltog i 
nogle forskellige følgegrupper til LCAByg og var involveret på mange ting. Så ansatte vi Lise i 2019, 
så ansatte vi igen i marts i år (2020), september i år (2020) og vi leder nu efter en til. Så det går 
ekstremt hurtigt. 
LCA generelt 
Hvorfor er det vigtigt at foretage LCA beregninger på bygninger? 
Det er sindssygt vigtigt at vi ved hvad det er vi bygger. Jeg ser det som et meget essentielt skridt 
at tage fra at nu har vi kigget på energiforbrug i bygningerne, som også har været kilden til den 
største udledning i vores byggeri til at vi nu åbner op og kigger på hele værdikæden af vores 
bygninger. Det er essentielt for at vi kan træffe de informerede valg. Hvad har det f.eks. af 
konsekvens at jeg bestiller min materialer fra Kina. Det kan godt være at de er billigere, men der er 
en anden afledt effekt af det. Og have en forståelse for at vi deindustrialiseret det danske samfund. 
Men det vi i virkeligheden har jeg gjort er at vi har flyttet det til nogle andre lande, som har en 
meget sortere energi grid end vi har. Og CO2 er jo globalt. Det er jo ikke noget vi bare kan styre 
her i DK og derfor er det enormt vigtigt at vi tager ansvar for hvad vi bidrager med, for nogen 
usynligt. Det er det vi skal gøre synligt. Og det kan man gøre ved at lave livscyklusvurderinger på 
byggerier.  
Hvad er grundlaget bag at i er gået fra at være 3 til at være 18 mand på forholdsvis kort 
tid? 
Det er nok en kombination af mange ting. Der er klart nogle bygherrer som er meget ambitiøse, det 
er typisk pensionsselskaber. I nogle lande er det også offentlige bygherrer. Det er det ikke 
nødvendigvis i DK. Men især i Norge, har statsbygg været en stor drivkraft i omstillingen. Men altså, 
de store pensionsselskaber med meget langsigtede mål har i en del år nu efterspurgt bæredygtigt 
==PAGE:104==
100 
 
byggeri. Og også sådan nogle i DK som hele region Nordjylland, der efterspørger det på alt offentligt 
byggeri. Så disse store bygherrer har været med til at skubbe på det. Så kan man sige internt i 
Rambøll har man lavet forskellige tiltag for at oplyse. Man har investeret mange penge i det her 
interne digitaliseringsprojekt, som man startede i 2018. Det var et globalt projekt i Rambøll. Man 
ville prøve at digitalisere bæredygtighed. Det var meget ambitiøst og det er i vi overhovedet ikke 
nået i mål med og det ved jeg heller ikke om man helt kan.  
Hvad går projektet ud på? 
Det blev kaldt Green BIM. Grund ideen er at vi har meget information i vores bygningsmodeller. Det 
må være muligt at trække den data ud og bruge den i en certificering. Man lavede en masse 
indledende studier. Valget faldt hurtigt på livscyklusvurdering. Fordi det, politiks, var ”going up” på 
agendaen og virkede også umiddelbart som noget man nemt kunne digitalisere. Det var noget med 
nogle mængder og noget emissions data. Det skulle egentlig bare kobles sammen. Easy. Det har 
det bare vidst ikke at være. Jo mere man dykker ned i det jo flere problemstillinger opdager man. 
Man kan starte med at nævne at der ikke er en ordentlig standard for hvordan man tegner i Revit 
f.eks. Så længe der ikke er en standard der bliver fulgt for det, så er det ret svært at koble de her 
ting sammen. Det kommer ikke til at bare at ske automatisk. Dernæst er der store problemer med 
dårlig modellering. Fejlmodellering. Det er også et kæmpe issue. Så i virkeligheden affødte det også 
et ret stort internt digitaliserings projekt og standardiserings projekt. Fordi det ligesom var afhængigt 
af det. Også hvis vi skal kunne stole på den data der bliver produceret. Det er jo helt spor for sig. 
Jeg vil sige at noget af det positive der kom ud af projektet, var det globale sammenarbejde på 
tværs af Rambøll byggeri indenfor de her bæredygtighedsfolk. Vi har holdt konferencer hvert andet 
år, hvor man samler alle medarbejder der arbejder med de her ting og bringer kunder ind og 
interessante talere ind til at inspirere og laver workshops med hvor er det vi bevæger os hen og 
hvad det er vi kan tilbyde. Kan vi gå sammen på tværs af nogle forskellige markeder og bidrage på 
anden vis. 
Var det international sammenarbejde med i Green BIM? 
Ja. Der var repræsentanter fra alle lande. Det er heller ikke lagt i graven overhovedet. Det har bare 
udviklet sig mere til noget der nu hedder en sustainability toolbox, hvor der er blevet lavet nogle 
forskellige dele. Vi har også lavet et early LCA tool, der ligger online. Og vi har lavet nogle forskellige 
ting. Det er bare stadigvæk lidt pilotfase, vil jeg sige. Men der sker noget lige nu, så det er ret 
spændende. Der er kommet ny projektleder på, og der begynder at ske nogle ting hvor man virkelig 
skal ud og teste det af med nogle kunder for at finde ud af hvordan er det vi kan bruge det her. 
Fordi meget af det handler om at oplyse. Altså simpelthen, få folk til at forstå at det ikke er ligegyldigt 
at vælge den ene eller den anden mursten. Det er ikke ligegyldigt at du vælger om det kommer fra 
Norge eller Polen. Det kan have kæmpe konsekvenser, især hvis vi snakker meget store byggerier. 
Rambøll er jo med til at bygge jeg ved ikke hvor mange tusinde kvadratmeter om året. Så selv små 
ting kan have en ret stor impact. I år har vi også lavet et carbon neutral buildings taskforce. Så der 
sker sindssygt mange initiativer og det er også noget af det der er med til at informere vores egne 
medarbejdere. Man skal tænke på at der er mange der har siddet her i branchen i 15, 20, 25 år som 
ikke aner noget om bæredygtighed. De har aldrig skænket det med CO2 en tanke. Så vi har et 
kæmpe ansvar i at oplyse og opruste vores egne medarbejder og virkeligheden også vores kunder, 
som ikke nødvendigvis selv har fokus på det. De store kunder ved det selvfølgelig godt. Men der er 
også en kæmpe pulje af kunder, der aldrig har arbejdet med det før. De skal måske bygge et nyt 
==PAGE:105==
101 
 
hovedsæde og det er måske første gang de skal gøre det. De har ikke nogen der ved noget om at 
bygningen også skal være grøn. Det er tit en aha oplevelse for dem. 
Det bringer os lidt videre til næste del. Der er selvfølgelig alle certificeringer og nu er 
den frivillige bæredygtighedsklasse også kommet hvor der er LCA inden over. Men 
mener du egentlig at det bør være en del af bygningsreglementet? 
Ja. Absolut. Det ligger de heldigvis også op til. Det er vi meget positivt stemt overfor. Når vi har et 
reglement der siger noget på energi siden, så synes jeg også at man i virkeligheden bør have et 
reglement der i stedet for at måle på kWh, så bør det måle på CO2. Det er jo så også lidt det der er 
ved at ske, ved at man vil udfase oliefyr og naturgas og indirekte er man jo så også med til at skubbe 
energikilden. Men man kunne også bare lovgive på CO2-eq i stedet for kWh. 
Har du været involveret i arbejde omkring FBK? 
Vi har to Rambøll projekter der skal starte op med FBK. Jeg er ikke så meget inden i de to, men jeg 
har været inden over FBK i den forstand at DI fik lov at lave en kommentering af LCA delen. Altså 
det kriterie, der handler om LCA og det blev sendt til mig, Jesper ?? i Dominia og Caroline i MOE. Vi 
tre fik lov at kommentere på det inden det blev udgivet. Lige nu har jeg en opgave for TBST, som 
har udgivet FBK. I den opgave kigger vi på 9 europæiske lande og deres lovgivning på LCA i 
bygningsreglementet. Og har også kigget på certificeringer og andre frivillige ordninger. Og det er 
jo fordi TBST er interesserede i at vide hvad gør man i andre lande, har de fundet på noget smart, 
er der noget vi kan kigge på. Der har vi spurgt ind til en masse ting også i forhold til 
referenceværdier. Kan man allerede nu stille krav, som er realistiske og brugbare.  
Kan man stille krav? 
Ja, det mener jeg godt man kan. Der bare nogle ting man skal være meget opmærksomme på. Det 
er helt vildt vigtigt at det er transparent. Hvad er med. Hvad er dækket ind. Hvad er det for nogle 
bygningsdele. Hvad er det for nogle livscyklusmoduler. Det er meget vigtigt. Jeg ved også at f.eks. 
klimapartnerskabets krav/niveau de har lagt på 12 kg-CO2-eq/m2/år, det er uambitiøst og de er 
blevet kritiseret for det. Der går jo politik i de her ting. Politisk har man jo et ønske om at få alle 
med uagtet niveauet. Så er der noget der handler om, når vi bliver dygtigere til de her ting. Jeg kan 
lige så godt være ærlig og sige at de første LCA der blevet lavet her i Rambøll for 4-5 år siden de 
var ikke gode nok. Men man havde ikke prøvet det før. Så man var måske ikke klar over hvordan 
man lige fik tjekket havde man alt med. Så, der ligger noget i jo dygtigere vi alle sammen bliver til 
at lave LCAerne, jo større emissioner har vi per. M2. Man kan også læse det i SBI rapport på de 60 
cases. Der har generelt manglet meget data på installationer. Når vi begynder at få det med, så 
stiger vores emissioner per. M2. Medmindre vi bliver meget gode til at designe os ud af det, men jo 
mere vi propper ind i beregningen, jo mere vil den stige. Så derfor har man haft en ide om at man 
ikke vil lægge kravet for hårdt. Fordi hvad nu hvis vi bliver rigtig gode til det. Og hvad nu hvis 
niveauet ikke var helt rigtigt med de 60 cases. Det har været en bekymring. Derudover tror jeg 
heller ikke at man skal underkende at der er meget lobbyisme i byggebranchen. Det er mange store 
virksomheder, der ikke er interesserede i at være sat ud af spillet pga. en referenceværdi. Jeg ved 
det ikke, men det ligger ekstremt højt, 12 kg/co2/m2/år. Men jeg også idealist, så selvfølgelig kan 
man. Så må vi bruge mere tid i designprocesserne, for at sikre os at vi kan leve op til det. Det 
behøvede ikke at være megahårde krav, men mere realistisk fra start af. En sidste ting der kan have 
gjort at det ligger så højt kan også være at både transport og byggeproces skulle inkluderes. Det 
ved vi reelt ikke hvor meget kommer til at rykke. Det ved vi ikke helt endnu. Indtil videre har vi 
==PAGE:106==
102 
 
antaget at transporten er neglicierbar. Nu har det måske vist sig at det er den måske alligevel ikke 
helt. Det samme med byggeplads proces. Der har jeg lige læst noget om i dag, at i Norge, på en 
byggeplads var den lige pludselig 3 gange høj som man havde regnet med at den ville være. Så det 
var man blevet enormt overrasket over. Det er jo svært at sige noget om noget man aldrig har 
regnet på.  
Hvordan afgør man hvilke faser der skal med? 
Indtil nu, der har man f.eks. fra DGNBs side, som jo kun har A1-A3, B4, B6 og EOL. Det har været 
fordi man har tænkt at transport er svært. Det er stort arbejde for rådgiveren at indhente den 
information og den er måske neglicierbar. Man har argumenteret for at den ikke betyder ret meget. 
Byggepladsproces, der har man sagt: Vi aner ikke hvor den ligger henne og det er meget svært at 
indsamle data. Så derfor har man til at starte med sagt: Vi holde os til det vi ved. Og det er A1-A3. 
Nu er man begyndt at kigge på det og de ringede også til os inde fra BUILD og spurgte os hvordan 
vi egentlig ville gøre det. De har prøvet at indsamle data fra rådgiveren på om man kan gøre det. 
Så det har vi sagt at det kan vi godt. Man gør det til LEED. Så det er ikke umuligt. B4 er supernem 
at have med, fordi det bare er en udskiftning. Det er bare A1-A3 igen. B1 handler om emissionerne 
i brugsfasen. Det kan være lækage af kølemidler. Hvordan måler man det. Hvad har man 
gennemsnitsdata. Det er ikke så nemt. Det kommer an på systemet og bygningen og hvilket 
kølemiddel man har proppet på. Det samme med B5, renovering. Det er også en svær en. Hvis man 
læser ind i den europæiske standard, så bruger du kun den hvis du har lavet en LCA da bygningen 
blev bygget. Så tilføjer man så en B5 når man renoverer den. Så kommer en ny cyklus bare ind i 
B5. Men vi har ikke rigtig nogen bygninger der har fået lavet en LCA. Så når du skal lave en LCA på 
en renovering i dag, så laver du den hele. Der mangler nogle metoder. Hvordan undgår man at 
dobbelt counte. Der er mange ting i det. 
LCA-værktøjer 
Hvilke/hvilket værktøjer anvender i hos Rambøll til at foretage LCA beregninger? 
Vi bruger primært LCAByg. Green BIM endte mere over i at være en tidlig dialog fase værktøj. Det 
skulle fungere globalt. Vi har hele tiden haft LCAByg i DK, som vi egentlig er fint tilfredse med. Det 
er et gratis værktøj og det er standard i branchen. Så det er nemt, hvis du sammenligner det med 
hvad andre laver, så er det godt at bruge samme værktøj. Derfor bruger vi LCAByg til stort set alt 
der har med DK at gøre. Resten af Rambøll (internationalt) bruger primært OneClick LCA, med 
varierende holdning til det. Nogen er meget glade for det og andre er ekstremt irriterede på det. 
Det har meget at gøre med black box. Noget data kan være svært at vide hvor det kommer fra. De 
er blevet bedre men der er stadigvæk nogle issues. Det har også være vores anke mod det. Vi har 
et gratis værktøj der fungerer fint, som er fuldstændig transparent. Vi kan endda være med til at 
påvirke fordi det ligger ved BUILD, der har følgegrupper og vi har mulighed for at give feedback og 
så er det tilpasset DK. Eller det bruger tysk data. Nu er man i gang med et sammenarbejder med 
EPD Danmark hvor man vil integrere alle danske EPDer ind i LCAByg. Der sker nogle ting. Vi er med, 
vi støtter og synes det er en god ide. 
Så jeg går ud fra du også venter på det nye LCAByg 5.0? 
Det bliver så interessant for os. Vi har lavet automatiseringer i Rambøll. Vi har f.eks. lavet en EPD 
reader fra vores EPD-database, så vi kun skal skrive EPDerne ind en gang, i stedet for at vi skulle 
sidde og skrive det ind hver gang i LCAByg. Så skriver vi det ind i et Excel ark og så loader den det 
ind i LCAByg hver gang vi åbner programmet gennem et software vi har lavet. Den software er vi 
==PAGE:107==
103 
 
meget usikre på om det fungerer. Det er så vores loss. Til gengæld har vi sparet en masse timer på 
at have de her automatiseringer so far. Det er ikke spildt. Men vi har et automatiseringsværktøj til 
LCA, som består af to ting. Det ene er EPD databasen som bliver loadet ind i programmet. Når man 
åbner det, så kan man starte med at lave et excel ark, som er sat op på en bestemt måde, der kan 
man indtaste sine bygningsdele, man kan vælge sine materialer og EPDer osv. Og så kan man åbne 
det hele op i LCAByg og så er det sat op. Så man skal ikke klikke rundt i det. Det sparer os tid. Så 
kan man trække det ud i excel igen. Hele ideen kom fra Green BIM. Hvis vi kan trække schedules 
ud fra revit og kopiere direkte til et excel ark som er linket til LCAByg. Så har vi en semiautomatisk 
proces. Det er det vi har lige nu. 
Så mængdeberegningsmotoren der er udtræk fra revit? 
Ja. Det skal så typisk tjekkes igennem. Det er typisk heller ikke os der står for det. Vi prøver at 
lægge mængdeudtrækket over på den faglighed der har med mængden at gøre. Det er jo arkitekten 
der er ansvarlig for at de har tegnet det rigtigt. Lige så snart vi roder i deres modeller og ikke gør 
det rigtig, det gider vi ikke. 
Så det er arkitekten der trækker mængden ud? 
Ja. Så vi sender dem et excel ark og siger: Vi skal bruge data i det her format. I kan fylde ind fra 
schedules. Vi gør dette også nogle gange selv. På vores egne projekter har vi nogle 
bygningskonstruktører der sidder og trækker data ud. Men summen er at vi skal have det over i det 
har Excel format som skal ind i LCAByg. 
Så det er her hele problemet opstår med forskellig tegne standarder på forskellige 
tegnestuer? 
Ja. Og det er derfor vi bliver nødt til at sige: Det kan vi ikke tage ansvar for. Vi har prøvet mange 
gange. I den her proces har vi virkelig testet ting af. Vi har siddet med den ene model efter den 
anden og har forsøgt at finde hoved og hale i det. Så er tingene skrevet ind som generiske objekter. 
Men jeg har brug for at vide om det er mursten, beton, hvad er styrken, alle mulige ting. Det står 
ikke i modellerne. Det er nogle gange nogle ret detaljerede faser vi er i hvor der ikke står de der 
ting. Det er lange lister af problemer. Vi kan ikke stå inde for det og vi kan ikke tjekke det. Det er jo 
et kæmpe problem i forhold til at vide om vores LCA er korrekte. Der er et stort potentiale for 
forbedring.  
Hvornår i design processen bruger i værktøjet (LCAByg)? 
I hele processen. I nogle af de små variantstudier, hvor man nærmest er nede og sammenligne 
EPDer. Det er hvor man sammenligner på produkt niveau, så er det altså bare excel ark vi kører 
med. Det er bare ind i excel, lave nogle grafer osv. Når vi bruger LCAByg, det er måske bare lige en 
tilføjelse, der er bare mange der ikke gør det. Når vi bruger LCAByg, så hiver vi alt data over i excel 
og konvertere det til Rambøll grafer, med de farvekoder man nu skal bruge og alle enheder, etc. 
Jeg ser tit folk laver et rapportudtræk fra LCAByg og jeg er ved at brække mig hver gang. Det er 
forfærdeligt at se på og der er ingen enheder på graferne. Det er også en ret stor del af vores 
proces, at vi laver nogle ordentlige notater og rapporter på hvad er det vi har beregnet. Hvad er 
forudsætningen for beregningen. Vi har et helt kvalitetssikringsskema vi skal igennem. Har vi nu 
husket det hele, har vi forklaret ordentlig, vi lægger et inventory bilag, der beskriver hvad er det 
præcist der er brugt af materialer, mængder og emmisionsdata. Det er en ret stor del af processen. 
Hvis der er nogle der kommer om et par år efter og siger: hov, hvorfor fik i det resultat. Så er det 
==PAGE:108==
104 
 
vigtigt at kunne ind og trække det ud. Det er enormt vigtigt i mange ingeniørydelser. De antagelse 
man gør sig, fordi det bygger på estimater.  
Hvordan anvender i værktøjerne? 
Vi laver en stor inventory. Det er i den vi har alt og linker til data og sørger for at skrive vores 
antagelser ind. Vi bruger primært Ökobau data fordi det ligger i LCAByg. Så bruger vi EPDer. 
Prioriteret rækkefølge kommer an på designfasen. Hvis vi er nede og undersøge to specifikke 
facadevarianter og man er langt i detaljeringen. Så kan man godt gå ned og finde en EPD. Men når 
du er i de tidlige designfaser, så arbejder vi mere med at hive en masse data ud, både generisk og 
EPD og så lavet boxplot, som viser variationen. Så kan man holde murstensfacade op mod en alu 
facade. Så har man to store variationer, de lapper måske lidt over, det kan også være at de ikke 
gør, men man kan i hvert fald se nogle tendenser. Du kan også gøre arkitekt eller bygherre 
opmærksom på at det ikke er ligegyldigt hvilken mursten man vælge. Den ene kan performe lige så 
dårligt som en alu facade. Det er for at gøre opmærksom på det. Når man så kommer senere hen i 
designfasen, så er der mulighed for at stille krav til max kg CO2/m2 facade. Så det er sådan vi 
arbejder i de tidlige faser. 
Hvad er din professionelle vurdering af værktøjets egenskaber? 
Det kunne jeg sikkert sende dig 1000 kommentarer på. Problemerne på BIM integrationen er blevet 
nævnt. Jeg tror det er langt ude i fremtiden. Det er ikke standardiseret nok. Det er helt umuligt. 
Hvis man alligevel skal sidde og assigne alle materialer, så kan lige så godt hive Schedules ud og 
tage det ind i excel. Jeg lyder måske allerede som en sort seer, det er bare fordi vi har prøvet det 
så meget og det har været meget problematisk. 
Generelt i forhold til hvad LCAByg kan og hvor det har nogle store begrænsninger. Det er nogle ret 
simple ting i virkeligheden. Jeg ved de er i gang med at løse nogle af tingene. Den ene ting går på 
renovering. Det skal være muligt at sætte rest levetider ind. Lige nu er man nødt til at lave noget 
fiks fakseri for at lave en renoverings LCA. Det kan man i LCCByg, ikke i LCAByg. De har en PHD 
ansat, som skal kigge på renovering. Så der kommer helt sikkert nogle forbedringer. Så er der 
generelt issues med energi dataen på driftsfasen. Man kan vælge energifremskrivning. Lige nu går 
fremskrivning kun frem til 2040 og efter 2040 bliver den statisk. Det er et issue, men det går måske 
lige så meget på at der ikke findes nogle gode fremskrivninger lovgivningsmæssigt. Det ville være 
fedt at have flere energiscenarier. Der findes kun fem gennemregnede fremskrivninger og lige nu 
ligger der kun den der går til DGNB. Der ville være fint at kunne vise en range til de tidlige 
designfaser. Det kan have stor betydning for resultatet. Der er ikke særlig god mulighed for at vælge 
mellem forskellige energi forsyningstyper. Kun fjernvarme, gas. Der mangler nogen. Hvad med 
træpillefyr? Der har vi været nødt til at gå tilbage og bruge det gamle LCA excel værktøj. Vi havde 
lavet nogle beregninger på energiforsyningen, det har vi ikke kunne lave i LCAByg. Den næste ting 
er at det er nødt til at være mere fleksibelt. Vi som et globalt firma har brug for at lave en LCA i 
Sverige eller Tyskland, så vil vi gerne have mulighed for at sætte lokale data ind. Det vil vi faktisk 
også i DK. Hvis jeg laver en LCA på en specifik bygning, i et specifikt område, så kan jeg putte 
specifikke data ind. Alle de ting kan man ikke i dag. Den sidste der ville være vigtig at kunne, det 
ville være... Lad os sige at man har lavet sine indeklimasimuleringer med afsæt i 2040 så er 
gennemsnitstemperaturen steget. Det vil sige at der er brug for mere køling i bygningen. Det ville 
jeg også gerne have mulighed for at sætte ind i min LCA. Jeg har det energiforbrug frem til 2040, 
men efter 2040 har jeg et andet. I mange af de opgaver vi laver, der har vi brug for fleksibilitet, så 
==PAGE:109==
105 
 
vi kan lave mere avancerede beregninger. Der er generelt noget med brugerfladen. Det rører ikke 
mig så meget. Vi som ingeniører er vant til denne type interface. Jeg viser dog aldrig programmet 
til mine arkitektkollegaer. Jeg laver beregninger og præsentere data i en flot graf, med nogle noter 
til forudsætningerne. Så snakker vi ud fra det. Det fungere ret fint. Det er vigtigste for mig er et 
program der fungerer og er fleksibelt.  Jeg var ikke glad for interface i LCAByg 4.0.  
Hvad med muligheden for at bruge jeres allerede udviklede værktøj til at læse EPDer? 
Ja. Det ville være rart hvis de lå der. Vi gider ikke at opdatere databasen. Det er spild af vores tid. 
Jeg ville langt hellere have at programoperatøren stod for at loade EPDer ind. Der sker masser 
digitalisering på EPD siden rundt omkring i Europa. EPD Norge er fuld digitaliseret. Så hvis alle EPD 
program operatører gør det i hele Europa, så bør det nærmest bare være en knap hvor man hente 
den relevante EPD database ind. Vi har jo selv udviklet den til det tidligere LCAByg, så det er klart 
en mangel. Der sker for mange fejl ved manuel indtastning. Det er store fejl når jeg har haft 
praktikanter til at lave LCAer. Folk kopierer tallet fordi der er mange decimaler. Så sætter man det 
ind og kommaet forsvinder. Der er også forskel på komma og punktum i hhv. EPDer og LCAByg. 
Man kan heldigvis hurtig se fejlen, men det er superirriterende. I forhold til integration med andre 
værktøjer, så er det indtil videre fedt at det er open source. Det har gjort at vi har kunne udvikle et 
program der taler sammen med det. Jeg ville ønske at der bare var et excel import. Jeg forstår ikke 
at det ikke findes, når der er et excel export. Så ville man kunne bruge schedules fra revit. Excel 
spiller sammen med mange andre ting. Så hvis det kom ville jeg sige at vi var nået et stort skridt.  
Er BUILD nemme at snakke med i forhold til udvikling og implementering af nye tiltag? 
Ja. Vi har god dialog. Deres problem er at de mangler funding. De sagde på et tidspunkt at de havde 
80.000 kr. om året, bare til vedligeholdelse. Det er jo ikke meget. Det kan man jo ikke udvikle en 
excel import på. Men de har vist fået en masse funding i år og det er derfor der kommer den nye 
version nu. Vi er måske også mange i branchen der har været ret large. Det er på mange måder 
ikke et godt nok program. Men min holdning er bare at vi ikke kan blive ved med at gå og sige at vi 
ikke har godt nok data eller værktøjer. Så kommer vi aldrig videre. Der er blevet lavet PHDer de 
sidste 20 år på DTU omkring LCA. Nogle har også været inde på sporet med infrastruktur og byggeri. 
Så vi kan jo ikke blive ved med at sige at vi ikke ved nok om det her. Så vi er nødt til at arbejde med 
det vi har. Vi har fra vores side forsøgt at lave LCAer og promovere det. Og så må vi bare være 
transparente omkring beregningerne. Og så er der en ting som mangler i værktøjet, som vi er blevet 
opmærksomme på det sidste halvandet år, følsomhedsanalyser. Det begynder vi nu at have med 
som standard i alle vores notater. Det kan fortælle bygherre noget om hvorvidt det var den ene 
antagelse der er betydende for konklusionen. Det skal de være klar over hvis de bruger det til at 
træffe beslutninger ud fra. Jeg kan være lidt bange for at man i nogle arkitektvirksomheder kommer 
til at sidde og sammenligne nogle EPDer som ikke er sammenlignelige og man glemmer måske at 
få metoden helt på plads. Det er meget vigtigt. 
LCA I den tidlige designfase 
Er det relevant at snakke om LCA i den tidlige designfase? Hvorfor er det 
relevant/hvorfor er det ikke relevant?  
Jeg synes jo det er relevant. Det er her man trækker de store streger. Det er meget relevant om at 
vælge at bygge i beton eller stål eller træ. Og det har jo meget at gøre for designet. Hvor store 
spænd kan jeg have hvis jeg vælger det ene fremfor det andet. Så jeg synes virkelig det har sin 
berettigelse i det tidlige design. Det er der er svært er at man ikke ved meget om sit design. 
==PAGE:110==
106 
 
Paradoxet med at man ingen data og så prøver man at sige noget om noget der er meget datatungt. 
Så det er derfor vi arbejder med boxplot, som illustrerer den usikkerhed. Lige nu ligger vi i det her 
spænd. Jo længere vi når i vores design proces, jo mindre skulle spændet gerne blive. Jeg har et 
slide der viser vores boxplot metode. Den går fra at være generel sammenligning af stål, beton, træ. 
Så er det x forskellige typer træ. F.eks. fyr og nål. Og til sidst kigger man specifikt på produktet ude 
hos entreprenøren, hvor man er nede på EPD niveau. Det er svært i den tidlige designfase, det er 
jo derfor der stadigvæk er specialestuderende der sidder og spørger ind til de her ting 4 år efter jeg 
selv gjorde det. 
Jeg ved ikke om jeg har det gode svar på det. Jeg kan sige hvad vi prøver at gøre. Vi prøver hele 
tiden at få mere og mere sammenarbejde med vores arkitekter. Det kan godt være på en 
konkurrence. Typisk er der kun tid til meget lidt. Så skriver typisk en tekst i konkurrencen om at vi 
vil lave LCAer løbende hvis vi vinder. Og så har man måske lavet en skriver typisk en tekst i 
konkurrencen om at vi vil lave LCAer løbende hvis vi vinder. Men jeg har endnu ikke fået lov at lave 
en LCA i konkurrence. Jeg ved at der er mange af vores arkitekter der gerne vil lave LCA, men har 
meget svært ved det. Tit er det jo tiden der er problemet. Tingene bliver lavet om. Jeg bliver f.eks. 
bedt om at vente til næste fase med at lave LCAen. Jeg prøver at forklare dem at vi kan lave en nu 
og så kan vi vise senere at vi har optimeret. Men hidtil har det været svært. Da jeg startede herude, 
så regnede vi med at kostede 100-200 timer at lave en LCA. Nu har vi minimeret tidsforbruget 
meget. Men har i ikke nogle værktøjer i CFM til at lave tidlig designfase? Så jeg føler at I er bedre 
til det. Jeg sidder jo mere traditionelt på ingeniør siden.  
Det man kan frygte i de tidlige faser, det er om folk får valgt de rigtige materialer i ökobau f.eks. og 
i LCAByg. Man skal virkelig ind og læse på det for at finde ud af om det er svarende til det man har 
i sit byggeri. Jeg har set mange fejl i lige netop det, hvor folk ikke får valgt de materialer der svarer 
til dem der er i byggeriet. En anden ting i forhold til tidlig design, som vi har fået ud af Green BIM, 
det er at vi har fået lavet et setup for en database for vores projekter. Så gennemregnede LCA-
projekter til at lave benchmark. Så er man ude i helt tidligt design. Hvis der kommer en bygherre og 
spørge hvad han skal sætte sit embodied carbon benchmark til, så kan vi bruge databasen. Så hvis 
vi kan samle alt viden fra alle projekter og lægger ind et samlet sted. Men her bliver det også 
problematisk at sammenligne på tværs af lande. F.eks. i England, der regner man ikke bruttoareal, 
men netto. Så deres emissioner er højere per. M2 end vores. Men det med at kigge på i en 
sammenlignelig database er spændende. Det går også lidt over i OneClick LCA. Jeg forestiller mig 
at det ligger inden man har sat en streg. 
Hvilke faser fra en LCA er vigtige at undersøge i den tidlige designfase? 
A faserne er klart de vigtigste, fordi det er nu og her at emissionerne sker. Men vi har et kæmpe 
problem når vi kun anvender A faserne. Det er de biobaserede materialer. Det er et kæmpe problem, 
som vi ikke kan stå inden for. Det er helt politisk spændingsfelt. Jeg ved at der er nogle store 
europæiske udbud fra Europa kommissionen hvor man har udbudt et kæmpe projekt. Essensen af 
projektet er at man vil have nogle nye metoder der både skal spille ind i EPDerne. Hvordan er det 
man beregner det bio baserede carbon eller hvordan man medtager dem i sin rapportering. Hvad er 
tilladt. Hvad er ikke tilladt i forhold til EOL. Det er sådan i en EPD at man regner EOL sådan som 
man ville bortskaffe materialet i dag. I dag ville f.eks. brænde sit træ. Nogle kan argumentere for 
at man ville genbruge det. Skal man så have lov til accounte for det CO2 optag der er i sin træbjælke. 
Derfor fokuserer Europa kommissionen på det og jeg tror det bliver et issue vi diskuterer de næste 
==PAGE:111==
107 
 
3-4 år. Men det er klart A fasen. Det kan man også se i alle vores beregninger. Det er der de store 
emissioner ligger og det er nu de foregår. Det er også noget vi ved mere eller mindre med sikkerhed. 
Vi aner f.eks. ikke noget om vores EOL.  
World green building council har lavet en rapport. Bringing embodied carbon up-front. Den har jeg 
været med til at lave og den snakker præcis om det her. Den går ind og sætter targets til 8 forskellige 
aktører i byggebranchen. Hvad er det vi alle sammen skal gøre for at bringe byggeriet mod zero 
emission. 
Så ja, jeg mener at det er der det ligger. Nu har vi efterhånden lavet nogle rapporter. Vi udgiver en 
rapport snart som jeg kan sende dig hvor vi har gennemregnet 16 faktiske byggeri cases på graden 
af renovering og så kontra nybyggeri. Og hvor skæring er mellem CO2 udledning og total økonomi. 
Til sidst, hvordan forløber jeres sammenarbejde med arkitekterne in-house og opkøbte 
Henning Larsen Architects? 
Der er et sammenarbejde. Men det har været en lidt sjov proces. Vi fik det at vide December 2019 
og så blev vi lagt sammen januar 2020, men sammenlægningen beror på at vi stadigvæk er opdelt 
hele 2020. De er ikke endeligt integrerede. Vi har ikke samme systemer. 
Har i en vidensdeling? 
Ja der har vi 100 % vidensdeling. Martha Lewis snakker jeg meget med og jeg har talt med hende 
siden 2017 da jeg startede i Rambøll fordi vi havde nogle projekter sammen. Hun sidder med i et 
andet netværk i Rambøll. Et dansk netværk på tværs af alle markeder om LCA, som jeg er tovholder 
på. Det er mig der har til opgave at samle de her mennesker. Vi har 1-2 folk fra hver afdeling. Martha 
er der fra Henning Larsen. Jeg er der fra byggeri. Så har vi nogle fra transport, vand, energi, 
management consulting, miljø. Vi mødes ca. hver 1,5-2 måned. Spiser frokost sammen og har noget 
videns udveksling. Vi har lavet kortlægning af services på forskellige markeder. For at finde ud af 
hvor vi mangler kompetencer og hvor vi kan bidrage. Så der er et sammenarbejde og en videns 
udveksling med Henning Larsen. Men mit problem er at jeg ikke bliver inviteret med ned i 
designfasen. Jeg ved ikke hvad skal gøre. Jeg vil gerne være med. Men det er på en måde svært at 
blive inviteret med i det maskinrum. Det kan være at i (CFM) er bedre til det. Men den integrerede 
design del som jeg lærte om på studiet, den syntes jeg ikke at jeg ser noget af. Det kan sagtens 
være at det eksisterede hos dem internt, men jeg er ikke en del af det. Det kan være lidt frustrende. 
Generelt tror jeg også det fungerer bedre på små kontor. Vores Aalborg kontor de er dygtige til 
integreret design fordi de sidder lige ved siden af hinanden. Der er en fysisk barriere i at sidde 
adskilt. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
108 
 
Appendix B: Interview 1 – Katrine Juul, BIG 
 
Interview 
Katrine Juul, Senior Architect & DGNB consultant, BIG 
 
Intro 
Hvilken stilling, rolle firma sidder du i? 
Jeg arbejder jo for BIG, hvor jeg lige har haft 6 års jubilæum. Jeg blev ansat som 
projekteringsarkitekt i starten, og har bla siddet og lavet vores Aarhus over i Aarhus( den der bygning 
der går op). Det var faktisk det jeg blev ansat til at lave i sin tid, og efter, at have lavet mange 
forskellige projekter, så spurgte de mig for 2 år siden, om jeg ikke ville tage DGNB uddannelsen, 
fordi at vores headquarter det skal DGNB certificeres, da vi er ved at rykke vores nye headquarter 
ud i Nordhavnen. Det ville jeg rigtig gerne, da det er noget jeg længe har villet, så det var fantastisk 
at få lov til. Herefter har den ene ting har taget den anden, fordi jeg er jo ansat som 
projekteringsarkitekt, så jeg er en af dem der kan få “lortet” til at holde og, at det kan tåle at stå 
ude i den friske luft og få solskin på sig. Derfor har mit fokus har været rigtig meget på, hvordan 
tager vi de bæredygtighedsideer som har været i designfasen og kører videre med dem. Udover det 
så fandt jeg også ud af, at der er nogle grundlæggende ting som allerede i konkurrencefaserne 
bliver grundlagt, men som kan give nogle gevaldigt store benspænd, og også fordyrer byggeriet når 
vi kommer længere hen. Derfor har mit fokus været rigtig meget på, hvordan kan vi allerede tidligt 
integrere nogle af de her gode ting og have tankerne med, og det som er utroligt vigtigt i en 
bæredygtighedsproces er jo også, at så mange som muligt giver ind på et meget tidligt stadie, og 
det kan jo godt være lidt overvældende for nogle af de lidt yngre konkurrence arkitekter, som i 
forvejen skal forholde sig til funktionaliteter, programmet, bygningsreglementet og så kommer vi og 
siger, at de allerede nu også lige skal forholde sig til nogle skakte og, at vi allerede nu skal tale om 
sol og hvordan bygningen vender og de her ting. Jeg har dog altid forsøgt at gøre det på en sådan 
måde, at jeg er den gode kollega og kommer ned og snakker og ikke siger “åh du gjorde det også 
forkert den her gang”. Der er altid en god dialog med “husk at tænk på, at det kan godt betyde 
noget hvis vi tænker på det sådan og sådan, når vi kommer længere ind i faserne.” Eller “hvis du 
gerne vil have et meget grønt tag, så betyder det jo også at opbygningen ikke er så lille, men så 
stor” Nogle af de helt basale ting, som måske lyder som om “nårh ja selvfølgelig tænker alle på det”, 
men der er så mange andre ting der er i spil, når man laver en konkurrence, det er jo mere et 
salgsmateriale. Problemet er bare at når vi skal tage det salgsmateriale videre og specielt med 
bæredygtige bygninger, så kan man ikke rigtig sige til bygherre: “og så i øvrigt så havde vi lige vendt 
bygningen forkert så nu vender vi den lige igen” det kan man bare ikke rigtig. 
Er du så kommet mere over i en konsulterende rolle end en projekteringsarkitekt rollen? 
Ja det er jeg, og det har sådan rent konkret også udmøntet sig i at jeg har skiftet afdeling, jeg har 
gået fra at være projekteringsarkitekt til komme til at sidde i det vi kalder tech-teamet, som i 
virkeligheden står for: beskrivelser, alt vores  BIM integration og så står det også for alt vores quality 
control af alt vores ting. Det giver jo rigtig god mening, fordi det spænder jo over alle byggeriets 
faser. Derfor er det på en måde en mere konsulterende rolle, og med i det er det jo at jeg er den 
her DGNB konsulent, som også sidder og laver LCAer på vores byggerier. Jeg sidder både og laver 
noget simulering kan man sige og alt det her kvalitetskontrol, kan man kalde det, på at de rent 
==PAGE:113==
109 
 
faktisk kan leve op til det som vi siger og vi kan bygge det bagefter så vi stadigvæk har et fantastisk 
byggeri. Det har så udmøntet sig i, at jeg har været med på byggerier over hele verden, fordi selvom 
jeg er DGNB konsulent, så er de grundlæggende ting i DGNB er ikke forskelligt fra BREEAM eller 
nogle af de andre, spørgsmålet er bare vægtningen af det. Noget af det jeg synes har været 
megaspændende, sjovt og fedt, har været det her med at være med på mange projekter, det må i 
også have haft ude på CF møller, fra Kina i øjeblikket. De buldrer ind lige nu og de skal stort set alle 
sammen certificeres i forhold til den green standard de har der over. Der er det meget sjovt at se, 
at hver bæredygtigheds certificering har jo hver deres, fokus i forhold til hvad er vigtigt for dem. 
Derover er det rigtig meget envelope, men også nogle ting som at have et udving over 
indgangsdørene, for hvis nu der falder et vindue ned i hovedet på dig, og sådan nogle ting, så deres 
certificering går meget ud på noget der skal kunne holde, end så mange andre ting. Det er rigtig 
sjovt, og vi har også et andet projekt, nede i Abu dhabi, hvor sheiken er gået ind i sin egen standard 
dernede estidama certifikationen. Et af de kapitler, som fylder rigtig meget, er det her precious 
water, som omhandler det her med, hvordan bruger vi så lidt vand som muligt og lade vær med at 
lave kæmpe grønne områder, hvor man skal bruge en hel masse saltvand, der skal laves om til 
almindeligt vand, som så kan bruges til at vande det her grønne område. Så det giver rigtig meget 
mening, alt efter hvor man er henne i verden. Efter det kommer LCA delen, så giver det også rigtig 
meget mening, hvor end man er henne i verden. Som eksempel så har vi gang i et projekt oppe i 
Norge, som kører efter BREEAM norge, de jo hardcore deroppe. Deres LCA er det vildeste. deroppe 
er det også altid noget med hvor tæt på materialerne de bliver produceret, der flueknepper vi hvert 
eneste materiale, som vi gør brug af, altså om det er inden for en radius af 500 km, og at det skal 
være norske produkter, der er så meget af sådan noget.  
De er også forholdsvis udviklet i forhold til deres EPD katalog ik? 
Jo det er de og det er meget spændende og fedt at være med på. Når man så ser det i forhold til 
Kina, hvor de også har noget med at deres produkter også skal være i en bestemt 
bæredygtighedsdatabase. Men hvor svaret så er “i kan bare vælge et produkt, også selvom det ikke 
har det der, for det tager kun 2 uger for produktet at komme med i bæredygtighedsdatabasen” hvor 
efter man tænker hvad er det så for nogle kriterier vi har med at gøre? 
Noget af det jeg har snakket rigtig meget om ude hos er, at vi gerne vil se om vi kan finde et værktøj 
som vi kan bruge globalt på LCA, så vi på en måde kan finde ud af at lave et carbon footprint på 
alle vores koncept byggerier. Lige så snart man begynder at sige vi skal lave et carbon footprint, så 
kommer du ind over alt det andet som vi allerede har snakket om, som eksempelvis hvilken envelope 
har du? Det vil sige alle de ting som er vigtige for mit synspunkt, når man er projekteringsarkitekt, 
altså alle de ting man på et meget tidligt stadie har taget hensyn til, så man ikke tegner en tag-
bygning der kun er 25 cm, men faktisk tegner en hvor der også er plads til noget isolering, så der 
ikke kun er dækket i sig selv. Det er altså det vi går og taler om nu her, og det data man nu har, 
hvordan får vi det ind og sådan nogle ting, fordi den er jo kun for Danmark, og vores firma har jo 
en tiendedel af vores projekter i udlandet, derfor har vi brug for et værktøj der fungerer globalt.  
LCA generelt 
Hvilken rolle har i som arkitekter i forbindelse med LCA-beregninger? (du nævnte at du 
selv sidder og laver selve LCA-beregningen som arkitekt) 
Grunden til, at det er rigtig fint jeg nu sidder i vores tech-team er, at man i LCA-beregningerne har 
brug for rigtig mange data, og rigtig meget af dataen kan man hive ud af vores revit modeller, når 
==PAGE:114==
110 
 
det er vi kommer ind i projekteringsfaserne. Der er et gap mellem koncept og projektering, vi kører 
på samme måde som CF møller, så vi har meget rhino ind over. Noget af det vi også undersøger nu 
her, er også hvordan får man lavet noget, så man rent faktisk får mængderne ud på en nem måde, 
fordi i en konkurrence sammenhæng der nytter det ikke noget, at alt design skal være fastfrosset 
en uge før, for at kan sidde og beregne mængder. Vi er dog ikke kommet til at løse det endnu i 
konceptfasen skal det lige siges, det er ikke noget problem at løse det efter konceptfasen, men 
hvordan det skal gøres i konceptfasen, har vi ikke helt løst endnu. Det er nogle af de udfordringer 
vi har, altså hvordan kan man gøre det hurtigt og nemt at få mængderne ud, og hvordan kan man 
også gøre noget som design teamet kan lege lidt med altså eksempelvis hvis man nu giver noget 
mere isolering herhenne og gør noget hist og pist, hvad sker der så med mit design overordnet? For 
det betyder jo rigtig meget, da LCA ikke kun er materialer, men også energi inputtet. 
Hvilke værktøjer bruger i nu hos BIG til at foretage både LCA beregninger men også 
mængdeberegninger?  
Revit har vist sig at have nogle udfordringer, på den måde at alt er jo delt op i nærmest hver eneste, 
altså hvis du har en gipsvæg fx, så får du hvert eneste lag gips og hver eneste regel ud. Der er lavet 
nogle scripts så vi kan lave modellen dum igen, så vi bare får en væg ud. Hvor inde i LCA-byg er 
det meget nemmere bare at sige her har jeg… vi har gjort det sådan at vi har et bygningsdelsjournal 
så vi har et typenummer på selve væggen og den har vi også et typenummer af inde i LCA-byg og 
så har vi inde i LCA-byg alle de lag der så er i den væg. Så det er ligesom den måde vi kører det på, 
for det nemt så, at opdaterer mængder på tingene, så får vi typenummeret ud på væggen. Den er 
så linket op til vores bygningsjournal, hvor den så også står, og det er så den som projekterings 
holdet så bruger, i forhold til når de sidder og projekterer. Det kører faktisk rigtig godt, det er igen 
bare koncept delen, som vi ikke helt har fået til at køre endnu. Vi bruger LCAByg program og så 
bruger vi one click LCA, på de internationale projekter. 
Hvad er jeres oplevelse med at bruge one click LCA 
Det er jo tusinde clicks LCA, men udover det så synes jeg at det fungerer okay, og jeg kan godt lide 
deres grafik, da den er nem at forstå. Det er ikke nødvendigvis skidt, men det er bare ikke one click. 
Det er dog væsentligt hurtigere end SBIs LCA-byg, jeg har dog ikke prøvet den nye endnu. 
Hvornår i design processen bruger i værktøjet? (det bruger i så projektering og ikke så 
meget i konceptfasen endnu) 
Det ville være fantastisk hvis vi kunne det allerede nu, men vi er ved at undersøge hvordan vi kan 
få det til at lade sig gøre, for vi er meget opsat på at få det til at lade sig gøre, sådan at vi kan få 
det til at performer på alle vores platforme. 
Så man også bruger det som et dynamisk design værktøj? 
Ja, det giver jo ikke mening ikke at gøre det tidligt i processen. 
 
LCA I den tidlige designfase 
Er det relevant at snakke om LCA i den tidlige designfase, i så datatung en kategori?  
Ja det synes jeg at det gør, hvilket er fordi, hvis vi kan gå ud og fortælle bygherren vores carbon 
footprint på vores bygninger i konceptet, så kan han jo også være med til at sige: “måske vil jeg 
gere have den her kobberfacade, og måske vil jeg ikke have den alligevel, måske passer det bedre 
hvis den er mere bæredygtig”. Den anden ting er at man kan gå ud og sige, at så kompenserer man 
==PAGE:115==
111 
 
bare istedet for, det er ikke noget jeg synes er en god ide, men det kan være at det er det klienten 
vil. Det er jo ikke nødvendigvis sådan, at alle ønsker bæredygtighed, det er også det, der er 
problemet, for vi kan ikke indoktrinere folk til at sige det skal i, eller vi gider ikke designe for jer, 
hvis de ikke har lyst. Vi har derfor valgt at tage den approach der lyder: Vi uddanner, vi indoktrinerer 
ikke. Vi prøver at forklare folk hvordan det hænger sammen, men vi indoktrinerer dem ikke til at 
sige det skal i gøre.  
Så også hvis bygherren ikke selv beder om en certificering, så går i også ind og 
uddanner? 
Ja 
LCA er en meget datatung disciplin, hvad med hele datagrundlaget, hvis man skulle 
snakke om det? (man snakker om at i LCA-byg bruger man meget generiske data, og 
det har man ofte det er ikke så tit man har specifikke data, men det kan jo ændre meget 
på en LCA-beregning) 
Jeg vil sige at fra jeg startede for 2 år siden til i dag er der mange flere firmaer, der ved hvad en 
EPD er, hver gang vi går ud og ser om vi har brug for en EPD, på det her produkt, fordi vi har tænkt 
os at bruge de produkter i det byggeri. Vi er ret heldige fordi vi har så mange private bygherre at vi 
er ikke underlagt de forskellige EU udbudsformer, hvor man ikke kan beskrive et konkret produkt, 
det kan vi ofte godt gøre hos os. Det betyder så samtidig, at vi også kan gå ud og kræve noget af 
leverandørerne, hvis vi siger “vi vil gerne bruge jeres produkt, men vi kan ikke bruge det medmindre 
vi får en EPD på det, så er det muligt for jer at lave en EPD på det?” Så har vi mulighed for, som 
branche og firma, at gå ud og presse firmaer til at få en større indsigt i hvad er det egentlig vi 
udleder, og vi gør i vores produkter, altså hvad er deres carbon footprint. Egentlig var jeg meget 
sortseer for nogle år siden, men det er jeg ikke mere for jeg synes der er sket en stor ændring fra 
alles side nu. Nu kunne det bare være dejligt, hvis regeringen havde det på samme måde. 
Tænker du at det her skal være en del af bygningsreglementet?  
Der er jo den her frivillige bæredygtighed, hvor LCA jo er en del af, der synes boligministeren, at 
den skal implementeres i bygningsreglementet 2023, hvilket jo ville være fantastisk, hvis det skete.  
Tænker du at det ville pushe hele branchen til også at der bliver udviklet EPD’er til 
mange flere materialer og datagrundlaget i virkeligheden vil blive større? 
Ja, det tænker jeg. Problemet lige nu er bare at halvdelen af de folk man snakker med de aner ikke 
hvad LCA det står for, og hvis man siger det står for livscyklusvurdering, så ved de stadig ikke hvad 
det er. Der er brug for en uddannelse om hvad er det egenligt det her LCA går ud på. En anden ting 
jeg har det lidt problematisk med, er det her med en LCA ikke nødvendigvis er en LCA, altså en LCA 
i USA er ikke det samme som det er i Danmark. Der er rigtig mange der snakker om carbon footprint 
og net zero carbon, fx så erfarede jeg med det projekt vi har kørende i Abu Dhabi, at net zero carbon 
dernede er 1700 kg CO2 pr. m2, det er net zero carbon, det er ikke lige der hvor jeg synes vi er. 
Der er bare noget med, hvis man på en eller anden måde kunne få en verdens standard, så ville det 
være helt fantastisk, men nu tænker jeg selvfølgelig meget stort. Til at starte med skal vi lige have 
folk til at forstå hvad LCA går ud på.  
Det lyder som om i godt kunne tænke jer nogle verdensstandarder og værktøjer, da i 
arbejder meget med internationale projekter? 
Ja rigtig meget. 
==PAGE:116==
112 
 
Det er måske uoverskueligt at skulle navigere i forskellige standarder?   
Ja, men også ting som at vi har en EU-standard, for hvordan der bliver lavet en EPD i EU, men det 
er jo ikke den samme standard som når man har et produkt der kommer fra New Zealand, hvad gør 
vi så? Der er så mange små dele i det som er så komplekse, så jeg ved ikke helt hvordan jeg skal 
gribe det an, andet end at jeg godt overordnet ved hvad jeg gerne vil. Jeg kunne rigtig godt tænke 
mig at vi performer en LCA på alle vores projekter, og det er også noget af det som vi gerne vil, 
men helt konkret hvordan vi får det til at lykkes når vi har så mange projekter på verdensplan det 
er meget kompleks og det er noget af det vi prøver på at finde ud af.  
Hvilke parametre er vigtige hvis man skal skabe værktøjer der kan bruges i den tidlige 
designfase? 
Her synes jeg det er vigtigt, du ikke kun har en fase 1,2 og 3. Vores ingeniør på kontoret har udviklet 
et lille værktøj, hvor vi kan gå ind og se på vores konstruktioner og vores MEP altså vores VVS og 
elektricitet, så vi på den måde kan gå ind og vurdere projekterne, på et tidligt stadie på det, men 
det er kun fase A1 til A3. Driftsfasen betyder meget mere, og hvis man kun taler ind i A1-A3, så taler 
man ind i alle de der penge mennesker, som bygger for at sælge dagen efter. Hvor driften jo betyder 
lige så meget, for man vil jo gerne have et hus der står i mange år, for det jo mere bæredygtigt end 
at bygge et hus der kun står i 20 år, som man så river ned og bygger et nyt. Hele driften og end of 
life synes jeg er også er meget vigtigt i det her, og det er derfor, at hvis man kunne lave et koncept 
værktøj, eller bare det at kunne sige at jeg vil have et carbonfootprint på min bygning, men hvor 
driften og end of life også er med. Der ville du kunne gå ind og allerede der kunne vurdere, hvor 
meget vedvarende energi har du med i dit byggeri, sådanne ting som, at man bygger på et site, 
hvor du er bundet til, at du skal tilslutte dig fjernvarme eller lign.(eller district cooling/heating), der 
har vi mange steder vi skal tilslutte os det, hvilket også er fint nok, men det giver nogle restriktioner 
som så kommer til at blive et problem for din arkitektur, fordi hvis det kører på ikke vedvarende 
energi, så har du pludselig rigtig meget CO2 i driften, og det bliver du så nødt til at kompensere for 
i din bygning, og hvordan du bygger og hvad for et valg du har af materialer. Derfor synes jeg det 
er enormt vigtigt at have med. 
Så det er enormt vigtigt at have alle faser med i den tidlige designfase? 
Du kan ikke have alle faser med.  
men dem der fx også er med i DGNB certificeringerne  
Ja, men DGNB og BREEAM har faktisk nogle fine faser med, BREEAM har lidt mere med end DGNB 
har, der er også noget med transport og sådan noget. Fra der hvor produktet produceres til det 
kommer hen på byggepladsen, det kan måske godt være lidt svært. 
så vidt jeg har forstået er det også lidt svært i den frivillige bæredygtigheds klasse  
Det kunne godt være, det ville politisk set være en god sag, fordi så ville man jo favoriserer de 
skandinaviske og danske produkter. 
Hvad tænker du omkring de resultater, der er jo nogle forskellige impact kategorier, 
man får som output, er der noget der er vigtigere at kigge på når man bare kigger på 
konceptfasen? 
Jeg tror helt klart at det er global warming og ozone deplecing. Det er også hvor stor en del af det 
der er vedvarende, og hvor stor en del der ikke er vedvarende energi, det kunne også være 
interessant at kigge på. Jeg synes at det de har med i LCA-byg, er fint, men det er selvfølgelig på 
==PAGE:117==
113 
 
et senere stadie man tager det, så man skal måske gå ind og kigge på hvad er så ikke så vigtigt i 
det her. Du sidder lige nu og laver noget der kan gøre det her, så du vil selvfølgelig gerne vide hvad 
man kan få som output i det her. 
Hvad er interessant og tage beslutninger på, som designparametre?  
Vi har lige siddet og haft en kæmpe diskussion omkring at det kunne være fedt hvis det var muligt 
og se, noget som levetid for materialer inde i SBIs LCA-program. Det ville være enormt fedt at kunne 
sige, hvor der skal vedligeholdes. Altså at man havde en graf så man kunne se, at der ligger nogle 
store omkostninger derudaf, men som er både materialeomkostninger og omkostninger for 
bygherren i forhold til vedligeholdelse. Hvis nu man brugte et andet materiale, hvad ville den 
omkostning så være i stedet? altså hvis man nu kunne sammenligne materialer, det kunne være 
interessant. Det dog nok ikke for konceptfasen, men det er interessant det her med at det måske er 
en god ide at vælge træ indendørs, men ikke udendørs, fordi det så skal vedligeholdes enormt 
meget, medmindre man går ind i noget træ som lærketræ der har olier i sig som gør at det er 
nemmere at vedligeholde.  
Er det relevant at bruge nogle mere analoge værktøjer som grafer osv? 
I princippet kan man sige, at hvis der ligger noget data der inde som allerede ligger i EPD’en eller i 
det man har puttet ind, så det også lidt fjollet man ikke kan få det ud på en måde som folk de 
forstår. En ting er at lave en graf, men en anden ting er at lave en graf som folk de forstår. Jeg har 
nogle gange siddet til ingeniør møder, hvor man er blevet væltet med data, men det er ikke det det 
kommer an på. det er noget med hvad siger det her data og hvad kan vi bruge det til. Jeg har ikke 
noget imod data og specielt ikke med data du allerede har inde i programmet, altså hvis man har 
slået nogle epd’er ind, så kender man allerede levetiden for det produkt er for det har du allerede 
skrevet ind. Så hvis du allerede har det data, så hvorfor ikke bruge det på en eller anden måde, man 
skal bare finde en måde at illustrere det på så, det giver mening eller have nogle mennesker der 
kan sidde og oversætte det. Vi har f.eks. noget med hver gang vi laver en ny konkurrence eller går 
i gang med et nyt projekt, så har vi nogle climate pages som vi sender ud til alle på tegnestuen. De 
er meget gode, men de er kun gode fordi de altid er blevet kommenteret, som sådan her ville 
normalt se ud i Danmark fx, men i andre lande hvor vi bygger der ser det ud på en anden måde. 
Grunde til at du ikke kan pivise her det er fx fordi der er overskyet det meste af tiden. Selvom det 
varmt og enormt fugtigt og man skulle tro at der derfor var en masse sol, så er der næsten ikke 
noget sol, fordi der er overskyet hele tiden. Det er altså den der oversættelse der er vigtig. 
det der hele tiden er min rolle, er lidt den der konsulentrolle og gå ned sige til folk “hvad har i tænkt 
over? hvordan har i tænkt jer at gøre det? har i husket at få af vide om der er nogle ting i den her 
certifikation som kan give jer nogle benspænd?” Altså den her oversætter rolle. Jeg tror ikke man 
kan sende et program ud uden, at man har noget backup house, til at følge op på det og hjælpe 
projektteamene. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
114 
 
Appendix C: Interview 1 – Rob Marsh, C.F. Møller 
 
Interview  
Rob March, Head of Sustainability, C.F. Møller Architects 
 
LCA generelt 
Hvorfor er det vigtigt at foretage LCA beregninger på bygninger? 
Det er vigtigt fordi driftsenergi er blevet nedbragt meget. Det giver ikke mening at stramme 
driftsenergi mere i BR18. Man bliver nødt til at begynde at kigge på andre ting. Så er det oplagt at 
kigge på LCA. På nye bygninger bruger man mere energi på at fremstille materialer end opvarmning. 
Så det er baggrunden for vigtigheden. Mange af de ting mange bruger til at spare driftsenergi med, 
har en materialepåvirkning. Hvis de fortsatte med at stramme energirammen, så ville man skulle 
bruge alt for mange materialer til at opnå det. 
Bør LCA være en del af bygningsreglementet nu hvor man har strammet energirammen 
i mange år? 
Ja. Det skulle være omvendt. Energirammen skulle være en del af LCA. Det skal ikke være to 
særskilte ting. Så man laver en energiramme og en LCA. Man skal ikke have to forskellige tal, som 
man går efter. Man skal have et LCA tal som inkludere energirammen. Så er det op til de enkelte at 
bestemme hvor de vil lægge kræfterne.  
Hvilken rolle har i som arkitekter i forbindelse med LCA-beregninger? 
Principielt er det vigtigt at arkitekter gør det, da det typisk er dem der bestemmer hvilke materialer 
der bliver brugt i bygningerne. Så det er en udvidelse af det arbejde man laver i forvejen. Det andet 
er. Typisk er valget af materialer, især de bærende konstruktioner, en beslutning man tager 
forholdsvis tidligt i processen. Derfor er det en god årsag til at arbejde med det tidligt i 
designprocessen. Det er typisk arkitekter, der er involveret i de tidlige faser. 
Kan man dermed tage mere rådgiveransvar inden for LCA som tegnestue? 
Så er man inden i diskussionen om kampen mellem rådgivende arkitekt og ingeniør. Når man stiller 
flere krav, så er det typisk ingeniøren der vinder ydelsen. Ligesom med energirammen og indeklima, 
etc. Personligt syntes jeg det er vigtigt for arkitekter at vi holder fast i nogle beslutninger. Ellers 
forsvinder beslutningen om hvilke materialer vi vælger. Så er det ingeniøren der bestemmer det ud 
fra LCA krav. Men det bør være arkitekter der tager den beslutning. Det er den kamp der er mellem 
de rådgivende parter. Så er det alt det med at jo flere ting man kan fastsætte tidligere jo større 
sandsynlighed er der for at opnå et ønsket resultat senere hen. Fremfor at det er en beslutning man 
træffe lidt for sent i processen. Det er typisk nemmere for arkitekten at navigere i den tidlige fase, 
med mange forskellige parametre der skal optimeres. 
LCA værktøjer 
Hvilke/hvilket værktøjer anvender i hos CFM til at foretage LCA beregninger? 
I de fleste projekter har man brugt excel regnearket som SBI har lavet før LCAByg. Det er det 
regneark, som blev brugt til de første DGNB projekter. Jeg tror først nu at nogle i Århus som laver 
DGNB er begyndt at bruge LCAByg. Vi har to DGNB projekter i LCAByg nu. Men det er udelukkende 
det værktøj man skal bruge i DK for at få DGNB. Jeg har kigget på OneClick LCA da jeg var i Arkitema. 
Vi blev enige om at værktøjet ikke var brugbart, fordi man ikke ved hvad der foregår inde i det. Der 
==PAGE:119==
115 
 
er meget black box. Den måde vi tegner i revit, hvor vi ikke opdeler vores bygningsdele i de enkelte 
materialer, det kan OneClick ikke håndtere, fordi der ikke er nok data i de enkelte lag. 
Hvilke/hvilket værktøjer anvender i hos CFM til at udregne materiale mængde? 
Det er Revit/Drofus. Og så er der de scripts vi har i konkurrenceafdelingen til at udtrække arealer 
og længder, etc.  
Hvordan anvender i værktøjerne? 
Som det er nu, så er det eneste der sker, det er at der bliver lavet LCA på færdige byggeri. Det er 
workflowet og det sker efter vi har tegnet. Så det vi kigger på nu, det er hvordan vi kan få nogle 
værktøjer der fungerer tidligere i processen. Ligesom du har lagt op til, så er det interessant med 
forskellige værktøj. Så man kan lave LCA for en hel bygning i hele processen og lave et variantstudie 
for en kvadratmeter af forskellige opbygninger. Den næste fase vil så være hvordan man kan 
anvende Revit/Drofus udtræk.  
Hvad er din professionelle vurdering af værktøjets egenskaber? 
Det er blevet mere brugervenligt end det var. Opdelingen med de tre lag, som er blevet integreret i 
programmet som meget grundlæggende del af det. Det syntes jeg er godt. Det er betydeligt 
nemmere at arbejde på den måde. Jeg synes LCAByg er gennemsigtigt. For hvert eneste materiale 
man vælger, så kan man se ökobau dataen med URL-link. Så man kan faktisk se hvad det er. Det 
er komplekst hvordan man importere egne EPD. Det har de snakket om at det er noget de kigger 
på. Og det skal være automatisk. Integrationen med 3. parts værktøjer er næsten ikke eksisterende. 
De har det problemet hele vejen igennem at de ikke må lave programmet så det arbejde med en 
bestemt software løsning. Det er en begrænsning som SBI har.  
Synes du JSON-integrationen er en god løsning? 
Det ved jeg ikke. Det kan du nok svare bedre på. Det er svært at opbygge skabelon til XML fil. Så 
det kan godt være at det nemmere med JSON. 
LCA I den tidlige designfase 
Er det relevant at snakke om LCA i den tidlige designfase? Hvorfor er det 
relevant/hvorfor er det ikke relevant?  
Der er mange andre områder hvor der stilles forholdsvis høje tekniske krav. F.eks. termisk indeklima. 
Som man skal dokumentere i konkurrencen. Jeg kan godt forestille mig at inden for de næste 5 år, 
vil der være høje krav til LCA-dokumentation i konkurrencen. Vi har konkurencer, hvor der stilles 
krav om at vi laver DGNB screening og LCA-analyse som en del af processen i konkurrencen. Der 
stilles ikke nødvendigvis krav på nuværende tidspunkt. Men jeg kunne forestille mig at det kommer 
til at ske i fremtiden. Så det er meget relevant. Den anden side er om det giver mening. Det syntes 
jeg at det gør. SBI har dokumenteret i de første projekter hvor de kiggede på hurtige metoder hvor 
de sammenlignede en færdig fuld beregning med de hurtige metoder. Forskellen var +/- 10 %. Det 
betyder at det ikke er så galt. Man kan godt få et forholdsvist fint resultat i de tidlige faser. Jeg 
mener at størstedelen af LCA er geometriske forhold med hvor mange meter, kvadratmeter man har 
af forskellige materialer og hvis man har får præcis data om de enkelte bygningsdele på 
kvadratmeter niveau og laver forskellige antagelse, så kan man godt få et præcist nok resultat. Det 
er præcist nok inden få nogle få procenter. I SBI-rapporten med de 60 cases kigger de også på den 
hurtige metoder i forhold til den komplekse metode. 
Hvilke afvigelser kan accepteres hvis værktøjet skal fungere som designværktøj? 
==PAGE:120==
116 
 
Et sted mellem 10-20 eller 30 % er mit gæt. 
Hvilke parametre er vigtige hvis man skal skabe værktøjer der kan bruges i den tidlige 
designfase? 
Hastighed er det vigtigste i de tidlige faser. En afvejning af hastighed og præcision. Så hvis man kan 
få noget der fungere meget hurtigt og fungere +/- 10 % i præcision, så er det meget fint. Hastighed 
betyder jo at man kan afprøve mange forskellige løsninger. Så kan man måske sætte det parametrisk 
op og køre forskellige konstruktive løsninger igennem, med samme geometri. Hvis man ved at det 
er forholdsvis præcist nok og man har de fleste ting med, og det ved vi, med den tilgang hvor vi 
kigger på kvadratmeter bygningsdel. 
Når man kommer længere hen i processen og skal projektere, hvad er så vigtigt? 
Når man kommer senere hen i processen, så har man mere præcis model i revit f.eks. Så har man 
specificeret flere ting og man ved hvilke materialer det er. Så kan man være mere præcis. Men igen, 
er der også noget med hastighed. Det store problem med LCAByg er den manuelle dataindstastning. 
Så hvis man kan lave nogle løsninger som betyder at man automatisere processen så meget som 
muligt, så er det en stor fordel. Hvis det går hurtigere så kan man lave flere beregninger. I DGNB 
lægger man op til at man kan få point hvis man laver LCA ved hvert faseskift. Fra dispositionsforslag 
til myndighedsprojekt og hovedprojekt, etc. Så i stedet for at lave en beregning til sidst, så får man 
point for at lave det flere gange undervejs. Hvis man kan lave det automatisk og hurtigt, så er det 
betydeligt nemmere at lave det arbejde i løbet af processen. FBK siger også at der skal laves en LCA 
ved myndighedsprojekt og en ved afslutning. Så mindst 2 gange der. Så hvis man kan lave det 
hurtigt og dermed flere gange, så er det en mere holdbar ydelse. Man kan ikke lave et arbejde der 
tager 50-100 timer flere gange.  
Hvilke faser fra en LCA er vigtige at undersøge i den tidlige designfase? 
Så mange som muligt. Teoretisk set, så ville man sætte det op så man havde alle de faser med som 
man har i den sidste udregning, så er det helt fint. Man har DGNB hvor man har de almindelige 
faser. Så har man FBK hvor man skal tage stilling til D og transport til byggepladsen. Det tror jeg i 
første omgang kører med nogle defaultværdier. Hvis man kan kigge på så mange faser som muligt, 
vil det være fint. 
Hvilke resultater fra en LCA er vigtige at bruge som oplysning til bygningsdesigneren i 
den tidlige designfase? 
Politisk, er det kun interessant at kigge på GWP. Fordi det er den man går efter skal reduceres med 
70 %. Så er der nogle andre ting der følger med. Hvis man har lav GWP, så vil renewable energy 
også være lav. Så er der noget med hvilke materialetyper man bruger, så følger alle de andre 
parametre stort set det samme. Der er nogle afvigelser hvis man f.eks. har mange metaller. Hvis 
man har værktøjer hvor man kan beregne meget hurtigt og parametrisk så kan man faktisk lave de 
analyser om der er en forskel i de andre impact kategorier. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:121==
117 
 
Appendix D: Interview 2 – Christin Collin, Rambøll 
 
Evaluation Interview  
Christine Collin, Senior Bæredygtighedskonsulent, Rambøll 
 
I hvor høj grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel hurtighed tilpasset den tiltænkte 
designfase? (Her tænkes der muligheden for at foretage flere beregninger)  
Det tænker jeg at det så rigtig hurtigt ud, det tegner da godt. Jeg spurgte jo lidt ind til det første 
værktøj, netop i forhold til er det bare en boks og hvad nu hvis det er lidt mere kompliceret volumen. 
Ligger der så lidt arbejde i at tilpasse din grasshopper model der. Når den så er tilpasset så er det 
jo hurtigt.  
i forhold til variant studierne(de to bygningsdeles analyser), hvis det er rigtig simpelt så det stadig 
hurtigst at køre i excel. men hvis man nu siger at man har 5 forskellige lidt mere kompliceret projekt 
opbygninger du gerne vil sammenligne så kunne jeg godt forestille mig, at det var hurtigere, at lave 
det der i. Det samme gælder hvis din sammenligning ikke er så konkret endnu, men at du i 
virkeligheden bare har behov for de her gængse standard vægopbygninger, eller materialer fra LCA 
byg, så tænker jeg også at det må være ret hurtigt. Det kan man i hvertfald ikke lave i ecxel lige så 
hurtigt. Så er spørgsmålet om man kan lave det lige så hurtigt inde i LCA byg - det er jeg ikke sikker 
på at man kan.  
med den del der arbejder med den lidt mere detaljerede del, der tænker jeg også lidt at det store 
arbejde ligger forud for LCA modulet her, altså det ligger i det excel ark altså i at få sat det op og, 
koblet det rigtigt til din bygningsmodeller, om det er revid eller hvad det er. Det er der det store 
arbejde ligger, for lige så snart du har løst det, så virker det sindssygt hurtigt, det er også et af de 
steder man kan spare rigtig meget tid, især når vi kommer over i den frivillig bæredygtigheds klasse 
projekter, hvor at du skal kunne lave det her allerede til byggetilladelsen og igen til færdigmelding. 
Vi ser også flere og flere bygherre som stiller krav om et vist niveau, altså CO2 parameter. Så jeg 
ville til hver en tid anbefale at man lavede nogle nedslag f.eks. ved hver facit, hvor man igen regnede 
på sine bygninger og checkede hvad ens CO2 udledning lå på, så man ikke står til sidst ved 
færdigmelding og så ikke kunne leve op til det man har lovet. Der tænker jeg at der sparer man 
utrolig meget tid fordi man slipper for alle de her kliks i LCA byg, men at det bare sker automatisk.   
I hvor høj grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel præcision tilpasset den tiltænkte 
designfase? (Her tænkes der håndtering af materiale data. Der gøres i alle værktøjerne 
brug 
af 
LCAs 
materiale/bygningsdels 
bibliotek. 
I 
mass 
modelværktøjet 
er 
bygningsdelene også prædefinerede) 
Håndteringen af data, vil jeg sige er næsten så præcis som det kan blive. Det du måske mangler i 
din mass model, er i virkeligheden nogle check af om, har du nok bygningsdele, hvad med alle 
indervæggene hvordan tælles det egentlig? Det mere på modellen, af mængderne ikke i materiale 
eller LCA dataen, men nærmere mængderne jeg ville checke.  
Der findes en teori om at der er 3 niveauer af indervægge (lidt-, mellem- og mange-
indervægge) 
Så kan man næsten også høre der at den er selvfølgelig mindre præcis der, og det er jo klart. Jeg 
tænker at det nok fint præcist til det stadie af designet man er på, og det man håber på at kunne 
==PAGE:122==
118 
 
finde ud af om lidt tid, det er at man så vil kunne sammenligne de her tidlige mass model LCA’er 
med den endelige LCA, og så se hvor langt fra var vi egentlig. 
Hvad tror du et acceptabelt bud ville være hvis vi siger på gvp? 
Det er et godt spørgsmål, jeg ville nok gerne ned om en sådan 10-15% fra, det er i hvertfald det 
jeg nogle gange selv lægger oven i, som en sikkerhedsfaktor. Jeg har ikke rigtig noget at baserer 
det på. 
I hvor høj en grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel fleksibilitet? (Her tænkes der 
muligheden for at skræddersy inputdata og værktøjet til projektet) 
De er meget fleksible synes jeg, jeg sidder og tænker lidt hvad de mere skulle kunne. Man kan sige 
måske kunne man have noget der var endnu mere før den her massmodel, som heller ikke er bygget 
op på et excelark, men altså så skulle man have noget, hvor man kun skulle inputte: det her er en 
kontorbygning, 9 etager og en grundflade på så og så meget. Altså et helt minimum af input 
parametre. Det skulle være det eneste man kunne savne lidt. Men det ville så også gøre det endnu 
mere usikkert.  
men jeg tror at det er fleksibelt nok, jeg kan meget godt lide grasshopper formatet, fordi man kan 
ændre også selv i det, hvis man nu sidder med et eller andet specifikt, det kræver så at man har 
nogle kundskaber inden for grasshopper. Jeg synes du har lavet det sådan rimelig brugervenligt, 
man sidder ikke og roder rundt i det, så det kun dem der kan finde ud af det der ville gøre det. Et 
byggeri er jo aldrig det samme så man har næsten altid behov for sådan at tweeke nogle ting. Det 
er fedt at det kan man her.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
119 
 
Appendix E: Interview 2 – Katrine Juul, BIG 
 
Evaluation Interview 
Katrine Juul, Senior Architect & DGNB consultant, BIG 
 
I hvor høj grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel hurtighed tilpasset den tiltænkte 
designfase? (Her tænkes der muligheden for at foretage flere beregninger)  
I de første faser er det jo super vigtigt, specielt i konkurrence fase, at du kan lave det her på et par 
dage, fordi du har bare ikke mere tid, men det ville også være fedt hvis man kunne lave det 
undervejs, fordi så kan man gå ind og rette op på hvis der er noget, som ikke lever op til. derfor kan 
det heller ikke nytte noget, at du har noget som så tager en uge om det og for sig konkurrencen jo 
allerede er meget længere fremme og mange beslutninger er taget. Det skal helst være en dags 
sparring pr. gang. Så kan man altid til sidst se på det hele. Så en dags sparing på de første faser og 
så må det rigtig gerne tage længere tid på den næste faser, for der bliver det meget mere komplekst, 
og det skal være meget mere præcist. 
I hvor høj grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel præcision tilpasset den tiltænkte 
designfase? (Her tænkes der håndtering af materiale data. Der gøres i alle værktøjerne 
brug 
af 
LCAs 
materiale/bygningsdels 
bibliotek. 
I 
mass 
modelværktøjet 
er 
bygningsdelene også prædefinerede) 
Det synes jeg er fint, men i en konkurrence så vil du også gerne skille dig ud, så hvis der er fundet 
nogle skærver der kan bruges til et eller andet, så tror jeg det er vigtigt at man har noget man kan 
taste ind, så man kan skille sig ud, for eller så ville man bare have samme materiale som alle andre 
har.  
I hvor høj en grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel fleksibilitet? (Her tænkes der 
muligheden for at skræddersy inputdata og værktøjet til projektet) 
Da jeg kun har set det sådan her, så kan jeg ikke sige noget, der skal man sidde med dig kunne 
sige hvad kan det og hvad kan det ikke. Jeg er helt sikker på, at hvis der er nogle af mine kollegaer, 
der får fingrene i det der så vil de rigtig gerne kunne ændre så meget som muligt, så der er det fedt 
at det er grasshopper for der kan man ændre rigtig meget. Jeg ville bare være bange for at nogle 
bruger så gjorde det som ikke havde forstand på det, så der skal også være noget der er låst. Altså 
så man ikke kan få fingrene i, for ellers så ville det jo ende med noget forkert output fordi det lige 
passede ind i en eller anden konkurrence, og der lige var en eller anden praktikant der var lidt fiks 
på fingrene med det der grasshopper. Man skal passe rigtig meget på ellers kommer man til at stå 
på mål for, nogle forkerte CO2 emissioner. Det kan godt være at der ikke er så mange der ved så 
meget om det lige nu, men jeg tror helt klart at det noget man i fremtiden bliver vurderet på, altså 
hvad er det du har givet ud og passer det med det du sagde. Det et liability question, det er lige så 
stort et problem, som når man i de senere faser lover nogle mængder som ikke passer. Det kommer 
der til at være i fremtiden, som det vil være i konkurrencefasen man sagde “vi kunne lade vær at 
netzero”, hvis man så ikke kan det, fordi du rent faktisk har husket tallene, det duer jo ikke. Derfor 
så tror jeg at det er vigtigt du låser noget på en måde.  
I hvor høj en grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel brugervenlighed? (Her tænkes 
primært user interface i grasshopper) 
==PAGE:124==
120 
 
Altså vi har også snakken hos os, altså lidt hvordan bruger man tingene, hvor meget skal være op 
til folk selv, skal der være noget supervision på en eller anden måde, skal vi gå ind og overvåge 
projekterne. Det er vel grundlæggende for hvordan tunet også bliver bygget op, fordi er det sådan 
noget med at man har et opslags møde og så sætter man nogle parametre ind og så giver man det 
til folk, så de kan lege med det. Eller skal man gå ind løbende og kigge på tingene, hvad er det vi 
sidder og laver? Sådan lidt overvågning. Jeg ved ikke om det er godt eller skidt, jeg tror det kommer 
an på hvad for en tegnestue man har, hvor stort det er, hvem der sidder med det. Jeg synes helt 
klart at det skal være sådan at folk kan lege med det, for de forstår det meget bedre hvis kan det. 
Man skal selv kunne sidde og rykke på tingene. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
121 
 
Appendix F: Interview 2 – Rob Marsh, C.F. Møller 
 
Evaluation interview 
Rob Marsh 
 
I hvor høj grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel hurtighed tilpasset den tiltænkte 
designfase? (Her tænkes der muligheden for at foretage flere beregninger)  
I virkeligheden laver man ikke de der typer analyser, fordi det er for langsomt på en hel bygning. 
Det der med bygningsdele, bliver det ikke det samme eller hurtigere i forhold til at bruge LCA byg? 
fordi så kan man fx sætte det op til at lave et eller andet parametrisk kunne man ik? så man kunne 
få det til at kigge på ting forskelligt og kører igennem. Det må være det samme eller hurtigere.  
så er der det sidste værktøj som er hele det modul som vi lavede i konkurrenceprojektet. 
Ja det må være basen i har der, fordi du skal ikke indtaste det hele. Ja den har helt klart en fordel 
på hurtighed for så kan man lave et eller andet manuelt træk og så taste det hele ind, så det også 
med på. Så har man også mulighed for at have bedre systematik over det.  
I hvor høj grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel præcision tilpasset den tiltænkte 
designfase? (Her tænkes der håndtering af materiale data. Der gøres i alle værktøjerne 
brug 
af 
LCAs 
materiale/bygningsdels 
bibliotek. 
I 
mass 
modelværktøjet 
er 
bygningsdelene også prædefinerede) 
Ja det er det, eller mere præcis. Hvis man skulle lave et eller andet nu, så ville man måske tage et 
udsnit ud af en bygning og så finde de der bygningsdele alligevel, så. 
I forhold til præcision af dataen i projekteringsfasen 
Så ville man finde frem til hvor man kunne lave lidt om, så man kan bestemme materialer og den 
slags. Hvis der var andre løsninger, hvor at de standard bygningsdele de har tilpasninger. 
Vi som tegnestue kunne arbejde med at udvikle vores eget materiale katalog og så sætte 
det ind? 
ja, men jeg tror problemet der er at der er ikke nogle projekter hvor man kører med samme løsning 
fra projekt til projekt, det er altid et eller andet specifikt. Det er hvad jeg har af erfaringer jeg prøver 
at lave det med nogle lidt mere faste opbygninger. Det viste sig ikke at passe med virkeligheden, 
fordi det er et lidt anderledes bestemt projekt.  
så et materialebibliotek ville måske ikke være relevant, fordi projekterne er så 
forskellige? 
Det jeg tror man gør, er at man tager en eller anden løsning man har brugt før og så laver man en 
tilpasning. så det fint hvis man det fra tidligere projekter, som man så laver lidt om, det tror jeg er 
hvordan det fungerer.  
I hvor høj en grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel fleksibilitet? (Her tænkes der 
muligheden for at skræddersy inputdata og værktøjet til projektet) 
Jamen det må være rimelig høj fordi det er muligt at lave nogle tilpasninger, men det er hele fordelen 
ved grasshopper på den måde, at man kan lave de der tilpasninger, til det projekt efter behov.  
Det kan være ikke så fleksibelt at man kun kan arbejde på en shoebox model? lige nu 
==PAGE:126==
122 
 
Ja det er rigtigt, men jeg tror det er betydeligt nemmere at gå fra en shoebox og op i kompleksitet, 
end det er hvis man havde lavet en meget kompleks model og så kunne simplificere det. Fordi vi 
kan meget nemt udskifte en model med en model, hvor der er vægge og vinduer og de forskellige 
overflader der bliver læst i rhino.  
Det bliver mere fleksibelt. Det i havde prøvet hedder minimum viable product, hvor man kan tilføje 
en kompleksitet og problemet med meget software udvikling er at det starter alt for komplekst og 
så bliver man aldrig færdig, så det bedre at lave det absolut minimum og så tilføje kompleksiteten 
bagefter.  
I hvor høj en grad har værktøjerne en acceptabel brugervenlighed? (Her tænkes 
primært user interface i grasshopper) 
det man gør det er, at man vælger nogle forskellige bygningsdele ik? i rhino interface og så sker det 
helt automatisk, så det må være betydeligt mere brugervenligt end hvis man skal finde frem til alle 
de ting man skal taste ind i LCA byg. Jeg tror det er LCA byg du ender med at lave rigtig mange, for 
man skal klikke rundt flere gange, flere forskellige steder bare for at lave den samme ting 10 gange, 
som man ikke behøver at gøre nu. så det er betydeligt mere brugervenligt. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
123 
 
Appendix G: Predefined construction elements developed for application case 1 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:130==
126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:131==
127 
 
 
