==PAGE:1==
Technical University Of Denmark
Master of Science in Pharmaceutical Design
and Engineering
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in
Microcontainers
Author:
Carl Gustav Lund Andersson (s154331)
Supervisors:
Postdoc Chiara Mazzoni, DTU Health Tech
Assoc. Prof. Line Hagner Nielsen, DTU Health Tech
Prof. Anja Boisen, DTU Health Tech
February 24th, 2021
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Project
Master Thesis
Title
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers
Author
Carl Gustav Lund Andersson (s154331)
Supervisors
Postdoc Chiara Mazzoni
Associate Professor Line Hagner Nielsen
Professor Anja Boisen
MSc programme
MSc in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
University
Technical University of Denmark
ECTS points
35
Date of Submission
The 24th of February 2021
==PAGE:4==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Preface
The present dissertation describes the research carried out by the author for the
MSc programme Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering at DTU Health Tech, the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) from September 2020 to February 2021 with
research group Nanoprobes in the Center of Intelligent Drug Delivery and Sensing
Using Microcontainers and Nanomechanics (IDUN). The project was supervised by
Postdoc Chiara Mazzoni, Associate Professor Line Hagner Nielsen, and Professor
Anja Boisen, for a total of 35 ECTS points.
Carl Gustav Lund Andersson (s154331)
Kongens Lyngby, February 24th, 2021
==PAGE:5==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Associate Professor Line Hagner Nielsen and especially
Postdoc Chiara Mazzoni for giving me the great opportunity of gaining insight to
the world of nanotechnology and extending my knowledge on drug delivery. Thank
you for the many good discussions, the many shared frustrations and the guiding
hand that was extended throughout the whole project. Thank you to Professor
Anja Boisen for giving me the great opportunity of joining her team.
Thanks to DTU Health Tech and especially IDUN for welcoming me and for
being eager to help in the lab. Thank you PhD student Juliane Fjelrad Christfort
for both assistance and suggestions along the way. Thank you laboratory technician
Lotte Hansen for helping with the HPLC system.
Thanks to the student oﬃce. Thank you Giulia, Carmen, Nicoline and Chrysillis
for the days of fun and good company. A special thanks to Giulia for your kindness,
your compassion, your support and cheering me up after long and grueling days
in the lab.
Lastly, a great thanks to my family and friends for cheering on me
throughout the project.
==PAGE:6==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Abstract
Orally administered therapeutics must cross many biological barriers before reaching
the pathological site. pH-variations, hydrolysis, and enzymatic degradation may
inactivate drugs or reduce their potency, which leads to the presence of suboptimal
concentrations of drugs at the desired site. Micrometer sized polymeric cylindrical
containers, known as microcontainers (MCs), have been developed for oral delivery
of therapeutics.
The purpose of MCs is to shield the drug cargo from pH and
enzymatic degradation.
Combined with a coating from pH dependent solubility
polymers, MCs containing prodrug can safely pass through the stomach and release
their contents in the small intestine, where pH is neutral.
For this project, MCs will be loaded with the prodrug Valacyclovir and coated with
a pH sensitive polymer to obtain drug release only in the intestine. Drug release and
degradation will be evaluated in vitro. Furthermore, ex vivo drug permeation using
porcine intestinal tissue will be assessed using MCs in Franz diﬀusion cells. Lastly,
drug absorption will be quantiﬁed in vivo using capsules loaded with individual
MCs containing prodrug in rats. While in vitro studies do not indicate shielding
eﬀect of prodrugs when using MCs, ex vivo studies show prodrug permeation to be
feasible when using MCs. Lastly, in vivo studies assessing absorption of prodrugs
when using MCs were not conclusive.
==PAGE:7==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Resumé
Oralt administrerede lægemidler krydser mange biologiske barrierer inden de
ankommer til det patologiske sted.
pH-variationer, hydrolyse og enzymatisk
nedbrydning kan undervejs inaktivere lægemidler eller reducere doseringen, hvilket
fører til lave koncentrationer af lægemidler på det ønskede sted.
Polymeriske,
cylindriske beholdere i mikrometer-skala, kendt som mikrocontainere (MC’ere),
er blevet udviklet til oral administrering af lægemidler. Formålet med MC’ere er
at beskytte lægemidler mod pH og enzymatisk nedbrydning. Kombineret med en
belægning fra pH-afhængige polymerer, der opløses ved ønsket pH, kan MC’ere
lastet med prodrugs sikkert passere gennem maven og frigive deres indhold i
tyndtarmen, hvor pH er neutral.
Dette projekt vil undersøge MC’ere fyldt med lægemidlet Valacyclovir og
belagt med en pH-følsom polymer for at opnå frigivelse af lægemiddel i
tarmen.
Både afgivelse og nedbrydning af lægemidlet vil blive evalueret in
vitro.
Derudover vil gennemtrængning af lægemiddel gennem svinetarmsvæv ex
vivo blive vurderet ved anvendelse af MC’ere i Franz-diﬀusions celler.
Endelig
kvantiﬁceres lægemiddelabsorptionen in vivo ved anvendelse af kapsler, fyldt med
individuelle MC’ere indeholdende lægemiddel, i rotter. Mens in vitro undersøgelser
ikke indikerer beskyttelse og nedsat degradering af lægemidler lastet i MC’ere,
viser ex vivo studier gennemtrængning af lægemiddel gennem svinetarmsvæv at
være mulig ved brug af MC’ere. Endelig var in vivo undersøgelserne, der vurderede
absorption af lægemiddel ved brug af MC’ere, ikke konkluderende.
==PAGE:8==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
List of abbreviations
AC
Acyclovir
ACN
Acetonitrile
AUC
Area under the curve
DBS
Dibutyl sebacate
DDS
Drug delivery systems
EDTA
Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
EL100
Eudragit® L100
EL100-55
Eudragit® L100-55
EM
Electron microscopy
ES100
Eudragit® S100
FaSSGF
Fasted state simulated gastric ﬂuid
FaSSIF
Fasted state simulated intestinal ﬂuid
FD70
70 kDa ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate–dextran
GI
Gastrointestinal
HBA
Hydrogen bond acceptor
HBD
Hydrogen bond donor
hPEPT-1
Human intestinal peptide transporter 1
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography
HPT-1
Human peptide transporter 1
HSV-1
Herpes simplex virus type 1
HSV-2
Herpes simplex virus type 2
IPA
2-propanol
LC
Liquid chromatography
I
==PAGE:9==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
LOD
Limit of detection
MC
Microcontainer
MeOH
Methanol
MS
Mass spectrometry
NSAID
Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs
PBS
Phosphate-buﬀered saline
RGM
Rat gastric media
RIM
Rat intestinal media
SAR
Structure-acitivty relationship
SE
Secondary electron
SEM
Scanning electron microscope
Si
Silicon
TEM
Transmission electron microscopy
Ti-Au
Titanium gold
VAL
Valacyclovir hydrochloride
II
==PAGE:10==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Gastrointestinal Tract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Oral Drug Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Controlled Drug Release . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Prodrugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.3
Lipinski’s Rule of Five . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Acyclvoir & Valacyclovir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Pharmacokinetics of Valacyclovir
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Pharmacodynamics of Valacyclovir
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Oral Microdevices for Drug Delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.1
SU-8 Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5
Spraycoating SU-8 Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.6
Ex vivo Drug Permeation Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.7
In vivo Drug Absorption Assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.8
Liquid Chromatography Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.9
Microplate Reader
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.10 Morphology of Drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.10.1 Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2
Hypotheis & Research Aim
19
3
Materials & Methods
20
3.1
Loading of Prodrug in Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Spray Coating of Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy for Evaluation of Loading and Coating
of MC chips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Sample Preparation of in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo Study . . . . . . .
26
3.4.1
In vitro Release Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.2
Standard Curve and Quantiﬁcation of In vitro Release Study .
28
3.4.3
Ex vivo Drug Permeation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.4
Standard
Curve
and
Quantiﬁcation
of
Ex
vivo
Drug
Permeation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.5
In vivo Drug Absorption Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.6
Standard
Curve
and
Quantiﬁcation
of
In
vivo
Drug
Absorption Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
III
==PAGE:11==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
3.5
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Results & Discussion
39
4.1
Loading and Coating of SU-8 Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
In vitro Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Ex vivo Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
In vivo Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Conclusion
59
6
Future Perspectives
60
IV
==PAGE:12==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
1
Introduction
Oral drug administration is usually favoured due to its convenience and patient
acceptance. However, many therapeutics have poor solubility, permeability and/or
stability in the gastrointestinal (GI) environment due to the challenges posed by
the GI tract (Zhang et al., 2013). Faced with the many challenges, including the
acidic gastric environment and the continuous secretion of mucus that protects the
GI tract, oral administration is likely to result in poor bioavailability (Ensign et al.,
2012).
1.1
The Gastrointestinal Tract
The pH in the GI tract greatly varies according to location. pH is typically observed
to be 1.2 in the empty stomach (but may ﬂuctuate after meals), 5–7 in the small
intestine and between 6–7.5 in the colon (Gaucher et al., 2010; Dressman et al.,
1990). Furthermore, the intestinal epithelium is composed of an eﬃcient physical
barrier that covers the surfaces of the GI tract. This allows selective absorption
of nutrients, electrolytes and ﬂuids while also protecting the host from foreign
organisms and compounds (Chen et al., 2011). This epithelial cell layer comprises
both immune (enteroendocrine cells and M cells) absorptive (enterocytes) and
secretory cells (goblet cells and Paneth cells) (Worthington et al., 2018).
Enterocytes are the most abundant epithelial cells in the intestine.
They are
dense and consist of organized microvilli on their surface. They are responsible for
transporting nutrients from the lumen to inner connective tissue and blood vessels
(Johnson et al., 2006). The second most abundant cell type are the mucus-secreting
goblet cells.
The number of goblet cells increases from the duodenum to the
terminal ileum (Johnson et al., 2006).
Lastly, the Paneth cells are located at the base of the crypts of Lieberkühn
(i.e. a gland found in submucosa between the intestinal epithelium lining of the
small intestine and large intestine).
When exposed to pathogens, Paneth cells
secrete speciﬁc anti-microbial proteins (α-Defensins) that selectively bind and kill
pathogens (Cheng and Leblond, 1974; Lueschow and McElroy, 2020). Schematic
representation is shown on Figure 1.
1
==PAGE:13==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the intestinal epithelium. Adapted from Lueschow
and McElroy, 2020, created in BioRender.com
As mentioned, goblet cells alongside submucosal glands are vastly responsible for the
secretion of mucus, a complex hydrogel composed of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids,
salts, antibodies, bacteria, and cellular debris (Sood and Panchagnula, 2001). The
main protein component of mucus is mucins. Mucins are large molecules, typically
0.5 and 40 MDa in size, formed by the linking of numerous mucin monomers,
each about 0.3 to 0.5 MDa, coated with a complex, diverse array of proteoglycans
(Shehaan and Carlstedt, 1984; Dekker et al., 2002).
The various components
in mucus work together to form a nanoscopically heterogeneous environment for
particle transport which has been extensively researched for drug delivery (Lai et al.,
2009).
1.2
Oral Drug Delivery
The ﬂuctuations in pH and the constant secretion of mucus plays a key role in oral
drug administration. Poor bioavailability of orally administrated drugs is typically
caused by poor drug absorption through the GI mucosa and/or low aqueous
solubility (Mrsny, 2012). In order to optimize bioavailability, orally administered
drugs must transit along the GI tract, adhere and inﬁltrate through the mucus
layer, travel across the intestinal epithelium, inﬁltrate the portal vein and ﬁnally
reach the peripheral circulation (Zhang et al., 2013).
However, many drugs are
susceptible to GI tract pH variations, as already discussed. Such pH variations can
2
==PAGE:14==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
cause pH-induced oxidation, deamidation or hydrolysis of protein drugs, leading to
loss of their activity (Sood and Panchagnula, 2001).
Conventional drug delivery methods administer therapeutics orally, suppository,
topically, through inhalation or injection (Rajak et al., 2011).
Then, they are
steadily distributed in the body and cross many biological barriers before reaching
their destination, the pathological sites of action. Upon reaching its destination, a
large quantity of drug is expected to be inactivated (Bae and Park, 2011; Sanjay
et al., 2016).
As a result to poor patient response due to the many challenges
already discussed, therapeutics are used in larger dosage which increases the cost
of treatment and may also cause undesirable cytotoxic eﬀects to normal cells and
tissues in the body.
In addition to lack of eﬃcacy due to pH ﬂuctuations and musuc secretion,
immediate or burst release, as seen in conventional drug release, where tablets
and capsules are formulated to release the active drug immediately, can also be
troublesome. This sudden therapeutic burst release after administration may cause
local concentrations to reach a toxic range. It is then followed by prompt decrease
in concentration, reaching the sub-therapeutic range after a short duration of time.
Thus, the optimum drug concentration, also known as the therapeutic window,
lasts for a small period of time (Sanjay et al., 2016).
This type of formulation
is very often seen in therapeutics for oral administration that are required to
work fast such as NSAID (i.e.
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs) and other
types of medication. Thus, it is widespread but not a universal strategy for oral
administration.
Burst release of therapeutics not only reduces the eﬃcacy of the therapy but
also increases the risk of adverse eﬀects and cytotoxicity, as already mentioned.
Lastly, low aﬃnity between therapeutic and pathological sites may decrease the
desired action of the therapeutic (Sanjay et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2013).
In
total, conventional drug delivery methods display a multitude of limitations, largely
caused by poor solubility, high toxicity, non-speciﬁc delivery and high dosage.
1.2.1
Controlled Drug Release
Using controlled release of therapeutics, the concentration is stabilized within the
therapeutic window for much longer, increasing eﬃcacy and patient compliance. As
3
==PAGE:15==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
a result, both local and systemic adverse eﬀects are minimized and bioavailability
improved.
Thus, sustained release provides a decrease in adverse eﬀects by
preventing ﬂuctuation of the therapeutic concentration in the body by releasing
therapeutic cargo at a predetermined rate in order to establish a constant drug
concentration over time (Fathima et al., 2012). This can be achieved using oral
drug delivery systems (DDS)
Oral DDS are used to enhance the bioavailability of both conventional small
molecules and biopharmaceuticals such as proteins and peptides. The great beneﬁt
of using DDS is that they overcome the obstacles already discussed; the lacking
solubility of drugs, lack of eﬃcacy due to pH and enzymatic degradation and
ﬂuctuations in drug concentrations.
Diﬀerent approaches have been explored
such as modiﬁcations of the drug itself by adding functional groups to improve
its permeability/solubility; encapsulation using nanoparticles; use of protease
inhibitors to decrease proteolytic degradation drastically; or use of polymers
hydrogels and other materials for drug delivery (Shetty and Srinivasan, 2015).
In general, drug delivery and eﬃcient release depends upon route of application,
release mechanism, vessel size, and delivery and targeting methods among other
parameters (Sandri et al., 2013).
1.2.2
Prodrugs
There are also ways of improving bioavailability by changing the drug design itself.
As shortly mentioned, poor solubility amongst other factors can greatly inﬂuence
therapeutic eﬃcacy. In order to increase solubility, the prodrug strategy is widely
used. A prodrug is a poorly active or inactive compound containing the parental
drug that undergoes some in vivo biotransformation through chemical or enzymatic
cleavage, enabling the delivery of the active molecule at eﬃcacious levels (Jornada
et al., 2016). A popular example is aspirin which is transformed into the active
metabolite, salicylate, through enzymatic cleavage, making it one of the most
successful prodrugs discovered to date (Jóhannesson, 2000).
Prodrugs are categorized into two.
One is bioprecursors where an inactive
compound with a carrier is rapidly converted to an active drug in vivo to perform
its desired pharmacological eﬀect. The other is carrier-linked prodrugs which can
be classiﬁed as bipartite prodrugs (carrier is linked directly to the parent drug)
and tripartite prodrugs (a spacer links the carrier to the parent drug) (Jornada
4
==PAGE:16==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
et al., 2016). Carriers are commonly attached by chemical groups such as an ester,
amide, carbamate, carbonate, ether, imine, phosphate, among others (Beaumont
et al., 2003).
The majority of drugs are administered at sites that are remote
from their site of action, the most common route of drug delivery being the oral
route. The optimal physicochemical properties to allow high absorption from oral
administration are well established and include a limit on molecular size, hydrogen
bonding potential and adequate lipophilicity (Beaumont et al., 2003).
These
limitations are commonly referred to as Lipinski’s Rule of Five.
1.2.3
Lipinski’s Rule of Five
Lipinski’s Rule, ﬁrst reported in 1999, predicts that poor absorption or permeation
is more likely when there are more than 3 hydrogen bond donors (HBD), 7 hydrogen
bond acceptors (HBA), molecular weight is greater than 400 Da and logP is greater
than 5 (Fernandes et al., 2016).
For many drug targets,
synthetic strategies can be done to balance the
physicochemical properties required for eﬀective transcellular absorption and
the structure-acitivty relationship (SAR) for the drug target.
At often times,
the requirement for signiﬁcant polarity and functional groups with high hydrogen
bonding potential such as carboxylic acids and alcohols can be introduced.
In
such cases, prodrug strategies have been employed. The idea behind the prodrug
strategy is to introduce lipophilicity and mask hydrogen bonding groups of an
active compound by the addition of another moiety, most commonly an ester
(Beaumont et al., 2003). This is also the case for the prodrug Valacyclovir.
1.3
Acyclvoir & Valacyclovir
Acyclovir (AC) (Figure 2) is a synthetic purine nucleoside analogue derived
from guanine and is mainly used for the treatment of viral infections such as
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2), varicella-zoster virus,
Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus (Granero and Amidon, 2006; O’Brien and
Campoli-Richards, 1989).
Certain literature, however, claim that it is not very
eﬀective in treating cytomegalovirus infections as the cytomegalovirus-thymidine
kinase does not phosphorylate and activate the drug (Mondal, 2007). Despite in
vitro activity against viral infections and a favorable toxicity proﬁle, many potential
applications of acyclovir are limited by its poor absorption.
5
==PAGE:17==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
AC is slowly and incompletely absorbed from the human GI tract due to limited
aqueous solubility and low permeability (Nair et al., 2014). Oral bioavailability of
AC is reported anywhere from 12 to 30% but most studies indicate bioavailability
within a range of 12 to 20% (Fletcher and Bean, 1985; Arduino and Porter, 2006;
Granero and Amidon, 2006; Patel, 1997). The prodrug, Valacyclovir or Valacyclocir
hydrochloride (VAL) (Figure 2), was synthesized by the addition of an amino acid
l-valine to AC (making it a carrier-linked esteriﬁed prodrug), resulting in increased
bioavailability by 3- to 5-fold over that achievable with oral AC (54% versus 12
to 20% for oral AC) whilst requiring less frequent administration (Granero and
Amidon, 2006; Patel, 1997).
Physiochemical properties for both AC and VAL
is shown on Table 1 (PubChem, 2021; FDA, 2005; ChemicalBook.com, 2017;
Guidetopharmacology.org, 2021).
Figure 2: Chemical structure of acyclovir (AC) and valacyclovir (VAL)
1.3.1
Pharmacokinetics of Valacyclovir
The conversion of VAL to AC likely already occurs within the gut lumen prior to
absorption, evidenced by the recovery of AC in faeces without evidence of VAL
(Soul-Lawton et al., 1995), in the small intestine after uptake (but before entry into
the portal blood system), and in the liver before entry into systemic circulation as
illustrated on Figure 3 (MacDougall and Guglielmo, 2004).
In vitro studies implicate the human intestinal peptide transporter 1 (hPEPT-1) as
well as human peptide transporter 1 (HPT-1) as carrier proteins for VAL. hPEPT-1
is expressed constitutively in the intestine and serves to transport dietary-derived
dipeptides and drugs with dipeptide-like structures (e.g. β-lactams) (Phan et al.,
2003; Han et al., 1998; Ganapathy et al., 1998).
6
==PAGE:18==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 1: Physiochemical values for acyclovir (AC) and valacyclovir (VAL)
Acyclovir
Valacyclovir
Chemical
structure
C8H11N5O3
C13H21ClN6O4
MW
225.086 Da
360.132 Da
logP
-1.9
-0.3
pKa
value(s)
2.52 and 9.35
1.90, 7.47,
and 9.43
Water solubility
(mg/mL at 25°C)
1.41
174
Melting point (°C)
255
170
Hydrogen bond
donor
3
3
Hydrogen bond
acceptors
5
7
In vitro studies also demonstrated increased mucosal-to-serosal (but not vice
versa) transport of VAL compared with AC, supporting the presence of carrier-
mediated transport and giving explanation to the increase in bioavailability using
the prodrug strategy (De et al., 1998). Inside the intestine, in vitro studies have
demonstrated a high rate of conversion of VAL into AC within intestinal cells (De
et al., 1998; Han et al., 1998). After entering the portal circulation, the remaining
prodrug enters the liver where VAL is rapidly and almost completely hydrolyzed to
AC prior to systemic exposure.
In vivo experiments in rats observed rapid hydrolysis in liver homogenates,
as well as a novel enzyme, valacyclovir hydrolase, to be responsible for the majority
of drug conversion, as illustrated on Figure 4 (Burnette and Demiranda, 1994).
Lastly, AC is either excreted or metabolised through hepatic metabolism. Overview
is shown on Figure 3.
7
==PAGE:19==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure
3:
Pharmacokinetics
of
acyclovir
(AC)
and
valacyclovir
(VAL).
Oral
administration of VAL yields systemic AC through uptake by dipeptide transporters in
the gut lumen and hydrolysis by esterase present in the gut lumen, intestinal wall as well
as the liver. Estimated >95% of VAL is converted into AC while the rest is excreted.
Adapted from MacDougall and Guglielmo, 2004, created in BioRender.com
1.3.2
Pharmacodynamics of Valacyclovir
As already mentioned, VAL is a highly potent inhibitor of HSV-1 and HSV-2 as well
as varicella-zoster virus, and has extremely low toxicity for the normal host cells.
The selectivity is reasoned by the ability of HSV-1, HSV-2 and varicella-zoster virus,
to code for a viral thymidine kinase which is capable of phosphorylating AC to a
monophosphate as seen on Figure 4 (Elion, 1982). The molecule is then converted
by cellular kinases to the diphosphate and then to the triphosphate analog. Due to
competitive inhibition of viral DNA polymerase, the triphosphate analog is able to
inhibit viral DNA replication. The incorporation of AC triphosphate into the viral
DNA chain results in termination of viral DNA synthesis, eﬀectively inhibiting
further replication of the virus (Mondal, 2007). The transformation is shown in
Figure 4.
8
==PAGE:20==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 4: Enzymatic conversion and phosphorylation of valacyclovir (VAL) to acyclovir
(AC) triphosphate
Even with increased solubulity, VAL is still steadily hydrolyzed or degraded
enzymatically in the GI tract. In order to shield the drug and increase therapeutic
dose, microdevices can be deployed.
1.4
Oral Microdevices for Drug Delivery
Microtechnology in regards to drug delivery has been used for fabrication and/or
assembly of diﬀerent components for drug delivery in the micro-scale.
These
microdevices have drug reservoirs in micro-scale, making it possible to avoid
modiﬁcations to the drug itself and make it highly targeted for GI drug delivery.
Microdevices utilize silicon (Si) and polymer-based fabrication techniques, and
are able to target speciﬁc tissue (such as intestinal tissue at neutral pH) that is
considered unfeasible using traditional therapeutic methods. Thus, microdevices
provide a well-controlled platform for sensitive drugs with an increase in drug
stability and delivery times (Sanjay et al., 2016).
Microfabrication
has
been
developed
to
fabricate
micron-sized
features
for
development of novel drug delivery microdevices.
Fabrication of diﬀerent
implantable and oral drug delivery devices based on Si, glass and Si elastomer
amongst other materials are well explored in literature (Shetty and Srinivasan,
2015). They typically hold a cavity shape, with the top and bottom part sealed
by a polymeric layer. This cavity shape shares the design of the microcontainers
developed by IDUN, DTU Health Tech (Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark).
Once the sealed polymer layer is triggered to open, the loaded drug is released from
9
==PAGE:21==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
the cavity. The great beneﬁt of microfabrication is that surface features, particle
size, and shape of an engineered device for drug delivery can utilize the advantages
of microparticles such as overall large reservoir for drug loading and the addition of
mulitple drug reservoirs in one single microdevice (Christfort et al., 2020; Shetty
and Srinivasan, 2015).
Furthermore, microfabricated devices can be utilized for
unidirectional release, minimize enzyme degradation, and precise dosing (Shetty
and Srinivasan, 2015), all favourable in oral DDS.
Polymers especially have been extensively researched for these systems both
in terms of fabrication of microdevices. Polymers in oral DDS play three major
roles:
drug protection, delayed release and drug release.
Furthermore, they
are regarded as unique types of biomaterials with easy availability, regulatory
acceptance, and unique physicochemical properties. Their application in oral drug
delivery ranges from speciﬁc manufacturing processes to those involved in modifying
drug release. Using polymeric excipients for drug delivery is beneﬁcial due to their
properties and characteristics that often relates to their solubility in water and
organic solvents, their overall charge (anionic, cationic, neutral), pH dependency,
rheology, molecular weight, cross-link density, and swelling capacity (Mastropietro
et al., 2017).
In terms of microdevices, polymers are also well explored and favored over
other materials, such as Si, as they can biodegrade completely and release the drug
at a controlled rate at a local site (Sanjay et al., 2016). Thus, no need for surgical
removal of the microdevice is required, given that the polymers are biodegradable.
1.4.1
SU-8 Microcontainers
Microcontainers (MCs) are micrometer-sized cylindrical microdevices, fabricated
in polymeric materials with an inner cavity for drug storage (Mosgaard et al.,
2019). The primary purpose of MCs is drug protection after oral intake in order
to optimize drug integrity and stability. The diameter and height of the MC is
approximately 300 µm and 250 µm, respectively, which enables eﬃcient drug loading
due to the large volume of the MC cavity. Furthermore, MCs have shown to provide
eﬃcient therapeutic dosing (Mazzoni et al., 2019) and several studies have shown
an increased oral bioavailability of pharmaceuticals when using MCs as oral DDS
(Nielsen et al., 2016; Mazzoni et al., 2017). Schematic representation of a MC is
seen on Figure 5.
10
==PAGE:22==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 5: Schematic representation of a microcontainer (MC) chip from silica with a total
of 625 MCs attached (size not accurate) and close-up on an individual MC made from SU-8
polymer. Created in BioRender.com
The MCs are made from SU-8, a polymer that is highly functionalized with 8
epoxy groups as is shown in Figure 5 and has the further advantage of being
photo-patternable, allowing feature sizes down to a few microns to be readily
fabricated with two steps of conventional mask-based photolithography on a Si
wafer (Nielsen et al., 2016).
Conventional mask-based photolithography can be described in short as a
microfabrication process where UV light is used to transfer a geometric pattern
from a photomask to a photosensitive chemical photoresist in order to develop the
geometric pattern on the wafer. One of the advantages of this technique is the lack
of polydispersity (Mosgaard et al., 2019). In the case for MC chips, microfabrication
of SU-8 MCs takes place on a wafer made from either Si or titanium gold (Ti-Au).
The wafer is then cut into Si chips, each chip containing 625 MCs and having a
size of 12.8 × 12.8 mm. Wafer made from Ti-Au enables easy detachment of MC
from the wafers which is helpful when loading capsules with individual MCs. The
fabrication technique allows for very uniform sizes and shapes of the MCs, thus
enabling uniform drug loading. It should also be mentioned that SU-8 polymer is
not biodegradable.
It is also worth mentioning that only one side of the MC is open, allowing
uni-directional drug release (Nielsen et al., 2016). The open cavity of the MC can
then be closed with a diﬀerent type of polymer for precise drug release that can be
tuned to dissolve and release loading depending on the surrounding environment.
11
==PAGE:23==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
MCs can be utilized with a variety of loadings such as drugs (Mazzoni et al., 2017),
biopharmaceuticals (Mazzoni et al., 2019), probiotics (Kamguyan et al., 2021),
hormones (insulin) (Jørgensen et al., 2020) and vaccines (von Halling Laier et al.,
2019).
1.5
Spraycoating SU-8 Microcontainers
Spray coating can be used to deposit polymer thin ﬁlm coatings that can be utilized
for protection of the cargo inside the MC and can be used as a controlled release
system at arrival in the small intestine. Spray coating can be brieﬂy described as
the formation of very ﬁne droplets and their deposition on a speciﬁc substrate. The
liquid (or in this case polymer solution) used for the coating breaks up into tiny
droplets by atomization in the spray nozzle (Bose et al., 2013).
The resulting droplets are then deposited on the substrate below the spray
nozzle to form a coating. Commonly, air pressure is utilized for the atomization
liquid coming through the nozzle and is broken down into tiny droplets upon
passage through a narrow oriﬁce (Tobiska and Kleinebudde, 2003). The nozzle itself
can deposit liquid in three diﬀerent directions; X, Y (horizontally and vertically
movement of the nozzle, respectively) and the Z-coordinates (height diﬀerence
between nozzle and material), making it very versatile for polymer thinﬁlm coating.
Variables include change in air pressure (can be used to modify shape of the
spray itself), infusion rate (mL/min), loops (i.e.
the number of times the same
area is spraycoated, also called spray passes), nozzle movement speed, height of
nozzle upon polymer deposition, polymer used for coating, among other things.
Variables may individually aﬀect homogenity and thickness of the spray coated
area.
Overall, the advantages of polymer thinﬁlm coatings are simplicity, good
transfer eﬃciency, precise coating on planar and non-planar surfaces, and excellent
reproducibility (Bose et al., 2013). Schematic of the features and setup of a spray
coating system is shown on Figure 6. Combining polymer thinﬁlm coatings with
the use of pH-sensitive polymers can furthermore enable release at the desired
target in vivo, making it a very important tool for drug delivery.
12
==PAGE:24==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 6: Schematic representation of setup for spray coating of microcontainer (MC)
chip. The polymer solution contained at the syringe pump is broken up into tiny droplets
by atomization in the spray nozzle. The resulting droplets are then deposited on the MC
chip to form a coating. Adapted from Bose et al., 2013, created in BioRender.com
Controlled release systems can be used to obtain prolonged or controlled drug
delivery, to improve bioavailability and to target drug to speciﬁc sites.
These
systems can also protect drugs from degradation.
These release systems can
be triggered from a variety of stimuli depending on the material used.
Stimuli-
responsive polymers are well described in literature and can be used to trigger
drug release in response to an external stimuli.
Examples are pH, temperature,
photo-irradation, presence of biomolecules in solution etc.
which make them an
excellent platform for controllable drug release (Qing et al., 2013).
The purpose of MCs is thus to shield the drug until the MC reaches the
small intestine.
In order to open the cavity of the MC, as shortly mentioned,
pH-sensitive polymers can be used to capture the drug inside the MC until it
reaches the intestine.
Only then should the enteric coating that protects the
opening of the MC dissolve in order to release drug loading. This can be achieved
using a pH-sensitive polymer that is stable in low pH and will disintegrate
in neutral pH. Several polymers have the characteristics of protecting the drug
against the action of enzymes and acidic gastric ﬂuids, one of them being Eudragit®.
Eudragit® is a copolymer of methyl acrylate commercialized by Evonik Industries
with diﬀerent acidic or alkaline end groups, which allows for a pH-dependent release.
Examples are Eudragit® L100-55 (EL100-55) dissolves at a pH > 5.5 (suitable for
13
==PAGE:25==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
duodenum targeting); Eudragit® L100 (EL100) dissolves at a pH 6–7 (suitable
for jejunum targeting); and Eudragit® S100 (ES100) at a pH > 7 (suitable for
ileum and colon targeting) (Grumezescu, 2018; Evonik, 2021). Eudragit® is well
explored in literature and used frequently to increase oral bioavailability for orally
administered drugs (Terao et al., 2001). Just about all Eudragit® polymers can
be used in spraycoating procedures, allowing controlled coating of most materials.
EL100 is an anionic copolymerization product of methacrylic acid and methyl
methacrylate, having a mean relative molecular mass of about 135 kDa (Cetin
et al., 2010). As already mentioned, both ES100 and EL100 have pH dependent
solubility at pH > 6, making them suitable for drug delivery to the small intestine.
For coating MC ships and sealing the drug loading inside the individual MCs,
the Exacta Coat Ultrasonic Spraying System (Sonotek, U.S) equipped with an
AccuMist nozzle is used.
A polymeric solution (typically EL100) is used for
the coating. Standard procedure of EL100 coating is using the AccuMist nozzle
(generator power: 2.2 W) with an infusion rate of 0.1 mL/min for 30 loops. This
usually gives a uniform coating that is, similar to drug loading, evaluated using
SEM.
1.6
Ex vivo Drug Permeation Assay
Franz diﬀusion cells are a widely used methodology to evaluate in vitro and ex vivo
drug permeation (Salamanca et al., 2018). They consist of two borosilicate glass
components; the upper component is the donor chamber, the lower is the receptor
compartment (Figure 7). The receptor compartment consists of a sampling port and
a intake/outtake for the water jacket surrounding the compartment itself, used to
maintain a constant temperature in the compartment. A tissue sample or membrane
goes in between the donor chamber and receptor compartment. Then, the donor
chamber is ﬁlled with a solution containing a compound of interest. If the compound
permeates across the barrier that has been laid in between the two glass components,
it can be sampled from the sampling chamber and quantiﬁed by further analysis.
14
==PAGE:26==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 7: Schematic representation of Franz diﬀusion cell, consisting of a donor chamber,
receptor compartment, and intake and outtake for water heating/cooling.
Created in
BioRender.com
1.7
In vivo Drug Absorption Assay
Animal models can serve as an important source of in vivo information such as
absorption, eﬃcacy and adverse reactions in animals. Furthermore, in vivo testing
aims to demonstrate safety and decide if a candidate drug has scientiﬁc merit to
justify further development for other in vivo studies and potentially clinical trials.
An example could be an anti-tumor drug in rats with tumors. It is important to
mention, however, that in vivo studies do not necessarily translate very well to
clinical trials as the average rate of successful translation from animal models to
clinical cancer trials is less than 8% (Mak et al., 2014).
Typically, the drug or
compound of interest is administered to the animal and blood samples are taken at
speciﬁc time points. Drug concentration in the blood serum can then be observed
over time.
1.8
Liquid Chromatography Systems
Quantiﬁcation of drug in solution is an extremely important tool to evaluate
eﬃcacy of drug delivery methods. While mass spectrometry can be used for drug
quantiﬁcation and/or characterization in biosamples, liquid chromatography (LC) is
an assay used to separate molecules based on their polarity quantiﬁcation (Argenta
et al., 2019). LC has a great advantage on the capability of separating complex
samples, so it is the most eﬀective option when applied to separate mixtures, but
15
==PAGE:27==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
not suitable to obtain structural information of the material (Pang et al., 2016).
Typically in clinical trials, samples of blood plasma are analysed for drugs and
their metabolites which are usually present in very low concentrations.
LC is
most useful for such qualitative and quantitative analysis and is performed using
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Hansen, 2016).
The HPLC system typically consists of a high pressure pump, a sample injection
device, the separation column and lastly a detector.
The HPLC systems diﬀers
from normal LC by working under very high pressure (typically around 200-300 Bar
with a pressure limit about 400 Bar) (Hansen, 2016). Independently, the HPLC is
advantageous for separating analytes in solution but not structural information of
the analytes. However, HPLC also works for quantifying compounds in solution as
the resulting spectrum of area under the curve (AUC) is directly proportionate to
the amount of compound present in the sample. Thus, by preparing a standard
with known concentrations, making a standard curve and recording the AUC, one
is able to identify concentrations in samples using HPLC for relatively fast and
very eﬃcient quantiﬁcation down to low concentrations.
1.9
Microplate Reader
The microplate reader is another tool used for quantiﬁcation of compounds in
solution. It utilizes ﬂuorescence spectroscopy which provides exceptional sensitivity
for biological assays (Gribbon and Sewing, 2003). The microplate reader enables
multiple-well ﬂuorescence measurements with an estimated acquisition time
of half a second per well, making it suitable for high-throughput ﬂuorescence
screening applications (Petersen et al., 2014). Measurements detect light signals
produced by the sample and the signal is measured by a detector which then converts
photons into electricity that is then quantiﬁed by the microplate reader. The output
of this process is numbers by which a sample is quantiﬁed (McGuinness et al., 2010).
Biological samples can then be combined with ﬂuorescent dyes that may be
excited at a speciﬁc wavelength. The signal intensity from the ﬂuorescent dye is
directly correlated to the quantity of compound present in the sample. Very similar
to what was described using the HPLC, prepared standards can then be used
to create a standard curve for accurate quantiﬁcation.
Thus, microplate reader
analysis can be used for visualization of gene expression dynamics in living bacterial
cells in real-time or quantiﬁcation of other ﬂuorescent molecules.
Schematic
16
==PAGE:28==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
representation of a microplate reader is shown on Figure 8.
Figure 8: Schematic representation of a microplate reader. Samples along with controls
are deposited in a 96-well microplate (number of wells may vary) and analyzed in the
plate reader. Measurements detect light signals produced by the sample and the signal is
measured by a detector which is then quantiﬁed into numbers. Adapted from McGuinness
et al., 2010, created in BioRender.com
1.10
Morphology of Drugs
Biomaterial surfaces inevitably have features from nanometer to micrometer sizes as
a result of processing and thermal history. Nanometer features are typically caused
by phase separation and/or crystallization, and the micrometer-size features can be
reasoned with steep gradients and diﬀerently sized pores. These can be described
in terms of morphology (domain structure) and topography (surface roughness due
to holes, peaks, ridges and valleys) (Sanjeeva Murthy, 2011).
In preparation of experiments and drug loading, the structure and morphology of
the drug carrier can be relevant. This is both relevant when conﬁrming the integrity
of the carrier itself but also to observe proper drug loading or polymer coating. In
the case of the MCs, conventional optical microscopy does not oﬀer high enough
resolution to conﬁrm any of the above. However, electron microscopy (EM) can be
used for visualising drug carriers in the hundreds of micrometers in size.
1.10.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy
EM can be divided into transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), with SEM being the most popular due to user-
17
==PAGE:29==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
friendliness of the apparatus and specimen preparation, and also the simplicity of
image interpretation (Michler and Lebek, 2016). SEM oﬀers a lateral resolution
of 0.2 µm and is used for surface topography analysis (Sanjeeva Murthy, 2011).
Overall, the apparatus is easy to use and oﬀers adequate resolution for visual
analysis of drug carriers in the size range of a few hundred micrometers.
SEM can be described brieﬂy as a beam of electrons that interact with the
specimen in a vacuum environment as illustrated in Figure 9. Interactions with
the primary electron beam and the sample results in transmission of primary and
secondary electron emission, and back scattering (Sanjeeva Murthy, 2011).
The
primary beam is directed through electromagnetic lenses over the sample. Then,
the secondary electrons emitted from the surface of the material are collected
through a detector and composed to provide a visualisation of the sample (Michler
and Lebek, 2016). The contrast that appears on the visualisation arises from either
electron absorption or emission which is also why SEM imaging does not provide
colour. Schematic representation is shown on Figure 9.
Figure 9: Schematic representation of a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and the
principles behind. Interactions with the primary electron beam and the sample combined
with the intensity of the detected signal is used to produce an image.
Adapted from
Sanjeeva Murthy, 2011, created in BioRender.com
18
==PAGE:30==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
2
Hypotheis & Research Aim
The hypothesis for this project is that delivery of therapeutics using MCs will
shield them from gastric pH and intestinal degradation, and increase absorption of
the prodrug.
Thus, the aim of this project is to demonstrate proof-of-concept using microcontainer
cavities ﬁlled with powder drug and observe drug release and prodrug stability in
vitro, drug permeation ex vivo and drug absorption in vivo using valacyclovir or
acyclcovir loaded inside MCs and coated with pH-sensitive polymers
19
==PAGE:31==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
3
Materials & Methods
Valacyclovir
hydrochloride,
acyclovir,
HEPES,
DMEM,
hydrochloric
acid,
perchloric
acid,
2-propanol,
Dibutyl
sebacate
(DBS),
acetonitrile
(ACN),
methanol,
chloroform,
sodium
chloride
pellets,
natriumhydroxid,
lyso-
phosphatidylcholine, taurocholate acid sodium salt hydrate and 70 kDa ﬂuorescein
isothiocyanate–dextran (FD70) were all supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO
USA). For the preparation of PBS buﬀer, deionized water was used with phosphate
buﬀered saline tablets that was also obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO
USA) and pH was adjusted to 5. For the preparation of 10 mM HEPES-buﬀered
DMEM (hDMEM), HEPES (119.151 mg) was added to 50 mL DMEM buﬀer that
was acquired from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc (MA, USA).
FaSSIF/FeSSIF/FaSSGF powder was acquired from Biorelevant.com Ltd (London,
England). Preparation of 1L FaSSIF solution was done by ﬁrst preparing the FaSSif
solution buﬀer. This was done with the addition of sodium hydroxide (0.420 g),
sodium phosphate monobasic dihydrate (4.470 g), and sodium chloride (6.186 g) in
1 L of milliQ water. pH was adjusted to 6.5 with HCl (1M). Then, in a blue-cap
bottle, SIF powder (2.240 g) was added alongside FaSSIF buﬀer solution to reach
1L. Solution was left in darkness for 2h before use to yield FaSSIF solution.
Preparation of 1L FaSSGF solution was done by ﬁrst preparing the NaCl/HCl
solution. This was done with the addition of sodium chloride (1.999 g) in 1 L of
milliQ water. pH was adjusted to 1.6 with HCl (1M). Then, in a blue-cap bottle,
SIF powder (0.060 g) was added alongside NaCl/HCl solution to reach 1L. Solution
was left in darkness for 2h before use to yield FaSSGF solution.
Rat gastric media (RGM) and rat intestinal media (RIM) were used for in
vitro dissolution model based on gastrointestinal ﬂuid characterisation in rats
(Christfort et al., 2019). The fasted state media consisting of ﬁrst RGM with pH
= 2.4 can then be converted into a RIM with pH = 7.5 with the addition of bile
buﬀer. First, 250 mL 50 mM HEPES buﬀer (pH = 8.1) was prepared by weighing
2.98 g HEPES and transferring to a 250 mL blue cap bottle where it was dissolved
in approximately 230 mL milli-Q water. Then, pH was adjusted to 8.1 using 10
M NaOH. The solution was transfered to a 250 mL volumetric ﬂask and made
to volume with milli-Q water. Then, for the preparation of 5 mL lyso-PC stock
solution (300 mM), lyso-PC (961.88 mg) was weighed into a 5 mL volumetric
20
==PAGE:32==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
ﬂask and approximately half the volume of chloroform was added. the volumetric
ﬂask was shaken well until completely dissolved and make to volume (5 mL) with
chloroform.
As for the preparation of 150 mL RGM and 50 mL bile buﬀer, the composition of
biorelevant media to be used is as follows:
Table 2: Composition of 150 mL rat gastric media (RGM)
Lyso-PC
stock solution
Sodium
Taurocholate
Sodium
Chloride
HCl (4 mM,
pH 2.4)
133.34 µL
36.406 mg
324.08 mg
50 mL
Table 3: Composition of 50 mL bile buﬀer
Lyso-PC
stock solution
Sodium
Taurocholate
Sodium
Chloride
HEPES buﬀer
(50 mM, pH 8.1)
1580 µL
1951.89 mg
407.26 mg
50 mL
For the preparation of RGM, the volume of lyso-PC stock solution as stated
on Table 2 was ﬁrst pipetted into a blue cap bottle.
The chloroform was then
completely evaporated in a fume hood to form a lipid ﬁlm.
Then, the required
amounts of sodium taurocholate and sodium chloride as stated on Table 2 were
added to the blue cap and just under 150 mL 4 mM HCl was also added. The blue
cap was stirred at 37 ◦C overnight (or at least 4h) on a magnetic stirrer, sealed with
paraﬁlm and covered with tinfoil (for insulation).
For the preparation of bile buﬀer, the required amount of lyso-PC stock solution
as stated on Table 3 is ﬁrst pipetted into a blue cap bottle. The chloroform was
completely evaporated in a fume hood to form a lipid ﬁlm.
Then, the required
amounts of sodium taurocholate and sodium chloride as stated on Table 3 were
added to the blue cap and just under 50 mL 50 mM HEPES buﬀer were also added.
The blue cap was stirred 37°C overnight (or at least 4h) on a magnetic stirrer,
sealed with paraﬁlm and covered with tinfoil (for insulation).
The next day, the pH of the RGM and the bile buﬀer were adjusted to 2.4
and 8.1 with NaOH/HCl, respectively.
The solutions were then transferred to
volumetric ﬂasks and made to volume with 4 mM HCl and 50 mM HEPES,
21
==PAGE:33==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
respectively.
For the preparation of phosphate buﬀer (100 mL), into a 100 mL volumetric ﬂask
was added sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihydrate (1.51 g) and approximately 95
mL milliQ water. Solution was stirred until salt was completely dissolved. Ph was
adjusted to 7.5 using NaOH (1M). Then, magnet was removed and milliQ water
was added to the 100 mL mark. The solution was ﬁnally transferred to a bluecap
bottle.
For the preparation of 0.02 M HCl buﬀer (100 mL), into a 100 mL volumetric ﬂask
was added 1M HCl (2 mL) and approximately 95 mL milliQ water water. Solution
was brieﬂy stirred and pH adjusted to 1.7 using 0.5M HCl.
Then, magnet was
removed and milliQ water was added to the 100 mL mark. The solution was ﬁnally
transferred to a bluecap bottle.
Eudragit® S100 and Eudragit® L100 were acquired from Evonik Industries
AG (Essen, Germany).
Deionized water (Milli-Q water) was provided from the
Milli-Q Integral Water Puriﬁcation System for Ultrapure Water produced by Merck
Millipore (Burlington, MA, USA). EL100 solution (both 1% w/V in 2-propanol
with 5% w/w DBS and 5% w/V in 2-propanol with 5% w/w DBS) and ES100
solution (1% w/V in 2-propanol with 5% w/w DBS + 2% Milli-Q water) were also
prepared. Porcine intestinal segments from Landrace × Yorkshire × Duroc pigs
were provided from the National Veterinary Institute (Copenhagen, Denmark).
SU-8 MCs on Si-wafers and Ti-Au-wafers were produced and provided by
micro- and nanofabrication specialist Lasse Højlund Eklund Thamdrup, IDUN
research center, DTU Health Tech (Lyngby, Denmark). The MCs were produced
with either a Si or a Ti-Au release layer and each wafer of microcontainers contained
32 MC chips with 625 MCs per chip. The height and diameter speciﬁcations of the
SU-8 microcontainers used for the vast majority of the project is shown on Table
4 for Si wafers and Ti-Au wafers (Figure 10). Other wafers of both Si and Ti-Au
were also used on separate occasions but the diameter and height vary very little
from each individual batch.
22
==PAGE:34==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 10: Image of (A) Si wafer MyC0025 Sharp2 and (B) Ti-Au wafer MyC0026 Sharp4,
both containing 32 microcontainer (MC) chips with 625 MCs per chip. Photograph by
Lasse Højlund Eklund Thamdrup, DTU Health Tech.
Table 4: The average diameter (D) and height (H) measurements (both inner and outer)
of individual SU-8 microcontainers on Si wafer MyC0025 Sharp2 and Ti-Au wafer MyC0026
Sharp4 used for the majority of this project. Data obtained from Lasse Højlund Eklund
Thamdrup, DTU Health Tech.
Microcontainers
on Si wafer
MyC0025 Sharp2
Microcontainers
on Ti-Au wafer
MyC0026 Sharp4
Average Dinner
238.8 µm
230.5 µm
Average Douter
317.8 µm
326.3 µm
Average Hinner
219.0 µm
218.0 µm
Average Houter
253.5 µm
253.0 µm
3.1
Loading of Prodrug in Microcontainers
In order to ﬁll the cavities of the MCs with drug, the easiest and fastest way
is manual loading by hand.
Depending on the drug of choice, loading can be
challenging and time-consuming. A shadow mask ﬁtting is manually clamped to
the MC chip before starting the drug loading process. The purpose of the mask is
to make a more precise loading by preventing the drug powder to fall in between
the MCs and down onto the Si wafer (Figure 11A). Then, drug powder of choice is
dispersed on top of the shadow mask and spread out evenly onto the shadow mask
(Figure 11B).
23
==PAGE:35==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
VAL and AC are both easily applied onto the shadow mask but simply spreading
the drug out does not make the powder ﬁll in the cavities in the shadow mask.
Instead, using a make-up brush, the powder is forcibly pushed inside the cavities of
the shadow mask and ﬁlling the MCs (Figure 11C). This process is usually repeated
once or twice in order to achieve optimal loading.
Lastly, the shadow mask is removed from the MC chip (Figure 11D) and
using an air gun, any excess powder that may be present in between the MCs on
the Si wafer is removed with gentle bursts of air (Figure 11E). Overview is shown
on Figure 11.
Figure 11: Schematic representation of manual loading of SU-8 microcontainers (size not
accurate). (A) A shadow mask is clamped on the microcontainer (MC) chip. Then, (B)
Drug powder of choice is applied on top of the shadow mask and spread out. (C) The
loading of the drug powder is carried out with the help of a make-up brush, pushing the
drug down into the MC cavities. (D) The shadow mask then is removed and (E) any excess
powder between the MCs is removed using an airgun. Created in BioRender.com
Loading MC chips with VAL was done according to Figure 11 and literature
regarding the subject (Nielsen et al., 2018).
MC chips were weighed using an
analytical balance (Mettler Toledo, XS105DU) and the shadow mask was clamped
on top of the MC chip. VAL powder was distributed across the shadow mask and
a make-up brush was used to push the powder into the individual MC cavities.
This process was repeated once again in order to gain optimal loading of the MCs.
Then, after removing the shadow mask, an air gun was used to remove any powder
24
==PAGE:36==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
that may had fallen in between the individual MCs.
This was done by gentle bursts of air onto the MC chip while holding the
chip sideways so that any loaded powder would not be blown away.
The MC
chips were weighed once again to calculate drug load. If load was not satisfactory
(approximately 3 mg of drug load or more per MC chip), process would be repeated
once more.
Furthermore, the number of missing MCs from each MC chip both
before and after loading was noted to estimate the loading of each individual MC.
3.2
Spray Coating of Microcontainers
Spray coating was done in order to seal the drug inside the MC cavity until release.
As already mentioned in Section 1.5, EL100 dissolves at pH 6–7 (suitable for
jejunum targeting) and ES100 dissolves at pH > 7 (suitable for ileum and colon
targeting). Any two of the polymers could potentially be used for spray coating
but ES100 was chosen as polymer of choice due to literature regarding it as reliable
in pH-sensitive drug release (Mehta et al., 2013; Khan et al., 1999; Khan et al., 2000).
The Exacta Coat Ultrasonic Spraying System (Sonotek, U.S.) equipped with
an AccuMist nozzle was used for this.
First, the system was washed with 2-
propanol (IPA, approximately 15 mL). Then, the polymer solution was placed in a
syringe pump connected by tubing to the atomizing nozzle, and washed through
the system (approximately 5 mL) and programmed with a liquid infusion rate of
0.1 mL/min.
The tip of the ultrasonic atomizer nozzle was actuated at a frequency of 120 kHz
with a generator power of 2.2 W. Compressed nitrogen at 0.02 Bar was introduced
into the air-focusing shroud.
The generated spray width was approximately 4
mm.
The movement of the nozzle was controlled by an X-Y-Z stage and the
spray path was performed in arcs with an oﬀset of 2 mm in the y-direction,
meaning that second round of spray coating would have an oﬀset of 2 mm in the
y-direction in order to coat the most of the MC chip. The loaded MC chip to be
coated was placed on the hot plate inside the spray coater with temperature kept
at room temperature. The number of loops was kept constant at 30 for each sample.
After the spray coating was completed, the system was again washed with
15 mL IPA and Milli-Q water. The coated MC chips were kept in a small plastic
25
==PAGE:37==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
box which was then wrapped tightly with paraﬁlm and kept at room temperature.
3.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy for Evaluation of Loading
and Coating of MC chips
Powder loading and spray coating evaluation was done by SEM using the
TM3030Plus Tabletop Microscope (Hitachi, Japan) in order to examine satisfactory
powder ﬁll in the MC cavities and good coating. SEM was also used to check coating
integrity after drug release studies. MC chips were mounted on a 45◦tilted metal
holder which was supported by double-sided carbon tape and the secondary electron
(SE) detector (15 keV) was used for imaging.
3.4
Sample Preparation of in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo Study
The following sections describes the preparation and execution of in vitro, ex vivo
and in vivo studies involving VAL loading in MCs coated with EL100 (1%) or ES100
(1%).
3.4.1
In vitro Release Study
The purpose of the in vitro study was to quantify drug release from both uncoated
and ES100 (1%) or EL100 (1%) coated MCs loaded with VAL. Furthermore, the
purpose was to observe VAL to AC conversion to evaluate shielding eﬀect when
using MCs.
The method of quantiﬁcation for this project was to be HPLC and so a
standard curve with known VAL concentrations and standard curve with known
AC concentrations were initially made in fasted state simulated intestinal ﬂuid
(FaSSIF). FaSSIF is made by Biorelevant.com Ltd and is extremely helpful to
establish a relationship between the in vitro assays and in vivo absorption. Diﬀerent
media were also used for calibration curves as will be described. The 6 MC chips
were loaded with VAL and only 3 of those were coated with ES100 (four out of
ﬁve release studies) or EL100 (one out of ﬁve release studies) using the spray
coater. For this study, the media rat gastric media (RGM) and rat intestinal media
(RIM) were prepared, both based on gastrointestinal ﬂuid characterisation in rats
(Christfort et al., 2019). The fasted state media consisting of ﬁrst RGM with pH =
2.4 can then be converted into RIM with pH = 7.5 with the addition of prepared
bile buﬀer. HCl buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer were also prepared for other attempts
26
==PAGE:38==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
of in vitro drug release.
Figure 12: In vitro study of SU-8 microcontainers (MCs) loaded with valacyclovir (VAL)
and comparing release of coated and uncoated MCs in either rat gastric media (RGM) and
rat intestinal media (RIM) or HCl buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer. The 6 MC chips (3 coated,
3 uncoated) were placed in 6 individual Falcon tubes and placed in the waterbath (37 ◦C
at 150 RPM). After media was poured into the Falcon tubes containing the MC chips,
release was monitored over 6h, drawing sampling from the tubes at speciﬁc time points.
Created in BioRender.com
6 MC chips (3 coated, 3 uncoated) were placed in 6 individual 50 mL Falcon tubes.
The tubes were then placed in a waterbath (37◦C, 150 RPM). RGM and bile buﬀer
were also placed in the waterbath to ensure that the media was 37◦C at the start
of the experiment. Once temperature was reached, the solution was again removed
from the waterbath. As seen, the studies were conducted in triplicates for both
coated and uncoated MC chips.
At 0 min, RGM (10 mL) was poured into all 6 Falcon tubes containing the
MC chips. Immediately after, a sample of 200 µL was drawn for every tubes and
placed in separate HPLC vials. Then, 200 µL of pure RGM was added to every
Falcon tube to ensure constant volume inside the tube. This process is repeated for
every time point (0, 5, 15, 30 min) up until 60 min.
At 65 min, bile buﬀer (5 mL) was added to all 6 tubes to change the media
27
==PAGE:39==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
from gastric pH to intestinal pH. Once again, 200 µL sample immediately after
addition of bile buﬀer and addition of 200 µL of pure RIM (RGM-bile buﬀer
2:1 ratio).
This process was repeated until the last time point at 365 min or
a little more that 6 hours.
In total, samples were deposited at the following
time points: 0, 5, 15, 30, 60, 65*, 70, 80, 95, 125, 185, 245, 365 min (*Indicates
transition from gastric to intestinal pH). After the last sample was deposited into a
HPLC vial, all samples were stored at -20◦C. The experimental setup is illustrated
on Figure 12. SEM visual analysis was performed on two MCs (one coated and
one uncoated before the start of the study) to evaluate coating and loading integrity.
As already mentioned, HCl buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer were also used for in
vitro drug release studies to simulate gastric and intestinal pH, respectively. Same
approach as described above, samples were deposited at the following time points:
0, 5, 15, 30, 60, 65, 70, 80, 95, 125, 185, 245, 365 min. At 65 min, the MC chips
were removed from Falcon tubes containing HCl buﬀer and transferred to tubes
containing phosphate buﬀer.
In addition to this, another in vitro experiment was done without the use of
MCs to observe the degradation of VAL in gastric and intestinal media. These two
experiments combined would essentially show if the use of MCs would indeed shield
VAL and lead to a decrease in degradation. The same process as described above
was done with Falcon tubes containing VAL powder instead of loaded and coated
MC chips. All samples were kept at -20◦C for a more fair comparison of the two
studies.
3.4.2
Standard Curve and Quantiﬁcation of In vitro Release Study
In addition to the samples from the study, additional standards were made in RIM
and RGM with known concentrations in order to observe how the media aﬀect
degradation of both VAL and AC over longer time.
Standards were made and
frozen very similar to the real samples from the in vitro experiment. Standards
were analyzed using the Shimadzu Nexera X2 UHPLC system complete with 2
Nexera X2 LC-30AD Pumps with 228-52706-92 and LPGE 30A mixer 228-45180-58
installed, Nexera X2 SIL-30AC, Nexera X2 CTO-30A Column Oven, CBM-20A
Controller, DGU-20A5R Degasser, and reservoir tray alongside a PC with Shimadzu
Labsolutions software installed was all acquired from Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan).
Speciﬁcation for the analysis is shown in Table 5.
28
==PAGE:40==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 5: Parameters used for HPLC standards and quantiﬁcation of acyclovir (AC) and
valacyclovir (VAL) in in vitro study
Column:
Kinetex® 2.6 µm C18 100 Å,
LC Column (30 x 0.3 mm)
Mobile phase:
PBS-MeOH (80:20)
Flow rate
1 mL/min
Injection volume
10 µL
Column temperature
40°C
Run time
4 min
Retention time (VAL, AC)
2.41 min, 1.90 min
3.4.3
Ex vivo Drug Permeation Study
The purpose of the ex vivo drug permeation study was to quantify AC permeation
in Franz diﬀusion cells using MCs on porcine intestinal samples.
The intestinal tissue was obtained from Landrace × Yorkshire × Duroc pigs
placed under anesthesia and euthanized for diﬀerent purposes January 2020.
Thus, no ethical approval was needed for retrieval of intestinal tissue. Following
euthanization, intestinal segments of 10–20 cm were sampled and kept at -20◦C
until a few hours before initiation of the permeation study. The exact location in
the small intestine from where the segment was sampled (duodejum, jejunum or
ileum) is not known. Prior to the study, 3 individual MCs were loaded with AC
but not spray coated. The reason that the MC chips were loaded with AC and not
VAL was supported by the fact that literature shows a high rate of conversion of
VAL into AC within intestinal cells, as described in Section 1.3.1. Furthermore, the
reason that the MC chips were not spray coated was under the assumption that the
coating would already have dissolved in the intestine.
An intestinal segment was thawed in 10 mM HEPES-buﬀered DMEM (hDMEM)
and longitudinally cut open. Luminal contents were washed away with hDMEM
and the muscularis externa was removed using tweezers before the mucosa was cut
into 4×4 cm pieces and placed in Franz diﬀusion cells (Figure 13). Water circulation
was attached to the Franz diﬀusion cells to enable a constant temperature of 37◦C
29
==PAGE:41==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
inside the receptor compartment. The experiments were conducted in triplicate.
Each receptor compartment (the lower part of the Franz diﬀusion cell) was
ﬁlled with 7 mL of hDMEM facing the serosal side of the intestinal tissue. The
donor compartment (the upper part of the Franz diﬀusion cell), facing the mucosa,
was ﬁlled with 1.5 mL FD70 solution (100 µL/mL) in hDMEM to imitate the
inclusion of a pathogen. To expand on this, if FD70 was to be found in the receptor
compartment, it would indicate poor integrity of the intestinal tissue which would
compromise the experiment.
FD70 is ﬂuorescent and can easily be detected by
plate reader analysis.
Water circulation was set to 37◦C and a small magnetic stirrer was dropped
in the receptor compartment at 300 RPM. Permeation was initiated by placing
loaded MCs (uncoated) directly on top with the openings facing the mucosa. Then,
260 µL of sample was drawn from the Franz cells followed by addition of equal
volume of hDMEM to keep volume constant. Permeation was monitored over 3h
with sampling time points at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120 and 180 min. Lastly, after
the last sample had been drawn, 260 µL was drawn from the donor compartment
containing the FD70 solution to analyze the presence of AC outside of the receptor
compartment. After last sample was deposited, all samples were put kept at -20◦C.
SEM visual analysis was performed on all three MCs to evaluate loading integrity.
The experimental setup is illustrated on Figure 13.
30
==PAGE:42==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 13:
Ex vivo intestinal perfusion model for investigating drug permeation of
acyclovir (AC) when using microcontainers (MCs).
Intestinal segments were placed in
Franz diﬀusion cells. The receptor compartments were ﬁlled with hDMEM and the donor
sides were ﬁlled with FD70 solution in hDMEM. Permeation was initiated by placing
uncoated AC-loaded MCs directly on top of the mucosa. Permeation was monitored over
3h, drawing sampling from the receptor compartment at speciﬁc time points. Created in
BioRender.com
3.4.4
Standard Curve and Quantiﬁcation of Ex vivo Drug Permeation
Study
Standards with known concentrations of AC in hDMEM were made and analyzed
on a Shimadzu Nexera X2 UHPLC system. Speciﬁcation for the HPLC analysis is
shown in Table 6. Furthermore, standards with known concentrations of FD70 in
hDMEM were also made to be analyzed on Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate
Reader was acquired from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc (MA, USA) by ﬂuorescence
emission at 518 nm and excitation at 492 nm.
3.4.5
In vivo Drug Absorption Study
The purpose of the in vivo study was to determine VAL absorption when using
microcontainers after oral administration in male Sprague-Dawley rats.
In preparation of the in vivo experiment, several experiments were done in
order to establish feasible ways to quantify AC in Sprague-Dawley rat blood
plasma by HPLC analysis.
This was done by collecting blood in EDTA-coated
(i.e.
ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid, an eﬀective anti-coagulent) Falcon tubes
from the animal facilities at DTU Food (Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark) and centrifuged
in a Eppendorf 5810R centrifuge (Hamburg, Germany) at max RPM (14000
31
==PAGE:43==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 6: Parameters used for HPLC standards and quantiﬁcation of acyclovir (AC) in ex
vivo study
Column:
Kinetex® 2.6 µm C18 100 Å,
LC Column (30 x 0.3 mm)
Mobile phase:
PBS-MeOH (80:20)
Flow rate
1 mL/min
Injection volume
10 µL
Column temperature
40°C
Run time
4 min
Retention time
1.90 min
RPM) for 10 min to obtain plasma. The blood samples were obtained from rats
that were euthanized for diﬀerent purposes ﬁrst in October 2020 and again in
December 2020. Thus, no ethical approval was needed for retrieval of blood samples.
Calibration curves were prepared from thawed rat blood plasma in Eppendorfs
(approximately 1.5 to 2 mL). Stock solution were prepared in two ways. The ﬁrst
being VAL and AC stock solution blood plasma. The second being VAL and AC in
a MilliQ-water and acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1) solution. Then, the MilliQ water-ACN
solution was added to blood plasma. The purpose of mixing the drug into MilliQ
water-ACN was to avoid drug aggregation in blood plasma. Samples were made
for the calibration curve alongside controls containing pure plasma.
In order to
precipitate the blood plasma even further, organic solvents (MeOH, ACN, acetone
and perchloric acid with solvent to sample ratios between 1:1 and 9:1) were used,
vortexed and centrifuged in a Eppendorf 5452 Minispin centrifuge (Hamburg,
Germany) at max RPM (13400 RPM) for 10 min. Then, the supernatants were
extracted from Eppendorfs into HPLC vials with inserts. The samples were then
analyzed using HPLC for drug quantiﬁcation.
The rats would be divided into two groups:
Group A and Group B. Group
A were fed capsules containing VAL in a loose powder form whereas Group B
were fed capsules containing VAL-loaded MCs as shown on Figure 14. Literature
shows the dosage in rat models to be around 20 to 25 mg/kg VAL (Burnette and
Demiranda, 1994; Katragadda et al., 2008), and based on this the capsule dosage
was decided to be approximately 20 mg/kg VAL for both Group A and Group B.
32
==PAGE:44==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 14: In vivo study of capsules containing SU-8 microcontainers (MCs) loaded with
valacyclovir (VAL) and capsules containing VAL and comparing absorption in rat models.
Capsules for Group A (control group) were loaded with VAL powder and the capsules
coated twice with Eudragit® L100 (EL100) (5%). Capsules for Group B (test group) were
loaded with individual MCs containing VAL and the MCs were coated with EL100 (1%).
Absorption was monitored over 24 h, sampling blood from the animals at speciﬁc time
points (9 time points in total). Created in BioRender.com
For the capsules for Group A (control group), VAL powder was carefully loaded
into mini capsules (size 9 with a capsule body capacity of 0.025 ml). Capsules were
weighed using an analytical balance before and after loading to estimate drug load.
Once loaded, the capsules were coated twice in EL100 (5%) by dipping the capsules
in the polymer solution and leaving them to dry. Capsules were weighed using an
analytical balance before and after coating to estimate coating thickness. Table 7
shows the capsules that were prepared for the in vivo study. Not all capsules were
used for the study. Table 8 shows capsules that were fed to rats with estimated
dosing.
33
==PAGE:45==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 7: Capsules loaded with VAL powder prepared for Group A (control group)
ID
Empty
capsules (mg)
Loaded
capsules (mg)
Loading of
valaciclovir
(mg)
Weight after
loading and
2 x coating (mg)
1
//
//
7,058
18,592
2
10,804
17,611
6,807
19,479
3
8,572
15,561
6,989
17,509
4
11,384
18,418
7,034
20,082
5
10,032
17,007
6,975
19,064
6
9,799
17,366
7,567
19,076
7
8,981
16,096
7,115
17,827
8
10,056
17,249
7,193
18,79
9
8,807
16,405
7,598
18,114
10
10,39
17,697
7,307
19,142
Average
9,869
17,046
7,164
18,768
Table 8: Group A (control group) consisting of six male Sprague-Dawley rats that were
dosed with capsules loaded with VAL powder
Animal ID
Weight (g)
Capsule no.
used
Estimated
valaciclovir
dosing (mg)
Estimated
valaciclovir
dosing (mg/kg)
A1
359
1
7,058
19,660
A2
374
2
6,807
18,201
A3
365
3
6,989
19,148
A4
357
4
7,034
19,703
A5
350
5
6,975
19,929
A6
358
6
7,567
21,137
34
==PAGE:46==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
For the capsules for Group B (test group), Ti-Au wafers with MC chips were
used instead of Si-wafers as individual MCs detach much easier from the Ti-Au
wafers which is very helpful for loading MCs in capsules.
Several MC chips on
Ti-Au wafers were loaded with VAL and coated with EL100 (1%) by spray coating.
After loading and coating, MCs were detached from the chips using a scalpel and
carefully loaded into mini capsules (size 9).
Capsules were weighed using an analytical balance before and after loading
of MCs to estimate drug load based on total number of MCs. Table 9 shows the
capsules that were prepared for the in vivo study. Not all capsules were used for
the study. Table 10 shows capsules that were fed to rats with estimated dosing
from estimated number of MCs in every capsule. Estimated valacyclovir loading
was estimated from the average VAL loading of MC chip and dividing by 625 as
every MC chip was equipped with 625 MCs. Thus, each MC was estimated to yield
4.55 µg VAL.
35
==PAGE:47==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 9: Capsules loaded with VAL-loaded microcontainers prepared for Group B (test
group)
ID
Empty
capsules
(mg)
Loaded
capsules
(mg)
Loading
(mg)
Estimated
number of
micro-
containers
Estimated
valaciclovir
loading (mg)
11
10,575
23,926
13,351
492
2,240
12
9,664
21,871
12,207
450
2,048
13
10,174
25,607
15,433
569
2,590
14
11,082
26,592
15,51
572
2,602
15
10,12
24,877
14,757
544
2,476
16
9,881
25,045
15,164
559
2,544
17
10,686
25,666
14,98
552
2,514
18
9,281
23,194
13,913
513
2,335
19
8,866
23,849
14,983
553
2,514
20
9,769
24,663
14,894
549
2,499
21
9,248
23,148
13,9
513
2,332
22
9,368
24,056
14,688
542
2,465
23
9,557
23,603
14,046
518
2,357
24
9,653
22,35
12,697
468
2,130
25
10,075
25,725
15,65
577
2,626
26
9,485
25,355
15,87
585
2,663
27
9,747
25,001
15,254
563
2,560
28
9,532
25,19
15,658
577
2,627
29
9,039
24,738
15,699
579
2,634
30
9,694
25,952
16,258
600
2,728
31
10,009
25,162
15,153
559
2,543
32
9,815
26,385
16,57
611
2,780
33
9,163
23,935
14,772
545
2,479
34
10,237
25,813
15,576
574
2,614
Average
9,780
24,654
14,874
549
2,496
36
==PAGE:48==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 10: Group B (test group) consisting of six male Sprague-Dawley rats that were
dosed with capsules loaded with VAL-loaded microcontainers
Animal ID
Weight
(g)
Capsule no.
used
Estimated
number
of micro-
containers
Estimated
valaciclovir
dosing
(mg)
Estimated
valaciclovir
dosing
(mg/kg)
B1
373
11; 12; 13
1512
6,878
18,440
B2
380
14; 15; 16
1675
7,623
20,061
B3
372
17; 18; 19
1618
7,362
19,791
B4
372
20; 21; 22
1603
7,296
19,613
B5
367
23; 24; 25
1563
7,113
19,382
B6
385
26; 27; 28
1725
7,850
20,389
37
==PAGE:49==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
The in vivo study conducted in rats were carried out in January 2021 under the
supervision of Postdoc Chiara Mazzoni, DTU Health Tech.
The protocol was
approved by the Animal Welfare committee, appointed by the Danish ministry of
Justice and all animal procedure were carried out in compliance with EC Directive
86/609/EEC and with Danish law regulating experiments on animals, under license
2020-15-0201-00610.
12 male Sprague-Dawley rats (2 groups) were weighed and fasted before study.
Mean weight before study was 368 ± 10 g.
Rats were housed in cages with a
reversed day-night cycle (i.e. cages were kept dark during the day and light source
was introduced during the night) one week before the study in order for the animals
to acclimatize. The study was carried out over the course of 24 h after feeding VAL
loaded capsules to rats. Blood samples were taken after 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120,
240, 360 and 1440 min, before the rats were sacriﬁced. Blood samples were then
centrifuged to obtain blood plasma and stored at -20◦C until further analysis and
drug quantiﬁcation (Figure 14).
The ﬁrst group (Group A, control group) was fed 1 capsule per animal containing
powder VAL. The capsules themselves would be coated with EL100 (5%).
The
second group (Group B, test group) was fed 3 capsule per animal containing
MCs that were loaded with VAL and coated with EL100 (1%).
Group B were
fed 3 capsules to obtain the same dosage (approximately 20 mg/kg) as Group
A. Absorption would then be monitored by HPLC analysis of blood serum for
quantiﬁcation of AC.
3.4.6
Standard Curve and Quantiﬁcation of In vivo Drug Absorption
Study
Standards with known concentrations of AC in blood plasma were made to be
analyzed on a Shimadzu Nexera X2 UHPLC system.
3.5
Statistics
All results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) unless stated
otherwise. Graphs and statistical analysis were carried out using Excel (version 16.0,
Microsoft Oﬃce 365). Graphs were ﬁnalized using Origin 2019b (version 9.6.5.169,
OriginLab Corporation).
38
==PAGE:50==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
4
Results & Discussion
The following sections contains the results and the discussion of the project.
4.1
Loading and Coating of SU-8 Microcontainers
In order to estimate drug loading of the MC chip, the weight of the MC chip was
weighed before and after loading.
Typically, the drug loading of an entire MC
chip when using VAL was between 2.5 and 3.5 mg, making the loading of each
individual MC approximately 4 to 6 µg.
Visual evaluation was also done using
SEM to conﬁrm that optimal drug loading was achieved, as shown on Figure 15.
Figure 15: Scanning electron microscopy of an individual SU-8 microcontainer (MC)
before and after valacyclovir (VAL) powder loading. (A) Empty MC before loading. (B)
MC ﬁlled with VAL powder after loading.
After loading, the MC chips were spray coated with EL100 or ES100 (1%). It is
relevant to mention that proper drug loading and proper coating are correlated as
poor drug loads causes the coating to ﬁll the inside of the MC cavity, as seen on
Figure 16A. This may cause coating integrity to decrease as the coating is dispersed
unevenly within the MC. Proper loading, however, causes a ﬁne, even coating as
seen on Figure 16B.
39
==PAGE:51==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 16:
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) visualization of individual loaded
microcontainers (MCs) after spray coating with polymer EL100. (A) Poor drug loading
causes the polymer to coat the inside of the MC cavities which may decrease coating
integrity. (B) Proper drug loading causes an even layer of polymer on top of the cavity,
making a even and stronger coating.
4.2
In vitro Experiments
In order to quantify drug release from coated and uncoated MCs, an in vitro study
was conducted. As already described, the RGM and RIM seemed like the optimal
choice as they are based on gastrointestinal ﬂuid characterisation in rats. Thus,
for the ﬁrst in vitro experiment (E010), RIM and RGM was prepared. Calibration
curves were done for both VAL and AC in RGM and RIM and MC chips from
Si-wafer were loaded with VAL and spray coated with ES100 with 30 loops. The
experiment was initiated as previously described and all samples were kept at -20◦C.
It should be mentioned that the experiment was performed several times with poor
results, as will be described later. Overview of in vitro drug release studies is shown
in Table 11.
40
==PAGE:52==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 11: Overview of experiments regarding the in vitro study displayed premature
drug release initially.
Media used were rat gastric media (RGM), rat intestinal media
(RIM), fasted state simulated intestinal ﬂuid (FaSSIF), fasted state simulated gastric ﬂuid
(FaSSGF), HCl buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer. Polymer coatings used were Eudragit® S100
(ES100) and Eudragit® L100 (EL100). Parameters for E024 showed successful drug release
Experiment
ID
Medium
Polymer
coating
Loops
Method of
analysis
Observation
E010
RGM & RIM
ES100 (1%)
30
HPLC
Premature
release in RGM
E014
RGM
ES100 (1%)
30
HPLC
No premature
release in RGM
E016
RGM & RIM
ES100 (1%)
30
HPLC
Premature
release in RGM
E019
RGM & RIM
ES100 (1%)
30
HPLC
Premature
release in RGM
E022
HCl buﬀer &
Phosphate buﬀer
ES100 (1%)
30
HPLC
Premature
release in RGM
E024
HCl buﬀer &
Phosphate buﬀer
EL100 (1%)
30 & 60
HPLC
Drug release
observed in RIM
E025
HCl buﬀer &
Phosphate buﬀer
//
//
HPLC
Degradation study
E028
HCl buﬀer &
Phosphate buﬀer;
FaSSGF & FaSSIF
//
//
HPLC
Degradation study
Before analysis of the initial in vitro experiment, it was deemed wise to observe
AC and VAL stability in RGM and likewise AC and VAL stability in RIM.
Four diﬀerent calibrations curves were made and all four were analyzed 3 times
subsequently in order to observe any change in linear regression over time. Each
analysis took 1 hour, so for every run of HPLC analysis, one hour had passed.
This enabled us to observe stability by the hour. If the coeﬃcient of determination
(R2-value) decreased worse over time, it would indicate that AC and VAL were
unstable in the media. If the coeﬃcients of determination on the other hand were
similar, it would indicate AC and VAL both were stable in the media. Calibration
curves are seen on Figure 17.
41
==PAGE:53==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 17: Acyclovir (AC) and valacyclovir (VAL) stability in both rat gastric media
(RGM) and rat intestinal media (RIM). Turquoise line shows ﬁrst analysis; orange line
shows second analysis; purple line shows third analysis. (A) VAL calibration in RGM,
(B) AC calibration in RGM, (C) VAL calibration in RGM, (D) AC calibration curve in
RGM. Each calibration curve was analyzed by HPLC three times (1 hour each) to observe
degradation over time. R2-value indicates stability over the course of 1, 2 and 3 hours.
From the repeated HPLC analyses of VAL degradation in RGM and RIM (Figure
17A and 17C), no signiﬁcant change in R2-values is observed, indicating that VAL
is stable in both media. The same was seen for degradation of AC in RGM and RIM
(Figure 17B and 17D), where the R2-values also seem to be stable over the three
hour time course. This would give ample of time for the HPLC analysis of samples
from the in vitro studies, which could easily take a few hours. Results obtained from
HPLC analysis of in vitro experiment (E010) is shown on Figure 18.
42
==PAGE:54==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 18:
Results from in vitro drug release experiment E010.
Red line shows
valacyclovir (VAL) release from non-coated MCs. Dark red line shows VAL release from
MCs coated with Eudragit® S100 (ES100, 30 loops). Dotted line indicates transition from
rat gastric media (RGM, low pH) to rat intestinal media (RIM, neutral pH). Only VAL is
quantiﬁed and not acyclovir (AC) due to technical diﬃculties.
Quantiﬁcation of VAL and not AC was made due to diﬃculties in the analysis of
AC. It is apparent from Figure 18 that VAL release was obtained from both coated
and non-coated MCs in RGM at low pH in RGM almost immediately. This was
at the time considered curious considering that the polymer coating should ensure
that the drug would only be release at neutral pH in RIM. Considering that there
were no reports of previous usage of RGM and RIM after freezing and thawing of
the media (Christfort et al., 2019), it was speculated whether freezing the media
may have caused faulty readings in the HPLC analysis. Another suspect was the
polymer solution used in the coating (ES100, 1%) or the spray coating process itself.
Following the premature VAL release after submersion into RGM, a study
was done (E014) to examine ES100 spray coating of MCs loaded with VAL before
and after submersion into RGM. The MC chips would undergo visual analysis by
SEM before and after submersion into RGM to see if ES100 did indeed dissolve
prematurely at low pH in RGM. Four MC chips were loaded with VAL and only three
of these were spray coated with ES100 (30 loops), leaving the last MC chip uncoated.
Following the same procedure as the previous release experiment,
the MC
43
==PAGE:55==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
chips were analyzed by SEM after initial spray coating to evaluate coating. Then,
the MC chips were placed in Falcon tubes with the addition of 10 mL RGM in a
waterbath (37◦C, 150 RPM). The MC chips were removed from the Falcon tubes
and and left to dry before taken to the SEM once again to compare. Visual results
are seen on Figure 19.
It is important to mention that the MCs compared on
Figure 19 before and after submersion are not the exact same MC but instead two
diﬀerent MCs both positioned on the same chip. The purpose of the evaluation,
however, was to ensure that coating integrity on all individual MCs was intact.
Thus, it was not deemed important to compare the exact same MC before and after.
Figure 19: SEM analysis of microcontainer (MC) chips before and after submersion into
rat gastric media for 1h in a waterbath (37◦C, 150 RPM) in order to observe any change
in coating intergrity. (A), (B), (C) and (D) shows individual MCs before submersion; (E),
(F), (G) and (H) shows MCs after submersion
As can be seen on Figure 19, coating integrity was indeed intact and the in vitro
release study was repeated once again in hopes of achieving better results. The
experiment was redone (E016) and once again, HPLC analysis showed premature
drug release in RGM at low pH despite MCs being coated with a pH-sensitive
coating that should only release at neutral pH. As mentioned shortly in Section 4.1,
it was suspected that poor drug load would compromise drug release as it might
result in an uneven layer of coating. Thus, there was a chance of VAL dissolution
in between the pockets of the polymer coating.
The experiment was redone for the 3rd time (E019) with great emphasis on
optimal drug loading in order to achieve an even coating. However, HPLC analysis
did not succeed in quantifying VAL from study samples. Literature shows many
44
==PAGE:56==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
examples of using HCL buﬀer (Ngwuluka, 2010; Chen et al., 2019; Mehta et al.,
2013) and phosphate buﬀer (Mayo-Pedrosa et al., 2008; Bodmeier et al., 1996;
Mundada and Shrikhande, 2006) for pH-sensitive drug release assays. Thus, the
two buﬀers were used for simulation of gastric and intestinal environment instead
of RGM and RIM.
The experiment was redone for the 4th time (E022) using HCl buﬀer (pH =
1.7) and phosphate buﬀer (pH = 7.5). The great beneﬁt of RGM and RIM was
that RGM could be transformed in RIM by the addition of bile buﬀer. This was
not the case with the use of buﬀer. Instead, MC chips were individually removed
from Falcon tubes containing HCL buﬀer, padded dry and transferred to a new
Falcon tube containing phosphate buﬀer to introduce the neutral pH environment.
The samples containing HCl buﬀer were analyzed right away on the HPLC and the
samples containing phosphate buﬀer were kept at -20◦C for later analysis.
Based on the previous results, ES100 (1%) was abandoned and instead EL100
(1%) was used for polymer spray coating. As already mentioned in Section 3.2,
EL100 dissolves at pH 6–7 while ES100 dissolves at pH > 7, making both suitable
for drug release at intestinal pH. Furthermore, drug release using EL100 is well
documented in literature (Moustaﬁne et al., 2005; Torres-Flores et al., 2019). In
order to compare thickness of EL100 coating and determine if 30 loops was indeed
enough to enclose VAL inside the MC while at gastric pH, it was decided to spray
coat 3 MC chips with EL100 (1%) for 30 loops and another 3 MC chips for 60 loops
to increase thickness of the coating and compare the two.
45
==PAGE:57==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
However, after a regular cleaning of the spray coating system, a drastic change
in pressure at which the polymer solution was expelled from the nozzle was
observed during spray coating.
Despite using the same polymer concentration
and loops, the thickness of the polymer was increased drastically (Figure 20B and
20C). Comparison between ’normal’ ES100 coating (30 loops) and the thick EL100
coating after cleaning the spray coater (both 30 and 60 loops) is shown on Figure 20.
Figure 20:
Scanning electron microscopy analysis of microcontainer chips with (A)
Eudragit® S100 spray coating (30 loops) from E014; (B) thick Eudragit® L100 spray
coating (30 loops) from E024; and (C) thick Eudragit® L100 spray coating (60 loops)
from E024
Despite diﬀerences in coating thickness, the 5th attempt at the experiment was
continued as planned (E024), concluding with promising results. Still using HCl
buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer instead of RGM and RIM, samples containing HCl
buﬀer were analyzed and samples containing phosphate buﬀer were kept at -20◦C
at the end of the experiment and thawed in time for HPLC analysis.
HPLC
quantiﬁcation of AC and VAL in both HCl buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer is shown on
Figure 21A.
46
==PAGE:58==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 21:
(A) Results from in vitro drug release experiment E024.
Red line shows
valacyclovir (VAL) release from Eudragit® L100 (EL100) coated microcontainers (MC)
(30 loops). Blue red line shows acyclovir (AC) release from EL100 coated MCs (30 loops).
Dark red line shows valacyclovir (VAL) release from Eudragit® L100 (EL100) coated MCs
(60 loops).
Purple red line shows acyclovir (AC) release from EL100 coated MCs (60
loops). (B) Yellow line shows total drug concentration (both VAL and AC) release from
EL100 coated MCs (30 loops). Orange line shows total drug concentration (both VAL and
AC) released from EL100 coated MCs (60 loops). Dotted vertical line indicates transition
from gastric pH (HCl buﬀer) to intestinal pH (phosphate buﬀer)
Results show that drug release is withheld in gastric pH (approximately 15-20%
drug release) and released exponentially at intestinal pH as shown on Figure 21A.
Also shown is the diﬀerence in release proﬁle from VAL (red line) when using
EL100 spray coating 30 loops and 60 loops.
Results indicate that drug release
occurs faster when using 30 loops in contrast to 60 loops and max release for both
is observed around 125 min. The VAL to AC conversion (blue line) is also shown on
Figure 21A which shows similar degradation regardless of polymer coating thickness.
Figure 21B shows total drug release (combined release of VAL and AC in
solution) and shows approximately 100% release when using 30 loops (around 125
min) and approximately 95% release when using 60 loops (around 245 min). The
reason for observing lower measurements of total drug concentration when using 60
loops is unknown.
Comparing to Figure 18 on page 43, the release proﬁles diﬀer signiﬁcantly
from the uncoated and coated MCs as a larger drug quantity was observed in the
burst release of uncoated MCs compared to the coated as expected. MC chips were
47
==PAGE:59==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
also inspected after the experiment using SEM analysis to examine drug release
and all MCs were found to be empty.
Following the success of E024, it was deemed relevant to perform an experiment
that could clarify VAL degradation in HCl buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer in order
to establish a decrease of prodrug conversion when using MCs. If the degradation
study would demonstrate that VAL degrades faster without the shielding eﬀect of
coated MCs, it would support the idea that MCs can be used for drug delivery with
increased bioavailability. Thus, degradation study E025 was done.
The experiment setup was very similar to the one of E024 except MC chips
and spray coating processes were excluded.
A few mg correlating the normal
drug load of an MC chip was placed inside individual falcon tubes.
Then, HCl
buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer was poured into the tubes and samples were taken
at speciﬁc time points, as described in Section 3.4.1. Results are shown on Figure 22.
Figure 22:
Results from in vitro drug degradation experiment E025.
(A) Red line
shows valacyclovir (VAL) concentration.
Blue line shows acyclovir (AC) concentration
after conversion from VAL. Black line shows total drug concentrations from VAL and AC
combined. Initial concentrations were observed to be very low for unknown reasons. Dotted
line indicates transition from HCl buﬀer (low pH) to phosphate buﬀer (neutral pH)
As shown on Figure 22, initial results showed very low starting concentrations
of VAL alongside a sudden increase in VAL concentration when transitioning
48
==PAGE:60==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
from gastric to intestinal pH. Therefore, the experiment was repeated and further
expanded to include fasted state simulated gastric ﬂuid (FaSSGF) to fasted state
simulated intestinal ﬂuid (FaSSIF). The reason for doing degradation study in
both buﬀer and simulated media was to observe any diﬀerence in degradation with
and without presence of the salts that are present in both gastric and intestinal
environments.
Thus, the purpose of encouraging degradation in buﬀer was merely to observe
how pH aﬀects drug degradation.
The purpose of degradation in simulated
media was to observe how pH and presence of salts aﬀects drug degradation.
Degradation study E028, done in both HCl buﬀer and phosphate buﬀer as well
as FaSSGF and FaSSIF, showed promising results. Results can be seen on Figure 23.
Figure 23: Results from in vitro drug degradation experiment E028. (A) Degradation
study in HCl buﬀer & phosphate buﬀer. Red line shows valacyclovir (VAL) concentration.
Blue line shows acyclovir (AC) concentration after conversion from VAL. Black line shows
total drug concentrations from VAL and AC combined. Dotted line indicates transition
from HCl buﬀer (gastric pH) to phosphate buﬀer (intestinal pH). (B) Degradation study in
FaSSGF & FaSSIF. Red line shows VAL concentration. Blue line shows AC concentration
after conversion from VAL. Black line shows total drug concentrations from VAL and
AC combined. Dotted line indicates transition from fasted state simulated gastric ﬂuid
(FaSSGF, gastric pH) to fasted state simulated intestinal ﬂuid (FaSSIF, intestinal pH).
Figure 23A shows VAL degradation in HCl buﬀer & phosphate buﬀer. A steady
decline on VAL (red line) is observed both in gastric and intestinal pH. Curiously,
when observing presence of AC (blue line), visible concentrations ﬁrst appear when
49
==PAGE:61==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
transitioning into intestinal pH. It is suspected that concentrations of AC at gastric
pH were too low to be quantiﬁed. Likewise, total drug concentration (both VAL
and AC combined, black line) is shown to drop from 100% steadily until 95 min
when it rebounds and stabilizes around 185 min.
Figure 23B shows VAL degradation in FaSSGF & FaSSIF. The same trend
is observed in gastric pH with steady decline of VAL and no apparent increase of
AC. At intestinal pH, the steady decline of VAL continues and AC concentrations
only increase so much. As a result, a decline in overall total drug concentration
(both VAL and AC) is seen with a concentration of approximately 90% at 365
min which is misrepresenting. This might be caused by further degradation into
unknown compounds or simply an analytical error.
When comparing AC concentrations in Figure 21A and Figure 23A, it becomes
apparent that VAL conversion to AC occurs at a steady rate regardless of using
MCs for drug encapsulation. From visual observation on Figure 21A, it would seem
that approximately 27% of VAL to AC conversion occurs when using MCs.
In
contrast, visual observation on Figure 23A would indicate approximately 20% VAL
to AC conversion without the use of MCs.
Despite literature has shown an increased oral bioavailability of pharmaceuticals
when using MCs (Nielsen et al., 2016; Mazzoni et al., 2017), initial experiments do
not display protection of VAL when using MCs.
4.3
Ex vivo Experiment
The purpose of the ex vivo study was to quantify intestinal perfusion from uncoated
MCs loaded with AC. The intestinal perfusion model was done using a porcine
intestinal segment since the physiology of the human GI tract is considered most
similar to that of pigs (Sciascia et al., 2016).
Protocol for porcine intestinal
perfusion model was adapted from literature (Jørgensen et al., 2020).
Calibration curves were prepared to standards for AC in hDMEM (HPLC
analysis) and FD70 in hDMEM (plate reader analysis). Three Franz diﬀusion cells
were run simultaneously with samples taken at speciﬁc time points. Results from
drug permeation experiment E029 are seen on Figure 24.
50
==PAGE:62==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 24:
Results from ex vivo drug permeation experiment E029.
Permeation of
acyclovir (AC, blue line) is observed based on total drug loading of MC chip. 70 kDa
ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate–dextran (FD70, gray line) was included as a pathogen marker
to ensure integrity of intestinal tissue during the course of the experiment.
Figure 24 shows total AC permeation through intestinal tissue over the course
of 3 hours. Furthermore, permeation of FD70 is also observed. AC permeation
occurs already after 15 min and rises steadily over the course of 3 hours.
As
already mentioned, FD70 was included as a pathogen marker to ensure integrity of
intestinal tissue. High concentrations of FD70 would indicate that the tissue was
torn and thus, experimental results would not be considered valid. Permeation of
FD70 is very low (never exceeds 0.03%) which serves to indicate that the intestinal
tissue did not break during the course of the study.
AC quantiﬁcation was done using HPLC analysis and FD70 quantiﬁcation
was done using plate reader analysis.
While most literature describe the use of
Franz diﬀusion cells for topical application of AC (Cernikova et al., 2018; Dias
et al., 2010; Coceani et al., 2003), the use of Franz diﬀusion cells for intestinal
perfusion studies of AC is at the time of writing not very well described.
As seen on Figure 24, great variation of AC permeation from triplicate samples was
observed over time (standard deviation of 8%). This may be caused by usage of
diﬀerent sections of the intestinal tissue that may have varying thickness. Overall,
29 ± 8% drug permeation was observed over the course of 3 hours. It should be
mentioned that AC quantiﬁcation was also done from sampling the donor chamber
51
==PAGE:63==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
(the upper chamber) containing the pathogen marker FD70 which found 29 ± 11%
of total drug quantity (not shown on ﬁgure). The remaining AC was suspected
to be entrapped inside the intestinal tissue itself and no analysis was done to
quantify AC inside the tissue. Analysis over a longer period of time might have
shown increased drug permeation. A 5 hour drug permeation study might be worth
exploring.
Overall, the study shows approximately 29% AC permeation over the course
of 3 hours. Considering that AC has an overall bioavailability from 12% to 20%, as
mentioned in Section 1.3, the overall permeation over the course of 3 hours seems
realistic to what would be expected in vivo.
4.4
In vivo Experiment
To compare the protective eﬀect of MCs on the delivery of VAL compared to
conventional oral delivery methods, rats were either given capsules containing
VAL-loaded MCs or capsules containing VAL in a loose powder form in the planned
in vivo study.
Before initiation of in vivo studies, calibration curves in rat blood plasma
was needed in order to establish a robust quantiﬁcation technique for data analysis
that would be able to quantify AC in ng/mL-concentrations. Quantiﬁcation was
challenging and thus several attempts with diﬀerent parameter is shown in Table 12.
For all calibration curve experiments, the Kinetex® 2.6 µm C18 100 Å LC Column
(30 x 0.3 mm) was used with a column temperature of 40◦C and a run time of 6 min.
While the protocol for calibration standards was discussed in Section 3.4.5,
the mobile phase, organic solvent and HPLC parameters were frequently changed in
order to optimize quantiﬁcation. Initial attempt of AC quantiﬁcation in rat blood
plasma (E030) with a max AC concentration of 57 µg/mL resulted in broad peaks
which was reattempted using a more organic mobile phase and MeOH was also used
for protein precipitation as it is well documented in literature for eﬀective protein
precipitation (Blanchard, 1981). Unfortunately, quantiﬁcation was not achieved.
52
==PAGE:64==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Table 12: Parameters used for HPLC standards and quantiﬁcation of VAL in rat blood
plasma. Parameters for E032 and E039 showed successful drug release.
Experiment
ID
Mobile
phase
Organic solvent
(ratio)
Concentration
range (µg/mL)
Flow rate
(mL/min)
Injection
volume (µL)
Results
E030
PBS-MeOH
(75:25 and 70:30)
ACN / MeOH
(3:1)
From 0
to 57
0.7
10
No
quantiﬁcation
E032
PBS-MeOH
(60:40 and 75:25)
ACN / MeOH /
Acetone (9:1)
From 0
to 540
0.7
10
Deﬁnite
quantiﬁcation
E033
PBS-MeOH
(70:30)
MeOH
(-20°C, 9:1)
From 0
to 0.5
1
50
No
quantiﬁcation
E034
4 mM ammonium
acetate-ACN (40:60)
MeOH
(-20°C, 9:1)
From 0
to 1
1
50
No
quantiﬁcation
E035
4 mM ammonium
acetate-ACN (40:60)
MeOH
(-20°C, 9:1)
From 0
to 1.25
1
50
No
quantiﬁcation
E036
4 mM ammonium
acetate-ACN (40:60)
Perchloric
acid (10%, 1:1)
From 0
to 6.25
1
50
No
quantiﬁcation
E037
PBS-MeOH
(75:25)
Perchloric
acid (10%, 1:1)
From 0
to 0.2
0.7
50
No
quantiﬁcation
E038
4 mM ammonium
acetate-ACN (40:60)
Perchloric
acid (10%, 1:1)
From 0
to 0.5
1
50
No
quantiﬁcation
E039
PBS-MeOH
(75:25)
Perchloric acid
(10% and 20%, 1:1)
From 0
to 500
0.7
50
Deﬁnite
quantiﬁcation
E041
PBS-MeOH
(75:25)
Perchloric
acid (20%) (3:1)
From 0
to 0.5
0.7
50 and 75
No
quantiﬁcation
Despite the low plasma protein binding of AC (between 9% and 22%) (de Miranda
and Blum, 1983), eﬀective plasma protein precipitation is crucial for accurate in
vivo measurements. Blanchard, 1981, describes the use of diﬀerent solvents and
their eﬃcacy in protein removal. This work was used to asses solvent as well as
volume of precipitant per volume of blood plasma. Experiment was redone (E032)
with the purpose of evaluating eﬀective organic solvents for protein precipitation.
Triplicate standards using precipitants ACN, MeOH and acetone (9:1) was done
(Figure 25).
53
==PAGE:65==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 25:
Calibration curves for evaluation of eﬀective organic solvents for protein
precipitation in blood plasma. Turquoise line shows use of precipitant acetonitrile (ACN);
orange line shows use of precipitant methanol (MeOH); purple line shows use of precipitant
acetone.
Figure 25 shows calibration curves for AC when using precipitants ACN, MeOH
and acetone. All three calibrations curves show similar R2-value which indicates
standard samples were made correctly.
AUC is generally higher for samples
precipitated with MeOH, lower for ACN and lowest for acetone
AUC on Figure 25 is an expression of drug that is no longer bound by plasma
proteins in the rat plasma samples. Thus, from looking at the results, they would
indicate that MeOH (orange line) is the most eﬀective precipitant since samples
treated with MeOH has the largest reading and therefore the least AC bound in
plasma proteins. It was decided that MeOH was to be continued as precipitant for
AC quantiﬁcation in blood plasma for further experiments.
A new study was done (E033) attempting to make a calibration curve using
lower concentrations of AC solution as opposed to earlier. Calibration curves with
the upper concentration limit 500 ng/mL as opposed to the much higher 900 µg/mL
were attempted. In order to achieve a more accurate reading, the injection volume
was increased from 10 µL to 50 µL as an increase in injection volume increases
drug quantity for every sample analysis. MeOH was cooled to -20◦C as the use
of ice-cold organic solvents has been known to increase protein precipitation as
opposed to organic solvents with room temperature (Fic et al., 2010). The initial
54
==PAGE:66==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
HPLC analysis showed overlapping peaks of plasma content and AC, making
quantiﬁcation extremely problematic. In order to separate the peaks and enable
more accurate AC quantiﬁcation, a new mobile phase was considered.
An extensive literature search was performed in order to establish new ways
of analysis of AC in rat blood plasma. Conclusively, four articles were taken into
serious consideration (Muralidharan et al., 2014; Malik et al., 2019; Zendelovska
et al., 2015; Perrottet et al., 2007). An overview of literature and parameters used
is shown in Table 13.
Table 13: Literature search on HPLC quantiﬁcation of acyclovir (AC) in blood plasma
Reference
Muralidharan
et al., 2014
Malik et
al., 2019
Zendelovska
et al., 2015
Perrottet
et al., 2007
Column
C18 column
BDS Hypersil
C18 column
Reversed phase
C8 column
Nucleosil 100–5
µm C18 column
Organic solvent
(solvent to sample ratio)
Perchloric acid 1:5
(10%)
Perchloric acid 2:1
(5%)
Perchloric acid 1:5
(20%)
Trichloroacetic
acid 1:4 (20%)
Mobile phase
4 mM
ammonium
acetate-ACN
(40:60) (V/V)
50 mM ammonium
dihydrogen phosphate
buﬀer-MeOH
(98:2) (V/V)
0.1% (V/V)
triethylamine
in MilliQ water
Gradient elution
program with
ACN & sodium
heptanosulfonate 0.4%
Flow rate
(mL/min)
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.0
Injection
volume (µL)
50
20
120
30
Retention
time (min)
4.12
6.3
7.75
15
Run time
(min)
5
10
?
42
Limit of detection
(LOD) (ng/mL)
25
5
100
100
A decision was made to follow the protocol developed by Muralidharan et al., 2014
due to low limit of detection (LOD) and materials being ready at hand in the labs
already to make study E034. Ice-cold MeOH was used instead of perchloric acid
(10%), due to the accessibility of this. Additionally to changing mobile phase to 4
mM ammonium acetate-ACN (40:60) and a new organic solvent, a new method for
making the stock solution was also made. Instead of mixing AC directly into blood
plasma, a stock solution was made by mixing AC into ACN-MilliQ water (1:1)
which was then injected into blood plasma to achieve the desired concentration.
This was done in the hopes of optimizing solubility of the drug. Drug quantiﬁcation
was not achieved due to unstable reading.
Study was replicated (E035) while
55
==PAGE:67==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
slightly increasing sample drug concentration, but again, quantiﬁcation was not
successful.
Attempting to recreate the protocol developed by Muralidharan et al., 2014,
perchloric acid (70%) was generously donated from DTU Food (Kgs.
Lyngby,
Denmark) in a small quantity and diluted into the required concentration using
Milli-Q water. Perchloric acid was later acquired from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO USA). The use of perchloric acid was also supported by literature and its
excellent usage as a precipitant with an even greater eﬃcacy in doing so in contrast
to MeOH (Blanchard, 1981).
A new study (E036) was made, replicating the
protocol described by Muralidharan et al.
except for using a much higher 1:1
solvent to sample ratio of perchloric acid instead of 1:5 that was described in Table
13. Even with an increase in AC drug concentration, AC quantiﬁcation was not
achieved.
Therefore, a new study (E037) was attempted using mobile phase PBS-MeOH
(75:25) instead of 4 mM ammonium acetate-ACN (40:60) and using a smaller
standard concentration range in order to quantify concentrations in the ng/mL
scale. Still using perchloric acid (10%) in the hopes of eliminating the noise caused
by various components in the plasma, the ﬂow rate was also decreased to eliminate
any broad peaks. The disturbance continued and AC was not quantiﬁed. Another
study (E038) was done using the previous mobile phase again (4 mM ammonium
acetate-ACN 40:60) and using same parameters with no luck.
Study E039 was done in order to explore the LOD for AC in blood plasma.
So far, only HPLC analysis done in µg/mL-concentrations had succeded whereas
analysis in ng/mL-concentrations had not.
Several standards samples were
prepared, the lowest concentration being 25 ng/mL to 500 µg/mL. Standards were
made with concentrations 0.025, 0.05, 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 5, 25, 50, 125, 250 and 500
µg/mL. Results are shown on Figure 26.
56
==PAGE:68==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Figure 26: Results from study E039 to evaluate limit of detection (LOD) of acyclovir
(AC) in blood plasma. (A) calibration curve made from 25 ng/mL to 500 µg/mL. (B) Same
calibration curve from 25 ng/mL to 25 µg/mL.
Figure 26A shows a broad calibration curve of AC in blood plasma ranging from
25 ng/mL to 500 µg/mL. R2-value as shown illustrates fair correlation between
standard samples. AUC reading below 25 µg/mL are very hard to identify and thus
Figure 26B was added to show lower reading. Figure 26B shows same calibration
curve, excluding all reading above 25 µg/mL. It becomes clear from Figure 26B
that readings below 25 µg/mL are very distort.
The negative AUC value from readings below 25 µg/mL is caused by subtraction of
blank plasma AUC from measured sample AUC. Based from this short experiment
alone, quantiﬁcation becomes challenging between concentrations from 5 µg/mL
to 25 µg/mL. These ﬁndings correlate well with initial quantiﬁcation results
so far.
Even so, literature reports AC quantiﬁcation as low as 5 ng/mL to
25 ng/mL using HPLC analysis (Muralidharan et al., 2014; Malik et al., 2019) and
so, HPLC quantiﬁcation should indeed be a possibility in the ng/mL-concentrations.
A last attempt was made at quantiﬁcation with focus on maximal protein
precipitation with the upper concentration limit being 500 ng/mL (E041). Instead
of perchloric acid with concentration 10% and ratio 1:1, a greater concentration
and solvent to sample ratio was used (20%, 3:1) in the attempt of eliminating the
noise caused by various components in the blood plasma. Injection volume was also
varied as the higher volume of organic solvent would inevitably dilute the sample
and cause samples to contain even less drug. AC quantiﬁcation was not achieved.
57
==PAGE:69==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
In vivo drug absorption study in rats was executed but blood plasma samples not
analyzed due to lack of robust HPLC method. Thus, no AC quantiﬁcation was
made.
58
==PAGE:70==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
5
Conclusion
The aim of the project was to load MC chips with the prodrug, apply a polymeric
coating and quantify both release and stability of the prodrug from MCs. For the
in vitro study, MC chips were successfully loaded with VAL, coated with both
EL100 and drug release and stability was quantiﬁed in HCl buﬀer and phosphate
buﬀer. Results show delayed release in low pH and full release in neutral pH with
Cmax after 1 hour in neutral pH. When comparing drug release proﬁles, the release
proﬁles diﬀered signiﬁcantly from the uncoated and coated MCs as a larger drug
quantity was observed in the burst release of uncoated MCs compared to the coated
as would be expected. When comparing VAL to AC conversion from using MCs
and not using MCs, initial studies do not display protection of VAL when using MCs
An ex vivo study was also conducted to asses drug permeation of drug when
using MCs.
Cmax was observed to be 29 ± 8% of drug permeation of AC was
observed over the course of 3 hours in porcine intestinal tissue. Another 29 ± 11% of
total AC quantity was observed in the donor chamber of Franz diﬀusion cell and the
remaining quantity of drug is suspected to be suspended inside the intestinal tissue.
Capsule dosage was prepared for an in vivo study in male Sprague-Dawley rats to
observe absorption of VAL with and without the use of MCs. Study was conducted
but samples were never analyzed. Calibration curves for AC in blood plasma were
made but were not robust enough to quantify AC in ng/mL-concentrations.
Overall, in vitro studies do not indicate shielding eﬀect of VAL when using
MCs; ex vivo study shows VAL permeation from MCs is feasible; and in vivo study
assessing increased bioavailability of VAL when using MCs is not conclusive.
59
==PAGE:71==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
6
Future Perspectives
As shortly mentioned,
SU-8 MCs are not biodegradable.
Future aspects
includes development of robust, biodegradable MCs made from either polymer,
polysaccharides or other materials.
In order to keep the key feature of the MC
which is uni-directional release of drug cargo, the MC should be constructed with
a material that enables a pH-sensitive lid to dissolve long before the MC itself.
Another aspect would be diﬀerent usage of controlled release than pH-speciﬁc
polymers. A suggestion could be biomolecules in solution such as enzymes that are
presented only in the intestine. The presence of these enzymes could quickly and
eﬀectively dissolve the lid on top of the MC and thus release the drug load.
In terms of cargo load, other types of cargo should be explored.
As already
mentioned in the introduction, MC cargo has been tested with the use of drugs,
biopharmaceuticals, probiotics, insulin, and vaccines. Especially exploration of MC
delivery with insulin could be interesting considering oral bioavailability of insulin
is generally very low, thus the need to inject intravenously.
Another suggestion
could be combined delivery of diﬀerent types of cargo, for example both NSAIDs
and probiotics for treatment of inﬂammatory bowel diseases.
Increasing the
availability of oral administration from drug, biopharmaceuticals, vaccines and such
might increase patient convenience and compliance and thus might be the better
alternative to intravenous drug administration. Combining multiple powder drugs
in one single cargo could also be explored further in diseases where administration
of multiple drugs are required.
In terms of polymer coating of the MCs,
controlled release over a longer
period of time may be worth exploring. A sustained release of drug cargo may be
favourable as it would require patients to administer medicine once every few days
of every week while dosage remaining inside the therapeutic window. This is of
course very much dependant on the type of therapeutic and other types of cargo
load and should be explored based from the cargo of the MC. While the rat in
vivo study with AC absorption was not concluded, doing so would be an important
step in further in vivo studies. Considering that the ex vivo studies performed on
porcine intestinal tissue showed fair drug permeation, an in vivo study in porcine
models could be interesting. Eventually, clinical trials might also take place using
MCs for improved oral drug delivery. However, I believe that biodegradability of
individual MCs should be explored before even considering clinical trials.
60
==PAGE:72==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Another in vitro
study with empathises on enzymatic degradation should
also be considered in combination with pH degradation.
Lastly, ex vivo VAL
permeation should be done using diﬀerent intestinal samples from duodejum,
jejunum and ileum to observe any radical changes in VAL permeation depending
on delivery site in the GI tract.
61
==PAGE:73==
==PAGE:74==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
References
Arduino, P. G. and Porter, S. R. (2006). Oral and perioral herpes simplex virus type
1 (hsv-1) infection: Review of its management. Oral Diseases, 12(3):254–270.
Argenta, D. F., Martelli, S. M., and Caon, T. (2019). Chapter 10 - dendrimer as a
platform for drug delivery in the skin. Materials for Biomedical Engineering:
Organic Micro and Nanostructures, pages 331–367.
Bae, Y. H. and Park, K. (2011). Targeted drug delivery to tumors: Myths, reality
and possibility. Journal of Controlled Release, 153(3):198–205.
Beaumont, K., Webster, R., Gardner, I., and Dack, K. (2003).
Design of
ester prodrugs to enhance oral absorption of poorly permeable compounds:
Challenges to the discovery scientist. Current Drug Metabolism, 4(6):461–485.
Blanchard,
J.
(1981).
Evaluation
of
the
relative
eﬃcacy
of
various
techniques for deproteinizing plasma samples prior to high-performance liquid
chromatographic analysis. Journal of Chromatography, 226(2):455–60.
Bodmeier, R., Guo, X., Sarabia, R. E., and Skultety, P. F. (1996). The inﬂuence
of buﬀer species and strength of diltiazem hcl release from breads coated with
the aqueous cationic polymer dispersions, eudragit rs, rl 30d. Pharmaceutical
Research (new York), 13(1):52–56.
Bose, S., Keller, S. S., Alstrøm, T. S., Boisen, A., and Almdal, K. (2013).
Process optimization of ultrasonic spray coating of polymer ﬁlms. Langmuir,
29(23):6911–6919.
Burnette, T. and Demiranda, P. (1994).
Metabolic disposition of the acyclovir
prodrug valaciclovir in the rat. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 22(1):60–64.
Cernikova, A., Bobal, P., Bobalova, J., Dohnal, J., and Jampilek, J. (2018).
Investigation of permeation of acyclovir through skin using alaptide.
Acta
Chromatographica, 30(1):62–65.
Cetin, M., Atila, A., and Kadioglu, Y. (2010).
Formulation and in vitro
characterization of eudragit® l100 and eudragit® l100-plga nanoparticles
containing diclofenac sodium. Aaps Pharmscitech, 11(3):1250–1256.
62
==PAGE:75==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
ChemicalBook.com (2017).
124832-27-5 (valacyclovir hydrochloride) product
description.
https://www.chemicalbook.com/ChemicalProductProperty_
US_CB8430566.aspx (visited on 2021-01-04).
Chen, L., Yang, G., Chu, X., Gao, C., Wang, Y., Gong, W., Li, Z., Yang,
Y., Yang, M., and Gao, C. (2019).
Polymer distribution and mechanism
conversion in multiple media of phase-separated controlled-release ﬁlm-coating.
Pharmaceutics, 11(2):80.
Chen, M. C., Sonaje, K., Chen, K. J., and Sung, H. W. (2011).
A review of
the prospects for polymeric nanoparticle platforms in oral insulin delivery.
Biomaterials, 32(36):9826–9838.
Cheng, H. and Leblond, C. P. (1974). Origin, diﬀerentiation and renewal of the
four main epithelial cell types in the mouse small intestine. i. columnar cell.
American Journal of Anatomy, 141(4):461–79.
Christfort, J. F., Guimera, C. M., Kamguyan, K., Thamdrup, L. H. E., Nielsen,
L. H., Zor, K., and Boisen, A. (2020). Dual-compartment microcontainers for
sequential drug delivery.
Christfort, J. F., Strindberg, S., Plum, J., Hall-Andersen, J., Janfelt, C., Nielsen,
L. H., and Müllertz, A. (2019). Developing a predictive in vitro dissolution
model based on gastrointestinal ﬂuid characterisation in rats. European Journal
of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 142:307–314.
Coceani, N., Colombo, I., and Grassi, M. (2003). Acyclovir permeation through rat
skin: Mathematical modelling and in vitro experiments. International Journal
of Pharmaceutics, 254(2):197–210.
De, Vrueh, R. L. A., Smith, P. L., and Lee, C.-P. (1998). Transport of l-valine-
acyclovir via the oligopeptide transporter in the human intestinal cell line, caco-
2. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 386(3):1166–1170.
de Miranda, P. and Blum, M. R. (1983).
Pharmacokinetics of acyclovir after
intravenous and oral administration. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,
12(suppl B):29–37.
Dekker, J., Rossen, J. W., Büller, H. A., and Einerhand, A. W. (2002). The muc
family: An obituary. Trends in Biochemical Sciences, 27(3):126–131.
63
==PAGE:76==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Dias, R. J., Mali, K. K., Ghorpade, V. S., Garje, S. B., and Havaldar, V. D. (2010).
In vitro absorption studies of acyclovir using natural permeation enhancers.
Latin American Journal of Pharmacy, 29(8):1411–1418.
Dressman, J., Berardi, R., Dermentzoglou, L., Russell, T., Schmaltz, S., Barnett,
J., and Jarvenpaa, K. (1990). Upper gastrointestinal (gi) ph in young, healthy
men and women. Pharmaceutical Research, 7(7):756–761.
Elion, G. (1982). Mechanism of action and selectivity of acyclovir. American Journal
of Medicine, 73(1A):7–13.
Ensign, L. M., Cone, R., and Hanes, J. (2012). Oral drug delivery with polymeric
nanoparticles: The gastrointestinal mucus barriers. Advanced Drug Delivery
Reviews, 64(6):557–570.
Evonik
(2021).
Eudragit®
functional
polymers
for
oral
solid
dosage
forms.
https://healthcare.evonik.com/en/products/pharmaceutical-
excipients/EUDRAGIT (visited on 2021-01-21).
Fathima, A., Saravana Kumar, P., Ramya Devi, D., and Vedha Hari, B. N.
(2012).
Microparticulate drug delivery system of orlistat for sustained
release. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research,
15(1):27–30.
FDA
(2005).
Prescribing
information:
Valacyclovir
hydrochloride.
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2005/
020487s007rel2_lbl.pdf (visited on 2021-01-04).
Fernandes, T. B., Segretti, M. C. F., Polli, M. C., and Parise-Filho, R. (2016).
Analysis of the applicability and use of lipinski’s rule for central nervous system
drugs. Letters in Drug Design and Discovery, 13(10):999–1006.
Fic, E., Kedracka-Krok, S., Jankowska, U., Pirog, A., and Dziedzicka-Wasylewska,
M. (2010). Comparison of protein precipitation methods for various rat brain
structures prior to proteomic analysis. Electrophoresis, 31(21):3573–3579.
Fletcher, C. and Bean, B. (1985).
Evaluation of oral aciclovir therapy.
Drug
Intelligence and Clinical Pharmacy, 19(7-8):518–524.
Ganapathy, M., Huang, W., Wang, H., Ganapathy, V., and Leibach, F. (1998).
Valacycloviv: A substrate for the intestinal and renal peptide transporters pept1
64
==PAGE:77==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
and pept2. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 246(2):470–
475.
Gaucher, G., Satturwar, P., Jones, M. C., Furtos, A., and Leroux, J. C. (2010).
Polymeric micelles for oral drug delivery. European Journal of Pharmaceutics
and Biopharmaceutics, 76(2):147–158.
Granero, G. E. and Amidon, G. L. (2006). Stability of valacyclovir: Implications for
its oral bioavailability. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 317(1):14–18.
Gribbon, P. and Sewing, A. (2003). Fluorescence readouts in hts: No gain without
pain? Drug Discovery Today, 8(22):1035–1043.
Grumezescu, A. M. (2018).
Design of Nanostructures for Versatile Therapeutic
Applications. Elsevier.
Guidetopharmacology.org
(2021).
Valacyclovir
hydrochloride
physico-
chemical
properties.
https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/
LigandDisplayForward?ligandId=4824 (visited on 2021-02-14).
Han, H. K., Oh, D. M., and Amidon, G. L. (1998). Cellular uptake mechanism
of amino acid ester prodrugs in caco-2/hpept1 cells overexpressing a human
peptide transporter. Pharmaceutical Research, 15(9):1382–1386.
Hansen, S. H. (2016). Hplc/uhplc. Advances in Delivery Science and Technology,
pages 413–437.
Johnson, L. R., Barret, K. E., Gishan, F. K., Merchant, J. L., Said, H. M., and Wood,
J. D. (2006). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, volume 1-2. Elsevier Inc.
Jornada, D. H., Dos Santos Fernandes, G. F., Chiba, D. E., De Melo, T. R. F.,
Dos Santos, J. L., and Chung, M. C. (2016).
The prodrug approach:
A
successful tool for improving drug solubility. Molecules, 21(1).
Jóhannesson, T. (2000). Aspirin. acetylsalicylic acid and aspirinlike drugs. a review.
Laeknabladid, 86(11):755–68.
Jørgensen, J. R., Yu, F., Venkatasubramanian, R., Nielsen, L. H., Nielsen, H. M.,
Boisen, A., Rades, T., and Müllertz, A. (2020).
In vitro, ex vivo and in
vivo evaluation of microcontainers for oral delivery of insulin.
Molecular
Pharmaceutics, 12(1):48.
65
==PAGE:78==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Kamguyan, K., Torp, A. M., Christfort, J. F., Guerra, P., Licht, T. R.,
Hagner Nielsen, L., Zor, K., and Boisen, A. (2021).
Colon-speciﬁc delivery
of bioactive agents using genipin-cross-linked chitosan coated microcontainers.
Acs Applied Bio Materials, 4(1):752–762.
Katragadda,
S.,
Jain,
R.,
Kwatra,
D.,
Hariharan,
S.,
and Mitra,
A. K.
(2008). Pharmacokinetics of amino acid ester prodrugs of acyclovir after oral
administration: Interaction with the transporters on caco-2 cells. International
Journal of Pharmaceutics, 362(1-2):93–101.
Khan, M. Z. I., Prebeg, Z., and Kurjakovic, N. (1999).
A ph-dependent colon
targeted oral drug delivery system using methacrylic acid copolymers. i.
manipulation of drug release using eudragit® l100-55 and eudragit® s100
combinations. Journal of Controlled Release, 58(2):215–222.
Khan, M. Z. I., Štedul, H. P., and Kurjaković, N. (2000).
A ph-dependent
colon-targeted oral drug delivery system using methacrylic acid copolymers.
ii. manipulation of drug release using eudragit® l100 and eudragit s100
combinations. Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy, 26(5):549–554.
Lai, S. K., Wang, Y.-Y., and Hanes, J. (2009). Mucus-penetrating nanoparticles for
drug and gene delivery to mucosal tissues. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews,
61(2):158–171.
Lueschow, S. R. and McElroy, S. J. (2020).
The paneth cell: The curator and
defender of the immature small intestine. Frontiers in Immunology, 11:587.
MacDougall, C. and Guglielmo, B. J. (2004).
Pharmacokinetics of valaciclovir.
Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 53(6):899–901.
Mak, I. W., Evaniew, N., and Ghert, M. (2014). Lost in translation: Animal models
and clinical trials in cancer treatment.
American Journal of Translational
Research, 6(2):114–118.
Malik, N. S., Ahmad, M., Minhas, M. U., and Khalid, Q. (2019). Determination of
acyclovir in rabbit plasma by high performance liquid chromatographic (hplc)
technique. Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica - Drug Research, 76(3):421–429.
Mastropietro, D., Park, K., and Omidian, H. (2017). Polymers in oral drug delivery.
Comprehensive Biomaterials II, pages 430–444.
66
==PAGE:79==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Mayo-Pedrosa, M., Cachafeiro-Andrade, N., Alvarez-Lorenzo, C., Martinez-Pacheco,
R., and Concheiro, A. (2008). In situ photopolymerization-coated pellets for
ph-dependent drug delivery. European Polymer Journal, 44(8):2629–2638.
Mazzoni, C., Jacobsen, R. D., Mortensen, J., Jorgensen, J. R., Vaut, L., Jacobsen,
J., Gundlach, C., Mullertz, A., Nielsen, L. H., and Boisen, A. (2019). Polymeric
lids for microcontainers for oral protein delivery. Macromolecular Bioscience,
19(5).
Mazzoni, C., Tentor, F., Andersen, S. S., Nielsen, L. H., Keller, S. S., Alstrøm, T. S.,
Gundlach, C., Müllertz, A., Marizza, P., and Boisen, A. (2017). From concept
to in vivo testing: Microcontainers for oral drug delivery. Journal of Controlled
Release, 268:343–351.
McGuinness, C. D., Nishimura, M. K. Y., Keszenman-Pereyra, D., Dickinson, P.,
Campbell, C. J., Bachmann, T. T., Ghazal, P., and Crain, J. (2010). Detection
of single nucleotide polymorphisms using a dna holliday junction nanoswitch-a
high-throughput ﬂuorescence lifetime assay. Molecular Biosystems, 6(2):386–
390.
Mehta, R., Chawla, A., Sharma, P., and Pawar, P. (2013).
Formulation and in
vitro evaluation of eudragit s-100 coated naproxen matrix tablets for colon-
targeted drug delivery system. Journal of Advanced Pharmaceutical Technology
and Research, 4(1):31–41.
Michler, G. H. and Lebek, W. (2016). Electron microscopy of polymers. Polymer
Morphology: Principles, Characterization, and Processing, pages 37–53.
Mondal, D. (2007).
Acyclovir.
Xpharm:
the Comprehensive Pharmacology
Reference, pages 1–4.
Mosgaard, M. D., Strindberg, S., Abid, Z., Petersen, R. S., Thamdrup, L. H. E.,
Andersen, A. J., Keller, S. S., Müllertz, A., Nielsen, L. H., and Boisen, A.
(2019). Ex vivo intestinal perfusion model for investigating mucoadhesion of
microcontainers. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 570:118658.
Moustaﬁne, R. I., Kabanova, T. V., Kemenova, V. A., and Van Den Mooter, G.
(2005). Characteristics of interpolyelectrolyte complexes of eudragit e100 with
eudragit l100. Journal of Controlled Release, 103(1):191–198.
67
==PAGE:80==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Mrsny, R. J. (2012). Oral drug delivery research in europe. Journal of Controlled
Release, 161(2):247–253.
Mundada, A. S. and Shrikhande, B. K. (2006). Controlled release gel of ciproﬂoxacin
hcl for ophthalmic administration. Indian Drugs, 43(1):9–12.
Muralidharan, S., Kalaimani, J., Parasuraman, S., and Dhanaraj, S. A. (2014).
Development and validation of acyclovir hplc external standard method
in human plasma:
Application to pharmacokinetic studies.
Advances in
Pharmaceutics, 2014:1–5.
Nair, A. B., Attimarad, M., Al-Dhubiab, B. E., Wadhwa, J., Harsha, S., and Ahmed,
M. (2014). Enhanced oral bioavailability of acyclovir by inclusion complex using
hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin. Drug Delivery, 21(7):540–547.
Nguyen, N. T., Shaegh, S. A. M., Kashaninejad, N., and Phan, D. T. (2013). Design,
fabrication and characterization of drug delivery systems based on lab-on-a-chip
technology. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 65(11-12):1403–1419.
Ngwuluka, N. (2010).
Application of in situ polymerization for design and
development of oral drug delivery systems. Aaps Pharmscitech, 11(4):1603–
1611.
Nielsen, L. H., Keller, S. S., and Boisen, A. (2018). Microfabricated devices for oral
drug delivery. Lab on a Chip, 18(16):2348–2358.
Nielsen, L. H., Melero, A., Keller, S. S., Jacobsen, J., Garrigues, T., Rades, T.,
Müllertz, A., and Boisen, A. (2016). Polymeric microcontainers improve oral
bioavailability of furosemide. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 504(1-
2):98–109.
O’Brien, J. and Campoli-Richards, D. (1989). Acyclovir. an updated review of its
antiviral activity, pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic eﬃcacy. Drugs,
37(3):233–309.
Pang, B., Zhu, Y., Lu, L., Gu, F., and Chen, H. (2016).
The applications
and features of liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry in the analysis of
traditional chinese medicine. Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative
Medicine, 2016:3837270.
Patel, R. (1997). Valaciclovir: Development, clinical utility and potential. Expert
Opinion on Investigational Drugs, 6(2):173–189.
68
==PAGE:81==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Perrottet, N., Beguin, A., Meylan, P., Pascual, M., Manuel, O., Buclin, T., Biollaz,
J., and Decosterd, L. A. (2007).
Determination of aciclovir and ganciclovir
in human plasma by liquid chromatography-spectroﬂuorimetric detection and
stability studies in blood samples. Journal of Chromatography B: Analytical
Technologies in the Biomedical and Life Sciences, 852(1-2):420–429.
Petersen, K. J., Peterson, K. C., Muretta, J. M., Higgins, S. E., Gillispie, G. D.,
and Thomas, D. D. (2014).
Fluorescence lifetime plate reader: Resolution
and precision meet high-throughput.
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments,
85(11):113101.
Phan, D. D., Chin-Hong, P., Lin, E. T., Anderle, P., Sadee, W., and Guglielmo, B. J.
(2003). Intra- and interindividual variabilities of valacyclovir oral bioavailability
and eﬀect of coadministration of an hpept1 inhibitor. Antimicrobial Agents and
Chemotherapy, 47(7):2351–2353.
PubChem (2021). Compound summary: Valacyclovir. https://pubchem.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/compound/valacyclovir (visited on 2021-01-04).
Qing, G., Li, M., Deng, L., Lv, Z., Ding, P., and Sun, T. (2013).
Smart drug
release systems based on stimuli-responsive polymers. Mini-reviews in Medicinal
Chemistry, 13(9):1369–1380.
Rajak, P., Bhattacharya, A., Sharma, N., Kataki, M. S., and Rajkumari, A. (2011).
Floating drug delivery system-retentive drug delivery. International Journal of
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 3(4):9–16.
Salamanca, C. H., Barrera-Ocampo, A., Lasso, J. C., Camacho, N., and Yarce, C. J.
(2018). Franz diﬀusion cell approach for pre-formulation characterisation of
ketoprofen semi-solid dosage forms. Pharmaceutics, 10(3).
Sandri, G., Bonferoni, M., C., Ferrari, F., Rossi, S., and Caramella, Carla, M. (2013).
The role of particle size in drug release and absorption. Particulate Products,
19:323–341.
Sanjay, S. T., Dou, M., Fu, G., Xu, F., and Li, X. J. (2016). Controlled drug delivery
using microdevices. Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, 17(9):772–787.
Sanjeeva Murthy, N. (2011). Techniques for analyzing biomaterial surface structure,
morphology and topography. Surface Modiﬁcation of Biomaterials: Methods
Analysis and Applications, pages 232–255.
69
==PAGE:82==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Sciascia, Q., Daş, G., and Metges, C. C. (2016). Review: The pig as a model for
humans: Eﬀects of nutritional factors on intestinal function and health. Journal
of Animal Science, 94(7):441–452.
Shehaan, J. and Carlstedt, I. (1984).
Hydrodynamic properties of human
cervical-mucus glycoproteins in 6m-guanidinium chloride. Biochemical Journal,
217(1):93–101.
Shetty, A. and Srinivasan, G. (2015). Microfabricated oral drug delivery systems.
Indian Drugs, 52(11):5–13.
Sood, A. and Panchagnula, R. (2001). Peroral route: An opportunity for protein
and peptide drug delivery. Chemical Reviews, 101(11):3275–3303.
Soul-Lawton, J., Seaber, E., On, N., Wootton, R., Rolan, P., and Posner, J. (1995).
Absolute bioavailability and metabolic disposition of valaciclovir, the l-valyl
ester of acyclovir, following oral administration to humans.
Antimicrobial
Agents and Chemotherapy, 39(12):2759–2764.
Terao, T., Matsuda, K., and Shouji, H. (2001).
Improvement in site-speciﬁc
intestinal absorption of furosemide by eudragit l100-55. Journal of Pharmacy
and Pharmacology, 53(4):433–440.
Tobiska, S. and Kleinebudde, P. (2003). Coating uniformity: Inﬂuence of atomizing
air pressure. Pharmaceutical Development and Technology, 8(1):39–46.
Torres-Flores, G., Nazende, G. T., and Emre, T. A. (2019).
Preparation of
fenoﬁbrate loaded eudragit l100 nanoparticles by nanoprecipitation method.
Materials Today: Proceedings, 13:428–435.
von Halling Laier, C., Gibson, B., Sevilla Moreno, J. A., Rades, T., Hook, S., Nielsen,
L. H., and Boisen, A. (2019). Microcontainers for protection of oral vaccines,
in vitro and in vivo evaluation. Journal of Controlled Release, 294:91–101.
Worthington, J. J., Reimann, F., and Gribble, F. M. (2018). Enteroendocrine cells-
sensory sentinels of the intestinal environment and orchestrators of mucosal
immunity. Mucosal Immunology, 11(1):3–20.
Zendelovska, D., Simeska, S., Atanasovska, E., Georgievska, K., Kikerkov, I.,
Labachevski, N., Jakovski, K., and Balkanov, T. (2015).
Determination
of acyclovir in human plasma samples by hplc method with uv detection:
70
==PAGE:83==
Oral Drug Delivery of Prodrugs in Microcontainers, C. G. L. Andersson (s154331)
Application to single-dose pharmacokinetic study.
Macedonian Journal of
Medical Sciences, 3(1):32–36.
Zhang, L., Wang, S., Zhang, M., and Sun, J. (2013). Nanocarriers for oral drug
delivery. Journal of Drug Targeting, 21(6):515–527.
71
