==PAGE:1==
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low
vision aids
Master Thesis
DTU Computer science and Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
Master Thesis
January, 2021
By Marek Mikitovic
Supervised by Fiona B. Mulvey and Per Bækgaard, Cognitive Systems, DTU Compute
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, BUilding 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
http://www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study explored the benefits of image manipulation in vision loss simulation among
a sample of participants with healthy vision. Different methods of image manipulation
were explored and analyzed. Based on the research optimal enhancements were imple-
mented into a prototype and tested. Research in vision loss and vision, in general, was
conducted to properly simulate its conditions. A suitable approach for justification was
considered and according to that, an adequate experiment was designed on which this
research was further conducted. Results indicate that image processing methods of color
reversal and contrast enhancement significantly affect performance in visual search, also
positive effects of edge detection on performance were noticed. Results also point out
that peripheral vision loss and central vision loss greatly affect eye movement behavior.
Results are discussed in form of future research and possible improvements in the field
which is still an active area of research.
ii
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to thank my thesis supervisors and advisors Fiona Bríd Mulvey and Per
Baegaard for technical expertise and assistance during whole period of my Master thesis.
They were always there for me, eager to help or point me in the right direction with issues
or obstacles I was facing and especially Fiona for being a great guide and motivator in
the field of human vison.
I would also like to thank the all the people involved in the Synoptic project, namely Nils
David Rasamoel for helping with numerous things, Mateusz Sadowski for helping with vi-
sion loss simulation and experiment design, Baosheng Hou for helping with python script-
ing.
I would also like to acknowledge help from my family and close friends for providing me
with unfailing support and continuous encouragement throughout my years of study and
through the process of researching and writing this thesis.
This accomplishment would not have been possible without any of them. Thank you.
Author
Marek Mikitovic
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction / Motivation
1
1.1
Eye-tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Low Vision & Current visual aids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Normal Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Dynamic and individualised image processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Predicting optimal image processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Testing which kinds of processing work for Low Vision . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Research questions: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Requirements and Implementation
7
2.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Design and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Experiment preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methods
14
3.1
Technical specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Results
23
5
Discussion
32
5.1
Hypothesis 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Hypothesis 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
Hypothesis 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4
Hypothesis 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.5
Hypothesis 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.6
Suggestions for future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6
Conclusions
35
.1
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
iv
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction / Motivation
1.1
Eye-tracking
Eye tracking is a technology that measures point of gaze and it helps us understand where
a person is really looking or where the preferred focus of an individual is. Eye tracking
isn’t new, it has been around for at least 100 years. The first photographic records of eye
movements were recorded in 1901 (Dodge and Cline, 1901), when eye trackers were only
used in labs as big and static state of the art analogue devices. One of the advancements
was study of Yarbus (1967). This Russian physiologist used head fixed recording tech-
nique and established that eye movements are not simply determined by the scene we
see but their pattern could be changed radically by asking the subject different questions
about what they are seeing. As time progressed eye trackers became smaller, wearable
and more convenient to use devices. This allowed us to broaden opportunities to study
vision and attention with a focus on real world environments and daily tasks (Land et al.,
1999).
Because of eye tracking, we can measure changing attention over time, we can get gaze
points of specific scene or picture, heat maps, time spent at location or on an object.
All these applications have brought significant improvements in industry from better ads,
interfaces, learning material, and thanks to UX design, more intuitive applications and
more.
Eye tracking allows us to explicate different types of eye movements such as fixations; the
period of time when the eyes remain fairly still and new information is acquired from the
visual field, saccades are the periods of time where the eye is moving, usually between
two fixations, vergence movements occur when we move our eyes inward, toward each
other, in order to fixate on a nearby object, vestibular eye movements occur when the
eyes rotate to compensate for head and body movements in order to maintain the same
direction of vision. There are also small eye movements which occur because of the fact
that eyes are never really still even during so called fixation, thanks to the constant tremor
or microsaccades, collectively called fixational eye movements. Drift is a slow, involun-
tary movement of the eye unrelated to target (?); microsaccade describes the movement
when eyes are fixating, but small movements potentially related to covert attention oc-
cur (Martinez-Conde et al., 2004) because of less-than-perfect control of the oculomotor
system by the nervous system. When this happens there is often small microsaccade
(which is much more rapid eye movement than drift) to bring eyes back to where they
were (Rayner, 2009, 1998).
New opportunities arose with integration of eye trackers into virtual and mixed reality de-
vices also referred as head mounted displays (HMDs). HMD technologies can be classi-
fied based on their display type and optical design. See-through displays such as retinal
projection devices have the greatest potential for use as low-vision aids. These devices
vary by their relationship to the user’s eyes, field of view, illumination, resolution, color,
stereopsis, effect on head motion and user interface (Ehrlich et al., 2017). Such devices
allow for new possibilities to enhance visual input for certain individuals or certain tasks.
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
1
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Low Vision & Current visual aids
Globally, at least 2.2 billion people have a vision impairment, and of these, at least 1
billion people have a vision impairment that could have been prevented or is yet to be
addressed World Health Organization (2019). The number of adults in the United States
who are affected by low vision is expected to reach 5.5 million by 2020, and it is estimated
that 25% have significant peripheral field loss (PFL), while 75% have central vision loss
(CVL) (Ehrlich et al., 2017).
This vision impairment or low vision refers to chronic disabling vision impairment caused
by disorders of the visual system that cannot be corrected with glasses/contact lenses,
medical treatment, or surgery.
The types of vision impairments that come under the
rubric of low vision include reductions in visual acuity, loss of contrast sensitivity, age
related macular degeneration (AMD)/central scotomas, retinitis pigmentosa (peripheral
visual field loss or ”tunnel vision”), night blindness, slow glare recovery, photophobia,
metamorphopsia, oscillopsia and others. Age related macular degeneration is an visual
medical condition which affects center of visual field. Over time patients with such condi-
tion experience blurred and in the later stages no vision (described as central scotoma)
in the center of the visual field. Retinitis pigmentosa also called ”tunnel vision” is a ge-
netic disorder affecting the peripheral visual field and it’s reduction, symptoms might also
include trouble seeing at night (night blindness). Glare is an difficulty of seeing in the
presence of bright light. It’s slow recovery after exposure can create difficulty in vision as
eye is overcompensating for the light it experienced. Photophobia is a symptom of abnor-
mal intolerance to visual perception of light, an discomfort or pain to the eyes due to light
exposure or by presence of actual physical sensitivity of the eyes. Metamorphopsia is a
type of distorted vision in which grid of straight lines appears wavy and parts of the grid
might appear blank. Oscillopsia is a visual disturbance in which objects in the visual field
appear to oscillate. The severity of the effect may range from a mild blurring to rapid and
periodic jumping. Often, low vision patients have combinations of these impairments. As
a result of their vision impairments, low vision patients have difficulty with or are unable
to perform valued activities. West et al. (2002); Rovner and Casten (2002)
There is help for individuals with low vision in form of traditional tools consisting of mag-
nifiers, glasses-mounted optical aids and color filters. There are also more advanced
commercially available visual aids, such as closed-circuit televisions (CCTVs) consisting
of camera display and controlling device. Such devices are called CCTV because of the
direct cable link between the camera imaging system and monitor viewing system. This
type of system might be considered a little obsolete or deprecated today but are still in
use as Electronic Vision Enhancement Systems (EVES) Wolffsohn and Peterson (2003).
These devices are capable of image magnification, minification, contrast stretching, color
reversal, edge enhancement and color and luminance contrast substitution. Typical strate-
gies used in head mounted displays (HMD) assistive technologies include magnification
to compensate for reduced visual acuity, illumination control with filters, and automatic
gain control to compensate for issues with light and dark adaptation, glare recovery, and
contrast enhancement via contrast stretching, contrast reversal, edge enhancement, and
colour and luminance contrast substitution or filters to compensate for low contrast sen-
sitivity Deemer et al. (2018). All of the aforementioned features are usually set as static
and without or very little option for adjustment.
Current solutions may only work for some people, or for certain tasks, meaning several
devices need to be carried around depending on what tasks the user intends (e.g. reading
vs walking around) and what they can practically carry safely. A solution which reduced
2
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:8==
(a) Normal vision
(b) Slow glare recovery
(c) Retinitis pigmentosa
(d) Age-related macular degeneration
Figure 1.1: Eye disease simulation Institute (2012)
the number of devices required in everyday life would be desirable, but would require
a considerable amount of individualisation of the tool, and would require a tool that can
change function depending on the task, environment, and goals of the user.
It seems that there is a gap or lack of adjustability in current HMDs which haven’t been yet
filled. Each individual could benefit from specific or more tailored image adjustment set-
tings for best effectiveness of the visual aid. These systems could potentially be dynamic
in the sense of adaptive to carrying out specific tasks, or react to different environments,
and lastly be individualized for each person.
1.3
Normal Vision
The eyes register light which is then converted into an electro-chemical signal transmitted
over neurons to our brain where it is processed. It can be thought of in terms of the same
principles of light transformation as simple camera. At the outside first in contact with the
light is the cornea, a transparent optical layer covering iris and lens and responsible for
the main focusing power, although it is fixed. The Iris is responsible for controlling the
amount of light entering the eye. The Pupil would be same as the aperture in camera
terms and the iris is the diaphragm. Due to the flexibility of the lens we are able to refocus
light for viewing objects that are closer to us. Now this altered light beam of photons
is traveling trough the inside of the eye filled with transparent gel-like substance called
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
3
==PAGE:9==
vitreous humour until it lands at the back surface of the inner eye called retina, a “surface”
made of light sensitive cells - photoreceptors.
Figure 1.2: Diagram of the human eye Rhcastilhos and Jmarchn. (2007)
We can distinguish between two types of light sensitive cells, rods and cones, named
after their physical shape. Almost all of our visual tasks are mediated by cones, yet cones
make up barely 5% of our retinal photo-receptors. Their acuity is high, it is situated in the
fovea, a small, central area of the retina where most of the cones are found. Cones have
very fast speed of response. They provide us with color vision and form the central vision
in high resolution. Rods contribute only under restricted conditions, after a considerable
time at very low light levels, but this is where they excel, in distinguishing saturation levels.
They have better contrast sensitivity compared to cones. Rods make up the majority of
our peripheral vision, as low resolution spatial vision Lamb (2016); Gao et al. (2019).
Reduction in visual acuity results in reduced ability in reading fine print, and also might
negatively influence ability to see large low-contrast objects or safe navigation around
unfamiliar environments (Freedman et al., 2019). In a healthy human eye, contrast sen-
sitivity and visual acuity are highly correlated (Rubin et al., 2001). West et al. (2002)
mentions that both contrast sensitivity and visual acuity loss contribute independently to
deficits in performance on everyday tasks.
Loss in contrast sensitivity can also influence reading performance, since it highly relates
to the ability to distinguish text from background (Rubin and Legge, 1989). Same applies
in contrast sensitivity in spatial field of vision, where reduction affects how well individuals
see and can distinguish objects in everyday life, that’s because the eye is more sensitive
for the observation of objects if the required amount of contrast is lower. Contrast we are
referring to is absolute difference in luminance also called contrast ratio. (Owsley and
Sloane, 1987; Barten, 1999). Contrast sensitivity has been shown to be important for
predicting reading speed in patients with severe visual impairment and is also associated
with postural stability and mobility performance in patients with low vision (Rubin et al.,
2001).
Central scotoma / Central vision loss is a degeneration which leads to loss of ability to
perceive objects in the central region of retina where high acuity, full colour visual input is
4
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:10==
processed. Such disability disrupts recognition of faces or details within the objects and
heavily affects performance in reading (Harvey and Walker, 2014).
Peripheral visual field loss could be a result of advanced retinitis pigmentosa which causes
progressive peripheral visual-field loss or glaucoma with binocular visual field ≤20◦(Cheong
et al., 2008). Individuals with peripheral field loss have difficulties in navigating around
new environments and in everyday tasks (Gameiro et al., 2018).
Glare refers to reduced visibility due to the presence of a light source elsewhere in the
visual field, or a sudden change in environmental light levels. Any disorder that increases
intraocular light scatter, such as lens opacity, may cause problems due to disability glare.
Glare testing of patients with cataract can predict the reduction in visual acuity outdoors
when facing the sun or in direct overhead sunlight (Rubin et al., 2001).
1.4
Dynamic and individualised image processing
The ability to detect eye movements and gaze direction, combined with individual vision
profiles, could provide the basis for a unique, individualised setup for each persons’ visual
aid. Such information would adjust parameters of image manipulation and create better,
operational visual aid tools. Aguilar and Castet (2017) directly suggests that the gaze-
controlled enhanced systems might be further developed and fruitfully incorporated in
different kinds of low vision aids.
1.5
Predicting optimal image processing
As discussed, loss in contrast sensitivity highly relates to the ability to distinguish text from
background Rubin and Legge (1989) and also affects how well individuals see and can
distinguish objects in everyday life, which could be adjusted with contrast enhancement
or histogram stretching.
For reduction in visual acuity we would consider the same approach at the loss of contrast
sensitivity since acuity and contrast are co-related.
Glare related issues would be fixed with applying a brightness adjustment filter in a same
way as putting on a sunglasses on a sunny day, and adjusting the image manipulation so
that it is timed to the individual’s ability to adapt.
Issues related to central scotoma and AMD would benefit from edge detection enhance-
ment or increased contrast applied over the visual field captured by HMD. Such adjust-
ment would display contrasting lines between detected edges at the cost of loosing color
information, which in this particular case is acceptable since peripheral vision is not as
sensitive to color but more sensitive to difference in contrast.
Peripheral visual field loss would need to be treated differently, compared to central vision
loss.
Minification, that is, minimizing the perceived visual field by zooming out, could condense
the visual information into the working visual field, thus zooming out of the scene when
general spatial orientation would be required. Luo and Peli (2006) confirmed that search
time was significantly reduced in visual search task when using a device with such a
minification function.
Also Moshtael et al. (2015) summarized 37 studies of image processing techniques for
subjects with low vision. The majority of participants from the experiment studies preferred
enhanced images over the original for a wide range of enhancement types. Adapting the
contrast and spatial frequency content often improved performance at object recognition
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
5
==PAGE:11==
and reading speed. However, it reported inconsistency in preferences and performance
measures, as well as a lack of independent studies. Although the summarized findings
should encourage further research in order to allow their widespread use in low-vision
aids, in other words it is stating that this thesis is on right track since there is still a lot to
explore in this active area of research.
1.6
Testing which kinds of processing work for Low Vision
Research with simulated artificial scotomas was carried out already (Henderson et al.,
1997), in three settings with CVL, PVL and no vision loss simulation. The research also
suggests that foveal information is not necessary (while still being very important) for per-
ceptual encoding during object identification. Ideally we would like to test in the real world
conditions as Timmis et al. (2017) was comparing the visual search strategies with walk-
ing tasks and obstacle crossing. Similar task was considered for our study but its scope
at the current time seemed challenging to validate, that’s why we have proceeded with
visual search based tasks. Visual search is a generalisable and well studied task, highly
related to everyday activity, with a clear performance measure and levels of task difficulty.
Therefore, it presents a good task for assessing visual performance that is generalisable
to everyday function. Taylor et al. (2017) conducted an experiment with searching for
objects in everyday scenes, which we adapt for our experiment. They have recorded
eye movements and search times per individual task and compared the results against
90% normative limit established with participants with healthy vision. A similar study Luo
and Peli (2006) used an augmented vision device by patients with tunnel vision and ex-
amined the effects on visual search performance. Ideally, we would test both types of
participants with real vision loss and healthy vision, but we were limited to participants
with healthy vision only due to an ongoing pandemic, and low vision being associated
with pre-conditions that may effect immunity. To properly justify if the image processing is
beneficial in low vision, we would conduct an experiment with the low vision simulation on
the healthy participants, multiple conditions with the specific image enhancements pre-
dicted for vision loss. Specifically we are focusing on simulation of central vision loss
(CVL) and peripheral vision (PVL).
1.7
Research questions:
• Does performance in visual search tasks in low vision benefit from mixed reality
based image processing?
• Does edge detection, contrast enhancement (image processing) improve visual
search for objects?
• Does color reversal (image processing) improve visual search for letter-based stim-
uli?
• Does type of vision loss (central or peripheral) predict which image processing is
beneficial?
• Does image processing change eye movement behaviour in low vision?
6
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:12==
2
Requirements and Implementation
2.1
Requirements
In order to conduct an experiment to answer our research questions we derived this set
of requirements:
• The solution should be toolbox for image adjustments in VR/AR suitable for individ-
ualisation to specific visual and retinal function
• The solution should provide a foundation for future development where new features
outside of the scope of this thesis will be implemented
• This solution should be portable across hardware, optimizable, and offer real-time
or at least near-real time rendering of visual effects, with latency low enough not to
be visually disturbing for the user.
2.2
Design and Implementation
2.2.1
Head mounted display
In order to describe the design we first consider the platform on which we will prototype
and execute experiments, since it might introduce some limitations. Choice of device
was based on state of the art hardware, with maximum available resolution and inbuilt
100Hz eyetracking in three dimensions. The Varjo system was selected for prototype
development because it represents the hardware performance that will be available in the
near future, in a lighter form factor. Development was on the XR-1 model mixed reality
system from Varjo. It’s an industry grade HMD suitable for automotive, product design,
entertainment industries and academic research Varjo (2020).
Figure 2.1: Varjo XR-1 Varjo (2019b)
The XR-1 features two stereo 12 megapixel cameras with fixed focus, 1/3” sensor size
with 1.55µ pixel size. Cameras have 94◦circular viewing angle and less than 20 ms la-
tency. It claims industrial-grade, sub-degree accuracy integrated with 100Hz binocular
eye tracking. The displays have a resolution of over 20/20 vision (over 60 PPD / 3000
PPI), flicker-free screen refresh at 60/90 Hz and 87 degrees of field of view. Combin-
ing two 1920×1080 low persistence micro-OLEDs and two 1440×1600 low persistence
AMOLEDs. With imaging pipeline of 4 streams (2 per eye): 1008 x 1008 down-scaled
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
7
==PAGE:13==
from the full 12 Mpx + foveated 834 x 520 full resolution crop, information gathered from
Varjo (2019b).
Manufacturers provide various SDK and plugins for Unity and Unreal engines to develop
in and a Native SDK in C++ which already provided support for real-time video post-
processing, bearing in mind that it was labeled as experimental, thus not being in it’s
final version or properly polished. Naturally we have chosen Native SDK as base for our
prototype since it already provided a solid base for developing image processing features.
2.2.2
Design
At first different approaches for image manipulation were investigated and evaluated. One
of possible candidates was using OpenCV as open source computer vision and machine
learning software library. It was built to provide a common infrastructure for computer
vision applications, contains more than 2500 optimized algorithms among which are also
image manipulation algorithms. A test of image manipulation, more precisely the Canny
edge detection algorithm, showed promising results.
Bonny and Henno (2018) did a
comparative study of three different edge detectors, namely Roberts, Prewitt and Sobel.
Based on this we selected which technique would be beneficial for our purposes. Results
showed that the Roberts detector achieves better edge detection with higher noise lev-
els. It is also faster and requires less capacity of logic gates than the Prewitt and Sobel
detectors.
(a) Roberts detector
(b) Sobel detector
(c) Original image
Figure 2.2: Comparison of different edge detectors algorithms David W. (2010)
8
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:14==
Our initial approach was to use the OpenCV library and tweak it’s parameters of the Canny
filter, Canny edge detector Canny (2009). This approach was abandoned due to the
unused potential and time consuming integration into the platform we were prototyping on.
After re-evaluation of the options we continued with use of the existing algorithm instead
of a library. We decided to proceed with Sobel detector instead of Roberts detector, based
on the results they were producing.
In figure 2.2 it can be clearly seen that Sobel detector is producing thicker contrasting
edges on processed image, which would be more suitable for our goal given that our
users could have low acuity or blurry vision and would not see very thin lines.
Sobel operator
Sometimes called the Sobel-Feldman operator, this method is used in image processing
and computer vision that aims at identifying points at which the image brightness changes
drastically. The Sobel–Feldman operator is based on convolving the image with a small,
separable, and integer-valued filter in the horizontal and vertical directions and is therefore
relatively inexpensive in terms of computations.
This operator uses two kernels which are convolved with the original image to find an
approximation of the derivatives, one for horizontal changes and one for vertical.
Figure 2.3: Sobel kernels
In figure 2.3 we define the original image as A and Gx and Gy are two images after
convolution operation executed on them with according kernels, where ∗denotes the
2dimensional signal processing convolution operation.
Figure 2.4: Convolution operation
The x coordinate image is increasing in the right direction and y coordinate image is in-
creasing in the down direction. After calculation of two images we perform gradient ap-
proximation of magnitude by using G =
√
G2x + G2y.
Color reverse
Lets consider that images are stored in the form of matrices with defined intensities of
red, green, and blue color as an integer between 0 and 255 per each pixel location, if
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
9
==PAGE:15==
we are using the RGB color space. For example rgb(0, 0, 255) would result in plain blue
pixel, because the blue parameter is set to it’s highest value and others are set at zero.
The color reversal could be achieved fairly simply, if we take each value of RGB and
subtract it from the maximum value of 255 we will be left with the exact opposite value in
the spectrum.
Contrast enhancement
For increasing the contrast multiple approaches were considered. With use of the pre-
viously mentioned convolution it’s possible to apply a sharpening filter on the original
image. The procedure requires the sharpening kernel in following form:


0
−1
0
−1
5
−1
0
−1
0

.
The resulting image has increased sharpness, as shown in Figure 2.5. There is another
possibility of using a kernel of bigger extent (5 by 5), based on Gaussian blur, with amount
as 1 and threshold as 0: −1
256


1
4
6
4
1
4
16
24
16
4
6
24
−476
24
6
4
16
24
16
4
1
4
6
4
1


.
but the required effect is not improved significantly with the increased size of kernel.
(a) Original image
(b) Sharpen mask 3x3
(c) Sharpen mask 5x5
Figure 2.5: Comparison of different contrast enhancement strategies Michael (2013)
2.2.3
Implementation
The solution was implemented based on the existing showcase examples provided from
Varjo. They have been written in the Native SDK (C++) required achieving full control at
the lowest level of the hardware. Most important thing that could be mentioned here was
that the image manipulation was done in the shader. Shader is a program that dictates
the color, brightness, contrast, and other characteristics of a single pixel in matrix of an
image. Thanks to this we could utilise the convolution operation described in section 2.2.2
which is a process executed on the GPU with special set of instructions.
10
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: System overview
Figure 2.7: Capture of an edge detection applied deferentially to a scene using gaze
position, in real-time video
2.3
Experiment preparation
Psychopy was used to create experiments; a free cross-platform package or tool with
wide range of experiments in the behavioral sciences (neuroscience, psychology, psy-
chophysics and linguistics...). It’s used as a standard in visual search experiments by
many researchers. The package provides it’s own builder for easy creation of exper-
iments with building blocks, called routines. Each routine represents one screen which
will be displayed on the monitor. We decided to split our experiment into two visual search
tasks - one based on text/letters and one based on objects, since the visual requirements
for reading and object recognition are different.
2.3.1
Physical setup
Participants sit behind the table with the HMD properly attached to their heads. The
HMD works like real see trough glasses displaying exactly what the participant would
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
11
==PAGE:17==
normally see, only with differences that we systematically manipulate vision loss simu-
lating CVL and PVL in combination with color reverse, sharpening and edge detection
enhancements. The HMD already provides eye-tracking capabilities at 100Hz. In order
to have more precise data, and given we are unsure of the reliability of 3D gaze track-
ing in this device, we provide a chin-rest for participants to help stabilise the head during
recording of the experiment. As a second parameter we will measure response time and
correctness of the participant’s response while executing visual search tasks. We have
set the button press on the keyboard as input for creating a timestamp from which we will
compute the response time to task completion (target object found). Our setup requires
2 screens, one for the participant and one for the experimenter in order to control the
experimental manipulations.
2.3.2
First visual search task - letters
In Experiment 1 we create a letter search task, where the participant searches for a tar-
get letter in array of distractors. As for our target we have selected letter L and for the
distractor letter T, we have been inspired with choosing of objects for our stimuli by Wolfe
et al. (2002) study.
These stimuli were presented white on the black background, or black on a white back-
ground. Light text on black background is in line with guidelines on accessible text for low
vision (Kirkpatrick et al., 2018). We have prepared our stimuli in three different variations
of difficulty; easy, medium, and hard by creating an arrays of 3x3, 4x4 and 5x5 randomly
distributed letters of the same size, with a constant array size, and random rotation of
each letter. The target was present only in half of the stimuli so the correct response was
’target present’ or ’target not present’. In total we have created 24 stimuli of varying diffi-
culties. First half of the first task would present 12 stimulus in random order, 6 with and
6 without the target. In second half we randomly presented the rest of the stimuli in the
similar fashion, keeping in mind that now the participant would have applied color reversal
image enhancement. We displayed images with similar background brightness together,
rather than randomly, as otherwise it takes time for the eye to adjust to overall brightness
change and this could effect performance if extreme changes in brightness are frequent.
2.3.3
Second visual search task
Second visual search task involves colourful, detailed real world object search. When
choosing the objects for stimuli we have kept in mind possible issue of pop-out effect
which occurs when a visual stimulus that is comprised of differing components has mostly
similar looking objects but one differing object that ’pops-out’ or stands out very noticeably
from the other objects in the visual field. This way have chosen teddy-bears with arrays
similar to the letter search this time on a white background. We chose these items be-
cause they have a similar overall shape but differ in colour and detail - meaning that good
detailed view is needed for identification of target. Teddy-bears were randomly distributed
in arrays of difficulties 2x2, 3x3 and 4x4. Now instead of letters, participants would search
for the specified teddy-bear which is shown on the previous screen before the stimulus,
without time limit (key press displays array when ready). This search task was split into
three parts. We acquired the images of teddy-bears from The teddy bear encyclopedia
P. (2001).
In the first condition 6 randomly selected stimuli appear, with target teddy-bear appearing
on the previous screen right before the stimulus. Of those 6 stimuli 3 would include a
target and 3 would exclude the target so that the correct response became ’target present’
or ’target not present’. In the second visual search task we use no image manipulation
in order to provide a baseline for performance with each of the vision loss simulations
and with normal vision, and then on the next 6 stimuli we would enable the sharpening
12
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:18==
enhancement and last 6 stimuli the participant experiences edge detection enhancement
turned on inside the HMD.
2.3.4
Manipulated conditions
The first shown screen of the experiment will present basic information about the exper-
iment, what types of response we are recording. What conditions we are going to simu-
late. As participants will be experiencing 2 different visual loss simulations (CVL & PVL)
with combination of different real time image enhancements as color reversal, contrast
enhancement and edge detection. After getting trough all screens explaining right as a
participant, data storage. Next we will be asking for their consent and they will agree or
disagree with specific button pres on the keyboard. There will be only last thing to col-
lect information about age and their vision condition (if they have any). Then first visual
search task is going to be explained ti the participant after which there will be 3 trial task in
order for participant to familiarize with the objective. The real visual experiment will begin
and after its successful completion there will be screen alarming participant to wait so the
proper image manipulation can be enabled and after the participant will get familiar with
it, we can continue in the next part of the visual search task.
(a) Teddy-bear object
(b) Target letter
(c) Distractor letter
Figure 2.8: Example of the objects used for creating the stimulus in first and second visual
search task
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
13
==PAGE:19==
3
Methods
3.1
Technical specifications
Since our prototyping solution was based on Varjo XR-1, this HMD required specific hard-
ware in order to work. We have chosen the to follow minimal requirements proposed by
Varjo Varjo (2019b).
3.1.1
Hardware
• The head mounted mixed-reality display Varjo XR-1.
• The computer had NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti graphics card, 32GB of RAM, AMD
Ryzen 7 3800X 8-Core Processor and appropriate mother board. Mother board had
to include Intel® Thunderbolt™3 port for powering the HMD, 2 x DisplayPort 1.2, 1
x USB-A 3.0 and whole system had to run on Windows 10 operating system.
• Two monitors ASUS MG279Q 27-inch with 144Hz refresh rate, 109ppi (pixel pre
inch), 42ppcm (pixel per centimeter) and diagonal 27in 68.58cm, width 23.4935in
59.6736 cm, height 13.2151in 33.5664cm dimensions. One for the participant and
one for experimenter observe and adjust conditions of experiment.
• Generic keyboard for an recording of button press responses.
3.1.2
Software
• The prototype was developed in Visual Studio 2017 with C++ profiler tools, Windows
10SDK (10.0.17763.0), VC++ 2017 version 15.9 v14.16 latest v141 tools, C++ profil-
ing tools, Visual C++ tools for CMake, Visual C++ ATL for x86 and x64, Test Adapter
for BoostTest, Test Adapter for Google Test.
• Varjo Base software version 2.5.0.5 which is needed for using the Varjo headset on
a Windows computer. It provides analytic tools and eye tracking features.
• Varjo XR-1 running firmware version 2.5 with mixed reality cameras firmware version
0.5.16
• Psychopy; a free cross-platform package or tool for wide range of experiments in
the behavioral science.
Hypotheses:
1. Edge detection (image processing) will improve performance in visual search for
objects.
2. Contrast enhancement (image processing) will improve performance in visual search
for objects.
3. Color reversal (image processing) will improve performance in visual search for
letter-based stimuli.
4. Type of vision loss (central or peripheral) will effect which image processing is ben-
eficial.
5. Image processing will change eye movement behaviour in low vision.
14
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Participants
Due to the current situation with Covid-19 pandemic restrictions, participants from the
close circle of people I meet on the regular basis were chosen to minimize spread of the
disease. Criteria for participants were that they have to be in span of 18 to 70 years old and
that they have to understand English language since it was necessary for them to read and
properly understand the experiment instructions, and consent. Standard deviation in age
of participants was 1.36and mean 26.12. The gender ratio was 62.5% male and 37.5%
female from total number of 8 participants. Ratios of vision condition in participants was
normal vision ratio 62.5%, longsighted and not wearing lenses 25.0% and participants
with astigmatism 12.5%. Their participation was completely voluntarily without form of
any compensation or reward.
3.3
Experiment
3.3.1
Stimuli
Letter search
As mentioned in section 2.3.2 we have created stimulus with 3 different difficulty levels
based on number of individual letters inside the arrays with 9, 16 and 25 letters. Half of all
prepared stimuli have included target L and half of the did not. In between array objects
we have inserted guiding lines to ease navigation across stimulus with hardened vision
conditions.
Teddy-bear search
As mentioned in section 2.3.3 we have created stimulus with 3 different difficulty levels
based on number of individual objects (teddy-bears) inside the arrays with 4, 9 and 16
letters. Half of all prepared stimuli have included target (which was displayed before
every stimuli) and half of the did not. In between array objects we have inserted guiding
lines to ease navigation across stimulus with hardened vision conditions.
(a) Letter stimulus with 4 by 4 array
(b) Teddy-bear stimulus with 4 by 4 array
Figure 3.1: Example of first and second visual search task stimulis
Vision loss simulation
If the participant didn’t wish to take a break, we have proceeded with simulation of vision
loss. First with central vision loss CVL and repeated all the steps from the 3.3.2. Suc-
ceeding in the second part of the experiment the participant was once again offered to
have a break, after that we have continued with last part of the experiment simulating the
peripheral vision loss PVL and repeating all the steps from the 3.3.2. On completion of
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
15
==PAGE:21==
the experiment the participant was asked to remove HMD with help of a experimenter and
was thanked for their participation.
(a) Simulated central vision loss
(b) Simulated peripheral vision loss
Figure 3.2: Capture of an simulated vision loss in real-time video
3.3.2
Procedure
The experiment began with participants entering the lab where the table, including com-
puter, HMD, chin rest was ready. Participant was asked to sit in the designated chair
and find a comfortable position by adjusting the height of the chair and table in such an
manner that they would be sitting with their torso relatively straight and have their chin
rest just in the same position as the chin-rest placed on the table. Keyboard was placed
in easy to access distance as it was an important part of the experiment for responding
with an (ENTER) button press marked with green sticker or an (SPACEBAR) marked with
red sticker to a call from a task appearing on the monitor.
The participant was informed about his rights such as withdrawal from experiment without
any binding, right to take a break during the experiment at any anytime and right to ask
question in case of any uncertainties. Experiment was executed from the computer and a
greeting screen was displayed to a participant. In the following 3 screen participant was
presented with his right, inclusion criteria, legal information about data privacy. Participant
was asked to respond with (Y) button as ”yes” agreeing with information presented to him
and his voluntary participation, in case(s)hedid not agreed(s)hehad an option to press
(N) button as ”no” and experiment would be terminated and participant would be asked
to leave. On the next 2 screens we collected participants age and information about his
vision condition.
Now the participant was asked to put on the augmented reality HMD, with a cushion fit-
ting his/her face properly and than sliding an head strap over his/her head and tightening
it securely. The experimenter talked them through adjustments and displayed a posi-
tioning guide inside the HMD screen for precise adjustments of HMD position on head.
After successful centering of the HMD the experimenter intiated calibration of eye track-
ing. Participant was instructed to follow a dot with their gaze, if everything went smoothly
16
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:22==
calibration ended with ”Calibration successful” message being displayed. In case that
HMD eye tracker was for some reson unable to finish calibration or detect eyes, the ex-
perimenter checked the eye camera feed in the Varjo Base software and resolved the
issue. Repeated mounting and positioning of the HMD, or cleaning of the lenses solved
the issues.
Experiment 1: Text based visual search
The participant was asked to rest his/her head on the chin-rest and keep their head sta-
ble using only their eyes to follow instructions presented on the monitor. After the par-
ticipant pressed the (ENTER) button, the first visual search task was presented and ex-
plained. Written instructions explained that participants were to respond with (ENTER)
button press as a positive response if the target is present in the image, and (SPACE-
BAR) button as negative response marking if the target is not present in the image.
With the next (ENTER) button press the participant was presented with a screen explain-
ing that (s)he would be presented with three visual search tasks with letters as practise
trials. After getting through those (s)he was presented with a screen explaining that now
the real experiment will begin.
Following key press, the participant was presented with twelve trials in random order, each
trial first displayed the target to be found, then an array in which the target may or may
not be present. Six trials included the target and six excluded the target. After getting
through those trials participant was presented with the screen to wait for experimenter to
enable image enhancement.
In the second part of first visual search task the experimenter enabled color reversal image
manipulation and gave verbal instruction for participant that (s)he may continue. Next
screen presented to a participant was a picture of a beach, in order to familiarize with the
image enhancement and adjust/adapt to changed light levels, following that the participant
could continue at will. The next twelve visual search tasks were presented in random order
with six trials including and six trials excluding the target. Now the first visual search task
part is completed.
Experiment 2: Object based visual search
With the next screen the participant was presented with explanation of the second visual
search task, in which (s)he is asked to find a certain teddy-bear in an array of teddy-
bears. Again (s)he was asked to respond with (ENTER) button if the target teddy-bear
was present and with (SPACEBAR) button if target teddy-bear was not present in the
array.
Following screen presented the target teddy-bear first and after (ENTER) button press
a practice image in which the target was required to be found was displayed. Again
three practice visual search tasks were shown. After getting through those the participant
was presented with screen explaining that now the real experiment will begin. Following
keypress, the visual search tasks were presented in random order with six trials including
and six trials excluding the target.
After getting through those trials the participant was presented with the screen to wait for
the experimenter to enable first image enhancement. In the second part of second visual
search task experimenter enabled contrast enhancement image manipulation and gave
verbal instruction for participant that (s)he may continue. The next screen presented to a
participant was a picture of a beach, in order to familiarize with the image enhancement,
now participant could continue following keypress.
The whole process got repeated and after twelve visual search trials the participant pre-
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
17
==PAGE:23==
sented with the screen to wait for experimenter to enable third image enhancement. In
the third part of second visual search task experimenter enabled contrast enhancement
image manipulation and gave verbal instruction for participant that(s)he may continue.
The next screen presented was a picture of a beach, in order to familiarize with the im-
age enhancement, and following that participant could continue at will via keypress. After
getting through another twelve visual search tasks the first part of whole experiment has
ended and participant was offered a break. Greeting screens from the experiment could
be found in Appendix .1.
3.3.3
Analysis
Preprocessing eye movement data
After recording each participants’ eye movements we have multiple log files, which had to
be combined for analysis. The Varjo software provided log files with the many different eye
related variables and Psychopy provided the log files with experiment related information.
Both files contained a common time stamp for coupling. From the Varjo log we were
mainly interested in these variables:
• raw_timestamp - the timestamp of when the sample was taken, in nanoseconds
• right_forward_x & right_forward_y - data contains information about direction of vec-
tor forward (x, y, z) for the right eye.
• left_forward_x & left_forward_y - data contains information about direction of vector
forward (x, y, z) for the left eye.
The Varjo log also provides ‘status’ and ‘stability’ variables, but they were found to be
misleading. Status for each eye and a general status variable were supposed to indicate
the following, on a sample-level basis:
• 0 – eye is not tracked and not visible (e.g. eye is shut)
• 1 – eye is visible but not reliably tracked (e.g. saccade or blink)
• 2 – eye is tracked but quality compromised (e.g. headset has moved after calibra-
tion)
• 3 – eye is tracked
as found on the Varjo developer portal Varjo (2019a).
However, we found no relationship between the left and right eye status, data quality, and
the general status variable. In fact, the general status variable was always a value of 2,
even when the eye was lost. Inspection of the raw data raised the following data quality
concerns:
• Periods when the eye was lost - indicated by pupil size being 0 and/or no intersample
velocity being present, were often given as 0,0 coordinates rather than system miss-
ing values. 0,0 is a point in the centre of the screen, so this distorted eye movement
data very severely.
• There were gaps in the sampling, indicated by 11.5 to 70ms changes in the system
clock, where no data was written.
• There was no inbuilt event detection to parse fixations and saccades.
• The SDK which would have allowed us to import eye data directly into psychopy
was unfinished.
18
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:24==
• The focus distance measure was unreliable - it showed large changes in focus dis-
tance when we knew there was none as target and head were in fixed geometry.
• Samples seemed to be lost particularly in the middle of saccades, when eye velocity
is highest.
• There was little support available for eye data from manufacturers, though there was
good support for the mixed reality side of the product.
Due to these shortcomings and unknowns, we decided to handle the eye data ourselves,
based on the known physiological constraints of the eye movements of humans, and
existing parsing algorithms for eye data on two dimensions - namely the dispersion based
event detection algorithm proposed by Salvucci and Goldberg (2000a), which handles
noisy, low sample rate data well. We used the implementation by Gian Perrone (Gian,
2015).
From the Psychopy log we were mainly interested in these variables:
• timeSinceBoot - which was the time stamp relative to the boot time of the computer
in milliseconds
• TrueFalse - response of the participant relative to correctness if the target was ap-
pearing in the stimuli or not
• ImageFile - the stimuli name
• task1_trial_key_resp.rt - response time from first visual task in seconds from the
appearance of the stimuli on the monitor until the button press with 14 digits precision
• task2_trial_key_resp.rt - response time from second visual task in seconds from
the appearance of the stimuli on the monitor until the button press with 14 digits
precision
•
To merge the log files we have used python script. We were merging the data from Psy-
chopy log into the Varjo log. First we have converted the raw_timestamp from nanosec-
onds to milliseconds and stored it so we would be able to synchronize the events from both
type of logs. As a second step we have synchronised the events based on the timestamps,
we have carried over the key response time, correctness of response, image file, array
difficulty variable describing the number of objects in array per each stimuli, type of image
enhancement and vision loss simulation. Then we have converted the right_forward_x,
right_forward_y and left_forward_x, left_forward_y vectors into horizontal and vertical de-
grees of vision by use of this simplified formula:
degreeshorizontal = [tangent(originx/originz)−tangent(forwardx/forwardz)]∗180/π
degreesvertical = [tangent(originy/originz) −tangent(forwardy/forwardz)] ∗180/π
where origin y was equal to 0 and origin z was equal to 1 since they are origin coordinates
in vector space. We have replicated the same calculations for the right eye vectors. Then
we have calculated the inter sample interval from the raw_timestamp by subtraction of
current timestamp from the previous timestamp. Next calculation was inter sample spatial
distance using the Euclidean distance formula:
√
(nextx −x) ∗(nextx −x) + (nexty −y) ∗(nexty −y)
.
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
19
==PAGE:25==
Based on sample spatial distance we have calculated inter sample velocities and started
with filtering all inadequate samples based on if the inter sample interval was bigger than
11.5 milliseconds that would mean we have a missing samples from an eye tracker which
records samples at 100Hz rate. This 11.5ms threshold meant that we included intersam-
ple velocities up to 3 standard deviations from the mean. We also excluded samples
according to when there was no velocity, as this is impossible, and when there was no
pupil size, as this indicates loss of the eye.
Based on tagging these samples, we replaced them with system missing values and, in
order for them to run through a dispersion based event detection algorithm, we interpo-
lated through system missing values only replacing missing values with the linear trend
for that sample in each dimension for each eye. The existing variable is regressed on an
index variable scaled 1 to n. Missing values are replaced with their predicted values.No
intervals above 70ms were interpolated, and the number of samples interpolated was no
more than 4% for any recording, with a mean of 4980.0625% and a standard deviation of
2211.0145%.
Since the focus distance was variant, and highly unreliable, it cause the two eyes to appear
side by side on the stimulus plane - either with the left eye on the left, indicating the focus
distance was estimated as closer than reality, or with the left eye on the right, meaning the
focus distance was estimated as further away than reality. For this reason, we average the
x and y of each eye, and submit the averaged coordinates to event detection algorithm.
We do not expect the saccade dynamics to be faithfully preserved by interpolation, how-
ever, when using dispersion based event detection, fixations are detected and saccades
are calculated as the time in ms and euclidean distance between successive fixations
which are the mean x,y coordinates during a fixation period - so that for our purposes,
we only need the interpolation to prevent samples in saccades from being tagged as fix-
ation. The results of interpolation, with no smoothing of raw sample data, and the event
detection algorithm applied with a spatial threshold of 1.5 degrees, is shown in Figure 3.3.
While some small head movement components are present in the data, the fixations and
saccades are well identified in the sample level data following these preprocessing steps.
Event Detection
For detection of the fixations we have decided to use the simple dispersion-based algo-
rithm from Salvucci and Goldberg (2000b). We are taking advantage of the fact that fixa-
tion points cluster closely together, thus this algorithm identifies those fixations as groups
of consecutive points within a particular dispersion or maximum spatial separation. Be-
cause fixations are typically defined with a duration of minimum 100 ms, dispersion-based
identification techniques often incorporate a minimum duration threshold of 100ms to help
alleviate equipment variability. The selected algorithm uses a moving window that spans
consecutive data points checking for potential fixations. Then checks the dispersion of the
points in the window by summing the differences between the points maximum and min-
imum x and y values D = [max(x)–min(x)] + [max(y)–min(y)]. If the dispersion metrics
are above the threshold, window does not represent a fixation, and the window moves
one point to the right. If the dispersion is below the dispersion threshold, the window rep-
resents a fixation. In this case, the window is expanded (to the right) until the window’s
dispersion is above threshold. The final window is registered as a fixation at the centroid
of the window points with the given onset time and duration. This process continues with
window moving to the right until the end of the protocol is reached.
This algorithm has been already implemented Gian (2015) and available on Git hub. As
described before the input to this algorithm were x and y coordinates in degrees of vision
20
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:26==
(a) Participant 2
(b) Participant 3
Figure 3.3: Plot of x and y coordinates with fixations marked following preprocessing and
dispersion based event detection from two participants.
and a time. The adjustable parameters were: the size of the window (in samples) and
threshold (diameter in degrees of vision) the as radius in which to consider a fixation.
We have adjusted the algorithm by approximating 1.5 degrees of a threshold and after trial
and error runs, having found out that threshold of 1.5 degrees was not missing out fixations
samples and not including samples from the next fixation or intervening saccades. We
have kept the window size at 10 samples since eye tracker was recording at 100Hz sample
rate, resulting in the standard 100ms minimum fixation durations.
Output from the detection algorithm was written to a file with fixation x and fixation y, fix-
ation start time stamp, fixation end time stamp, saccade start timestamp, saccade end
timestamp variables. We removed the first fixation on each individual stimulus as it likely
began before stimulus onset and was related to the target pre-test presentation. Calcu-
lation of fixation duration, saccade amplitude as euclidean distance between successive
fixations, and scanpath length as the sum of saccade amplitudes up to response, were
calculated.
Lastly we have removed the correctness of response metrics from our data given the
rate at which they occurred on average, which were very few wrong. We have excluded
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
21
==PAGE:27==
eye data from dummy stimuli where there was no target present, they were included as
balancing factor to minimise learning effects. We have also excluded trials with an array
size of 4 in experiment 2, since this led to very brief response times which often had no
eye movement data.
22
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:28==
4
Results
4.0.1
Variables submitted to analysis
• response time - as total time from appearance of the test stimuli until confirmation
(keypress) if the target was included in the array or not
• saccade amplitude
• fixation duration (measure of mental load)
• scan path length
• type of image processing (none, edge detection, contrast enhancement, colour re-
verse)
• type of simulated vision loss (none, central vision loss, peripheral vision loss)
Since we are not interested only in one outcome parameter which is response time, but
also saccade amplitude, fixation duration and scanpath length, and since we also have two
predictor variables - type of image processing and type of simulated vision loss, data was
submitted to a factorial Multivariate Analysis of Variance - MANOVA, for both experiments.
4.0.2
Experiment 1: Letter based visual search
From the Box’s Test of Equality of Covariance Matrices we test if the null hypothesis that
the observed covariance matrices of the dependent variables are equal across groups.
Box’s M tests the null hypothesis that the observed covariance matrices of the depen-
dent variables are equal across groups. The Box’s M test statistic is transformed to an F
statistic with df1 and df2 degrees of freedom. Since this test showed a significant result,
α =< .001, which is less than 0.05 suggesting that the assumptions are not met, and thus
the model results are suspect. Box’s M is sensitive to large data files, meaning that when
there are a large number of cases, it can detect even small departures from homogene-
ity. Moreover, it can be sensitive to departures from the assumption of normality. As an
additional check of the diagonals of the covariance matrices, look at Levene’s tests.
The assumption for the multivariate approach is that the vector of the dependent vari-
ables follow a multivariate normal distribution, and the variance-covariance matrices are
equal across the cells formed by the between-subjects effects. Box’s M tests the null
hypothesis that the observed covariance matrices of the dependent variables are equal
across groups. The first result that needs to be interpreted from multivariate tests is in-
teraction of image manipulation*vision simulation. There was no significant interaction
effect between image manipulation*vision loss simulation on combined dependent vari-
ables F(8, 542) = 0.396, p = 0.923 with Pilai’s trace V = 0.012.
Using Pilai’s trace, there was a significant effect of vision loss simulation on combined
dependent variables, V = 0.115, F = (8, 542) = 4.14, p < 0.05. However, separate
univariate ANOVASs on the outcome variables revealed
significant effect of vision simulation on Scanpath length F(5, 229.22) = 5.93, p < 0.05,
for no vision loss mean = 42.724, SD = 17.316 central vision loss mean = 67.379, SD =
17.047 and peripheral vision loss mean = 47.069, SD = 17.316.
Partial eta squared of scanpath length on vision simulation is 0.042, indicating that the
effect for group differences in their MANOVA accounted for 4.2% of the group-differences
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
23
==PAGE:29==
plus associated error variance and value of Observedpower = .651 is telling us that there
is 34.9% chance of failing to detect an effect that is present.
From the Levene’s test of Equality of Error Variances we tests equality of the error vari-
ances across the cells defined by the combination of factor levels. A separate test is
performed for each dependent variable. The α for Response time in s is .043 which is
less than 0.05, indicating that the equal variances assumption is violated for this variable,
same applies for Fixation duration in ms with α of .004 and Scanpath length in degrees of
vision with α of .006. Where α for Saccade amplitude in degrees of vision was .052 which
is just above the threshold which suggests that the assumption of equality is violated - we
proceed with adjusted degrees of freedom.
Pairwise comparisons table interprets these post hoc values. There was a significant
difference between the independent groups of two image enhancement on the fixation
duration variable since p = 0.019. With mean = 280.942 for no image enhancement and
mean = 221.428 for colour reversal.
There was significant difference between the central vision loss and peripheral vision loss
groups of independent artificial scotomas on the scanpath length F = (2, 229.218) =
5.93, p = 0.008.
There was significant difference between the no vision loss and central vision loss groups
of independent artificial scotomas on scanpath length due to p = 0.001. With mean =
42.724, SD = 17.316 for no vision loss, mean = 67.379, SD = 17.047 for central vision
loss and mean = 47.069, SD = 17.316 for peripheral vision loss.
Post hoc test revealed that scanpath is significantly different according to Bonferroni
among no vision loss and central vision loss due to p = 0.006 with SD = 24.194, meandifference =
−24.021 and among the central vision loss and peripheral vision loss due to p = 0.024 with
SD = 23.805, meandifference = 20.15. Peripheral vision and normal vision showed no
significant difference to each other in this case.
24
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.1: Estimated marginal means of Response time in seconds from first visual
search task
Figure 4.2: Estimated marginal means of Saccade amplitude in degrees of vision from
first visual search task
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.3: Estimated marginal means of Fixation duration in milliseconds from first visual
search task
Figure 4.4: Estimated marginal means of Scanpath length in degrees of vision from first
visual search task
Figure 4.1 illustrates that response time differs significantly in first visual search task with
application of colour reverse image-manipulation, where for the other types of visual loss
simulation there is no significant difference. In figure 4.2 we can observe that saccade
amplitude is not significantly different across the visual loss simulation types when no
image-manipulation is selected. Although we can see that with colour reverse image-
26
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:32==
manipulation there is significant difference in saccadic amplitude with central vision in-
creasing saccade amplitude and no vision loss with decreased saccade amplitude.The
saccade amplitude is not affected by use of the no image-manipulation.
In figure 4.3 we can observe that there is significant difference in all types of artificial
scotomas when colour reverse image-manipulation filter is applied. In figure 4.4 we can
observe that there is only one significant difference in scanpath length affected by colour
reversal image-manipulation on no visual loss simulation. Rest of the visual loss simula-
tions are different but not significantly.
4.0.3
Experiment 2: Object based visual search
From the Box’s Test of Equality of Covariance Matrices we test if the null hypothesis that
the observed covariance matrices of the dependent variables are equal across groups.
Since α of the test was < .001 which is lower than < .05, suggesting that the assumptions
are not met and thus we proceed with caution.
The first result that needs to be interpreted is interaction term of image manipulation*vision
simulation. There was a statistically significant interaction effect between image manip-
ulation*vision simulation on combined dependent variables F(16, 528) = 1.771, p = 0.032
with Pilai’s trace V = 0.204.
Using Pilai’s trace, there was a significant effect of vision simulation on combined de-
pendent variables, V = 0.173, F = (8, 260) = 3.07, p < 0.05 and separate univariate
ANOVASs on the outcome variables revealed a significant effect of vision loss simulation
on fixation duration F(8, 43.298 = 4.495, p < 0.05 with mean = 455.378, SD = 153.130
for no vision loss, mean = 259.148, SD = 153.130 for central vision loss and mean =
268, SD = 297, 212 for peripheral vision loss. Also separate univariate ANOVASs on
the outcome variables revealed significant effect of vision simulation on scanpath length
F(8, 89.384) = 5.552, p < 0.05 with mean = 35.496, SD = 21.709 for no vision loss,
mean = 67.127, SD = 21.709 for central vision loss and mean = 41.411, SD = 42.134 for
peripheral vision loss.
Partial eta squared of scanpath length on vision simulation is 0.078, i.e. the effect for group
differences accounted for 7.8% of the group-differences plus associated error variance
and the value of Observedpower = .848 is telling us that there is 15.2% chance of failing to
detect an effect that is present and partial eta squared of fixation duration is 0.064 meaning
that group differences in their MANOVA accounted for 6.4% of the group-differences plus
associated error variance and the value of Observedpower = .76 is telling us that there is
24% chance of failing to detect an effect that is present.
From the Levene’s test of Equality of Error Variances we tests equality of the error vari-
ances across the cells defined by the combination of factor levels. A separate test is
performed for each dependent variable. The α for Response time in s is .004, indicating
that the equal variances assumption is violated for this variable, same applies for Saccade
amplitude in degrees of vision with α of < .001 and for Fixation duration in ms with α of
< .001 and Scanpath length in degrees of vision with α of < .001.
Pairwise comparisons interprets these post hoc values. There was a significant difference
between the independent groups of contrast enhancement and edge detection on the
response time variable since p = 0.019. With mean = 2.22, SD = 0.812 for contrast
enhancement and mean = 3.507, SD = 1.514 for edge detection. There was significant
between the independent groups of no image enhancement and edge detection on the
response time variable p = 0.05, with mean = 2.44SD = 0.790 for no image enhancement
and mean = 3.507SD = 1.514 for edge detection.
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
27
==PAGE:33==
There was significant difference between the central vision loss and no vision loss groups
of independent artificial scotomas on the fixation durations, p = 0.005, with mean =
259.148SD = 153.13 for central vision loss and mean = 455.378SD = 153.13 for no
vision loss. There was a significant difference between the central vision loss and no vi-
sion loss groups of independent artificial scotomas on scanpath length since p = 0.001.
With mean = 67.127SD = 21.709 for central vision loss and mean = 35.496, SD = 21.709
for no vision loss.
In this case, Bonferonni post hoc test didn’t reveal any significant differences only sug-
gest some differences that would be worth mentioning. Post hoc test is pointing out that
saccade amplitude is slightly different according to Bonferroni among no image enhance-
ment mean = 5.001SD = 2.912 and edge detection mean = 6.210SD = 5.587 but it
failed to meet significance p = 0.365. Post hoc test is also pointing out that fixation du-
ration is slightly less different according to Bonferroni among no image enhancement
mean = 284.390SD = 153.474 and edge detection mean = 329.076SD = 294.480 but it
failed to meet significance p = 0.335.
In figure 4.5 we can observe that response times differ significantly in the second visual
search task with application of edge detection image-manipulation for peripheral vision
loss. The application of image-manipulation to Central vision loss does not significantly
effect response time; no vision loss has a slight difference in response time across two
image-manipulation techniques. Also quite obvious finding in all of the estimated marginal
plots for second visual task is that peripheral vision loss compared to other groups might
have large outlier. In figure 4.6 we can observe significant difference in response time
with peripheral vision loss in positive direction when contrast enhancement was applied
and in negative direction when edge detection image-manipulation was applied. Normal
vision without vision loss simulation is almost unaffected and for central vision loss we can
observe that there is significant difference in saccade amplitude when edge detection was
applied. With mean = 5.146, SD = 2.906 for no vision loss mean = 7.4826, SD = 2.906
for central vision loss mean = 4.937, SD = 5.641 for peripheral vision loss and mean =
5.001, SD = 0.921 for no image enhancement mean = 6.354, SD = 0.948 for contrast
enhancement mean = 6.210, SD = 1.767 for edge detection.
In Figure 4.7 we can observe difference in fixation duration among all vision loss simula-
tions when contrast enhancement was applied. Peripheral vision loss produced shorter
fixation durations and no vision loss produced longer fixation durations when edge detec-
tion was applied.
Central vision loss was almost unaffected by image enhancement except for a slight in-
crease in fixation duration during applied contrast enhancement. In Figure 4.8 we can
observe that scanpath length with central vision loss is significantly different compared
to other two types of vision loss simulation across the whole image-manipulation filters.
There is significant difference in scanpath length in peripheral vision loss while edge de-
tection was applied. Both no vision and peripheral vision loss have slight decrease in
scan path length while contrast enhancement was applied.
28
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.5: Estimated marginal means of Response time in seconds from second visual
search task
Figure 4.6: Estimated marginal means of Saccade amplitude in degrees of vision from
second visual search task
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.7: Estimated marginal means of Fixation duration in milliseconds from second
visual search task
Figure 4.8: Estimated marginal means of Scanpath length in degrees of vision from sec-
ond visual search task
4.0.4
Hypotheses
Hypothesis 1. Color reversal (image processing) will improve performance in visual search
for letter-based stimuli.
It can be observed that according to the analysis response time was improved only for
30
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:36==
trials without vision loss simulation based on the estimated marginal means. Thus this
hypothesis is supported by analysis.
Hypothesis 2.
Edge detection (image processing) will improve performance in visual
search for object.
It can be observed that according to the analysis response time was not improved for no
vision loss and peripheral vision loss based on the estimated marginal means. Although
there was slight improvement in response time for central vision loss. Thus this hypothesis
was not supported by analysis but the effect in central vision could be discussed.
Hypothesis 3. Contrast enhancement (image processing) will improve performance in
visual search for object.
It can be observed that according to the analysis response time was slightly improved for
central and peripheral vision loss. There is no improvement in no vision loss. Thus this
hypothesis is supported.
Hypothesis 4. Type of vision loss (central or peripheral) will predict which image process-
ing is beneficial.
It can be observed that according to the analysis of first visual search task response time
was not improved for central and peripheral vision loss by use of image enhancement,
in fact it didn’t change. Based on saccade amplitudes there was also no change with
peripheral vision loss and it even got higher in central vision loss. Fixation duration was
decreased in all groups of artificial scotomas. Scanpath lengths had slight increase in
central and peripheral vision loss.
According to the analysis of the second visual search task response time was not im-
proved by use of any image enhancement, in fact it increased for peripheral vision loss
with use of edge detection. Saccade amplitudes in peripheral vision loss were increased
by contrast enhancement and in central vision loss it was slightly increased. Fixation
duration was only slightly decreased in peripheral vision loss and scanpath length was
increased in peripheral vision loss by use of edge detection. Summarizing the results it
can concluded that this hypothesis is not supported.
Hypothesis 5. Image processing will change eye movement behavior in low vision.
It can be observed that according to the analysis of first visual search task saccade am-
plitudes were not different in peripheral vision loss compared to no vision loss but it got
higher in central vision loss. Fixation duration was decreased in all groups of artificial
scotomas. Scanpath lengths had slight increase in central and peripheral vision loss. All
of those differences were achieved with use of colour reversal.
According to the analysis of the second visual search task saccade amplitudes were in-
creased in peripheral vision loss with use of contrast enhancement and slightly increased
in central vision loss with use of an edge detection. Fixation duration was only decreased
in peripheral vision loss and scanpath length was increased with use of edge detection.
Thus this hypothesis is supported.
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
31
==PAGE:37==
5
Discussion
5.1
Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis one stated that colour reversal (image processing) will improve performance
in visual search for letter-based stimuli, was supported by the analysis. We were expect-
ing improvement in performance, in other words response time should get smaller, but
there was improvement only in normal vision. This means that color reversal is improving
contrast which is helpful for recognising letters. What is surprising is no improvement in
response time using colour reversal with CVL and PVL. This might be due too the fact that
it was hard for the participants to get used to vision loss simulation in general, and that this
overwhelmed any difference in performance they might have had if they were adapted to
vision loss as a person with real vision loss would be. This could be also described as
a flaw in experiment design, because we were having sample group healthy vision and
that since the groups of conditions as image enhancement and vision loss simulations
were executed not in random order could introduce an learning effect on what to do in the
individual visual search tasks. However, artificial scotomas are common in eye move-
ment research, and it is also possible that the stable finding that colour reverse is helpful
for reading, and the accessibility standards that are based on that, do not generalise to
letter-based visual search.
A decrease in fixation duration was observed across all vision loss simulation, suggesting
that fixation was difficult to maintain in simulated vision loss, as it often is in real vision
loss. It means that we can not rely on fixation duration as a measure of mental load in
this case, since difficulty maintaining fixation would be an extraneous variable effecting
results.
5.2
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 2 stated that edge detection (image processing) will improve performance in
visual search for object, was not supported by the analysis. It was expected that edge
detection would improve performance in visual search in all vision loss simulation types.
There was slight improvement in reduction of response time in CVL, confirming that ap-
plication of edge detection on working peripheral vision increased visual acuity resulting
in reduced time response. Slight increase in saccade amplitude for CVL could mean that
participants could better recognise objects in the arrays and more precisely guide their
fixations. This could also mean that we have introduced learning effect in the experiment
design since the groups of conditions as image enhancement and vision loss simulations
were executed not in random order. This was because some image manipulations, like
edge detection, change the overall brightness of the stimulus, and it would take some
time for the eye to adapt to those changes. We did not want adaption to changing light
levels, which are known to be difficult for people with low vision, to become an extraneous
variable invalidating performance measures.
For peripheral vision loss we have observed quite outstanding increase in response time,
that could be due to fact that the type of edge detection was not beneficial for PVL, mean-
ing participants had harder time differentiating between objects viewed foveally when
edge detection was applied. This is also confirmed by increased scanpath length. If
we take a look at the spread of the means this might indicate that one of our participants
could be possible outlier. Participants had to spend way more time on each visual task
32
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:38==
searching, most probably revisiting the objects in array multiple times to decide if they
could identify target. This suggests that edge detection is really beneficial to peripheral
vision, which would make sense, as peripheral vision relies mostly on contrast and shape
information, not high acuity - as discussed in section 1.2.
5.3
Hypothesis 3
Hypothesis 3 stated that contrast enhancement (image processing) will improve perfor-
mance in visual search for objects. The hypothesis was supported with a modest effect,
indicating that contrast enhancement does improve visual search for objects in both cen-
tral and peripheral vision loss simulations. This agrees with previous research on image
enhancement in low vision Moshtael et al. (2015), and is the clearest and most universal
result from this study in terms of beneficial effect of image enhancement.
5.4
Hypothesis 4
Hypothesis 4 stated that type of vision loss (central or peripheral) will predict which image
processing is beneficial, was not supported by the analysis.
Surprisingly, we were not expecting such a result as the fixation duration in first visual
search task was decreased, meaning that the mental load of the participant was lower
since the time for processing of what was seen was shorter. What might be little sur-
prising is the fact that response time and scanpath length have slightly increased that
might due to a fact that participants didn’t familiarize with image enhancement enough
to acquire it’s full potential, since colour reversal is quite drastic enhancement. Another
surprising result was that response time didn’t improve. Saccade amplitude increased in
CVL, possibly due to becoming better in visual search tasks and knowing where to look
for the objects in the stimuli. From the visual search task for objects we have detected
no significant change overall in response time by use of any image enhancement except
in PVL, where it increased. This could be affected by not suitable type of edge detec-
tion or selection of objects for the experiment, since it was apparently hard to recognise
the distinctive shapes of individual objects. Saccade amplitudes in PVL were increased
by contrast enhancement, which could mean that participant could fixate more confidently
across stimulus, with less small corrective saccades, which is also confirmed by shortened
scanpath length. Fixation duration haven’t changed by use of contrast enhancement, but
in edge detection there was a decrease of fixation duration in PVL. This may indicate
reduced mental load with edge detection, but these results are not clear.
5.5
Hypothesis 5
Hypothesis 5 stated that image processing will change eye movement behavior in low vi-
sion, was supported by the analysis. From analysis of the first visual task we have found
out that saccade amplitudes were increased during CVL, which can be explained as par-
ticipants have tried to use their peripheral vision to identify details in the stimuli, which
contrast to normal behavior in normal vision since people tend to do small saccades to
properly recognise details of an object or area of interest in their central visual field. Scan-
path lengths had slight increase in central and peripheral vision loss. Due to use of colour
reversal image enhancement the fixation duration decreased in all vision loss simulations,
it can be explained as the visual acuity of the separate visual fields was increased which
helped in recognising the letter based stimuli. From analysis of the second visual task
we have found out that saccade amplitudes were increased in PVL with use of contrast
enhancement. Where saccade amplitudes only slightly increased in CVL with use of an
edge detection, which could be explained as more accurate saccades to target, with less
small corrective saccades. Fixation duration was decreased in PVL and scanpath length
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
33
==PAGE:39==
was increased with use of edge detection. This may be because the effect of edge detec-
tion was counterproductive, since participants had to spend more time, resulting in longer
scan paths, iterating trough arrays of objects in stimuli with short fixations. Different ob-
jects had to look very much alike that’s why it was hard to differentiate between them and
find the correct target.
5.6
Suggestions for future research
After evaluation of the accomplished work we see room for improvements, which we are
going to discuss in here. After the analysis we have found out that difference in saccade
amplitudes is pointing out to a fact that PVL simulation will probably be systematically
effected by the size of visual field of view remaining. Systematically varying the visual
field of view in PVL might result in different effects of processing depending on whether
any parafoveal vision remains, and would be more informative since PVL can occur in low
vision with varying remaining visual field.
The visual simulation and image manipulation was developed in a way as see through
glasses affecting the real world image of the person currently wearing the HMD. An im-
provement could be setting up an experiment that would apply the visual loss simulation
and image enhancements inside the virtual environment. This way we wouldn’t need to
deal with imperfections while recording eye movements related to head movement since
the stimulus were displayed on physical monitor. This approach wouldn’t require chin
rest which might result in more comfortable recording of participants possibly resulting in
better, less noisy data. However, we wanted to test the effect of image processing in real
time, while looking at the real world, since this is our intended usage case for future visual
aids.
Same would apply for the actual collection of the eye data from the HMD. Integration of
eye tracking or eye data directly into the Psychopy environment would ease the data ma-
nipulation and possibly create less room for error. This was not possible in the current
work due to unfinished SDK for this hardware, and unknowns which were part of the pro-
prietory ‘black box’ of the system.
Another improvement would be better selection of objects (teddy-bears) in object search
visual task, since application of edge detection made differentiating of the individual ob-
jects quite difficult. Resizing or switching to simpler types of objects would have mitigate
the problem, although we note that we do not have floor or ceiling effects in these stimuli.
Few issues with collected data were pointing out that recording from one of the partici-
pants have introduced an possible outlier in edge detection image enhancement part in
second visual search task. We do not repeat analysis without this outlier as we have few
participants, but with more participants this may be advisable and would like restore e.g.
homogeniety of variance.
As Moshtael et al. (2015) revealed that there is still a lack of consistency in preference
and performance measures in low vision, and this is probably due to individual variation.
Nevertheless, the promising results should encourage further research in order to allow
their widespread use in low-vision aids that take individual variation into account. Even
from this thesis there is lot more to explore in the field of vision loss and image manipula-
tion. The replication of experiment based on outcome of our research might reveal more
precise data. There would be still possibilities for collecting the data from a sample group
with real low vision.
34
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:40==
6
Conclusions
Image enhancement can enhance visual function for low vision, but the effects are subject
to large individual variation, not only based on the type of loss but probably also on level
of adaption to the loss.
Future research should explore different types of image enhancements as Canny Edge
detection, individualised settings of contrast enhancements, in image zooming, and minifi-
cation of the visual field for people with PVL. We recommend such studies take account of
the individual, type of loss, and the size and shape of their visual field in terms of contrast
and colour sensitivity as well as the extent of scotoma/area of loss.
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
35
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
Carlos
Aguilar
and
Eric
Castet.
Evaluation
of
a
gaze-controlled
vision
en-
hancement system for reading in visually impaired people.
PloS one,
12
(4):e0174910,
2017.
ISSN 1932-6203.
doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0174910.
URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28380004http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/
articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC5381883.
Peter G. J. Barten.
Contrast sensitivity of the human eye and its effects on im-
age quality.
SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 1999.
ISBN 9780819434968.
URL https://spie.org/publications/book/353254?webSyncID=d839c87a-1da6-adc4-a332-
892e334071a9&sessionGUID=89b584d6-4b36-0a36-b43d-d86d00511bc3&SSO=1.
Talal Bonny and Safaa Henno. Image Edge Detectors under Different Noise Levels with
FPGA Implementations. Journal of Circuits, Systems and Computers, 27(13):1850209,
12 2018. ISSN 0218-1266. doi: 10.1142/S0218126618502092. URL https://www.
worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S0218126618502092.
J. Canny. Canny Edge Detection. 2009.
Allen M Y Cheong, Duane R Geruschat, and Nathan Congdon. Traffic Gap Judgment in
People with Significant Peripheral Field Loss. Optometry and Vision Science, 85(1):
26–36, 2008.
Kennedy David W. Varjo gaze data logging. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roberts_cross,
2010.
A D Deemer,
C K Bradley,
N C Ross,
D M Natale,
R Itthipanichpong,
F S
Werblin,
and R W Massof.
Low Vision Enhancement with Head-mounted
Video Display Systems:
Are We There Yet?
Optometry and Vision Sci-
ence,
95(9):694–703,
2018.
doi:
10.1097/OPX.0000000000001278.
URL
https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85052670653&doi=10.1097%
2FOPX.0000000000001278&partnerID=40&md5=1eb3864743aacb16b8e18a9a351c12c9.
Raymond Dodge and Thomas Sparks Cline. The angle velocity of eye movements. Psy-
chological Review, 8(2):145–157, 1901. ISSN 0033295X. doi: 10.1037/h0076100.
URL http://content.apa.org/journals/rev/8/2/145.
Joshua R Ehrlich, Lauro V Ojeda, Donna Wicker, Sherry Day, Ashley Howson, Va-
sudevan Lakshminarayanan, and Sayoko E Moroi. Head-Mounted Display Technol-
ogy for Low-Vision Rehabilitation and Vision Enhancement. American journal of oph-
thalmology, 176:26–32, 4 2017.
ISSN 1879-1891.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2016.12.021.
URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28048975http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/
articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC5580828.
Andrew Freedman, Jacob Achtemeier, Yihwa Baek, and Gordon E Legge. Gaze behavior
during navigation with reduced acuity. Experimental eye research, 183:20–28, 2019.
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2018.11.002. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2018.11.002.
Ricardo Ramos Gameiro, Kristin Jünemann, Anne Herbik, Anika Wolff, Peter König, and
Michael B. Hoffmann. Natural visual behavior in individuals with peripheral visual-field
loss. Journal of Vision, 18(12):10, 2018. ISSN 1534-7362. doi: 10.1167/18.12.10.
36
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:42==
Yi Gao, Michael A. Webster, and Fang Jiang. Dynamics of contrast adaptation in central
and peripheral vision.
Journal of Vision, 19(6):23, 6 2019.
ISSN 1534-7362.
doi:
10.1167/19.6.23. URL http://jov.arvojournals.org/article.aspx?doi=10.1167/19.6.23.
Perrone Gian. Event detection algorithms. https://github.com/gian/eventdetect, 2015.
Hannah Harvey and Robin Walker. Reading with peripheral vision: A comparison of read-
ing dynamic scrolling and static text with a simulated central scotoma. Vision Research,
2014. ISSN 18785646. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2014.03.009.
John M Henderson, Karen K M C Clure, Steven Pierce, and Gary Schrock. Object iden-
tification without foveal vision : Evidence from an artificial scotoma paradigm. East, 59
(3):323–346, 1997.
National Eye Institute. Eye disease simulation. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Eye_
disease_simulation, 2012.
Andrew Kirkpatrick, Joshue O Connor, Alastair Campbell, and Michael Cooper.
Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1. 2018. URL https://www.w3.org/TR/
WCAG21/#text-alternatives.
T. D. Lamb. Why rods and cones?
Eye (Basingstoke), 30(2):179–185, 2016. ISSN
14765454. doi: 10.1038/eye.2015.236.
Michael Land, Neil Mennie, and Jennifer Rusted. The Roles of Vision and Eye Movements
in the Control of Activities of Daily Living. Perception, 28(11):1311–1328, 11 1999. ISSN
0301-0066. doi: 10.1068/p2935. URL http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1068/p2935.
Gang Luo and Eli Peli. Use of an Augmented-Vision Device for Visual Search by Patients
with Tunnel Vision. Investigative Opthalmology & Visual Science, 47(9):4152, 9 2006.
ISSN 1552-5783. doi: 10.1167/iovs.05-1672. URL http://iovs.arvojournals.org/article.
aspx?doi=10.1167/iovs.05-1672.
Susana Martinez-Conde, Stephen L Macknik, and David H Hubel. THE ROLE OF FIX-
ATIONAL EYE MOVEMENTS IN VISUAL PERCEPTION.
Nature Reviews Neuro-
science, 5(March):229–240, 2004. doi: 10.1038/nrn1348.
Plotke Michael.
Kernel image processing operations.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Kernel_(image_processing), 2013.
Howard Moshtael, Tariq Aslam, Ian Underwood, and Baljean Dhillon. High Tech Aids Low
Vision: A Review of Image Processing for the Visually Impaired. Translational Vision
Science & Technology, 4(4):6, 2015. ISSN 2164-2591. doi: 10.1167/tvst.4.4.6.
C. Owsley and M. E. Sloane. Contrast sensitivity, acuity, and the perception of ’real-world’
targets. British Journal of Ophthalmology, 71(10):791–796, 1987. ISSN 00071161. doi:
10.1136/bjo.71.10.791.
Cockrill P. The teddy bear encyclopedia. DK Publishing, 2001.
Keith Rayner.
Eye Movements in Reading and Information Processing: 20 Years of
Research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124(3):372–422, 1998.
ISSN 00332909.
doi:
10.1037/0033-2909.124.3.372.
Keith Rayner. Eye movements and attention in reading, scene perception, and visual
search. Quarterly journal of experimental psychology (2006), 62(8):1457–506, 8 2009.
ISSN 1747-0226.
doi: 10.1080/17470210902816461.
URL http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/abs/10.1080/17470210902816461.
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
37
==PAGE:43==
Rhcastilhos and Jmarchn.
Schematic diagram of the human eye.
https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Schematic_diagram_of_the_human_eye_en.svg, 2007.
Barry W. Rovner and Robin J. Casten.
Activity Loss and Depression in Age-Related
Macular Degeneration. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 10(3):305–310,
5 2002. ISSN 10647481. doi: 10.1097/00019442-200205000-00010. URL https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S106474811261361X.
G S Rubin, K Bandeen-Roche, G H Huang, B Muñoz, O D Schein, L P Fried, and S K
West. The association of multiple visual impairments with self-reported visual disability:
SEE project. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science, 42(1):64–72, 1 2001. ISSN
0146-0404. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11133849.
Gary S. Rubin and Gordon E. Legge. Psychophysics of reading. VI-The role of contrast in
low vision. Vision Research, 29(1):79–91, 1989. ISSN 00426989. doi: 10.1016/0042-
6989(89)90175-2.
Dario D. Salvucci and Joseph H. Goldberg. Identifying fixations and saccades in eye-
tracking protocols.
In Proceedings of the Eye Tracking Research and Applications
Symposium 2000, pages 71–78, New York, New York, USA, 2000a. Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM). ISBN 1581132808. doi: 10.1145/355017.355028. URL
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=355017.355028.
Dario D. Salvucci and Joseph H. Goldberg. Identifying fixations and saccades in eye-
tracking protocols.
In Proceedings of the Eye Tracking Research and Applications
Symposium 2000, pages 71–78. Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2000b.
ISBN 1581132808. doi: 10.1145/355017.355028.
Deanna J. Taylor, Nicholas D. Smith, and David P. Crabb. Searching for objects in every-
day scenes: Measuring performance in people with dry age-related macular degener-
ation. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 58(3), 2017. ISSN 15525783.
doi: 10.1167/iovs.16-21122.
M A Timmis, J Allsop, M Baranian, J Baker, I Basevitch, K Latham, S Pard-
han, and K N van Paridon.
Visual search behavior in individuals with retini-
tis pigmentosa during level walking and obstacle crossing.
Investigative Oph-
thalmology and Visual Science, 58(11):4737–4746, 2017.
doi:
10.1167/iovs.17-
21573. URL https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85030670945&doi=
10.1167%2Fiovs.17-21573&partnerID=40&md5=d41a8e7f72cba02e7a2bf72324d70518.
Varjo. Varjo gaze data logging. https://developer.varjo.com/docs/get-started/gaze-data-
collection, 2019a.
Varjo. Varjo xr-1 developer edition technical specifications. https://cornershop.immersion.
fr/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Varjo_xR-1_SpecSheet_US_sml.pdf, 2019b.
Varjo. Varjo research. https://varjo.com/solutions/research/, 2020.
Sheila K West, Gary S Rubin, Aimee T Broman, Beatriz Muñoz, Karen Bandeen-Roche,
and Kathleen Turano.
How does visual impairment affect performance on tasks of
everyday life? The SEE Project. Salisbury Eye Evaluation. Archives of ophthalmology
(Chicago, Ill. : 1960), 120(6):774–80, 6 2002. ISSN 0003-9950. doi: 10.1001/archopht.
120.6.774. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12049583.
Jeremy M. Wolfe, Aude Oliva, Todd S. Horowitz, Serena J. Butcher, and Aline Bompas.
38
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:44==
Segmentation of objects from backgrounds in visual search tasks. Vision Research, 42
(28):2985–3004, 12 2002. ISSN 00426989. doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(02)00388-7.
James S Wolffsohn and Rachael C Peterson. A review of current knowledge on Electronic
Vision Enhancement Systems for the visually impaired. Technical report, 2003. URL
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1046/j.1475-1313.2003.00087.x.
World
Health
Organization.
World
report
on
vision,
volume
214.
2019.
ISBN 9789241516570. URL https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/328717/
9789241516570-eng.pdf.
Alfred L. Yarbus. Role of eye movements in the visual process. Plenum Press, New York,
1967.
.1
Appendix A
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
39
==PAGE:45==
GREETING SCREEN: 
In this test, you will be asked to search for an item in an array of several similar items. You will first 
be shown a single item or target item, which is what you should find. When you've seen that item, 
and memorised what it looks like, you press the {ENTER} key to show a picture of several items, and 
you should find the target in it. When you have found the item, look at it, and press the {ENTER} key 
to advance the next slide. When you have finished searching for all the items, you will reach a screen 
to end the test.  
 
As you go through this test, you may be presented with dark patches on certain parts of the image 
which makes it difficult to see. When this happens, you will be given time to look around a picture 
and get used to it. When you are ready, press the {ENTER} key to move on to the next round of 
search tasks.  
 
All recorded data will be anonymized and will be used during work on a new generation of vision 
aids for vision impaired. 
 
Inclusion criteria: 
1. You must be aged 18-70 
2. You must be able to use a computer and understand English 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
1. Individuals who use psychotropic medication, and those who suffer from psychiatric or 
neurological disorders 
 
Press <ENTER> key to continue… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:46==
SUBJECT INFORMATION LETTER SCREEN: 
Subject Information Letter - Visual search with enhanced images 
 
Dear participant, 
 
In this letter we will inform you about the purpose of the experiment and the procedures. It is 
important that you read the letter carefully. If you have any questions do not hesitate to contact us 
at: 
 
Marek Mikitovic - s1828551@student.dtu.dk   for clarification. 
 
Your rights as participant 
 
Your participation in this experiment is voluntary. This means that you can leave the experiment at 
any point in time without consequences for yourself, and without having to give a reason. We will 
ask you for an informed consent to participate, after you have completed the test we will explain 
what data we measured and the purposes of the study. If you would like your data deleted we will 
do so. All data stored will be anonymised. 
 
Purpose of research project 
 
In this project we are investigating the effects of image transformations on the ability to find things; 
visual search. We will record the response time and correctness of your choices when performing 
the tasks. 
 
 
Press <ENTER> key to continue… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
41
==PAGE:47==
DATA STORAGE SCREEN: 
Data storage and handling 
All recorded data will be anonymized, meaning that it is not stored in connection to any other 
information that would allow to identify you. For this, your data will be stored under a handle (key 
code). 
If you have any questions about the experiment, the methods or your safety and rights, do not 
hesitate to contact us per email (s182855@student.dtu.dk). 
 
Press <ENTER> to continue… 
 
CONSENT SCREEN: 
I confirm that: 
- I was satisfactorily informed about the study concerned in writing by means of the subject 
information letter 
- I have had the opportunity to put forward questions regarding the study and that these questions 
have been answered satisfactorily 
- I have carefully considered my participation in the experiment 
- I participate of my own free will 
 
 
I understand that: 
 
- My participation is voluntary, and I have the right to withdraw from the experiment at any time 
without having to give a reason 
- My privacy is protected according to Danish Low and European guidelines (GDPR; EU 2016/697) 
- My consent will be sought every time I participate in a new experiment 
 
Please press the corresponding key to continue or quit the experiment: 
 
(Y) I give my consent to take part in this experiment. Continue >> 
 
(N) I do NOT give my consent to take part in this experiment. Quit << 
 
42
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:48==
AGE QUESTION SCREEN: 
 
In order to allow us to describe our sample, we would like you to answer two demographic 
questions. 
Q1. How old are you (in years)? 
Type two digits. Continue by pressing  
<ENTER> 
 
VISION LOSS TYPE SCREEN: 
 
Q2. What type of vision do you have? 
Normal vision (1) 
Shortsighted (wearing glasses or lenses) (2) 
Longsighted (wearing glasses or lenses) (3) 
Either 2 or 3 and not wearing corrective lenses (4) 
Astigmatism (5) 
 
TASK1 INSTRUCTIOINS SCREEN: 
 
Instructions for Task 1 
Please keep a comfortable posture during the experiment and try not to change your position. 
Place your index finger of your right hand on the right enter on the keyboard, which has a green 
sticker on it, and your left hand on the spacebar, which has a red sticker on it. You will respond with 
your right hand (green) if the target IS present in the image, and the spacebar (red) if it IS NOT. You 
will be presented images with an array of letters. Your task is to determine if there is a letter L within 
all the other letters.  
 
Choose the <ENTER> right enter if there is an L in the image or choose the <SPACEBAR> if there is no 
L in the image. Try to do it as quickly and accurately as possible. 
 
You will first be presented 3 example trials for practice. 
 
Press the <ENTER> to continue… 
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
43
==PAGE:49==
 
TASK2 INSTRUCTIOINS SCREEN: 
 
Instructions for task with real world object images. 
 
This time instead of looking for L's you will be looking at images of teddy bears :) . For each trial you 
will try to find a teddy bear targets within the image. 
 
You will use the <ENTER> located on the right side of the keyboard, marked with a green sticker, if 
you see the object in the image. If you think the object is not present, you will press the 
<SPACEBAR>, marked with the red sticker. 
 
At first, the object that you will have to look for, will be presented to you. 
 
You will first be presented practice trials. 
 
Press <ENTER> when you are ready to continue… 
 
END SCREEN: 
 
This is the end of the experiment. 
 
Thank you for participation 
 
If you have any questions you can contact us at: 
 
s182855@student.dtu.dk 
 
 
44
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
==PAGE:50==
Image manipulation and eye tracking for low vision aids
45
==PAGE:51==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, BUilding 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
http://www.compute.dtu.dk
