==PAGE:1==
Road risk assessment for insurance
pricing
Andreas Brink Jørck
(s144713)
February, 2021
Supervised by
Stefan Eriksen Mabit, DTU Transport
Marcus Skyum Myhrmann, DTU Transport
Mikkel Vilstrup, UNDO
==PAGE:2==
Road risk assessment for insurance pricing
Abstract
Traditional car insurance premiums are priced using generic driver and car characteristics. However,
insurance companies have found appeal in diﬀerentiating premiums according to the risk proﬁle of
individual drivers, from tracking driving behaviour and travelling patterns. The motivation of this thesis
is to estimate factors that inﬂuence the latent risk of accidents in the Danish road network, independent
of individual driving behaviour.
The data used for this purpose is mainly sourced from the Danish Road Directorate, delivering spatial
data on both accidents and traﬃc counts in the 10-year period 2010 to 2020 to estimate the dependent
variable. OpenStreetMap has been used as a base map to distinguish road segments, which is the unit
of measure for the study. All other variables have been constructed from publicly available databases
and matched to the representation of the Danish road grid using geographic information system (GIS)
techniques in Python.
The thesis uses three statistical models to estimate the inﬂuence of various factors on road risk. First, a
multiple linear regression is estimated as a baseline. A linear mixed eﬀects model with random intercept
is estimated to account for unobserved heterogeneity among municipalities, which proved statistically
signiﬁcant.
Finally, the Heckman two-step model is attempted to test for potential selectivity bias,
however the resulting model is subject to lacking an exclusion restriction.
Findings include that road risk varies signiﬁcantly across road types, with larger roads exposing individual
drivers to signiﬁcantly less risk compared to smaller roads, and motorways being considered the road
type with lowest risk. Time of day also signiﬁcantly inﬂuences risk levels. Travelling during peak traﬃc
is found to signiﬁcantly lower road risk, compared to travelling between peak hours, or outside peak
hours.
The results show great potential for including a measure of road risk in insurance premium pricing,
according to individual driving patterns.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis is written as a culmination of the Industrial Engineering and Management master’s
programme at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis was undertaken in the Transport division
of DTU Management, and was prepared in close collaboration with an insurance company called UNDO
to maintain a focus on applicability of ﬁndings to a real industry, which was a high motivation for the
project.
Before the project, I had limited knowledge about both insurance and road safety, thus It requires no
prior knowledge of the insurance industry or road safety, but basic knowledge of statistics, mathematical
notation and network science is recommended for sections revolving around statistical modelling.
The process of identifying relevant data sources, ﬁnding key stakeholders to contact and gather the data
was drastically underestimated, but proved fruitful with enough persistence. Similarly, materializing the
abundance of information in statistical models and text was a a long process, but a relief. At last, the ﬁnal
product is sought to provide a thorough picture of the project and results outlined in the abstract.
February 26, 2021
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I have received a great deal of support and guidance throughout the process of writing this thesis, for
which I am very thankful.
First, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors at DTU, namely Stefan Mabit and Marcus
Skyum Myhrmann, who guided me through the process of writing the thesis and continuously inspired
me to seek more knowledge within the ﬁeld.
A special thanks goes to Mikkel Vilstrup from UNDO for providing insights on the insurance industry,
challenging my ideas and pushing the limits of the study. I would also like to thank Tim Myhrvold and
UNDO for the opportunity of writing the thesis in close collaboration with a company, which allowed me
to always maintain a focus on practical application in industry.
Lukas Bredo also deserves a mention for his time to tirelessly discuss statistical models, for which I am
very grateful.
Finally, I wish to thank my close friends and family for supporting me throughout writing this thesis,
especially during the ﬁnal weeks of hard work.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature
3
2.1
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Under-reporting of accidents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Unobserved heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Spatial correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
6
3.1
Unit of measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Dependent variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Linear regression and statistical inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Linear mixed model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Heckman model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Data
13
4.1
Spatial aggregation approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Accidents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Traﬃc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Derivation of dependent variable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Additional variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Data summarized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Modeling
36
5.1
Baseline - Linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Linear mixed model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Heckman two-step model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Results, goodness of ﬁt, and robustness of coeﬃcient estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Discussion
53
6.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Industry applicability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Conclusion
55
Appendices
59
A Project brief and learning objectives
60
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
Overlay of CVF on OpenStreetMap to assess diﬀerences. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Examples of the various distributions of road segment lengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Plot of graph object created by OSMNx containing all road segments in Denmark
. . . .
17
4
Example of hierarchy in R-trees to allow for eﬃcient spatial operations . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Distributions of snapping distances between accidents and nearest road segments . . . . .
20
6
Traﬃc counts recorded in Mastra per year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
Traﬃc counts recorded in Mastra per municipality, excluding VD with 6992 traﬃc counts
23
8
Boxplot of counted days by year
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
9
Plot of graph of remaining road segments created by OSMNx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
10
Number of traﬃc counts per highway type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
11
Distribution of relative share of daily traﬃc per day
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
12
Illustrative example of how the dependent variable can be used to assess the overall risk
exposure of individual drivers’ driving patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
13
Illustrative example of sinuosity in west-Zealand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
14
Distribution of the log-transformed dependent variable - Log(Risk) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Car insurance premiums are traditionally determined by generic characteristics in the form of age of
driver, car model, area of residence and insurance history.
This information yields a probability of
reimbursement for the insurance provider, which is used to pool customers of similar risk and price the
premiums accordingly. Using this approach, all customers in a particular group can be said to pay in
solidarity in case of large payouts, but premiums are inﬂated in certain groups from covering high-risk
individuals. To put this into perspective, a study investigated the driving risk of individuals with a
purpose of categorizing drivers. The study categorized 6% of drivers as high-risk and 84% as low-risk,
but most interestingly concluded that high-risk drivers were 10 times more likely to experience dangerous
events, measured by crashes or near-crashes per 1000 miles driven at 3.95 for high-risk drivers and 0.39
for low-risk drivers [13]. Insurance providers are however not able to single out high-risk drivers using
only the generic characteristics mentioned above.
The solidarity approach to pricing is still default for most insurance providers, only challenged by usage-
based insurance that reﬂects the risk proﬁle of individual drivers in premiums, often referred to as ’pay-how-
you-drive’. From the mid 2000s, advancements in smartphone technology has enabled insurance providers
to use smartphone-based telematics1 [?] rather than vehicle-mounted devices, which leverages low cost of
equipment, and an abundance of censor-generated data to signiﬁcantly improve the risk assessments [3].
By collecting data about individual driving behaviour, insurance providers can diﬀerentiate premiums
to achieve a fairer pricing for low-risk customers, and pool high-risk customers, ultimately resulting in a
lower average premium for the majority of customers.
The risk described above can be thought of as the individual driver risk. In addition to this, it can
be argued there is a latent risk in the road network, independent of individual driving behaviour, that
drivers’ are exposed to when driving. Thus, if insurance providers can quantify the latent road risk that
individuals are exposed to, they would be able to estimate the total risk proﬁle of a given client. That is,
by knowing where clients drive, it is possible to assess the level of risk they are exposed to. This relies
on the crucial assumption that individual driving patterns are somewhat systematic and predictable.
If that is not the case, historical driving patterns cannot be used to estimate risk exposures and in
turn diﬀerentiate insurance premiums. This was studied by González et al. in an eﬀort to understand
human mobility patterns, and they found that daily travel patterns of individuals shows a high degree of
regularity. The probability of ﬁnding an individual at a given location is well approximated by P(L) ∼1
L,
where L is a location ranked by frequency of visit (i.e. 1 is the most visited, 2 is the second most, and
so forth) [11]. Thus, individuals spend most time at a few preferred locations, and on average about
40% time is spent at the ﬁrst two preferred locations [11]. With that, the assumption of exposure to
road risk still relies on the chosen route as well as mode of transport, which will not be addressed in the
thesis.
The motivation for this thesis is to provide insurance companies with an approach to assess the latent
risk present in the Danish road network, which can be combined with the pay-how-you-drive approach
to yield a total measure of risk each individual driver experiences behind the wheel. Road risk thus
accounts for the risk drivers are exposed to derived from external factors, independent of individual
driving behaviour.
1Telematics can be thought of as all information gathering, processing, and transmission that occurs in a vehicle,
exempliﬁed by GPS and often used for vehicle or ﬂeet tracking.
1
==PAGE:8==
In short, the thesis seeks to model road risk using statistical and econometric methods to identify factors
that are signiﬁcant in determining risk, detailed to a degree that can be used to diﬀerentiate insurance
pricing. The project brief and learning objectives are provided in Appendix A.
This thesis will not study the insurance or compliance aspects of either pay-how-you-drive or risk exposures
with regards to insurance premium modelling, but solely focus on modelling the latent risk in the
Danish road network with the purpose of being able to diﬀerentiate risk according to road, traﬃc and
environmental characteristics. A main focus of the study is interpretability of results, such that insurers
can feasibly derive insights from the estimated eﬀects on road risk. Practical applicability is equally
emphasized in terms of availability of data to relevant parties in the industry once the project is terminated.
Thus, the study seeks to prove the concept of modelling exposure to risk to inﬂuence insurance pricing
in a practical manner.
The remainder of the thesis is structured as follow. Section 2 reviews past research and literature in the
ﬁeld of road safety. Section 3 outlines the methodology used in this particular study. Section 4 presents
the approach to data selection, extraction, and exploration. In Section 5, the modelling steps are brieﬂy
shown and results summarized. Section 6 discusses the chosen approach as well as potential future studies
to improve the results, and ﬁnally the thesis is concluded in Section 8.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature
This section contains a brief review of existing research within road safety and other topics relevant to the
thesis with a focus on the main modelling approaches, and how speciﬁc issues in the ﬁeld of road safety
have previously been addressed. Speciﬁc data and modelling decisions will be presented and discussed
locally in the relevant sections throughout the thesis.
2.1
Modelling
There is an abundance of research in the ﬁeld of road safety, which often falls into one of two categories;
modelling accident frequency (reviewed by Lord and Mannering in 2010 [21]), or modelling accident
severity (reviewed by Savolainen et al in 2011 [28]). The former, namely accident frequencies, being the
most common. The reason for this is the fact that most studies focus on relatively homogeneous study
areas to identify factors inﬂuencing the likelihood of accidents. That is, study areas are delimited to only
include speciﬁc entities, i.e. either motorway segments, or urban intersections, as these have been found
to display vastly diﬀerent behaviours. The type of spatial aggregation unit used in most studies fall into
one of the following categories; road segments, intersections, traﬃc analysis zones, or regions [39].
With regards to the temporal aspect, accident frequency is studied with various scopes, starting from
5-minute granularity to annual number of accidents. Naturally, this type of data consists of non-negative
integers, often referred to as count data, thus simple Poisson regression was initially the default in research.
However, it became evident that the nature of accident data violated the assumptions of the Poisson
distribution, causing inconsistencies in coeﬃcient estimates. This warrented the introduction of other
variants of the Poisson regression, for example negative binomial models to account for over-dispersion
in the accident data (mean is much larger than variance), or zero-inﬂated Poisson and negative binomial
regression models to account for the occurrence of road segments with zero accidents [23]. Baysian
modelling has also found applications within road safety, from hierarchical joint models to empirical
and Full Bayes models, which can be used to account for heterogeneity from unobserved factors in road,
traﬃc, environment or driver characteristics [39]. Finally, on rare occasion, accident rates are modelled
by combining the traditional accident frequencies with some measure of exposure. The typical measures
include traﬃc, vehicle distances travelled, or area. Accident rates are modelled using various regression
models, mostly mixed eﬀects models or censored regression [23].
In 2020, Ziakopouslos and Yannis reviewed research in the ﬁeld of spatial dependence and heterogeneity
speciﬁcally [39], with a focus on modelling approaches within the three main spatial aggregation levels
adopted by researchers, namely road segment and intersections, zonal, and regional. Finally, in recent
years, non-parametric, or machine learning, approaches such as neural networks, support vector machines,
and random forests have yielded high prediction accuracies in both traﬃc and accident modelling. Another
advantage of these types of models is that they do not rely on assumptions about the distribution of
data, however they can be complex to estimate and the resulting parameters are often not directly
interpretable [21].
In terms of literature, Washington et al.
produced the third edition of Statistical and Econometric
Methods for Transportation Data analysis [34], in which they describe and illustrate most of the models
mentioned above with practical examples, as well as other relevant methods in the ﬁeld.
The use of advanced modelling techniques is often a result of the methodological issues connected to
3
==PAGE:10==
working with traﬃc and accident data, which is prone to complex relationships and high levels of noise.
Two of the main issues within road safety modelling that are relevant to this study are outlined below,
namely under-reporting of accidents and unobserved heterogeneity.
2.2
Under-reporting of accidents
The most common source of accident data for road safety research is police reported accidents. These
have however been found to be under-reported to diﬀerent extends, which will be examined explicitly
section 4.2.1 for Denmark speciﬁcally. This introduces a problem for researchers, as the true number
of accidents is unknown. Two main approaches are found in research to either reduce zero-inﬂation
(zero-inﬂated Poisson and negative binomial models), or try to account for under-reporting (censored
regression models) [23]. Zero-inﬂated models are more common due to the fact that accident frequencies
are count data, thus count models (e.g. Poisson or negative binomial) are preferred. Zero-inﬂated models
estimate the proportion of zeros that constitute the inﬂation, i.e. how many excess zeros are there
compared to the expectation for a given Poisson distribution. Then, the Poisson probability is estimated
with the remainder of the observations. For accident rates however, Anastaopoulus argues that because
accident frequency counts tend to cluster at zero it can be considered a left-censored variable [2]. With
left-censored variables other models, including the proposed Tobit regression model [2], can be applied.
This approach will be elaborated in Section 3. Finally, Anastasopoulos compares the two approaches,
ﬁnding they both perform comparatively well to each-other, and both models explain more variance in
the data than comparative models without these corrections [1].
2.3
Unobserved heterogeneity
In road safety research, and many other ﬁelds, it is recognized that there are many factors inﬂuencing the
likelihood of a given event (accidents in this case), and it is not feasible for researchers to account for all
of these. This leads to an eﬀect among observations that may be unaccounted for, and have the potential
to introduce bias in the resulting estimates (from unobserved heterogeneity). An example could be the
comparison of accidents on diﬀerent types of roads (e.g. motorways versus residential roads) without
including measures to capture variation in the condition of roads, which may vary systematically.
Statistical models seek to estimate a set of parameters to explain as much variance in a data set as possible,
only leaving the residuals to contain randomness and noise. However, as outlined above, some sources
of variation may be unobserved, thus researchers seek ways to account for unobserved heterogeneity.
This can be done by introducing random parameters, or random eﬀects, to the models to account for
systematic heterogeneity across observations or groups of observations. Mannering et al. [24] has outlined
the typical sources of unobserved variation between observations in road safety research and summarized
common methods to account for this.
Another way to strengthen the robustness of an analysis to unobserved heterogeneity is to ensure the
temporal and spatial aggregation of observations match across all explanatory variables. An example
could be weather data, since it has often been found highly signiﬁcant in estimating the likelihood of
accidents; this type of data may not be available to researchers in the required temporal granularity,
thus it may be tempting to discretize variables from weekly data to daily for example. This results
in signiﬁcant information loss, however it may also introduce a bias in the model estimation resulting
from unobserved heterogeneity [21]. Malin et al. [22] countered this speciﬁc methodological problem by
4
==PAGE:11==
ensuring comparability in both the temporal and spatial aspect of their input data to avoid potential
heterogeneity problems.
With regards to the spatial aspect, it is evident that the larger the study area, the more unobserved
eﬀects are to be expected, as it becomes increasingly complex to account for explicitly. [39]. The simplest
solution is to account for these eﬀects using random parameter models, as mentioned above.
2.4
Spatial correlation
Finally, it is worth mentioning that analysis of spatial correlation is increasingly seen in research. Re-
searchers face the problem having to select an appropriate scale of spatial aggregation units which has
many consequences for the study. One of these consequences is the potential for spatial autocorrelation,
which is a term covering the systematic spatial variation in parameters concerning observations in close
proximity that may lead to biased estimators if these are unaccounted for [21]. Yao et al. [37] reviewed
the approaches to modelling accidents while accounting for spatial dependencies and heterogeneity. In
summary, researchers tend to use either Full Bayes (FB) models to adjust for unobserved spatial, and
temporal, heterogeneity, or some form of geographically weighted regression. Ziakopoulos and Yannis [39]
conﬁrms this with their 2020 review of spatial modelling approaches, which comprehensively summarizes
most recent studies within the ﬁeld. The models tend to vary depending on the spatial aggregation
unit. Unfortunately, this aspect will not be considered in this study, but merely provide a foundation for
discussion.
All of the considerations mentioned above are often combined with other methodological considerations
of modelling road safety to build large all-encompassing models. An example of the combination of the
approaches described above is the use of random parameters multivariate Tobit models, which has the
potential to account for unobserved heterogeneity among individual observations, while respecting the
fact that accident data is prone to under-reporting and thus being censored [1].
5
==PAGE:12==
3
Methodology
This section covers the modelling methodology used in the thesis. First, the unit of measure and dependent
variable to be studied are brieﬂy presented. Three types of models are then discussed; linear regression as
a baseline, linear mixed model to estimate the eﬀect of unobserved heterogeneity between observations,
and ﬁnally the Heckman two-step model is estimated in an attempt to account for under-reporting of
accidents and control for selectivity bias. Comparison of model robustness and ﬁt will be presented in
Section 5.
3.1
Unit of measure
The choice of unit of measure is brieﬂy stated in this section, as it relates to the dependent variable. The
approach to spatial aggregation depends on the scope of the study and data available. In this case, it
was found that using individual road segments as the unit of measure suited both the study and data
best, which is discussed in depth in Section 4.1.
3.2
Dependent variable
The choice of dependent variable has to satisfy the scope of the study. As mentioned in section 2, most
studies operate with rather homogeneous units of measure (arterial highways, urban intersections, or
similar sized zones), allowing researchers to use accident frequency as the dependent variable, as the
units of measure are comparative. It is however the ambition of this study to assess road risk across
all road types and geographical areas in Denmark. Such a broad research objective demands the either
the chosen models or the dependent variable to include a measure of exposure, making it continuous,
rather than simple accident counts. Without such exposure measure, any model would yield highways
and large urban intersections to be signiﬁcantly more dangerous than anywhere else as they experience a
lot more accidents simply due to the amount of traﬃc. Including a measure of exposure will result in a
comparable risk across road types, while also enabling a categorization of road segments in terms of risk
proﬁles after this initial study.
As previously mentioned, in road safety literature, the measure of exposure is often based on traﬃc
(number of vehicles), length, or a combination (vehicle kilometers travelled) [34]. This study will use
traﬃc as the exposure variable, thus the continuous dependent variable will take the form illustrated in
Eq. 1, which is hereafter referred to as risk.
Riski = Accidentsi
Traffici
(1)
Risk is thus deﬁned as the sum of accidents on road segment i, divided by a measure of traﬃc on road
segment i. The chosen measure of traﬃc is Average Annual Daily Traﬃc (AADT), representing the
average number of cars travelling on a speciﬁc road segment per day.
The risk measure is still abstract as this point, as it lacks a temporal dimension to aggregate accidents.
This will be elaborated further examined in Section 4, once all considerations with regards to data
availability have been presented. The intuitive interpretation remains the same throughout the thesis,
namely; if an average of x cars travel on a speciﬁc road segment, and the same road segment has an
average of y accidents, it results in a given risk. This allows the study to explore diﬀerences in risk
6
==PAGE:13==
according to both observable and unobservable factors.
3.3
Linear regression and statistical inference
Linear regression will be used as a baseline for comparison to other models. Theory in the following is
derived from [34]. The algebraic representation of the multivariate linear relationship between dependent
variable y and independent variables x is shown in equation 2 below.
yi = β0 + β · x i + εi
(2)
Eq. 2 shows yi as a function of the constant, β0, called the intercept, and a vector of predictors, x,
multiplied by their respective parameters in the vector β. Subscript i refers to individual observations,
where i = 1, 2, 3, ..., N for a total of N observations. Finally, the error term, εi, is the diﬀerence between
the estimated ˆyi to the true yi.
Linear regression is the process of regressing the dependent variable, y, on the explanatory variables, x,
to estimate the parameters, β, that achieves best ﬁt, i.e. minimize the error. Least Squares estimation is
commonly used to estimate the parameters, in a method referred to as Ordinary Least Squares, or OLS.
The process seeks to minimize the function Q, see Eq. 3, exempliﬁed by the simple linear regression with
a single predictor. A hat above a parameter or variable is the predicted value based on the sample.
Qmin =
n
X
i=1
(yi – ˆyi)2
min =
n
X
i=1

yi –
h
ˆβ0 + ˆβ1 · x1i
i2
min
(3)
The parameters ˆβ0 and ˆβ1 are estimated on a random sample of the total population, and in order
to be valid, or good, estimators for the true population, they have to satisfy following four properties;
unbiasedness, eﬃciency, consistency, and suﬃciency. In essence, this refers to estimators that yield
parameters across samples that converge towards the true population mean, use all information in
samples and has minimum variance. Once a parameter is estimated, we test the statistical signiﬁcance
of the estimated parameter - In other words, whether it is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero, i.e. if it is
making a diﬀerence in the model. In this paper, this is tested by calculating the t statistic of an estimated
parameter, and testing it versus the null of setting the parameter equal to zero. The estimate is deemed
statistically signiﬁcant at a given signiﬁcance level if the t-statistic is higher than a certain critical value,
determined by the degrees of freedom (degrees of freedom is determined by the number of observations,
less the number of predictors in the case of a chi-squared distribution). Eq. 4 shows the formula for
calculating the t-statistic.
t = β – β0
σ0
(4)
where σ0 refers to the standard deviation of β0. In order for the OLS-estimator to be the Best Linear
Unbiased Estimator (BLUE), ﬁve assumptions have to hold for the data. These assumptions are referred to
as the Gauss-Markov Theorem and are known as MLR (Multiple Linear Regression) 1-5. The assumptions
cannot all be tested on the data, instead it is necessary to argue that they hold. If any of the assumptions
do not hold, the OLS-estimator is not considered BLUE. Deﬁnitions of MLR 1 through 5 are derived
from [36].
7
==PAGE:14==
MLR 1: Linearity - The linearity assumption simply states that the population model is linear in
the parameters β1, β2, ..., βk. That is, dependent and independent variables can be any function of the
underlying variables, but the parameters are assumed linear.
MLR 2: Random sampling - OLS estimates the parameter coeﬃcients on a random sample of
observations, following the population model in MLR 1 (see Eq. 2). The OLS estimators ˆβ1, ˆβ2, ..., ˆβk
are considered estimators of the parameters in the population model β1, β2, ..., βk, for all k independent
variables.
MLR 3: No perfect collinearity - MLR 3 states that no independent variables in the sample can be
constant or form a linear relationship with other independent variables, referred to as perfect collinearity.
The reason this may be a problem is that multiple linear regression seeks to estimate the ceteris paribus2
eﬀect (or partial eﬀect) of each predictor, however this is not possible if variables perfectly co-vary. MLR
3 can be tested using the variance inﬂation factor (VIF), or identifying highly correlated variables, which
will be done in Section 5. Potential violations can be resolved by either dropping one of the involved
variables, or transforming them.
MLR 4: Zero conditional mean - That is, the expected value of the error term is zero, given any of
the explanatory variables. This assumption can fail as a result of omitting variables that correlate with
the error term, leading to biased estimators. Furthermore, when MLR 4 holds, the explanatory variables
are referred to as exogenous, whereas if these are correlated to the error term, they can be said to be
endogenous. In the case of this particular study, the explanatory variables are sought to cover the main
inﬂuences of road risk, given the current research within the ﬁeld and availability of data, in which case
we can assume that MLR 4 holds. In practice MLR 4 is the most common MLR assumption to fail. This
is due to omitted variable bias.
MLR 5: Homoskedasticity - In essence, the variance of the error term conditional on the explanatory
variables has to be constant, i.e. Var(ε|x1, ..., xk) = σ2. If this is not the case, the model is said to
display heteroskedasticity. Robust standard errors can be used to obtain unbiased standard errors for
OLS estimators under heteroskedasticity, and they should be used in statistical inference and hypothesis
testing under such conditions. Robust standard errors are often larger than normal standard errors, which
eﬀectively expands the conﬁdence interval and sets higher requirements for coeﬃcients to be statistically
signiﬁcant. Several tests can be made to test for heteroskedasticity; the Breusch-Pagan test will be used
in this thesis in Section 3.
MLR 6: Normality - MLR 6 is an additional assumption to the previous 5 Gauss-Markov assumptions
for OLS to be BLUE. It states that the population error is independent of explanatory variables and
normally distributed with a mean of zero and constant variance. MLR 6 is assumed to hold in practice
due to the Central Limit Theorem. In this case, the sample size is so large that MLR 6 is assumed to
hold. A potential correction is log-transforming the dependent variable, as that tends towards a normal
distribution, and does not impose restrictions on the data (e.g. risk cannot be negative, whereas log(risk)
can).
The base model will be built using bi-directional stepwise regression, which is a procedure that starting
from a full model with all available variables selectively adds and removes independent variables from the
regression to achieve the best ﬁtting model, based on some criterion. The procedure iteratively compares
2All else equal, i.e. all other variables ﬁxed
8
==PAGE:15==
models with diﬀerent variables to ﬁnd the best ﬁt, with the minimum number of variables. Typically,
stepwise regression is referred to as either forward (from the simplest to more complex models, referred
to as speciﬁc-to-general) or backward (full model to simpler models, referred to as general-to-speciﬁc),
however programmatically, it can be beneﬁcial to allow bi-directional steps, which is will be used in this
case. The criterion of choice is the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC). AIC is a measure of prediction
error, which evaluates how well the model ﬁts the data, while penalizing models that use more explanatory
variables. AIC can be thus be used to compare relative goodness-of-ﬁt among competing models in order
to identify the best ﬁtting one, and is calculated as follows:
AIC = 2k – 2LL(Θ)
(5)
where k refers to the number of parameters, 2LL(Θ) is the log-likelihood at convergence [34], and lower
values of AIC are preferred. Other information criteria may also be suited, however AIC is chosen for
this study. In short, the stepwise regression iteratively adds or removes a single variable at a time to
test whether it explains enough variance in the model compared to the added variance of including it.
Enough is determined by AIC, and models that decrease AIC by 2 is considered signiﬁcantly better than
the previous model. Ultimately this approach seeks to strike a balance between a well-speciﬁed model
and a parsimonious model, which has lead some to also refer to it as a minimum adequate model. Note
that the remaining variables may not all be statistically signiﬁcant, in which case inference cannot be
made with those particular parameters.
3.4
Linear mixed model
The following section outlines a method to account for potential unobserved variance between groups of
road segments, where groups can be deﬁned by some geographical or administrative feature, to be speciﬁed
later. The motivation for looking into this stems from the traditional approach to pricing premiums in
the insurance industry, which takes postal code as one of the parameters, thus it is interesting to ﬁnd out
whether road risk diﬀers signiﬁcantly between groups of road segments. Finally, by controlling for this
variation, consistent estimates of the parameters for the variables of interest can be obtained.
The data sample in question can be said to be hierarchical in nature, in that road segments belong to
some group, i.e. zone, municipality, region, country, or even road type. Individual road segments may
not be independent of the groups they inherently belong to, i.e. they may share some features with
other road segments of the same group that inﬂuence road risk, and this non-independence is reﬂected in
inconsistent estimates and standard errors. Theory for this section is derived from [36], while examples
are inspired by [29]. There are several ways to account for such non-independence in data. One is to
aggregate observations within each group to be used as a new sample, and thus losing a lot of the variance
from individual observations. Another option is to analyze groups independently, which may yield vastly
diﬀerent results, and it may yield an unmanageable number of models. Linear mixed models (LMMs)
can be thought of as combining these two, and LMMs are often used in the case of non-independent
hierarchical data by introducing ﬁxed and random eﬀects [29]. A ﬁxed eﬀect is a parameter that does not
vary, similar to the estimated parameters in linear regression outlined above. Random eﬀects however
allow parameters to vary as random variables as well. An example of the form of LMMs is provided in
Eq. 6. Depending on the scope of the study, it may be relevant to analyse the diﬀerence within group
9
==PAGE:16==
and between groups using these eﬀects.
yi = β0 + β · x i + z j · uj + εi
(6)
where yi is the vector of dependent variables, x i is a N×p matrix with N observations and p independent
variables. β is then referred to as the vector of ﬁxed eﬀects parameters. z j is the design matrix of q
random eﬀects and j groups (i.e holds zeros and ones to indicate which eﬀects are modelled and reduces
to a vector if only the intercept is modelled) and uj is a vector of q random eﬀects for j groups. Finally,
εj is the remaining residuals in yj not explained by the model or captured by the eﬀects [29].
Including random eﬀects relies on the assumption that the unobserved heterogeneity explained by the
eﬀect is uncorrelated with the independent variables. Thus, any group-speciﬁc variables (i.e. constant
for all within-group observations) cannot be included, as they inevitably will be perfectly correlated with
the random eﬀects term. An example could be if the group level is determined to be municipality; if
variables are manipulated at the municipal level, some impact on individual road risk could be expected.
Therefore, when random eﬀects are included, all variables assumed to be correlated with the unobserved
heterogeneity of the group has to be left out. The reason for still considering LMMs is to test whether
estimating random eﬀects captures enough unobserved heterogeneity within groups to not consider these
group variables, therefore this trade-oﬀbetween group speciﬁc variables and controlling for within-group
correlation is worth pursuing.
In order to determine the hierarchical level to introduce random eﬀects, as well as the type of random
eﬀects, the scope of the study and data availability has to be considered. As mentioned above, insurance
providers traditionally diﬀerentiate premiums by postal code as the only geographical attribute, however it
is not assumed that premiums vary much according to this in the traditional premium models. Therefore,
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in road risk from any geographical feature or grouping might be of interest to the
industry and will be investigated in Section 5.
A ﬁnal thing to be aware of is sample sizes within groups. The groups should not be too unbalanced, or
contain few observations. This will be checked in Section 5, and manually adjusted if potential issues are
detected to avoid collinearity issues.
3.5
Heckman model
The last model to be considered in this study is the Heckman two-step model. In the initial stages
of the project, it was found that police reported accidents are signiﬁcantly under-reported, resulting
in a signiﬁcant number of zero-accident observations, thus a method to leverage the information in all
of the data was sought, and possibly also account for under-reporting. With the many zero-accident
observations, the data set is left-centered data set at zero.
The classic example by James J. Heckman of censored, or truncated, data is that of the hourly wage of
women [?]. If an individual is working at the time of a survey, the wage can be observed, however if not,
all other variables can be observed, but wage is zero. It is said to be incidentally truncated, as it depends
on another variable, namely labor force participation [36], and thus a selectivity bias exists. Similarly, in
this study, the observed number of accidents is assumed under-reported, leading to a discrepancy between
the observed risk and the true risk. The variable this under-reporting depends on, the so-called selection
variable, or exclusion restriction, may however be diﬃcult to pinpoint.
10
==PAGE:17==
Censored regression models (as well as selection models) seek to estimate and correct this bias. These
are widely used econometric models in economics, which has also been adopted in road safety when
modelling continuous variables by for example Anastapoulos [2], and in literature, the simpler version of
the Heckman two-step model, namely Tobit model is suggested for censored regression [34]. Theory in
this section is based on [32], [34], and [36]. The Heckman two-step model takes the following form:
y∗
i = β0 + β · x i + εi;
i = 1, ..., n
(7)
d∗
i = γ + γ · z i + νi;
i = 1, ..., N
(8)
di = 1
if
d∗
i > 0;
di = 0
otherwise
(9)
yi = y∗
i · di
(10)
Eq. 7 is known as the outcome model and is the equation of interest. It estimates the population
parameters, namely β by OLS given a random sample. It shows the latent endogenous variable y∗
i , with
the observed dependent variables found in yi, and their relationship provided by Eq. 10. di is an indicator
variable, where di = 1 if y is observed and 0 if not, as per Eq. 9. Eq. 8 shows the selection equation
with latent variable d∗
i , that depends on the observed factors in z i, and the unobserved error, νi. x i
and z i are vectors of explanatory variables. β and γ are vectors of parameters to be estimated. In this
cse, N refers to the all observations, while n is the sample where di = 1. Finally, εi and νi are zero
mean error terms, where E

εi|νi

̸= 0. The estimates of β for the sample n will be inconsistent given
the correlation in the error terms, therefore approaches to estimate, or eliminate, this correlation with a
term are sought.
James J. Heckman proposed a correction for the sample selection bias outlined above [?] in form of a
two-step approach. The two-step approach estimates a term that accounts for the nonzero expectation
of εi given νi, and relies on the assumption that the error terms above are independently and identically
distributed (IID), i.e. N (0, Σ), where Σ is the covariance matrix:
Σ =
 
σ2ε
σεν
σεν
σ2ν
!
(11)
and (εi, νi) are independent of zi. As mentioned above, for the fully parameterized model, the equation
for the subsample containing only road segments with accidents, denoted n is simpliﬁed to
yi = βx i + εi;
i = 1, ..., n
(12)
where βx i = β0 + β1x1i + β2x2i, ..., βkxki for k parameters.
Knowing that the OLS estimates are biased because of the correlation mentioned above, Heckman includes
a correction term that accounts for observed variation in errors by taking the conditional expectation of
12, yielding
E

yi|z i, di = 1

= βx i + E

εi|z i, di = 1

;
i = 1, ..., n
(13)
Using the IID assumption of the error terms, and formula for the conditional expectation of a truncated
11
==PAGE:18==
random variable, see [34], the conditional error term can be stated as
E

εi|z i, di = 1

= σεν
σ2ν



φ

z
′
iγ

Φ

z
′
iγ




(14)
where φ (·) and Φ (·) denote the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function
of the standard normal distribution. In essence, the right bracket of the right-hand side is the term to
be estimated, and is referred to as the inverse Mills Ratio. An estimate of the inverse mills ratio can
be obtained by estimating γ over the total N observations using the Probit model, estimated by the
maximum likelihood estimator. Essentially, the inverse mills ratio is the error from the Probit model
that explains the selection, if a proper selection variable is chosen. Thus, by estimating the parameters γ
and σν using Probit over all observations Heckman is able to consistently estimate the inverse Mills ratio,
which is then included as an additional regressor Eq. 7, denoted λi, with parameter μ to be estimated by
OLS on the n samples for which di = 1, like so
yi = βx i + μˆλi + ηi;
i = 1, ..., n
(15)
where ηi denotes the zero-mean residual errors. By accounting for potential selectivity bias, OLS should
yield consistent estimates for β using the selected sample, noting that μ = σεν
σ2ν from eq. 14. Note also
that if μ = 0, the error terms of Eq. 7 and Eq. 8 are uncorrelated, and λ is not included, thus y can be
regressed on x using the selected sample n for consistent estimates of β. In the case μ ̸= 0, the model
suﬀers from omitted variable bias from not controlling for the correlation between the error terms, which
is what is referred to as the selectivity bias. As mentioned, μ is given by:
μ = σεν
σ2ν
(16)
i.e. the fraction of the covariance between the error terms, and the variation in the error term of the
selection model, provided by Eq. 8. A test of selectivity bias is simply the t-test of the parameter μ, with
the null H0 : μ = 0, in which case there is no sample selectivity bias. When μ is found to be signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from zero, the standard errors reported by OLS are not correct, as they do not account for the
estimation of γ. This will be tested in Section 5.
12
==PAGE:19==
4
Data
In this section, each of the major steps in data procurement and preparation will be explained, as this
constituted a large part of the thesis. Furthermore, all considerations of potential trade-oﬀs made during
the study will be elaborated. The topics of particular interest are; spatial aggregation approach, collecting
accident data, and collecting traﬃc data. The timeframe considered for accident and traﬃc data is 01-
01-2010 to 01-10-2020. Finally, as mentioned in the introduction, practical applicability is emphasized,
thus considerations with regards to availability of data to relevant parties after the study are included in
each step.
4.1
Spatial aggregation approach
As mentioned in Section 3, the unit of measure was determined to be road segments, however there are
several options to source this data from. The following requirements were identiﬁed, which a given source
of data had to satisfy in order to be used as a point of reference for the remainder of the project.
• The data source has to exhaustively and accurately map the Danish road network
• The road segments should be logically connected (i.e. in some form of relational structure)
• External data can be mapped to speciﬁc places on a road using geo-spatial features
• The data is at a level of detail to be useful for analysis
• The entire country of Denmark can be modelled using the computational resources available to the
project with the chosen data set
Two main sources of road network data were identiﬁed that met the requirements stated above, namely
the Central Road and Track Register (Centrale Vej- og Stifortegnelse, CVF3) and OpenStreetMap4. CVF
is publicly available through a Web Feature Service (WFS) connection to the Danish Road Directorate
using any Geographical Information System (GIS) software. OpenStreetMap is also publicly available,
and is often accessed and modelled using the Python library called OSMNx, which creates a graph
representation of the area in question. Both options are visualized in ﬁgure 1, illustrating that the
representations are similar in terms of coverage. Note that red lines, representing OpenStreetMap, are
slightly thicker than blue lines to be able to diﬀerentiate which areas are solely covered by CVF, solely
covered by OpenStreetMap and which they both cover. Note also, that tracks and trails have been
removed from CVF.
Evidently, both representations cover all main roads and most smaller roads, with small deviations in
both. CVF is a government produced data set, which means the accuracy can be assumed higher than the
crowd-sourced OpenStreetMap as evidenced by many small blue dead-end roads in ﬁgure 1b. However,
OpenStreetMap may be updated more frequently, evidenced by the addition of many smaller new red
roads in urban Amager on ﬁgure 1a. It would be interesting to quantify the diﬀerence (for example by
total lengths) to gain an understanding of the identiﬁed diﬀerences, however due to the diﬀerences in the
underlying data structures this would yield vastly diﬀerent results. In conclusion, the visual inspection
of the overlay shows that both representations agree to a high degree.
3cvf.vd.dk/cvf
4www.openstreetmap.org
13
==PAGE:20==
(a) Urban example of Amager, Copenhagen. CVF
overlay on OpenStreetMap
(b) Rural example of west Zealand. CVF overlay
on OpenStreetMap
Figure 1: Overlay of CVF on OpenStreetMap to assess diﬀerences.
The immediate beneﬁt of using CVF as the point of reference is the fact that the Danish Road Directorate
use this for internal purposes due to the high level of accuracy provided by using the Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinate reference system as a standard for geographical coordinates. Roads in CVF
are stored in their entirety, meaning they are not segmented by intersections, which can be desirable for
certain types of analysis, however for most purposes, intersections should be added in the data preparation.
The CVF data set does not contain any descriptive attributes, however some are available through various
internal databases in VD, which can be matched to individual roads using GIS software. It is relevant
to note that these databases are designed for individual municipalities to use them for speciﬁc local
purposes (monitoring road conditions, tracking local traﬃc, etc.), and thus it is cumbersome to extract
large volumes of data. Furthermore, data ownership of additional attributes resides with individual
municipalities, and is thus not publicly available.
The alternative considered for this study is a representation of the Danish road network provided by
OpenStreetMap, accessed using the python library OSMNx. The beneﬁt of using OpenStreetMap is the
direct access to road speciﬁc characteristics, such as road type, speed limit, and number of lanes. Roads
are stored as individual road segments, delimited by intersections, adjacent roads, or branches, resulting
is many short segments, especially in urban areas. Finally, the resulting data is structured as a graph
object, which has some computational beneﬁts, and it can be used for modelling routes and paths, which
may be of interest.
For this study, the OpenStreetMap representation of the Danish road network was found to be most
suitable due to the fact that it approximates the CVF well, it is publicly accessible, and more more
characteristics are immediately available. The graph representation also makes the analysis computation-
ally feasible. This was gradually optimized over the course of the project, and by implementing Python
libraries optimized for spatial analysis on the graph representation, allowing the project to expand the
initial analysis of small geographic areas to encompass the entire country with signiﬁcantly more features
in the same processing time. Furthermore, traﬃc counts are provided on single locations, and it cannot be
assumed that these traﬃc counts are consistent on the entire stretch of road, thus smaller road segments
are desired - this will be elaborated in Section 4.3.
14
==PAGE:21==
This decision inﬂuences the direction of the study signiﬁcantly, since smaller segments, with signiﬁcantly
more features available and with a high degree of accuracy in each of these features, allows for a more
speciﬁc study. It is worth commenting further on the resulting length of road segments derived from the
decision of using OpenStreetMap. Length of segments is a topic of discussion in road safety research,
with the main concern being short segments. Short segments appear when homogeneous characteristics
are sought the entire length of the road segment (e.g. same number of lanes, traﬃc, median barriers). As
a consequence, underlying problems in for example reporting accuracy in terms of location of accidents
become more evident [7], similarly the share of road segments with zero accidents is likely to increase
dramatically. To counter this, researchers have assessed diﬀerent approaches to optimally subdivide road
segments, which fall into the categories of either using road attributes to determine length, or ﬁxing
the length of road segments to achieve better modelling results [7,19]. [7] and [19] have the following in
common; they focus on main roads and motorways, they seek homogeneity in road attributes, exclude
intersections, and subdivide based on horizontal curvature (curved segments versus straight segments).
To assess the possibility of achieving somewhat similar road segment lengths, the following plots were
created:
(a) Boxplot of road segment lengths in the
municipality of Copenhagen, with mean of 101
meters
(b) Boxplots of segment lengths per road type, mean
values ranging from 100 to 1700 meters
Figure 2: Examples of the various distributions of road segment lengths
The road types illustrated above will be introduced shortly, but evidently, road segment lengths vary
signiﬁcantly and ideally, should be streamlined as proposed above. However as G. Koorey [19] found
in a study of New Zealand, it is not deemed feasible to adjust the length of road segments with the
current layout of the OpenStreetMap data, while maintaining homogeneity across attributes and an
accurate representation of the actual road network. Furthermore, most studies focus solely on well-
documented main roads, in which case it is easier to achieve homogeneous segments, whereas this is
a country-wide study, including everything from motorways to rural roads, as well as the urban grid
of small interconnected streets. These considerations should however be kept in mind assessing the
validity of potential inferences made later in the study, and length should be added as a control variable.
The considerations could also be explored in further additional studies by stratifying the road segments
further.
15
==PAGE:22==
4.1.1
OpenStreetMap
This section will brieﬂy introduce OpenStreetMap and how it was used to generate a representation
of the Danish road network. The OpenStreetMap project was started at University College London in
2004 with a purpose of providing open source geographical information across European countries using
Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI), i.e. active contributors who build and improve the network
continuously [14]. The quality of OSM data in terms of accuracy and completeness is thus expected
to vary across countries and areas, but has been improved signiﬁcantly since the outset, as evidenced
by the use of OSM in both commercial and research settings in Denmark [20,25]. Several studies have
been conducted to assess the quality on a set of parameters in various locations to verify the use of
OSM for research purposes, hereunder Tehran in 2014 [9], France in 2010 [10], and China in 2014 [38].
These studies take diﬀerent approaches, but all conclude that urban and highly populated areas are well
mapped and pose an accurate source of cost eﬃcient data compared to commercial datasets. They further
ﬁnd that the quality depends on the discipline of contributors to adhere to the well-deﬁned standard
speciﬁcations, inﬂuencing the interpretability of ﬁnal networks.
As for conducting a similar study in Denmark, C. Barron et al. [5] proposes a framework consisting of
25 methods to assess the quality of OSM data in a particular region based solely on the data’s editing
history, which may be relevant for future studies. This thesis will however not test the accuracy of OSM
as such, but merely refer to Figure 1, demonstrating the overlay of OpenStreetMap on CVF to conﬁrm
that OSM approximates the true road network with reasonable accuracy in multiple settings. Finally, G.
Boeing [6] presents important points for using this type of network data in research to ensure replicability,
avoiding over-simpliﬁcation and ensuring large enough sample sizes. These guidelines will be the basis
for using OSM in this thesis, therefore the approach is outlined brieﬂy below.
The OSM data was downloaded and stored as a graph object using the python library OSMNx’s
graph_from_place function:
1
#initiate using coordinates to include Storebæltsbroen
2
Full_Graph = ox.graph_from_point((55.331046, 10.970260), dist=20000, network_type="drive",
3
truncate_by_edge=True, clean_periphery=False)
4
for municipality in municipalities:
5
next_graph = ox.graph_from_place(f"{municipality}, Danmark", network_type="drive",
6
truncate_by_edge=True, clean_periphery=False)
7
Full_Graph = nx.compose(Full_Graph, next_graph)
Code 1: Python code to load road network using OSMNx.
ox referring to OSMNx, nx referring to NetworkX
Note that this iterates over a list of all 98 municipalities in the country. The OSM API does not limit
the number or size of data requests, however it requires signiﬁcant memory to construct the graph as a
whole, therefore this approach is streamlined for lower memory requirements and yields the same result
as requesting the entire country at once. The resulting graph of road segments is visualized in Figure 3
below, which contains 380,043 nodes (intersections) and 457,815 edges (road segments) with a total length
of 97,444 km. According to Statistics Denmark, the total length of the Danish road network was 74,849
km5 in 2020. The deviance in the graph representation is assumed to be caused by storing individual
lanes separately in OpenStreetMap.
5www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/geograﬁ-miljoe-og-energi/infrastruktur/vejnet
16
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3: Plot of graph object created by OSMNx containing all road segments in Denmark
This representation of the country is currently structured as a multidigraph in network science terms.
Multidigraphs is a type of directed graph, which can hold multiple edges between a pair of nodes and
may contain self-loops [4,26]. The network is simpliﬁed to an undirected graph, meaning nodes only have
a single bi-directional edge between them. This has clear consequences for the analytical potential, and
it would be desired to use a directed graph, however the accuracy of the external data (accidents and
traﬃc in particular) is not reliable enough to diﬀerentiate direction of travel, thus it suﬃces to work with
an undirected graph.
As a ﬁnal remark, the main road types in OpenStreetMap are brieﬂy explained. The categories are
explained on the OpenStreetMap Wikipedia6. Motorways are self-explanatory, as the largest roads in the
country. Trunk roads refer to the Danish motortraﬁkvej. Primary, secondary, and tertiary refer to the the
remaining main types of roads, in descending order of importance to the road network. Unclassiﬁed refers
to minor roads, but they serve a purpose other than access to properties. Finally, residential streets are
all living streets, large and small. One of the downsides of using crowd-sourced data, is that it allows for
individual interpretation of the outlined characteristics of road types, and in the case of Denmark, most
rural roads are categorized as tertiary, whereas in the United States, most are categorized as primary.
Therefore, primary, secondary and tertiary roads will not be diﬀerentiated much in the remainder of the
study.
6https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:highwayRoads
17
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Accidents
In Denmark, there is only one main source of accident data available, namely the Danish Road Direc-
torate’s database of police reported accidents. The database holds records of all traﬃc related accidents
over the past 20+ years, including accidents involving pedestrians, bicycles, public transport, and pro-
fessional transport. However, at least one of the involved entities has to be a car for the accident to be
considered in this study, therefore the remainder is ﬁltered out. There are three main concerns to keep
in mind with regards to using this data source. First, reporting accuracy in terms of location and time is
important for this particular study. Secondly, several studies have found that police reported accidents
are highly under-reported, both in Denmark and abroad. Finally, the register is not publicly available,
and can only be accessed through a research agreement. This ﬁnal concern was resolved by enquiring
the Danish Road Directorate (VD) about the possibility of sharing the accident records, aggregated to a
degree where it is not possible to pinpoint individual events in terms of time, place and involvement of
individuals to ensure anonymity. By doing so, all accident-related features are obfuscated and unusable
except time and location, however this aligns with the scope of the study, as per Section 1, by only
focusing on all external factors, independent of individuals involved.
The two other concerns are addressed in Section 4.2.1 and Section 4.2.2 respectively.
4.2.1
Under-reporting of police reported accidents
This study’s focus is to help insurance providers estimate the risk of payout due to the latent risk of car
accidents, given a client’s driving patterns and routes. Thus, a large degree of under-reporting poses
a problem, as the estimated risk using this type of data will inevitably be biased. Several researchers
have investigated the level of under-reporting across nations, and the most recent Danish study is by K.
Janstrup [17], who investigated under-reporting of accidents for diﬀerent modes of transport by comparing
hospital emergency room reports with police accident reports. Janstrup found that in the years 2003-2007,
car accidents were only recorded in police reports in 25-31% of all cases reported at hostipal emergency
rooms on Funen [17]. Furthermore, studies within the ﬁeld found that the reporting is biased in terms of
severity of injury [8,17], resulting in heavier under-reporting of medium to low injury severity, compared
to high severity and fatal accidents. The studies reason that the police are never informed about these
accidents, thus they are never oﬃcially recorded. In Denmark, the police are obliged to record accidents
if [31]:
• Accident occurred in public area
• People are injured
• Property damage exceeds 50,000 DKK on the involved vehicle, or 5,000 DKK on external elements
• Foreign visitors are involved
• Employees by the police are involved
• In the opinion of the police, such an infringement of the traﬃc legislation has been committed
during the accident that it in itself should give rise to a charge (e.g. high speed, reckless driving,
etc.)
According to VD, material damage cases are however most often recorded due to the last reason [31],
conﬁrming the ﬁndings in the studies above about the bias of low-severity accidents. In conclusion, it
18
==PAGE:25==
is advised to include other sources of accident data, for example emergency room records to provide a
fuller picture.
The focus of this study is accidents relevant to insurance providers, which includes all grades of accidents
that entail potential insurance payouts, including the lowest severity level, namely property damage. Thus,
the best additional source of accident data would be insurance providers’ historical data on car insurance
payouts. However, it was quickly found that insurance providers in Denmark do not log information, such
as location, of accidents reported by clients - only the reimbursed amount and minimal administrative
details are kept. Thus, it is highly recommended for insurance companies to record these details, as they
may prove to be the best source of data available in the future. By doing so, records of parking dents,
single person accidents on private property, etc. would be recorded for additional studies. As an example,
Tryg Forsikring had an approximate 25% market share7 of the Danish car insurance market in the fourth
quarter of 2019, which means that a single insurance provider could potentially record as much data
annually as is currently recorded by the police reports, if not more. There are potentially compliance
issues of keeping such records containing personal information, however those will not be discussed in
this thesis.
For the purposes of this study, the police reported accidents will constitute the sole source of accident
data due to the limited availability of other sources, and with the above considerations in mind, the
modelling methodology is deliberately chosen to attempt to account for under-reporting to some degree,
and inferences made on the results will have to reﬂect this. Furthermore, it has to be assumed that
under-reporting is somewhat uniformly distributed, such that the resulting bias will not aﬀect certain
regions more than other.
4.2.2
Matching accidents to road segments
The exercise of matching the accident data points to road segments is rather simple, however compu-
tationally expensive. The approach was optimized several times during the study to account for larger
areas, and ﬁnally the entire country was mapped. The most eﬃcient approach identiﬁed was spatial joins
using R-trees. Essentially, R-trees are data structures similar to a balanced search tree, but for spatial
data. By applying bounding boxes with coordinates around all leaf-nodes and sub-trees, it is possible to
quickly decide whether a speciﬁc entity is inside a sub-tree. Each branch, referred to as a rectangle as
depicted in Figure 48, contains objects in near vicinity of each other, while minimizing the surrounding
bounding boxes. The only memory necessary is to store coordinates of the bounding boxes and the unique
identiﬁers of each of them, referred to as spatial indices. The reason why it is more eﬃcient is because
R-trees achieve high ﬁll-rates (number of observations per rectangle) by simply scaling the bounding
boxes to the density of observations in a given area9.
7www.forsikringogpension.dk/statistik/markedsandele-for-motorforsikring/
8Source of illustration: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R-tree
9https://geoﬀboeing.com/2016/10/r-tree-spatial-index-python/
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4: Example of hierarchy in R-trees to allow for eﬃcient spatial operations
R-trees are implemented in the python libraries GeoPandas and Shapely, which assigns spatial indices
to spatial data with coordinates in the preferred coordinate references system, and ultimately allows for
eﬃcient spatial operations, for example snapping points to lines or joining points in polygons.
In order to match individual accidents to the nearest road, a tolerance was set at 15 meters, meaning all
accidents were given a 15 meter radius tolerance, and if no roads were found within these 15 meters, it
is assumed that accidents are either reporting errors, or occurred on private property, parking lots, or
otherwise outside the scope of this study of road segments. The tolerance of 15 meters was found by
visually inspecting the resulting snapping distances from running the algorithm with a tolerance of 50
meters, see Figure 5a below, and ﬁnally determining the appropriate tolerance to be 15 meters, while
respecting the ultra short roads in the center of large cities.
(a) Histogram of distances between accidents and
nearest road
(b) Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) plot of
distance between accidents and nearest road, per
road type
Figure 5: Distributions of snapping distances between accidents and nearest road segments
Figure 5a displays the distance between accident locations and the nearest roads. With the current
20
==PAGE:27==
number of bins, it is evident that the tolerance could be slightly lower than 15 meters, however while
determining the appropriate tolerance, it was found that motorways in general had a snapping distance
between 5 and 12.5 meters, see Figure 5b. Interestingly, problems with reporting accuracy were expected,
however this is a result of using OSMNx rather than CVF, since VD, and CVF, represents motorways as
a single edge, whereas OSMNx represents motorways and dual carriageways with separate edges for each
direction, as previously mentioned. The result is that motorway accidents cannot be matched to a single
direction, without accounting for the attribute containing the cardinal direction for individual accidents.
Upon inspecting this attribute in the data set, it was found to be inconsistent, and could not be modelled
to accurately allocate accidents on motorways and other dual carriageways. The chosen solution for
this study was to allocate all motorway accidents evenly to both directions (weight 0.5 accident in each
direction), working under the assumption that an accident in one direction also aﬀects drivers in the
opposite direction, and both directions experience similar levels of accidents. This is a strong assumption,
however the acquired data does not support other ways of accurately inferring or imputing the direction
of travel for these types of accidents.
A total of 155,564 accidents were matched to the road segments, which is 92.69% of the initial accident
count.
4.3
Traﬃc
This section outlines and explains the process of ﬁnding, accessing and processing traﬃc data to be able
to estimate the risk factor for each road. Traﬃc counts will be the limiting factor that determines the
sample size for this study, as it was known from the outset that accurate traﬃc counts are not available
for all road segments in the country. There are diﬀerent approaches to include traﬃc as the exposure
variable in road safety studies. In Denmark, the following datasets were identiﬁed as potential sources of
either traﬃc counts, ﬂow of cars or trips, that could be used for the purposes of this study to calculate
AADT.
• Connected Cars - Trip-based data set from telematics devices in thousands of vehicles by a
professional provider.
• Zendrive - Similar to Connected Cars, focuses on logging trips and events. The data set is very
small compared to Connected Cars, and also collected by a professional provider.
• Mastra - Collects all public traﬃc counts, processes them and feeds the resulting aggregated data
to the Danish Road Directorate.
Each of the data sets come with advantages and disadvantages, and a combination of all of the data sets
would probably be ideal to cross-validate, unfortunately that is not feasible. In order to select the best
the best option for this particular study, the following requirements were identiﬁed.
• Annual Average Daily Traﬃc (AADT), or equivalent measure, for road segments is sought to
calculate the dependent variable as per Section 3.
• Suﬃcient coverage across the Danish road network
• Margin of error present in data is known to some degree, and is acceptable
• Possibility of stratifying traﬃc in speciﬁc time-slots to assess the temporal aspect of risk
21
==PAGE:28==
• Accessible for insurance providers
The reason why the requirements above are rather vague is because the selection of a single data set
inevitably results consists of many trade-oﬀs, for example between accuracy and coverage. Connected
Cars and Zendrive are supplied by professional providers, which charge a large sum in order for insurance
providers to gain access to their data. Zendrive’s ﬂeet is not large enough to provide suﬃcient coverage
in Denmark, whereas Connected Cars’ ﬂeet has a signiﬁcant size of approximately 100.000 cars in total,
and have previously been used for estimating ﬂows of traﬃc, for example by K. Walther [33]. These two
data sets are however deemed infeasible due to the up-front cost of acquiring them, however for large
insurance providers, it may very well be worth it, due to the quality and high temporal resolution. Mastra
is, as mentioned, a consolidation of all traﬃc counts performed by public oﬃcials and all municipalities
in the country, which also pre-processes all raw traﬃc counts to obtain estimates of AADT. This data is
mainly accessible through VD’s databases, however data on all central roads has actually been published
for public use, whereas data on municipality owned roads remain unavailable to the public as they may
hold political value locally.
Since the two former data sets were deemed infeasible for this study, Mastra is chosen as the data set
for this study. Mastra contains data on traﬃc counts from the past 20+ years, and is used for all VD’s
purposes, thus it is deemed to be the best currently available source of processed traﬃc data.
4.3.1
Mastra
In essence, the systematic collection, processing and storage of traﬃc registrations across Denmark are
centralized in Mastra for municipal and government use, as well as for research and public reporting
purposes10. The main contributors and users are individual municipalities and VD, thus the systems are
designed for their purposes. As a consequence, extracting data on all municipalities is a manual operation,
however the format is consistent and data is generally of high quality. In total, this resulted in 54,919
traﬃc counts; Figure 6 shows the resulting distribution of traﬃc counts across years, while Figure 7 shows
the traﬃc counts in the 98 municipalities over the past 10 years. Note that traﬃc counts on VD owned
roads are not included in Figure 7, as the scale is much larger than the remainder of municipalities.
Figure 6: Traﬃc counts recorded in Mastra per year
Figure 7 shows that several municipalities have only very few traﬃc counts, which in turn results in a
10https://www.vejdirektoratet.dk/side/viden-om-ydelser-mastra
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 7: Traﬃc counts recorded in Mastra per municipality, excluding VD with 6992 traﬃc counts
very small sample for this study and potential issues when ﬁtting the LMM model, if municipalities are
used as the grouping variable. The reason may be that most roads of interest are governed by VD in
these particular municipalities, in which case the traﬃc counts will be contained in the large volume of
VD traﬃc counts, totalling 6992 in the 10 year period. Once the traﬃc counts are matched to individual
road segments, they can be allocated to their respective municipalities.
On the positive side, most
municipalities have a reasonable number of traﬃc counts with a mean of 540 and only 10 municipalities
with less than 100 traﬃc counts. The potential issues of ﬁtting models with small sample sizes will be
discussed further in Section 5.
The main available variables for each data point are presented in
Variable
Description
Data owner
Municipality ID, or the Danish Road Directorate
Location
Short description of location, coordinates
Road name
Name of road
Counted days
Duration of counting
Traﬃc variables
Annual Average Daily Traﬃc (AADT). Weekday Daily Traﬃc, July Daily Traﬃc
Speed variables
Average speed, 15% fractile of speed, 85% fractile of speed, % of drivers above
the speed limit, % of drivers 10% above the speed limit, % of drivers 20% above
the speed limit, speed limit
Truck variables
Annual Average Daily Trucks, truck % of traﬃc
Distribution of traﬃc
Largest hour (most cars), Smallest hour (fewest cars), Morning peak hour, After-
noon peak hour
Table 1: Table of available variables in Mastra data set
In terms of pre-processing, the traﬃc counts are projected to 2019 numbers using projection factors
provided by Mastra in order to ensure comparability. Such projection factors could be estimated using
some form of regression on particular road segments with many observations across the ten year period,
however the factors provided by Mastra proved to be stratiﬁed across regions, road type and year, which
would be very time consuming to estimate with the accurately. Mastra’s own projection factors were
23
==PAGE:30==
thus used, like so:
AADTproj 2019 = AADTorig · PForig, 2019
(17)
where AADTorig refers to the original year’s estimated AADT, and PForig, 2019 denotes the projection
factor from the original year to year 2019, conditional on regional and road type indices in the data set.
As an example, one segment of a road called Artillerivej was calculated to have an AADT of 10,252 in
2010 based on a traﬃc count. With the relevant regional and road type indices, this yields a projection
factor of 1.02, ultimately projecting an AADT of 10,457 in 2019. The factors vary greatly, some are even
negative in case large changes to the regional road network have been made in the 10 year period - There
are of course uncertainties connected to making such projections, which will be elaborated in Section
4.3.3. Note that year 2020 remains unaltered, as no projection factors were provided between year 2019
and year 2020.
Finally, if multiple projected traﬃc counts exist for unique road segments, the median of these is used
for analysis. This is also a determining factor for the remainder of the study, as large deviations exist
in some of the road segments with several data points. The best measure of central tendency among
these data points was determined to be median, instead of simply taking the mean, or most recent
observation.
4.3.2
Interpolation of traﬃc counts
As mentioned above, the limiting factor that determines the sample size for all models is the number of
unique road segments with traﬃc counts - without a traﬃc count, it is not possible to estimate the risk
measure presented in Section 3, and the ideal scenario is to be able to analyze every single road segment
in the country. Thus, several approaches were investigated to estimate traﬃc counts to adjacent road
segments in the network in order to expand the sample size. The approaches that were investigated are
listed below:
• Simple interpolation between data points. If 10 cars are known to travel along one road segment
on average per day, and the following segment is unknown, whereas the third has an AADT of 8,
the unknwon segment is assumed to have an AADT of 9.
• Kriging interpolation using QGIS in Python using distances and variation between known data
points to interpolate traﬃc on road segments in between.
• Regression on AADT to predict traﬃc based on the available variables
• Network science methods including centrality measures and Page Rank to identify the most impor-
tant intersections, weighted by known traﬃc counts, to ﬁnally extrapolate to unknown areas.
The approaches that were implemented yielded varying results (much high error compared to a test
samples), all due to the same underlying problem; they all require highly accurate data to provide
accurate estimates, which claims another full study for this single topic. Furthermore, these estimates
are based on the assumptions of the underlying data, namely Mastra, which have already been processed
in terms of projection to another 2019 and median, which also adds a level of unquantiﬁable uncertainty.
Therefore, to maintain a certain level of validity in the study, it was determined that the sample size is
simply the number of unique road segments with traﬃc counts, without further interpolations.
24
==PAGE:31==
4.3.3
Uncertainty in Mastra data
It is however relevant to investigate the latent uncertainty in the traﬃc counts accessible via Mastra.
The Danish Road Directorate provided a guide in 2006 [30] which outlines the methodology for planning,
executing and post-processing traﬃc counts in Denmark, including estimates of uncertainty with a
95% conﬁdence interval for diﬀerent counting methods. The mentioned sources of uncertainty in AADT
estimates are; counting equipment, counting duration (number of hours and days) and timing (seasonality).
As an example, the uncertainty from timing was determined per week in a 1999 study [30], with the
results ranging from 4% in week 39 to 20% uncertainty in week 2. This means that a 1000 count in week
39 is found with 95% probability in the range 960 to 1040, whereas if the same count occurred in week 2,
the 95% conﬁdence interval would be 800 to 1200 - Quite a diﬀerence.
Furthermore, AADT is computed in several steps from the initial raw traﬃc counts, using factors to convert
high-resolution counts to annual averages, which are speciﬁed centrally in Mastra, see eq. 18.
AADTestimate = Raw count · DT · WWT · WT · AADTfactor
(18)
where DT denotes the factor to convert counts to daily traﬃc, WWT denotes the factor from DT to weekly
weekday daily traﬃc, WDT denotes the factor from WWT to weekly daily traﬃc, and ﬁnally AADTfactor
denotes the factor to convert to an estimate of AADT. This computation is prone to the following sources
of uncertainty; uncertainty from natural variations in traﬃc, counting errors, and uncertainty connected
to AADT computation factors [30]. In general, uncertainty in the AADT estimates are minimized by
prolonging the counting period, as well as daily counting hours to level out potential variation in the
observations. For example; by increasing the counted hours per day from 4 to 12, the uncertainty is
lowered from an estimated 11.6% to 4.7% [30]. Similarly, by extending the number of counting weeks
from 1 to 8, the uncertainty connected to weekly averages is lowered from 8% to 3% [30]. These numbers
are of particular interest to researchers, as it enables studies to selectively sample only long-period traﬃc
counts to lower the known level of uncertainty present in the AADT estimates. Furthermore, from eq.
18, it is evident that the eﬀects multiply, such that a short study period with only a few hours of eﬀective
traﬃc counting results in highly uncertain estimates of AADT.
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 8: Boxplot of counted days by year
In the exploration of traﬃc counts from Mastra to clarify the level of uncertainty, a systematic change
in the data was uncovered, see Figure 8. Namely, the number of counted days started conforming to
the same interval, namely between 7 and 12 days for the vast majority of traﬃc counts following the
directions proposed by VD in 2006 [?], after which a systematic change to the number of counted days
happened between year 2006 to 2007. Note that year 2020 does not conform to this, as municipality
generated traﬃc counts were not processed at the time of data extraction, thus the displayed boxplot of
2020 is highly inﬂuenced by the automated counting machines owned and operated by VD, which run
continuously. The discovery above supported the decision to only use traﬃc counts after year 2010, once
the new systematic collection of traﬃc counts was implemented. This limits the study to contain data
for the past 10 years, rather than 20.
4.3.4
Matching traﬃc to road segments
Matching traﬃc counts to OpenStreetMap’s representation of the road network followed the exact same
approach as accidents, explain in Section 4.2.2. In total, Mastra contained 54,919 traﬃc counts in the 10
year period, of which 99.82% were matched to OpenStreetMap road segments with the 15 meter tolerance.
The remaining 1% is assumed to concern road segments that have been refurbished in the past, and
now the coordinates do not match speciﬁc roads. The interesting aspect of matching traﬃc to the road
network is the resulting number of road segments, as it determines the sample size. The approach yielded
30,024 unique road segments across the country, visualized in Figue 9, which can be compared with
Figure 3 containing all available road segments in OpenStreetMap.
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 9: Plot of graph of remaining road segments created by OSMNx
In terms of coverage, all larger cities are covered, but some areas are prone to having close to zero
observations (Langeland, Djursland, north-west-Jutland, Læsø to name a few). This can be attributed to
the prioritization of resources in the local municipalities, as accurate traﬃc counts are both cumbersome
and costly to conduct. This also leads to a discussion of bias in the data, in that roads are not randomly
selected for traﬃc counts. Traﬃc counts are mostly conducted on roads of special interest, which can be
many. Some of which include political motivation, traﬃc control, or modelling road safety. In the case of
road safety, traﬃc counts are often conducted in so-called ’hotspots’ of accidents, in which authorities
have an interest in reducing the number of accidents, however in order to do so, they need to measure
the ﬂow of traﬃc. Unfortunately, there is no direct way to test this assumption of a bias with the current
data set, but it is worth noting that all road segments in the analysis have been selected by authorities
to be counted for some reason in the ﬁrst place. To gain an less biased distribution of traﬃc simply
according to travel (without a bias in terms of interest to VD or municipalities), a data set like Connected
Cars would have to be used.
Finally, Figure 10 shows the distribution of traﬃc counts per road type.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 10: Number of traﬃc counts per highway type
4.4
Derivation of dependent variable
The two components of the risk measure have been matched to the same representation of the road
network.
This section outlines considerations in combining the two, in order to calculate the ﬁnal
measure of risk.
4.4.1
Intersections
As mentioned in the literature review in Section 2, traditional road safety studies consider intersections
independent from road segments, as they display a vastly diﬀerent behaviour in terms of accident frequen-
cies. This was a major concern in this study, and the following approaches to countering this problem
were considered:
• Conduct separate study of intersections, by deriving variables from the data (intersection type
from number of adjacent edges, environmental characteristics, traﬃc, etc.) and estimating their risk
separately.
• Exclude accidents close to end-points of road segments to minimize inﬂuence of intersections
• Level inﬂuence of intersection accidents by distributing these according to traﬃc on adjacent road
segments
• Add variable to account for accidents around end-points of road segments, to capture eﬀects of
approaching dangerous intersections
• Leave intersections as inherent part of road network
Ultimately, the scope of the study did not allow for elaborate models accounting for intersection risk,
and with limited resources, the last option suﬃces for the current scope of the study. Ideally, a stronger
mitigation of the issue was desired, but time did not allow for separate modelling of intersections to
obtain a more accurate risk for these parts of the road network. Additionally, if the above-mentioned
approaches are not implemented well, it can introduce unwanted bias in the model when redistributing
28
==PAGE:35==
accidents. In conclusion, intersections are argued to be an inherent part of the network and thus remain
in the sample, despite producing outliers with high accident density on very small road segments.
4.4.2
Time of day stratiﬁcation
From insurance providers’ perspective, it is very relevant to investigate systematic diﬀerences in road
risk by time of day. The direct consequence of stratifying the current observations by time of day is
that it renders most traﬃc variables (e.g. proportion of trucks, average speed, or largest hour) unusable.
The reason being that these are observed as an average over the sampling duration, without factors that
display the diﬀerence between peak hours and non-peak hours. This trade-oﬀis deemed worth it, as
information regarding time of day is expected to provide more value to insurance providers, compared to
the number of trucks or average speed on a given road segment, as these variables are not immediately
available to the companies. Time of day can be directly matched to individual driving patterns, and
thus result in a more accurate exposure to an estimated risk. With that, the following method was used
to stratify traﬃc counts. Once again, this exercise introduces an unknown level of uncertainty in the
data.
Mastra provides the distribution of traﬃc per hour in the format shown in Table 2, making it possible to
calculate the relative share of traﬃc at any given hour. The distribution is visualized in Figure 11.
From-to
Mon
Tues-Thurs
Fri
Sat
Sun
00-01
0.003
0.003
0.004
0.014
0.017
01-02
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.010
0.012
02-03
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.007
0.009
03-04
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.006
0.007
04-05
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
0.006
05-06
0.016
0.016
0.015
0.007
0.007
06-07
0.049
0.048
0.045
0.013
0.011
07-08
0.098
0.094
0.089
0.022
0.017
08-09
0.081
0.077
0.073
0.039
0.029
09-10
0.054
0.051
0.050
0.063
0.052
10-11
0.050
0.049
0.051
0.080
0.068
11-12
0.051
0.050
0.057
0.088
0.079
12-13
0.054
0.053
0.064
0.088
0.086
13-14
0.059
0.059
0.073
0.083
0.087
14-15
0.075
0.076
0.088
0.078
0.086
15-16
0.100
0.098
0.096
0.074
0.083
16-17
0.097
0.095
0.079
0.070
0.079
17-18
0.065
0.067
0.061
0.066
0.071
18-19
0.044
0.047
0.044
0.049
0.056
19-20
0.031
0.033
0.029
0.035
0.045
20-21
0.024
0.027
0.022
0.030
0.037
21-22
0.020
0.023
0.019
0.027
0.028
22-23
0.014
0.016
0.017
0.025
0.018
23-24
0.007
0.008
0.014
0.021
0.010
DT factor
1.020
1.010
1.00
0.990
0.980
Table 2: Relative share of across days, per hour. Source: Mastra
Note that Figure 11 depicts the type of travel categorized as "residence-to-work" in 2019, which is most
suited for this particular study. The plot shows clear diﬀerences between the distribution of traﬃc in
weekdays and weekends. Weekdays have a bi-model tendency, whereas weekend traﬃc has a single peak
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 11: Distribution of relative share of daily traﬃc per day
in the middle of the day. From this plot, it is decided that the following ﬁve categories are made for
traﬃc:
Peak - Weekdays in the hours 07 to 08 and 14 to 16, a total of 5 hours
Between peak - Weekdays in the hours 09 to 13, a total of 5 hours
Outside peak - Weekdays in the hours 17 to 06, a total of 14 hours
Weekend peak - Weekend days in the hours 10 to 17, a total of 8 hours
Weekend outside peak - Weekend days in the hours 18 to 09, a total of 16 hours
This can be modelled by 4 indicator variables; peak, outside peak, between peaks, and a weekend indicator.
With these assumptions, the Annual Average Daily Traﬃc per time interval can be calculated using the
following formulas:
Estimating weekday daily traﬃc, WWDT, and weekend day daily traﬃc, WndDT, using the factor to
convert AADT to WWKT of 0.86, provided by Mastra.
WWDT = AADT
0.86
(19)
WndDT = 7 · AADT – 5 · WWKT
2
(20)
These are multiplied by the total relative share of daily traﬃc, for each of the time intervals mentioned
above. The conceptual calculation of weekdays is showed in eq. 21, which yields the ﬁnal estimated
traﬃc per time interval, simply referred to as Traﬃc
Traﬃci =
End hour
X
Start hour
Rhour · DT · WWDT
(21)
where R and DT refer to the relative shares of traﬃc per hour and daily traﬃc factor respectively from
Table 2. Traﬃc estimates for weekend days is similar with WndDT instead of WWDT. Ultimately, this
yields traﬃc counts per time interval, which is what was desired. Furthermore, the stratiﬁcation results
30
==PAGE:37==
in ﬁve times as many observations. The new number of observations is therefore 150,120 in total.
Next, accidents must be stratiﬁed in a similar manner. This is much simpler, as the time and date of
occurrence is provided in the data set. First, the raw accident counts per road segment are by the time
intervals outlined above, and simple counts are used to aggregate accidents. Similar to traﬃc, this yields
ﬁve data points from a single road segment, some of which are expected to have zero observed accidents
however. Because the number of accidents are aggregated over a 10 year period, all counts are divided
by 10 · 365 to obtain the average number of accidents per time interval, per day, see Eq. 22.
Average Accidentsi = Accidentsi
10 · 365
(22)
where subscript i denotes individual observations, i.e. for each road segment we have 5 observations - one
per time interval. This is a simpliﬁcation, as there may be other factors that have caused ﬂuctuations in
the number of accidents over the past 10 years, however it is not feasible to correct for this for all the
individual road segments.
At this point, the ﬁnal risk measure can be calculated, as per Eq. 23.
Riski = Average Accidentsi
Traﬃci
(23)
where i denotes individual observations. This will be used as the dependent variable in the modeling
section. Note that the numerator and denominator cover the same time periods, thus the division in
Eq. 23 yields a measure of risk of a single accident per car that travels on the road segment in question,
which is comparable across observations.
As a ﬁnal remark, a hypothetical example of how the dependent variable would be used is provided,
to illustrate the beneﬁts of including traﬃc as an exposure, rather than simply estimating accident
frequencies.
Figure 12: Illustrative example of how the dependent variable can be used to assess the overall risk
exposure of individual drivers’ driving patterns
Figure 12 depicts an individual’s trip, and the corresponding risks they have been exposed to (note, the
risks in Figure 12 are artiﬁcially high for the sake of providing a tangible example, and the example
disregards time of day and other variables for simplicity). Road segment 1 has a risk of 0.1, which
means that if someone pass this particular road segment 10 times, they are expected to have one accident
on average. If the entire trip is taken into consideration, the driver would be expected to experience
0.1+0.02+0.006+0.2+0.5 = 0.826 accidents on the trip, derived from the expected number of accidents
per vehicle travelling on these speciﬁc road segments.
In essence, it allows us to calculate the total risk an individual has been exposed to on a given trip, simply
by knowing the route. Ultimately, the average of all drivers that pass a given road segment is expected to
31
==PAGE:38==
converge towards the estimated risk, if the model is accurate. Thus, in the ideal scenario where all road
segments in the country are modelled, insurance providers can derive all drivers’ individual cumulative
risk during some period from their driving history. Finally, the full risk proﬁle of clients is computed by
factoring in the individual driving behavior.
The average risk across all road segments with risk > 0 is 1.253691e-06, which is equivalent to one accident
per
1
1.253691e–06 = 797, 644 cars travelling on a road segment.
In summary of the sections above, the data contains; 150,120 observations of 30,024 unique road segments.
19.5% of the observations have observed accidents, thus 85.5% have a risk of 0. The observed road
segments constitute 16.7% of the total initial length and contain 27.2% of the total accidents in the past
10 years.
4.5
Additional variables
In addition to all the considerations regarding accident and traﬃc data mentioned above, this section
will brieﬂy outline other variables of high relevance, and ﬁnally summarize all available variables in a
table.
4.5.1
Speed limit
As previously mentioned, certain values were inherently present in the OpenStreetMap data. One of these
were the speed limit for each road segment, however this particular value had approximately 27% missing
values. The traﬃc counts contained information regarding speed limit on the measured road segments, to
be used as a validity check of the OpenStreetMap data and ﬁll some of the missing values. The remaining
missing values were imputed. The imputation method was improvised, but systematic.
Speed limit
motorway
motorway_link
primary
residential
secondary
tertiary
trunk
unclassiﬁed
30
1,648
917
4,184
2,509
1,057
50
3,841
4,702
8,910
1,090
7,118
4,019
9,095
1,198
60
22,701
8,604
10,938
1,886
10,141
6,160
7,426
2,449
70
10,660
9,634
11,948
850
12,926
7,667
11,013
3,978
80
29,039
5,853
6,670
315
5,098
1,901
9,780
279
90
38,476
4,455
6,472
9,126
16,312
9,679
110
46,224
4,276
20,670
25,678
19,740
27,720
12,447
63,965
130
29,426
2,311
7,718
17,213
26,068
37,829
Table 3: Average AADT by road types and speed limit
Table 24 shows a pivot table with road types as columns, speed limits as rows and average AADT per road
segment as values. This was used to systematically impute speed limits of road segments by identifying
the relevant column based on road type, and then use eq. 24. Note how several road types are used for
other purposes than what they describe, for example ’primary’ has cases of motorway speeds. This will
typically be the result stretches of primary roads, which lead to motorways - similarly motorways can
have low speed limits in the beginning and end. It is also interesting to note, without considering the
number observations in either category, that road segments with a speed limit of 130 generally has less
traﬃc than those with a speed limit of 110.
MIN
 |Row value – AADT|

(24)
for each of the row elements to identify the row with the minimum absolute diﬀerence between AADT of
32
==PAGE:39==
the road segment in question and the row value. This ensured that 99.99% of observations had a speed
limit.
4.5.2
Lanes
Similar to speed limit, OpenStreetMap contains information regarding number of lanes, however >80%
are missing. Several methods were investigated, as well as other data sources for this information, but
it was unfortunately not possible to ﬁnd a feasible method of estimating the number of lanes per road,
therefore this variable was excluded completely from the analysis.
4.5.3
Curvature
Road curvature is often considered for road safety studies, and has previously been found to increase the
likelihood and decrease the likelihood of accidents [18]. The inﬂuence of road curvature on road safety
is complex to quantify, therefore several methods have been previously deployed to estimate the eﬀect.
One example is how sharp a turn is, as very acute road bends have been found to have lower risk of
accidents [18], presumably due to the lower speed, and alertness of drivers. Similarly, [27] found road
curvature in general to be negatively associated with accident severity. Several measures of curvature
were considered for this study, which are all outlined below.
Bend density - Inspired by [18] and [27], bend density in this study is deﬁned as
BDi = SPi
Li
(25)
where SPi refers to the minimum number of shape points (e.g. vertices) to represent the shape of a road
segment, i, and Li is the length of the road segment. As previously mentioned, the graph representing
the road network has been simpliﬁed such that edges contain the minimum number of vertices, which
makes Eq. 25 consistent and comparable across edges. This is a very simple measure of curvature, and
is sought to represent the general level of curvature of road segments
Sinuosity - A measure originating from geographical terminology to describe meandering of rivers11
measured as the ratio of river length to valley length. In road safety, sinuosity is the ratio of road segment
length to aerial distance between start and end point, like so
Sinuosityi =
Li
ADi
(26)
where ADi refers to the aerial distance between start and end points. If a road deviates signiﬁcantly
from a straight line, sinuosity will be high, whereas a straight line will simply yield 1.
Inspiration
from [18,34].
Figure 13 illustrates sinuosity in an area of west-Zealand. Relatively straight road segments appear light
blue, whereas segments with curves appear orange, and ﬁnally segments that deviate signiﬁcantly from a
straight path between start and end appear red.
Sharpness - Finally, a measure of sharpness of turns was sought, which could be achieved in multiple
ways. For example by estimating a curvature change rate, or summing the degrees of turns along road
11www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803100508490
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 13: Illustrative example of sinuosity in west-Zealand
segments. The last option was investigated. Github user adamfranco provides a library to calculate
curvature of OpenStreetMap road segments12, which was initially developed to help motorcycle and
driving enthusiasts ﬁnd twisty roads, see note13. It calculates the spherical arc length of all adjacent
triples of vertices along the length of road segments. The narrower circles any three points form, the
more sharp the curve is.
4.5.4
Landstraﬁkmodellen
The remaining explanatory variables to be used in the models are included to account for environmental
and socioeconomic factors, such as land use, income levels, car ownership, etc.
In terms of land use, the Danish Business Authority has made all local building regulations as well as zonal
distinctions (urban, rural and vacation areas) public through Plandata14. The data is accessible online,
or WFS connections for mass extraction using GIS software. The resulting data are binary variables to
indicate land use in terms of urban, rural, and vacation areas.
With regards to socioeconomic factors, several sources were identiﬁed. First of all, Statistics Denmark
are reliable in providing high quality data, however the publicly available data sets are highly aggregated
(municipal level). It is of course desired to have a higher spatial resolution to minimize unobserved local
eﬀects. Landstraﬁkmodellen, LTM, was found to be an alternative, in which certain characteristics are
available at a higher spatial resolution, namely 907 zones across the country. LTM is a large model of
the Danish road network used in planning infrastructure, and it is worth mentioning that the base of the
model is year 2010. The following variables were extracted from the large LTM model’s input variables:
12github.com/adamfranco/curvature
13roadcurvature.com/
14planinfo.erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/plandatadk
34
==PAGE:41==
car ownership, income, population numbers, unemployment, and GDP.
Both of the sources mentioned above were matched to the representation of the road network using
map matching, by using polygons to represent zones, and adding the attributes to all intersecting road
segments.
4.6
Data summarized
The resulting explanatory variables are presented in Table 4.
Table 4: Table of explanatory variables available to the study
35
==PAGE:42==
5
Modeling
The models presented in Section 3 will be implemented on the data presented in Section 4 with the
purpose of ﬁnding the best ﬁtting model. First, a baseline will be made using linear regression, followed
by the linear mixed model with random intercept and then ﬁnally the Heckman two-step model. The
results of all three models will be presented and analyzed with emphasis on robustness of parameter
estimates and interpretation of coeﬃcients. All modelling has been done using the R packages stats for
linear regression, lme4 for the linear mixed model and sampleSelection for the Heckman selection model.
The dependent variable was presented in Section 4.4.
5.1
Baseline - Linear regression
This section will construct the base model, following the approach outlined in Section 3 by testing MLR
3-5, and ﬁnding a parsimonious model using stepwise regression.
First, the problem of zero inﬂation will be addressed. The dependent variable contains 80% zeros, due
to no accidents having taken place in the sample period. All of these zero-variables will not be included
in the sample for the base model Thus, the base linear regression is ﬁtted on the remaining 29,284
observations. Furthermore, the dependent variable is log-transformed due to the large variation in risk,
resulting in the distribution illustrated in Figure 14.
Figure 14: Distribution of the log-transformed dependent variable - Log(Risk)
The remaining 80% zero-observations will be used for the Heckman selection model, see Section 5.3.
First, the Gauss-Markov assumptions are presented.
5.1.1
Testing MLR 3 - No perfect collinearity
MLR 1 and MLR 2 have been assumed to hold, as argued for in Section 3. MLR 3 is tested by calculating
the variance inﬂation factor (VIF). VIF is the factor by which the variance of a coeﬃcient β of a variable
x is higher from not being uncorrelated with other independent variables [36], calculated by Eq. 27.
VIFj =
1
1 + R2
j
(27)
36
==PAGE:43==
for coeﬃcient j, where R2
j is the explained variance from regressing the variable in question on all other
explanatory variables [36]. Typically high VIF factors show up pairwise inﬂated when two variables are
highly correlated, because they explain the same variance in the data. In that case, at least one of the
variables should be omitted or transformed. In order to test this, a multiple linear regression is estimated
on all the explanatory variables from Table 4, and the VIF factor is calculated for all coeﬃcients. Note,
Age: Population below 30 and Income: Below 400k are removed to avoid perfect multicollinearity. For the
same reason, the ﬁrst categorical value for Road type, Land use, and Time of day are omitted, resulting
a base case of Residential roads in Urban areas Outside peak traﬃc.
Variable name
VIF
Oneway
2.32
Length
2.10
Speed limit
4.98
Road type: Motorway
5.31
Road type: Motorway link
2.46
Road type: Primary
2.02
Road type: Secondary
2.53
Road type: Tertiary
3.01
Road type: Trunk
1.25
Road type: Unclassiﬁed
1.43
GDP per pop
1.06
Curve density
1.29
Sinuosity
1.20
Sharpness
1.21
Land use: Rural
2.09
Land use: Vacation
1.03
GDP
1.69
Population
14.37
Pop density
3.92
Cars
12.74
Cars per pop
4.13
Pop 30 to 64
1.32
Pop above 64
3.05
Income above 400k
2.74
Employment
6.69
Num. adresses
3.74
Bed capacity
1.30
Time of day: Peak traﬃc
1.31
Time of day: Btw peak traﬃc
1.52
Weekend
1.19
Table 5: VIF values for the full multiple linear regression
Typically, a threshold is set of either 5 or 10 for VIF to identify variables of interest, and evidently,
37
==PAGE:44==
Population and Cars have higher VIF scores than any other variables at 14.37 and 12.74 respectively.
These two variables have a correlation of 0.87, which can be considered very high. In this case, it was
decided to transform both variables. It was decided to use population as the variable for transforming
other area descriptors, and the following variables were created; cars per capita and GDP per capita.
Similarly, unemployment has a high VIF score, and by looking at the current deﬁnition, it is evident
that it captures all individuals outside the labour market, including retired people and unemployed
students. These groups could be considered highly correlated with the variables describing population
age. Therefore, unemployment is changed to only constitute the percentage share of the population
outside the labor market, who would otherwise be expected to work. Finally, certain road types display
high VIF scores around 5, which is assumed to be due to high correlation between individual road types
and certain speed limits. The simple solution would be to exclude the speed limit, however that may not
be necessary, if the variables are not correlated as a whole. This can be tested by performing Pearson’s
Chi-squared test on road type and speed limit with 49 degrees of freedom, yielding a χ2 test statistic of
199,701 with p–value < 2.2e–16, thus the null of non-independence between the variables is rejected, and
it is concluded that the two variables can be considered independent. Therefore, both variables remain.
A new multiple linear regression model is created with the changes above, and VIF scores are calculated.
A new problem has appeared, as the new unemployment and income above 400k are highly correlated
at -0.91. Therefore, it was decided to remove income above 400k, and only include unemployment for
further analysis.
Despite the low correlation among variables, additional variables are also log-transformed due to the large
range in these particular variables. That means that length, curve density, sinuosity, GDP per capita,
and cars per capita are log-transformed.
5.1.2
Testing MLR 4 - Zero conditional mean
MLR 4 assumes zero conditional mean of the error term, which can simply be tested by taking the mean
of the residuals from estimating the multiple linear regression. The resulting mean is 3.947976e-17, which
is very close to zero, thus MLR 4 is assumed to hold.
5.1.3
Testing MLR 5 - Homoskedasticity
MLR 5 assumes homoskedasticity for OLS to be BLUE. According to Wooldridge 2019 [36], if MLR
5 fails, the usual t and F test statistics do not retain their distributions, and they are thus not valid
for hypotheses testing under the Gauss-Markov assumptions in the presence of heteroskedasticity. In
that case, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors (or simply robust standard errors) and test statistics
should be used.
Typically, it is possible to visually assess the variance of residuals by plotting residuals versus all of
the explanatory variables individually. This will give an indication of whether the residuals display
signs of heteroskedasticity (i.e. if they form a relationship with the explanatory variable in question,
or some unobserved factor), however there are many explanatory variables in this case, thus we resort
to the Breusch-Pagan test for heteroskedasticity instead. The null hypothesis of the Breusch-Pagan
test is homoskedasticity, thus if the p-value is suﬃciently small, we reject the null, and conclude that
MLR 5 does not hold, because our model suﬀers from heteroskedasticity. As mentioned, according to
Wooldridge, a corrective measure in the case of heteroskedasticity is to use robust standard errors and
test statistics [36].
38
==PAGE:45==
The Breusch-Pagan test results in a very low p-value (2.2e-16), which shows that the data displays
heteroskedasticity. Therefore, robust standard errors and test statistics will be used for the remainder of
the thesis, as normal standard errors will not be reliable for inferences.
5.1.4
Baseline results
With that, the model to be used as a baseline can be ﬁtted using stepwise regression, as outlined in
Section 3. The method of choice is stepAIC in the R package called MASS, using the default settings
with regards to penalties of adding predictors and calculate AIC. Table 6 below shows the raw model
without robust standard errors, the base model with robust standard errors, and the stepwise regression
results.
Dependent variable: log(Risk)
OLS
Robust OLS
Stepwise regression
Intercept
–14.102∗∗∗(0.242)
–14.102∗∗∗(0.228)
–14.102∗∗∗(0.228)
Oneway
–0.559∗∗∗(0.021)
–0.559∗∗∗(0.022)
–0.559∗∗∗(0.022)
log(Length)
0.488∗∗∗(0.013)
0.488∗∗∗(0.013)
0.488∗∗∗(0.013)
Speed limit
–0.002∗∗∗(0.001)
–0.002∗∗∗(0.001)
–0.002∗∗∗(0.001)
Road type: Motorway
–2.998∗∗∗(0.045)
–2.998∗∗∗(0.048)
–2.998∗∗∗(0.048)
Road type: Motorway link
–1.135∗∗∗(0.049)
–1.135∗∗∗(0.050)
–1.135∗∗∗(0.050)
Road type: Primary
–1.988∗∗∗(0.029)
–1.988∗∗∗(0.038)
–1.988∗∗∗(0.038)
Road type: Secondary
–2.117∗∗∗(0.025)
–2.117∗∗∗(0.024)
–2.117∗∗∗(0.024)
Road type: Tertiary
–1.391∗∗∗(0.021)
–1.391∗∗∗(0.021)
–1.391∗∗∗(0.021)
Road type: Trunk
–2.612∗∗∗(0.059)
–2.612∗∗∗(0.061)
–2.612∗∗∗(0.061)
Road type: Unclassiﬁed
–0.346∗∗∗(0.033)
–0.346∗∗∗(0.033)
–0.346∗∗∗(0.033)
log(Curve density)
0.346∗∗∗(0.016)
0.346∗∗∗(0.016)
0.346∗∗∗(0.016)
log(Sinuosity)
0.266∗∗∗(0.055)
0.266∗∗∗(0.060)
0.266∗∗∗(0.060)
Sharpness
–0.331∗∗∗(0.020)
–0.331∗∗∗(0.021)
–0.331∗∗∗(0.021)
Land use: Rural
0.260∗∗∗(0.018)
0.260∗∗∗(0.017)
0.260∗∗∗(0.017)
Land use: Vacation
0.309∗∗∗(0.112)
0.309∗∗∗(0.087)
0.309∗∗∗(0.087)
log(GDP per capita)
–0.087∗∗∗(0.008)
–0.087∗∗∗(0.008)
–0.087∗∗∗(0.008)
log(Pop density)
–0.131∗∗∗(0.006)
–0.131∗∗∗(0.006)
–0.131∗∗∗(0.006)
log(Cars per capita)
–0.090∗∗∗(0.031)
–0.090∗∗∗(0.032)
–0.090∗∗∗(0.032)
Pop 30 to 64
1.061∗∗∗(0.378)
1.061∗∗∗(0.358)
1.061∗∗∗(0.358)
Pop above 64
2.478∗∗∗(0.296)
2.478∗∗∗(0.294)
2.478∗∗∗(0.294)
Unemployment
1.528∗∗∗(0.171)
1.528∗∗∗(0.172)
1.528∗∗∗(0.172)
Num. adresses
–0.00002∗∗∗(0.00001)
–0.00002∗∗∗(0.00001)
–0.00002∗∗∗(0.00001)
Bed capacity
0.00004∗∗∗(0.00001)
0.00004∗∗∗(0.00001)
0.00004∗∗∗(0.00001)
Time of day: Peak traﬃc
–0.400∗∗∗(0.014)
–0.400∗∗∗(0.014)
–0.400∗∗∗(0.014)
Time of day: Btw peak traﬃc
0.137∗∗∗(0.017)
0.137∗∗∗(0.017)
0.137∗∗∗(0.017)
Weekend
0.216∗∗∗(0.014)
0.216∗∗∗(0.014)
0.216∗∗∗(0.014)
Observations
29,361
29,361
29,361
Adjusted R2
0.495
0.495
0.495
F Statistic (df = 26; 29237)
1,103.586∗∗∗
1,103.586∗∗∗
1,103.586∗∗∗
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 6: Table of multiple linear regression models
Interestingly, all variables are signiﬁcant at the 1% conﬁdence level in all models.Wooldridge 2019 argues
that in research, often times only few variables are of interest, and the remainder of variables are used
to check the robustness of the coeﬃcients on those variables. He further argues that if a variable is
statistically signiﬁcant in only few of the estimated models, it is likely that the variable does not have an
eﬀect in the population [36]. Similarly, if we fail to account for unobserved heterogeneity, the coeﬃcients
may not provide good estimates of the population parameters.
There are a few things to comment on in Table 6. First of all, the robust OLS has slightly higher standard
errors compared to the original OLS - This is to be expected, however the robust t-statistics gives the same
39
==PAGE:46==
result for signiﬁcant variables as without robust standard errors. All variables are statistically signiﬁcant
at a 1% conﬁdence level. Because all variables are statistically signiﬁcant, the stepwise regression is
unable to improve the model, and evidently the robust MLR and the stepwise regression are identical in
terms of both coeﬃcients and standard errors. This can also partly be credited to the transformation of
variables described in the previous subsections, which sought to ensure that the MLR assumptions hold.
The fact that the model cannot be made smaller because all the variables are signiﬁcant is a positive
thing though, as it means that all variables contributes to estimating road risk. It will be interesting to
test the robustness of these coeﬃcients by estimating the remaining models.
Next, the coeﬃcients of each explanatory variable will be investigated. Notice that the dependent variable
is log(Risk)) for all three models, some of the independent variables are also log-transformed, while others
are not. This inﬂuences the interpretation of the coeﬃcients on the parameters. Table 7 will be used in
the interpretation of the diﬀerent functional forms.
Model
Dependent variable
Independent variable
Interpretation of β1
Level-level
y
x
Δy = β1Δx
Level-log
y
log(x)
Δy =

β1
100

%Δx
Log-level
log(y)
x
%Δy = (100β1) Δx
Log-log
log(y)
log(x)
%Δy = β1%Δx
Table 7: Functional forms of models including log transformation. Source: Wooldridge, 2019 [36]
Each of the coeﬃcients are listed and commented on below. The section is rather long, however it contains
all of the interesting ﬁndings of the initial model. It is worth reiterating the point made in Section 3, that
the model estimates the eﬀect of changing a variable assuming ceteris paribus, i.e. the eﬀect of changing
one variable does not change any other variable.
Intercept - The intercept in this case constitutes the hypothetical risk of a residential street in an
urban area outside peak traﬃc - The base scenario of the categorical values, when all other variables
are zero. Evidently, the risk in this scenario very small at approximately e–14.102 = 7.50895e–7 accidents
per vehicles. To put that into perspective, the average residential road, in an urban area, outside peak
traﬃc in the sample see an average of 29.56 cars per hour. The time interval referred to as Outside peak
traﬃc is 15 hours of the day, thus the hypothetical annual expected number of accidents on such a road
segment is e–14.102 · 29.56 · 15 · 365 = 0.122 accidents. However, this number assumes all other variables
are zero, therefore it is only a hypothetical number (e.g. the road length and speed limit will never be
zero).
Oneway - has an estimated coeﬃcient of –0.559, and the change in risk from travelling on oneway streets
is thus e–0.559 = 0.57. I.e. we expect (1–0.57)·100 = 43% less risk on oneway roads. Note that the model
is subject to the data, and for OpenStreetMap, any road with median barriers in the middle of the road
(incl. motorways and dual carriageways) are considered oneway roads. By independently controlling for
road types in the model, the oneway variable actually turns out to be a measure of the eﬀect of having
median barriers. The eﬀect of such barriers has been studied in research from both an accident frequency
and severity point of view, which will not be elaborated in this study, but a review of the research can
be found in Mannering and Bhat, 2014 [23]. Intuitively, median barriers should decrease the inﬂuence
of accidents on one side of the road to the other. Unfortunately, the oneway variable cannot directly be
interpreted as only including this eﬀect, but it is interesting to ﬁnd it signiﬁcant at the 1% signiﬁcance
40
==PAGE:47==
level.
Length - is interesting. First of all, this is an example of the log-log interaction, which means that the
coeﬃcient β estimates the elasticity of the dependent variable with respect to log(Length), implying that
a 1% increase in road segment length results in a 0.488% increase in risk. The intuitive interpretation is
slightly tricky, and will be presented through an example. If a 1000m stretch of road is considered with
100 cars travelling along the segment per hour, the coeﬃcient of log(Length) dictates that a 100% increase
in the length results in 48.8% increase in risk, all else equal. That means the density of traﬃc decreases
to 50% of the original density of traﬃc. I.e. length is a measure of traﬃc density, and evidently denser
traﬃc results in lower risk. The model cannot explain the reason for this behaviour, but a speculation
is that drivers are more alert when traﬃc is dense. Finally, it is worth noting that length may capture
other eﬀects; one example is that rural segments inherently tend to be longer than urban segments. This
may also be reﬂected in the length variable, despite controlling for land use independently.
Speed limit - has a coeﬃcient of just –0.002, which is signiﬁcant at the 1% level. Speed limit falls into
discrete bins (i.e. 30, 40, 50, etc. kilometers per hour), but is modelled as a continuous variable. Once
again, by considering two identical road segments, but one has a speed limit of 50, while the other has
a speed limit of 80, the higher speed limit yields a risk 100 · –0.002 · (80 – 50) = –6% lower than the
road segment with a speed limit of 50. Note that this is an approximation, which is consistent for small
changes in speed, and the actual number is (e–0.002∗(80–50) – 1) · 100 = –5.8%. In essence, higher speed
limits are found to result in lower risk, per car. It would be interesting to see what inﬂuence the actual
speed and deviance from the speed limit has on road risk. Data for the actual speed limit, and thus
the deviation from the legal speed limit, is available, but as mentioned, they were dropped in the data
processing because of the need to stratify daily traﬃc into speciﬁc time intervals.
Road type - Road type is a group of dummy variables, indicating which road type a given road segment is
categorized as, with residential as the base road type. Evidently, all road types have negative coeﬃcients,
and are thus expected to have lower risk, relative to residential roads. Motorways and trunk roads (the
Danish motortraﬁkvej) are found to only have e–2.998 · 100 = 4.99% and e–2.612 · 100 = 7.33% of the risk
of residential roads. This is interesting, especially because the model includes various control variables
(e.g. speed limit, length, and oneway), so road type represents some inherent features in each of the unique
types of road. That is, motorways and trunk roads are less risky than residential streets due to some
unspeciﬁed (unobserved) factor. This could be the inherent safety features of these types of roads, the
way individuals typically behave/drive on such roads, or something else. In absolute terms, motorways
have more accidents compared to residential roads in the raw data, however at times, the traﬃc is also
towards 1000 times higher on motorways, which explains the lower expected risk. Regardless, all road
types investigated has a signiﬁcantly lower risk than residential roads, and it is most easily distinguished
for motorways and trunk. The remaining road types are not clearly identiﬁed for the Danish road grid,
as discussed in Section 4.1.1, but constitute some form of larger roads throughout the country.
Measures of curvature - Each of the three measures of curvature were found statistically signiﬁcant
at the 1% signiﬁcance level. The signs do however vary - Interestingly, these reject the initial hypothesis
that curved roads reduce the overall risk of accidents by yielding positive coeﬃcients. The ﬁndings agree
with [18] road with acute turns (high sharpness), which reduces the risk of accidents. That is, curve
density and sinuosity both have positive coeﬃcients, whereas sharpness has a negative coeﬃcient. That
means, that if a road in general deviates a lot from a straight line, measured by sinuosity, the expected
risk increases. However, if two roads with identical sinuosity curve in diﬀerent manners; one with sharp
41
==PAGE:48==
turns, the other with long, smooth bends, the one with sharp turns is expected to have a lower risk.
Intuitively, this can be defended by the assumption that smooth bends might require less conscious eﬀort
while driving, whereas sharp turns keep drivers alert, in alignment with ﬁndings in London [27].
Land use - The three zones considered as land use vary with respect to risk, however in this case, urban
proves to be the zone with the lowest risk. Interestingly, roads in rural areas have 1 – e0.26 · 100 = 29.7%
higher risk than urban areas, while vacation areas experience 1 – e0.309 · 100 = 36% higher risk than urban
areas. One thing to note is that the model does not correct for seasonality, thus the estimated eﬀect of
vacation is an average throughout the year, and this is an issue as traﬃc is known to vary signiﬁcantly
in vacation areas. Furthermore, many motorways often span across rural areas, but are categorized as
urban as both the start- and end-points are located in urban areas. Despite the possible data issues it
is an interesting ﬁnding that urban roads has signiﬁcantly lower risk compared to other types of land
use.
Socioeconomic variables - All of the socioeconomic variables are diﬃcult to interpret individually, as
they are unique for their areas (i.e. zones or municipalities), therefore the ceteris paribus assumption
is strained, which will be addressed in the linear mixed model in Section 5.2. For now, the variables
are brieﬂy discussed individually. GDP per capita was included as a measure of the productivity in a
given area, and is expected to be highly inﬂuenced by how many large companies are found in the area.
With an elasticity of –0.087, we expect a decrease of 0.087% for each 1% in GDP per capita for a given
area. This is diﬃcult to test, as no areas are identical, however the variable indicates that areas with
higher productivity levels per inhabitant experience lower risk. With regards to population density, Table
6 shows that higher population density leads to lower road risk, regardless of car ownership. Similarly,
higher car ownership in an area, measured by cars per capita, results in lower overall risk. If these three
were to be summarized, it seems that the denser the activity level is in a given area, the lower the road
risk is. In areas with higher unemployment, the risk of road segments is expected to be higher, compared
to areas with lower unemployment rates, the range of unemployment is however rather small, so the actual
diﬀerence in risk on two identical road segments in an area with the highest unemployment versus an
area with the lowest unemployment rate is only 1 – e1.528·(0.377–0.1477) · 100 = 41.95%, as unemployment
is measured in percent share of the total population. It would be interesting to investigate the cause of
higher risk in areas with higher unemployment rates.
Population age - The coeﬃcients of population age displayed in Table 6 are relative to the share of
population below 30. Thus, from this baseline model, it is evident that road risk increases with population
age in a given area. In fact, for each percent increase in the share of the population above 64, the road
risk increases by 100 · 2.478 · 0.01 = 2.478%. Traditionally, young male drivers are penalized in insurance
premiums, however this model shows, that areas with a large share of young people in their population
experience lower risk on the roads. It is not possible to derive any further conclusions from this particular
model, however it could be interesting to analyse the relationship between accident frequency among
individuals, across age groups and for each of the sexes to actually test whether the insurers approach to
pricing premiums is justiﬁed or not.
Number of addresses and bed capacity - These variables are simply characteristics of the zone in
question, as additional measures of how they are populated by both residents and externals (e.g. tourists,
business people, etc.), and will not be interpreted individually.
Time of day and weekend - As previously mentioned, time of day is of particular interest to insurance
42
==PAGE:49==
providers, as it can be directly derived from the driving history of individual clients. The base scenario
is outside peak traﬃc, i.e. before the morning peak hours, and after the afternoon peak hours, thus the
two estimated coeﬃcients representing peak traﬃc and between peak traﬃc are relative to this. With a
coeﬃcient of –0.4, driving in peak traﬃc exposes drivers to (e–0.4 –1)·100 = –32.97% less risk compared to
driving on the same road outside peak traﬃc. In contrast, driving between peak hours exposes drivers to
(e0.137 – 1) · 100 = 14.68% more risk, relative to drivingoutside peak traﬃc. Finally, driving on Saturdays
and Sundays is (e0.216 –1)·100 = 24.11% more risky compared to driving during the week. These are very
interesting ﬁndings, as they are all highly statistically signiﬁcant. It shows that if one client drives the
exact same route to and from work every single day during peak traﬃc, they are exposed to signiﬁcantly
less risk compared to someone who takes the exact same journey for a night shift.
5.2
Linear mixed model
The next type of model to be estimated is the linear mixed model (LMM). The goal of the thesis is to
estimate consistent parameters for road risk throughout the country, and the estimates parameters in the
baseline may be prone to unobserved heterogeneity. As previously mentioned, many of the explanatory
variables of interest are ﬁxed over observations (and time), so a ﬁxed eﬀects model is not desirable, as
they would be dropped. Therefore, a random intercept model is considered. With regards to the level of
grouping, the obvious choices are LTM zonal level (907 levels), municipalities (98 levels), or regions (5
levels). Harrison et al. argues that the estimates of ai, can be imprecise if there are few levels [15], thus
regional level is not preferred. The LTM zones have 907 levels, however many of these have zero or very
few observations, which will result collinearity issues. Therefore, municipalities as groups was found to
be the best alternative. By considering random intercept, we expect that road risk within municipalities
may be correlated due to unobserved factors, for example infrastructure, public spend on infrastructure,
standards for driving schools, or something completely diﬀerent. There may even be diﬀerences in the
mentality of inhabitants of diﬀerent municipalities, e.g. some may be more rushed, causing more accidents,
or be inﬂuenced by some other unobserved population feature inﬂuencing road risk. All of this can cause
roads to be more homogeneous within municipalities, compared to between municipalities [29], i.e. we
expect road segments to be non-independent of their respective municipalities.
This can be controlled by constraining observations to have the same intercept in each municipality,
to estimate the among-municipality variance. By doing so, it is also possible to test whether road risk
varies signiﬁcantly across municipalities, however if we want to test whether speciﬁc municipalities are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other, they would have to be included as dummy variables in the model.
Introducing random intercepts allows for the all else equal assumption to hold for all remaining variables.
As mentioned, groups should generally not be too small, and balanced in size. If this is not the case, it
is worth manually correcting, otherwise models may fail to ﬁt due to perfect collinearity. As per Figure
7, certain municipalities are known to have very few observations. These are removed from the data
set, such that only municipalities with more than 75 observations remain. 3 municipalities are removed,
namely Struer, Langeland, and Norddjurs. This obviously changes to the sample compared to the baseline,
and it is likely outliers in terms of for example unemployment that are removed, therefore the sample
will also be adjusted for the baseline before comparing the ﬁnal models. The model is ﬁtted under the
assumptions mentioned in Section 3.4, and summarized in Table 8.
Note that the explanatory variables assumed to be correlated with the error term are removed from the
regression, as per the assumption of random eﬀects, see Section 3.4 - These are all the level 2 variables,
43
==PAGE:50==
i.e. associated with municipalities.
Dependent variable: log(Risk)
Fixed eﬀects
Random intercept
Intercept
–15.090∗∗∗(0.045)
–14.802∗∗∗(0.055)
Oneway
–0.725∗∗∗(0.021)
–0.580∗∗∗(0.021)
log(Length)
0.550∗∗∗(0.014)
0.527∗∗∗(0.013)
Speed limit
0.0001 (0.001)
–0.001∗∗(0.001)
Road type: Motorway
–3.032∗∗∗(0.046)
–2.993∗∗∗(0.046)
Road type: Motorway link
–1.128∗∗∗(0.050)
–1.110∗∗∗(0.049)
Road type: Primary
–1.870∗∗∗(0.030)
–1.963∗∗∗(0.030)
Road type: Secondary
–2.015∗∗∗(0.025)
–2.076∗∗∗(0.025)
Road type: Tertiary
–1.341∗∗∗(0.021)
–1.365∗∗∗(0.021)
Road type: Trunk
–2.627∗∗∗(0.061)
–2.579∗∗∗(0.060)
Road type: Unclassiﬁed
–0.264∗∗∗(0.034)
–0.303∗∗∗(0.033)
log(Curve density)
0.355∗∗∗(0.016)
0.369∗∗∗(0.016)
log(Sinuosity)
0.231∗∗∗(0.056)
0.253∗∗∗(0.055)
Sharpness
–0.370∗∗∗(0.020)
–0.349∗∗∗(0.020)
Land use: Rural
0.472∗∗∗(0.017)
0.430∗∗∗(0.017)
Land use: Vacation
0.695∗∗∗(0.114)
0.581∗∗∗(0.112)
Time of day: Peak traﬃc
–0.398∗∗∗(0.014)
–0.394∗∗∗(0.014)
Time of day: Btw peak traﬃc
0.147∗∗∗(0.017)
0.148∗∗∗(0.017)
Weekend
0.216∗∗∗(0.014)
0.221∗∗∗(0.014)
Observations
29,264
29,264
Log Likelihood
-42,399.29
-41,779.86
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 8: Table of OLS regression on remaining variables, compared to the linear mixed eﬀects model
with random intercept
A log-likelihood ratio test has to be run to test the signiﬁcance of the eﬀect of random intercepts for
municipalities [35], i.e. whether the variance of the added error term, ui is signiﬁcant. To do so, the
exact same model is estimated without random intercept, referred to as the ﬁxed eﬀects model in Table 8,
estimated by maximum likelihood. The null hypothesis is that σ2a = 0, in which case adding the random
intercept ai to the model does not make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
The likelihood ratio statistic is simply twice the diﬀerence in log likelihoods, as per Eq. 28 [36].
2 ·

log(Likelihood)Intercept model – log(Likelihood)Base model

(28)
This test statistic is compared to the χ2
1 critical value, subscript 1 refers to one degree of freedom,
as one additional eﬀect is added in this case.
The likelihood ratio statistic is calculated to be 2 ·
(–41, 779.86 – (–42, 399.29)) = 1, 238.86, which is much larger than the critical value at the 5% level
of 3.84. As 1, 238.86 >> 3.84, the null is rejected, and we ﬁnd that road segments vary signiﬁcantly
between municipalities. Thus, the random intercept model is used. That means that the intercept in
Table 8 is the average of all municipalities, and the municipality speciﬁc intercepts are determined by
their deviance from the average intercept, given by ui. Note that the slope remains the same for all
44
==PAGE:51==
groups, however by allowing for random intercepts, the variance from unobserved eﬀects at the municipal
level after controlling for explanatory variables should be reduced, allowing for more consistent estimates
of the population parameters. In this case, diﬀerences between municipalities only explains 7% of the
variance that remains after the variance explained by the ﬁxed eﬀects.
5.3
Heckman two-step model
The ﬁnal model to be estimated is the Heckman two-step model. As mentioned in Section 3.5, this
model uses the entire data set, and ﬁrst estimates a selection model, after which the outcome model is
ﬁtted. This will ﬁrst be done sequentially by estimating a Probit model to estimate the inverse mills
ratio from the residuals, to be used as an additional regressor in the outcome model. This may not yield
reliable standard errors, as the inverse mills ratio is assumed constant by estimating the two models
sequentially, when it should actually be considered a random variable. Therefore, the robustness of the
sequentially estimated two-step model will be tested by estimating a Heckman two-step model using the
sampleSelection package in R, which yields consistent estimates of the inverse mills ratio from running
multiple iterations of the estimations.
Essentially, our goal is to estimate risk, however due to the heavy under-reporting, we believe that the
risk of some road segments is unobserved, as risk is only observed when accidents > 0, and assume there
is a systematic reason it is unobserved. We seek to add this reason in the selection model, in the form of
a selection variable.
First, the Probit model is estimated, i.e. the selection model found in Eq. 8. The Probit model estimates
the probability for observations to contain accidents or not, and in turn whether the risk is zero, or above
and enters the sample for the outcome model. Originally, traﬃc was thought of as the selection variable,
however traﬃc is part of the dependent variable risk, and thus highly correlated with the outcome,
therefore this was not a possibility in fear of inconsistencies in the model. Furthermore, traﬃc is not
thought of as the reason for under-reporting. According to Janstrup, accident severity on the other hand
may inﬂuence the level of under-reporting [17]. This would not identify the true-zero-accident observations
however, which would require another source of accident data, for example hospital records of traﬃc
related injuries. Unfortunately, no such measures have been included in the current data set, therefore
the initial set of explanatory variables will have to suﬃce, without a distinct selection variable.
The Probit model is estimated using the maximum likelihood estimator on all 150,055 observations, with
the binary dependent variable Accidenti, equal to 1 if any accidents have been observed on the road
segment in the sampling period, and 0 otherwise, and the resulting model is summarized in Table 9.
45
==PAGE:52==
Dependent variable: Accident
Probit
Intercept
–6.345∗∗∗(0.167)
Oneway
–0.008 (0.015)
log(Length)
0.359∗∗∗(0.010)
Speed limit
–0.002∗∗∗(0.0004)
Road type: Motorway
2.300∗∗∗(0.038)
Road type: Motorway link
0.621∗∗∗(0.033)
Road type: Primary
1.262∗∗∗(0.021)
Road type: Secondary
0.981∗∗∗(0.016)
Road type: Tertiary
0.529∗∗∗(0.013)
Road type: Trunk
1.106∗∗∗(0.046)
Road type: Unclassiﬁed
0.006 (0.019)
log(Curve density)
0.192∗∗∗(0.011)
log(Sinuosity)
–0.079∗∗(0.039)
Sharpness
–0.029∗∗(0.013)
Land use: Rural
–0.116∗∗∗(0.012)
Land use: Vacation
–0.325∗∗∗(0.057)
log(GDP per capita)
0.073∗∗∗(0.006)
log(Pop density)
0.192∗∗∗(0.004)
log(Cars per capita)
–0.301∗∗∗(0.023)
Pop 30 to 64
2.939∗∗∗(0.262)
Pop above 64
–1.199∗∗∗(0.202)
Unemployment
1.537∗∗∗(0.117)
Num. adresses
–0.00002∗∗∗(0.00000)
Bed capacity
0.00001∗∗(0.00000)
Time of day: Peak traﬃc
0.128∗∗∗(0.009)
Time of day: Btw peak traﬃc
0.188∗∗∗(0.012)
Weekend
–0.305∗∗∗(0.009)
Observations
150,055
Log Likelihood
–61,702.020
Akaike Inf. Crit.
123,458.000
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 9: Probit model to estimate the probability of accidents on road segments
The estimated coeﬃcients of the Probit model will not be analyzed in depth, however it is worth mentioning
a few things. The Probit model cannot be directly compared to the other models for various reason. For
one the dependent variable is very diﬀerent, however it can be used to test intuitive assumptions about
the likelihood of accidents. It is also interesting, to see whether the same variables are signiﬁcant in
determining both road risk and probability of accidents on a road. Table 9 shows that all variables are
statistically signiﬁcant in determining the probability of accidents at the 5% level, except oneway and
road type: unclassiﬁed. Time of day shows that accidents are more likely during peak traﬃc and between
peak hours. That makes intuitive sense, as the current model does not account for traﬃc, thus these
periods see a lot more traﬃc compared to outside peak traﬃc. Similarly, all the road types are more
likely to see accidents than residential roads, which inevitably also relates to traﬃc. The model does not
estimate the number of accidents, but still ﬁnds motorways to be more likely to see accidents compared
46
==PAGE:53==
to other road types, which agrees with the ﬁndings in the 2017 Road Safety Annual report [16].
Next, an estimate of the inverse mills ratio can be obtained for each of the observations. This will be
included as a regressor to allow the β parameters of the outcome equation, Eq. 7, to be consistently
estimated by OLS. The inverse mills ratio is used to control for endogeneity, i.e. the part of the error
term that explains whether a road segment sees an accident, which inﬂuences the road risk. However,
without a distinct variable that is thought to explain the selection, the interpretation of the inverse mills
ratio is strained. The resulting inverse mills ratio is highly correlated with traﬃc. This makes sense, as
it captures the correlation between the two dependent variables for selection and outcome, and traﬃc
explains a lot of this variation.
The OLS results are found below. Note that the results of the outcome model in the simultaneous
estimation using R’s sampleSelection package are also provided to check the robustness of the standard
errors of the sequential approach.
47
==PAGE:54==
Dependent variable: log(Risk)
Sequential two-step
Simultaneous two-step
Intercept
–23.839∗∗∗(0.559)
–23.839∗∗∗(0.893)
Oneway
–0.580∗∗∗(0.023)
–0.580∗∗∗(0.029)
log(Length)
0.932∗∗∗(0.026)
0.932∗∗∗(0.043)
Speed limit
–0.004∗∗∗(0.001)
–0.004∗∗∗(0.001)
Road type: Motorway
–0.401∗∗∗(0.146)
–0.401∗(0.228)
Road type: Motorway link
–0.295∗∗∗(0.066)
–0.295∗∗∗(0.096)
Road type: Primary
–0.296∗∗∗(0.096)
–0.296∗∗(0.148)
Road type: Secondary
–0.779∗∗∗(0.076)
–0.779∗∗∗(0.117)
Road type: Tertiary
–0.650∗∗∗(0.045)
–0.650∗∗∗(0.067)
Road type: Trunk
–1.120∗∗∗(0.100)
–1.120∗∗∗(0.151)
Road type: Unclassiﬁed
–0.361∗∗∗(0.033)
–0.361∗∗∗(0.038)
log(Curve density)
0.565∗∗∗(0.019)
0.565∗∗∗(0.029)
log(Sinuosity)
0.195∗∗∗(0.061)
0.195∗∗∗(0.073)
Sharpness
–0.326∗∗∗(0.021)
–0.326∗∗∗(0.025)
Land use: Rural
0.114∗∗∗(0.018)
0.114∗∗∗(0.027)
Land use: Vacation
–0.228∗∗(0.091)
–0.228∗(0.128)
log(GDP per capita)
0.007 (0.009)
0.007 (0.013)
log(Pop density)
0.125∗∗∗(0.015)
0.125∗∗∗(0.023)
log(Cars per capita)
–0.450∗∗∗(0.040)
–0.450∗∗∗(0.054)
Pop 30 to 64
4.700∗∗∗(0.402)
4.700∗∗∗(0.598)
Pop above 64
0.733∗∗(0.304)
0.733∗(0.421)
Unemployment
3.528∗∗∗(0.196)
3.528∗∗∗(0.286)
Num. adresses
–0.0001∗∗∗(0.00001)
–0.0001∗∗∗(0.00001)
Bed capacity
0.0001∗∗∗(0.00001)
0.0001∗∗∗(0.00001)
Time of day: Peak traﬃc
–0.231∗∗∗(0.016)
–0.231∗∗∗(0.023)
Time of day: Btw peak traﬃc
0.380∗∗∗(0.021)
0.380∗∗∗(0.031)
Weekend
–0.184∗∗∗(0.025)
–0.184∗∗∗(0.039)
InvMillsRatio
1.844∗∗∗(0.098)
1.844∗∗∗(0.154)
Observations
150,055
150,055
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 10: Summary of Heckman two-step models
The ﬁrst conclusion to be drawn is that the sequential model has lower standard errors compared to
the simultaneous model, as expected. However, most variables are signiﬁcant at the 5% level in both
models. The next thing to note is that the parameter μ of the inverse mills ratio is highly signiﬁcant in
both models, which is evidence of selectivity bias, i.e. the errors terms of the selection and the outcome
equation are not independent (cov(ε, ν) ̸== 0). This is to be expected in this particular case, for multiple
reasons. The dependent variable in the selection model is part of the risk measure, and there is no distinct
selection speciﬁed. Due to these endogeneity issues, both models are diﬃcult to interpret and cannot be
assumed consistent due to the potential issues in the functional form. Furthermore, as the independent
variables all appear in the selection model (Probit), they cannot be directly interpreted. Instead, the
marginal eﬀects on risk are determined by the eﬀect on the selection, as well as the outcome. This will
not be investigated further, due to the misspeciﬁcation of the model, which was discovered late in the
48
==PAGE:55==
study, unfortunately.
5.4
Results, goodness of ﬁt, and robustness of coeﬃcient estimates
The resulting models are summarized in Table 11.
Dependent variable: log(Risk)
OLS
Random intercept
Heckman two-step
Intercept
–14.102∗∗∗(0.242)
–14.802∗∗∗(0.055)
–23.839∗∗∗(0.893)
Oneway
–0.559∗∗∗(0.021)
–0.580∗∗∗(0.021)
–0.580∗∗∗(0.029)
log(Length)
0.488∗∗∗(0.013)
0.527∗∗∗(0.013)
0.932∗∗∗(0.043)
Speed limit
–0.002∗∗∗(0.001)
–0.001∗∗(0.001)
–0.004∗∗∗(0.001)
Road type: Motorway
–2.998∗∗∗(0.045)
–2.993∗∗∗(0.046)
–0.401∗(0.228)
Road type: Motorway link
–1.135∗∗∗(0.049)
–1.110∗∗∗(0.049)
–0.295∗∗∗(0.096)
Road type: Primary
–1.988∗∗∗(0.029)
–1.963∗∗∗(0.030)
–0.296∗∗(0.148)
Road type: Secondary
–2.117∗∗∗(0.025)
–2.076∗∗∗(0.025)
–0.779∗∗∗(0.117)
Road type: Tertiary
–1.391∗∗∗(0.021)
–1.365∗∗∗(0.021)
–0.650∗∗∗(0.067)
Road type: Trunk
–2.612∗∗∗(0.059)
–2.579∗∗∗(0.060)
–1.120∗∗∗(0.151)
Road type: Unclassiﬁed
–0.346∗∗∗(0.033)
–0.303∗∗∗(0.033)
–0.361∗∗∗(0.038)
log(Curve density)
0.346∗∗∗(0.016)
0.369∗∗∗(0.016)
0.565∗∗∗(0.029)
log(Sinuosity)
0.266∗∗∗(0.055)
0.253∗∗∗(0.055)
0.195∗∗∗(0.073)
Sharpness
–0.331∗∗∗(0.020)
–0.349∗∗∗(0.020)
–0.326∗∗∗(0.025)
Land use: Rural
0.260∗∗∗(0.018)
0.430∗∗∗(0.017)
0.114∗∗∗(0.027)
Land use: Vacation
0.309∗∗∗(0.112)
0.581∗∗∗(0.112)
–0.228∗(0.128)
log(GDP per capita)
–0.087∗∗∗(0.008)
0.007 (0.013)
log(Pop density)
–0.131∗∗∗(0.006)
0.125∗∗∗(0.023)
log(Cars per capita)
–0.090∗∗∗(0.031)
–0.450∗∗∗(0.054)
Pop 30 to 64
1.061∗∗∗(0.378)
4.700∗∗∗(0.598)
Pop above 64
2.478∗∗∗(0.296)
0.733∗(0.421)
Unemployment
1.528∗∗∗(0.171)
3.528∗∗∗(0.286)
Num. adresses
–0.00002∗∗∗(0.00001)
–0.0001∗∗∗(0.00001)
Bed capacity
0.00004∗∗∗(0.00001)
0.0001∗∗∗(0.00001)
Time of day: Peak traﬃc
–0.400∗∗∗(0.014)
–0.394∗∗∗(0.014)
–0.231∗∗∗(0.023)
Time of day: Btw peak traﬃc
0.137∗∗∗(0.017)
0.148∗∗∗(0.017)
0.380∗∗∗(0.031)
Weekend
0.216∗∗∗(0.014)
0.221∗∗∗(0.014)
–0.184∗∗∗(0.039)
Inverse Mills Ratio
1.844∗∗∗(0.154)
Observations
29,264
29,264
150,055
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 11: Summary of the three models: OLS, LMM, and Heckman two-step
First of all, it is interesting to see that all three models agree on the sign of coeﬃcients of variables related
to road characteristics. Similarly, the three models somewhat agree on the signiﬁcance of variables,
despite the speciﬁcation issues of the Heckman two-step model. The only diﬀerences in signs between
Heckman and the other models are found in land use: vacation and weekend. This could potentially be
linked to the exposure to less traﬃc in these variables. With the previous comments about the Heckman
49
==PAGE:56==
two-step model, this it taken rather lightly, as the model is not well speciﬁed, thus the focus remains
on the OLS and random intercept models. It is also recognized, that the models do not vary much in
the speciﬁcations, thus large deviations are not expected in either coeﬃcients or signiﬁcance levels. It
is however interesting to see that the random intercept model results in almost identical coeﬃcients for
most variables of interest, despite not controlling explicitly for the socioeconomic variables. This shows
robustness in the coeﬃcient estimates, and the interpretations of each of the coeﬃcients from 5.1.4 still
hold.
That means, that according to the estimated models, the following holds true, independent of which
municipality a given road segment is found in. Note that only certain of the variables are included below,
as they were found to be easily comprehensible and distinguishable for any road in the country.
• Road type - Travelling on motorways exposes individual drivers to the least amount of risk, out of
the investigated road types. For the remainder of road types, the ﬁndings indicate that, in general,
the smaller the road, the more risk individuals are exposed to.
• Land use - Driving in urban areas poses signiﬁcantly less risk to individual drivers, compared to
rural areas. Similarly, vacation areas are found to expose individuals to more risk compared to
urban areas, without accounting for seasonality in traﬃc.
• Time of travel - Travelling during peak traﬃc yields a signiﬁcantly lower risk compared to between
peak traﬃc hours, or outside peak traﬃc hours. Similarly, travelling mostly in weekends exposes
drivers to more risk than weekdays.
Which are all ﬁndings that can potentially directly impact insurance providers’ pricing decisions dependent
on clients’ driving patterns. This actually enables us to answer many questions about how to diﬀerentiate
pricing according to individuals’ travel patterns. If you work at night, on weekends, in a rural area, you
are exposed to signiﬁcantly more risk compared to someone who works from 8am to 4pm in the city
Monday through Friday. However, it is worth mentioning that the ﬁndings are of course subject to both
the data quality and all of the assumptions described in the previous sections.
Finally, the goodness of ﬁt will now be assessed..
The estimated models are not directly comparable, as they are not estimated using the same sample
sizes, assumptions, or estimators. Therefore, comparing them on explained variance in terms of R2, or
AIC would not be suitable. Therefore, out-of-sample validation was considered, which could be done by
estimating the models on 80% of the data, and use the remaining 20% to estimate the out-of-sample
prediction error. The only problem with this approach would be that it is not possible to make predicts
with the the Heckman 2-step model, without estimating the inverse mills ratio for each of the new
observations, once again introducing diﬀerences in the sample sizes each of the model were to be ﬁtted on.
In conclusion, it was decided to simply compare the models’ in-sample estimations in terms of root mean
squared error (RMSE), as well as the mean absolute error (MAE), see Eq. 29 and 30, from Wooldridge
2019 [36]. In this study, the sample sizes are quite large, thus overﬁtting is not as big a concern, and
the in-sample residuals are assumed to resemble the errors of an out-of-sample prediction. Finally, the
beneﬁt of using RMSE and MAE to measure goodness-of-ﬁt is that they are directly comparable across
50
==PAGE:57==
all three models.
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
ε2
i
(29)
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|εi|
(30)
where n is the number of observations, and εi are the residuals, i.e. the diﬀerence between the actual
values of yi, and the estimated, or ﬁtted, values ˆyi. Both RMSE and MAE are metrics of the average
residuals, however RMSE penalises higher deviations more by squaring them, whereas MAE simply
assumed that an error of 2 is twice as bad as an error of 1. MAE is simpler to interpret compared to
RMSE, as it uses the same unit as the underlying data. A last goodness-of-ﬁt metric is introduced,
namely the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), which is introduced to give an intuitive sense of
how far from the true values the estimates are.
MAPE = 1
n
n
X
i=1

yi – ˆyi
yi
 · 100
(31)
where yi is the actual risk, and ˆyi is the estimated risk. Note that the dependent variable was log-
transformed for the models, thus in order to calculate the errors, the logarithmic base of the log-
transformation is raised to the power that generates y. In this case, the natural logarithm was used, thus
we simply have the natural constant e as the base and the estimated log(Risk) as exponent. The one
caveat of MAPE to be aware of in this case is that the dependent variable is extremely small, thus even
small deviations result in high percentage variations.
The goodness-of-ﬁt metrics are provided for each of the models in Table 12.
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
OLS
1.00563
1.048393e–06
88.83%
Random intercept
1.00050
1.046266e–06
89.04%
Heckman two-step
1.00076
1.048005e–06
88.04%
Table 12: Goodness of ﬁt for the OLS, random intercept and Heckman two-step models for samples
where risk > 0
As previously mentioned, these models do not vary a lot in their speciﬁcation. This is also evident in
the goodness of ﬁt measures, as they are very similar. The average percentage error is found to be
approximately 88.6%, which is quite high, i.e. on average, the models estimates are +- 88.6% from the
real risk. This was to be expected, due to the small values, and the fact that both traﬃc and accidents
inherently contain a lot of random noise that cannot necessarily be estimated. Interestingly, Table 12
shows that OLS has a higher RMSE compared to the other models, but similar MAE. That shows that
some of the OLS residuals are higher in magnitude than the competing models, i.e. it is prone to outliers.
It is diﬃcult to determine the source of these higher outliers, however it may be associated with certain
51
==PAGE:58==
regional diﬀerences, that are accounted for otherwise by allowing the random intercepts in the mixed
eﬀects model, which captures some of the otherwise unobserved eﬀects.
It is diﬃcult to estimate how well the models would perform, if they were to be used for any practical
purposes, e.g. adjusting premiums for car insurances based on driving patterns. However, an example
can be estimated by looking at the average risk from Section 4. The average risk of all road segments
where risk > 0 was found to be 1.253691e–06 accidents per vehicle, i.e. if a single car travels along
a road segment
1
1.253691e–06 = 797, 644 times, it is expected to have a single accident.
Similarly, if
797,644 cars travel independently on the road segment, one car is expected to experience an accident.
With a average MAE across the three models of 1.047555e–06, that yields an interval for the average
risk of 1.253691e–06 ± 1.047555e–06 =
h
2.06136e–07; 2.301246e–06i
. To put that into perspective, the
equivalent interval for number of vehicles to drive along the road segment to expect a single accident
is; [434, 547; 4, 851, 166] - A huge interval, with the higher value more than 10 times the lower value! In
conclusion, the current models do not estimate the risk accurately, but do provide insightful ﬁndings with
regards to factors that inﬂuence road risk.
52
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion
This section will discus some of the main assumptions the ﬁndings rely on, as well as potential future
directions that may improve similar studies in determining factors that inﬂuence road risk, and in turn
insurance pricing. The previous section found several signiﬁcant factors in determining road risk, however
they heavily rely on the underlying data being representative of the true risk, as well as the applied
methods.
6.1
Methodology
From the outset, the ambition of the study was to build a large scale model that could estimate road
risk across the entire country. Perhaps, it would have been beneﬁcial to conduct a smaller study, with
well-speciﬁed study areas, which could be selectively sampled to represent diﬀerent areas of the country.
By doing so, the same models would be ﬁtted, however the trust in accuracy of the variables would be
higher, and it may have been possible to check the assumptions about under-reporting of accidents.
The chosen statistical models provided great interpretability, however the relationships in determining
road risk may prove more complex and require diﬀerent modelling techniques. Non-parametric and
machine learning models have shown great potential in both traﬃc and accident modelling in recent years.
These may be options for a diﬀerent approach to modelling, which may however come at the cost of
interpretation of results. Similarly, for industry applicability in a ﬁeld like insurance, traceability of results
is assumed important, thus a black box solution may not be suited. In this particular study, the three
models are thought highly applicable, due to the purposes they each serve. However, a combination of both
a selection model and random parameters has the potential of controlling for both eﬀects simultaneously.
Unfortunately, time did not allow for such a model to be estimated in this study.
As for the linear mixed eﬀects model, it may have proved fruitful to investigate the nested structure
of the data further, as it provides a unique opportunity to test assumptions at several levels, in order
to determine the sources of variance in road risk. Similarly, a study exploring the diﬀerences in road
segment risk among postal codes would have the opportunity to challenge the current model for insurance
pricing.
The estimated Heckman two-step model can almost be referred to as a pseudo-two-step model, as the
estimated model does not capture the desired eﬀects. The simplest solution is to add additional sources
of accident data to the data set, as proposed by [17]. This would allow for a better estimation of the
current level of under-reporting and potentially identify factors inﬂuencing the level of under-reporting for
future use. The expected outcome of the Heckman two-step model was unknown from the onset, however
as Greene states "It is quite possible that the magnitude, sign, and statistical signiﬁcance of the eﬀect
might all be diﬀerent from those of the estimate of β, a point that appears frequently to be overlooked
in empirical studies" [12], they can be vastly diﬀerent from simple OLS regression on the observed sub-
sample. Especially in this case, when the expected level of reported accidents only constitutes between
25% and 31% [17].
A ﬁnal consideration with regards to modelling concerns spatial autocorrelation, which was brieﬂy touched
upon in Section 3. In addition to unobserved eﬀects captured by diﬀerences among municipalities, road
segments in close proximity may display more similarity, compared to those further away. A method
for analysing spatial autocorrelation and clustering is Moran’s I, which can be used to test for such
53
==PAGE:60==
correlation using the Moran’s I statistic. If signiﬁcant, several approaches can be used to account for
spatial autocorrelation
6.2
Data
First of all, the structure of the data will be addressed. The choice of structuring the project as a graph
did not impact the project signiﬁcantly, however several extra features could have been derived from
this speciﬁc data structure. One example includes the layout of intersections in terms of number of
incoming and outgoing roads, degrees between roads, or centrality in the network. Some of these features
are not traditionally found in road safety analysis, however it may prove insightful to add a network
science perspective to the investigation of road safety. Measures of centrality could be of speciﬁc interest,
to see whether risk varies signiﬁcantly depending on the importance of a speciﬁc element in the road
network. Similarly, distances to various points of interest may prove signiﬁcant in determining road
risk, as it is often used to model traﬃc [34]. Finally, for simplicity, the current graph representation
was simpliﬁed to an undirected graph, such that only motorways and other roads with medians are
actually directed, whereas all smaller roads are not. The granularity of data does not currently allow for
further stratiﬁcation, however for something like analysis of peak traﬃc it is deﬁnitely relevant to include
directionality to the models.
Several discussion points with regards to accidents have been addressed throughout the study, so this will
simply provide a perspective to the level of under-reporting not previously mentioned. From insurance
providers’ perspective, all accidents that require payouts are of interest. However, it is very unlikely that
all insurance related accidents are reported. I.e. this type of model may catch many major payouts, but
deﬁnitely not be exhaustive. Over time however, the best source of accident data is assumed to be the
insurance claims. The remaining issue is modelling traﬃc. There are multiple ways of doing so, one
example is shown in this paper.
Several additional variables were sought to control for socioeconomic diﬀerences, one particular one of
interest is the individual municipality spend on infrastructure. Furthermore, if any data was available on
condition of roads (e.g. a grade scale of 1 to 5), the interaction between these two would be interesting,
however incredibly hard to obtain reliable data for the entire country, both for a research project, but
especially for insurance providers. This would be of particular interest to both VD and municipalities
however, as that would provide a tool to prioritize resources in maintaining the road network.
6.3
Industry applicability
Section 5.4 lists a few ﬁndings that can be directly interpreted. Similar ﬁndings can be derived from the
remaining variables. The current model thus provides an indication that it may make sense to diﬀerentiate
insurance pricing according to features of the roads, that individuals generally travel on. The level of
aggregation (road segments, entire roads, routes) may be a topic of discussion, and it may potentially
make sense to categorize entire roads in diﬀerent risk levels, stratiﬁed by time intervals. This can be
achieved by clustering, which may in turn be simpler to incorporate in a pricing model.
From Section 1, the aim of the study was to identify factors inﬂuencing road risk, independent of driving
behaviour. All of the investigated factors are assumed independent of individual drivers, thus it is believed
that the potential of including a measure of road risk in a pricing model will not result in endogeneity
issues with individual driving behaviour.
54
==PAGE:61==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has undertaken a large scale data collection, in an eﬀort to identify factors that inﬂuence the
risk of accidents on the Danish road network. The motivation of the project was to be able to diﬀerentiate
risk according to observable characteristics of road segments independent of individual drivers. Ultimately,
this will allow insurance providers to assess the total risk proﬁle of individual drivers based on their
driving behaviour and patterns and diﬀerentiate insurance premiums accordingly.
Factors considered include road characteristics, time of day, land use, and socioeconomic variables. First,
a multiple linear regression was ﬁtted as a baseline. Then, a random intercept model was estimated
to account for unobserved heterogeneity among municipalities to ensure consistent estimates, which
proved that the initial parameters were robust in terms of coeﬃcient size, sign, and signiﬁcance. Finally,
a Heckman two-step model was attempted to account for sample selectivity bias due to heavy under-
reporting of police-reported accidents, which ultimately lacked a selection variable to properly capture
the desired eﬀects.
In conclusion, the study found all the studied factors statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level in determining
road risk. Speciﬁcally, larger roads were found expose individual drivers to less risk compared to smaller
roads, and motorways were found to have the lowest overall risk levels. Similarly, urban road segments
expose drivers to less risk compared to rural road segments. Lastly, it was found that travelling during
peak traﬃc yields the lowest risk, compared to both between peak hours and outside peak hours. These
results show high potential in including individual exposure to risk in insurance premium pricing.
55
==PAGE:62==
References
[1] Panagiotis Ch Anastasopoulos. Random parameters multivariate tobit and zero-inﬂated count data
models: Addressing unobserved and zero-state heterogeneity in accident injury-severity rate and
frequency analysis. Analytic Methods in Accident Research, 11:17–32, 2016.
[2] Panagiotis Ch Anastasopoulos, Fred L. Mannering, Venky N. Shankar, and John E. Haddock. A
study of factors aﬀecting highway accident rates using the random-parameters tobit model. Accident
Analysis and Prevention, 45:628–633, 2012.
[3] Philippe Baecke and Lorenzo Bocca. The value of vehicle telematics data in insurance risk selection
processes. Decision Support Systems, 98:69–79, 2017.
[4] Albert-László Barabási. Network Science . Cambridge University Press, 1st edition, 2016.
[5] Christopher Barron, Pascal Neis, and Alexander Zipf. A Comprehensive Framework for Intrinsic
OpenStreetMap Quality Analysis. 2013.
[6] GeoﬀBoeing. OSMnx: New methods for acquiring, constructing, analyzing, and visualizing complex
street networks. 2017.
[7] Salvatore Caﬁso, Carmelo D’Agostino, and Bhagwant Persaud.
Investigating the inﬂuence of
segmentation in estimating safety performance functions for roadway sections. Journal of Traﬃc
and Transportation Engineering, 5(2):129–136, 2018.
[8] Rune Elvik and Anne B Mysen. Incomplete Accident Reporting - Meta-Analysis of Studies Made
in 13 Countries. Transport Research Record, 1665(99):133–140, 1999.
[9] Mohammad Forghani and Mahmoud Reza Delavar. A Quality Study of the OpenStreetMap Dataset
for Tehran. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf, 3(2):750–763, 5 2014.
[10] Jean-François Girres and Guillaume Touya.
Quality Assessment of the French OpenStreetMap
Dataset. Transactions in GIS, 14(4):435–459, 8 2010.
[11] Marta C González, César A Hidalgo, and Albert-László Barabási. Understanding individual human
mobility patterns. 453, 2008.
[12] William H. Greene. Econometric analysis. Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey,
5th editio edition, 2002.
[13] Feng Guo and Youjia Fang. Individual driver risk assessment using naturalistic driving data. Accident
Analysis and Prevention, 61:3–9, 2013.
[14] Mordechai Haklay and Patrick Weber.
OpenStreetMap: User-Generated Street Maps.
IEEE
Pervasive Computing, 7(4):12–18, 10 2008.
[15] Xavier A. Harrison, Lynda Donaldson, Maria Eugenia Correa-Cano, Julian Evans, David N. Fisher,
Cecily E.D. Goodwin, Beth S. Robinson, David J. Hodgson, and Richard Inger. A brief introduction
to mixed eﬀects modelling and multi-model inference in ecology. PeerJ, 2018(5):1–32, 2018.
[16] Kira H. Janstrup. Road Safety Annual Report 2017. Technical report, OECD Publishing, Paris,
2017.
56
==PAGE:63==
[17] Kira H. Janstrup, Sigal Kaplan, Tove Hels, Jens Lauritsen, and Carlo G. Prato. Understanding traf-
ﬁc crash under-reporting: Linking police and medical records to individual and crash characteristics.
Traﬃc Injury Prevention, 17(6):580–584, 2014.
[18] A. P. Jones, R. Haynes, V. Kennedy, I. M. Harvey, T. Jewell, and D. Lea. Geographical variations
in mortality and morbidity from road traﬃc accidents in England and Wales.
Health and Place,
14(3):519–535, 2008.
[19] Glen Koorey. Road Data Aggregation and Sectioning Considerations for Crash Analysis. Journal
of the Transportation Research Board, (2103):61–68, 2009.
[20] Anders Lehmann and Allan Gross.
Using Crowd Sensed Data as Input to Congestion Model.
Technical report, 2016.
[21] Dominique Lord and Fred Mannering. The statistical analysis of crash-frequency data: A review and
assessment of methodological alternatives. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,
44(5):291–305, 2010.
[22] Fanny Malin, Ilkka Norros, and Satu Innamaa. Accident risk of road and weather conditions on
diﬀerent road types. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 122(August 2018):181–188, 2019.
[23] Fred L. Mannering and Chandra R. Bhat. Analytic methods in accident research: Methodological
frontier and future directions. Analytic Methods in Accident Research, 1:1–22, 2014.
[24] Fred L. Mannering, Venky Shankar, and Chandra R. Bhat.
Unobserved heterogeneity and the
statistical analysis of highway accident data. Analytic Methods in Accident Research, 11:1–16, 2016.
[25] Jakob Moellerhoej. Åbne data i Danmark gør OpenStreetMap bedre, 10 2014.
[26] NetworkX Developers. MultiDiGraph - NetworkX 2.5 documentation, 9 2020.
[27] Mohammed A. Quddus.
Modelling area-wide count outcomes with spatial correlation and het-
erogeneity: An analysis of London crash data.
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 40:1486–1497,
2008.
[28] Peter T. Savolainen, Fred L. Mannering, Dominique Lord, and Mohammed A. Quddus.
The
statistical analysis of highway crash-injury severities: A review and assessment of methodological
alternatives. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43(5):1666–1676, 2011.
[29] UCLA: Statistical Consulting Group. Introduction to Linear Mixed Models.
[30] Vejdirektoratet. Traﬁktællinger - Planlægning, udførelse og efterbehandling - Vejledning. Number
49-54. 2006.
[31] Vejdirektoratet. Traﬁksikkerhedsberegninger og ulykkesbekæmpelse. Number August 2015. 2015.
[32] Francis Vella. Estimating models with sample selection bias: A survey. Journal of Human Resources,
33(1):127–169, 1998.
[33] Kris Walther. Spatio-temporal modelling and forecasting of road traﬃc using Gaussian processes
and deep neural networks. 2020.
57
==PAGE:64==
[34] Simon Washington, Matthew Karlaftis, Fred Mannering, and Panagiotis Anastasopoulos. Statistical
and Econometric Methods for Transportation Data Analysis. Third edition. 2020.
[35] Jeﬀrey M. Wooldridge. Selection corrections for panel data models under conditional mean inde-
pendence assumptions . Journal of Econometrics, 68(1):115–132, 7 1995.
[36] Jeﬀrey M Wooldridge. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach (MindTap Course List).
2019.
[37] Shenjun Yao, Becky P.Y. Loo, and Bruce Zi Yang.
Traﬃc collisions in space: four decades of
advancement in applied GIS. Annals of GIS, 22(1):1–14, 2016.
[38] Shudan Zheng and Jianghua Zheng. Assessing the completeness and positional accuracy of Open-
StreetMap in China. Number 41361084. 2014.
[39] Apostolos Ziakopoulos and George Yannis. A review of spatial approaches in road safety. 2020.
58
==PAGE:65==
Appendices
59
==PAGE:66==
Project brief 
Motivation and project description 
Undo is an insurance start-up from 2018, which was initially funded by the Danish insurance company Tryg. 
The company seeks to disrupt the insurance industry by offering modular and flexible insurances to drive 
down prices for the young consumer segment. In the fall of 2020, Undo plans to launch a car insurance, 
priced using data rather than the traditional approach of generalizing prices across a demographic 
segment. This will be achieved by tracking individual consumer’s driving behaviour and routes using sensors 
in their smartphones and factoring these into the pricing of their insurances. 
The factors are divided into two groups, namely ‘personal risk’ referring to driving behaviour and ‘road risk’ 
referring to the risk of accidents on a given road at a given time. This project will focus on the latter. 
The basis of the thesis will be data on accidents on Danish roads from Vejman.dk, as well as some proxy of 
the number of vehicles on the roads. Together, these constitute the accident risk on a given road, thus if a 
consumer travels regularly on high-risk roads, the price of their insurance will increase. Furthermore, the 
aspect of timing of accidents is also important and should be considered. 
The main challenges are: 
1. Using data, build a model that describes road risk on a certain level (region, city, road) 
2. Transfer the model to predict/determine risk based on variables available to Undo in the future 
 
Finally, it is in Undo’s long-term interest to influence their customers’ driving behaviour and help them 
avoid accidents by providing data-driven advice as to which roads to avoid at which times as well as how to 
lower the ‘personal risk’. This aspect could potentially be incorporated in the thesis, if it adds value to the 
analysis. 
  
Goal of your thesis 
The ambition of the thesis is to be able to show a direct link between the consumers’ chosen routes and a 
specific decrease, or increase, in the price of an insurance. 
The thesis is expected to have an initial broad approach to the problem, and methodically work closer to 
the ideal scenario of providing the risk of individual sections of roads at specific times. 
 
Overall, the thesis seeks to model road risk using statistical and econometric methods to identify factors 
that are significant in determining risk, detailed to a degree that can be used to differentiate insurance 
pricing. 
Deliverable to company: 
- 
Provide a transparent model for factoring in the road risk aspect of the total pricing of Undo’s car 
insurance, at a sufficiently detailed level. 
 
 
A
Project brief and learning objectives
60
==PAGE:67==
Learning objectives 
- 
Search, describe and assess relevant literature on the topic of Road Risk and Accident Risk and 
pricing in the insurance industry 
- 
Identify potential models for 1) quantifying accident risk for roads and 2) connecting accident risk 
to individual driving patterns and argue for the relevance of specific models. 
- 
Conduct statistical modelling of road risk on relevant data including accident data using the 
selected models  
- 
Interpret and evaluate models on relevant metrics (i.e. traceability, accuracy and overall 
performance) 
- 
Synthesize results and transfer the model to a useful tool for the company 
 
 
61
