==PAGE:1==
    POLITECNICO DI MILANO 
                 DANMARKS TEKNISKE
               UNIVERSITET 
  Department of Civil and Environmental 
                          Department of Environmetal 
Engineering 
           
           Engineering 
 
A comparison between SiC and ZrO2 
membranes in industrial tent washing 
machine wastewater treatment
Master project of  Beatrice Dal Pio Luogo    921312
          
Supervisors            Prof. Francesca Malpei (Politecnico di Milano)
    
Prof. Wenjing Angela Zhang (DTU)
Co-supervisors      Victor Manuel Candelario (LiqTech Aps)
Nanna P. Hartmann (DTU)
Academic year 2020/2021
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Index
Abstract
3
1. Introduction
5
2. Objectives 
          7
3. State of the art 
9
3.1. Membrane technology 
9
3.1.1. Separation processes 
9
3.1.2. Conﬁguration 
9
3.1.3. Parameters 
          11
3.1.4. Membrane porosity and target contaminants
          16
3.1.5. Membrane materials 
          17
3.1.6. Membrane geometry 
          20
3.1.7. Membrane fouling 
          21
3.2. Microplastics 
          26
3.2.1. Origin and fate of microplastics 
          26
3.2.2. Risks associated with microplastics 
          29
3.2.3. Microplastic detection and removal in WWTPs           30
3.2.4. Microplastics from laundering of synthetic textile         32
4. Methods  
         37
4.1. Water characterization 
          38
4.1.1. Physical-chemical parameters 
          38
4.1.2. Microplastics 
          42
1
==PAGE:6==
4.2. Membrane characterization 
         46
4.2.1. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) 
         46
4.2.2. Capillary Flow Porometry (CFP) 
         48
4.3. Filtration tests 
         54
4.3.1. Filtration of the artiﬁcial water 
         57
4.3.2. Filtration of the wastewater: critical ﬂux 
determination and back-ﬂush determination                60
5. Results 
       63
5.1. Membrane characterization 
        63
5.2. Filtration 
        65
5.2.1. Clean water permeability 
        65
5.2.2. Filtration of the artiﬁcial water
        66
5.2.3. Filtration of the wastewater
        70
5.2.4. Critical ﬂux determination 
        71
5.2.5. Back-ﬂush time determination 
        71
5.2.6. Long term ﬁltration 
        73
5.3. Water characterization 
        74
5.3.1. Physical-chemical parameters
        74
5.3.2. Microplastics 
        78
6. Conclusion and future work 
       85
Bibliography 
        89
2
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
This study will compare the performance of two different ceramic membranes, 
a silicon carbide membrane (SiC) and a zirconia membrane (ZrO2), on the 
treatment of a wastewater rich in synthetic ﬁbers coming from a washing 
machine designed for industrial tents, with the scope to recycle the water in the 
same laundry. The role of industrial tent laundering in microplastic pollution 
and the possibility to reduce energy consumption and saving water by reusing 
the laundry wastewater will be investigated. First the ﬁltration of artiﬁcial 
water with designed nylon ﬁbers will be performed, then the ﬁltration of the 
wastewater coming from the ﬁrst cycle of the washing of industrial tents will 
occur. The water from the washing machine will be studied to analyze its 
physical-chemical parameters, including microplastics in the shape of ﬁbers 
(polyvinyl-chloride). The ZrO2 membrane results to have a denser selective 
layer and a smaller diameter of the pores: the D50 (mean pore size) for SiC 
membrane is 247.2 nm while for ZrO2 is 42.6 nm, hence the SiC membrane is a 
microﬁltration membrane while the ZrO2 is a ultraﬁltration membrane. Testing 
the membranes with 0.25 g/L of designed microplastics (with length of 1000, 
700  and  500  μm,  equally  mixed)  in  RO  water,  no  loss  of  ﬂux  nor  of 
permeability was observed. With smaller microplastics in a lower concentration 
(0.18 g/L of designed microplastics with 80 μm average length), only the SiC 
membrane exceeded the critical ﬂux, in fact a loss of ﬂux and of permeability 
was observed. When the unit was run with wastewater it was possible to 
calculate the critical ﬂux, that for SiC is 100 L/m²/h, while for ZrO2 is 55 L/m²/
h. The back-ﬂush time for the ZrO2 membrane is 1 hour, while for the SiC 
membrane is 20 minutes. The unit was set for long term ﬁltration and the SiC 
membrane manifested a higher decrease of permeability with respect with the 
ZrO2 membrane: the SiC membrane permeability decreased of the 42.85% 
3
==PAGE:8==
while the one of the ZrO2 decreased of the 23.07%. The quality of water 
improved  with  better  efﬁciencies  for  the  ZrO2  membrane:  Turbidity  was 
reduced by the 95% in the SiC permeate and by the 99.5% in the ZrO2 
permeate. Total Suspended Solids were removed with 76.3% efﬁciency by the 
SiC  membrane  and  with  95.9%  efﬁciency  by  the  ZrO2,  while  VSS  was 
removed  with  79%  efﬁciency  by  the  SiC  and  with  100%  by  the  ZrO2 
membrane. The SiC membrane removed 98.5% of microplastics from the 
laundering wastewater while the ZrO2 removed the 99.2%. This means that the 
ZrO2 membrane will capture solid particles with a smaller sizes. In conclusion, 
as this study suggests, the ZrO2 membrane will require less maintenance to 
restore the original ﬂux, being more long-lasting, and will guarantee a highest 
selectivity in this treatment application.
4
==PAGE:9==
1. Introduction
Water is the most precious resource on Earth. It is the main component of the 
human body and is necessary for the survival of plants and animals. Still, a 
small  percentage  is  available  to  sustain  human  life.  Water  scarcity  could 
displace  700  million  people  by  2030.  As  water  resources  are  limited, 
wastewater treatment is a very important process to improve the quality of 
water, as it is the recycling of water for industrial processes, saving energy and 
freshwater. A new challenge to achieve a good quality water is the removal of 
microplastics (MPs) from water. MPs are fragments of synthetic materials, 
typically smaller than 5 mm. Due to their size they can pass through the 
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and reach directly the oceans posing a 
threat  to  marine  ecosystem  and  to  human  health.  It  is  a  major  concern 
considering the disastrous impact on the environment. The potential danger of 
these pollutants consists in the fact that they can be ingested by aquatic 
organisms and then accumulate in the food chain. They can adsorb toxic 
compounds  from  the  surrounding  environment  or  being  colonized  by 
potentially pathogenic bioﬁlms, causing numerous negative effects on living 
organism and on human beings. Both civil and industrial wastewater contain a 
large amount of MPs: they reach the puriﬁcation plants and are not completely 
removed by primary and secondary treatment. Washing processes of synthetic 
textiles has recently been assessed as the main source of primary MPs in the 
oceans (F. De Falco et al. 2019), hence is very important to increase the 
effectiveness of methods to remove them at the washing machine discharge 
before they reach the WWTPs. 
The  type  of  washing  process  investigated  in  this  study  is  industrial  tent 
laundering.  Industrial  tents  (Figure  1.1.)  are  usually  made  of  poly-vinyl-
chloride (PVC) fabric, which is chosen for being a water-resistant and hard 
5
==PAGE:10==
material, that make them suitable to cover structures outdoor. They get covered 
by environmental agents, collecting dust from the atmosphere and releasing 
microplastics in the water used to wash them periodically.
Figure 1.1. Industrial tents
To remove solids from the laundering water, in particular microplastics, and to 
permit the reuse of wastewater in the same washing process, a solution can be 
represented by membrane technologies. Membrane technologies consists in a 
separation technology where a membrane, deﬁned as a layer of semi-permeable 
material, separates substances when a driving force is applied. This study will 
compare  the  performance  of  two  different  ceramic  membranes:  a  silicon 
carbide membrane (SiC) and a zirconia membrane (ZrO2) on the treatment of a 
wastewater rich in synthetic ﬁbers coming from a washing machine designed 
for industrial tents.
6
==PAGE:11==
2. Objectives
The objective of this work is to test two membranes in the treatment of 
wastewater coming from the laundering of synthetic tents. A silicon carbide 
(SiC) membrane and a zirconia (ZrO2) membrane will be characterized and 
tested in two phases: ﬁrst, the ﬁltration of artiﬁcial water with designed nylon 
ﬁbers will take place. Then the ﬁltration of real wastewater coming from the 
ﬁrst cycle of the washing machine will be performed. The wastewater will be 
analyzed before and after ﬁltration to determine how much it improved in terms 
of quality. The water from the washing machine will be studied in order to 
analyze the main quality parameters, including a focus on microplastics in the 
shape of ﬁbers, precisely polyvinyl-chloride ﬁbers (PVC) coming from the 
washing  of  synthetic  tents.  A special  focus  will  be  made  on  the  fouling 
phenomena: membrane fouling causes a reduction of the ﬂux for ﬁxed Trans 
Membrane Pressure (TMP) or, conversely, an increase of TMP for ﬁxed ﬂux. 
This study, starting from a case of a industrial washing machine, addresses to 
the washing machine’s issue in general, which has a fundamental role in 
microplastic pollution that nowadays is a concern worldwide for its spread in 
all environmental sectors. Moreover, separating water from the solid particles 
makes it suitable for reuse, reducing energy consumption and saving water, the 
most valuable resource all over the world. 
This project therefore will contribute to several of the Sustainable Development 
Goals of the United Nations Agenda: the SDG6 (Clean Water and Sanitation), 
SDG12 (Responsible Consumption and Production) and SDG14 (Life Below 
Water). In particular, this work addresses subgoal 6.3 that states “by 2030, 
improve  water  quality  by  reducing  pollution,  eliminating  dumping  and 
minimizing  release  of  hazardous  chemicals  and  materials,  halving  the 
7
==PAGE:12==
proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and 
safe reuse globally”, 6.4: “By 2030, substantially increase water-use efﬁciency 
across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater” 
and 14.1 “By 2025, prevent and signiﬁcantly reduce marine pollution of all 
kinds, in particular from land-based activities”.  
8
==PAGE:13==
3. State of the art
3.1. Membrane technology
3.1.1. Separation processes
Membrane separation for liquid ﬁltration consists in the partial separation with 
a semi-permeable barrier through which one specie (water) moves faster than 
the  other  (the  pollutant).  The  membrane  must  be  perm-selective  (A.J. 
Burggraaf, K. Keizer, 1990) and the process requires the application of a 
driving force which allows the ﬂux of water that passes through the separation 
layer. A driving force may be pressure, concentration gradient, temperature 
difference or electric potential. As shown in ﬁgure 1., the water entering the 
system, or feed water passes through the membrane while a certain percentage 
of the particles or solute molecules remain in the feed. 
3.1.2. Conﬁguration
There are three types of conﬁguration: dead-end (Figure 3.1.1.), cross-ﬂow 
(Figure 3.1.2.) and semi-dead-end.
• Dead-end
Figure 3.1.1. Dead-end separation process; the orange dots are the particles or solute 
molecules. The solid matter rejected forms the cake layer on the selective membrane
Feed water
Product water 
(permeate)
Semi-permeable membrane
9
==PAGE:14==
In dead-end ﬁltering the water ﬂows perpendicular to the membrane and the 
particles larger than the pore sizes of the membrane are stopped on the surface 
while the water ﬂows through. Retained particles that are rejected by the 
membrane does not have a free path to exit the membrane module, but they 
build up on the surface of the membrane as a “cake”. Dead-end conﬁguration is 
preferable for wastewater treatments with a low content of suspended solids.
• Cross-ﬂow
Figure 3.1.2. Cross-ﬂow separation process by a semi permeable membrane. The feed 
enters parallel the membrane, the permeate is ﬁltrated while the retentate goes out 
In  cross-ﬂow  conﬁguration  the  ﬂow  of  feed  water  ﬂows  parallel  to  the 
membrane and the water is reused. The ﬂows involved are the feed stream, 
loaded  with  pollutants,  subjected  to  the  ﬁltration  process;  the  permeate 
(permeate), that is the outgoing ﬂow which has crossed the membrane and 
which therefore has a concentration of solids lower than the supply section; and 
the retentate, which is a second outgoing ﬂow and is very concentrated of all 
that material that has been rejected by the membrane. Here, only a small part of 
the feed water is used for permeate production, where the largest part will leave 
the module. 
Since  the  particulate  matter  rejected  by  the  membrane  undergoes  a  high 
turbulence and has a more free path to exit the membrane, it will form a smaller 
“cake” on the surface. Hence this process is preferable to control the thickness 
of the deposit on the membrane and prevent fouling. Flux rates are less affected 
than in dead-end mode, hence this conﬁguration affords a longer ﬁltration cycle 
time.
Feed
Permeate
Retentate
10
==PAGE:15==
• Semi-dead-end
In semi-dead-end conﬁguration all water passes through the membrane during 
normal operation, but during back-ﬂushing the retentate valve is opened, to 
allow for a sweeping ﬂow inside the channels of the membranes, hereby 
removing the particles from the surface of the membrane. This mode is suitable 
for low-medium particle concentrations. 
3.1.3. Parameters
• Transmembrane pressure (TMP)
The pressure is the driving force of the ﬁltration process: the energy required 
for the operation of the membrane processes is supplied by a pump, which is 
used to pressurize the feed liquid, so as to allow it to pass through the 
membrane  inside  the  module.  Due  to  the  strength  of  the  membrane,  a 
difference in pressure is generated between the two sides of the membrane, 
called transmembrane pressure (TMP). For the cross-ﬂow conﬁguration, the 
TMP is deﬁned as the pressure gradient of the membrane, or the average feed 
pressure, minus the permeate pressure. The TMP helps in determining how 
much water is pushed through the membrane, described in (1.1)
(1.1)
where  TMP is  the  Trans  membrane  pressure  [kPa  or  bar],   Pin  is  the 
alimentation pressure or feed pressure [kPa o bar], while Pout  is the retentate 
pressure and Ppermeate  is the permeate pressure [kPa o bar]. For the dead-end 
conﬁguration, the TMP is illustrated in formula (1.2):
(1.2) 
      TMP  =  PA  - PP 
11
==PAGE:16==
• Flow
The ﬂow [m3 s- 1] is deﬁned as the volume of water that ﬂows through the 
membrane per unit time (2).
(2)
• Flux
The ﬂux (J) is deﬁned as the volume that ﬂows through the membrane per unit 
area per unit time (3).
(3)
Flux is a measure of the rate at which permeate passes through the membrane 
per unit membrane surface area. The unit is L/m²/hour (typically called LMH). 
The critical ﬂux is deﬁned as the permeate ﬂux of a membrane system under 
which no or little fouling is observed. Limiting ﬂux is deﬁned as the point 
where ﬂux remains constant and is not signiﬁcantly affected by increasing 
applied pressure. 
• Permeability
Permeability (K) or speciﬁc ﬂux Js of a membrane is the rate of passive 
diffusion of molecules through the membranes and depend mainly on the 
electric charge and polarity of the molecules. It is the permeate ﬂow rate 
obtained per membrane surface unit, applying a unit pressure gradient and is 
given by the ratio between the ﬂow and the transmembrane pressure like in 
equation (4): 
Flow = Vw/T 
J = Qp/Am 
12
==PAGE:17==
(4)
where J is the ﬂux, Qp is the ﬂow of the clean water feed, A is the area of the 
membrane calculated in the previous step, and the TMP (Trans Membrane 
Pressure) is the pressure difference across the membrane, deﬁned also as the 
pressure gradient of the membrane or the average feed pressure minus the 
permeate pressure. K is expressed in m3/ (m²· s · kPa) o in L/ (m2 · h · bar). 
Permeability must be used together with other data such as the membrane 
permeability measured with pure water, and operating conditions (constant 
ﬂow or constant TMP). The measurement of permeability variation is an 
important parameter to evaluate the fouling rate of the membrane, and it can be 
calculated as the ratio between the ﬂux and the TMP.
• Cross ﬂow velocity
The cross ﬂow velocity is deﬁned as the velocity in the individual channels at 
the inlet of the membrane element. The cross ﬂow removes the particles 
trapped at the surface of the membrane, due to shear forces. This shear force 
entails a pressure drop along the length of the membrane. 
• Concentration factor and recovery
The concentration factor is the ratio between the particle concentration in the 
feed and the retentate (5)
(5)
• Rejection factor 
The membrane, as mentioned, is a selective barrier that allows some types of 
substances to cross while retaining others. This property is expressed with the 
13
==PAGE:18==
rejection  factor,  expressed  by  equation  (5),  where  CA is  the  substance 
concentration in the feed [kg/m3], while CP  is the concentration of the 
substance in the permeate [kg/m3]:
(6)
• Recovery
Recovery is deﬁned as the percent of the raw water passing through the 
membrane (permeate) as compared to the total feed volume (equation 7)
(7)
• Total membrane resistance
The total membrane resistance Rt  [1/m] is the sum of different terms as shown 
in formula (8): Rm is the hydraulic resistance of the clean membrane 
and is inversely proportional to the thickness of the membrane. Rm is generally 
measured by ﬁltration tests carried out with tap water. Rc is the hydraulic 
resistance of the solid material deposited on the membrane during ﬁltration (the 
‘cake’ layer), while Rp is the hydraulic resistance caused by colloids and 
macromolecules  that  determine  the  restriction  of  pores  according  to  the 
mechanism of pore restriction. These last who terms are present because during 
ﬁltration, both the occlusion of the pores of the membrane and the formation of 
a dirtying layer called cake layer occur, determining the presence of those 
terms in the equation of total hydraulic resistance.
14
==PAGE:19==
 (8)
To control deposition of solids on the membrane surface, back-ﬂushing of the 
membrane is performed. During this process the permeate is pressed back 
through the membrane either by a pump or by applying compressed air as 
illustrated in Figure 3.1.3, causing the detachment of the solids from the 
selective layer. 
Figure 3.1.3. Schematics of back-ﬂushing principle
The  volume  ﬂow  of  the  backﬂush  should  at  least  be  the  volume  of  the 
membrane housing whereas the pressure should be between TMP = -2 to -3 bar, 
with TMP = -3 bar being the maximum allowed pressure. The volume and the 
backﬂush  pressure  depend  on  the  application;  these  quantities  should  be 
investigated during the test. Initial values could be 2 times the volume of the 
housing  and  TMP =  -3  bar.  During  backﬂushing  the  retentate  valves  are 
normally open. 
It can be useful to remember that for porous medium, TMP and Flow are linked 
by the Darcy equation in (9):
(9)
where J is the ﬂux of permeate [m/s], TMP is the transmembrane pressure [Pa 
or bar], μ is dynamic viscosity [Pa · s], Rt is total membrane resistance [1/m].
15
==PAGE:20==
3.1.4. Membrane porosity and target contaminants
There are different types of membranes depending on pore size and hence 
cutoff diameter, addressing different target solutes, as illustrated in Figure 
3.1.4. Membranes can be macroporous (> 50 nm), mesoporous (2-50 nm), and 
microporous (0.2-2 nm). Microﬁltration (MF) is the ﬁltration process using a 
pore size between 50 and 500 nm. This range allows to remove yeast and fungi, 
algae, protozoa, bacteria, oil emulsion and suspended solids like sediments, 
sand and clay. Ultraﬁltration (UF), which pore size range from 1–100 nm, can 
reject particulates and macromolecules such as proteins, fatty acids, bacteria, 
protozoa, viruses, small colloids, and suspended solids. Nanoﬁltration (NF, 
pore size <= 2 nm) rejects divalent ions, NOMs, SOCs, divalent cations (Ca2+, 
Mg2+, Zn2+, Cd2+), polyvalent anions (SO4
2-, PO4
3-, AsO4
3-, CrO4
2- ), 
common antibiotics. Reverse osmosis (RO, pore size 0.3-0.6 nm). is the only 
separation process able to separate monovalent ions and organic antibiotics. 
In RO the removal is based on the difference in the solubility and diffusivity of 
the ions and the water molecules. In NF, removal occurs due to a combination 
of size exclusion and difference in solubility and diffusivity. In MF and UF the 
removal is based on particle size, so the ﬁltration occurs thanks to mechanical 
separation: the impurities in water are separated by a sieving mechanism with 
the aid of low pressure. In view of the super mechanical, chemical and thermal 
properties  compared  with  traditional  polymeric  membranes,  ceramic 
membranes can be backwashed and regenerated with some harsh cleaning 
additives, thus they can service in a long life.
16
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1.4. Comparison of membrane processes in terms of rejection (Schäfer 2001)
3.1.5. Membrane materials
Key factors in membrane technology are selectivity, ﬂux and stability. For the 
technical feasibility of the ﬁltration process, a membrane material should have
• Good mechanical, thermal and chemical resistance
• High permeability in order to have high ﬂows with limited surfaces
• An adequate degree of selectivity towards the species to be separated
• The ability to maintain these properties over time without deteriorating in 
normal  operation  or  in  the  washing  cycles,  so  the  ability  to  withstand 
cleaning and backwashing 
Ceramic membranes are made from inorganic materials such as alumina, 
titania, silica, silicon nitride, zeolite and zirconia are commonly used in the 
fabrication of ceramic membranes. Channels are coated with a membrane layer, 
as shown in Figure 3.1.5., which is usually formed by a macro porous layer 
17
==PAGE:22==
anchored to the ceramic body, a mesoporous layer that acts as binder and a 
micro porous layer, which determines the separation characteristics.
Figure 3.1.5. Schematic  representation  of  a composite  membrane (Encyclopedia of 
Membranes Eds. Drioli and Giorno, 2016) 
Compared to polymeric membranes, that undergo easily to fouling and have a 
shorter lifetime, ceramic materials have technical advantages including narrow 
and well-deﬁned pore size distribution, better separation at higher ﬂux, higher 
hydrophilicity, high ﬂuxes at low pressures (B. Hofs, J. Ogier, D. Vries, E.F. 
Beerendonk, E.R. Cornelissen, 2011) and and lower fouling, since the colloids 
don’t establish irreversible bonds with the membrane surface and so can be 
easily removed.
Ceramic membranes are more resistant to aggressive substances and this high 
stability, together with thermal stability, makes them suitable for treating water 
with acids or strong solvents and for high temperature operations. They also 
have a good mechanical stability in large pressure gradient and high resistance 
to abrasion. Their  disadvantages  are  their  brittleness,  relatively high cost 
and  the  need  for  complicated  sealing  technology  in  high-temperature 
applications. (A.J. Burggraaf and K.Keizer, 1990). They are a rigid, monolithic 
material with no plasticity and therefore can be stressed at a crack tip. They are 
mostly applied in MF and UF, on some occasions in NF and RO. 
18
==PAGE:23==
Silicon carbide (SiC) is one of the most durable man made materials and 
allows to manufacture highly stable products. Also known as “carborundum”, 
appears as yellow to green to bluish-black, iridescent crystals (Figure 3.1.6. a). 
It has a set of unique physical-chemical properties, such as high hardness (the 
second hardest material solely beaten by diamonds) and mechanical stability at 
high  temperatures,  excellent  thermal  conductivity  and  low  coefﬁcient  of 
thermal expansion, high resistance to corrosion and oxidation, wide bandgap, 
and others (A. S. Mukasyan, 2017). In a SiC crystal the Si and C atoms form 
very  strong  tetrahedral  covalent  bond  (Figure  3.1.6.  b).  SiC  is  abrasive, 
chemically inert and sublimes with decomposition at 2700°C. It is very rare in 
nature, under the form of the mineral moissanite, most frequently it is produced 
by sintering to form very hard ceramics. Typically SiC membranes ensure a 
high  ﬂux  and  recover  faster  than  conventional  ceramic  or  polymeric 
membranes.
Figure 3.1.6. a) SiC look (Credit: Scott Horvath, USGS) b) SiC formula
Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2): known also as Zirconia, is a white crystalline 
metal oxide of zirconium (Figure 3.1.7. a). The mineral baddeleyite is its most 
naturally  occurring  form  and  presents  a  monocyclic  crystalline  structure 
(Figure 3.1.7. b). Also known as “ceramic steel”, it is chemically inert, very 
refractory and corrosion resistant and has a very high ionic conductivity. It has 
exceptional mechanical properties, such as high resistance to cracking, high 
thermal  shock  resistance,  high  temperature  resistance,  low  thermal 
conductivity, melting point of 2700ºC. These properties makes the membrane 
suitable  to  be  applied  in  harsh  conditions  such  as  high  temperature 
environments and in a large range of pH values. Zirconia membranes are 
(a)
(b)
19
==PAGE:24==
attractive also for treating high-salinity wastewater. They are characterized by a 
high  hydrophilicity:  this  property  is  relevant  because  it  means  that  the 
membrane will sustain a higher ﬂux and membrane fouling will occur slower 
(Shuang  Li  et  al.  2020).  Also  in  the  oil-water  treatment  ﬁelds,  zirconia 
membrane  showed  more  excellent  permeability  and  efﬁciency  than  other 
membranes  because  of  its  higher  oil  rejection,  less  fouling  and  excellent 
hydrophility (J. E. Zhou et al. 2010).
 Figure 3.1.7. a) ZrO2 look b) ZrO2 formula
3.1.6. Membrane geometry
There are different types of ceramic membrane geometries, the most common 
include tubular, disc and ﬂat sheet geometry (Figure 3.1.8.) For this study only 
the tubular geometry (Figure 3.1.8 a) will be taken into account. Tubular 
modules consist of the inner tube, called the membrane tube, and the shell, 
which  is  the  outer  tube.  The  feed  stream  goes  across  the  length  of  the 
membrane tube and is ﬁltered out into the outer tube, called the shell, while 
concentrate collects at the end of the membrane tube. Tubular systems is 
suitable for harsh conditions and a higher load of solids compared to other 
geometries, but on the other hand they require more energy to achieve a certain 
ﬂow because of the large inner diameter of the tubular modules.
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1.8. a) Tubular geometry b) disc geometry c) ﬂat sheet geometry (LiqTech)
3.1.7. Membrane fouling
Membrane ﬁltration is impeded by a major drawback: fouling. Fouling is a 
process that determines the increase in resistance to the motion through the 
membrane, due to the deposit/adsorption on the membrane surfaces and in the 
pores of solid matter. The increase in the concentration of the rejected solute 
near the membrane, which is a consequence of the selectivity of the membrane, 
the adsorption of particles on the membrane surface due to the existence of 
attractive forces, the precipitation of slightly soluble macromolecules/salts on 
the membrane surface and the accumulation of solid material on the membrane 
are all phenomena that fall under the name of fouling. Since fouling blocks the 
pores on the membrane surface, it determines a increase in the TMP because 
there’s the need of more energy to achieve the same ﬂux. In the operation 
below the critical ﬂow, the TMP trend follows three phases (Zhang et al., 
2006), as shown in Figure 3.1.9. and explained below:
- Phase 1: an initial increase of TMP in a short time;
- Phase 2: slower growth of the linear or exponential type of MPT
- Phase 3 or TMP jump: a rapid increase in dTMP / dt growth
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.1.9. Illustration of the TMP trend (Meng et al., 2009)
Fouling is an crucial factor that must be taken into account in the design and 
operation of membrane systems. First, it leads to a decrease in permeate 
production due to interruptions in ﬁltration and the need of backwashing to 
remove the deposited layer. Second, it can lead to damages that reduce the 
lifespan of the modules resulting in high replacement costs. In general, fouling 
conducts to a permeability loss, and as a result of this loss, larger membrane 
surfaces, higher applied pressures or higher ﬂow rates are required resulting in 
higher energy consumption or more frequent washing of the membranes. This 
results in higher operational costs and costs of replacement.
• Classiﬁcation of membrane fouling
The loss of speciﬁc ﬂux from the initial clean membrane permeability, which 
cannot be recovered by backwashing or cleaning, is called irreversible fouling, 
while the one that can be recovered is called reversible fouling (Meng et a., 
2009). Reversible fouling can be easily eliminated by the implementation of 
backwashing, while irreversible fouling requires chemical cleaning. Reversible 
fouling is caused by the “cake” layer formation, irreversible fouling is caused 
by  the  particulate  matter  strongly  attached  to  the  membrane  causing  the 
blockage  of  the  pores.  This  latter  is  a  permanent  fouling  that  cannot  be 
removed by any approach. The difference between reversible and irreversible 
fouling in terms of loss of ﬂux per time or volume of water ﬁltered is visible in 
Figure 3.2.1.
22
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2.1. Fouling and ﬂux decline
• Factors affecting fouling
Among the factors inﬂuencing fouling there are the hydrodynamic conditions, 
the chemical composition of the feed and membrane characteristics, such as 
morphology and charge. Some membrane characteristics that have a effect on 
fouling was investigated in detail:
- Roughness: it plays an important role on the particles adhesion and the 
performance of the membrane. In cross-ﬂow ﬁltration, roughness, which is 
responsible of the friction force, produces two competing effects on the ﬂux: 
it opposes the drag force of the ﬂow and hence helps the particle adhesion, 
but on the other hand, it induce unsteady ﬂows, turbulence, that prevents the 
‘cake’ formation. 
- As shown in Figure 3.2.2. the steady-state ﬂux increase ﬁrst with membrane 
roughness and then decreased as a result of the two competing effects. A 
interesting  study  by  Z.  Zhong  et  al.  “Membrane  surface  roughness 
characterization and its inﬂuence on ultra ﬁne particle adhesion” of 2012 
underlines the effect of surface roughness on fouling phenomena. According 
to their experiments, particles smaller than 100 nm in diameter which moves 
for Brownian diffusion preferentially accumulate in the ‘‘valleys’’ of rough 
membranes,  which  causes  more  particles  deposition  than  in  smooth 
membranes, because large roughness results in large contact area between 
particles and surface. However, roughness had no role while dealing with 
micro sized particles. Z. Zhong et al. suggests that minimization of fouling by 
particle deposition could be achieved by choosing membranes with asperities 
smaller than the size of the particles.
- Zeta-potential:  the  surface  charge  of  membranes  results  in  electrostatic 
interactions between the surface and the solid matter of membrane surfaces. 
As  underlined  in  the  study  of  D.  Breite  et  al  2016,  those  electrostatic 
interactions are crucial factors in fouling. In general, particles and surfaces 
having opposite charge will attract, while with the same charge will result in 
23
==PAGE:28==
repulsive forces preventing fouling. A interesting point of view is given by 
Zhang et al. 2014, according to which a certain combination of zeta potential 
and roughness can be beneﬁcial: increasing surface charge highly raises 
electrostatic double layer interaction, and designing membranes with a high 
zeta potential and certain roughness can signiﬁcantly mitigate membrane 
fouling.
- Hydrophobicity: it is determined experimentally by estimating the contact 
angle: the greater the angle, the greater the hydrophobicity. It was considered 
a crucial property for membrane fouling: according to Kim et al., 2004; Weis 
et al., 2005; Santos and Judd, 2010, hydrophilic membrane corresponds to 
lower membrane fouling than hydrophobic one. This statement is a common 
misconception if considering the study of Choo and Lee, 1996; Chen et al., 
2012 and Zhang et. al (2014), that report the lack of correlation between the 
membrane surface hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity and the fouling, comparing 
to the correlation existing between zeta-potential and fouling or roughness 
and fouling. This can be found also in nature, if observing the surface of lotus 
leaf which anti-adhesion property is accompanied by a high hydrophobicity. 
Wang  et  al.,  2009,  and  Zhang  et  a.,  2013  report  that  is  the  surface 
morphology of the lotus ﬂower and not the hydrophilicity to give the ability 
to be anti-adhesive. Hydrophobicity should have a important effect if the two 
contacting surface are inﬁnite planar, for the deﬁnition of hydrophilicity is 
the interaction strength of two same planar surfaces in contact with each 
other:  however,  for  the  interactions  between  a  spherical  particle  and 
membrane surface, hydrophobicity is irrelevant.
• Fouling removal
As regards the removal of fouling from membranes, there are two types of 
operations: physical cleaning (backwashing) and chemical cleaning. 
Physical cleaning involve membrane relaxation, that is a phase when ﬁltration 
is temporarily interrupted, and their backwashing, when the permeate is sent 
upstream across the membranes. The key parameters of backwashing are its 
frequency, duration and therefore the relationship between these two. Less 
24
==PAGE:29==
frequent but longer backwashes have been shown to be more efﬁcient than 
more frequent but short-lived backwashes (Jiang et al., 2005). This operation to 
combat fouling include operating costs in terms of energy, which is required for 
the reversal of the ﬂow and consumption of the ﬁltered permeate. 
Chemical cleaning is distinguished into chemical backwashing (daily basis), 
chemical maintenance with a high concentration of chemicals (on a weekly 
basis) or intense chemical cleaning (once or twice a year). Under normal 
conditions, the most used chemical agents are sodium hypochlorite (for organic 
staining agents) and citric acid (for inorganic staining agents).
Figure 3.2.2. Steady state ﬂux vs Roughness (Z. Zhong et al./Separation and 
Puriﬁcation Technology 90 (2012) 140–146) 
25
==PAGE:30==
3.2. Microplastics
3.2.1. Origin and fate of microplastics
Plastic materials are widely used in many applications thanks to their properties 
of durability and versatility combined with low costs. According to Statista’s 
statistical data, global plastic production increased rapidly from 1.5 million 
tons in 1950 to 359 million tons in 2018. Only about 9% of plastic is recycled, 
12% is incinerated and 79% is buried or discharged into the environment 
(UNEP 2020). Microplastics (MPs) are deﬁned as polymeric materials with a 
diameter of less than 5 mm: there is not a formal deﬁnition for the lower size 
boundary, but particles below 1 μm are usually referred to as nano-plastics 
(Koelmans et al., 2015). 
MPs can be classiﬁed according to their origin in primary and secondary. 
Primary MPs are plastics intentionally produced in small sizes (Chang, 2015) 
and some regulations was established to ban their production, such as the 
Microbead-Free Waters Act of 2015 (Public Law 114-114). Secondary MPs 
come from the degradation and breakdown of larger plastic items such as 
plastic bottles or plastic bags after being subjected to UV light from sun 
radiation,  environmental  factors  and  ocean  waves.  If  these  degradative 
phenomena occur after the object has entered the environment, all the authors 
classify the MPs generated as secondary, if the degradation occurs before it 
reaches  the  environment  there  is  no  agreement  regarding  the  correct 
classiﬁcation.  Hence,  MPs  resulting  from  ﬁbers  released  from  washing 
synthetic fabrics, from tires abrasion and from plastic manufacturing industries 
are not uniquely classiﬁed into one of those categories (S. Cesa et al., 2017). 
The shape of microplastics is categorized as ﬁber, granular, fragment, ﬁlm, and 
foam. Polypropylene (PP), polyethylene (PE), Polystyrene (PS), polyvinyl-
chloride (PVC), polycarbonate (PC), polyamides (PA) Polyester (PES), and 
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) which are thermoplastic polymers are the 
more common plastic materials founded in the efﬂuents (J. Talvitie et al., 
26
==PAGE:31==
2017). In addition to these materials, there are also thermoset polymers that are 
irreversible materials that cannot be re-melted, reformed and recycled: the most 
common thermoset materials are vinyl ester, silicone, unsaturated polyester and 
resins.  The  most  commonly  encountered  plastic  polymers,  with  related 
formulas and chemical structures are those reported in Table 3.2.3. 
Table 3.2.3. Formulas and molecular structures of the most common polymers
Polymer
Formula
Structure
Poly-ethylene (PE)
(C2H4)n 
Poly-propylene (PP)
(C10H8O4)n 
Poly-amides (PA)
(CO-NH) amide group
Nylon (aliphatic)
(aromatic)
Poly-propylene (PP)
(C3H6)n 
Poly-styrene (PS)
(C8H8)n 
27
==PAGE:32==
MPs pose a environmental, political and social concern worldwide. They are 
found in all environmental compartment, both in fresh and marine waters (Avio 
et al., 2017). In 2014, there were between 15 and 51 trillion microplastic 
particles estimated in the world’s oceans, weighing from 93000 to 236000 tons 
(Ioakeimidis et al., 2016). 89% of water in the Northeast Atlantic ocean was 
discovered to contain a concentration of 2.46 particles/m3, the 95% of Arctic 
Polar waters contains MPs concentration of 0–1.31 particles/m3 (Lusher et al., 
2014), while Jade Bay, South–North Sea contains 1.77 particles/m3 (Dubaish 
and Liebezeit, 2013). MPs have been found in wastewater, food and drinking 
water (Wright and Kelly, 2017). They are detected in the air we breathe 
(Gasperi et al., 2018), and are found even in remote, sparsely inhabited areas 
through  atmospheric  transport  (Allen  et  al.  2019).  As  reported  in  the 
experiment conducted by Allen et al. on the french Pyrenees where it was 
documented relative daily counts of 249 fragments, 73 ﬁlms and 44 ﬁbres per 
square metre. In the same study MPs transport through the atmosphere resulted 
in a distance of up to 95 km. The origin of primary microplastics in the ocean 
are illustrated in Figure 8, where it is shown that the main contribution is from 
synthetic textile washing and from abrasion of vehicle tires (J. Boucher and D. 
Friot, 2017). Considering that today, in developed countries, more than 95% of 
homes have a washing machine (operating for 3-5 cycles per week), it has been 
estimated that the release due to washing of synthetic fabrics reaches levels of 
190000 tons / y of microﬁbers entering the marine environment. If the release 
considered is not only in the aquatic compartment but also in the air, the 
estimates reach 500000 tons / y (Jönsson et al., 2018).
Poly-vinyl-chloride 
(PVC) 
(CH2CHCl)n 
28
==PAGE:33==
3.2.2. Risks associated with microplastics
MPs are very persistent contaminants. They can take hundreds of years to 
decompose, and in the meantime they are easily ingested and can accumulate 
on large scale, in every type of environment and organism (Avio et al., 2017; 
Carbery et al., 2018; Nelms et al., 2018, Zhao et al. 2020). The study of 
Browne et. al 2008, conducted on mussels, highlights that the smaller the 
plastic fragments are, the higher the accumulation in the tissues of an organism. 
The potential impact for human health is still being investigated, and some 
studies  are  available  on  the  issue  revealing  that  MPs,  although  they  are 
biochemically  inert  (Salvador  Cesa  et  al.,  2017)  can  act  as  carrier  of 
contaminants  adsorbed  on  their  surface  such  as  polychlorinated  biphenyls 
(PCBs), polybromodiphenyl ethers (PBDE), pesticides, endocrine disruptors, 
drugs,  dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane  (DDT),  nonylphenol,  phenanthrene, 
ﬂame  retardants,  heavy  metals,  plasticizers,  persistent  organic  pollutants, 
antioxidants  and  dyes.  These  substances  come  from  both  the  production 
process and the environment and can cause toxicological consequences and 
reach humans after a long path along the food chain. If inhaled or ingested, 
micro plastics may accumulate and exert localized particle toxicity by inducing 
or enhancing an immune response (Wright and Kelly, 2017). A recent study by 
A. T. B. Guimarães et al. 2020 highlights that polystyrene nanoplastics is 
capable in inducing DNA damage, mutagenic changes and toxicity in ﬁsh. The 
reduced size allows the nanoparticles to pass through biological barriers (K. 
Mattsson et al., 2017) to penetrate tissue, to accumulate in organs, and to enter 
the base of a food chain more easily than larger. Moreover, the degradation 
processes increase the surface area of its degradation products, causing an 
enormous biological impact, for example, the 40 nm nanoparticles deriving 
from the degradation of a common plastic bag have a surface area of 2600 
square meters (K. Mattsson et al., 2015). This issue is crucial considering that 
nowadays, 98% of MP is retained from wastewater treatment plants but MP 
with a size smaller than 20 μm and NP is not retained (J. Talvitie et al., 2017).
29
==PAGE:34==
3.2.3. Microplastic detection and removal in WWTPs
The main pathways of MPs into the ocean are through runoff, wind transfer and 
WWTPs (J. Boucher and D. Friot, 2017). Regarding the amount of microplastic 
contained in wastewater, studies conducted in Northern Europe, the United 
States, and Australia reveal a detected amount of MPs ranging between 1–3160 
and 0.0007–125 particles L−1 for raw and treated wastewater, respectively (G. 
Gatideau et al., 2019). Despite the high removal efﬁciency, the huge amount of 
treated  waters  from  WWT plants  is  considered  a  source  of  microplastics 
(Talvitie et al. 2017). It is necessary to notice that the comparison of the 
literature data in terms of removal efﬁciency of MP is not so simple for the lack 
of a standard method: the different composition of the wastewater, the different 
characterization procedures and also the range size of the MP taken into 
account varies from study to study. 25 μm, 100 μm, and 500 μm are most 
frequently used for size classiﬁcation, but recent studies showed that plastic 
particles with nanometer size are also present in the wastewater due to the 
fragmentation of synthetic ﬁbers or to the degradation of polymers. Sun et al. 
2019 reported the removal efﬁciencies of several MPs of some WWTPs in 
Europe, which in a case reach the 99.9%, maybe due to the size range of the 
MPs considered. A study conducted by S. Magni et al. (2018) highlights that, 
despite the high MP removal efﬁciency of a WWTP in Northern Italy, that 
reaches the 84% removal rate, its contribution to microplastic pollution of 
freshwaters is signiﬁcative: 160000000 MPs are released daily in freshwaters 
by the selected WWTP (Figure 3.2.4.). In the sludge, a matrix often reused in 
agriculture, it was calculated a deposition of 3400000000 MPs per 30 tons of 
sludge produced on a daily bases. This amount provides new elements for 
regulation  of  the  biosolid  disposal  in  the  environment.  Also,  the  great 
variability of methods in detecting and characterizing microplastics in WWT 
plants highlights the need to create a standardized procedure and to include the 
NP in the evaluation, since they are the most dangerous particles and most 
difﬁcult to remove.
30
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.2.4. Microplastics in a WWTP’s efﬂuent. Source: S. Magni et al. (2018)
Several studies highlights that the release of MPs from WWTPs are mainly due 
to  a  lack  of  ad-hoc  designed  processes  addressing  microplastic  removal 
(Talvitie et al., 2017), since plastic pollution is a new issue that still requires 
experience and technologies.  
The  traditional  wastewater  processing  can  be  grouped  into  four  main 
treatments: preliminary treatment, primary treatment, secondary treatment, and 
tertiary treatment, also named ﬁnal or advanced treatment (Muralikrishna, I.V. 
et al., 2017). Preliminary treatment is often required to boost the performance 
of the following treatment steps. Primary treatment consists in removing large 
suspended organic solids, it involves coagulation (Hidayaturrahman and Lee, 
2019), ozonation (Chen et al., 2018) for MPs removal that occur with a 
efﬁciency of approximately 25%. The secondary treatment, involving activated 
sludge process (Edo et al., 2020; Magni et al., 2019) and other processes, can 
reduce microplastic concentrations by 75% (J. Talvitie et al., 2015). Removal 
efﬁciency of 98% could be reached by tertiary treatment, with activated carbon 
treatment, ﬁltration and membrane processes. A study by T. Poerio et al. 2019 
shows that ultraﬁltration could be used to remove PE particles totally, but 
further studies are required to understand the inﬂuence of microplastics on the 
cake layer formation and the fouling. Also the shape of microplastic can affect 
31
==PAGE:36==
their removal in different water treatments, since as reported in Talvitie et al. 
2017, a portion of plastic in “ﬁber shape” is not retained by the WWTPs. 
Therefore, the ﬁnal stage treatments should be designed to target the ﬁbers to 
increase the removal efﬁciency of MPs. The performance of Reverse Osmosis 
(RO) at the end of a WWTP with respect to MPs removal was reported by 
Ziajahromi et al. 2017: results indicate the presence of microplastic ﬁbers in the 
samples after RO process, in particular, irregular shaped microplastic were 
identiﬁed by Fourier Transform Infra Red spectroscopy analyses in Attenuated 
Total Reﬂectance (ATR-FTIR) as alkyd resin (modiﬁed polyester). The author 
attributed this detection to some membrane defects or small openings between 
pipework, indicating the necessity to design the processes speciﬁcally for 
microplastic  removal.  RO  obtained  particularly  good  performances  when 
coupled with membrane bioreactor (MBR). The use of a MBR signiﬁcantly 
improved the MP removal and decreased the number of process stages, hence 
MBR are very promising in reducing MP pollution (T. Poerio et al., 2019). 
WWTPs currently have trouble especially in removing the “ﬁber shaped” 
plastic particles coming from the washing of synthetic clothing, which is the 
most abundant shape of plastic particles found in the wastewaters (U. Pirc et 
al., 2018), this is why this study will focus on ﬁber removal through membrane 
process.
3.2.4. Microplastics from laundering of synthetic textile
Laundering of synthetic textiles has been assessed as the main source of 
primary micro plastics in the oceans (F. De Falco et al. 2019). In 2016 more 
than 100 million tons of textiles were produced, of which 65% was made up of 
synthetic ﬁbers mostly composed of polyester (a class that mainly includes 
PET) but also polyamide (PA), polypropylene (PP), polyethylene (PE), acrylic 
and a number of other polymers (Jönsson et al., 2018). In a laundry machine, 
the washing process leads to a release of MPs through abrasion and shedding of 
ﬁbers due to the mechanical and chemical stresses that fabrics undergoes. 
32
==PAGE:37==
The washing methods, the products used and the material type can affect the 
release of microﬁbers as explained below:
- Washing time: higher times lead to an increase in release, due to the longer 
exposure to friction, but the differences are not signiﬁcant (De Falco et al., 
2018).
- Friction: greater mechanical action leads to an increase in release even if with 
insigniﬁcant differences (De Falco et al., 2018).
- Temperature: Higher temperatures lead to a slight increase in MP due to 
greater surface abrasion and relaxation of the polyester fabrics in the event 
that  an  alkaline  detergent  is  used  (De  Falco  et  al.,  2018,  Napper  & 
Thompson, 2016).
- Detergent: the use of powder detergent seems to lead to a greater detachment 
of ﬁbers than liquid detergent: the reasons are different, ﬁrst it can contain 
zeolite, a inorganic compound that is insoluble in water that can create 
friction with fabrics. Second, powder detergent has a higher pH and alkaline 
detergents are effective in inducing chemical damage to polyester fabrics by 
slow hydrolysis of the surface (De Falco et al., 2018). Moreover powder 
detergents can lead to an underestimation in the determination of MP because 
it creates a layer on the ﬁlter in which the ﬁbers can partially penetrate 
(Napper & Thompson, 2016).
- Water hardness: the increase in water hardness can lead to greater abrasion of 
the fabrics (De Falco et al., 2018).
- Washes performed with fabric softener and whitening agent (bleach) induce a 
decrease in the ﬁbers released by the polyester fabric (PES) compared to the 
scenarios with liquid detergent (De Falco et al., 2018). About the softener, its 
effect may be due to the ability to reduce the friction between the ﬁbers by 
counteracting the effect of the detergent which makes the garments more 
rigid. This reduce damage and breakage of the ﬁbers. In addition, the softener 
acts as an antistatic agent allowing the ﬁbers to retain more water (Napper & 
Thompson, 2016). It has been estimated that the use of softener during a 
33
==PAGE:38==
home wash of 5 kg of polyester fabrics can reduce the release of microﬁbers 
by more than 35% (De Falco et al. 2018) 
- Fabric processing: the distinction is between loom-woven fabrics that is 
composed of two yarns (woven), which are respectively the weft and the 
warp, or knitted garments, consisting of a single yarn (knitted). Polyester 
(PES)  releases  a  greater  amount  of  ﬁbers  when  present  in  the  fabric, 
compared to when it is knitted
- Fabric age: new fabrics frees a higher amount of ﬁbers than garment that has 
been used for a long time and washed a certain number of times: tests carried 
out by Napper & Thompson (2016) on polyester fabrics show that the 
number of ﬁbers tends to decrease by about 50%-65% (based on the fabric 
studied) after the ﬁrst 5 washes and stabilize. According to Pirc et al. (2016) 
the number of ﬁbers released by a PET fabric stabilizes at the eighth wash.
- Length of the ﬁbers: the shorter ﬁbers may slide off the yarn more easily 
during washing, causing more release from the fabric
- Virgin or recycled polymers: washing jerseys made from recycled polymers 
releases less ﬁbers than washing fabrics made from virgin polymers (Roos et 
al., 2017). An example is provided by the results of Falco et al. (2019a) 
which show release values of 48.6 mg microﬁbers / kg tissue as opposed to 
125 mg microﬁbres / kg tissue of virgin material.
A recent study by F. De Falco et al. 2019 describes the release of synthetic 
ﬁbers from washing processes. The tests were conducted on BT, a 100% 
polyester t-shirt, RT a 100% polyester t-shirt, GB, a 100% polyester blouse of 
which 65% is recycled polyester, and GT, a top whose front is made of 100% 
polyester and whose back is made of a blend of 50% cotton and 50% modal. 
After one cycle, washing 2-2.5 kg of clothes, the average microﬁbers released 
was in average 151.25 mg/kg of textile washed (Figure 3.2.5.)
34
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.2.5. Microﬁbres released (mg/kg) from different types of textiles (F. De 
Falco et al 2019)
According to this study, the 1st cycle is the most critical for the release of the 
ﬁbers, as shown in Figure 3.2.6.
Figure 3.2.6. Microﬁbers released (mg/kg) during 10 washing cycles from (a) BT and 
(b) GT (F. De Falco et al 2019)
Figure 3.2.7. Microﬁbres released (mg/kg) from different textiles, recovered on 
different pore size ﬁlters (F. De Falco et al 2019)
About the most frequent size of ﬁbers released, the study reports that the ﬁbers 
recovered on the 60 μm pore size ﬁlter represent the most abundant fraction 
(Figure 3.2.7.) .Those ﬁbers had a average length of 0.445 mm (Figure 3.2.8.). 
35
==PAGE:40==
To get some information about the concentration of ﬁbers in the wastewater, a 
sample of 30 mL of wastewater coming from the 1st cycle was ﬁltered through 
a 5 um pore size ﬁlter and revealed a average concentration of ﬁbers of 20.5 
mg/kg. (Figure 3.2.9.)
Figure 3.2.8. Length of ﬁbers released from different textiles and captured by different 
pore size ﬁlters (F. De Falco et al 2019)
Figure 3.2.9. Concentration of ﬁbers released (F. De Falco et al 2019)
36
==PAGE:41==
4. Methods
The main water quality physical-chemical parameters were measured in the 
feed sample (Figure 4.1), which was taken from wastewater coming from the 
1st cycle of the textile washing machine and then, after performing ﬁltration, in 
the permeate of both membranes. pH, Conductivity, Turbidity, Total alkalinity 
(TAL),  Total  Suspended  Solids  (TSS),  Volatile  Suspended  Solids  (VSS), 
Chemical  Oxygen  Demand  (COD)  were  calculated.  Then  the  water  was 
characterized in terms of presence of microplastics and nanoplastics.
Figure 4.1.1. Wastewater sample before ﬁltration
Membrane characterization was performed with Scanning Electron Microscopy 
(SEM) and Capillarity Flow Porometry (CFP).  Filtration was performed with a 
SiC and a ZrO2 membranes having tubular shape and area of 0.09 m2, running 
the unit with cross-ﬂow conﬁguration. Clean water permeability was measured, 
then the test was divided into two steps: one consisted in the ﬁltration of 
artiﬁcial water contained designed ﬁbers, the other consisted in the ﬁltration of 
37
==PAGE:42==
the real wastewater. The aim was to ﬁnd the critical ﬂux, the back-ﬂush time 
and to investigate the fouling effect.
4.1. Water characterization
4.1.1. Physical-chemical parameters
Water samples were collected from feed and permeate and they were analyzed 
for the main physical-chemical parameters. Measurements were repeated two-
three times to assess reproducibility.
• pH: pH is a measure of acidity, measuring the activity of the hydrogen ion in 
a logarithmic of 10 scale. It goes from 0 (acid) to 14 (basic), neutrality 
corresponds to pH equal to 7, which is the pH of distilled water at 25°C. 
Industrial wastewater can be acidic or basic, requiring neutralization. pH has 
effects  on  bacterial  activity,  dissociation  equilibrium  of  compounds, 
solubilization or precipitation of salts, hydroxides and metals. In this study 
pH was measured with a pH probe HQ40D (Hach, USA) and with a pH 
indicator. 
• TDS, TSS and TDS: Total Suspended Solids (TSS) is the amount of solids in 
suspension in the liquid sample and which can be separated by mechanical 
means such as vacuum ﬁltration or centrifugation. TSS is determined by the 
difference of Total Solids (TS) and Total Dissolved Solids (TDS), as in 
Figure 4.1.2: to determine TS (usually measured in mg/L) a known quantity 
of the sample, well homogenized, was placed in a ceramic capsule of known 
weight, then placed in an oven at 105 ° C for 20 minutes and then cooled in a 
desiccator for other 15 minutes. By difference in the weight of the capsule 
after and before drying, the TS were determined. A similar procedure was 
used for measuring TDS,  but on sample previously ﬁltered on a 0.45 μm 
ﬁlter. 
38
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.1.2. Schematics of the classiﬁcation of the solids
Volatile  Suspended  Solids  (VSS)  is  the  volatile  component  of  the  Total 
Suspended Solids previously deﬁned, and it represents the organic component. 
To ﬁnd the VSS, the sample was put in the oven at 500°C for 1 hour to make 
VSS evaporate, then they were cooled in a desiccator for 20 minutes and 
weighted, obtaining the sum of aluminum disc, ﬁlter and the ashes. Ashes are 
the non volatile part of the TSS, representing the the inorganic component. 
Since TSS is equal to the sum of VSS and ashes, the VSS were calculated as in 
equation (1):
(1)
• Total Alkalinity TAL: Total Alkalinity is the capacity of water to neutralize 
acids. In uncontaminated water, alkalinity is determined by the presence of 
these ions: carbonate, bicarbonate, hydroxyl and hydrogen by (3)     
(3)       
      TAL =[𝑂𝐻−]+[𝐻𝐶𝑂−]+2[𝐶𝑂2−]-[𝐻+]            
  
where A is expressed in equivalents per liter and the ions are measured in moles 
per liter. It is measured by titration, that consists the slow adding of a strong 
acid to the water until the pH diminished to 4.5, which corresponds to the 
equivalence point in (4) 
39
VSS
Ashes
                      final weight of the filter with TSS - final weight of the filter with ashes
==PAGE:44==
 (4)       
       [𝐻+] = [𝐻𝐶𝑂−] 
A sample volume of 50 mL was transferred with a pipette to a conical ﬂask 
with a pH probe in it. Sulﬁc acids was used as strong acid in a concentration of 
0.0481 mol/L to titrate the sample. The sample was titrated with sulﬁc acid 
until the probe measured a pH of 4.5, and the volume of used titrant was read at 
the burette. 6 mL of titrant was used to bring the pH from 6.8 to 4.5.
Total alkalinity is deﬁned empirically by titration with acid as stated in the 
equation (5)
   (5)           %
where A is the volume of the sample in mL, B is the normality of titrant in eq/
L,  and C is the volume of of titrant used in mL.
• Conductivity: is the capacity of a solution to conduct electricity. It is a 
parameter directly linked to the TDS. Typically high quality deionized water 
has a conductivity of about 0.5 μS/cm at 25 °C, typical drinking water is in 
the range of 200 - 800 μS/cm, while sea water is about 50000 μS/cm. A 
conductivity meter measures the amount of electrical current or conductance 
in a solution. Meters are equipped with a probe: after the probe is placed in 
the liquid to be measured, the meter applies voltage between two electrodes 
inside the probe: electrical resistance from the solution causes a drop in 
voltage, which is read by the meter. Conductivity is temperature dependent: 
over  a  limited  temperature  range,  the  way  temperature  affects  the 
conductivity of a solution can be calculated linearly through the equation (6):
(6) 
   
where T is the temperature of the sample, Tcal is the calibration temperature, σT 
is  the  electrical  conductivity  at  the  temperature  T,  σTcal  is  the  electrical 
conductivity  at  the  calibration  temperature  Tcal,  α  is  the  temperature 
Alkalinity eq/L = C mL titrant ⋅B eq/L
A mL sample
40
==PAGE:45==
compensation gradient of the solution. In this study conductivity was tested 
with an electrical conductivity meter (EC400 model ExStik).
• Turbidity: Turbidity is the cloudiness or haziness of a ﬂuid caused by large 
numbers of individual particles, usually invisible to the naked eye. While 
some suspended material (settable solids) will be large and heavy enough to 
settle rapidly to the bottom of the container if a liquid sample is left still, very 
small  particles,  for  example  colloids,  will  not  settle.  These  small  solid 
particles cause the liquid to appear turbid. It is a key factor of water quality 
both from a aesthetic and a hygienic point of view, since contaminants, in 
particular  the  Priority  Substances  deﬁned  by  European  Union,  but  also 
viruses and bacteria, can attach on the solids’ surface. 
ISO 7027:1999 is the standard for water quality that enables the determination 
of turbidity. This technique is used to determine the concentration of suspended 
particles in a sample of water by measuring the incident light scattered at right 
angles from the sample. The scattered light is captured by a photodiode, which 
produces an electronic signal that is converted to a turbidity. The most widely 
used measurement unit for turbidity is the Formazin Turbidity Unit (FTU), ISO 
refers to it as FNU (Formazin Nephelometric Units). Another measure of 
Turbidity is called Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU), which describes the 
propensity of particles to scatter a light beam focused on them. Turbidity 
measured this way uses an instrument called a nephelometer with the detector 
set up to the side of the light beam. The more small particles scattering the 
source beam there are, the more light reaches the detector.
In this study turbidity has been tested with a Turbidimeter TN-100 (Thermo 
Scientiﬁc Eutech, USA), calibrated with a Kalkit Turb 430. The calibration was 
done according to the Turbidity Standards, the standards of the set were tested 
with a pHotoFlex Turn Turbidimeter which was calibrated by use of master 
standards that are traceable to stock primary Formazin as speciﬁed in the 
standard method 2130 of the “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water 
and Wastewater” 20th edition. The samples for the calibration are reported in 
Table 4.1.1.
41
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.1.1. Turbidity sample calibration 
• COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand): COD is an overall measure of all organic 
substance, both biodegradable and non-biodegradable, which is carried out 
by chemical oxidation with potassium dichromate (very strong oxidant) and 
catalyst. It does not provide information on biodegradability, but on the other 
hand allows to calculate exact mass balances referring to the oxidation of the 
organic substance, both chemically and biochemically. In this study COD 
was calculated with a cuvette test for COD with 15-150 mg/L O2
4.1.2. Microplastics
First, the wastewater was analyzed to detect and measure the micro and nano 
ﬁbers. The main purpose of this phase was to ﬁnd two information about the 
ﬁbers: number and size distribution. The number is useful to calculate what is 
approximately the concentration of them in the water. The size tells what ﬁbers 
are more likely to be captured by the membrane and what are going to pass 
through it. A sample of 20 mL of wastewater was ﬁltered through a 5 um pore 
size  ﬁlter  and  light  microscopy  (Figure  4.1.3.)  was  applied  to  detect 
microsplastics  in  the  sample.  Observing  the  ﬁlter  at  the  microscope,  the 
prevalence  of  dust  was  immediately  evident,  hence,  a  pretreatment  with 
hydrogen peroxide was made necessary to remove part of the carbon and make 
the particle detection more easy: 1 mL H2O2 was added to 20 mL water. The 
ﬁbers were detected and measured using QCapture Pro software.  This test was 
repeated three times.
Lot no.
Nominal value
Tolerance
Measured value
18262511
0.02 FNU
+- 0.02 FNU
0.02 FNU
18179047
10.0 FNU
+- 1%
10.0 FNU
17502261
1000 FNU
+- 1%
999 FNU
42
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.1.3. Light microscopy
• Number: the ﬁbers were detected through visual counting. The ﬁlter was 
divided into a net of boxes as in Figure 4.1.4., that made it easier to make a 
count box by box. In order to speed up the counting, only 12 squares were 
chosen, in a well distributed manner in the ﬁlter. Their area was 0.25 cm². 
The average number of microplastics counted per box were multiplied for the 
total number of boxes contained in the sample, that according to the total area 
of the ﬁlter (23.74 cm²) was 94.94 boxes.
1
2
3
4
6
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.1.4. Scheme of the ﬁlter. In blue are numbered the boxes selected for the 
microplastic counting
• Lenght: the microplastics detected in the selected boxes were measured with 
the software QCapture Pro to deﬁne the microplastic size distribution in the 
wastewater.  QCapture  Pro  is  a  program  that  provides  imaging  analysis 
capabilities and can be used for acquiring, enhancing and analyzing images.
• Some  calculations  about  the  industrial  tent  laundering:  to  get 
informations about the case of industrial tent washing and ﬁnd out how many 
microplastics  could  can  come  out  from  a  tent  washing  machine,  some 
technical speciﬁcations from industrial tents washing machines have been 
found and are reported in the Figure 4.1.7. An average of the values from 
Figure 4.1.5. has been calculated: weight capacity (just tents): 445 kg per 
load; water used during ﬁlling = 630 L; water used per cycle = 2727 L (600 
gallons); loads/day = 3.58 loads/day; days/week of operation = 4.5 days/
week.
44
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.1.7. Technical speciﬁcation for industrial tents washing machines (https://
www.teecosolutions.eu)
45
==PAGE:50==
4.2. Membrane Characterization
4.2.1. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) imaging has been used by researchers to 
characterize the membrane properties. A proper understanding of the membrane 
surface properties is essential to assess how these can change over time. 
Scanning Electron Microscopy have been extensively used to characterize the 
membrane surface properties (Z. Abdullah et al., 2014), both qualitatively 
(visual observation) and quantitatively (pore size, pore shape and porosity).
• Principles of SEM imaging
A scanning electron microscope produces images of a sample surface by 
scanning the surface with a focused beam of electrons which interacts with the 
atoms contained in the sample, producing signals that give information about 
the surface topography and composition. The electron beam is scanned in a 
raster scan pattern, and the position of the beam is combined with the intensity 
of the detected signal to produce an image. In ﬁltration and similar applications 
it is essential to know the smallest diameter of the through pores (C. Agarwal et 
al. 2012). The signals used by an SEM to produce an image result from 
interactions of the electron beam with atoms at various depths within the 
sample. Various types of signals are produced including secondary electrons 
(SE),  back-scattered  electrons  (BSE),  characteristic  X-rays  and  light 
(cathodoluminescence) absorbed current (specimen current) and transmitted 
electrons. An electron beam is emitted from an electron gun ﬁtted with a 
tungsten ﬁlament cathode. The beam passes through pairs of scanning coils or 
pairs of deﬂector plates in the electron column, typically in the ﬁnal lens, which 
deﬂect the beam in the x and y axes so that it scans in a raster fashion over a 
rectangular  area  of  the  sample  surface.  When  the  primary  electron  beam 
interacts  with  the  sample,  the  electrons  lose  energy  by  repeated  random 
scattering and absorption within a teardrop-shaped volume of the specimen 
known as the interaction volume, which extends from less than 100 nm to 
46
==PAGE:51==
approximately 5 μm into the surface. The size of the interaction volume 
depends on the electron's landing energy, the atomic number of the specimen 
and the specimen's density.
• Membrane preparation
SEM samples have to be small enough to ﬁt on the specimen stage, and may 
need special preparation to increase their electrical conductivity and to stabilize 
them, so that they can withstand the high vacuum conditions and the high 
energy  beam  of  electrons.  Samples  are  generally  mounted  rigidly  on  a 
specimen  holder  or  stub  using  a  conductive  adhesive.  Non-conducting 
materials  are  usually  coated  with  an  ultra-thin  coating  of  electrically 
conducting material, deposited on the sample either by low-vacuum sputter 
coating  or  by  high-vacuum  evaporation.  The  membranes  were  dried  in  a 
vacuum drier at room temperature and then coated with a metal using a sputter 
coater to achieve a speciﬁc coating thickness (Figure 4.2.1.). Commonly used 
coating materials are gold (Au), gold–platinum (AuPt), gold-palladium (AuPd), 
chromium (Cr) and iridium (Ir).  Metal used affects structure of coating. The 
use of gold and gold composite often result in coating with uneven thickness, 
and  a  relatively  thick  layer  is  needed  to  get  a  uniform  coating.  Iridium/
chromium  provides  smoother  coating  and  even  coating  thickness  can  be 
archived with a relatively thin layer (R. Sebring et al., 1997)
Figure 4.2.1. Coater for SEM
47
==PAGE:52==
Commonly used range for coating thickness is 2–5 nm. Samples with an 
extremely thin layer of coating (i.e. 2 nm) can be imaged at moderately high 
magniﬁcation but as drawback a thin layer may result in an uneven distribution 
of  metal,  which  can  lead  to  charging,  image  drift,  and  beam  damage  to 
membrane, especially in case of polymeric membranes (Jeol USA, JEOL Guide 
to Scanning Microsocope Observation, 2013). A thick layer can obscure detail, 
add  ﬁne-scale  texture  or  can  ﬁll  in  nanoscale  gaps  and  also  can  bridge 
nanopores, which will lead to the inaccurate measurements of the membrane 
surface properties.  On the surface of the membrane samples no coating was 
applied. For the cross section, the metal used for coating was gold. In Table 
4.2.1. there is a synthesis of the parameters used to coat the two samples.
Table 4.2.1. Parameters chosen for the SEM testing
Magniﬁcation in an SEM can be done over a range of about 6 orders of 
magnitude from about 10 to 3000000 times. Magniﬁcation is not a function of 
the lens but results from the ratio of the dimensions of the raster on the 
specimen and the raster on the display device.
4.2.2. Capillarity Flow Porometry (CFP)
Capillary  Flow  Porometry  is  a  characterization  technique  based  on  the 
displacement of a wetting liquid from the sample pores by applying a gas at 
increasing pressure. It is useful to measure minimum, maximum, mean ﬂow 
pore sizes, pore size distribution of the pores in membranes and the bubble 
48
Material
Gold
Coater used
Quorum Q150TES
Sputtering time
60 s
Sputtering current
20 mA
Thickness
9.3 nm
==PAGE:53==
point pressure, which is is deﬁned as the pressure at which the ﬁrst gas bubble 
appears while decreasing pressure on a ﬂuid sample.
In this technique an inert gas is used to displace a liquid that is in the pores. 
The pressure required to empty the pore corresponds to the pressure necessary 
to evacuate the liquid from the most constricted part of the pore, that offers the 
highest resistance to remove the wetting liquid and therefore is the most 
challenging  one.  This  parameter  is  very  relevant  in  ﬁltration  and  similar 
applications since it is important to know the smallest diameter of the pores. To 
measure the pore size it is necessary to impregnate the samples with a wetting 
liquid. An inert gas ﬂow is used to displace the liquid that is in the pores and 
the  pressure  required  to  empty  the  most  constricted  part  of  the  pore  is 
measured. The most constricted part of the pore is the most challenging one 
because it offers the highest resistance to remove the wetting liquid. This 
measured pressure permits to obtain the pore diameter, which is calculated with 
the Young-Laplace formula (7)
(7)
P= 4·γ·cosθ·/D 
where D is the pore size diameter, P is the measured pressure, γ is the surface 
tension of the wetting liquid and θ is the contact angle of the wetting liquid 
with the sample. The surface tension γ is a measurable physical property and 
depends on the wetting liquid used. The contact angle θ depends on the 
interaction between the material and the wetting liquid. In CFP the wetting 
liquid enters spontaneously the pores of the sample ensuring a total wetting of 
the material, and therefore the contact angle of the wetting liquid with the 
sample is 0 and the previous formula can be simplied as (8)
(8)
     P= 4·γ/D
49
==PAGE:54==
Measurement methods include
• Pressure scan: in this approach the pressure increases continuously at a 
constant rate and the gas ﬂow through the sample is measured. The number 
of data points acquired can be adjusted by the user. It is a method generally 
recommended for quality control work and for samples with identical pores. 
It is important to take into account that when the samples have a complex 
structure and with a considerable amount of pores of different tortuosity it is 
possible that, during the pressure scan, pores with the same diameter but 
higher pore length are not emptied at the pressure corresponding to their 
diameter. Therefore that longer pores will result in a smaller pore size than 
the actual one. This is the method used in this study.
• Pressure  step/stability:  it  represents  an  alternative  for  a  more  accurate 
measurement of the pore sizes. It takes into account the different tortuosity 
and length of pores. The acquisition of a data point is only carried out after 
holding the pressure at a constant value for a time deﬁned by the user and 
also only after the gas ﬂow through the sample is stable. This allows enough 
time for the gas ﬂow to displace the wetting liquid in long and tortuous pores 
of the same diameter. Moreover, it allows measuring the true First Bubble 
Point (FBP), in opposition to the pressure scan method which only permits 
calculation the FBP at the selected ﬂow rates.
CFP is  useful  to  obtain  different  parameters  in  a  single  measurement.  A 
measurements with the wet sample is carried out ﬁrst: it is normally known as 
the "wet run”, and the representation of the gas ﬂow vs. the applied pressure is 
the "wet curve”. After the wet run the measurement of the same sample in dry 
state is carried out in order to deﬁne a "dry curve". The half-dry curve is 
obtained by the mathematical division by 2 of the data originating from the dry 
curve. From the representation of the three curves (schematically represented in 
Figure 11. it is possible to identify relevant information about the sample: 
50
==PAGE:55==
• Maximum pore size (or ﬁrst bubble point) is recorded when gas ﬂow through 
the sample is being detected;
• Mean ﬂow pore size corresponds to the pore size at which 50% of the total 
gas ﬂow can be accounted (half the ﬂow is through pores larger than this 
diameter) and it is calculated at the pressure where the wet curve and the half 
dry curve meet;
• Minimum pore size is calculated at the pressure at which the wet curve meets 
the dry curve: from this point onwards the ﬂow will be the same because all 
the pores have been emptied;
• Gas  ﬂow  rate  (if  the  material  area  and  thickness  are  known,  the  gas 
permeability can also be calculated)
• Cumulative ﬁlter ﬂow distribution vs the pore size, which shows which 
percentage of the ﬂow (at the Y-axis) has passed through pores with a size 
larger than the value at the corresponding point at the X-axis. It is also known 
as ﬁlter efﬁciency;
• Differential ﬁlter ﬂow shows the percentage of ﬂow (at the Y-axis), which has 
passed the pores with a corresponding size at the X-axis and the following 
size value at the same axis. According to ASTM this graph shows the so 
called “pore size frequency”;
• Pore size ﬂow distribution shows the ﬂow distribution normalized per unit of 
change in size (ﬂow changes are divided by size changes). Sometimes it is 
also referred to as pore size distribution.
The choice of the wetting liquid is very important for the test. Some of the most 
used  wetting  liquids  used  include  water,  alcohols,  silicone  oil  and 
perﬂuoroethers, and the choice depend on the type of sample analyzed and on 
the application. It is important to use always the same wetting liquid when 
comparing results. In this study perﬂuoroethers has been used, since this type 
of wetting liquid present the advantage to have very slow surface tensions and 
low vapor pressures. Water and alcohols can evaporate easily and so the sample 
51
==PAGE:56==
can be partially dry before the actual test begins, also water has a high surface 
tension compared to perﬂuoroethers, so water presents the drawback to need a 
higher pressure in order to measure the same pore size. Silicone oil does not 
present the evaporation drawback but its high viscosity is a disadvantage when 
it comes to cleaning the equipment between one measurement and other. 
Figure 4.2.2. Typical curves obtained by the CFP technique
Capillary Flow Porometry was performed on each membrane, cutting a sample 
of 2.5 cm from a tubular membrane in three different points of it: left, middle, 
and right (Figure 4.2.3.)
Figure 4.2.3. Schematics of the samples cut from the membrane to perform CFP
The samples, once cut, needed a further preparation. First, a coating had to be 
put on the cross section (Figure 4.2.4.) to block the surface pores. An ABS 
(acrylonitril butadiene styrene) solution with 20 wt% in acetone in a 250 ml 
cap bottle was prepared. The sample was hold and dipped in the ABS solution 
for the ﬁrst 0.5 cm from the cut. Compressed air was blown carefully through 
the holes in the sample from the dry size, and the sample was put in a fume 
Left          Middle       Right
3.5 cm
2.5 cm
52
==PAGE:57==
hood for drying, with the wet side upwards. The procedure was repeated on all 
the samples for both membranes.
Figure 4.2.4. Cross section of the ZrO2 membrane 
The sample was put in a small beaker and a porewick solution was added to 
fully cover it. It was left in the solution for 30 minutes, to let the solution 
saturate the pores, until the sample was no longer bobbling. Then it was ready 
to be mounted in the sample holder, which is then tightened with the screws 
and adjusted checking the distance between the top and the bottom part of the 
sample holder.
Figure 4.2.5. Sample holder opened (a) and closed (b)
(a)
(b)
53
==PAGE:58==
Capillarity  measurement  were  taken  through  the  software  Quantachrome 
Instruments 3GWin2 Porometer 3G. Some of the values to give in input were 
the range of the pore size, the diameter of the sample holder, the type of 
wetting ﬂuid (Poroﬁl) and the pressure range, adjustable in the settings. For the 
ZrO2 membrane, which pore size is smaller, a higher pressure was needed, so it 
was necessary to open the valve of the N2 bottle. The ﬁle containing the 
measurements was saved as “.por”.
4.3. Filtration tests
The tests were all conducted on a unit running with cross ﬂow and tubular 
membranes with membrane area of 0.09 m². A schematics of the unit is shown 
in Figure 4.3.1. The unit was run with 1527 L/h of crossﬂow and with 90% 
recovery. The tube of the retentate and of the permeate were connected to the 
tank of the feed, in order to perform recirculation.
Figure 4.3.1. Schematics of the unit. 
The following steps have been followed for each ﬁltration test (Figure 4.3.2.). 
In Figure 4.3.3. it is possible to see the control monitor (a) and the place of the 
tubular membrane (b) of the unit.
Feed
Permeate
Retentate
Crossflow
Membrane
Pumps
Valves
54
==PAGE:59==
• Clean water permeability: Before using the membrane in real applications 
with wastewater, clean water permeability should be measured. Clean water 
permeability is a useful parameter to compare the water permeability before 
and after the cleaning in place of the membrane. 
• Critical ﬂux determination: The critical ﬂux is deﬁned as the threshold ﬂux 
below which irreversible fouling does not occur, and above which fouling 
becomes  noticeable.  Testing  with  a  gradual  increase  of  TMP  and 
measurement of ﬂux can be performed to determine the critical ﬂux or, as an 
alternative,  it is possible to gradually increase the ﬂow (so the ﬂux) and to 
measure TMP. This second option was the one chosen for the experiment.
• Back-ﬂushing: To control deposition of solids on the membrane surface, 
backﬂushing  (BF)  of  the  membrane  is  performed.  When  back-ﬂushing 
permeate is pressed back through the membrane by a pump. The maximum 
interval that should be kept between each back-ﬂush was investigated in 
order to have an optimal operation, where stable ﬂux and only a small 
permeate consumption are required.
• Cleaning  in  Place  (CIP):  It  is  very  important  for  the  operation  and 
maintenance of any membrane facility. It is a way of restoring the original 
ﬂux of the membrane, by cleaning the system with a combination of alkalines 
(RO DAN 220 Alkaline membrane cleaning agent) and acids (RO DAN 
Acid). It is called cleaning in place since the cleaning is done without 
removing the membrane from the housing. During CIP the cleaning solution 
is recirculated inside the loop of the membrane plant, with the permeate line 
closed. Typically both chemicals and elevated temperature of the water will 
help to clean the membrane. During the CIP procedure the permeate valve is 
closed and the valve connecting the CIP loop to the membrane is opened. 
The cleaning was performed with the following phases
- 5 minutes rinsing with cold tap water
- 30 minutes run with 20 L of hot water mixed with 2% in volume of base
- 5 minutes rinsing with cold tap water
55
==PAGE:60==
- 30 minutes run with 20 L of hot water mixed with 2% in volume of base
- 5 minutes rinsing with cold tap water
After CIP, clean water permeability needs to be measured again, to check if the 
membrane has restored its ﬁltration capacities.
Figure 4.3.2. Flow diagram of the test plan
Figure 4.3.3. Unit monitor (a) and tubular membrane case (b)
• Clean water permeability determination
Determination of the clean water permeability of the ZrO2 membrane
RO water was used, the ﬂow (L/h) was gradually increased every 10 minutes: 
2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 20, 30, 40, and TMP was measured every 5 minutes. Cross ﬂow = 
1527 L/h, Recovery = 90 %
Determination of the clean water permeability of the SiC membrane
56
Clean water 
permeability
Critical flux
determination
(TMP step-up) 
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
BF 
investigation
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
Long term
experiment
==PAGE:61==
RO water was used, ﬂow (L/h) was gradually increased every 10 minutes: 5, 
10, 20, 30, 40, 100, 200, 300 and TMP was measured every 5 minutes. Cross 
ﬂow = 1527 L/h, Recovery = 90 %
4.3.1.  Filtration of the artiﬁcial water 
Figure 4.3.4. Schematics of the experimental plan
As shown in Figure 4.3.4. the test was conducted in different steps:
• Filtration of RO water mixed with large microplastics (lenght: 1000, 700 and 
500 μm) mixed in equal parts
• Filtration of RO water mixed with small microplastics (lenght: 80 μm) 
• Filtration of wastewater from the 1st cycle of the washing machine
All tests were conducted on the SiC and the ZrO2 membrane. The scope of the 
ﬁrst two tests was to see the behavior of the membrane regarding the rejection 
of microplastics of different sizes and concentrations.
The two artiﬁcial water tests were conducted running RO water containing 
designed nylon microplastics in the shape of ﬁbers, in different concentrations 
Clean water 
permeability
Critical flux
determination
(TMP step-up) 
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
Artificial water mix of 1000, 700 and 500 um
ZrO2
Clean water 
permeability
Critical flux
determination
(TMP step-up) 
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
SiC
SiC
Real water
Clean water 
permeability
Critical flux
determination
(TMP step-up) 
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
BF 
investigation
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
Long term
experiment
ZrO2
Clean water 
permeability
Critical flux
determination
(TMP step-up) 
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
BF 
investigation
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
Long term
experiment
Clean water 
permeability
Critical flux
determination
(TMP step-up) 
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
Artificial water 80 um
ZrO2
Clean water 
permeability
Critical flux
determination
(TMP step-up) 
CIP
Clean water 
permeability
SiC
57
==PAGE:62==
and size distribution, described in Table 4.3.1. They are visible also in Figure 
4.3.5., under light microscopy. 
Table 4.3.1. Designed nylon ﬁbers average length and standard deviation
Red particles, with mean length of 80 μm, are the smaller particles taken into 
account  in  the  tests.  They  are  obtained  through  cryogenic  grinding  (or 
cryogrinding). Cryogrinding is a technique that consist in freezing a material 
and then reducing it into a small particle size through milling. Due to the 
technique  used  to  produce  them,  their  standard  deviation  is  quite  high 
corresponding to 0.039 mm. Their broad size distribution is visible also though 
light microscopy in Figure 4.3.5.
Figure 4.3.5. Microplastics at light microscopy (a) Mean length: blue 1000 μm, green 
700 μm, black 500 μm (b) Mean length: red 80 μm, standard deviation 0.039 μm
• The choice of the ﬁber size
The microplastics recovered on the 60 μm pore size ﬁlter, with average lenght 
of 0.445 mm, represent the most abundant fraction. This fraction is abundant 
also in the wastewater sample: observing the microplastics in the wastewater 
58
Average length (mm)
Microplastic color
Standard deviation (mm)
1
Blue
negligible
0.7
Green
negligible
0.5
Black
negligible
0.08
Red
0.039
(a)
(b
==PAGE:63==
feed through light microscopy the most abundant fraction of ﬁbers found was 
the one with size  length between 0.4 and 0.6 mm. Also combining the data 
from literature (De Falco et al., 2019) and technical speciﬁcation, as shown in 
Table 4.3.2., the microplastics with length of 0.445 mm resulted to be the most 
abundant in terms of concentration after the 1st washing cycle.
Table 4.3.2. Fiber concentration from 445 kg of tents in 2727 L water
This evidence was the reason why the ﬁrst test was conducted with the 500 μm 
size black microplastics. The microplastics, in the form of designed ﬁbers, were 
mixed with RO water before the ﬁltration and kept well mixed through a mixer 
(Figure 4.3.6.)
Figure 4.3.6. Designed nylon ﬁbers before mixing with water (a) and red nylon ﬁbers 
mixed with RO water before the ﬁltration (b)
Critical ﬂux determination with artiﬁcial water
(a)
(b)
59
Average length 
(mm)
Filter pore size 
(μm)
Average mass of 
particles released 
(mg/kg)
Concentration of 
particles released 
(g/L)
1.35
400
19.7
0.0032
445
60
111.3
0.1815
305
20
21.3
0.0035
0.27
5
-
-
==PAGE:64==
Determination of critical ﬂux of the ZrO2 membrane with adjustment on the 
concentration
• 0.025 g/L of black particles (500 μm), RO water (20°C)
• 5 g/L of mixed particles (1000, 700, 500 μm), RO water (20°C)
Flow (L/h) was gradually increased every 10 minutes: 2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 20, 30, 40, 
TMP was measured every 5 minutes. Crossﬂow = 1527 L/h, Recovery = 90 %
Determination of critical ﬂux of the ZrO2 membrane
• 0.25 g/L of mixed particles (1000, 700, 500 μm), RO water (20°C)
• 0.18 g/L of red particles (80 μm), RO water (20°C)
Flow (L/h) was gradually increased every 10 minutes: 2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 20, 30, 40, 
TMP was measured every 5 minutes. Cross ﬂow = 1527 L/h, Recovery = 90 %
Determination of critical ﬂux of the SiC membrane
• 0.25 g/L of mixed particles (1000, 700, 500 μm), RO water (20°C)
• 0.18 g/L of red particles (80 μm), RO water (20°C)
Flow (L/h) was gradually increased every 10 minutes: 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 100, 
200, 300 and TMP was measured every 5 minutes. Cross ﬂow = 1527 L/h, 
Recovery = 90 %
4.3.2. Filtration of the wastewater: critical ﬂux determination and 
back-ﬂush time determination
The ﬁltration tests were then performed with the real wastewater from the 
industrial laundry. The water was stocked in a tank, which was closed in order 
to avoid any nuisance connected to the smell. The tank was connected to the 
unit through a tube for the feed (input in the unit) and a tube for the permeate 
and one for the retentate (output from the unit), in order to recirculate the water 
60
==PAGE:65==
(Figure 4.3.7.). A mixer on the top of the tank was used to guarantee a good 
mixing of the wastewater.
Figure 4.3.7. The unit recirculating wastewater, stored in the tank on the right
Critical ﬂux determination with real water
Determination of critical ﬂux of the ZrO2 membrane
Flow (L/h) was gradually increased every 10 minutes: 2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 20, 30, 40, 
TMP was measured every 5 minutes. Cross ﬂow = 1527 L/h, Recovery = 90 %
Determination of critical ﬂux of the SiC membrane
Flow (L/h) was gradually increased every 10 minutes: 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 100, 
200, 300 and TMP was measured every 5 minutes. Cross ﬂow = 1527 L/h, 
Recovery = 90 %
Back-ﬂush investigation with real water
Once obtained the critical ﬂow for the wastewater, the back-ﬂush time was 
determined by making the unit run at a constant ﬂow, equal to the critical ﬂow. 
61
==PAGE:66==
The back-ﬂush was ﬁxed to some speciﬁc time interval, and the TMP was read 
before and after the back-ﬂush was performed. TMP was plotted vs time.  Once 
TMP increased with respect with the initial TMP, this means that the back-ﬂush 
interval set is too long, and so for the long term ﬁltration the unit needs to be 
run with a lower time interval, since the back-ﬂush at that interval cannot bring 
the TMP back to the original one.
Back-ﬂush investigation for the ZrO2 membrane
Flow (L/h) kept constant at critical ﬂow = 5 L/h
BF set following the time intervals: 30 minutes, 1 hour, 1.5 hour, 2 hour, 3 hour
Check of the TMP at minute: 0, 15, 30, 60, 75, 90, 150, 165, 180, 270, 285, 
300, 420, 460, 480.
Back-ﬂush investigation for the SiC membrane
Flow (L/h) kept constant at critical ﬂow = 9 L/h
BF set following the time intervals: 30 minutes, 1 hour, 1.5 hour, 2 hour, 3 hour
Check of the TMP at minute: 0, 15, 30, 60, 75, 90, 150, 165, 180, 270, 285, 
300, 420, 460, 480.
Long term ﬁltration
Long term ﬁltration for the ZrO2 membrane 
Constant ﬂux a bit below the critical ﬂux (55 L/m²/h), BF time of 60 minutes 
Duration of the test: 4 days 
TMP recorded every 30 minutes.
Long term ﬁltration for the SiC membrane
Constant ﬂux a bit below the critical ﬂux (100 L/m²/h), BF time of 20 minutes 
Duration of the test: 4 days 
TMP recorded every 30 minutes.
62
==PAGE:67==
5. Results
5.1 Membrane characterization
Figure 5.1.1. Scanning Electron Microscopy applied to the membrane selective layer 
with a magniﬁcation of 5000x (a) SiC and (b) ZrO2
Figure 5.1.2. Scanning Electron Microscopy applied to the membrane cross section 
with a magniﬁcation of 500x (a) SiC and (b) ZrO2
Scanning Electron Microscopy was performed on the two membranes on the 
selective layer (Figure 5.1.1.) and on the membrane cross section (Figure 
5.1.2.): as it is possible to see confronting the results of the two membranes, the 
ZrO2 present a denser layer than the SiC. Hence, it is expected that the ZrO2 
membrane will have a better performance in terms of removal.
This  difference  in  pore  size  range  and  distribution   is  conﬁrmed  also 
quantitatively from the results of Capillary Flow Porometry, visible in Figure 
5.1.3.
63
10 um
10 um
(a)
(a)
(b)
100 um
100 um
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.1.3. Results of Capillary Flow Porometry performed on (a) SiC and (b) ZrO2 
in terms of pore ﬂow (% cumulative) plotted vs pore diameter (μm)
The average values of maximum, minimum, mean pore size and bubble point 
pressure from the three samples (middle, left and right part of a tubular 
membrane) has been calculate for both membranes. As it is possible to see from 
Table 5.1.1., the 90% of the pores (expressed as D90) in the sample are below 
302.5 nm, while for ZrO2 the 90% are below 51.9 nm. The 50% of the pores 
(D50) in the SiC samples are below 247.2 nm, while for ZrO2 the same 
percentage is below 42.6 nm, so we have one order of magnitude of difference 
between the size of the pores in the two membranes. The absolute value (or 
maximum pore size) in nm for SiC is 604.3 nm while for ZrO2 is 118.7 nm. 
This difference in terms of pore dimensions is clear also looking at the value of 
bubble point pressure, measured in bars: for SiC is 0.78, while for ZrO2 is 4.08. 
This difference in the value of pressure needed is due to the fact that the 
smaller the pores are the higher the value of pressure required to ﬁll them. 
Table 5.1.1. Results of CFP
64
(b)
(a)
Absolute value 
(nm)
D90 (nm)
D50 (nm)
Bubble point 
pressure (bars)
SiC
604.3
302.5
247.2
0.78
ZrO2
118.7
51.9
42.6
4.08
==PAGE:69==
5.2. Filtration
5.2.1. Clean water permeability 
Confronting the result of the run with clean water in Figure 5.1.4. for the SiC 
membrane and Figure 5.1.5.  for the ZrO2 one, the values of ﬂow chosen for the 
ZrO2 membrane are way lower than the ones for the SiC one because the 
smaller pores of the ZrO2 membrane (D50 of ZrO2 is 40 nm approximately) 
need more pressure with respect of the ones of the SiC (D50 is 250 nm for SiC) 
to reach the same ﬂow. For this reason it would not be possible to reach the 
same ﬂow of SiC of 100, 200 L/h since the power needed would exceed the one 
reachable by the unit pump. The maximum ﬂux (LMH) reached by the SiC 
membrane is around 2500 L/m²/hour, while for the ZrO2 it is around 400 L/m²/
hour. Permeability, deﬁned as the ratio between ﬂux and TMP, is higher for SiC 
than for ZrO2, and, in both cases, seem to remain constant with time, as it is 
possible to see in Figure 5.1.4. and 5.1.5. 
For both membranes, the relationship between TMP and ﬂux is linear as shown 
in Figure 5.1.4. a and 5.1.5. a, while permeability increases until stabilizing at 
around 2100 L/m²/hour·bar for SiC membrane (Figure 5.1.4. b) and at 325 L/
m²/hour·bar for ZrO2 (Figure 5.1.5. b).
Figure 5.1.4. Clean water test for SiC membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability vs 
time
(b)
(a)
65
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.1.5. Clean water test for ZrO2 membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability 
vs time
5.2.2. Filtration of the artiﬁcial water
Basing on the technical speciﬁcations and literature (assuming 151.25 mg/kg of 
ﬁbers released after 1 cycle), the total concentration of ﬁbers is between 0.020 
and 0.025 g/L. The upper limit was chosen, that corresponds to 500 mg for 20 
L which was the minimum volume for running the unit. The black ﬁbers (the 
ones with the most frequent length of 500 μm) in a concentration of 0.025 g/L 
was used for the ﬁrst test.
Figure 5.1.6. Run with 0.025 g/L of microplastics (length of 500 um) for ZrO2 
membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability vs time
After running the ﬁrst test and plotting the data, it was clear it was not possible 
to ﬁnd the critical ﬂux with this concentration, which was too low and did not 
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
66
==PAGE:71==
cause fouling. In fact, observing the Image 5.1.6., it is visible that the trend is 
very similar to the one resulting from the test with clean water.
For this reason, the concentration was increased to 5 g/L and the three larger 
microplastics (1000, 700 and 500 μm) were mixed in equal parts, since fouling 
occur more easily with a broader size range of ﬁbers. The results of this new 
test are visible in Figure 5.1.7.: also in this case, the trend is very similar to the 
one of the clean water test, but this new test lead to the clogging of the system 
and the stop of the pump. This made it necessary to go back to a lower 
concentration.
Figure 5.1.7. Run with 5 g/L of mixed microplastics (1000, 700 and 500 μm) for ZrO2 
membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability vs time
The initial concentration of 0.025 g/L was increased 10 times becoming 0.25 g/
L. The mixing in equal parts in weight of the three larger ﬁbers was kept, in 
order to get a more realistic experiment. The unit was run with 0.25 g/L of 
mixed ﬁbers (1000, 700 and 500 μm). Rejection of particles was of 100%, and 
loss of permeability was not observed, maybe for two reasons: the ﬁrst is that 
the particles did not get trapped inside the small pores of the two membranes, 
the second is that the designed water, differently from the real one, is less 
heterogeneous  and  does  not  contain  organic  matter.  The  test  on  the  SiC 
membrane is visible on Figure 5.1.8., while for the ZrO2 is in Figure 5.1.9. As it 
is possible to see from Figure 5.1.9., maximum TMP reached by the ZrO2 
membrane is lower than in the case with clean water, and also permeability 
slightly decreases with time.
(b)
(a)
67
==PAGE:72==
Figure 5.1.8. Run with 0.25 g/L of mixed microplastics (1000, 700 and 500 μm) for 
SiC membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability vs time
Figure 5.1.9. Run with 0.25 g/L of mixed microplastics (1000, 700 and 500 μm) for 
ZrO2 membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability vs time
Then, the unit was run with smaller microplastics: 0.18 g/L of mixed ﬁbers (80 
μm average length). TMP vs Flux and Permeability vs time are plotted in 
Figure 5.2.1. for SiC and 5.2.2. for ZrO2. As it is possible to see from Figure 
5.2.1., fouling occurs in the case of SiC but not with the ZrO2 membrane. In 
fact plotting TMP vs Flux for the SiC membrane and plotting the tendency line 
(in orange), that is obtained by interpolating the lower points and represents the 
behavior that the membrane would have in case of clean water, it is possible to 
see that the empirical data, with a increase of the Flux, reach rapidly a high 
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
68
==PAGE:73==
TMP and so does not overlaps anymore with the tendency line. This means that 
the SiC membrane undergoes a loss of Flux. Additionally, observing Figure 
5.2.2. b, it is clear that in case of the ZrO2, permeability decreases very slowly, 
this means that we are below critical ﬂux. Instead, for SiC the decrease of 
permeability occurs rapidly with time (Figure 5.2.1. b) and this suggests that 
we are above the critical ﬂux, in fact, the relationship between TMP and ﬂux is 
not linear anymore in the case of SiC membrane (Figure 5.2.1. a).
 
Figure 5.2.1. Run with 0.18 g/L of mixed ﬁbers (average length: 80 μm) for SiC 
membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability vs time
Figure 5.2.2. Run with 0.18 g/L of mixed ﬁbers (average length: 80 μm) for ZrO2 
membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) Permeability vs time
(b)
(a)
(a)
(b)
69
==PAGE:74==
5.2.3. Filtration of the wastewater
The unit was run with the wastewater from the tent washing machine. With the 
real water, both membranes manifest a rapid increase in TMP with time, with a 
decrease of Flux, due to the fact that the water was way more heterogeneous 
than RO water with designed microplastics, which have a sharp length and no 
organic matter. The decrease of Flux is more accentuated for the SiC membrane 
(Figure 5.2.3.) than for the ZrO2 (Figure 5.2.4.). Also Permeability manifest a 
rapid decrease with time, since the unit is running above the critical ﬂux for 
both membranes.
Figure 5.2.3. Filtration with wastewater for SiC membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) 
Permeability vs time
Figure 5.2.4. Filtration with wastewater for ZrO2 membrane (a) TMP vs Flux (b) 
Permeability vs time 
70
Critical 
(b)
(a)
Critical 
(b)
(a)
==PAGE:75==
5.2.3.1. Critical ﬂux determination
For both membranes the data recorded from the run with wastewater were 
simpliﬁed and then plotted to ﬁnd the critical ﬂux, which is the ﬂux above 
which fouling occurs and the ﬂux above which the relationship between TMP 
and  ﬂux  is  not  linear  anymore.  On  Figure  5.2.3.  a  and  5.2.4.  a,  a  line 
interpolating the ﬁrst data recorded was plotted, describing the behavior of the 
membrane in case of no loss of ﬂux (as in the clean water ﬁltration test). In 
both case, the tendency line (in red) diverge from the experimental line (blue). 
Critical ﬂux can be found where the empirical data do not follow anymore the 
tendency line, so it corresponds to the point where, at a increase in TMP, the 
ﬂux does not increase as at the beginning, but slower. For SiC membrane, the 
critical ﬂux that results from Figure 5.2.3. a, is 100 L/m²/h. As it is possible to 
see in Figure 5.2.4. a, in the case of ZrO2 the critical ﬂux is 55 L/m²/h.
5.2.4. Back-ﬂush time determination
The unit with SiC membrane was set to a constant ﬂux a bit below to the 
critical ﬂux, which was 100 L/m²/h from the previous experiment. The initial 
TMP recorded was 0.19 bar. After a back-ﬂush time of 30 minutes, the initial 
TMP was recovered. With BF time set after 60 minutes, TMP slightly increased 
with respect with the initial one, while for a time above 60 minutes TMP 
increased and was not recoverable, as it is visible in Figure 5.2.5. Hence, BF 
for long term has to be set to 20 minutes. After a BF interval of 1 hour, the 
TMP became too high and the BF couldn’t bring it back to the original one. 
The same procedure was performed with ZrO2 membrane (Figure 5.2.6.) with a 
constant ﬂux a little below 55 L/m²/h. After a back-ﬂush time of 30 minutes, 
the membrane could recover completely the initial TMP which was 0.37 bar. 
TMP could not be recovered after 90 minutes back-ﬂush time. After a BF 
interval of 3 hours, the TMP became too high and the back-ﬂush could not 
bring it back to the original one. Hence, BF time has to be set to 1 hour for the 
long term ﬁltration.
71
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.2.5. Back-ﬂush time determination for the SiC membrane
Figure 5.2.6. Back-ﬂush time determination for the ZrO2 membrane
5.2.5. Long term ﬁltration 
After determining the critical ﬂux and the back-ﬂush time, the unit was set for 
long term ﬁltration at optimal conditions, so with constant ﬂux a bit below the 
Initial TMP
Back-ﬂush
Back-ﬂush
30 min
1 h
1.5 h
Back-ﬂush
Back-ﬂush
Back-ﬂush
Initial TMP
Back-ﬂush
30 min
1 h
1.5 h
2 h
3 h
72
==PAGE:77==
critical ﬂux (100 L/m²/h for SiC, 55 L/m²/h for ZrO2) and back-ﬂush time of 20 
minutes for SiC and 1 hour for ZrO2. The long term ﬁltration consisted in 
recirculating the wastewater through the membrane for 4 days recording TMP 
every 30 minutes. The settings were based on the previous experiments, with 
the time of back-ﬂush set to the value found previously and the ﬂow at the 
critical ﬂow calculated for each membrane. Results of the long term ﬁltration 
are visible in Figure 5.2.7. for SiC membrane and 5.2.8. for ZrO2 .
Figure 5.2.7. Long term ﬁltration with wastewater for SiC membrane, Permeability vs 
time 
Figure 5.2.8. Long term ﬁltration with wastewater for ZrO2 membrane, Permeability 
vs time
73
==PAGE:78==
As it is possible to see, despite both membranes were ﬁltrating at their optimal 
conditions, the SiC membrane manifested a more accentuated decrease of 
permeability, while for the ZrO2 the permeability loss is less accentuated for 
the same time. In fact SiC membrane permeability decreased of the 42.85% 
(from around 700 to around 400 L/m²/hour·bar) while the one of the ZrO2 
decreased of the 23.07% (from around 260 to around 200 L/m²/hour·bar) in 
the same period of time. This means that the SiC membrane is more subjected 
to the fouling phenomena than the ZrO2.  
5.3. Water characterization 
5.3.1. Physical-chemical parameters
The values found by applying each technique for measuring the main physical-
chemical characteristics are in Table 5.1.2. for the wastewater feed, in Table 
5.1.3. (a) for the permeate from ﬁltration with the SiC membrane and 5.1.3. (b) 
for the permeate from ﬁltration with the ZrO2 membrane. In Table 5.1.4. there 
are the removal efﬁciencies of the most signiﬁcative parameters involved in the 
deﬁnition of the water quality.
The ﬁrst aspect that is noticeable both qualitatively and quantitatively is the 
transparency of the ﬁltrated sample: the wastewater feed was very black and 
dusty, while both permeate are clear when observed at naked eye. This visual 
improvement is conﬁrmed also by the measurement of Turbidity, that changed 
from 206 NTU of the feed to 10.3 NTU in the SiC permeate (turbidity was 
removed by this membrane with 95% efﬁciency) and 1.01 NTU in the ZrO2 
permeate (99.5% efﬁciency). Also the smell has improved a lot.
It can be noticed that pH didn’t change a lot after ﬁltration: in the feed it was 
6.8, for what concerns SiC permeate, it remains around neutrality (7.06), while 
for ZrO2 permeate it becomes slightly alkaline (8.36), as it can be easily noticed 
confronting Total Alkalinity of the feed (5.77 meq/L) and of the ZrO2  permeate 
74
==PAGE:79==
(8.53 meq/L), which is higher, while TAL of the SiC permeate is 6.81 meq/L. 
Conductivity remains more or less the same before and after ﬁltration, around 
800 μS/cm. This could be predictable since the membrane is not capable of 
changing the amount of salts contained in the water. 
What presents a signiﬁcative variation, as it was expected, is the solid matter 
contained in the water, especially in terms of TSS and VSS. Total Suspended 
Solids were 221.67 mg/L in the feed, while after ﬁltration with SiC they 
become 52.5 mg/L (76.3% efﬁciency of removal) and with ZrO2 they become 9 
mg/L (95.9% removal). This difference in the removal efﬁciency is explained 
by the physical separation mechanism performed by the membranes: in the 
case of ZrO2 has smaller pores on its selective layer, at 50% below 42.6 nm, 
and so is capable to remove more solids than the SiC, which has larger pores 
(at 50% below 247.2 nm). Focusing on the Total Dissolved Solids, in the 
wastewater they are 737 mg/L while in the SiC permeate they are 731 mg/L 
and in the ZrO2 permeate they are 585 mg/L, so they don not change a lot. The 
value of TDS diminish but not as much as the TSS and VSS, this can be 
explained by the fact that TDS are deﬁned as a combination of organic and 
inorganic substances in molecular, ionic and colloidal form suspended in the 
water and they can pass through the membranes. Further treatment, such as 
Reverse Osmosis (RO) or Forward Osmosis (FO), could be required to reduce 
TDS. Regarding the organic matter contained in the water, Volatile Suspended 
Solids changed from 121.67 mg/L in the feed to 25 mg/L in the SiC permeate 
(the removal occurred with 79% efﬁciency) while they are negligible in the 
permeate of ZrO2. Chemical Oxygen Demand in the wastewater feed was 424 
mg/L, while in the SiC permeate it was 84.3 mg/L and in the ZrO2 permeate it 
was 68.7 mg/L. Further removal of organic matter should be performed by 
coagulation and ﬂocculation or microbial action. 
75
==PAGE:80==
Table 5.1.2. Physical-chemical parameters of the wastewater before ﬁltration
Table 5.1.3. Physical-chemical parameters of water after ﬁltration with a) SiC 
membrane b) ZrO2 membrane
Table 5.1.4. Efﬁciency of removal by the SiC and the ZrO2 membrane
76
Wastewater feed
Parameter
Value
Unit
Turbidity
206
NTU
pH
6.8
-
Conductivity
866
μS/cm
TAL
5.77
meq/L
TSS
221.67
mg/L
VSS
121.67
mg/L
TDS
737
mg/L
COD
424
mg/L
a) SiC permeate
Parameter
Value
Unit
Turbidity
10.3
NTU
pH
7.06
-
Conductivity
814
μS/cm
TAL
6.81
meq/L
TSS
52.5
mg/L
VSS
25
mg/L
TDS
731
mg/L
COD
84.3
mg/L
b) ZrO2 permeate
Parameter
Value
Unit
Turbidity
1.01
NTU
pH
8.36
-
Conductivity
822
μS/cm
TAL
8.53
meq/L
TSS
9.0
mg/L
VSS
none
mg/L
TDS
585
mg/L
COD
68.7
mg/L
Removal efﬁciency
Parameter
SiC (%)
ZrO2 (%)
Turbidity
95
99.5
TSS
76.3
95.9
VSS
79
100
==PAGE:81==
In general, the ZrO2 membrane achieved a better removal of Turbidity, TSS, 
VSS and COD, probably because of its denser selective layer and its surface 
characteristics.
The values found for the parameters of the wastewater feed were compared to 
the typical values of industrial laundering from the study of O. Lade and Z. 
Gbagba  2018,  and  resulted  to  be  in  the  same  range  of  values  for  the 
characterization of laundry wastewater resulting from the study (Table 5.1.5.)
Table 5.1.5. Typical laundry wastewater parameters
* O. Lade and Z. Gbagba (2018) Sustainable water supply: Potential of 
recycling laundry wastewater for domestic use 
To reduce the consumption of freshwater in the laundry industry, a new trend of 
separating waste water has resulted in the water reuse. In fact one of the scope 
of  this  study  is  to  see  whether  these  membranes  are  suitable  to  ﬁltrate 
wastewater from tent laundry to recycle it, for example through recirculation. 
According to EU regulations (in particular Guidelines on Integrating Water 
Reuse into Water Planning and Management in the context of the WFD, 2016), 
an industry may reuse its own treated wastewater, or that from another industry 
(industrial symbiosis), or from a urban WWTP. This practices are encouraged 
since they bring many advantage from a environmental and economic point of 
view. Infact "industrial water from treated wastewater replaces the use of 
drinking water or the abstraction of ground or surface water by the industry 
itself and, therefore, can be part of a water scarcity plan”, promoting the 
77
Laundry wastewater
Parameter
Empiric
al value
Range*
Unit
Turbidity
206
14-400
NTU
pH
6.8
9-11
-
Conductivity
866
640-3000
μS/cm
TSS
221.67
200-987
mg/L
TDS
737
400-6000
mg/L
COD
424
375-4155
mg/L
==PAGE:82==
conservation of freshwater resources. Moreover it can also reduce the discharge 
of  treated  wastewater  into  the  environment,  limiting  the  introduction  of 
pollutants  and  emerging  substances,  such  as  microplastics,  which  are  not 
removed  by  the  WWTPs.  In  the  world,  different  countries  have  several 
standards for the quality of recycled water. Regarding the reuse/recycle of 
wastewater, the directive does general statements: “wastewater shall be reused 
whenever appropriate” and "member States shall minimise any adverse effects 
on the environment from reuse of wastewater”, but there is a lack of a speciﬁc 
standard, or technical guidelines for every sector, with the exception of water 
reuse in agriculture. Hence the values found cannot be confronted with a EU 
standard about the minimum quality parameters for the reuse in industrial 
laundry, but the EU guideline of 2016 recommends to identify any possible 
hazard and do a risk analysis for the water reuse, and leave to the member 
states the possibility to do further regulations. 
In the case of this study, the wastewater feed presented a high turbidity and a 
lot of TSS, probably due to the dust that accumulates on the industrial tents, 
since they usually cover structures located outdoor, in contact with wind that 
transport sediments. Also COD and TDS were quite high, due to pollutants, 
salts due to atmospheric deposition, microorganism that from the tent surface 
can be washed and be found in the laundering water. Maybe the slightly acid 
pH of the feed water could be caused by acid rains and depositions on the tents 
washed. 
Water  parameters  after  ﬁltration  are  improved  with  respect  to  the  ones 
measured  in  the  wastewater  feed,  hence  the  water  would  be  suitable  for 
recirculation and reuse in the same laundry facility. Further studies can be done 
regarding the savings in terms of water resource, energy and carbon footprint. 
5.3.2. Microplastics
• Number 
78
==PAGE:83==
The characterization of the water quality then focused on the microplastics, 
calculating the average number of microplastics found in 20 mL of wastewater 
feed by visual counting through light microscopy. The counting was made 
easier by the fact that the ﬁlter was divided in boxes: 12 boxes well distributed 
on the ﬁlter were chosen and the ﬁbers in each  box was counted. Test was 
repeated three times, so the results of the test repetitions will be named a, b and 
c. The number of microplastics counted per box of ﬁlter are shown in Table 
5.1.6. An average no. of microplastics found in every selected box are reported 
in Table 5.1.7. Considering the area of a single box of the ﬁlter and the area of 
the entire ﬁlter, it can be calculated that, in total, there are 94.96 boxes in a 
ﬁlter, so it is possible to calculate an average of the number of microplastics 
that are present in 20 mL of samples ﬁltered, which is 896.8 microplastics.
Table 5.1.6. No. of microplastics counted per box of the ﬁlter
Table 5.1.7. No. of microplastics counted per box of the ﬁlter
79
No. of microplastics counted per box
Square
Test a)
Test b)
Test c)
1
10
11
10
2
9
10
7
3
8
7
10
4
14
9
11
5
8
10
8
6
10
7
9
7
7
15
13
8
5
7
11
9
7
9
14
10
16
10
9
11
9
7
8
12
11
9
5
No. of microplastics on average
Test a)
Test b)
Test c)
Per box
9.5
9.25
9.58
In total
902.1
878.3
910.03
==PAGE:84==
The number of microplastics found can be approximated to 900 microplastics 
for 20 mL, so 45000 microplastics/L. Since the volume of a single microplastic 
is 353 · 10−9 cm³ considering a average length of 0.5 mm, a radius of 0.015 
mm and a cylindric geometry, and the density of PVC which is between 
1.40-1.45 g/cm³, the weight of a single microplastic can be approximated to 
503 ·10−9 g. Multiplying this value for the number of microplastics per liter 
found before, it is possible to calculate the concentration, which is 22.6 mg/L. 
This is a value comparable to the one found in literature (de Falco et al. 2019), 
equal  to  20.5  mg/L of  ﬁbers,  released  after  the  1st  washing  cycle.  It  is 
interesting to have found a comparable value, especially because in literature 
the value was referred to domestic washing while the wastewater of this study 
comes from industrial tent washing: in these two processes materials and 
weight capacity are different. 
Starting from the washing machine technical speciﬁcation of the industrial tent 
washing machine (an average of 445 kg of tents washed/load, 3.58 loads/day), 
1594.58 kg of tents can be washed per day, so if a washing machines runs an 
average of 4,5 days/week, 7175.6 kg of tents are washed every week. Assuming 
that the behavior of PVC is similar to the one of polyester (so 151.25 mg 
microplastics  released/kg  tents  washed),  an  average  of  1.08  kg/week  of 
microplastics would be released in the environment by a single industrial 
washing machine, just considering the 1st washing cycle, of course if the 
wastewater does not undergo a proper treatment addressing the microplastics.
After  ﬁltration,  the  number  of  microplastics  found  in  the  permeate  from 
ﬁltration with the SiC membrane were 25 microplastics in 20 mL of sample, so 
1250 microplastics/L. Considering their average length of 0.3 mm and their 
average radius of 0.015 and the density of PVC of 1.40-1.45 g/cm, the weight 
is 302 ·10−9 g/microplastic. So, the concentration can be calculated and results 
to be 0.3 mg/L, meaning that the SiC membrane has been able to remove the 
98.5% of microplastics from the laundering wastewater. 
A similar calculation has been done for the microplastics found in the permeate 
from ﬁltration with the ZrO2 membrane: in 20 mL of permeate 9 microplastics 
80
==PAGE:85==
were found, so in terms of concentration there were 450 microplastics/L, with a 
concentration of 0.135 mg/L. This value is very low, and means that the 
percentage of removal of microplastics for this membrane is around 99.2 %.
The removal efﬁciency of microplastics is summarized in Table 5.1.8. In both 
cases, almost all microplastics has been removed, with a higher efﬁciency for 
the ZrO2 membrane probably because of the smaller pore size. But this result 
does  not  provide  any  information  about  nanoplastics,  that  are  not  visible 
through light microscopy.
Table 5.1.8. Removal efﬁciency of microplastics by the SiC and the ZrO2 membranes
• Fiber length distribution
Since the microplastics were in form of ﬁbers, they were measured with the 
software QCapturePro to ﬁnd their length. Some of the ﬁbers captured with the 
program are visible on Figure 5.3.2. Once they were measured, the values of 
the sizes found were divided into six classes: ﬁbers smaller than 0.08 mm, from 
0.08 to 0.2 mm, from 0.2 to 0.4 mm, from 0.4 to 0.6 mm, from 0.6 to 1 mm and 
larger than 1 mm. The length distribution of microplastics in the wastewater 
before the ﬁltration was difﬁcult to determine with precision, since the sample 
was really heterogeneous and full of dust despite the treatment with oxygen 
peroxide (Figure 5.3.2.) 
81
Removal efﬁciency (%)
SiC
ZrO2
Microplastics
98.5
99.2
==PAGE:86==
Figure 5.3.2. Microplastics in the wastewater sample before ﬁltration
After ﬁltration the pretreatment with oxygen peroxide was unnecessary because 
of the sample transparency, as shown in Figure 5.3.3. for the permeate from 
ﬁltration with SiC and 5.3.5. with ZrO2. The pores of the ﬁlter used were 
smaller, equal to 0.45 um. 
The ﬁbers detected were almost all below 0.08 mm, as it is visible from Figure 
5.3.4. for SiC. This is explained by the fact that the SiC membrane performs a 
complete rejection of the larger ﬁbers, that are not anymore present in the 
sample. The 56% of the ﬁbers found are below 0.08 mm, the 20% are between 
0.08 and 0.2 mm, the 16% between 0.2 and 0.4 mm. The most frequent class 
found in the feed in terms of weight (0.4 and 0.6 mm), after ﬁltration with SiC 
passes from the 23.8% of number of ﬁbers to the 8%. In the case of the ZrO2 
membrane, results are shown in Figure 5.3.6. Fibers found are all below 0.2 
mm, with a prevalence of ﬁbers below 0.8 mm (almost 90% of the total number 
of ﬁbers).
Figure 5.3.3. Microplastics in the wastewater sample after ﬁltration with the SiC 
membrane
a)
b)
82
==PAGE:87==
Figure 5.3.4. Size distribution of the microplastics in the wastewater sample after 
ﬁltration with the SiC membrane in terms of a) absolute number b) percentage
Figure 5.3.5. Microplastics in the wastewater sample after ﬁltration with the ZrO2 
membrane
Figure 5.3.6. Size distribution of the microplastics in the wastewater sample after 
ﬁltration with the ZrO2 membrane in terms of a) absolute number b) percentage
83
a)
b)
==PAGE:88==
84
==PAGE:89==
6. Conclusion and future work
• From Capillary Flow Porometry the absolute value (or maximum pore size) 
for the SiC membrane is 604.3 nm while for ZrO2 is 118.7 nm, while the D50 
(mean pore size) for SiC membrane is 247.2 nm while for ZrO2 is 42.6 nm 
The ZrO2 membrane results to have a denser selective layer and a smaller 
diameter of the pores, in the range for ultraﬁltration, while the SiC membrane 
is in the range for microﬁltration. 
• Running the unit with RO water 0.25 g/L of designed microplastics (1000, 
700 and 500 μm, equally mixed), the two membranes behaved similarly and 
no loss of ﬂux nor of permeability was observed, in fact the particles were 
too  large  to  get  trapped  inside  the  pores  of  the  membranes.  With  a 
concentration of 0.18 g/L of designed microplastics with 80 μm average 
length, a loss of ﬂux and of permeability was observed solely in the case of 
the SiC membrane: maybe the small ﬁbers could get trapped more easily in 
the pores of the SiC layer. During the experiment with SiC membrane the 
ﬂux exceeded the critical ﬂux, resulting in a loss of permeability, while for 
ZrO2 the ﬂux did not exceed the critical ﬂux.
• Running the unit with the wastewater from the tent washing machine, both 
membranes showed a rapid increase in TMP with time, with a decrease of 
Flux, having both reached the critical ﬂux, that for SiC was 100 L/m²/h, 
while for ZrO2 is 55 L/m²/h. Back-ﬂush time was calculated for both the 
membranes and was 1 hour for the ZrO2  membrane, while for the SiC 
membrane  was  20  minutes.  The  membranes  were  tested  to  long  term 
ﬁltration for 4 days at optimal conditions, so a little below the critical ﬂux 
and with the back-ﬂush time of 1 hour for the ZrO2  membrane and of 20 
minutes  for  the  SiC:  the  SiC  membrane  permeability  decreased  of  the 
42.85% while the one of the ZrO2 decreased of the 23.07% in the same 
period of time.
85
==PAGE:90==
• The two membranes achieved different removal efﬁciencies: in general the 
ZrO2 membrane had higher removal rate than the SiC membrane: ZrO2 
removed  Turbidity  with  99.5%  of  efﬁciency,  with  respect  to  the  SiC 
membrane with reached 95% efﬁciency. TSS were removed with 76.3% 
efﬁciency by the SiC membrane and with 95.9% efﬁciency by the ZrO2, 
while VSS was remove with 79% efﬁciency by the SiC and with 100% by 
the ZrO2 membrane. The SiC membrane removed 98.5% of microplastics 
from  the  laundering  wastewater  while  the  ZrO2  removed  the  99.2%  of 
microplastics.
These differences are caused by the different physical-chemical and surface 
properties of the membranes:  the ZrO2 membrane has smaller pore size, 
reducing the capacity of particles to enter and block the pores. Moreover, it has 
a high hydrophilicity, a relevant property since from other studies it results in 
enabling the membrane to sustain a higher ﬂux and slow down the process of 
membrane fouling. As the results of this study conﬁrm, from the long term 
ﬁltration it is possible to see a quicker decrease of permeability with time in the 
SiC membrane than in the ZrO2, resulting in less fouling phenomena and a 
longer lifespan for this latter. 
The better results of the ZrO2 membrane in terms of water quality after 
ﬁltration can be explained by the fact that the membrane is a ultraﬁltration 
membrane, resulting in a highest selectivity range and a denser active layer. 
This study evidences that the ZrO2 ensures a highest quality of the treated 
water and undergoes a slower fouling phenomena, providing a higher durability 
and selectivity. For this reasons the ZrO2 membrane could be more suitable for 
the purpose to recirculate water from laundering of industrial tents.
Further studies could focus on the correlation between the performances of the 
ZrO2 membrane and its surface properties, such as surface roughness, zeta 
potential, and maybe it could be interesting to test the performances of a 
conﬁguration  of  SiC  and  ZrO2  membranes  in  series  on  the  treatment  of 
wastewater. Also a future study could be of circular economy, quantifying the 
86
==PAGE:91==
water and energy savings that the laundry of industrial tents could achieve with 
the recirculation of water thanks to membrane ﬁltration.
87
==PAGE:92==
88
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
Esra Eray, Vittorio Boffa, Mads K. Jørgensen, Giuliana Magnacca, Victor M. Candelario Enhanced 
fabrication of silicon carbide membranes for wastewater treatment: From laboratory to industrial scale 
(2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2020.118080 
Esra Eray, Victor M.Candelario, Vittorio Boffa, Hamed Safafar, David N. Østedgaard-Munck, Nanette 
Zahrtmann, Haris Kadrispahic, Mads K.Jørgensen A roadmap for the development and applications of 
silicon carbide membranes for liquid ﬁltration: Recent advancements, challenges, and perspectives 
(2021) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.128826
Poerio,  Teresa  &  Piacentini,  Emma  &  Mazzei,  Rosalinda.  (2019).  Membrane  Processes  for 
Microplastic Removal. Molecules (Basel, Switzerland). 24. 10.3390/molecules24224148. 
Francesca De Falco, Emilia Di Pace,  Mariacristina Cocca, Maurizio Avella The contribution of 
washing processes of synthetic clothes to microplastic pollution Sci Rep 9, 663 (2019) https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-019-43023-x 
Francesca De Falco, Maria Pia Gullo, Gennaro Gentile, Emilia Di Pace, Mariacristina Cocca, Laura 
Gelabert, Marolda Brouta-Agnesa, Angels Rovira, Rosa Escudero, Raquel Villalba, Raffaella Mossotti, 
Alessio Montarsolo, Sara Gavignano, Claudio Tonin, Maurizio Avella Evaluation of microplastic 
release caused by textile washing processes of synthetic fabrics (2017) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.
2017.10.057
A.J.Burggraaf,
 
K.
 
Keizer
 
Ceramic
 
Membranes
 
(1991)
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-08-034720-2.50027-7
Schäfer, Andrea, Fane, Anthony G., Waite, T.D. Cost factors and chemical pretreatment effects in the 
membrane ﬁltration of waters containing natural organic matter (Elsevier, 2001) http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0043-1354(00)00418-8 
Talvitie, Julia & Mikola, Anna & Koistinen, Arto & Setälä, Outi. (2017). Solutions to microplastic 
pollution – Removal of microplastics from wastewater efﬂuent with advanced wastewater treatment 
technologies. Water Research. 123. 10.1016/j.watres.2017.07.005
Jönsson, Christina & Levenstam, Oscar & Hanning, Anne-Charlotte & Landin, Rebecka & Holmström, 
Emma & Roos, Sandra. (2018). Microplastics Shedding from Textiles—Developing Analytical Method 
for Measurement of Shed Material Representing Release during Domestic Washing. Sustainability. 10. 
2457. 10.3390/su10072457. 
Georgia Gatidou, Olga S. Arvaniti, Athanasios S. Stasinakis, Review on the occurrence and fate of 
microplastics in Sewage Treatment Plants, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Volume 367, 2019, Pages 
504-512, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.12.081.
Kayvani Fard A, McKay G, Buekenhoudt A, Al Sulaiti H, Motmans F, Khraisheh M, Atieh M. 
Inorganic Membranes: Preparation and Application for Water Treatment and Desalination Materials 
(2018) Jan 5;11(1):74. 10.3390/ma11010074
89
==PAGE:94==
Edo, Carlos & gonzalez pleiter, Miguel & Leganes, Francisco & Fernandez-Piñas, Francisca & Rosal, 
Roberto.  (2019).  Fate  of  microplastics  in  wastewater  treatment  plants  and  their  environmental 
dispersion with efﬂuent and sludge. Environmental Pollution. 259. 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113837. 
Zeming He, Zhiyang Lyu, Qilin Gu, Lei Zhang, John Wang Ceramic-based membranes for water and 
wastewater treatment (2019) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2019.05.074 
B. Hofs, J. Ogier, D. Vries, E.F. Beerendonk, E.R. Cornelissen, Comparison of ceramic and polymeric 
membrane permeability and fouling using surface water Sep. Purif. Technol. 79 (2011) 10.1016/
j.seppur.2011.03.025
Zhaoxiang  Zhong,  Dongyan  Li,  Bingbing  Zhang,  Weihong  Xing  Membrane  surface  roughness 
characterization and its inﬂuence on ultraﬁne particle adhesion (2011) 10.1016/j.seppur.2011.09.016 
L. Fan, T. Nguyen, F.A. Roddick, J.L. Harris, Low-pressure membrane ﬁltration of secondary efﬂuent 
in water reuse: Pre-treatment for fouling reduction J. Membr. Sci. 320 (2008) 135–142 https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2008.03.058. 
B. Hofs, J. Ogier, D. Vries, E.F. Beerendonk, E.R. Cornelissen Comparison of ceramic and polymeric 
membrane permeability and fouling using surface water Separ. Purif. Technol. 79 (2011) 365–374 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j. seppur.2011.03.025
Matthew Cole A novel method for preparing microplastic ﬁbers” (2016) Scientiﬁc Reports 10.1038/
srep34519  
Chen Li, Wenjun Sun, Zedong Lu, Xiuwei Ao, Simiao Li Ceramic nanocomposite membranes and 
membrane fouling: A review” (2019) a https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.115674  
Jing  Sun,  Xiaohu  Dai,  Qilin  Wang,  Mark  C.M.  van  Loosdrecht,  Bing-Jie  Ni  Microplastics  in 
wastewater  treatment  plants:  Detection,  occurrence  and  removal”  (2019)  https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.watres.2018.12.050 
Stefano Magni, Andrea Binelli, Lucia Pittura, Carlo Giacomo Avio, Camilla Della Torre, Camilla Carla 
Parenti, Stefania Gorbi, Francesco Regoli The fate of microplastics in an Italian Wastewater Treatment 
Plant” (2018) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.269
Steve Allen, Deonie Allen, Vernon R. Phoenix, Gaël Le Roux, Pilar Durántez Jiménez, Anaëlle 
Simonneau, Stéphane Binet & Didier Galop  Atmospheric transport and deposition of microplastics in a 
remote  mountain  catchment  Nat.  Geosci.  12,  339–344  (2019).  DOI:  https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41561-019-0335-5
Stephanie L. Wright and Frank J. Kelly Plastic and Human Health: A Micro Issue?” Environmental 
Science & Technology 2017 51 (12), 6634-6647 10.1021/acs.est.7b00423 https://pubs.acs.org/doi/
10.1021/acs.est.7b00423
Pirc, U.; Vidmar, M.; Mozer, A.; Krzan, A. Emissions of microplastic ﬁbers from microﬁber ﬂeece 
during domestic washing Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. (2016) 10.1007/s11356-016-7703-0 
90
==PAGE:95==
Shannen T.L. Sait, Lisbet Sørensen, Stephan Kubowicz, Kristine Vike-Jonas, Susana V. Gonzalez, 
Alexandros  G.  Asimakopoulos,  Andy  M.  Boot  Microplastic  ﬁbres  from  synthetic  textiles: 
Environmental degradation and additive chemical content (2020) 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115745
Xiaohua Xia, Menghan Sun, Miao Zhou, Zhongjie Chang, Li Li Polyvinyl chloride microplastics 
induce growth inhibition and oxidative stress in Cyprinus carpio var. larvae (2020) 10.1016/j.scitotenv.
2019.136479
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals https://sdgs.un.org/goals
Regulation (EU) 2020/741 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 May 2020 on 
minimum  requirements  for  water  reuse  (Text  with  EEA relevance)  http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/
2020/741/oj
U. Mueller, G. Biwer, G. Baldauf, Ceramic membranes for water treatment, Water Sci. Technol. Water 
Supply. 10 (2010) 987–994, https://doi.org/10.2166/ ws.2010.536
International Standard ISO13321 Methods for Determination of Particle Size Distribution Part 8: 
Photon Correlation Spectroscopy, International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) 1996
Dahneke, B.E. (ed) Measurement of Suspended Particles by Quasi- elastic Light Scattering, Wiley, 
1983
Common Implementation Strategy for the Water Framework Directive and Flood Directive Guidelines 
on  Integrating  Water  Reuse  into  Water  Planning  and  Management  in  the  context  of  the  WFD, 
Document endorsed by EU Water Directors at their meeting in Amsterdam on 10
th 
June 2016 
Lade O, Gbagba Z (2018) Sustainable water supply: Potential of recycling laundry wastewater for 
domestic use. J Civil Eng Environ Sci 4(2): 056-060. DOI: http://doi.org/10.17352/2455-488X.000029
Berstein M (1986) Water and Wastewater: a Guide for Industrial Launderers, ﬁrst ed. Institute of 
Industrial Launderers, Washington DC, USA.  
Browner CM, Charles FJ, Frace SH, Rubin MB, Jordan M (2000) Technical Development Document 
for the Final Action Regarding Pretreatment Standards for the Industrial Laundries Point Source 
Category. EPA Report No. 821-R-00-006  https://goo.gl/yVBGa6 
Encyclopedia of Membranes Eds. Drioli and Giorno, 2016
B. Hofs, J. Ogier, D. Vries, E.F. Beerendonk, E.R. Cornelissen, Comparison of ceramic and polymeric 
membrane permeability and fouling using surface water  (2011) 10.1016/J.SEPPUR.2011.03.025
Alexander  S.  Mukasyan,  Silicon  Carbide  in  Concise  Encyclopedia  of  Self-Propagating  High-
Temperature Synthesis (2017) https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804173-4.00133-2
Fangang Meng, So-Ryong Chae, Anja Drews, Matthias Kraume, Hang-Sik Shin, Fenglin Yang, Recent 
advances in membrane bioreactors (MBRs): Membrane fouling and membrane material (2009) https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2008.12.044
F. Meng, S. Chae, A. Drews, M. Kraume, H. Shin, F. Yang, Recent advances in membrane bioreactors 
(MBRs): Membrane fouling and membrane material, Water Res., 43 (2009) https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.watres.2008.12.044
91
==PAGE:96==
Zhang J., Chua H., Zhou J., Fane A.G., Factors affecting the membrane performance in submerged 
membrane bioreactors J. Memb. Sci., 284 (2006) doi: 10.1016/j.memsci.2006.06.022 
Zhaoxiang  Zhong,  Dongyan  Li,  Bingbing  Zhang,  Weihong  Xing,  Membrane  surface  roughness 
characterization  and  its  inﬂuence  on  ultraﬁne  particle  adhesion,  Separation  and  Puriﬁcation 
Technology, Volume 90, 2012, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2011.09.016
D. Breite,  M. Went, A. Prager and  A. Schulze, The critical zeta potential of polymer membranes: how 
electrolytes impact membrane fouling (2016) https://doi.org/10.1039/C6RA19239D
Meijia Zhang, Bao-qiang Liao, Xiaoling Zhou, Yiming He, Huachang Hong, Hongjun Lin, Jianrong 
Chen, Effects of hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of membrane on membrane fouling in a submerged 
membrane bioreactor (2015) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.10.058
K.H. Choo, C.H. Lee Effect of anaerobic digestion broth composition on membrane permeability Water 
Sci. Technol., 34 (9) (1996), pp. 173-179 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0273-1223(96)00801-3 
D.S. Kim, J.S. Kang, Y.M. Lee The inﬂuence of membrane surface properties on fouling in a 
membrane bioreactor for wastewater treatment Sep. Sci. Technol., 39 (4) (2004), pp. 833-854 
Weis, M.R. Bird, M. Nyström, C. Wright The inﬂuence of morphology, hydrophobicity and charge 
upon  the  long-term  performance  of  ultraﬁltration  membranes  fouled  with  spent  sulphite  liquor 
Desalination, 175 (1) (2005), pp. 73-85 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2004.09.024
Santos, S. Judd The commercial status of membrane bioreactors for municipal wastewater Sep. Sci. 
Technol., 45 (7) (2010), pp. 850-857
L. Liu, B. Shao, F. Yang, Polydopamine coating - surface modiﬁcation of polyester ﬁlter and fouling 
reduction Sep. Purif. Technol., 118 (2013), pp. 226-233 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2013.07.003 
L. Chen, Y. Tian, C.-Q. Cao, J. Zhang, Z.-N. Li, Interaction energy evaluation of soluble microbial 
products (SMP) on different membrane surfaces: role of the reconstructed membrane topology, Water 
Res., 46 (8) (2012), pp. 2693-2704 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.02.030
Z. Wang, Z. Wu, A review of membrane fouling in MBRs: characteristics and role of sludge cake 
formed on membrane surfaces, Sep. Sci. Technol., 44 (15) (2009), pp. 3571-3596
M. Zhang, W. Peng, J. Chen, Y. He, L. Ding, A. Wang, H. Lin, H. Hong, Y. Zhang, H. Yu, A new 
insight into membrane fouling mechanism in submerged membrane bioreactor: osmotic pressure during 
cake  layer  ﬁltration,  Water  Res.,  47  (8)  (2013),  pp.  2777-2786  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.
2013.02.041 
United Nations Environment Programme (2020). Emissions Gap Report 2020. Nairobi
Albert A. Koelmans, Nur Hazimah Mohamed Nor, Enya Hermsen, Merel Kooi, Svenja M. Mintenig, 
Jennifer De France, Microplastics in freshwaters and drinking water: Critical review and assessment of 
data quality, Water Research, Volume 155, 2019, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.02.054. 
Microbead-Free Waters Act of 2015 114th Congress (2015-2016) Public Law 114-114
Salvador Cesa, Flávia & Turra, Alexander & Baruque-Ramos, Julia. (2017). Synthetic ﬁbers as 
microplastics in the marine environment: A review from textile perspective with a focus on domestic 
washings. Science of The Total Environment. 598. 1116-1129. 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.04.172. 
92
==PAGE:97==
Avio, Carlo Giacomo & Gorbi, Stefania & Regoli, Francesco. (2016). Plastics and microplastics in the 
oceans: From emerging pollutants to emerged threat. Marine Environmental Research. 128. 10.1016/
j.marenvres.2016.05.012. 
C. Ioakeimidis, K.N. Fotopoulou, H.K. Karapanagioti, M. Geraga, C. Zeri, E. Papathanassiou, F. 
Galgani, G. Papatheodorou, The degradation potential of PET bottles in the marine environment: an 
ATR-FTIR based approach Sci. Rep., 6 (2016), pp. 1-8, 10.1038/srep23501
Lusher, Amy. (2015). Microplastics in the Marine Environment: Distribution, Interactions and Effects. 
10.1007/978-3-319-16510-3_10. 
Dubaish, F. and Liebezeit, G. (2013) Suspended Microplastics and Black Carbon Particles in the Jade 
System,  Southern  North  Sea.  Water,  Air,  &  Soil  Pollution,  224,  1352.   https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11270-012-1352-9 
Wright SL, Kelly FJ. Plastic and Human Health: A Micro Issue? Environ Sci Technol. 2017 Jun 
20;51(12):6634-6647. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.7b00423. Epub 2017 Jun 7. PMID: 28531345.
Dris R., Gasperi J., Tassin B. (2018) Sources and Fate of Microplastics in Urban Areas: A Focus on 
Paris  Megacity.  In:  Wagner  M.,  Lambert  S.  (eds)  Freshwater  Microplastics.  The  Handbook  of 
Environmental Chemistry, vol 58. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61615-5_4 
S.L. Wright, J. Ulke, A. Font, K.L.A. Chan, F.J. Kelly, Atmospheric microplastic deposition in an urban 
environment  and  an  evaluation  of  transport,  Environment  International,  2020,  105411,  ISSN 
0160-4120, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.105411.
S. Allen, D. Allen, V.R. Phoenix, G. Le Roux, P. Durantez Jimenez, A. Simonneau, et al. Atmospheric 
transport and deposition of microplastics in a remote mountain catchment Nat. Geosci., 12 (2019), pp. 
339-344 
Bernardo A. da Silva, Vinicius de Souza Godim de Oliveira, Marco Di Luccio, Dachamir Hotza, 
Kurosch  Rezwan,  Michaela  Wilhelm,  Characterization  of  functionalized  zirconia  membranes 
manufactured  by  aqueous  tape  casting,  (2020)  Ceramics  International,  https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ceramint.2020.03.162.
Shuang Li, Chuncheng Wei, Peng Wang, Peiling Gao, Lijuan Zhou, Guangwu Wen,
Zirconia ultraﬁltration membranes on silicon carbide substrate: microstructure and water ﬂux, (2020)
Journal of the European Ceramic Society, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2020.04.020
Jian-er Zhou, Qibing Chang, Yongqing Wang, Jinming Wang, Guangyao Meng,
Separation  of  stable  oil–water  emulsion  by  the  hydrophilic  nano-sized  ZrO2  modiﬁed  Al2O3 
microﬁltration membrane, (2010) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2010.08.008 
Boucher, J. and Friot, D. (2017) Primary Microplastics in the Oceans: A Global Evaluation of Sources. 
IUCN, Gland, 43 p. https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2017.01.en
Pirc, U., Vidmar, M., Mozer, A. et al. Emissions of microplastic ﬁbers from microﬁber ﬂeece during 
domestic  washing.  Environ  Sci  Pollut  Res  23,  22206–22211  (2016).  https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-016-7703-0
Technical speciﬁcations for the industrial tent laundering https://www.teecosolutions.eu
93
