==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Assessment of induced glial cells using bulk
RNA-seq data and single-cell RNA-seq data
Rebeka Julianna Bató (s182575)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Bioinformatics
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in collaboration with
the Goldman Lab at the Center for Translational Neuromedicine at the University of
Copenhagen. The project was done in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
an MSc degree in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology at DTU. The duration of the
work was 5 months and 3 weeks, which corresponds to 30 ECTS; started on 15th
September 2020 and concluded on 8th March 2021.
The supervisor of the project from DTU was:
Professor Haja Kadarmideen
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
The co-supervisor of the project from DTU:
Maria Belen Rabaglino
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
The external supervisor of the project from KU was:
Gwen Huynh
Center for Translational Neuromedicine
University of Copenhagen
Kongens Lyngby, March 8, 2021
Rebeka Julianna Bató (s182575)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to dedicate this thesis to my parents, who have always been supporting
my studies and my personal growth throughout the years in Denmark. I would also
like to thank my colleagues at the Goldman lab who shared their professional thoughts
on the topic with me and assisted my project. I thank my supervisors Professor Haja
Kadarmideen, Maria Belen Rabaglino, and Gwen Huynh for guiding me through the
project and gave me honest feedback during my progress. Lastly, I would like to thank
my boyfriend, Peter, who made me take some break sometimes and took special care
of my personal well-being in the last 6 months.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Summary
In regenerative medicine, the in vitro production of clinically relevant cells provides
important resources for disease modeling and therapeutic transplantation. The crit-
ical question is however raised; to what extent these reprogrammed cells resemble
the target cell type, and how to design the differentiation protocols to bring the cell
populations closer to the desired cell identity. CellNet, a network biology platform,
allows for the quantification of cell identity of the engineered cell populations and
proposes candidate transcription factors whose perturbation would probably enhance
the potentials of these cell lines. Utilizing machine learning algorithms and measuring
gene regulatory networks (GRNs) as the determinants of cell identity, CellNet proved
to be a powerful and highly usable tool to answer various biological questions in this
project. CellNet was successfully applied to bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq
data of glial cells in order to assess the genetic effects of Schizophrenia on these cell
types.
Abnormalities in the differentiation of glial cells were previously found to
be essential contributors to Schizophrenia (SCZ) . Cell replacement therapy could
provide a potential treatment for this neurodegenerative disease, therefore intensive
research is carried out to analyse the functional abilities of induced glial progenitor
cells (GPC) in vitro and in vivo. As a result of my analyses, improvements in the
differentiation protocols of induced GPCs were proposed, as well as a transcription
factors (TFs) were revealed whose manipulation could potentially result in the gen-
eration of ”cured” cells. Additionally, a handful of TFs were identified playing an
important role in the maturation of normal in vivo GPCs and astrocytes, then in
light of this, the effects of the disease on the differentiation of in vivo glial cells were
discussed.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Summary
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background to stem cell biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The role of glial cells in schizophrenia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq technologies
. . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
CellNet: a computational tool for cell identity assessment . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Project Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Materials & Methods
13
2.1
Bulk RNA-seq data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Single-cell RNA-seq data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
CellNet experimental design and important metrics . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Results
25
3.1
Bulk RNA-seq data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Single-cell RNA-seq data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Discussion
45
A An Appendix
47
A.1 Additional figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Although the first stem cell studies were published in the late 19th century [RW07],
we still have insufficient knowledge about the biology of these cell types and the true
potential of stem cell therapy. Apart from spectacular experiments like the cloning
of mammals, which have gained much public attention [Bub+14; Men+15; Wak+98;
Wel+97; Sch+97], stem cell therapy has achieved promising results with the treatment
of diabetes, blindness, or recovery from spinal cord injuries by stem cell transplants
[HT04; Sha+10; JB15]. Stem cell biology is an intensely researched field that has
been receiving ever-growing attention in medicine.
1.1
Background to stem cell biology
Stem cells play an important role in the course of metazoan ontogenesis as well as
in adult life, providing the individual’s endogenous healing system. They are undif-
ferentiated cells that are capable of either symmetric cell division thereby renewing
themselves, or giving rise to more specialized cell types by asymmetric cell division
[CN11]. During development, these pluripotent cells entirely constitute the embryo
in the early stage before differentiating into the numerous embryonic tissues. Cells
from the inner cell mass of blastocysts can be isolated and cultured in vitro in order
to produce embryonic stem cell (ESC) stocks [Cow+04]. ESCs may be induced to
form specific cell types for research and therapeutic purposes, for instance, to replace
damaged tissues or diseased cells [CDK08].
Another widely used pluripotent cell type in laboratories is the induced pluripo-
tent stem cell or iPSC. It was a groundbreaking discovery when studies 1.5 decades
ago proved that somatic cells are not irreversibly differentiated, but can be repro-
grammed to an ESC-like state in a controlled manner [TY06]. iPS cells proved to be
an invaluable resource in clinical research, since these pluripotent cells may be gen-
erated from accessible adult tissue, and permit to model difficult-to-study diseases
where sampling and cell culturing is suboptimal or even impossible, such as in the case
of neurodegenerative disorders. iPS cell lines of individual patients can be produced
and then induced to differentiate into the affected cell type. The examination of such
cells can illuminate yet undiscovered underlying causes of that specific disease and
promote the establishment of possible treatments. In addition, using the power of
modern gene targeting technologies, the patient-specific iPS cells might be repaired
from the disease-causing mutation(s) followed by the transplantation of the healthy
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
cell subtype into the affected tissue where corrected cells are hoped to replace the sick
cell population [RD12] (Figure 1.1). Lastly, iPSCs eliminate the numerous ethical
issues related to harvesting ESP from human embryos.
Figure 1.1: Application of iPSCs in regenerative medicine. [Lod04; RD12]
In neuromedicine, cell therapy holds great promise for potential treatments of many
neurodegenerative disorders, such as Huntington’s disease, schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s
disease, Parkinson’s disease, or Canavan disease [Osi+19; Win+17; LYZ20; WP20;
Fen+20]. The endogenous healing processes in the brain are very limited, exemplified
by the lack of any potential for restoring damaged central nervous system (CNS) cells
or arresting neuronal loss in these types of human diseases. Thus, cell transplantation
therapy is a promising and widely researched tool nowadays.
1.2
The role of glial cells in schizophrenia
In this project, schizophrenia is placed in the spotlight. Thus, I intended to give a
non-exhaustive description of this disease, as well as, to demonstrate the role of the
glial cells in contributing to SCZ.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 The role of glial cells in schizophrenia
3
1.2.1
Background to schizophrenia
The story of the American mathematician and Nobel laureate John Forbes Nash Jr.,
is a prominent example of symptoms and course of the severe psychiatric disorder that
is Schizophrenia. Although the symptoms and their severity vary from case to case,
the list generally includes deficits in attention, delusions, hallucinations, social with-
drawal, reduced emotions, and disorganized speech and behavior [GSD10]. People
with SCZ become symptomatic during adolescence or adulthood. In a genome-wide
association study (GWAS) in 2014, 128 genetic variants were identified as being asso-
ciated with the schizophrenic phenotype [Rip+14]. Most of these genetic mutations
were hypothesized to account for dysfunctional synaptic transmission. Additionally,
mounting evidence highlights marked differences in glial gene expression between
schizophrenic patients and healthy individuals, meaning that glial cells are also as-
sociated with SCZ [Win+17; SE19; Sto+17]. As of today, no cure exists for SCZ.
Existing medications only slow down the progress of the disease and relieve particu-
lar symptoms to a certain level. Patients, however, require lifelong treatment.
1.2.2
Background to glial cell types of the central nervous system
SCZ has always been studied in the context of neuronal abnormality, however, growing
evidence has been indicating that glial dysfunction may largely contribute to the
degeneration of the central nervous system (CNS). These findings emphasize that
glial cells are not merely responsible for the structural support of neurons, but also
for the healthy development of the nervous system, metabolic support and viability
of neurons, maintaining homeostasis, and remodeling of synaptic networks. Hence,
disturbance in neuronal-glial communication resulting from glial dysfunction may give
rise to neurodegeneration in the brain. In the CNS, glia make up close to 90% of the
total cells, which comprise the dominant oligodendrocytes and astrocytes as well as
microglia, ependymal cells, and in the peripheral nervous system Schwann cells and
satellite cells.
Oligodendrocytes are crucial in forming myelin around the axons thereby allowing
rapid, saltatory conduction of electrical impulses among the neurons of the CNS
[SN16]. Besides axonal insulation, they also provide trophic support contributing to
neuronal viability [Fün+12].
Astrocytes are the most abundant cell type in the brain and show high levels of
structural and functional diversity based on their location [Aze+09]. The so-called
protoplasmic astrocytes can be found in the gray matter, while the fibrous astrocytes
are localized in the white matter. Highly branching processes of astrocytes are found
to envelop synapses, contact nodes of Ranvier, form gap junctions with another as-
trocyte, and contact with blood vessels. Such interactions enable them to perform
functions like regulation of blood flow in response to neuronal activity, mediations of
nutrients towards the neurons, maintenance of transmitter homeostasis in synapses,
and altering neuronal excitability through releasing gliotransmitters into the synaptic
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
space [Att+10; NRG03]. Additionally, they have an important role during develop-
ment as they guide growing axons and tag synapses to be eliminated [HN15].
During embryonic neurogenesis, neural stem cells (NSC, or neuroprogenitor cells:
NPC) maintain their own numbers by self-renewal furthermore, they generate neu-
rons, subsequently glial cells. Induced by different genetic signals, NSC undergoes a
gliogenic switch and gives rise to glial cells at the expense of neurons (Figure 1.2).
GPCs are bi-potential progenitors that can become astrocytes as well as oligodendro-
cytes [TZ16]. GPC is the main proliferative cell type in the adult brain that retains
its ability to migrate, exit the cell cycle and differentiate into new glial cells [Eme10;
SN16]. The final differentiation of mature myelinating oligodendrocytes and mature
highly branched astrocytes are preceded by several premature cell stages. For a more
exhaustive background to the genetic pathways and transcription factors influencing
the differentiation of different glial lineages, the reader is advised to see the appendix
A.13.
Figure 1.2: Schematic figure of the glial cell differentiation [Osi19]. Important surface
markers are indicated for the specific cell types. For example: PDGFR for GPCs,
CD44 and S100beta for APCs and astrocytes, GFAP for astrocytes, O4 for pre-OL
and CD9 for mature myelinating OL.
1.2.3
Applications of induced glial cells
Human induced pluripotent cells and embryonic stem cells can be effectively directed
to glial progenitor cell fate [Cow+04]. Additionally, induced GPCs further differenti-
ate into astrocytes and oligodendrocytes (OL) both in vivo (transplanted into mice)
or in vitro. Figure 1.3 shows the main stages of the differentiation protocol of GPCs,
from hiPSCs through the formation of neuroepithelial cells and premature GPCs to
the derivation of OLIG2/NKX2-2/SOX10/PDGFRA expressing mature GPCs that
are ready for transplantation or in vitro terminal differentiation towards astrocytes
and OLs.
In order to investigate possible cell therapy treatments for different glial disorders,
researchers at the Goldman Lab (University of Rochester Medical Center/Copen-
==PAGE:15==
1.2 The role of glial cells in schizophrenia
5
Figure 1.3: Overview of the different stages of in vitro GPC generation indicating the
main marker genes that the cells express at a given stage. (OPC=GPC) [Cow+04]
hagen University) developed a technique to create human glial chimeric mice, in
which immunodeficient and myelin-deficient or myelin-wildtype neonatal mice are
transplanted with human glial progenitor cells (hGPCs), resulting in the widespread
integration of human cells into the developing mouse brain followed by cell migration
and further cell differentiation and myelinogenesis [Win+08].
In a previous study, for example, skin biopsies were obtained from both schizophrenic
and healthy children in order to generate patient-specific iPS cell lines by reprogram-
ming isolated fibroblasts cells to pluripotency (Figure 1.4). The iPSCs were induced
to glial differentiation in vitro to obtain GPCs.
These healthy or schizophrenic
individuals-derived GPCs were subsequently utilized for mice transplantation and
transcriptome sequencing analysis. This procedure allowed researchers to better un-
derstand the myelination competence of SCZ hGPCs and WT hGPCs in vivo, as well
as, to explore the differentially expressed genes of SCZ GPCs relative to those of
control-derived glia.
Researchers found that GPC development is delayed and disrupted in mice en-
grafted with SCZ hGPCs. This resulted in deficient oligodendrocytic differentiation,
hypomyelination of the adult brain, and abnormal astrocytic morphology, which to-
gether may lead to impaired synaptic development and maintenance.
Sick mice
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: Visual abstract. [Win+17]
also displayed abnormal behavior, excessive anxiety, and sleeping issues [Win+17].
Moreover, differential expression analysis identified a set of down-regulated key GPC
lineage transcription factors such as OLIG1, OLIG2, SOX10, and ZNF88.
Addi-
tionally, RNA expression data showed the down-regulation of genes associated with
myelination, synaptic development and function. Interestingly, a subsequent study
showed that the transplantation of fetal hGPCs effectively restored myelin to the
demyelinated host brain with functional improvement. In fact, treated mice showed
improved motor behavior as well [Mar+20]. These results illuminate the possibilities
of cell replacement therapy for relieving the symptoms of myelin disorders such as
SCZ, although much work remains for neuroscientists to develop proper treatment
protocols for human patients.
Several biological methods can be applied to evaluate the correct maturation of
iPSCs into GPCs or astrocytes. One of these procedures is to measure the transcrip-
tome signature of the produced cell lines, which expectedly resemble the expression
signature of the target cell types. In the following subsections, I will present the main
methods employed for measuring the transcriptome and finally CellNet, a computa-
tional software designed to accomplish such evaluation.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq technologies
7
1.3
Bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq
technologies
Bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) are both high-throughput se-
quencing technologies that enable the quantification of the transcriptome [Con+16;
LT19]. The transcriptome encompasses the complete set of transcripts; mRNA, non-
coding RNAs, small RNAs being transcribed from the DNA of a cell at a given time
point and environment.
Measuring the mRNA expression of the cells and tissues
allows for understanding the actual state of that cell population and those biological
processes with which the entity responds to the environmental factors. In medical re-
search, analyzing the mRNA data of diseased cells and tissues helps reveal the effects
of the disease relative to the normal functioning cell and tissue types. These technolo-
gies have become a standard part of the toolkit used in biological research. Several
bioinformatics tools have been developed not only to process bulk or single-cell data
but also to perform downstream analyses to answer various biological questions. Both
bulk RNA-seq and scRNA-seq embrace too large fields to exhaustively describe them
in this report, thus I only attempted to give a comparative description highlighting
the advantages and disadvantages of these technologies.
There is no single optimal experimental design and data analysis pipeline for the
variety of different applications in which RNA-seq is used. The major steps can be
broken down to the followings:
• mRNA (or small RNA) purification from biological samples
• library construction in which the RNA is reverse-transcribed to cDNA, usually
amplified, and the fragments are equipped with different identification sequences
• libraries are frequently composed of small reads which are subjected to sequenc-
ing on a wide range of platforms
• quality control of raw reads, demultiplexing
• transcript/gene quantification in which read coverage is used to calculate expres-
sion level. This can be done by aligning the reads to the reference genome or
transcriptome, or alternatively by alignment-free quasi-mapping method (faster
method).
Importantly, during single-cell sequencing, the first step is the single-cell dissociation
in which the tissue is digested to generate a single-cell suspension. In order to measure
mRNA in each cell separately, single-cell isolation is performed by either plate-based
techniques or microfluidic droplet-based methods.
The library construction takes
place in the wells or droplets serving as micro reaction spaces. The libraries then
pooled together for sequencing.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
The essential difference between the two technologies is that bulk RNA-seq en-
ables the measurement of the average expression level for each gene across a large
population of input cells, while scRNA-seq allows for measuring the expression level
for each gene in a single cell. Bulk RNA-seq is useful for comparative studies; i.e.
assessment of the differences of transcriptomes of healthy tissues and diseased tissues.
Also, this technology has been in practice for a longer time, and researchers are more
experienced with this procedure and the subsequent data analysis. One of the main
drawbacks of bulk RNA-seq is that it measures heterogeneous cell populations in
which the cells may be in different cell-cycle stages or compounded with other cell
types. scRNA-seq provides a solution for this problem since it allows for the profiling
and identification of each cell that is present in the biological sample. scRNA-seq per-
mits uncovering yet uncharacterized cell types in complex tissues, carrying out cell
development studies, and the exploration of the stochasticity of gene expression in
otherwise identical cells. Additionally, researchers can work with very small amounts
of starting mRNA which means a substantial advantage. However, single-cell data
has its own challenges; transcriptomes typically contain very few expressed genes com-
pared to the corresponding pooled populations thus technical noise means a bigger
challenge. Furthermore, the correct identification of cell types in the output data is
a critical step; clustering algorithms provide current solutions. Undoubtedly, both
technologies have their own advantages and disadvantages which should be consid-
ered by scientists when planning biological experiments. Figure 1.5 schematize the
essential difference between the bulk and the single-cell RNA-seq.
Figure 1.5:
Schematic figure compares bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq.
(Source: https://www.lcsciences.com/discovery/signle-cell-analysis/)
==PAGE:19==
1.4 CellNet: a computational tool for cell identity assessment
9
1.4
CellNet: a computational tool for cell identity
assessment
CellNet is a bioinformatics tool that was primarily developed to quantitatively assess
the fidelity of engineered cells compared to their native counterparts [Cah+14]. In
regenerative medicine, the application of somatic cell reprogramming, or other cell
differentiation methods, is widely used to produce the desired cell type in vitro. The
critical question is to what extent the reprogrammed cells resemble the target cell
type, and how to induce them to eventually make them identical to the target. The
functional ability of in vitro derived cells is frequently assessed via animal transplan-
tation, while the molecular similarity can be determined with quantitative RT-PCR
or RNA-seq. On top of this, CellNet provides a more precise quantitative diagnos-
tic tool that utilizes machine learning algorithms and builds cell or tissue-specific
(C/T) gene regulatory networks as the determinants of cell identity. Gene regulatory
networks control the steady-state expression program of a particular cell type thus
measuring the establishment of a C/T-specific GRN in the query samples serves as
a robust metric of cellular identity [DE06]. The cell state is essentially controlled
by transcriptional regulators forming specific network modules to secure stable gene
expression [LB17]. Literature suggests that only a few TFs are necessary to maintain
cell identity [FR15; Mor16; IZ16]. CellNet means a systematic approach to identify
those transcriptional regulators whose perturbations would most probably improve
the differentiation of the query cells. Beyond the assessment of induced cells, another
application of CellNet can be the detection of dysregulated transcriptional regulators
in diseased cell populations relative to the healthy cell lines. It can be hypothesized
that the manipulation of the dysregulated TFs in the sick cell lines could potentially
result in the generation of „cured” cells.
To sum up, CellNet is a compact tool designed for
1. classifying the query samples (i.e.: in vitro induced cells) by their similarity to
the target cell types (i.e.: fetal-derived tissue samples)
2. measuring the extent to which C/T GRNs are established in the query samples
3. uncovering dysregulated transcriptional regulators by the query samples relative
to the target cell types (Figure 1.6).
These are measured by the following metrics: classification scores, GRN status, and
network influence score (NIS), which will be explained in the Material and Methods
chapter.
1.4.1
Gene Regulatory Networks (CLR)
The reconstruction of cell or tissue-specific GRNs is an essential part of the CellNet
pipeline. GRNs rigorously control the stages of cell differentiation and a variety of
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
Figure 1.6: Overview of CellNet input and output. [Cah+14]
cellular functions [DE06]. These networks are composed of nodes and edges, where
the nodes represent either the regulators (TFs) or the target genes, and the edges
indicate regulatory relationships between the nodes. GRNs are directional since the
regulator nodes influence the expression of the target gene nodes [Wal11]. The total
space of possible regulatory relationships is the number of transcription factors mul-
tiplied by the number of genes (targets) multiplied by the number of environmental
contexts that might influence the cell. There is therefore a need for a proper algorithm
that is able to determine true regulatory interactions out of the billions of possible
ones. Besides other methods like relevance networks [JKS09], ARACNE [Mar+06],
Bayesian networks [FNL11], context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm has
the advantage of efficiently identifying statistically relevant regulatory interactions
given a network context [Fai+07]. CLR estimates the statistical relevance of the mea-
sured Pearson correlation between the expression levels of two genes (regulator and
a possible target gene) given the observed local network context. A gene and a TF
are predicted to interact if the Z score of their interaction is above a given threshold.
The Z score of each interaction depends on the distribution of the correlation values
measured between the target gene and its all possible regulators and the distribution
of correlation values measured between the regulator and all its possible targets. Such
comparison of each possible interaction to a ”background” distribution (null model)
helps to eliminate indirect and false relationships.
CellNet first randomly selects an equal number of expression profiles from each
cell type, then computes the Pearson correlation coefficient between a transcrip-
tional regulator and all its possible target genes.
The input list of human tran-
scriptional regulators was generated based on combined Gene Ontology annotation
of “nucleic acid binding” and “transcriptional regulation”. CLR is applied to assign
context/background-corrected Z score to each TR-target candidate. To remove weak
interactions (edges), every predicted relationship with a Z score lower or equal to 4
is excluded. Subsequently, C/T-specific GRNs are identified by extracting the nodes
and edges of C/T-enriched genes obtained from gene enrichment analysis [Sub+05]
(Figure 1.7) [Rad+17].
==PAGE:21==
1.5 Project Objectives
11
Figure 1.7: Overview of C/T-specific GRN generation by CellNet. New approach
does not include subnetwork identification by InfoMap, only extract the edges and
nodes of C/T-enriched genes. [Cah+14]
1.4.2
Machine Learning Algorithms (Random Forest)
Machine learning techniques are becoming more and more pervasive in modern bi-
ology and are extensively used in bioinformatics. The learning process refers to the
ability to learn patterns from observed data and utilizing the learned model for solv-
ing future situations of the same type, preferably with as little as possible human
intervention. ML terminology usually differentiates two main categories: supervised
and unsupervised learning based on how much information is known about the in-
put data (labeled or unlabeled). An example for supervised learning is the Random
Forest (RF) classification method, while the previously mentioned CLR is unsuper-
vised since the algorithm tries to discover the label information from the data alone.
CellNet utilizes RF to train a binary classifier for each cell type. Random Forest
is given observations (expression levels of C/T-specific GRN genes) and class labels
(the corresponding cell types) from which it learns a rule for determining which class
the observations belong to. The model is subsequently applied to unknown observa-
tions (expression profile of a query biological sample) for a purpose of identification
(identify the cell type of the query sample). RF is a tree-based method, it essentially
works by building multiple decision trees and then combining them to obtain more
robust predictions. Additionally, RF adds randomness to the model by randomly
taking a subset of features (genes) into account when splitting a node. RF proves to
be a popular and efficient technique in biological data analysis being nonparametric
and able to handle high data dimensionality [Qi12].
1.5
Project Objectives
The aim of this project was to utilize CellNet, a network biology platform, to assess
induced glial cells based on their transcriptome expression profiles, to diagnose aber-
rant gene regulatory networks, and to identify dysregulated transcriptional regulators.
In this project both bulk RNA-seq data and single-cell RNA-seq data were analyzed
that separates the project into two main parts.
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
In the first part of the project, bulk RNA-seq data was analyzed. CellNet was
trained upon in vitro glial data to use it as a reference to examine the followings:
• Validate the fidelity of the in vitro generated GPCs by comparing them to
fetal-derived GPCs. At the same time, identify those transcriptional regulators
whose manipulation may lead to an improvement in the differentiation protocol.
• Using the data of SCZ iPSC-derived glial samples, identify those transcriptional
regulators whose manipulation may lead to an improvement in the SCZ-affected
GPCs and astrocytes.
In the second part of the project, single-cell RNA-seq data was analyzed. Cell-
Net was trained upon human fetal-derived glial data which served as a reference to
examine the followings:
• Identify those transcriptional regulators that are important in the differentiation
of in vivo GPCs and astrocytes.
• Using SCZ in vivo glial data, identify those effects on the gene regulatory net-
works that can be attributed to the disease.
To this end, the following steps were performed for both the bulk RNA-seq and
the single-cell RNA-seq data using CellNet:
• Reconstruction cell/tissue-specific gene regulatory networks on the training data
set.
• Traning cell/tissue-specific binary classifier on the training data set.
• Application of the trained classifier to query samples to determine cell type
identity.
• Computation of cell/tissue-specific GRN status in the query samples.
• Computation of network influence scores of transcriptional regulators between
the query data and a specific cell type in the training data.
The results of this analysis are intended to either confirm previous hypotheses or serve
for the generation of new ones in regard to present cell differentiation protocols of
glial cells or studying the normal and abnormal glial differentiation. The primary goal
was to report the transcriptional regulators prioritized in different contexts mentioned
above to facilitate the future work of the researchers. Deep functional and pathway
analysis of these genes were not part of the project.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Materials & Methods
2.1
Bulk RNA-seq data
2.1.1
Preprocessing of the training data
FASTQ files containing the raw read sequences and the corresponding quality scores
were pulled from GEO based on a list of preselected SRA ids.
These files were
produced from either single-end or paired-end sequencing. Th fastp tool [Che+18]
was applied to the FASTQ files to perform quality control, adapter trimming and
quality filtering as follows:
• drop every read shorter than 35 base pair
• trim reads from 5’ to 3’ until the base pair quality is at least 13 (window size
1)
• trim reads from 3’ to 5’ until the base pair quality is at least 13 (window size
1)
• remove specified adapters
Quality checked data were subsequently aligned to the RefSeq NCBI reference human
genome version GRCh38 [PTM07] using the STAR read aligner [Dob+13]. Transcript
quantification was then performed with RSEM [LD14] using the reference genome. To
obtain a merged expression matrix from several RSEM output files (quant.sf) along
with the gene-level estimation of read counts, tximport was employed [SID15]. In
order to create proper data for CellNet, poor samples and low-expressed genes were
filtered out with the following cut-offs:
• samples where the total number of raw read counts is lower than 105
• genes whose mean expression in all cell types were lower than 5 TPM
The dimensions of the final data set were 1555 columns (samples) and 20306 rows
(genes).
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Materials & Methods
2.1.2
Content of the training data
The cleaned training data include a total of 1555 expression profiles of 18 human cell
and tissue types pulled from 118 different studies 2.1. Astrocyte and GPC samples
originated from studies carried out at the Goldman Lab, while the rest of the data
were obtained from a range of projects with publicly available data on GEO. Astro-
cytes were represented by 32 samples while GPCs were represented by 120 samples.
The category (cell type) possessing the smallest sample size contained 27 samples,
which was eventually applied by random sampling to each category in order to con-
struct GRN for each cell type. Additionally, the data encompassed samples from 5
different contexts, that is, ectoderm, blood, non-blood, germ, and endoderm derived
samples. This level of diversity presented in the data is known to positively affect
the effectiveness of the context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm in GRN
construction [Fai+07].
Cell type
Number of samples
GPC
120
Astrocyte
32
Lung
95
Brain
109
Intestine colon
64
B cell
83
Monocyte
199
HSPC
27
T cell
53
Skeletal muscle
189
Macrophage
242
Fibroblast
79
ESC
52
Liver
32
Dendritic cell
75
Kidney
27
Endrothelial cell
53
Heart
22
Total
1555
Table 2.1: The table summarizes the number of samples per cell type in the training
data.
2.1.3
Preparation and content of the query data
The query data consist of SCZ diseased GPC and astrocyte samples as well as hu-
man fetal-derived GPC samples generated at the Goldman Lab. RSEM output files
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Bulk RNA-seq data
15
(quant.sf) of these samples were processed using tximport to combine the data and
quantify read counts at gene-level. The preprocessing resulted in a separate expression
data table for each condition, that is, fetal-derived and SCZ. Genes were restricted to
only those that are present in the training data (20603). The following table serves
as an overview of the content of the query data (Table 2.2).
-
GPC
Astrocyte
Total
SCZ
26
6
32
Fetal
12
-
12
Table 2.2: Number of GPC and astrocyte samples in the query data sets: SCZ, fetal.
2.1.4
Experimental background of GPC and astrocyte samples
GPC and astrocyte samples used in the training data were generated in vitro from
healthy individuals-derived iPSCs according to a previously reported differentiation
protocol at the Goldman lab [Cow+04; Win+17].
SCZ GPC and astrocyte samples were produced based on the same protocol, but
these cell lines were derived from diseased iPSC cell lines.
Fetal data consists of ex vivo produced GPC samples that were derived from
human fetuses and cultured in the lab.
Figure 2.1: Figure summarizes the usage of different data sets in the first part of the
project.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Materials & Methods
2.2
Single-cell RNA-seq data
2.2.1
Preprocessing of the training data
Training data consist of single-cell RNA-seq data obtained from human embryo-
derived CD140a+ cells sorted by Fluorescence Activated cell sorting, whereby CD140a
identifies a population of highly myelinogenic human glial progenitor cells [Sim+11]. I
was provided with the prepared feature-barcode matrix, the output of the CellRanger
pipeline. The expression matrix was preprocessed with Seurat [Hao+20] following
these steps:
• Quality check and data filtering:
– remove genes not expressed in at least 3 cells
– remove cells that are suspected to result from sequencing artifacts (empty
droplets, cell doublets or multiplets) or express a high level of mitochon-
drial DNA (dead cells)
• Data transformation by sctransform [HS19] that encompasses the followings:
– normalization of expression values to mitigate the problem of different
sequencing depth
– remove unwanted variation in the data (i.e.: mitochondrial contamination)
– select the 3000 most variable genes for downstream analysis
• Perform PCA and identify important dimensions in the data
• Run UMAP and place cells in low-dimensional space
• Cell clusterization with the following steps:
– calculate KNN (k-nearest neighbors)
– construct the SNN (shared nearest neighbor) graph
– perform modularity optimization with the Louvain algorithm to determine
clusters
• Find differentially expressed positive markers in each cluster by comparing a
single cluster to all the other cells, using the statistical method Wilcoxon Rank
Sum test. Testing was limited to genes that:
– show min 0.25 log-fold-change between the two measured groups
– are detected in a minimum of 25% of the cells in either of the two measured
groups
• Assign cell type to clusters based on the expression of the determined marker
genes in the reference Glial Database https://ctngoldmanlab.shinyapps.io/
glialdatabase/ (generated at the Goldman Lab)
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Single-cell RNA-seq data
17
11 clusters - and cell types - were identified in agreement with the reference glial
database. The preprocessed clustered data was then used to prepare proper input for
CellNet.
2.2.2
Creating pseudo-bulk samples
In order to utilize the single-cell data for GRN construction and classifier training,
pseudo-bulk samples were generated for each cell type.. First, low-expressed genes
were filtered out if their mean expression in all cell types was lower than 5 TPM.
Next, the remaining genes were limited to those genes that were present in all the
query samples (11158 genes in total). Afterward, 150 pseudo samples were produced
in each category by randomly sampling a defined number (24) of single-cell profiles of
a given cell type, followed by aggregating. Tables 2.3 and 2.2 show the summary of
the data transformation. The dimensions of the new training data set became 1650
columns (pseudo samples) and 11158 rows (genes).
Cell type
Number of cells
Astrocyte
158
GPC
130
Immature astrocyte
122
Microglia
108
Cycling GPC
105
Neuron/NPC
105
APC
87
Astrocytic GPC
41
Pericyte/EC
33
Neuron
33
Radial glia
25
Total
947
Table 2.3: Content of the single-cell RNA-seq training data.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Materials & Methods
Cell type
Number of pseudo-samples
Astrocyte
150
GPC
150
Immature astrocyte
150
Microglia
150
Cycling GPC
150
Neuron/NPC
150
APC
150
Astrocytic GPC
150
Pericyte/EC
150
Neuron
150
Radial glia
150
Total
1650
Table 2.4: Content of the transformed data
2.2.3
Experimental background and preprocessing of the query
data
Neonatal mice were injected with in vitro induced healthy or SCZ human GPCs.
The control and SCZ chimera mice were sacrificed several weeks later and human
xenografts were isolated from the corpus callosum. This method provides an in vivo
model for assessing the healthy or SCZ human GPCs and astrocytes.
Query data comprised single-cell RNA-seq data of both the control chimera-
derived human glial cells and the SCZ chimera-derived human glial cells. The prepro-
cessing of the query data started with the enrichment of the human cells and removing
data from mouse cells. Since reads were aligned to the genome of both species, only
those cells were kept in which the total number of human gene-assigned reads was
at least twice as much as the total number of mouse gene-assigned reads. The sub-
sequent preprocessing steps were performed with Seurat following the same steps as
explained before for the training data preprocessing.
A cluster was established if
approximately 10 differentially expressed positive marker genes were detected with
adjusted p-value < 0.01. As a result of this, 4 clusters with a total number of 250
cells were identified in the control data, and 6 clusters with a total number of 262
cells in the SCZ data.
2.2.4
Data aggregation
To be consistent, the genes of the query data sets were restricted to the 11158 genes
that are present in the preprocessed training data. In order to prepare proper input
for CellNet, the single-cell expression profiles were aggregated within each cluster
thereby producing technically one “sample” per cluster.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 CellNet experimental design and important metrics
19
Figure 2.2: Figure summarizes the usage of different data sets in the second part of
the project.
2.3
CellNet experimental design and important
metrics
2.3.1
Training and assessment of CellNet processor
For each data set the CellNet pipeline started with the normalization of the raw read
counts to correct for library size differences. Following the CellNet approach, expres-
sion matrices were downsampled so that each sample had the same total number of
reads. The additional processing steps on the reference data ultimately resulted in
a CellNet processor that can be used to analyze the query samples relative to the
reference data. First, the data devoted to creating the CellNet processor were sub-
jected to C/T-specific GRN construction. For this, CellNet required the normalized
expression data, the metadata containing information about the samples, and a list
of human transcriptional regulator IDs. The obtained C/T GRN genes were then
utilized as predictor variables in the training of the C/T-specific binary classifiers via
the Random Forest algorithm.
Validation of the model is crucial before proceeding and drawing any biological
conclusion. CellNet was therefore initially trained with only a subset of the whole
training data set, and evaluated on an independent, held out data set. The model
performance was assessed by computing the precision rate and the recall rate of the
classification results of the validation data set. After determining that the precision-
recall balance shows a tendency towards 1, the complete training data set was used
to train the final C/T classifiers along with creating the CellNet object.
CellNet
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Materials & Methods
processor includes all the information that allows the analysis of query samples and
produces the following outputs:
1. classification scores explaining the probability that a query sample expresses
the C/T GRN genes at a level that is identical to the same cell type in the
reference data
2. GRN status explaining the extent to which the reference C/T GRN is estab-
lished in a query sample
3. list of transcription factors ranked based on the probability that alteration of
their expression would bring the query samples in question closer to a reference
C/T GRN
Figure 2.3: Overview of the CellNet workflow [Rad+17].
==PAGE:31==
2.3 CellNet experimental design and important metrics
21
2.3.2
Precision and recall
Classification events have four possible outcomes that are summarized by the confu-
sion matrix (Table 2.4): a prediction relative to the labeled data can be true positive,
true negative, false positive, and false negative. A frequently used way to evaluate the
performance of binary classification algorithms is to compute the recall and precision
of the classification event. Recall, or true positive rate incorporates the number of
true positive predictions relative to all observations in the positive class (true positive
and false negative) (Figure or formula). Precision is the ratio of the number of true
positives to the number of observations predicted as positive (true positive and false
positive) (Figure 2.5). The prediction is perfect if both the precision and recall equal
1. To plot the precision-recall curve, precision and recall for a given classifier are
computed at a variety of decision thresholds (0 to 1), whereby the decision threshold
is the predicted probability of an observation belonging to the positive class. The
goal is to achieve a precision-recall balance close to 1.
Figure 2.4: Possible outcomes of a classification problem.
Figure 2.5: The formulas to calculate recall and precision
2.3.3
Classification score and heatmap
One of the outputs of CellNet is a visual summary in the form of a classification
heatmap. The rows represent the cell types in the reference data, and each column
represents a query sample subjected to classification. The values are the classification
scores ranging from 0 to 1, with colour shades: black: 0.0 -> green: 0.5 -> yellow:
1.0. Higher scores indicate a higher probability that a query sample expresses the
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Materials & Methods
C/T-specific GRN genes at a level that is indistinguishable from the given cell type
in the reference data.
2.3.4
GRN status
In order to measure the establishment of a given GRN in a sample, we investigate
whether the expressions of the GRN genes in the sample fall within the distributions
of gene expressions observed in the corresponding C/T in the reference data. The
GRN status in a query sample is given by the weighted mean of the Z scores of the
genes in the GRN. Each Z score is weighted by the importance of the gene to the
network (and to the classifier) so that the genes more highly expressed have more
influence on the GRN status. (Figure 2.7) The raw GRN status is transformed and
normalized so that the higher GRN status indicates a higher similarity to the target
C/T GRN (Figure 2.8)
Figure 2.6: The GRN status depends on the closeness of the expression of each GRN
gene to its expected value and the importance of the gene to the network [Cah+14].
Figure 2.7: The formula for calculating the raw GRN status. n = number of genes
in the GRN. The weight is proportional to the expression level of the gene in the
reference cell type. [Cah+14]
Figure 2.8: The transformation and normalization of the raw GRN status.
The
expression in the denominator is the average RGS of C/T samples in the whole
training data. [Cah+14]
==PAGE:33==
2.3 CellNet experimental design and important metrics
23
2.3.5
Network influence score (NIS)
To assess the importance of a dysregulated TF in a network relative to a reference
network, a network influence score is calculated for each TF specific to the target
GRN. NIS depends on the difference in the expression level of the given TF between
the query and the target, the difference in the expression of the genes regulated by
the TF, and the number of regulated genes. Positive values indicate that the TFs
are too highly expressed compared to TFs in the target network, therefore they are
supposed to be repressed in order to bring the cells closer to the target C/T GRN. In
turn, negative values indicate that the TF expression is too low and thus needs to be
enhanced.
Figure 2.9: NIS depends on the extent of the dysregulation of the TF and its predicted
targets, and the number of the targets [Cah+14]
Figure 2.10: NIS depends on the expression level of the TF in the target C/T, the
extent of the dysregulation of the TF and its predicted targets, and the number of
the targets. TR: transcriptional regulator, n = number of genes in the GRN. The
Z score of the target gene and the TR is weighted by their mean expression in the
reference samples. [Cah+14]
==PAGE:34==
24
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Results
3.1
Bulk RNA-seq data
3.1.1
CellNet construction and validation
As a first step, CellNet was called to reconstruct C/T-specific gene regulatory net-
works by randomly selecting 27 samples per cell type and training a binary classifier
for each category. Table 3.1 shows the summary of the reconstructed GRNs; such as
the number of genes (or nodes) in a C/T-specific GRN and the number of transcrip-
tional regulators involved in each subnetwork.
Cell type
Number of GRN genes
Number of TFs in the GRN
GPC
516
100
Astrocyte
300
27
Lung
805
43
Brain
1470
41
Intestine colon
737
48
B cell
446
22
Monocyte
286
9
HSPC
261
30
T cell
387
14
Skeletal muscle
451
22
Macrophage
273
11
Fibroblast
315
32
ESC
345
54
Liver
501
11
Dendritic cell
105
8
Kidney
179
13
Endrothelial cell
266
21
Heart
161
11
Table 3.1: The summary of C/T GRNs.
To evaluate the performance of the model, approximately 75% of the whole train-
ing data was used for training classifiers, while the remaining 25% was held out for
validation. The resulting classifiers were then applied to the validation data set and
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Results
precision-recall curves were plotted to assess the performance (Figure 3.1). The plot
indicates perfect prediction for almost all cell types as both P(precision) = 1 and
R(recall) = 1. Most importantly, the performance of predicting GPC and astrocyte
samples is proper for subsequent analysis. Eventually, to create the final CellNet
processor all the training data were subjected to training. In the following sections,
CellNet outputs will be presented and interpreted for each query data set: fetal data,
SCZ data.
Figure 3.1: Precision-recall curves per cell type.
3.1.2
Analysis of human fetal-derived samples
In this analysis, I attempted to assess the in vitro generated healthy ESC-derived or
iPSC-derived GPC samples whether they are identical to their fetal-derived counter-
parts. In order to achieve this, the CN processor was applied to the fetal-derived GPC
samples. On the resulting classification heatmap it becomes evident that most of the
samples were classifiable as GPCs with classification scores between 0.3-0.7 (Figure
3.1), although some of the samples, namely hfCD140-1p, hfCD140-2p, hfCD140-4p,
and hfCD140-5p, showed especially low scores of 0.1-0.2. These samples likely came
from the same batch and the low scoring may be attributed to sampling issues.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Bulk RNA-seq data
27
Figure 3.2: Classification results of the fetal GPC samples.
Figure 3.3: GPC GRN status in the fetal GPC samples. Dark blue: GPC GRN status
in the training data samples. Light blue: GPC GRN status in the query samples (fetal
GPCs).
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Results
In agreement with the classification results, the GRN status bar plot confirmed that
the fetal-derived samples did not express the same GPC GRN, as they showed a much
lower GPC GRN status compared to the reference GPC samples (Figure 3.3). Indeed,
the fetal samples scored with higher GPC identity establish higher GPC GRN status
as well (July2014_hfCD140-1p, July2014_hfCD140-3p, fcd140_3), while the samples
showing almost black cells on the heatmap demonstrate low GPC GRN status (<0.6).
In order to obtain a ranked list of dysregulated transcriptional regulators in the
fetal-derived samples, network influence scores were determined for each GPC GRN
TF. Negative scores indicate that the candidate TFs are downregulated in the fetal-
derived samples, meaning that these TFs are overregulated in the in vitro samples.
CellNet prioritized several genes that belong to gene families playing important roles
in cell fate differentiation and are connected to the Notch signaling pathway [LW16];
namely the HES gene family [KOK07], DLX gene family [Mer+00], and the SOX
gene family [Lef+07].
HES6, DLX1, MEIS3, SOX4, and DLX2 are among those
transcription factors that received high negative network influence scores, suggesting
that these genes are especially downregulated in the fetal-derived GPCs relative to
the in vitro GPCs. In other words, these TFs are highly expressed in the in vitro
GPC cell lines, and the repression of these TFs may lead to a fetal-like GPC cell
population. HES6 and MEIS3 are essential in maintaining the proliferative stage of
NPC and prevent immature differentiation, while in line with this DLX1/2 and SOX4
reportedly repress GPC formation [Koy+00; UB15; Pet+07; Bra+18]. The observed
overexpression of these genes in the in vitro generated GPCs may suggest that the
cell populations contain early-stage cells.
Figure 3.4: NIS plot shows the first 20 highly prioritized dysregulated transcriptional
regulators in the fetal GPC samples compared to the in vitro GPCs.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Bulk RNA-seq data
29
3.1.3
Analysis of SCZ iPSC-derived glial samples
This analysis focused on whether the SCZ patient-derived induced GPC and astrocyte
samples are different from the healthy cell types, and furthermore on which TFs
could be targeted to improve these diseased cell lines. A previous study described
several differentially expressed genes by SCZ GPCs that are responsible for glial
differentiation, myelin synthesis, synapse formation and regulation [Win+17]. SCZ
GPCs and SCZ astrocytes were found to display impaired maturation.
CellNet classified all the SCZ GPC samples as GPCs with high confidence (mean
score = 0.89) (Figure 3.5). A few samples, SCZ_164B, SCZ_164F, SCZ_51C, showed
resemblance to astrocytes (mean score = 0.064). The reference GPC GRN was 100%
established in the SCZ GPC samples (Figure 3.6), while in line with the classification
results, they also reflected higher astrocyte GRN status than the GPC samples in
the training data (Figure 3.7). This suggests that the samples expressing astrocyte-
specific genes at a higher level indicate some level of commitment towards the astro-
cyte differentiation lineage.
Figure 3.5: Classification results of the SCZ GPC samples.
SCZ astrocyte samples were classified as astrocytes with high scores (in the range
from 0.5 to 0.96). However, samples SCZ_31A_CD44 and SCZ_31B_CD44 achieved
near the same scores for GPC cell identity and astrocyte cell identity (0.45 and 0.55,
respectively) (Figure 3.8). GRN status plots confirmed that the reference astrocyte
GRN is perfectly established in the SCZ samples (Figure 3.9), whilst the GPC GRN
genes were expressed at a higher level than what in the astrocyte samples of the
training data (Figure 3.10). It can be speculated that the SCZ astrocyte samples
with high GPC scores more resemble an immature state.
As a next step, network influence scores were computed to discover dysregulated
TFs controlling the GRN of the SCZ GPCs or SCZ astrocytes.
Reference GRNs
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Results
Figure 3.6: GPC GRN status in the SCZ GPC samples and in the reference data.
Dark blue: reference cell types, light blue: the average GPC GRN status of the SCZ
GPC samples.
Figure 3.7: Astrocyte GRN status in the SCZ GPC samples and in the reference data.
Dark blue: reference cell types, light blue: the average astrocyte GRN status of the
SCZ GPC samples.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Bulk RNA-seq data
31
Figure 3.8: Classification results of the SCZ astrocyte samples.
Figure 3.9: Astrocyte GRN status in the SCZ astrocyte samples (and in the reference
cell types). The light blue bar stands for the average astrocyte GRN status of the
SCZ astrocyte samples.
were provided by the healthy GPC and astrocyte samples in the training data. By
looking at the GPC related NIS plot, it can be seen that most of the TFs received
low influence scores as their NIS medians fall in the range between -1 and 1.5 (Figure
3.11). This can be explained by the fact that SCZ GPCs were found to be greatly
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Results
Figure 3.10: GPC GRN status in the SCZ astrocyte samples (and in the reference
cell types). The light blue bar stands for the average GPC GRN status of the SCZ
astrocyte samples.
similar to the control GPCs.
However, there was overexpression of SOX2, which
points to embryonic neural stem cells, and overexpression of DLX genes (DLX1/2)
which are repressors of glial differentiation, as mentioned previously. SOX4 is usually
found to act together with SOX11 and their prolonged-expression may interfere with
normal myelination and cause premature differentiation of GPCs [Pot+07]. Moreover,
POU3F2 is reportedly a core regulator of a gene co-expression network associated with
Schizophrenia [Che+18].
the astrocyte-related NIS plot shows low importance of TFs with medians spread-
ing between -0.25 and 1.25 (Figure 3.12). GLIS3 and FOXG1 are the first two highly
prioritized dysregulated genes in the SCZ astrocytes. GLIS3 is expressed in NPCs,
which helps govern the NPC cell fate, and its overexpression is reported to be associ-
ated with tumorigenesis [Jeo+19]. FOXG1 inhibits astrogenesis from stem cells, and
a decline in its expression is required for the neuronogenic-to-gliogenic transition of
progenitor cells [Luk+07].
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Bulk RNA-seq data
33
Figure 3.11: NIS plot shows the first 20 highly prioritized dysregulated transcriptional
regulators in the SCZ GPC samples compared to the in vitro GPCs.
Figure 3.12: NIS plot shows the first 20 highly prioritized dysregulated transcriptional
regulators in the SCZ astrocyte samples compared to the in vitro astrocytes.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Results
3.1.4
Conclusion
To sum up the results from analyzing bulk RNA-seq data, the following conclusions
may be drawn:
1. Fetal-derived GPC samples are not identical to the in vitro generated GPCs,
which proposes an improvement in the differentiation protocols of induced
GPCs.
CellNet prioritized a set of transcriptional regulators related to cell
differentiation pathways.
The overexpression of TFs such as HES6, MEIS3,
SOX4, DLX1/2 in the in vitro cell lines implies the presence of NPC cells and
not fully established mature GPCs.
Therefore, the repression of these TFs
may bring the induced GPCs closer to a more mature cell population ready for
transplantation.
2. SCZ GPCs and SCZ astrocytes express the GRN genes of their healthy coun-
terparts at a high level, which is reflected in high GRN status values for both
cell types. Remarkably, 2 out of the 6 SCZ astrocyte samples show dual cell
identity; around 55% astrocyte and 45% GPC identity respectively.
Taking
previous studies into account, this could be explained by the delayed matura-
tion of the diseased astrocytes. SCZ GPCs overexpress a handful of TFs that
interfere with the expected maturation of GPCs for example SOX4 and SOX11,
DLX1/2, SOX2. Additionally, a higher presence of GLIS3 and FOXG1 in the
SCZ astrocyte samples to some degree indicates a hindered astrogenesis.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Single-cell RNA-seq data
35
3.2
Single-cell RNA-seq data
In the second part of the project, single-cell RNA-seq data were analyzed in order
to overcome some of the limitations that come with using bulk transcriptomic data,
such as the cell composition heterogeneity of the tissue samples. Tissue heterogeneity
may influence CellNet results as opposed to highly purified samples. Thus, single-cell
data were analyzed in order to obtain results that would allow for the generation
of more accurate hypotheses.
SingleCellNet [TC19], a similar tool as CellNet, is
designed to take single-cell data to perform cell identity detection. However, Single-
CellNet is not yet able to construct gene regulatory networks using sparse data as
obtained from single-cell expression experiments (which naturally include many zero
values). Consequently, the program is not able to compute network influence scores
of transcriptional regulators. Due to these issues, the CellNet pipeline was applied to
single-cell data, even though this tool is primarily designed for analyzing bulk RNA-
seq data. In order to provide valid input data for CellNet, some modifications had
to be done (see materials methods). Pseudo samples were generated to model new
training data. Further, query data were aggregated in a way that single-cell profiles
were summed up in each cluster, which resulted in a single “sample” per cluster. All
data sets were subsequently normalized to minimize the effects of technical differences
between the samples.
3.2.1
CellNet construction and validation
The fetal-derived single-cell data were utilized as reference data in subsequent com-
parisons. By this, human fetal glial cells were compared to a more mature in vivo
glial cell stage obtained from adult mice to shed light on the genetic changes the glial
cells underwent during maturation.
The following 11 cell types were identified in the training data based on comparing
the cluster-specific marker genes to a reference glial database: astrocyte, GPC, im-
mature astrocyte, microglia, cycling GPC, neuron/NPC (neuroprogenitor cell), APC
(astrocyte progenitor cell), astrocytic GPC, pericyte/EC (endothelial cell). The po-
sitions of the cell type-labeled clusters are visualized in a low-dimensional space by
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP), showing cells with more
similarity co-localizing on the map (Figure 3.13).
For model validation, the single-cell data was split into training and validation
data sets, before the same number of pseudo samples (150) were generated by boot-
strapping both data sets. CellNet was trained and applied to the held-out data to
measure the performance of the C/T classifiers. The precision-recall curves indicate
that the immature astrocyte and APC samples were predicted with little success.
However, the classification of GPC and astrocyte samples proved to be accurate
enough (Figure 3.14). Following this, the complete single-cell data were used to cre-
ate 150 pseudo samples in each category, reaching the dimensions with 11158 genes
and 1650 pseudo-bulk samples. This expression data set was the input for training
the final CellNet processor, the produced C/T GRNs are summarized in the Table
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Results
Figure 3.13: UMAP of the training data
3.2. It can be observed that this approach resulted in GPC and astrocyte GRNs
that contained fewer genes and TFs than the GPC or astrocyte GRNs produced with
the bulk RNA-seq data. The next sections demonstrate which CellNet outputs were
obtained after applying the trained CN processor to the query data sets; control data,
SCZ data.
Cell type
Number of GRN genes
Number of TFs in the GRN
Astrocyte
186
11
GPC
261
26
Immature astrocyte
106
8
Microglia
416
21
Cycling GPC
414
49
Neuron/NPC
661
83
APC
76
7
Astrocytic GPC
1428
182
Pericyte/EC
145
179
Neuron
838
114
Radial glia
462
28
Table 3.2: Content of the transformed data
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Single-cell RNA-seq data
37
Figure 3.14: Precision-recall curves per cell type
3.2.2
Analysis of control chimera-derived in vivo data
This analysis aimed to answer the question of whether the control chimera-derived
human GPCs and astrocytes are similar to the human fetal-derived GPCs or astro-
cytes. Hypothetically, these cells should be highly similar but some differences in the
level of maturity can be expected.
4 clusters were identified in the single-cell data (Figure 3.15) and investigated for
known marker gene expression such as the mature GPC marker PDGFRA and the
astrocyte marker GFAP. The presence of these marker genes indicated that cluster 3
consisted of astrocyte cells, while cluster 1 was made up of mature GPC cells (Figure
3.16).
The single-cell profiles were subsequently aggregated as described previously. With
the help of the CellNet processor, first the cell type identity of the clusters was de-
termined, then dysregulated TFs in the control chimera-derived GPCs or astrocytes
were explored. The first cluster showed the highest GPC identity among all clusters
with a score of 0.91, while cluster 3 was identified as APC and astrocyte with scores
of 0.53 and 0.54, respectively (Figure 3.17). It can be concluded that the first cluster
contained GPC cells that were highly similar to the human fetal GPCs and the third
cluster contained astrocytes and APC cells with high proportions. Since only cluster
1 expressed the mature GPC marker gene PDGFRA, this cluster was used in the sub-
sequent analysis. Besides, I found that clusters 0 and 2 contained a high proportion
of oligodendrocytes expressing the myelin basic protein (MBP) marker gene, which
cells should be avoided when it comes to GPC GRN comparison. Since in this case
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Results
Figure 3.15: UMAP of control chimera-derived in vivo data
Figure 3.16: Localization of the GPC marker gene PDGFRA and the astrocyte marker
gene GFAP.
only one query GPC or astrocyte sample was compared to the reference data, the
network influence scores are not represented by box plots, but instead there is only
one score per TF.
The GPC NIS plot highlights a set of highly expressed TFs in the in vivo GPCs
such as OLIG1, SOX8, NKX2-2, SOX10, MYT1 (Figure 3.18). OLIG1, SOX8, and
SOX10 are important positive regulators of the oligodendrocyte lineage differentiation
[Tur+18; ZA02]. Similarly, NKX2-2 promotes OL maturation, while MYT1 plays role
in myelin production [Zhu+14; Nie+04]. The overexpression of these genes in the in
vivo GPCs leads to the conclusion that these progenitor cells probably showed com-
mitment to the OL lineage differentiation. Consequently, the fetal-derived progenitor
cells were in an earlier stage maintaining their bipotential status.
Comparing in vivo astrocytes and fetal-derived astrocytes, it was expected to find
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Single-cell RNA-seq data
39
Figure 3.17: Classification results of the control chimera-derived pseudo samples
those TFs that control the differentiation of a more mature state in the astrocytes.
The NIS plot indicates the importance of FOXJ1, DBX2, CEBPD, NACC2, LMO2
as they received high positive network influence scores, while HMGA1 and HOPX
were found to be repressed in the in vivo astrocytes (Figure 3.19).
Figure 3.18: NIS plot shows the first 20 (or fewer if there are no 20 GRN TFs in
total) highly prioritized dysregulated transcriptional regulators in the control in vivo
GPCs compared to the fetal-derived GPCs.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Results
Figure 3.19: NIS plot shows the first 20 (or fewer if there are no 20 GRN TFs in
total) highly prioritized dysregulated transcriptional regulators in the control in vivo
astrocytes compared to the fetal-derived astrocytes.
3.2.3
Analysis of SCZ chimera-derived in vivo data
In the previous section, genes influencing the normal maturation of in vivo glial cells
were explored relative to their fetal counterparts. In this analysis, I aimed to discover
those TFs that show dysregulation in the SCZ-affected glial cells due to the disease.
6 clusters were identified and investigated for the expressions of the mature GPC
marker gene and the astrocyte marker gene (Figure 3.20 and 3.21). It can be seen that
clusters 1 and 5 mainly consisted of astrocyte cells while cluster 0 included mostly
mature GPCs.
After expression profile aggregation, the cell type identity of the clusters was
assessed by classifying them in comparison to the fetal-derived reference data. The
classification heatmap showed that clusters 0, 2, and 3 were highly similar to the
human fetal-derived GPCs (with scores: 0.88, 0.79, 0.44, respectively), while cluster
1 and 5 were mainly composed of astrocytes and APCs (mean score for astrocyte: 0.53,
and for APC: 0.62) (Figure 3.22). In order to clarify in what manner the SCZ GPCs
and astrocytes were different from the fetal-derived cells, cluster 0 was measured
against the fetal-derived GPCs, as well as, clusters 1 and 5 together were measured
against the fetal-derived astrocytes. In spite of the high classification score as GPC,
clusters 2 and 3 were not included in further analysis, since it does not show the
expression of PDGFRA, but express the MBP oligodendrocyte marker gene, which
cells were not relevant for my purpose.
The GPC related NIS plot prioritized a set of overexpressed TFs in the in vivo
SCZ GPCs that were really similar to that of the list obtained from the control in
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Single-cell RNA-seq data
41
Figure 3.20: UMAP of SCZ chimera-derived in vivo data
Figure 3.21: Localization of the GPC marker gene PDGFRA and the astrocyte mark-
ergene GFAP
vivo GPCs in the previous section: OLIG1, SOX8, MYT1, SOX10 (Figure 3.23).
This implicates that these progenitor cells were similarly committed to giving rise to
oligodendrocytes just like the control in vivo GPCs. Interestingly, some transcription
factors that play an important role in the maturation processes of the progenitor
cell such as OLIG1, SOX8, SOX10, NKX2-2 were lower expressed in the SCZ GPCs
than what we have seen in the control GPCs. As a consequence, SCZ GPCs were
probably closer to a more immature state as they showed a higher resemblance to the
fetal-derived cells. Importantly, OLIG2 and CHD7 were reported as downregulated
TF in the in vivo SCZ GPCs, but not in the control in vivo GPCs. OLIG2 is an
essential positive regulator in all stages of the OL lineage development and early
GPC specification [Mai+10]. Additionally, CHD7 is a direct target of OLIG2 and
together with SOX10, it promotes the late stages of OL differentiation and myelin
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Results
Figure 3.22: Classification results of the SCZ chimera-derived pseudo samples
gene expression [He+16]. Consequently, the diseased in vivo GPCs probably displayed
a deficit in normal oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination.
By examining the astrocyte related NIS plot (Figure 3.24), some level of similarity
was observed between the prioritized TFs here and the ones that were found to be
important in the differentiation of the control astrocytes. For example, HMGA1 and
HOPX were similarly repressed in these cells. However, it is interesting to observe
the difference in levels of magnitude of the network influence scores of FOXJ1, DBX2,
CEBPD, LMO2 between the control astrocytes and in the SCZ astrocytes. FOXJ1
received as high NIS as 15.2 in the control astrocytes, while the median of the NIS
was 2.5 in the SCZ astrcoytes. To mention a few other TFs showing higher differences:
DBX2 NIS was 5.9 in the control and 0.1 in the SCZ, CEBPD NIS was 3.9 in the
control and 0.4 in the SCZ, LMO2 NIS was 3 in the control and -0.35 in the SCZ.
Since these genes were found to be important in the differentiation of healthy in vivo
astrocytes, the observed downregulation of these TFs in the SCZ astrocytes may cause
problems during normal maturation.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Single-cell RNA-seq data
43
Figure 3.23: NIS plot shows the first 20 (or fewer if there is no 20 GRN TF in total)
highly prioritized dysregulated transcriptional regulators in the SCZ in vivo GPCs
compared to the fetal-derived GPCs.
Figure 3.24: NIS plot shows the first 20 (or fewer if there is no 20 GRN TF in
total) highly prioritized dysregulated transcriptional regulators in the SCZ in vivo
astrocytes compared to the fetal-derived astrocytes.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Results
3.2.4
Conclusion
As a conclusion of analyzing the single-cell in vivo data with CellNet, the following
points can be made:
1. CellNet provides an adequate tool to analyze single-cell data after necessary
modifications are made. Although there is a risk for information loss during
the process, this approach is able to generate biologically relevant results with
single-cell RNA-seq data.
2. Control chimera-derived GPCs highly expressed TFs playing role in GPC and
OL maturation: OLIG1, SOX8, SOX10, NKX2-2, MYT1. SCZ chimera-derived
GPCs expressed these genes at a lower level and downregulateed OLIG2 and
CHD7, two important genes in GPC and OL differentiation. These observations
suggest that SCZ GPCs were more immature compared to the control GPCs
and may show poor ability to give rise to normal oligodendrocytes.
3. A handful of TFs were found to be important in the differentiation of healthy
in vivo astrocytes such as FOXJ1, DBX2, CEBPD, NACC2, LMO2. In fact,
these genes were lower expressed in the astrocytes that were matured from SCZ-
affected GPCs. Consequently, it can be assumed that the SCZ in vivo astrocytes
were delayed in their maturation.
4. In order to clarify the effects of the disease on the in vivo glial cells, a comparison
of the control chimera-derived glial cells and the SCZ chimera-derived glial
cells would be more appropriate. For this comparison, a developed version of
SingleCellNet would be recommended.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
Stem cell biology greatly relies on the in vitro generation of specific cells and tis-
sues permitting the researchers to produce resources for biomedical research, drug
discovery, and therapeutic transplantation. CellNet is the first tool that provides
a compact computational platform for quantitatively assessing the cell identity of
the engineered cells and proposing candidate genes for interventions to help refine
cell fate specification. Utilizing machine learning algorithms, such as the CLR to
compute true regulatory relationships when building gene regulatory networks and
the Random Forest classification method to determine cell identity, makes this tool
highly efficient. CellNet also derived important metrics such as the GRN status and
the network influence score.
The former measures the extent to which a specific
C/T GRN is established in a sample and the latter helps prioritize transcriptional
regulators controlling the deviant GRN. Besides the primary goal of CellNet, this
tool proved its high usability in examining the aberrant GRNs of diseased cells in
comparison to their healthy cell types. Moreover, provided enough data, it allows for
the comparison of GRNs of cells of any condition (i.e.: fetal vs in vivo, in vitro vs in
vivo). CellNet is freely downloadable software which also exists as an online tool for
biologists who are not experienced in the R programming language.
In this project, I demonstrated the high usability of CellNet in various biological
contexts, nevertheless, the tool has its own limitations. CellNet is sensitive to the
quantity and the quality of the input data; the CLR algorithm reportedly requires at
least 60 expression profiles per cell type to achieve highly accurate GRNs [Fai+07].
Additionally, CLR performs better if input data are enriched with expression pro-
files representing different biological contexts (i.e.: ectoderm-derived, blood-derived,
endoderm-derived, nonblood mesoderm-derived). This type of variance in the data
serves as information to the algorithm. In my experience, the tool can be reliably used
with fewer than 60 samples per cell type, however, too few samples (<10) negatively
affect the robustness of the overall GRN construction, and the Random Forest algo-
rithm classifies these cell types poorly since the given cell type is not well-represented
in the training data (highly imbalanced data should be avoided). Importantly, the
data wished to be used in training and in downstream analysis should be composed
of highly purified samples in order to exclude unwanted variables from the analysis.
Otherwise, it is difficult to decide whether the desired GRN is not established in the
engineered cell or the presence of other cell types influences the data. Of note, the
input list of the transcriptional regulators is an essential factor in GRN reconstruc-
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Discussion
tion and the final results are highly dependent on it. Therefore, it is recommended
for the users to carefully select the TF list that they intend to use, a good source for
this could be the CIS-BP Database (http://cisbp.ccbr.utoronto.ca/index.php).
Unfortinately, the official documentation of the CellNet functions is not exhaustive,
but the developer team is certainly helpful and responsive to any questions. CellNet
is under further development to provide a more robust tool, however, cancerCellNet
[Pen+20] already includes important extensions and improvements that can be uti-
lized in the CellNet pipeline as well. According to my information, adapting network
influence score to single-cell RNA-seq data is also a work in progress, which would
make it possible to obtain the list of ranked transcription factors at a single-cell level.
In the first part of this project, CellNet was successfully utilized for analyzing
bulk RNA-seq data which resulted in interesting findings. On one hand, the in vitro
induced GPCs were found to show some extent of immaturity when they were com-
pared to fetal-derived GPCs, as well as, a set of transcription factors were suggested
whose manipulation expected to improve the differentiation protocols. On the other
hand, glial cells affected by SCZ were assessed in comparison to their normal in vitro
generated counterparts. My observations were in agreement with the findings of pre-
vious studies, according to that the SCZ GPCs were delayed in their maturation
and the astrocytes that could be derived from these cells also displayed hindered
differentiation.
In the second part of the project, CellNet was applied to single-cell RNA-seq data
since this tool provided those features that suited my goals. Although SingleCellNet is
designed for handling this type of data, unfortunately, this tool is not yet able to derive
network influence scores to rank transcription factors nor able to reconstruct GRNs.
After consulting the CellNet developer team, I was advised to modify my single-
cell training data by creating bulk pseudo samples as well as aggregating the single-
cell expression profiles in the query data before applying the CN processor. While
these modifications allowed for running CellNet, at the same time, the advantage of
using single-cell data was lost. In this way, such samples were created that could
be considered as highly purified cell populations and expectedly give better insight
than bulk samples.
Undoubtedly, it was possible to produce biologically relevant
results and demonstrate a set of transcription factors that played an important role
in the normal differentiation of in vivo GPCs and astrocytes. Also, the diseased in
vivo GPCs were found to be impaired in their normal differentiation, consequently,
the astrocytes and oligodendrocytes matured from these progenitor cells were also
affected by the disease.
The lists of transcriptional regulators reported in this project are proposed for
further supervision and investigation for fellow scientists who research the glial con-
tribution to schizophrenia. In most cases, the manipulation of only a few genes is
enough to induce the cells towards the desired target. Thorough literature work is
required to better understand the extended effects of these TFs on cell fate differ-
entiation. For future work, the application of the advanced version of SingleCellNet
may be recommended to make comparisons at the single-cell level thereby refining
the results presented in this project.
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Additional figures
A.1.1
Classification scores
The figures listed below show the classification score of each sample based on which
the classification heatmaps were created in each analysis.
Figure A.1: Classification scores of the fetal GPC samples (1) for Figure 3.2
==PAGE:58==
48
A An Appendix
Figure A.2: Classification scores of the fetal GPC samples (2) for Figure 3.2
Figure A.3: Classification scores of the SCZ GPC samples (1) for Figure 3.5
==PAGE:59==
A.1 Additional figures
49
Figure A.4: Classification scores of the SCZ GPC samples (2) for Figure 3.5
Figure A.5: Classification scores of the SCZ GPC samples (3) for Figure 3.5
==PAGE:60==
50
A An Appendix
Figure A.6: Classification scores of the SCZ astrocyte samples for Figure 3.8
Figure A.7: Classification scores of the control chimera-derived in vivo samples for
Figure 3.17
==PAGE:61==
A.1 Additional figures
51
Figure A.8: Classification scores of the SCZ chimera-derived in vivo samples for
Figure 3.22
A.1.2
Network influence scores
The figures listed below show the network influence score of each transcription factor
in each analysis of the second part of the project. (The NIS tables belonging to the
first part of the project are too large to decently place here.) Note, NIS plots only
include the first 20 most important genes, or fewer if there were no 20 GRN TFs in
total. Here, the NIS of all the TFs is listed.
==PAGE:62==
52
A An Appendix
Figure A.9: NIS for Figure 3.18
Figure A.10: NIS for Figure 3.19
==PAGE:63==
A.1 Additional figures
53
Figure A.11: NIS for Figure 3.23
==PAGE:64==
54
A An Appendix
Figure A.12: NIS for Figure 3.24
==PAGE:65==
A.1 Additional figures
55
A.1.3
Additional figures
Figure A.13: Factors in glial specification and differentiation [Osi+19].
==PAGE:66==
56
A An Appendix
A.2
Code
This code demonstrates the general steps used to train data and assess classifier
performance with CellNet.
1 # load metadata, expression data with raw read counts and TF list
2 stAll <- utils_loadObject("data/metadata_train_cleaned.rda")
3 expAll_raw <- utils_loadObject("data/rsem_count_data_train_cleaned.rda")
4 load("data/hsTF_list.rda")
5
6 # normalize expression data by downsampling
7 min_total_reads <- 100000
8 expAll_norm <- trans_rnaseq(expAll_raw, min_total_reads)
9
10 # reconstruct C/T GRNs
11 grnProp <- cn_make_grn(stAll, expAll_norm, species = "Hs", tfs = hsTF_list)
12
13 # assess classifier performance and plot precision-recall curves
14 classifierPerformance <- cn_splitMakeAssess(stAll, expAll_norm, grnProp,
prop = 0.75, dLevel = "cell_type", dLevelStudy = "study_id", dLevelSID =
"sample_name")
15
16 plot_class_PRs(classifierPerformance$PRs)
17
18 # generate the CellNet processor using the complete training data
19 cnProc <- cn_make_processor(expAll_norm, stAll, grnProp, sidCol = "sample_
name")
This code demonstrates the general steps used to apply trained CN processor to query
data and plot results.
1 # load query metadata, expression data with raw read counts and CN processor
2 stQuery <- utils_loadObject("data/metadata_query_cleaned.rda")
3 expQuery_raw <- utils_loadObject("data/rsem_count_data_query_cleaned.rda")
4 load("data/cnProc.rda")
5
6 # normalize expression data by downsampling
7 min_total_reads <- 100000
8 expQuery_norm <- trans_rnaseq(expQuery_raw, min_total_reads)
9
10 # apply CellNet to query data
11 cnRes <- cn_apply(expQuery_norm, stQuery, cnProc)
12
13 # plot C/T classification results
14 cn_HmClass(cnRes)
15
16 # plot GRN status of query samples (this is plotting the GPC GRN status in
the GPC query samples)
17 cell_types <- as.vector(unique(cnProc[["stTrain"]][["cell_type"]]))
18 cn_barplot_grnSing(cnRes,
19
cnProc,
20
snName = "gpc",
21
ctrlSamps = cell_types,
==PAGE:67==
A.2 Code
57
22
bOrder = c(paste0(cell_types, "_train"), "gpc_query"),
23
sidCol = "sample_name",
24
dlevel = "condition")
25
26 # compute NIS and plot (this is calculating the scores of the GPC GRN TFs in
the GPC query samples)
27 tfScores_gpc <- cn_nis_all(cnRes, cnProc, "gpc")
28 plot_nis(tfScores = tfScores_gpc,
29
targetCT = 'gpc',
30
sampTab = stQuery,
31
group = 'gpc',
32
limitTo = 20,
33
dLevel = 'cell_type')
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[Att+10]
David Attwell et al. “Glial and neuronal control of brain blood flow”. eng.
In: Nature 468.7321 (2010), pages 232–243. issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi:
10.1038/nature09613.
[Aze+09]
Frederico A. C. Azevedo et al. “Equal Numbers of Neuronal and Non-
neuronal Cells Make the Human Brain an Isometrically Scaled-Up Pri-
mate Brain”. eng. In: Journal of Comparative Neurology 513.5 (2009),
pages 532–541. issn: 10969861, 00219967. doi: 10.1002/cne.21974.
[Bra+18]
Luca Braccioli et al. “SOX4 inhibits oligodendrocyte differentiation of
embryonic neural stem cells in vitro by inducing Hes5 expression”. eng. In:
Stem Cell Research 33 (2018), pages 110–119. issn: 18767753, 18735061.
doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2018.10.005.
[Bub+14]
K. Bubke et al. “Cloned Transgenic Calves Produced from Nonquiescent
Fetal Fibroblasts”. eng. In: (2014).
[Cah+14]
Patrick Cahan et al. “CellNet: Network Biology Applied to Stem Cell
Engineering”. eng. In: Cell 158.4 (2014), pages 903–915. issn: 10974172,
00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.07.020,10.1016/j.cell.2014.
07.020.
[CDK08]
Despoina M. Choumerianou, Helen Dimitriou, and Maria Kalmanti. “Stem
cells: Promises versus limitations”. eng. In: Tissue Engineering - Part B:
Reviews 14.1 (2008), pages 53–60. issn: 19373376, 19373368. doi: 10.
1089/teb.2007.0216.
[Che+18]
Shifu Chen et al. “Fastp: An ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ preprocessor”.
eng. In: Bioinformatics 34.17 (2018), pages i884–i890. issn: 13674811,
13674803, 02667061, 14602059. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560.
[CN11]
Pedro C. Chagastelles and Nance B. Nardi. “Biology of stem cells: an
overview”. eng. In: Kidney International Supplements 1.3 (2011), pages 63–
67. issn: 21571716, 21571724. doi: 10.1038/kisup.2011.15.
[Con+16]
Ana Conesa et al. “A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis”.
eng. In: Genome Biology 17.1 (2016), page 13. issn: 1474760x, 14747596.
doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-0881-8.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
[Cow+04]
Chad A. Cowan et al. “Derivation of Embryonic Stem-Cell Lines from
Human Blastocysts”. eng. In: New England Journal of Medicine 350.13
(2004), pages 1353–1356. issn: 15250024, 15250016, 15334406, 00284793.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMsr040330.
[DE06]
Eric H. Davidson and Douglas H. Erwin. “Gene Regulatory Networks
and the Evolution of Animal Body Plans”. und. In: (2006).
[Dob+13]
Alexander Dobin et al. “STAR: Ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner”. eng.
In: Bioinformatics 29.1 (2013), pages 15–21. issn: 13674803, 14602059,
02667061, 13674811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635.
[Eme10]
Ben Emery. “Regulation of oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelina-
tion”. eng. In: Science 330.6005 (2010), pages 779–782. issn: 10959203,
00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.1190927.
[Fai+07]
Jeremiah J. Faith et al. “Large-scale mapping and validation of Escherichia
coli transcriptional regulation from a compendium of expression profiles”.
eng. In: Plos Biology 5.1 (2007). Edited by Andre Levchenko, pages 0054–
0066. issn: 15457885, 15449173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0050008.
[Fen+20]
Lizhao Feng et al. “Cell-Based Therapy for Canavan Disease Using Hu-
man iPSC-Derived NPCs and OPCs”. eng. In: Advanced Science 7.23
(2020), page 2002155. issn: 21983844. doi: 10.1002/advs.202002155.
[FNL11]
Nir Friedman, Iftach Nachman, and Michal Linial. “Using Bayesian Net-
works to Analyze Expression Data”. eng. In: (2011).
[FR15]
Tristan Frum and Amy Ralston. “Cell signaling and transcription factors
regulating cell fate during formation of the mouse blastocyst”. eng. In:
Trends in Genetics 31.7 (2015), pages 402–410. issn: 01689525, 13624555.
doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2015.04.002.
[Fün+12]
Ursula Fünfschilling et al. “Glycolytic oligodendrocytes maintain myelin
and long-term axonal integrity”. eng. In: Nature 485.7399 (2012), pages 517–
521. issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature11007.
[GSD10]
Pablo V. Gejman, Alan R. Sanders, and Jubao Duan. “The role of ge-
netics in the etiology of schizophrenia”. eng. In: Psychiatric Clinics of
North America 33.1 (2010), pages 35–66. issn: 15583147, 0193953x. doi:
10.1016/j.psc.2009.12.003.
[Hao+20]
Yuhan Hao et al. “Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data”.
In: bioRxiv (2020). doi: 10.1101/2020.10.12.335331. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.335331.
[He+16]
Danyang He et al. “Chd7 cooperates with Sox10 and regulates the onset
of CNS myelination and remyelination”. eng. In: Nature Neuroscience 19.5
(2016), pages 678–689. issn: 15461726, 10976256. doi: 10.1038/nn.4258.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
61
[HN15]
Philip G. Haydon and Maiken Nedergaard. “How do astrocytes partici-
pate in neural plasticity?” eng. In: Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in
Biology 7.3 (2015), a020438. issn: 19430264. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.
a020438.
[HS19]
Christoph Hafemeister and Rahul Satija. “Normalization and variance
stabilization of single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative bino-
mial regression”. eng. In: Genome Biology 20.1 (2019), page 296. issn:
1474760x, 14747596. doi: 10.1186/s13059-019-1874-1.
[HT04]
Mehboob A. Hussain and Neil D. Theise. “Stem-cell therapy for diabetes
mellitus”. eng. In: Lancet 364.9429 (2004), pages 203–205. issn: 1474547x,
01406736. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16635-X.
[IZ16]
Makiko Iwafuchi-Doi and Kenneth S. Zaret. “Cell fate control by pioneer
transcription factors”. eng. In: Development (cambridge) 143.11 (2016),
pages 1833–1837. issn: 14779129, 09501991. doi: 10.1242/dev.133900.
[JB15]
Balendu Shekhar Jha and Kapil Bharti. “Regenerating Retinal Pigment
Epithelial Cells to Cure Blindness: A Road Towards Personalized Artifi-
cial Tissue”. eng. In: Current Stem Cell Reports 1.2 (2015), pages 79–91.
issn: 21987866. doi: 10.1007/s40778-015-0014-4.
[Jeo+19]
Kilsoo Jeon et al. “GLIS3 Transcriptionally Activates WNT Genes to
Promote Differentiation of Human Embryonic Stem Cells into Posterior
Neural Progenitors”. eng. In: Stem Cells 37.2 (2019), pages 202–215. issn:
15494918, 10665099. doi: 10.1002/stem.2941.
[JKS09]
Atul J. Butte, Isaac S. Kohane, and I. S. Kohane. “Mutual Information
Relevance Networks: Functional Genomic Clustering Using Pairwise En-
tropy Measurements”. eng. In: (2009).
[KOK07]
Ryoichiro Kageyama, Toshiyuki Ohtsuka, and Taeko Kobayashi. “The
Hes gene family: Repressors and oscillators that orchestrate embryogene-
sis”. eng. In: Development 134.7 (2007), pages 1243–1251. issn: 14779129,
09501991. doi: 10.1242/dev.000786.
[Koy+00]
N. Koyano-Nakagawa et al. “Hes6 acts in a positive feedback loop with the
neurogenins to promote neuronal differentiation”. eng. In: Development
127.19 (2000), pages 4203–4216. issn: 09501991, 14779129.
[LB17]
Mo Li and Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte. “Ground rules of the pluripo-
tency gene regulatory network”. eng. In: Nature Reviews Genetics 18.3
(2017), pages 180–191. issn: 14710064, 14710056. doi: 10.1038/nrg.
2016.156.
[LD14]
Bo Li and Colin N. Dewey. “RSEM: Accurate transcript quantification
from RNA-seq data with or without a reference genome”. eng. In: Bioin-
formatics: the Impact of Accurate Quantification on Proteomic and Ge-
netic Analysis and Research (2014), pages 41–74. doi: 10.1201/b16589.
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
[Lef+07]
Véronique Lefebvre et al. “Control of cell fate and differentiation by
Sry-related high-mobility-group box (Sox) transcription factors”. eng. In:
International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology 39.12 (2007),
pages 2195–2214. issn: 13572725, 18785875. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.
2007.05.019.
[Lod04]
Harvey Lodish. Molecular cell biology. eng. Freeman, 2004, Getr. Zählung
(unknown). isbn: 0716743663.
[LT19]
Malte D. Luecken and Fabian J. Theis. “Current best practices in single-
cell RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial”. eng. In: Molecular Systems Biology
15.6 (2019), e8746. issn: 17444292. doi: 10.15252/msb.20188746.
[Luk+07]
Inna Lukashova-v.Zangen et al. “Ependymoma gene expression profiles
associated with histological subtype, proliferation, and patient survival”.
eng. In: Acta Neuropathologica 113.3 (2007), pages 325–337. issn: 14320533,
00016322. doi: 10.1007/s00401-006-0190-5.
[LW16]
Joseph L. Lasky and Hong Wu. “Notch signaling, brain development, and
human disease”. eng. In: (2016).
[LYZ20]
Xin Yu Liu, Lin Po Yang, and Lan Zhao. “Stem cell therapy for alzheimer’s
disease”. eng. In: World Journal of Stem Cells 12.8 (2020), pages 787–802.
issn: 19480210. doi: 10.4252/WJSC.V12.I8.787.
[Mai+10]
Cécile L. Maire et al. “Gain-of-function of olig transcription factors en-
hances oligodendrogenesis and myelination”. eng. In: Stem Cells 28.9
(2010), pages 1611–1622. issn: 10665099, 15494918. doi: 10.1002/stem.
480.
[Mar+06]
Adam A. Margolin et al. “ARACNE: An algorithm for the reconstruction
of gene regulatory networks in a mammalian cellular context”. eng. In:
Bmc Bioinformatics 7.1 (2006), S7. issn: 14712105. doi: 10.1186/1471-
2105-7-S1-S7.
[Mar+20]
J. N. Mariani et al. “Human Glial Progenitor Cells Effectively Remyeli-
nate The Demyelinated Adult Brain”. eng. In: Multiple Sclerosis Journal
26.1SUPPL (2020), pages 145–145. issn: 14770970, 13524585.
[Men+15]
Li Meng et al. “Rhesus Monkeys Produced by Nuclear Transfer”. eng. In:
(2015).
[Mer+00]
G. R. Merlo et al. “Multiple functions of Dlx genes”. eng. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Developmental Biology 44.6 (2000), pages 619–626. issn:
16963547, 02146282.
[Mor16]
Samantha A. Morris. “Direct lineage reprogramming via pioneer factors;
a detour through developmental gene regulatory networks”. eng. In: De-
velopment (cambridge) 143.15 (2016), pages 2696–2705. issn: 14779129,
09501991. doi: 10.1242/dev.138263.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
[Nie+04]
Joseph A. Nielsen et al. “Myelin transcription factor 1 (Myt1) modulates
the proliferation and differentiation of oligodendrocyte lineage cells”. eng.
In: Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 25.1 (2004), pages 111–123. issn:
10959327, 10447431. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2003.10.001.
[NRG03]
Maiken Nedergaard, Bruce Ransom, and Steven A. Goldman. “New roles
for astrocytes: Redefining the functional architecture of the brain”. eng.
In: Trends in Neurosciences 26.10 (2003), pages 523–530. issn: 1878108x,
01662236. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2003.08.008.
[Osi+19]
Mikhail Osipovitch et al. “Human ESC-Derived Chimeric Mouse Models
of Huntington’s Disease Reveal Cell-Intrinsic Defects in Glial Progenitor
Cell Differentiation”. eng. In: Cell Stem Cell 24.1 (2019), 107–122.e7. issn:
18759777, 19345909. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2018.11.010.
[Osi19]
Osipovitch. “Transcriptomic analysis identifies common glial dysfunction
in Huntington’s disease and schizophrenia”. eng. In: 245 (2019).
[Pen+20]
Da Peng et al. “Evaluating the transcriptional fidelity of cancer models”.
In: bioRxiv (2020). doi: 10.1101/2020.03.27.012757. eprint: https:
/ / www . biorxiv . org / content / early / 2020 / 03 / 29 / 2020 . 03 . 27 .
012757.full.pdf. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
2020/03/29/2020.03.27.012757.
[Pet+07]
Magdalena A. Petryniak et al. “Dlx1 and Dlx2 Control Neuronal versus
Oligodendroglial Cell Fate Acquisition in the Developing Forebrain”. eng.
In: Neuron 55.3 (2007), pages 417–433. issn: 08966273, 10974199. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2007.06.036.
[Pot+07]
Michaela R. Potzner et al. “Prolonged Sox4 expression in oligodendro-
cytes interferes with normal myelination in the central nervous system”.
eng. In: Molecular and Cellular Biology 27.15 (2007), pages 5316–5326.
issn: 02707306, 10985549. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00339-07.
[PTM07]
Kim D. Pruitt, Tatiana Tatusova, and Donna R. Maglott. “NCBI refer-
ence sequences (RefSeq): A curated non-redundant sequence database of
genomes, transcripts and proteins”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 35.1
(2007), pages D61–D65. issn: 13624962, 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkl842.
[Qi12]
Yanjun Qi. “Random Forest for Bioinformatics”. eng. In: (2012).
[Rad+17]
Arthur H. Radley et al. “Assessment of engineered cells using CellNet
and RNA-seq”. eng. In: Nature Protocols 12.5 (2017), pages 1089–1102.
issn: 17502799, 17542189. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2017.022.
[RD12]
Daisy A. Robinton and George Q. Daley. “The promise of induced pluripo-
tent stem cells in research and therapy”. eng. In: Nature 481.7381 (2012),
pages 295–305. issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature10761.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[Rip+14]
Stephan Ripke et al. “Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated
genetic loci”. eng. In: Nature 511.7510 (2014), pages 421–427. issn: 14764687,
00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature13595.
[RW07]
Miguel Ramalho-Santos and Holger Willenbring. “On the Origin of the
Term ”Stem Cell””. eng. In: Cell Stem Cell 1.1 (2007), pages 35–38. issn:
18759777, 19345909. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.05.013.
[Sch+97]
Angelika E. Schníeke et al. “Human factor IX transgenic sheep produced
by transfer of nuclei from transfected fetal fibroblasts”. eng. In: Science
278.5346 (1997), pages 2130–2133. issn: 00368075, 10959203. doi: 10.
1126/science.278.5346.2130.
[SE19]
Kristina Sakers and Cagla Eroglu. “Control of neural development and
function by glial neuroligins”. eng. In: Current Opinion in Neurobiology
57 (2019), pages 163–170. issn: 18736882, 09594388. doi: 10.1016/j.
conb.2019.03.007.
[Sha+10]
Jason Sharp et al. “Human embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte
progenitor cell transplants improve recovery after cervical spinal cord
injury”. eng. In: Stem Cells 28.1 (2010), pages 152–163. issn: 10665099,
15494918. doi: 10.1002/stem.245.
[SID15]
Charlotte Soneson, Michael I. Love, and Mark D. Robinson. “Differential
analyses for RNA-seq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level infer-
ences [version 1; referees: 2 approved]”. eng. In: F1000 Research (2015).
issn: 20461402. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.7563.1.
[Sim+11]
Fraser J. Sim et al. “CD140a identifies a population of highly myelino-
genic, migration-competent and efficiently engrafting human oligoden-
drocyte progenitor cells”. eng. In: Nature Biotechnology 29.10 (2011),
pages 934–942. issn: 15461696, 10870156. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1972.
[SN16]
Mikael Simons and Klaus Armin Nave. “Oligodendrocytes: Myelination
and axonal support”. eng. In: Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biol-
ogy 8.1 (2016), a020479. issn: 19430264. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.
a020479.
[Sto+17]
Jeff A. Stogsdill et al. “Astrocytic neuroligins control astrocyte morpho-
genesis and synaptogenesis”. eng. In: Nature 551.7679 (2017), pages 192–
197. issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature24638.
[Sub+05]
Aravind Subramanian et al. “Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-
based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles”. eng.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 102.43 (2005), pages 15545–15550. issn: 10916490, 00278424.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506580102.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[TC19]
Yuqi Tan and Patrick Cahan. “SingleCellNet: A Computational Tool to
Classify Single Cell RNA-Seq Data Across Platforms and Across Species”.
eng. In: Cell Systems 9.2 (2019), 207–213.e2. issn: 24054720, 24054712.
doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2019.06.004.
[Tur+18]
Tanja Turnescu et al. “Sox8 and Sox10 jointly maintain myelin gene ex-
pression in oligodendrocytes”. eng. In: Glia 66.2 (2018), pages 279–294.
issn: 10981136, 08941491. doi: 10.1002/glia.23242.
[TY06]
Kazutoshi Takahashi and Shinya Yamanaka. “Induction of Pluripotent
Stem Cells from Mouse Embryonic and Adult Fibroblast Cultures by De-
fined Factors”. eng. In: Cell 126.4 (2006), pages 663–676. issn: 00928674,
10974172. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.07.024.
[TZ16]
Yunlong Tao and Su Chun Zhang. “Neural Subtype Specification from
Human Pluripotent Stem Cells”. eng. In: Cell Stem Cell 19.5 (2016),
pages 573–586. issn: 18759777, 19345909. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.
10.015.
[UB15]
Rosa A. Uribe and Marianne E. Bronner. “Meis3 is required for neural
crest invasion of the gut during zebrafish enteric nervous system develop-
ment”. und. In: (2015).
[Wak+98]
T. Wakayama et al. “Full-term development of mice from enucleated
oocytes injected with cumulus cell nuclei”. eng. In: Nature 394.6691 (1998),
pages 369–374. issn: 00280836, 14764687. doi: 10.1038/28615.
[Wal11]
Albertha J.M. Walhout. “Chapter 10 - Gene-Centered Regulatory Net-
work Mapping”. In: Caenorhabditis elegans: Molecular Genetics and De-
velopment. Edited by Joel H. Rothman and Andrew Singson. Volume 106.
Methods in Cell Biology. Academic Press, 2011, pages 271–288. doi:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 544172 - 8 . 00010 - 4.
url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
B9780125441728000104.
[Wel+97]
David N. Wells et al. “Production of cloned lambs from an established
embryonic cell line: A comparison between in vivo- and in vitro-matured
cytoplasts”. eng. In: Biology of Reproduction 57.2 (1997), pages 385–393.
issn: 15297268, 00063363. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod57.2.385.
[Win+08]
Martha S. Windrem et al. “Neonatal Chimerization with Human Glial
Progenitor Cells Can Both Remyelinate and Rescue the Otherwise Lethally
Hypomyelinated Shiverer Mouse”. eng. In: Cell Stem Cell 2.6 (2008),
pages 553–565. issn: 18759777, 19345909. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.
03.020.
[Win+17]
Martha S. Windrem et al. “Human iPSC Glial Mouse Chimeras Reveal
Glial Contributions to Schizophrenia”. eng. In: Cell Stem Cell 21.2 (2017),
195–208.e6. issn: 18759777, 19345909. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2017.06.
012.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[WP20]
Shirley D. Wenker and Fernando J. Pitossi. “Cell therapy for Parkinson￿s
disease is coming of age: current challenges and future prospects with
a focus on immunomodulation”. eng. In: Gene Therapy 27.1-2 (2020),
pages 6–14. issn: 14765462, 09697128. doi: 10.1038/s41434-019-0077-
4.
[ZA02]
Qiao Zhou and David J. Anderson. “The bHLH Transcription Factors
OLIG2 and OLIG1 Couple Neuronal and Glial Subtype Specification”.
und. In: (2002).
[Zhu+14]
Qiang Zhu et al. “Genetic evidence that Nkx2.2 and Pdgfra are major
determinants of the timing of oligodendrocyte differentiation in the devel-
oping CNS”. eng. In: Development (cambridge) 141.3 (2014), pages 548–
555. issn: 14779129, 09501991. doi: 10.1242/dev.095323.
