==PAGE:1==
Denmark Technical University
Master of Science in Engineering
Lifecycle Analysis for Loan-Financed
Investment
Supervisor:
Kourosh Rasmussen
DTU Management
Submitted By :
Miguel Martins Cunha
s182550
Msc Business Analytics
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Buying a house is a milestone in the life of many individuals. In most cases, a house is
the most valuable asset many people will ever own during their lifetime. The standard Fixed-
Rate Mortgages and Interest Only Mortgages are two commonly mortgage products found in
the danish mortgage market. However, these products lack in ’¼éexibility in terms of payments
obligations. In rare circumstances the individual may ’¼ünd himself struggling to keep up with
the ’¼ünancial obligations established with the mortgage bank. This thesis proposes a new
’¼ünancial product in the danish mortgage market, called Flexible Principal Loan. The new
product allows the customer to manage the repayment of the debt. Moreover, it makes
use of an investing account that tracks an underlying asset which allows the customer to
generate additional returns that can later be used to pay the mortgage debt. In this process,
asset allocation curves, inspired in the danish pension plans, are developed to determine the
strategy of repayment. Hence, the main goal of the thesis is to evaluate the new productŌĆÖs
’¼ünancial performance, in terms of customer risks and costs, and with this propose it is used
simulation methods. The secondary goal is to ’¼ünd the optimal asset allocation strategies that
minimize such risks and maximize the returns. With this purpose, equations to de’¼üne the
structure of Flexible Principle Loan are illustrated, being part of a proposed methodology in
which the simulation models are presented and compared, Block-Bootstrap and Geometric
Brownian Motion. Moreover, the methodology presents a cost function used to evaluate
the new mortgage. In the analysis, in a ’¼ürst instance, the asset allocation strategy with
100% allocation on the investing account is evaluated. The research shows that the Flexible
Principal Loan following such strategy outperforms most of the times the standard Fixed-
Rate Mortgages and Interest Only Mortgages under the same conditions. In addition, it
is concluded that the performance of the Flexible Principal Loan is directly proportional
with the duration of the loan. Lastly, such strategy has higher risks in the last years of
the mortgage due to the high exposure. The second part of the analysis explores the asset
allocation strategies created. Using the E’¼ācient Frontier, 5 optimal allocation curves are
chosen according to 5 di’¼Ćerent levels of risk. The asset allocation curves lying on the E’¼ācient
Frontier are all from the save curve type which replicates the danish pension fund plans.
Further analysis helps to show that low risk allocation strategies perform better in pessimist
scenarios due to the low exposure.
Key words: Flexible Principal Loan, Geometric Brownian Motion, Block-Bootstrap,
Stock Price Prediction, Investment Optimization
I
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take a step back and express my gratitude towards the support and
interest I have received from my supervisor, Kourosh Rasmussen from the management
and economics department at DTU. For the useful guidelines and fruitful conversations
throughout the thesis. In addition, I would like to thank to Peter Holms├Ė for the fundamental
discussions and collaboration in the initial part of the project. Lastly, I would like to reserve
a special thanks to my ’¼éatmates and friends Lorenzo Lugarezi, Dimitrios Kokkinopoulos,
Luca Sartori and Maria Ferraz for showing me the a light at the end of the tunnel when
times were less inspiring, specially under the conditions of COVID-19.
II
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
List of Figures
V
List of Tables
VI
Nomenclature
VII
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Measures of Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Value at Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Conditional Value at Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
E’¼ācient Frontier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Data and Methodology
9
3.1
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Supporting Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Asset Allocation Curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
Stock Returns Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Modelling and Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
Scenario Generation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.2
Flexible Principal Loan Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.1
Methods Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.2
Stability Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.3
Cost Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Naive Approach
34
4.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.1
Duration of Loan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Worst-case Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Optimal Asset Allocation Strategy
42
5.1
Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Interest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Worst Cases Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Conclusion and Future Work
53
6.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
III
==PAGE:5==
Contents
References
I
.1
Mortgage Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III
.2
Asset allocation strategies - parameters used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
.2.1
Pension Plan curves (Linear & Exponential) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
.2.2
Reverse Logistic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
.2.3
Reverse Exponential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
.2.4
Linear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
IV
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Methodology work-’¼éow.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Cash-’¼éows of the Flexible Principal Loan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Example of FPL Mortgage, priority account and Investment account snapshot. 12
4
Example of portfolio allocation curves based on four di’¼Ćerent functions func-
tions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
MSCI World Standard Index Price for Large and Mid caps, without dividends
(USD). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Time series of the MSCI returns and respective box-plot. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
7
Histogram: MSCI World Index returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
8
Q-Q plot: MSCI World Index returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
9
Histogram and box-plot of 20.000 simulations from Monte Carlo method (left)
and Block-Bootstrap method (right). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
10
Right plot: Value of contribution of 1000 DKK at the end of 30 years for Geo-
metric Brownian Motion and Block-Bootstrap method. Left plot: Logarithm
of value of contribution of 1000 DKK at the end of 30 years for Monte Carlo
and Block-Bootstrap method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
11
Stability test of investing account value at the end of the term. . . . . . . . .
30
12
Stability test of investing account valueŌĆÖs CV aR1%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
13
Priority Account (red). Investing Account with median and percentiles (blue).
The investing account values are marked on the right y-axis. . . . . . . . . .
36
14
Priority Account (red). Investing Account with median and percentiles (blue).
The investing account values are marked on the right y-axis. . . . . . . . . .
37
15
Priority Account (red). Investing AccountŌĆÖs 5% and 1% percentiles (blue).
.
38
16
Investing Account performance for FPL with 10 years term.
. . . . . . . . .
39
17
Worst-case scenarios based on average scenario return . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
18
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
19
Optimal asset allocation curves for each risk level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
20
Asset development for the optimal asset allocation strategies. . . . . . . . . .
47
21
Asset development for the optimal asset allocation strategies. . . . . . . . . .
49
22
Cost for the optimal asset allocation strategies.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
23
CV aR0.3% of the optimal curves for scenarios with worst average mean. . . .
52
Page V of V
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Descriptive statistics of returns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2
Cost descriptive statistics for optimal strategies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3
Fixed Rate Mortgage with annual ’¼üxed repayments, of both interest and prin-
cipal with a lifetime (l = 30), interest rate (r = 1.5%) and debt (g = 3000000
DKK). In this kind of mortgage, the interest decreases as the debt is repaid
during the term. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III
4
Mortgage X with annual ’¼üxed repayments with a lifetime (l = 30), interest
rate (r = 1.5%) and debt (g = 3000000 DKK). As there is no principal
payment, the interest is always does not change. The ’¼üxed cost of Mortgage
X is higher than an FRL but can be decrease depending on the average stock
returns.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
Page VI of V
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
FPL
Flexible Principal Loan
FRM Fixed-Rate Mortage
IOM
Interest Only Mortgage
Page VII of V
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Mortgages constitute one the oldest ’¼ünancial products in the banking industry and
are an important driver for the economy. One of the reasons for its economical impact is
the positive correlation between the housing market and the household consumption, since
an increase in the housing market increases the overall wealth of the householder [1]. This
relationship may be explain by an increase in the consumerŌĆÖs con’¼üdence that logically a’¼Ćects
his willingness to spend more and take more credits or the reverse causality to precautionary
savings.
Besides the economical bene’¼üts, owning a house also plays an important role in psy-
chological and social factors of the individuals. The list of theories of its positive impacts
is extensive: leads to higher life satisfaction and to higher rates of social involvement [2][3];
compared to renters, homeowners tend to live in better quality housing, mostly single-family
houses, often with yards, that provide a more stimulating environment for the children [4][5];
homeowners have access to neighborhoods with better schools, and better physical and social
conditions [6][7].
According to Cambridge Dictionary, a mortgage, is "an agreement that allows you to
borrow money from a bank or similar organization, especially in order to buy a house, or
the amount of money itself." The borrower gives creditor the legal right to take over the
property in case the borrower fails to meet his obligations of paying the debt. The borrower
executes multiple repayments throughout the term of the loan until the total cost of the loan
is covered. The cost of mortgage can be separated into principal, which is the value of the
loan, and interest, which is the creditorŌĆÖs reward for the risk of lending money. This two
concepts will be recurrently used throughout the thesis.
The most traditional form of mortgage, a standard ’¼üxed-rate mortgage (FRM) is struc-
tured so that the ’¼ürst years of repayments cover more interest than principal, while in the
’¼ünal years the opposite is performed. This situation is illustrated in the example presented in
Table 3 of the Appendix 1 where the customer borrows 3,000,000 DKK with an interest rate
of 1.5% and 30 years lifetime with yearly payments. The client pays a ’¼üxed annual amount
that throughout the years is distributed di’¼Ćerently between interest and principal. As more
principal is paid, the interest payment decreases since the outstanding debt decreases and
more is allocated to pay the principal.
Page 1 of 55
==PAGE:10==
Another similar product is the Interest Only Mortgages (IOM) which is a FRM but with
only interest payment. As the name suggests, in this kind of ’¼ünancial instrument no principal
is paid throughout the duration of the mortgage which leads to lower periodic payments.
However, in the end of the term the customer performs a repayment that builds the entire
equity of the mortgage, like illustrated in example of Table 4 of the Appendix 1 under the
same conditions as the standard FRM mentioned before. Since the mortgageŌĆÖs principal
balance does not decrease, the interest costs are higher when compared to the standard
FRM.
In the mortgages banksŌĆÖ perspective, the IOM has higher risk than the standard FRM.
The principal repayments performed in the standard FRM decrease the exposure to possible
customer default.
Moreover, the single payment performed in the end of the loan in a
IOM makes the customer way more vulnerable to external factors like a ’¼ünancial crises or
unemployment.
Consequently, nowadays is observed that the interest rates are lower in
standard FRM than in IOM. This factor is important in the new mortgage loan suggested
in this thesis as it works like an IOM but with the FRM low interest rates.
One of the main disadvantages of the two mortgages types mentioned before is the lack of
’¼éexibility for the customer. Once the periodicity, loan amount, loan duration and interest
rate are established, the client is given a payment plan that is obliged to meet, like the
ones illustrated in Table 3 and 4 of the Appendix 1. This is where Flexible Principal Loan
makes a di’¼Ćerence. The idea behind this product is to take advantage of the lower rate
o’¼Ćered by mortgage banks for a standard FRM and provide a ’¼éexible payment product to
the customer. This is achieved by having a third entity, a personal bank, that covers the
payments of the mortgage principal. Therefore, the loan debt ends up being transferred to
the personal bank into an account, called priority account, where the customer can manage
the repayments without any further periodic monetary obligations. However, the customer
still has the obligation of paying the interest over the mortgage loan and the new debt in the
priority account. At the same time, the personal bank also o’¼Ćers the customer an investing
account where he can deposits his available money in order to generate additional returns,
that can later be used to amortize the debt in the priority account.
Theoretically, the investing account will allow the consumer to generate higher returns
then the interest in the priority account. For example, in the last 10 years, the MSCI World
Index, an index that tracks stocksŌĆÖ performance from large and mid companies throughout
the world, had an average annual return of 10.48% [8]. Nonetheless, the high returns from
Page 2 of 55
==PAGE:11==
stocks come in hands with risk. Imagine the situation where the customer deposits all his
contributions into the investing account and only removes them at the end of the lifetime
of the mortgage to pay his outstanding debt in the priority account. The customer would
be exposed to big ’¼éuctuations of the stock market like economic crisis and other small
crashes, as the recent example of COVID-19. That volatility could lead the client to fail his
’¼ünancial commitments, therefore is very important to decrease the risk as the end of the
term approaches. This type of approach is seen specially in pension funds which, just like
this mortgage, take the clients contributions and invest in assets to generate returns.
Topdanmark is a danish pension fund, that o’¼Ćers pension plans that follow a speci’¼üc asset
allocation strategy according to the risk that the client is willing to take [9]. The asset
allocation curve determines the proportion of money distributed between the assets. As the
end of the term approaches, the proportion of the portfolio in riskier assets decreases in
order to decrease the risk. Similar strategies will be used to ’¼ünd the optimal strategy for
the customer.
The context described by the Topdanmark pension fund, in the sequence of explanation
and examples presented in this chapter, introduces the focus of this thesis. Hence, the aim of
this research is to evaluate the feasibility of FPL in terms of costs and risks for the customer.
Firstly using a simpli’¼üed approach to the problem, called Naive Approach, were the customer
sees all his contributions deposited in the investing account until the end of the mortgage
loan where he pays all the outstanding debt. This approach will increase the risks of failing
the commitment due to the high exposure in the last years of the mortgage. After analysing
the Naive Approach, a deeper analysis is made to ’¼ünd the optimal asset allocation strategy
for the client inspired in pension plan asset allocation strategies.
This work is separated in ’¼üve parts. The next Chapter 2 familiarizes the reader with
the theory used in this thesis that is the foundation of the work developed. Chapter 3
presents the methodology used in this thesis in order to achieve the ’¼ünal results. It explains
the process and approach taken during the thesis, from the problem formulation and the
simulation framework of the stocks returns to the validation methods.
It also provides
information on data used and on construction of the asset allocation strategies that are
later addressed in the analysis. Chapter 4 focus on the analysis of the problem, under the
simpli’¼üed approach, called Naive Approach. It investigates the results using the measures
proposed in the Literature Review and Methodology. Moreover, it also analyses the in’¼éuence
of the duration of the loan and the performance under pessimistic scenarios. Chapter 5
Page 3 of 55
==PAGE:12==
gives continuation to the analyses of the previous chapter and tackles some of the problems
found by implementing other asset allocation strategies. Lastly, the Chapter 6 will discuss
the obtained results and future work that could be done.
Page 4 of 55
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature Review
Stock forecasting is increasingly important specially considering the immense predictable
power that it can provide for an investor when looking at the stock market. Forecasting
stocks is very complex due to all its variables and as we increase the span of the forecast the
probability of having a accurate predicting decrease even more drastically since the variables
increase and more extreme scenarios can take place [10]. For example, the occurrence of
macro economical crises like the COVID-19 crises or the 2008 US housing market crises.
However, the use of ’¼ünancial engineering principles and the development of computationally
intensive methods such as Monte Carlo simulation have changed the landscape of ’¼ünancial
modeling. The use of Geometric Brownian Motion, a common Monte Carlo method, can
be suggested due to the fact that there is enough evidence suggesting that stock prices do
follow a random walk [11].
As part of this thesis, stochastic models are used in order to evaluate the performance
of the FPL in di’¼Ćerent circumstances . The objective of the stochastic models is not to
provide an accurate forecast. Instead, the main goal is to generate multiple scenarios that
will cover a wide range of possible future outcomes, providing a "what if" analysis. The
advantage of this approach is that di’¼Ćerent forecasts can be tested, which allows to evaluate
the performance of the FPL in optimistic, average and pessimist scenarios.
The two methods of forecasting used in this thesis are Geometric Brownian Motion and
Block-Bootstrap. As a Monte Carlo simulation method, the ’¼ürst method uses repeated ran-
dom sampling from an underlying distribution in order to generate scenarios. The scenarios
are generated from an underlying distribution with known parameters extracted from his-
torical data. Regarding the distribution of asset returns, it is commonly assumed that the
returns follow a normal distribution. In this thesis the focus is mainly on monthly returns
since the customer performs monthly payments for the mortgages. As shown by Jianqing Fan
and Qiwei Yao (2015), for Apple stocksŌĆÖ returns, the monthly returns are closer to a normal
distribution than the weekly returns and the daily returns [12]. However, empirical evidence
has shown that the assumption of the normal distribution is not a consistent explanation
for the stock returns. Just like the data used in this thesis, Jianqing Fan and Qiwei Yao
(2015) also observes that all the histograms for the stock returns are skewed to the left due
to a few large negative returns. One of the drawbacks of the Geometric Brownian Motion
is the fact that it assumes the underlying data follows a speci’¼üc distribution, in this case
the normal distribution, which sometimes does not translate the reality. Thus, under the
Page 5 of 55
==PAGE:14==
Geometric Brownian Motion method extreme cases of negative or positive returns are less
likely to happen.
The second method is the Block-Bootstrap. Oppositely to the Monte Carlo method, the
Block-Bootstrap does not requires the user to ’¼ünd the underlying distribution of the data.
Instead it resamples the original dataset repeatedly to create many simulated samples. There
are many examples of bootstrap applications in ’¼ünance related topics, for example, Book-
staber and McDonald (1987) [13]. As stated in their work, similar related investigations
using random number generator had similar results to those obtained using the Bootstrap
approach. The method assumes that original sample is representative of the population.
However, one must take into account that the method does not add any additional informa-
tion since it is based on resampling directly the existing dataset. In particular, if the original
sample presents a biased view of the underlying population, then all of the new samples will
get be bias too.
While the standard Bootstrap method draws random data points from the original
population, the Block-Bootstrap segments the data into independent blocks of prede’¼üned
length. The blocks can be overlapping and their length is determined by the parameter
blocksize. This parameter allows to capture some temporal correlation of the data, like a
period of recession or boom. Regarding the blocksize a very straight forward approach was
taken and it was assumed that a length of 6 would be enough to reproduce the distribution
of data and capture some correlation in the data.
A comparison between the distribution of the bootstrap sample and the actual distribu-
tion from which the bootstrap was drawn can be used to access the new samplesŌĆÖ accuracy.
Like the approach used by Bookstaber and McDonald (1987) [13], a comparison is done
using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on the histograms of the original sample and the bootstap
data. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test provides two outputs with di’¼Ćerent meanings, the ’¼ürst
one related to the sample size, statistic, and the later a p-value that is compared to a level
of signi’¼ücance. In case the p-value is bellow 0.05, the null hypothesis can be reject that
both sample come from the same distribution. The statistic is compared to a reference table
and when higher than the critical value, it can be considered that the two distributions are
di’¼Ćerent [14].
Besides the simulation, an important step is the methods used to evaluate the results of
the simulation. When looking at an investment an investor tries to pick the strategy that
will bring higher returns and lower risk. The investor can evaluate di’¼Ćerent aspects of the
Page 6 of 55
==PAGE:15==
2.1
Measures of Performance
investment, like the risk, the cost or the return, but di’¼Ćerent measures can be used to assess
the same aspects. In this research the focus is in measuring the return and the risk of the
FPL, alongside the cost for the customer. Most of the measures used in this thesis can be
found in the investing world and are explained in the following section.
2.1
Measures of Performance
When looking to an investment there are multiple ways of evaluating its performance
but each one of them has its pros and cons. Despite its simplicity, one of the most popular
ways of measuring the investment is looking at the ’¼ünal return of the asset. The return is
simply the variation of the value of a speci’¼üc asset percentage wise. So return can be de’¼üned
as [12]:
Return = Pt ŌłÆPtŌłÆ1
PtŌłÆ1
ŌłŚ100
(2.1)
where:
Pt
= Portfolio value at time t
PtŌłÆ1 = Portfolio value at time t ŌłÆ1
However, considering the returns do not cover all the aspects of an investment. An
increase in return normally comes with an increase in risk. Another important indicator is
risk, that can be measured through multiple metrics like value at risk and conditional value
at risk explained in the following subsections.
2.1.1
Value at Risk
Another common method to measure risk is the Value at Risk (VaR). By de’¼ünition, it
is the maximum expected potential loss of the portfolio over the given time horizon for a
given con’¼üdence interval under normal market conditions [15]. In this project the VaR is
applied not only in simulated returns but also on other measures, like cost, returning the
lowest outcome given a probability. The following Equation 2.2 describes the calculation
of VaR, where ╬▒ represents the desired con’¼üdence level and FX the cumulative distribution
function of x.
V aR╬▒ = min{z|FX(z) Ōēź╬▒}
(2.2)
Page 7 of 55
==PAGE:16==
2.1
Measures of Performance
2.1.2
Conditional Value at Risk
Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) or expected shortfall, does not focus on calculating
directly the volatility but instead looks at the worst outcomes. The CVaR is derived by
taking the average of values in the tail of distribution, beyond the VaR value. The CVaR
ends up being a more e’¼ācient risk management metric since the VaR does not provide any
information for the scenarios exceeding VaR, specially of the tail of the distribution.
2.1.3
E’¼ācient Frontier
The E’¼ācient Frontier is a graphical tool used to ’¼ünd the best trade-o’¼Ćbetween return
of an investment portfolio and its ŌĆÖriskŌĆÖ: the higher the risk an investor is willing to take,
the higher the expected returns of the investment [16]. For a given risk there is an optimal
expected return. In Chapter 5 this concept is used to compare risk strategies for the asset
allocation between the investing and savings account. The best possible risk strategies will
lie in the E’¼ācient Frontier curve and have the highest expected return for the same level of
risk. In portfolio investments, the E’¼ācient Frontier is calculated by plotting the expected
returns, in the y-axis, over the volatility, on the x-axis. However, volatility in that sense is
calculated as being the variance of a portfolio. The main volatility measure for the E’¼ācient
Frontier used in this project is the Conditional Value at Risk.
Both the simulation methods and the measures of performance are highly important as
they lay the foundation on which the thesis settles. While the simulation methods are used to
give robustness to the problem, the measures of performance allow to read and compare the
output of the simulation framework. The following chapter presents the work’¼éow followed
in the construction of the thesis. It illustrates the problem de’¼ünition and the models used
in the simulation framework.
Page 8 of 55
==PAGE:17==
3
Data and Methodology
The purpose of this chapter is to familiarize the reader with the methodology used
throughout this research work. The following diagram illustrates the methodology followed.
Figure 1: Methodology work-’¼éow.
The ’¼ürst part of the chapter, aims to explain in depth the mechanics of the Flexible
Principal Loan. Firstly is presented the model that de’¼ünes the FPL product and shows
the underlying calculations. The second part of the chapter focus on the supporting data
used in the model. It explains the formulation of the asset allocation curves that determine
the asset allocation and consequently control the level of risk of the FLP. Moreover, it also
presents an analysis of the stock dataset used in the simulation method and validates the
distribution of the data. This step is very important for the modelling phase. Thereafter,
the simulation framework is illustrated where the Geometric Brownian Motion and Block-
Bootstrap methods are presented. The modelling of the problem formulation is also presented
in this section. Subsequently, the simulation methods are compared and validated. The last
to steps of the methodology will be shown and developed in the next chapters.
3.1
Problem Formulation
Like explained in the Introduction chapter, while taking on the standard FRM the
customer establishes an agreement with the mortgage bank with an initial loan value, G0,
and with an interest rate, r.
Looking in detail to this kind of loan, if no payment was
performed during the lifetime of the loan, the mortgage balance, principal plus interest, in
period t would be given the following calculation:
MBt = G0 ├Ś (1 + r)t
(3.1)
The formula demonstrates the e’¼Ćect of compound interest ŌĆö accumulation of interest
Page 9 of 55
==PAGE:18==
3.1
Problem Formulation
on both the principal and the interest from the previous period. Dividing the mortgage
balance in the end of the term by the number of payment periods would overestimate the
payment amount since as payments are performed, the principal decreases thus decreasing
the interest amount. Therefore to calculate the periodic ’¼üxed payment, P, the following
formula 3.2 can be used, where t is the number of periods of the mortgage and r is the
interest rate for that given period [17].
P = G0 ├Ś (1 + r)t ├Ś
r
(1 + r)t ŌłÆ1
(3.2)
The term presented in equation 3.1 is the ’¼ürst part of equation 3.2. The second part of
the equation aggregates the e’¼Ćects of periodic interest and principal payments. According
to the periodicity of the payments, t and r are adjusted. Like described in the Introduction,
the ’¼üxed payment value P pays the interest over the remaining principal and amortizes part
of the principal. The amount of interest and principal paid change during the loan as shown
in equations 3.3 and 3.4. Firstly the interest gets paid and the remaining amortizes the
principal.
Pinterest,t = Gt ├Ś r
(3.3)
Pprincipal,t = P ŌłÆGt ├Ś r
(3.4)
Each successive period, more of the ’¼üxed monthly payment goes to principal and less
goes to interest as Gt decreases. Note that P is ’¼üxed. The outstanding debt on period t can
be obtain by the following formula 3.5 where GtŌłÆ1(1 + r) represents the principal from the
previous
Gt = GtŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ(P ŌłÆGtŌłÆ1 ├Ś r) = GtŌłÆ1(1 + r) ŌłÆP
(3.5)
If Gt = GtŌłÆ1, then the customer is only paying the interest which is equivalent to a
IOM. On the other side, if Gt < GtŌłÆ1, then P > GtŌłÆ1r thus is a standard FRM. The
periodic payment, of principal and interest of the standard FRM shown in Table 3 of the
Appendix 1 are obtained using equations 3.2, 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5. The payments mentioned
before are determined beforehand between the customer and the mortgage bank according
to the periodicity, number of years and interest rate. The customer needs to meet those
obligations with the mortgage bank without missing any payment.
Regarding the Flexible Principal Loan, understanding the math behind the standard FRM
is important since the FPL is build on the basis that a standard FRM established between the
Page 10 of 55
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Problem Formulation
mortgage bank and the customer. The following Figure 2 illustrates the cash-’¼éow dynamics
mentioned already in the Introduction that characterize the FPL.
Figure 2: Cash-’¼éows of the Flexible Principal Loan.
The dotted line represents the mortgage loan debt of the client that is established in a
the ’¼ürst moment. The solid lines represent the money cash-’¼éow throughout the FPL.
Like, mentioned before, the mortgage bank has a standard FRM established with the
customer (1), that is established in the very ’¼ürst moment of the agreement.
So in the
terms of cash-’¼éows, in the mortgage bankŌĆÖs perspective, there is a positive ’¼üxed payment,
as described in Table 3 of the Appendix 1 calculated from equations 3.2, 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5.
From the periodic payment performed to the mortgage bank, the principal is paid from the
priority account (2). Even though is uncommon, the new debt of the priority account is
assumed to have the same interest rate as the mortgageŌĆÖs interest, since the personal bank
has more guarantees considering that is backed up by the mortgage and the house. The
customer has the obligation to pay the periodic interest rate of the mortgage principal (5)
and the priority account debt (6). While the interest mortgage decreases as principal gets
paid, the priority interest increases proportionally so the total of both payments, (5) and
(6), sums up to 45,000 DKK (1.5% of 3,000,000 DKK) if no debt in the priority account is
amortized.
The personal bank also opens an investing account where the customer will invest his
available money (3). In the investment account the deposited money generates compounded
interest depending on the underlying assetŌĆÖs return, in this case, stocks (7). The contributions
Page 11 of 55
==PAGE:20==
3.1
Problem Formulation
deposited in the investing account depend on the customerŌĆÖs ’¼éexibility but should at least
keep up with the debt in the priority account in order to be able to pay it.
Considering the following example of an FPL is possible to illustrate the mechanics ex-
plained before based on the same conditions of the mortgages examples presented in Ap-
pendix 1: mortgage loan amount of 3.000.000 DKK; interest rate of 1.5%; period of 30 years
with yearly payments.
Figure 3: Example of FPL Mortgage, priority account and Investment account snapshot.
The Figure 3 shows a snapshot of the Mortgage Principal debt, the priority account
and the investing account in the beginning of the 1st year, in the middle and by the end of
the term. In the ’¼ügure is assumed that the customer does not pay any of the growing debt
of the priority account during the term and that the customer deposits constant monthly
contributions equal to the ’¼ürst principal payment (79 918 DKK) in the investing account.
Lastly, for the example is assumed an average yearly stock return of 4%.
In the ’¼ürst moment, the full value of the mortgage is still to be paid and since no
payment was done the priority and the investing account are empty.
Once the periodic
payments start, the principal starts being paid by the priority account while the interest is
paid by the customer. As it can be observed, the new loan in the personal bank, represented
by the priority account, starts with zero debt and increases as more money is used to pay
Page 12 of 55
==PAGE:21==
3.1
Problem Formulation
the mortgageŌĆÖs principal.
By year 15th, the priority account ’¼ülls up the sum of all the
principal payments of a standard FRM at the same year (see Table 3 of the Appendix 1
for reference). The contributions on the investing account, 1,198,763 DKK is given by the
number of year times the constant yearly contribution. On top of that compounded interest is
being generated from the underlying stocks, 401 473 DKK. By the end of the term, since the
customer does not amortize any debt of the priority account, the mortgage loan is fully paid
but, the principal debt is totally transferred from the mortgage loan to the priority account.
In this example, since the stock return is higher than the interest rate, the investing account
presents for more money then the priority account. By the end of the term, the mortgage
loan is fully paid.
As mentioned before, the customer has the ’¼éexibility to pay the growing debt in the priority
account whenever he wants, which in practice means that he would move the money from
the investing account to the priority account. A speci’¼üc asset allocation strategy is followed
to determine the ratio of assets in the investing account and the assets used to amortize the
debt in the priority account. The total assets of the customer is given by the value of the
periodic contributions that he deposits in the investing account, the value of the investing
account itself and ’¼ünally the amount of amortized debt. The following equations provide a
basis of understanding for the development of the total assets, investing and priority accounts
for a given period, t, represented by Assetst, IAt and PAt, respectively. They include the
e’¼Ćect of the asset allocation curves.
Assetst = IAtŌłÆ1(1 + rst) + Dt +
t
X
i=1
(Pprincipal,iŌłÆ1) ŌłÆPAtŌłÆ1
(3.6)
IAt = Assetst ├Ś RSt
(3.7)
PAt =
t
X
i=1
(Pprincipal,i) ŌłÆAssetst ├Ś (1 ŌłÆRSt)
(3.8)
Interestt = r ├Ś (Gt + max(PAt, 0))
(3.9)
where:
rst
= stock return at time t
RSt = proportion allocated to the investing account
Dt
= clientŌĆÖs deposit at time t
Page 13 of 55
==PAGE:22==
3.2
Supporting Data
The total assets of the customer at time t is given by the investing account compounded
returns, IAtŌłÆ1(1 + rst), the development of the customerŌĆÖs contributions, Dt, and ’¼ünally the
amount of amortized debt. The amortized debt can be obtained by subtracting the value of
the priority account by the sum of all the principal payments up to that period.
In equation 3.7 and 3.8, the term RSt is given in percentage and determines what was
called before the asset allocation strategy. It controls the level of exposure of the client to
the stock market volatility by determining the amount of capital in the investing account
and the amount of capital used to liquidate the priority account debt. If RSt = 100% then
all the capital is in the investing account and the other way around, if RSt = 0% all the
available capital was used to pay the priority account debt.
In the priority account debt, if never amortized will ful’¼ül the total amount of the original
principal, G0, by the end term. The debt in equation 3.8 is impacted by all the principal
payments transferred to the mortgage bank and the amortized debt according to the asset
allocation.
Logically is not possible to amortize more than current debt in the priority
account, however the capital can stay in the priority account, in which case the customer only
pays interest for the principal, like shown in equation 3.9. Notice that if the investing account
value decreases due to negative returns, the total value of the asset will consequently decrease
too. Thereby, some money might be moved from the priority account to the investing account
to keep the correct asset allocation proportion.
3.2
Supporting Data
With the problem formulation completed, an analysis of the input data needs to be
done before moving to the modelling section. Understanding the data implies processing
the data and evaluating the underlying distributions alongside other descriptive statistics
that represent the dataset. Furthermore, it also de’¼ünes other data created for the modelling
section, like the asset allocation curves. The next subsection provides further understanding
about he asset allocation strategies developed in the thesis.
3.2.1
Asset Allocation Curves
The investing characteristics of the new mortgage product, alongside its lifetime horizon
makes it possible to use similar asset allocation strategies as the ones seen in pension plans.
Topdanmark, o’¼Ćers pension plans with a prede’¼üned asset allocation curves separated into
three di’¼Ćerent risk pro’¼üles, low, medium and high-risk according to the proportion of the
portfolio in riskier assets, like stocks [9]. In this thesis the asset allocation curves determine
Page 14 of 55
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Supporting Data
the proportion of portfolio distributed between the investing and saving accounts.
The
savings account represent the lower risk asset, with a ’¼üxed annual return of 1.5%, and the
investing account represents the high risk asset, with a variable return that can either be
negative or positive according to the performance of the underlying stock market.
The pension plans strategy normally starts with high-risk pro’¼üle since the money in-
vested is relatively low and there are many years until the term ’¼ünishes so they have time to
recover any possible loss. The tolerance to risk decreases throughout the years. To discover
the optimal asset allocation strategies, four di’¼Ćerent types of curves are considered. Each
type of strategy is derived from a speci’¼üc equation that describe similar trends as Topdan-
mark asset allocation strategies, decrease the risk as a function of time. An example of the
di’¼Ćerent types of asset allocation curves are shown in the following ’¼ügure and explained in
the following subsections.
Figure 4: Example of portfolio allocation curves based on four di’¼Ćerent functions functions.
The following section can also be found in Peter Holms├ĖŌĆÖs thesis [18]. All the parameters
used can be found in the thesisŌĆÖ Appendix.
Pension Plan curves (Linear & Exponential)
Page 15 of 55
==PAGE:24==
3.2
Supporting Data
The Linear & Exponential curves create asset allocation strategies similar to the ones seen
in Topdanmark pension plans. They can be described as the mix of a linear horizontal curve
until the point where it starts decreasing following an exponential function. Therefore, the
asset allocation strategy can be de’¼üned as follows:
f(t) =
’Ż▒
’Ż▓
’Ż│
100 , if t < m
h(tŌłÆm) ŌłŚ100 , if t Ōēźm
(3.10)
where:
h = steepness of the curve
m = midpoint value
According to equation 3.10, the asset allocation curve starts with a 100% of the portfolio
in the risky asset and when t = m it changes to the exponential function. In order to decrease
with time, the steepness of the curve needs to be between ]0, 1[.
Reverse Logistic
The reversed logistic is a reversed sigmoid distribution. The S-shape that is the trademark
of the logistic curve makes it an interesting asset allocation curve. It can be described by
the following equation:
f(t) =
k
1 + eh(tŌłÆm)
(3.11)
where:
k = curveŌĆÖs maximum value
h = steepness of the curve
m = midpoint value
The di’¼Ćerence between the logistic and reverted logistic is the sign of the parameter
h. The positive sign in the reverted logistic will increase the denominator as t increases
decreasing the value of f(t) as pretended. The m parameter indicates the point where f(t)
equals half of he maximum value, k. Di’¼Ćerent pairs of parameters h and m are tested while
k is ’¼üxed to 100%.
Reverse Exponential
Page 16 of 55
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Supporting Data
The Reverse exponential curves have a similar behaviour as the Topdanmark asset alloca-
tion curves described before. However, the decrease happens slower and gradually increases
its steepness, oppositely to the decay shown in the Pension Plan curves. It can be de’¼üned
by the equation 3.12
f(t) =
’Ż▒
’Ż▓
’Ż│
(1 ŌłÆ(1 + p)tŌłÆa) ŌłŚ100 , if t < a
0 , if t Ōēźa
(3.12)
where:
p = steepness of the curve
a = endpoint value
The parameter a in equation 3.12 indicates the year where the proportion of portfolio
in the investing account reaches 0%. When t > a the proportion keeps its value at 0% since
it cannot be negative.
Linear
The last type of asset allocation strategy comes from the linear function, de’¼üned on
equation 3.13:
f(t) =
’Ż▒
’Ż▓
’Ż│
b ŌłÆat , if t < b
a
0 , if t Ōēźb
a
(3.13)
where:
a = slope of the curve
b = intercept
Just like the reverse exponential, the linear curve also needs a cap to avoid negative
percentages. The curve reaches a negative value once t = b
a.
3.2.2
Stock Returns Data
As mentioned before, there are two methods explored in this thesis: Geometric Brownian
Mtion and Block-Bootstrap. The Monte Carlo method is based on assumption that the
underlying data follows a speci’¼üc distribution, in this case a Gaussian distribution. Before
moving to the simulation that same assumption is evaluated.
The underlying data used in the stock simulation corresponds to the MSCI World In-
dex, which is a global equity index that captures large and mid cap performance across
Page 17 of 55
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Supporting Data
23 developed markets, excluding the emerging markets. This particular index follows the
performance of the underlying 1,585 stocks. Even though the equity index is not tradeable,
there are exchange trade-funds that replicate this indexŌĆÖs stock holding which allows the
investors to pro’¼üt from the indexŌĆÖs performance. Since there are multiple ETFŌĆÖs that follow
MSCI Index, for simpli’¼ücation purposes it was assumed that the ETF in which the customer
invested had exactly the same performance as the MSCI World Index.
The reason behind the choice of the MSCI World Index was to provide a safer investing
option when compared to investing in speci’¼üc company stocks. Moreover, deciding the best
combination of stocks does not enter in the scope of this project, but could be considered in
future work. The historical data of the MSCI World Index consists of monthly data starting
from 1970 until today. The data used excludes dividends, which corresponds to the MSCI
World Index ŌĆÖPriceŌĆÖ. The following Figure 5 shows the data.
Figure 5: MSCI World Standard Index Price for Large and Mid caps, without dividends
(USD).
The data starts in 1969 with a price base of 100 USD and develops according to the
performance of the underlying stocks. Is interesting to observe that the data captures some
of the biggest crisis that occurred during the last 50 years. The Dot-com bubble burst that
Page 18 of 55
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Supporting Data
started in 2000, the USA housing bubble that led the world into a the Great Recession
during 2007-2009 and ’¼ünally the pandemic crisis in 2020. From the MSCI World Index the
performance of the index is calculated, which is the return. From the Index price the monthly
return is calculated using equation 2.1, where t corresponds to each data row, starting in
t = 1. Analysing the distribution of the returns is another important step before moving to
the simulation process.
In order to analyse the underlying distribution the time series of the returns, calculated
using equation 2.1, is presented along side the respective box-plot. Both the plots are very
useful to obtain more insight on the data distribution. The red line in the time series marks
the mean value of returns while the box-plot marks the median, the 25th and 75th percentile.
Figure 6: Time series of the MSCI returns and respective box-plot.
Looking at the time series it seems that the monthly returns are equally spread around
the mean value, 0.63 %, marked by the horizontal red line, which would lead us to conclude
that the returns are normal distributed.
However, the box-plot provides us some more
insight. Firstly, there is a big concentration of returns in the upper percentile and more
spread returns in the lower percentile. This is con’¼ürmed by the fact that the mean is lower
than the median, as shown on table 1. The higher amount of outliers on the negative side
of the box-plot is also indicative of that same spread. A distribution of this type is also said
to be skewed to the left because it is pulled out to the left, which is translated to a negative
skewness.
Page 19 of 55
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Supporting Data
Value
25th Percentile
-1.81 %
Mean
0.63 %
Median
0.96 %
75th Percentile
3.06 %
Table 1: Descriptive statistics of returns
For a better analysis of the proximity to a normal distribution other graphical method
can be used, like an histogram and Q-Q plot. In the histogram the data is presented (in blue)
with a ’¼ütted normal distribution on the data (in black). The Q-Q plot is used to compare
the percentiles of two distributions, the original data distribution and a normal distribution
with mean and standard deviation extracted from the historical data.
Figure 7: Histogram: MSCI World Index
returns
Figure 8: Q-Q plot: MSCI World Index
returns
Even thought the skewness observed before indicates some deviation from the normal
distribution, looking at the histogram it is obvious that the data generally follows that same
distribution. However, the long tails mean that extreme events are more likely to occur
in reality than what a normal distribution would predict.
Regarding the Q-Q plot, the
blue dots, in its majority, fall on the normal distribution line specially in the middle but
deviate as they approach the tails. Like suggested before, the deviation on the left tail is
more signi’¼ücant. Nevertheless, the data presents most of the characteristics of a normal
distribution so it will be assumed as so.
Page 20 of 55
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Modelling and Simulation
3.3
Modelling and Simulation
The modelling section presents the construction of the simulation frameworks. Firstly,
it focus on the scenario generation methods and afterwards presents the Flexible Principal
Loan simulation model. As mentioned before, understanding the underlying distribution
of the stock data was an essential step on the methodology process. Even though there is
enough evidence in other researches that the stock returns can be assumed to be normal
distributed [12], it was still important to validate such assumption.
3.3.1
Scenario Generation Methods
The ’¼ürst method used for the scenario generation is known as Geometric Brownian Mo-
tion. The Geometric Brownian Motion is one of the most common stochastic methods used
to simulate stock prices [19]. The Geometric Brownian Motion is de’¼üned by the following
stochastic di’¼Ćerential equation:
ŌłéSt = ┬ĄSt Ōłét + ŽāSt ŌłéWt, where S(0) = x0
(3.14)
The relative change, which represent the returns can be then de’¼üned by [20]:
ŌłéSt
St
= ┬Ą Ōłét + Žā ╬Ą
ŌłÜ
Ōłét
(3.15)
The ’¼ürst component ┬Ą is called "drift" and it indicates the trend that the relative
change will follow. The second component is called "shock", where Žā represents the expected
volatility of the returns and ╬Ą
ŌłÜ
Ōłét represents the random volatility that increases as the
period of time increases. The model assumes that the price will change according to the
expected return, the drift, but might be impacted by random shocks that will be added or
subtracted to the drift.
The scenarios generated in this section consist in a matrix of returns that represent the
performance of the MSCI World Index during a range of time. The returns are simulated
using equation 3.15. The ┬Ą and Žā parameters in equation 3.15 can be substituted by the
sample parameters ╦å┬Ą = 0.63% and ╦åŽā = 4.27% found in section 3.2.2. The following algorithm
describes the Geometric Brownian Motion method used to create the arti’¼ücial scenarios.
Page 21 of 55
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Modelling and Simulation
Algorithm 1: Geometric Brownian Motion pseudo-code
Input
: DataMSCI;
Nsimul = number of simulations;
tmax = number of periods of the loan
Extract ╦å┬Ą and ╦åŽā from DataMSCI;
Scenarios = {};
for i ŌåÉ1 to Nsimul do
for j ŌåÉ1 to tmax do
Generate random number x Ōł╝N(0, 1);
Scenarios[i, j] = ╦å┬Ą + ╦åŽā ├Ś x
end
end
Output: ScenariosNsimul,tmax
The model receives as input the MSCI World Index data, alongside the duration of the
mortgage as the number of periods, tmax and the number of simulations, Nsimul. The time
increment in equation 3.15 is of one periodic unit so the component Ōłét = 1 which allows
to simplify the formula like illustrated in the algorithm. The output is a matrix of shape
Nsimul ├Ś t with the periodic returns.
The second method used is the Block-Bootstrap.
Like mentioned before, the Block-
Bootstrap method does not requires the user to ’¼ünd the underlying distribution of the data
and draws directly from the dataset. The following algorithm describes the Block-Bootstrap
method.
Page 22 of 55
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Modelling and Simulation
Algorithm 2: Block-Bootstrap Simulation pseudo-code
Input
: DataMSCI;
Nsimul = number of simulations;
tmax = number of months of loan;
blockize = 6;
Initialization:
Scenarios = {};
l ŌåÉlength(DataMSCI);
j = 0;
for i ŌåÉ1 to Nsimul do
while j < tmax do
Generate random number x Ōłł{1, l ŌłÆblocksize};
Scenarios[i, j] = DataMSCI[x]
j = j + 1
for k ŌåÉ1 to blocksize do
Scenarios[i, j] = DataMSCI[x + k]
j = j + 1
end
end
end
Output: ScenariosNsimul,tmax
In order to validate the new samples a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on the histograms of
the original sample and the bootstrap data. The critical value is calculated through the
following equation, where n1 and n2 are the sizes of the samples being compared and c(╬▒) is
the coe’¼ācient determined by the level of signi’¼ücance ╬▒. For ╬▒ = 0.01 the following critical
value is obtained.
D0.05 = c(0.05)
rn1 + n2
n1 ├Ś n2
= 1.63
r
613 + 360
613 ├Ś 360 Ōēł0.1149,
(3.16)
where 1.63 is the coe’¼ācient for ╬▒ = 0.01. The historical dataset contains 613 data
points, n1 and 360 corresponds to a 360 years mortgage, n2.
From 20.000 scenarios generated by the Block-Bootstrap method only 173 reject the null
hypothesis thus meaning that the two distributions are di’¼Ćerent.
Considering that 173
Page 23 of 55
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Modelling and Simulation
scenario accounts for only 0.865% of the total scenarios it was assumed the Block-Bootstrap
method presents valid possible scenarios.
3.3.2
Flexible Principal Loan Model
This subsection shows the model used for the simulation of the Flexible Principal Loan.
The model will take as input the MSCI World Index data, the original principal debt, the
lifetime of the mortgage, interest rate of the mortgage and the asset allocation curves. In this
research, the ’¼ürst four parameters are going to ’¼üxed as the objective is to compare di’¼Ćerent
asset allocation strategies. Firstly, is considered that the customer takes a FPL with an
original principal of G0 = 3, 000, 000 DKK like in the examples shown before. As for the
duration of the mortgage, it will be considered to be 30 years as it is the most common length
given in mortgage. Moreover, payments are commonly performed on a monthly basis, debited
from the salary of the customer during the lifetime of the loan, so the there are 360 periods,
12 months ├Ś 30 years where payments occur. The interest rate is considered to be ’¼üxed by
1.5%/year which corresponds to the currently practiced rates in the danish mortgage market
for long term mortgage bonds [21].
However, in the FPL model the customer performs
monthly payments so the interest rate needs to be converted to monthly rate. Since the
interest rate is compounded, dividing the annual interest by 12 would overestimate the
monthly interest rate. The "compound" term refers to the exponential growth as the interest
is calculated based on both the principal and the accumulated interest from previous periods.
The following calculation shows the transformation of annual rate to monthly rate.
rmonth = (1 + ryear)1/12 ŌłÆ1 = (1 + 0.015)1/12 ŌłÆ1 Ōēł0.0012415
(3.17)
During the entire thesis it was assumed that the customer performs ’¼üxed deposits in
the investing account with equal value to the ’¼ürst principal payment.
This assumption
implies that if the customer does not amortize any debt his expenditures are equal to the
monthly payment P from equation 3.2, from which 1.5% of G0 as interest and the remaining
is invested. If the customer amortizes debt the the interest will pay will decrease but the
monthly invested money remains the same.
Looking at the historical data presented in
Chapter 3, is expected that the stock return will outperform the interest rate considering that
the stock market has an average 0.63% monthly return comparing to the monthly interest
rate of 0.12415%. The following Algorithm 3 describes the FPL with the characteristics
mentioned above. The output of Algorithm 3 are four matrix containing the development of
the investing account, priority account, total assets and interest costs during the lifetime of
Page 24 of 55
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Modelling and Simulation
the loan.
Algorithm 3: Flexible Principal Loan pseudo-code
Input
:
Nsimul = number of simulations;
tmax = 360;
G0 = 3.000.000 DKK;
r = 0.0012415;
ScenariosN,tmax;
CurvesNcurves,tmax
Initialization:
P ŌåÉGet monthly payment using equation 3.2;
for j ŌåÉ0 to tmax do
Pinterest[j] = Gj ŌłŚr;
Pprincipal[j] = P ŌłÆPinterest[j];
Gj = G[j ŌłÆ1] ŌłÆPprincipal[j];
end
for k ŌåÉ1 to Ncurves do
// First value of the investing account and priority account
IA[:, 0] = Pprincipal[0] ├Ś Curves[k, 0];
PA[:, 0] = Pprincipal[0] ├Ś (1 ŌłÆCurves[k, 0]) ;
for i ŌåÉ1 to Nsimul do
for j ŌåÉ1 to tmax do
// Simplification of equations 3.6, 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9:
Assets[i, j] = IA[i, j ŌłÆ1] ├Ś (1 + Scenarios[i, j]) + Pprincipal[0]
+
t
X
i=1
(Pprincipal,iŌłÆ1) ŌłÆPAtŌłÆ1 ;
IA[i, j] = Assets[i, j] ├Ś Curves[k, 0];
PA[i, j] =
t
X
i=1
(Pprincipal,i) ŌłÆAssets[i, j] ├Ś (1 ŌłÆCurves[k, 0]) ;
Interest[i, j] = r ├Ś (Gt + max{PAt, 0})
end
end
end
Output: Assets, IA, PA, Interest
In the Algorithm 3 it can be seen that the di’¼Ćerent asset allocation curves are tested on
the same scenarios. Testing them on di’¼Ćerent scenarios would add more randomness between
the results which would create more di’¼āculties interpreting the results. As mentioned in
the Problem Formulation, following a speci’¼üc asset allocation curve will lead the customer
Page 25 of 55
==PAGE:34==
3.4
Model Validation
to amortize the debt before the end of the term. Besides the decreasing the risk it also has
other impacts like decreasing the interest paid by the customer.
The analysis is separated into two parts. The ’¼ürst part, called Naive Approach, implies
that the asset allocation strategy followed by the customer is a 100% allocation of the assets
to the investing account. This leads to simpli’¼ücations in the algorithm formulation: the
investing account represents the total assets, the priority account is equal to the sum of all
the principal payments and the monthly interest costs are ’¼üxed and equal to r ├Ś G0. The
second part focus on the ’¼ünding the optimal asset allocation curves and which adds more
complexity since all the outputs, Assets, IA, PA and Interest are variable.
3.4
Model Validation
As part of the methodology process is necessary to validate the models created. In the
section presented before, two scenario generation methods were presented, the Geometric
Brownian Motion and the Block-Bootstrap. Both methods have pros and cons but only
one of the methods is used in the Flexible Principal Loan model.
This section aims to
evaluate and compare both methods and present the logic followed that led to the choice of
the Geometric Brownian Motion method. Moreover, it also presents evaluates the number
of simulation runs necessary to obtain a stable result.
Finally, it presents the reader a
cost function created to measure, on the customer view, the performance of the FPL under
di’¼Ćerent asset allocation strategies.
3.4.1
Methods Comparison
Even though is commonly accepted to approximate the stocks distribution to a normal
distribution, this approximation is known to be far to simple when considering the more
extreme returns, specially in the negative side of the returns. Therefore, in this section we
analyse the output of the two simulation methods for 20.000 simulations. The following
’¼ügure shows the histograms and box-plots of all the returns generated 20.000 scenarios from
each of the simulation methods.
Page 26 of 55
==PAGE:35==
3.4
Model Validation
Figure 9: Histogram and box-plot of 20.000 simulations from Monte Carlo method (left) and
Block-Bootstrap method (right).
As expected, the Monte Carlo method is presented with a clear bell shape characteristic
of the Gaussian distribution while the Block-Bootstrap method mirrors totally the original
data distribution. In the box-plots it can be observed that in fact the Geometric Brownian
Motion creates more extreme returns than the Block-Bootstrap method, however, the num-
ber of occurrences of these values is relatively low so the impact of those extreme values is
residual. Since the Block-Bootstrap method is based on directly drawing samples from the
original dataset, the number of occurrences of extreme returns is considerably higher. How-
ever, the Block-Bootstrap method does not add any additional information and can create
biased scenarios if the original dataset also contains bias. Moreover, the dataset contains by
613 data points and the generated scenarios have 360 data points, meaning that there is a
lot of repetition from scenario to scenario.
To compare the two methods in practice, consider a situation where a single a contribu-
tion of 1000 DKK is deposited in the investing account tracking the generated MSCI World
Index return scenarios. The following plot shows the distributions of values of investing
account at the end of the 30 years.
Page 27 of 55
==PAGE:36==
3.4
Model Validation
Figure 10: Right plot: Value of contribution of 1000 DKK at the end of 30 years for Ge-
ometric Brownian Motion and Block-Bootstrap method. Left plot: Logarithm of value of
contribution of 1000 DKK at the end of 30 years for Monte Carlo and Block-Bootstrap
method.
On the left histogram one can observe that the Block-Bootstrap method generates more
pessimist forecasts as the concentration of lower values is higher. This is caused by the
repetition of extreme negative returns present in the MSCI World Index data. The same
can be said about the higher values. On the other hand, the Geometric Brownian Motion
generates values that on average are more conservative that can be observed by the higher
concentration of values between 4000ŌłÆ10000 DKK. The distribution of the investing account
values are close to a log-normal distribution, so by performing the log-transformation of the
investing account ’¼ünal values the right plot is obtained. In the right plot the comparison
of the to methods is more clear, the distribution of results of the Block-Bootstrap method
are more spread and does not ’¼üt perfectly a normal distribution.
On the right plot is
clear the higher concentration of optimistic scenarios in the Block-Bootstrap method, as its
distribution is more shifted to the right.
One of the objectives of the thesis is to provide a "what if" analysis of the FPL product
with a realistic measure of most likely outcome. The Block-Bootstrap method provides more
extreme cases in terms of high and low returns but contains many risks like the bias in the
scenarios specially considering the size of the original population sample and the size of
the scenarios samples. The Geometric Brownian Motion presents an average output that is
more conservative when compared to the Block-Bootstrap method. Taking a conservative
approach is something worth considering given that the FPL is a ’¼ünancial product based
Page 28 of 55
==PAGE:37==
3.4
Model Validation
on a mortgage that in many cases is one of the individualŌĆÖs most valuable asset. Risking to
fail such a commitment can have huge implications for the individual. Moreover, the Monte
Carlo method is an acknowledged method with several research applications supporting its
use. Therefore, the method chosen was the Geometric Brownian Motion.
3.4.2
Stability Test
Before performing the simulation experiments an important issue is to de’¼üne how many
simulations runs or replications are required. The de’¼ünition about the required number of
simulation runs allows ensure that a reliable mean is being obtained. There are multiple
approaches to ’¼ünd the number of simulations. One the methods used in this project is the
mean convergence, where the mean is plotted in the y-axis and the number o simulations in
the x-axis. The number of models runs is picked when the change in the mean prediction
does goes bellow a threshold value. The method is also very e’¼Ćective in visual terms.
In this project the factor that most in’¼éuences the stability analysis is the investing account
by the end of the term and the corresponding CV aR. This happens because the investing
account depends directly from the stochastic simulations of the stock returns and the asset
allocation curve. Unsurprisingly, FPL following curves with higher allocation on stocks will
lead to more variability in the investing account ’¼ünal value and therefore will take more runs
to stabilize the result and provide an accurate mean estimate. Therefore, for the stability
test, the most aggressive asset allocation curve was chosen, this is, a 100% allocation on the
investing account throughout the entire term. The following plot shows the FPLŌĆÖs value by
the end of the term over the number of simulation runs for a FPL with 30 years lifetime and
1.000.000 DKK loan with monthly contributions and yearly interest rate of 1.5%.
Page 29 of 55
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Model Validation
Figure 11: Stability test of investing account value at the end of the term.
The ’¼ügure above shows that only after approximately 7000 simulations the average value
of the investing account seems to achieve a level of stability. The CV aR1% of the investing
account value, is based on the arithmetic average of the lower values beyond V aR1%. In order
to do so, throughout the simulation runs, the worst 1% results are selected and averaged,
meaning that the CV aR1% considers a new data point every 100 simulations. The following
shows the CV aR1% over the number of simulation runs.
Page 30 of 55
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Model Validation
Figure 12: Stability test of investing account valueŌĆÖs CV aR1%.
It was expected that the it would take more runs to get an accurate estimate of CV aR1%
as it only considers 1% of the results of the simulations. The deviation of the values of
CV aR1% have a much lower scale when compared to the mean ’¼éuctuations. From 5000
to 7500 simulations, the CV aR1% presents a change of 0.8% comparing to the scale of the
mean.
Besides the previous method, one another was considered for comparison purposes.
The second approach, presented by Michael D. Byrne [22], is based on con’¼üdence intervals
and level of precision, which will give a precise number of simulation runs according to the
following formula:
n =
z╬▒/2
w
├Ś CV
2
, where CV = Žā
┬Ą
(3.18)
The coe’¼ācient of variation or CV is a measure of variability that results from the division
of the standard deviation of the sample, Žā, by the mean of the sample ┬Ą. The parameter
w represents the "proportion of the mean" or precision. As for the second method, for a
Page 31 of 55
==PAGE:40==
3.4
Model Validation
con’¼üdence level of 99% and a precision of 2% of the mean 7891 simulations are necessary,
which con’¼ürms the previous method results.
n =
2.58
0.02 ├Ś ┬Ą
Žā
2
Ōēł7891 simulations
3.4.3
Cost Function
Finally, in this last subsection, a cost function is proposed in order compare FPLŌĆÖs
following di’¼Ćerent asset allocation strategies. The cost of the FPL has three components:
the sum of monthly interest payments that the customer performs for the mortgage debt
and priority account debt, Interestt; the debt in the priority account, PAt; and the net
pro’¼üt/loss of the investing account. The net pro’¼üt/loss is calculated by subtracting the
total contributions deposited into the investing until period t, by the value of the investing
account on the same period t. The cost at time t is then given by equation where a positive
value in the cost function represents pro’¼üt for the customer.
Costt = IAt ŌłÆ
t
X
i=0
(Di) ŌłÆPAt ŌłÆ
t
X
i=0
(Interesti)
(3.19)
Costt = IAt ŌłÆPAt ŌłÆ
t
X
i=0
(Interesti + Di)
The cost will most of the times be negative but in some cases, specially in more aggressive
asset allocation strategies, the investing account will cover for a big portion of the other cost
factors. The cost function will vary according to the asset allocation strategy and the stock
returns.
In conclusion, in this chapter the reader was presented with in depth explanation of
the problem formulation, more speci’¼ücally how the assets, interest payments, investing and
priority account are calculated and change over time. It was observed that the customer can
decrease the interest payments by amortizing the principal in the priority account, but that
also depends on the performance of the investing account and on the asset allocation strategy.
From there on, the asset allocation curves were de’¼üned and an analysis on the population
data was performed to validate the assumption of being normal distributed. Following the
methodology process, the scenario generation methods and FPL model were presented. In
the ŌĆÖValidationŌĆÖ section, after analysing the results, the simulation method selected for study-
Page 32 of 55
==PAGE:41==
3.4
Model Validation
ing the problem case was the Geometric Brownian Motion. After calculating the number
of runs for each simulation a new measure of performance was presented compare di’¼Ćerent
parameter sets. The following chapter presents the ’¼ürst part of the analysis of the output of
the FPL model.
Page 33 of 55
==PAGE:42==
4
Naive Approach
This chapter presets the results and analysis of the FPL under the Naive Approach,
which consists in a simplistic approach of the FPL problem with ’¼üxed contributions to the
Investing Account and a 100% asset allocation on that same account. As mentioned before,
the approach relies on two major assumptions:
1. The customer deposits contributions periodically in the investing account with equal
amount as the ’¼ürst principal principal payment.
2. The customer never amortizes the growing debt in the priority account. Meaning that
RSt in equation 3.7 and 3.8 is constant with a value of 1.
Assumption number one implies that Dt = Pprincipal,0 on equation 3.6 for the entire
duration of the term. The assumption aims to simplify the problem and instead focus the
comparison between the returns generated from the stocks and the the growing debt of the
priority account. Assumption number two imposes that the customer will not amortize the
debt in the priority account and instead will have all of his money in the investing account.
Considering that no repayment is done on the priority account, it will accumulate principal
payments until it builds up to the initial value of the loan by the end of the lifetime of
the loan. Therefore, in the Naive Approach whatever the generated scenario is the priority
account will always describe the same behaviour. By the end of the term the values of those
two accounts are compared. Moreover, the second assumption also implies that the periodic
interest payments are constant and Interestt = r ├Ś G0.
4.1
Analysis
In practice the FPL under the Naive ApproachŌĆÖs assumptions works exactly like IOM.
Even though the customer spends monthly contributions equal to the periodic payment of
the mortgage, P (equation 3.2), only the interest is being paid, and contributions deposited
in the investing account. So one should ask what is the cost bene’¼üt from of the taking
the FPL when compared to the IOM. Regarding the cost, a IOM under the same set of
parameters as the Naive Approach, {N, tmax, G0, r, ScenariosN,tmax}, will cost ŌłÆ4, 340, 807
DKK, from which 1,340,807 DKK are interest costs. Since the interest costs are equal in
both mortgages, the investing account needs to be enough to pay the full principal. If the
investing account is not enough to pay the debt by the end of the term, then the customer
needs to settle the di’¼Ćerence.
Page 34 of 55
==PAGE:43==
4.1
Analysis
The key di’¼Ćerence is that the IOM is paid entirely by the capital of the customer, while
the investing account contains additional returns from the contributions. So as long as the
investing account does not lose value when compared to the total contributions deposited,
the cost will always be lower for the FPL when compared to the IOM. It can be concluded
that with ’¼üxed contributions Dt = Pprincipal,0 into the investing account:
Cost(FPL) > Cost(IOM), if IAtmax Ōēź
t
X
i=0
(Di) = 2, 381, 200 DKK
Similar calculations can be made in order to compare the FPL with a standard FRM
or even to ’¼ünd when does the FPL has a positive cost. The standard FRM has a negative
cost of 3,722,007 DKK, which is equivalent to the total contributions plus the total interest
payments of the customer in the FPL. Therefore if the investing account reaches the 3,000,000
threshold, the customer does not incur in more costs. It can be concluded that:
Cost(FPL) > Cost(FRM), if IAtmax ŌēźG0 = 3, 000, 000 DKK
Lastly, in order for the customer to have no costs with the FPL, the investing account
would need to cover for the interest costs, the contributions deposited and the full principal.
Which would lead to:
Cost(FPL) > 0, if IAtmax Ōēź
t
X
i=0
(Di + Interesti) + G0 = 6, 722, 007 DKK
To better understand the development of the cost function during the mortgage lifetime,
Figure 13 shows the cost function with its underlying components: interest payments, priority
account, contributions and investing account. The investing account follows the development
of the median value.
Page 35 of 55
==PAGE:44==
4.1
Analysis
Figure 13: Priority Account (red). Investing Account with median and percentiles (blue).
The investing account values are marked on the right y-axis.
The curves in red have a negative contribution to the cost and the curve in blue has a
positive contribution to the cost. The cost of the FPL decreases drastically in the ’¼ürst years
of the mortgage when the value of the investing account is still too low compared to the
other factors. But has the investing account value starts growing exponentially due to the
compounded returns, the cost starts reducing quickly and before the end of the term ends
with a positive net cost. Nonetheless, this is possible due to the compounded returns of the
investing account that are more impactful in the last years of the loan.
However what is the probability of the investing account reaching such values by the
end of the term?
The following plot shows the percentiles of the value of the investing
account throughout the mortgageŌĆÖs 30 years period. Figure 14 shows the main percentiles
of the investing account alongside the priority account.
As mentioned before, given the
assumptions made, the priority account is only dependent on the principal payments so by
the end of the term its value will be equal to G0 for any given stock scenario.
Page 36 of 55
==PAGE:45==
4.1
Analysis
Figure 14: Priority Account (red). Investing Account with median and percentiles (blue).
The investing account values are marked on the right y-axis.
The ’¼ügure above provides a good idea of the distribution of the results. Like shown
in the section 3.4.1 of the Methodology, given that the returns follow a normal distribution
according to the Geometric Brownian Motion, the distribution of the value of the investing
account follows a log-normal distribution. There is a higher concentration of values on the
1% and 5% percentiles when compared to opposite percentiles, 99% and 95%. From the plot
is evident that the investing account at the end of the term outperforms the priority account
in the vast majority of the scenarios.
The value of the investing account starts with zero and grows with the monthly ’¼üxed
deposits invested and the compounded returns. As the number of years increase and the
mortgage starts reaching its end, the gap between the investing account and priority account
tends to increase with exception of the 1% and 5% percentiles. In fact, the 5% percentile
curve starts at the same value as the priority account but immediately goes under the priority
account curve due to negative/low returns of the stock market. In the ’¼ürst half of the term
the gap between the two curves increases but as it reaches around half of the term the
behaviour changes and the gap starts closing up until it passes the priority account value
Page 37 of 55
==PAGE:46==
4.1
Analysis
closer to the end of the term ending above the original mortgage debt, G0. Figure 15 shows
the 1% and 5% percentile development in more detail.
Figure 15: Priority Account (red). Investing AccountŌĆÖs 5% and 1% percentiles (blue).
The 1% percentile is not far from the total contributions deposited in the investing
account that represents the threshold cost for the IOM. This behaviour suggests that even
though the initial low or negative returns, in the long run, the returns from the underlying
stock will outperform the priority account given the monthly average return of 0.63%. Since
the ’¼ünal value of the investing account follows a log-normal distribution as shown in section
3.4.1 the cumulative density function of the log-normal distribution can be used to ’¼ünd the
probability of the investing account reaching the speci’¼üc values mentioned before. Note
that this is an approximation based on the assumption that the stocks follow a normal
distribution. Considering this, there is approximately a 97.9 % probability that the FPL
will have a lower cost than a IOM under the same conditions. The same logic is applied to
conclude that there is approximately 95% probability of having lower costs than a standard
FRM.
Page 38 of 55
==PAGE:47==
4.1
Analysis
4.1.1
Duration of Loan
The plots shown before, show evidence that the performance of the FPL might change
with the duration of the FPL. The aggressive strategy of the Naive Approach puts more
emphasis on the compounded e’¼Ćect of the investment account that creates an exponential
e’¼Ćect. However, with shorter a lifetime the compounded e’¼Ćect on the investing account
might not be as obvious impactful. In order to evaluate the e’¼Ćect of the duration of the
mortgage on the FPLŌĆÖs performance algorithm 3 was run under the same set of parameters
{N, G0, r, ScenariosN,tmax} but with a lifetime of 10 years. The results are shown in the
following ’¼ügure.
Figure 16: Investing Account performance for FPL with 10 years term.
Is evident the di’¼Ćerence in performance between the 10 years FPL and the 30 years FPL.
In the 10 years FPL, the investing account not ensure as much success as in the previous
example case. Like mentioned before, the short duration of the mortgage does not play an
advantage on the e’¼Ćects of the compounded e’¼Ćect of the investing account. It can be said
that the FPL with 100% asset allocation on the investing account will perform better as the
lifetime of the mortgage increases.
Page 39 of 55
==PAGE:48==
4.1
Analysis
4.1.2
Worst-case Results
Looking to the worst case results can provide useful information on how the FPL per-
forms when undergoing very low returns. However when looking at the worst-cases one can
use di’¼Ćerent criterion. Choosing the scenarios cases with lower average returns will not nec-
essarily lead to the scenarios with lower values for the IA. Figure 17 presents the CV aR0.1%
and the scenarios under the V aR0.3% based on the average scenario return (left plot) and
based the investment accountvalue at the end of the term (right plot).
Figure 17: Worst-case scenarios based on average scenario return
The CV aR0.3% of the average scenario return (left plot) shows a steady but slow increase
of the investing account which slightly ’¼éattens around the 20th year, but keeps an upward
trend. The right plot CV aR0.% presents a steeper trend until the 16th year which then turns
to a downwards slope until the second half of the term. The CV aR0.3% end value is higher
on the left plot than the on right plot. This shows that the performance of the investment
accountis more a’¼Ćected by the performance of the underlying stock in the last years before
the term end than the average performance during the loan lifetime.
As observed before, the performance of the FPL is more sensitive to the stock performance
in the last years of the loan than the average performance during the term. One way of
tackling such sensitivity is by decreasing the exposure in the last years of the loan. This
is done by decreasing the amount of assets in the investing account, and instead allocating
Page 40 of 55
==PAGE:49==
4.1
Analysis
some capital to amortize part of the principal debt in the priority account. Inspired in the
danish pension fund Topdanmark the asset allocation curves created in chapter 3.2.1 are
used now in the FPL in order to try to achieve similar results but with lower risk. The
results are presented in the following chapter.
Page 41 of 55
==PAGE:50==
5
Optimal Asset Allocation Strategy
Unlike before, this chapter focus on the application of asset allocation curves developed
in the Methodology chapter. The analysis of the worst-case results in the previous chapter
showed that the success of the FPL is more a’¼Ćected by the performance of the underlying
stock in the last years of the FPL than the average performance during the loan lifetime.
One of the main goals of using the asset allocation curves is to explore other strategies that
decrease the risk exposure of the FPL, specially in the years close to the end of the lifetime of
the FPL. The returns obtained might be lower but so it will be the risk. The asset allocation
curves determine the distribution of the capital that the customer possesses at time any
given time t. As de’¼üned in the Problem Formulation, the customerŌĆÖs capital at time t is
given by the value of the investing account and the amount of amortized debt. In this new
analysis is still assumed that the customer deposits constant contributions periodically, but
now they are distributed between the priority and investing account according to the asset
allocation curve being followed. The same set of parameters are used in this chapter: number
of simulations, number of periods, the initial loan value, the periodic interest rate and the
generated scenarios {N, tmax, G0, r, ScenariosN,tmax}. There is an additional parameter used
that represents the 1390 asset allocation curves created, AllocationCurves, which is a matrix
of shape 1390 ├Ś tmax. In the following section an analysis of the output of the algorithm 3
is presented.
The mean, V aR1% and CV aR1% are fundamental measures to perform the analysis of
the di’¼Ćerent asset allocation curves. In the Naive Approach, both the cumulative interest
payments and the priority account at the end of the term were ’¼üxed.
However, unlike
the previous analysis, the asset allocation strategies add more complexity to the problem
solution. The fact that the customer can amortize the debt in the priority account leads to
’¼éuctuations on the interest costs and on the priority account value for di’¼Ćerent scenarios.
Moreover, a strategy that ends with low values in the investing account does not necessarily
implies that had a bad performance as the gathered returns and contributions might be in
the priority account. Therefore, is no longer enough to only look at the investing account
and priority account values.
For each asset allocation curve that was tested, the mean,
V aR1% and CV aR1% of the assets, investing account, priority account and interest costs
were calculated.
Page 42 of 55
==PAGE:51==
5.1
Assets
5.1
Assets
One of the outputs of the model, the assets, provide an overview of the total capital
that the customer possesses. This capital, can only come from the monthly contributions
done by the customer or from the additional gains of the investing account. Whether in the
investing account or in repaid debt in the priority account, the assets value at the end of
the term is a good indicator of how much capital does the customer has in his possession to
pay the principal debt. Like an E’¼ācient Frontier the expected value of the assets is plotted
on the y-axis with the CV aR1% on the x-axis as a measure of risk. The CV aR is presented
in negative values so that a higher CV aR means higher risk for the customer. The plot is
divided into 5 risk pro’¼üles that go from low risk to high risk as the CV aR1% increases in the
x-axis. Moreover, for each point the respective curve type is identi’¼üed.
Figure 18
It can be observed that the value of the excepted return of the Assets varies between a
range of 2, 439, 000 ŌłÆ8, 900, 437 DKK (2.4% and 277% return of the contributions) at the
end of 30 years of term, meaning that some strategies almost donŌĆÖt provide any returns from
Page 43 of 55
==PAGE:52==
5.1
Assets
the investing account while other strategies use its full potential like the Naive Approach
explored in the previous chapter.
On the other hand the CV aR1% of the Assets varies
between 1, 828, 043ŌłÆ2, 368, 448 DKK (-23.2% and -0.5%). In order to pay the principal debt,
the total assets need to be at least of the same value of initial mortgage principal. Given that
the contributions are ’¼üxed for all the asset allocation strategies, it can be concluded that the
total assets should have a return of at least of 26% to reach the threshold of 3, 000, 000DKK.
Some of the applied strategies provide an expected Asset value bellow the this threshold
meaning that they donŌĆÖt make enough use of the investing account compounded returns and
amortize the debt on the priority account too early.
There is a trade-o’¼Ćbetween the assets expected return and the risk or volatility, the higher
the expected returns the riskier the investment. The same can be observed in Figure 18. As
the expected asset value increase in the y-axis, the asset allocation strategies present a more
aggressive strategy that will generate higher expected returns but volatility also increases.
The average worst 1% results, CV aR1%, increases since those curves present more risk. Just
like in an E’¼ācient Frontier, the objective is to maximize the returns for given the risk. On
the upper boundary lie the optimal asset allocation strategies, that have the highest expected
returns for a given level of risk. The Naive Approach, analysed in the previous chapter lies
in the extreme top right corner of the frontier. Being the strategy with highest returns but
also with higher risk. The plot was separated into 5 portions that represent 5 di’¼Ćerent risk
levels and the optimal asset allocation curve for each one of those risk levels was chosen.
Since multiple strategies lie in the e’¼ācient frontier is necessary to pick a criteria to ’¼ünd the
optimal strategy within each of the risk level. The criteria is demonstrated in the following
formula:
Optimal Ratio = Median Cost
1
CV aR1%,Cost
Choosing the "Cost" instead of the "Assets" has the intention of measuring the perfor-
mance in the customerŌĆÖs perspective, including the interest costs too. Choosing the median
provides a more conservative measure when compared to the mean. Very aggressive strate-
gies will shift the average above the median value due to the extreme positive values obtained
in the investing account. Even though this was the criteria chosen, other criterion could have
been picked which could in’¼éuence the choice of the optimal strategies. Lastly, the component
1
CV aR1%,Cost ensures the ratio increases with a higher values of CV aR1%,Cost.
Page 44 of 55
==PAGE:53==
5.1
Assets
Regarding the asset allocation curves in Figure 18, there is a clear dominance in the upper
boundary by the "Linear-Exponential" curves that were based on Topdanmark pension plans.
Moreover, there is a clear pattern on the performance of the "Linear-Exponential" curves
caused by the variation of the curves parameters: the year from which the stock allocation
starts to decrease, m, and the speed of decrease of the referred allocation, h. The lower
the value of h the more steep is the decrease. It can be observed a negative correlation
between the steepness of the curve and the expected value of the assets. For steep slopes
the parameter m impacts a lot the performance creating big shifts to the left on the x-axis.
The parameter m presents a positive correlation with the expected value of the assets. At
the same time the parameter slope, h, plays a bigger in’¼éuence in the performance when the
year of decrease occurs earlier in the lifetime of the FPL. Ultimately, When h > 0.99 the
in’¼éuence of parameter cannot provide signi’¼ücant increments in the expected returns of the
FPLŌĆÖs assets since it also approaches the e’¼ācient frontier.
The following plot show the optimal asset allocation curves for di’¼Ćerent risk levels. As it
can be seen in the previous plot the curves all lie in the in the e’¼ācient frontier. The slope
steepness is relatively low, between [0.994, 0.998], when compared to the other curves.
Figure 19: Optimal asset allocation curves for each risk level.
Looking at the asset allocation strategies it can be clearly observed the in’¼éuence of the
Page 45 of 55
==PAGE:54==
5.2
Interest
year parameter m in the risk level. The parameter increases with the risk levels with the
exception of the risk level 2-3 where the steepness of the decrease plays a bigger in’¼éuence.
Is interesting to observe that all the optimal asset allocation curves end up with a stock
allocation above the 20% in the investing account. If more levels of risk were considered
strategies with lower allocation to stocks would also be observed. Moreover, all the optimal
strategies selected have period with 100% of the assets in the investing account for at least
one third of the duration of the loan.
5.2
Interest
The assets are a good indicator of the performance of the asset allocation curves. As long
as the assets are equal or higher than the initial principal loan G0 the customer is ensured to
have the debt paid. However, the assets do not provide a total view of the FPL. One other
factor that might in’¼éuence the performance of the loan is the interest costs. The interest
costs at the end of the term can change depending on the strategy followed. However, only
part of the interest costs can be reduced. The customer will be always obliged to pay the
interests referring to the standard FRM established with the mortgage bank, thus the only
variable interest cost is the interest from the priority account. At the same time, the interest
costs also have a ceiling value since the debt in the priority account cannot be higher than
the principal paid (equation 3.9). The interest cost of a standard FRM and the interest costs
of the IOM set the boundaries in which the interest can ’¼éuctuate because they represent
opposite behaviours. Thus, interest costs will range between 722, 007 ŌłÆ1, 340, 807 DKK.
Figure 20 shows the expected interest costs and the assets CV aR1%. The optimal curves
obtained in the previous asset analysis are also marked on the plot.
Page 46 of 55
==PAGE:55==
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
Figure 20: Asset development for the optimal asset allocation strategies.
Oppositely to the assets, the interest costs ideally should be as low as possible, as it
will decrease the overall cost of the loan. The interest costs are positively correlated with
the allocation to the investing account. Regarding the optimal asset allocation curves, it is
observed that they all present the highest expected interest costs for the same level of risk.
Meaning that this types of curves perform badly at reducing the interest costs. Nevertheless,
like mentioned before, the interest costs can only have a di’¼Ćerent of 618,800 DKK between
the two extreme strategies. However, how is going to be observed later the interest costs do
not play a relevant e’¼Ćect on the performance of the FPL. The dominant factor continues to
be the compounded e’¼Ćect of the investing account.
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
This section aims to explore and analyse the optimal risk curves selected in the previous
section. As mentioned before, the total assets is crucial to determine the success of the
customer in paying the debt. If the customerŌĆÖs assets are able to reach the initial value
of mortgage, the success of the FPL is guaranteed. Figure 19 shows that the optimal asset
Page 47 of 55
==PAGE:56==
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
allocation curves share many characteristics. All start with a 100% allocation on the investing
account and will only start to diverge their results after years 10. The ’¼ürst aspect evaluated
is the development of the totals assets of each optimal curve with respective percentiles
represented in Figure 21. The plots show the optimal asset allocation curves from lower
risk to high risk, from the left to the right, and top to the bottom. The plot located in the
bottom of Figure 19 presents a larger scale in order to ’¼üt the formatting of the page.
All the optimal curves have allocation to stocks throughout the lifetime of the loan which
leads to exhibit an exponential growth but with di’¼Ćerent speeds according to the level of risk.
The separation into ’¼üve di’¼Ćerent levels of risk has clearly one main impact on the assets.
Firstly, the low risk strategies have their results less spread due to the debt amortization
earlier in the term. The di’¼Ćerence in the extreme positive results is obvious, but there is
also a di’¼Ćerence in the lower extreme results. The 1% percentile presents better results in
the optimal curve with risk level 1 (top left corner of Figure 21) than the other.
Page 48 of 55
==PAGE:57==
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
Figure 21: Asset development for the optimal asset allocation strategies.
A pattern that is clear in all the optimal allocation strategies, is that their 5% percentile
is quite close to the threshold of 3,000,000 DKK that corresponds to the mortgage loan. As
it is going to be shown in Figure 22, all the strategies clearly outperform the standard FRM
and IOM.
Observing the cost function would allow to have a complete picture of the performance of
the FPL as it aggregates the in’¼éuence of total assets and the interest costs into a single value
comparable between di’¼Ćerent strategies. Figure 22 uses a box-plot to show the distribution
Page 49 of 55
==PAGE:58==
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
of the cost values for the 8000 simulation runs. The whiskers of the box-plot mark the 1%
and 99% percentile. The ’¼ügure also shows the cost of a IOM and a standard FRM with the
same conditions.
Figure 22: Cost for the optimal asset allocation strategies.
The observations made before regarding the assets of the asset allocation curves are
con’¼ürmed again through the cost statistics. The low risk strategy provides safer investment
options but has lower expected cost. Since the bottom whiskers mark the 1% percentile, it
can be concluded that all optimal strategies are very likely to outperform the IOM, however,
the strategies with lower risk have more guarantees of beating that threshold. To complement
the box-plots, Table 2 shows some descriptive statistics of the costs.
Page 50 of 55
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
Cost (DKK)
Risk Level 1
Risk Level 2
Risk Level 3
Risk Level 4
Risk Level 5
Mean
-1.444.619
-378.294
477.141
1.406.547
2.168.424
Median
-1.755.500
-934.733
-341.859
253.342
718.383
CV aR5%
3.843.652
-3.919.609
-4.012.793
-4.124.867
-4.244.073
CV aR1%
-4.220.367
-4.409.574
-4.575.261
-4.738.195
-4.891.388
Table 2: Cost descriptive statistics for optimal strategies.
Looking at the progression of the CV aR1% and median of the risk levels, one can clearly
see that the increase of the median value happens at a faster pace than the decrease in the
CV aR1%. Therefore, one needs to question whether the small increase in the risk makes up
for the higher increase in the performance of the strategy. Choosing another ratio/criteria
could could provide more insights on the trade-o’¼Ćbetween the risk-return.
5.3.1
Worst Cases Scenarios
This section shows the development of the assets for the ’¼üve risk level on the scenarios
that have the lowest 0.3% average returns. In the previous analysis chapter it was observed
that the worst results of the FPl with 100% allocation in the investing account were caused
by low returns in the second half of the mortgage term. The optimal asset allocation curves
share the same allocation until the 10th year from which they start to diverge. The next
’¼ügure shows the average performance of each optimal strategy in the worst 24 scenarios.
Page 51 of 55
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Optimal Asset Allocation Curves
Figure 23: CV aR0.3% of the optimal curves for scenarios with worst average mean.
Just like observed under the Naive Approach, the riskier strategies tend to perform worst
under pessimistic scenarios of stock returns. On the opposite side, the optimal strategy of
lowest risk, risk level 1, is the one that performs the best. While the other risk levels around
year 20 start reaching a plateau, the risk level 1 is able to keep a stable growth of the assets
by moving part of the assets to the priority account that does not have any exposure, while
continuing depositing periodic contributions. The payment of the priority account debt has
shown to be a safe methodology to protected the customer against the exposure to low return
periods in the last years of the loan.
Page 52 of 55
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusion and Future Work
6.1
Conclusion
In this thesis a new ’¼ünancial product was presented, the Flexible Principal Loan. It
was analysed and ’¼ünally compared with two mortgage products existing currently in the
mortgage market, the standard Fixed-Rate Mortgage and Interest Only Mortgage.
The
FPLŌĆÖs performance depends in part on an underlying assetŌĆÖs returns, in this case the MSCI
World Index, even though other assets could have been chosen. Through the right statistical
tools, like Q-Q plots and histograms, the MSCI World Index returns were proven to be ap-
proximately normal distributed. In order to test the performance of the Flexible Principal
Loan, a simulation framework was built based on two di’¼Ćerent methods of simulation from
which the Geometric Brownian Motion was chosen due to its more conservative output when
compared to the Block-Bootstrapping. After validation of the model, the FPL was ’¼ürstly
analysed under an approach where the customer deposit constant contributions into the in-
vesting account. Throughout the entire thesis it was assumed that the customer performs
periodic ’¼üxed payments. Such approach allowed to compared directly the evolution of the
debt with the evolution of the investing account. It was concluded that the performance of
the of FPL with 100% allocation in stocks and a 30 year lifetime will outperform both the
IOM and standard FRM in terms of costs 95% of the times. When analysing in detail the cost
function was possible to understand that the performance of the FPL is highly impacted by
the compounded e’¼Ćect of the returns on the investing account. When decreasing the lifetime
of the FPL to 10 years under the same conditions it was observed that the probabilities of
outperforming the both IOM and standard FRM decreased to 83%. The positive correlation
of the performance of the FPL and the duration of the lifetime is linked to the compounded
e’¼Ćect of the returns. The compounding factor occurs since the investment gains are rein-
vested to generate additional earnings over time, exhibiting a exponential growth. Therefore,
the longer the duration of the FPL the bigger the impact of the exponential growth of the
investing account.
When analysing the Naive ApproachŌĆÖs worst results, it was possible to observe a mis-
match with the scenarios with the lowest average growth. Instead, it was observed that
the FPL under the Naive Approach is more impacted by the performance of the underlying
stock in the second half of the term due to the high exposure of the 100% allocation in
the investing account. In scenarios where the underlying stock under-performs closer to the
end of the term, the net losses have bigger magnitude due to the exponential e’¼Ćect of the
Page 53 of 55
==PAGE:62==
6.1
Conclusion
compound e’¼Ćect and the investing account does not has time to recover.
Later in this research, another analysis was performed implementing 1390 di’¼Ćerent asset
allocation strategies inspired in the danish pension fund Topdanmark. These asset allocation
strategies have an initial high allocation of the customer assets on the investing account and
decrease its allocation throughout the term. By plotting the expected value of the assets
and the CV aR1% it was possible to ’¼ünd the boundary that maximizes the expected return
for a certain level of risk. Any given curve lying on that e’¼ācient frontier is considered to
be optimal. It was observed that the curves on the optimal frontier were mostly de’¼üned by
the same function "Linear-Exponential" showing a clear dominance of this type of curve.
According to the risk measure, CV aR1%, and a determined criteria based on the median cost
and CV aR1% cost, 5 optimal curves were picked, separated into 5 di’¼Ćerent levels of risk.
While analysing the optimal risk strategies, it was observed that even the lower risk
strategies are very likely to outperform the two benchmark mortgages, the standard FRM
and IOM. All the ’¼üve optimal risk strategies chosen present a 100% asset allocation in the
investing account until at least the 10th year of the 30 years mortgage. Like mentioned
before, the performance of the FPL is highly dependent on the compounded returns on
the investing account, therefore is logical that all that the ’¼üve optimal strategies have such
aggressive strategy in the beginning, which will boost the performance in the ’¼ürst years and
capitalized the earnings later by amortizing the debt in the priority account. When testing
the curves 24 scenario with the worst average returns, the low risk strategy, corresponding
to risk level 1, was the one performing better and the other way around for the risk level 5.
Therefore, it can be concluded that under pessimistic scenarios, decreasing the risk in the
second half of the term by transferring the capital from the investing account to the priority
account is proved to be an e’¼ācient method of risk management.
To conclude, in this research it was shown that the Flexible Principal Loan is ’¼ünancial
product that using optimal asset allocation strategies is proven to outperform other mortgage
products existing in the market, like the standard FRM and IOM. Besides the ’¼éexibility
advantages that it o’¼Ćers to the customer, which were not explored in this thesis, the investing
account o’¼Ćered to the customer can provide a boost in the cost of the loan, leading in some
cases to a positive net value at the end of the term. The investing account was proven to
be the main engine of the performance of the FPL. The compounded returns will generate
exponential growth according to the performance of the underlying asset. Therefore, it is
for customer bene’¼üt to opt for long loan durationŌĆÖs when taking a FPL as it will increase
performance of the loan.
Page 54 of 55
==PAGE:63==
6.2
Future Work
6.2
Future Work
The ’¼ürst assumption made in the thesis regards the distribution of the MSCI World
Index data. Even though is commonly accepted to approximate the distribution of stock
returns to a normal distribution, there is enough evidence showing that this approximation
is not entirely true, specially considering the tail events. More extreme returns are more
likely to occur in really than what is characterized under a normal distribution. Finding
a distribution that would ’¼üt better the data, like the t-distribution, could provide slightly
more realistic scenarios.
All the analysis performed on this thesis relies on the assumption that the customer
performs constant ’¼üxed payments. However, this does not represent the reality. Firstly,
an individual on average tends to increase his salary as he progresses in his career. This
would mean a progression of growing contributions which could impact di’¼Ćerently the FPLŌĆÖs
performance.
However, it was also observed that the customer bene’¼üts more from the
long e’¼Ćect of compounded returns, so depositing higher amount in the beginning would
be something interesting to observe. Still regarding the assumption of constant deposits,
due to external factors like unemployment or ’¼ünancial recession, some individuals may not
be able to keep the rate of deposits. So just like before it would be interesting to incorporate
such events into the analysis, either by introducing periods with interruption/reduction of
contributions or by modeling these external factor with some randomness in the progression
of the deposits.
Finally, the underlying asset chosen, the MSCI World Index was chosen for representing
a stable index however other stocks may present less variability or better returns. Changing
the underlying asset will de’¼ünitely a’¼Ćect the performance of the FPLl. Choosing more stable
assets could create worst results but less risk while choosing assets with higher returns would
create the opposite e’¼Ćect. So exploring the performance of the FPL under di’¼Ćerent assets
could also enrich this project.
Page 55 of 55
==PAGE:64==
References
References
[1] Leonard, Jeremy A., ŌĆ£The impact of the housing market boom and bus on consumption
spending,ŌĆØ 2010.
[2] G.-W. Michal, T. R. W. Shanks, K. R. Manturuk, Clinton C. Key, Jong-Gye Paik,
and J. K. P. Greeson, ŌĆ£Homeownership and parenting practices: Evidence from the
community advantage panel,ŌĆØ Children and Youth Services Review, no. 32, pp. 774ŌĆō782,
2010.
[3] J. Harkness and S. J. Newman, ŌĆ£Homeownership for the poor in distressed neighbor-
hoods: Does this make sense?,ŌĆØ Housing Policy Debate, no. 13, pp. 597ŌĆō630, 2002.
[4] D. R. Haurin, T. L. Parcel, and R. J. Haurin, ŌĆ£Does homeowneship a’¼Ćect child out-
ocmes?,ŌĆØ Real Estate Economics 30, no. 4, pp. 635ŌĆō666, 2002.
[5] G. C. Galster, ŌĆ£Homeowners and neighborhood reinvestment,ŌĆØ 1987.
[6] B. Glen and N. K. Karley, ŌĆ£Homeownership, poverty and educational achievement:
School e’¼Ćects as neighbourhood e’¼Ćects.,ŌĆØ Housing Studies 22, no. 5, pp. 693ŌĆō721, 2007.
[7] H. Scott and S. J. Newman, ŌĆ£The e’¼Ćects of homeownership on childrenŌĆÖs outcomes: Real
e’¼Ćects or self-selection?,ŌĆØ Real Estate Economics 40, no. 3, pp. 566ŌĆō602, 2012.
[8] ŌĆ£Msci world index,ŌĆØ Orange County Case for large and mid-cap.
[9] ŌĆ£Asset allocation strategies,ŌĆØ TopDanmark, pension plan, Pro’¼ülpension.
[10] J. Patel, S. Shah, P. Thakkar, and K. Kotecha, ŌĆ£Predicting stock and stock price index
movement using trend deterministic data preparation and machine learning techniques,ŌĆØ
Expert Systems and Applications, no. 42, pp. 259ŌĆō268, 2015.
[11] M. Mehmood, A. Mehmood, and B. G. Mujtaba, ŌĆ£Stock market prices follow the random
walks: Evidence from the e’¼āciency of karachi stock exchange,ŌĆØ European Journal of
Economics, Finance and Administrative Sciences., 2012.
[12] J. Fan and Q. Yao, ŌĆ£The elemenets of ’¼ünancial econometrics,ŌĆØ Science Press, Beijing,
2015.
[13] R. M. Bookstaber and J. B.McDonald, ŌĆ£A general distribution for describing security
price returns,ŌĆØ Journal of Business, no. 60, pp. 401ŌĆō424, 1987.
Page I of V
==PAGE:65==
References
[14] ŌĆ£Critical values for the two-sample kolmogorov-smirnov test (2-sided).ŌĆØ https://
sparky.rice.edu//astr360/kstest.pdf.
[15] P. Jorion, ŌĆ£Orange county case: 3.1 introduction to var,ŌĆØ Orange County Case, 2011.
[16] T. K. Dijkstra, ŌĆ£Where is the e’¼ācient frontier?,ŌĆØ University of Groningen, Department
of Econometrics, 2001.
[17] D. J. McDonald and D. L. Thornton, ŌĆ£A primer on the mortgage market and mortgage
’¼ünance,ŌĆØ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 2008.
[18] P. Holms├Ė, ŌĆ£Optimal life cycle planning,ŌĆØ Tehcnical University of Denmark, 2021.
[19] K. Reddy and C. Vaughan, ŌĆ£Simulating stock price using geometric brownian motion ev-
idence from australian companies,ŌĆØ Australian Accounting, Business and Finance Jour-
nal, no. 10(3), pp. 23ŌĆō47, 2016.
[20] K. Reddy and C. Vaughan, ŌĆ£Geometric brownian motion in stock prices,ŌĆØ Journal of
Physics Conference, no. Series 1377 012016, 2012.
[21] ŌĆ£Mortgage
rates.ŌĆØ
https://financedenmark.dk/hard-figures/
housing-statistics/mortgage-rates/.
[22] M. D. Byrne, ŌĆ£How many times should a stochastic model be run? an approach based
on con’¼üdence intervals,ŌĆØ Departments of Psychology and Computer Science,6100 Main
Street Houston, TX 77005 USA.
Page II of V
==PAGE:66==
.1
Mortgage Examples
.1
Mortgage Examples
Year
Payment
Interest
Principal
Outstanding Debt
1
124 918
45 000
79 918
2 920 082
2
124 918
43 801
81 116
2 838 966
3
124 918
42 584
82 333
2 756 633
4
124 918
41 349
83 568
2 673 065
5
124 918
40 096
84 822
2 588 243
6
124 918
38 824
86 094
2 502 149
7
124 918
37 532
87 385
2 414 764
8
124 918
36 221
88 696
2 326 068
9
124 918
34 891
90 027
2 236 041
10
124 918
33 541
91 377
2 144 665
11
124 918
32 170
92 748
2 051 917
12
124 918
30 779
94 139
1 957 778
13
124 918
29 367
95 551
1 862 227
14
124 918
27 933
96 984
1 765 243
15
124 918
26 479
98 439
1 666 804
16
124 918
25 002
99 916
1 566 889
17
124 918
23 503
101 414
1 465 474
18
124 918
21 982
102 935
1 362 539
19
124 918
20 438
104 479
1 258 060
20
124 918
18 871
106 047
1 152 013
21
124 918
17 280
107 637
1 044 375
22
124 918
15 666
109 252
935 124
23
124 918
14 027
110 891
824 233
24
124 918
12 363
112 554
711 679
25
124 918
10 675
114 242
597 436
26
124 918
8 962
115 956
481 480
27
124 918
7 222
117 695
363 785
28
124 918
5 457
119 461
244 324
29
124 918
3 665
121 253
123 071
30
124 918
1 846
123 071
-
Total
3 747 527
3 000 000
747 527
Table 3: Fixed Rate Mortgage with annual ’¼üxed repayments, of both interest and principal
with a lifetime (l = 30), interest rate (r = 1.5%) and debt (g = 3000000 DKK). In this kind
of mortgage, the interest decreases as the debt is repaid during the term.
Page III of V
==PAGE:67==
.1
Mortgage Examples
Year
Payment
Interest
Principal
Outstanding Debt
1
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
2
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
3
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
4
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
5
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
6
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
7
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
8
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
9
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
10
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
11
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
12
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
13
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
14
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
15
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
16
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
17
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
18
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
19
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
20
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
21
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
22
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
23
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
24
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
25
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
26
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
27
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
28
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
29
15 000
15 000
-
3 000 000
30
1 015 000
15 000
3 000 000
-
Total
4 350 000
3 000 000
1 350 000
Table 4: Mortgage X with annual ’¼üxed repayments with a lifetime (l = 30), interest rate
(r = 1.5%) and debt (g = 3000000 DKK). As there is no principal payment, the interest is
always does not change. The ’¼üxed cost of Mortgage X is higher than an FRL but can be
decrease depending on the average stock returns.
Page IV of V
==PAGE:68==
.2
Asset allocation strategies - parameters used
.2
Asset allocation strategies - parameters used
.2.1
Pension Plan curves (Linear & Exponential)
ŌĆó h - {0.980, 0.981, 0.982, ... 0.997, 0.998, 0.999}
ŌĆó m - {5, 6, 7, ..., 23, 24,25}
.2.2
Reverse Logistic
ŌĆó h - {0.01, 0.02, 0.03..., 0.1}
ŌĆó m - {5, 6, 7, ..., 23, 24,25,26, 27, 28, 29, 30}
.2.3
Reverse Exponential
ŌĆó p - {0.005, 0.006, 0.007,....,0.02, 0.025, 0.035, 0.045,...,0.085}
ŌĆó a - {10, 11, 12, ..., 23, 24,25,26, 27, 28, 29, 30}
.2.4
Linear
ŌĆó a - {0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04..., 0.2}
ŌĆó b - {0.5, ,0.55, 0.6, 0.65, 0.7, 0.75, 0.8, 0.85, 0.9, 0.95, 1}
Page V of V
