==PAGE:1==
Landslide mapping using machine learn­
ing applied to remote sensing imagery
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Microwaves and Remote Sensing
==PAGE:2==
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
Master Thesis
March, 2021
By
Eigil Yuichi Hyldgaard Lippert
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
ESA Sentinel­2 Image of Ummiammakku mountain (Karrat Fjord): Modi­
fied Copernicus Sentinel data 2020/Sentinel Hub.
Published by:
DTU, Microwaves and Remote Sensing, Ørsteds Plads, building 348.,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six and a half months at the Section for Microwaves
and Remote Sensing, DTU Space, National Space Institute at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng. It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine
learning, statistics and remote sensing.
Eigil Yuichi Hyldgaard Lippert ­ s132561
Signature
Date
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis is concerned with investigating the feasibility of automatically monitoring land­
slides in Western Greenland by combining Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (In­
SAR) data and U­Net deep learning models. It focuses on a large area in central Western
Greenland including the Karrat Fjord, where several landslides are known to have taken
place. The landslides that happened on the 15th of November 2016 and on the 17th of
June 2017 are of special interest as these are also seen in InSAR data derived from the
European Space Agency (ESA) Sentinel­1 satellites, and are used throughout the the­
sis for testing the developed U­Net models. Due to the lack of a labelled training data­set
various approaches to simulating landslide samples in InSAR coherence imagery are pro­
posed. These play a central role in the thesis and provides many insights into the relevant
constituents of the InSAR coherence patterns derived from landslides. Based on one of
the proposed simulation approaches, a final model is presented, capable of distinguishing
the 2016 and 2017 landslides from their surroundings.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Eigil Yuichi Hyldgaard Lippert, MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering, DTU,
would like to acknowledge the following people for their support of the completion of the
thesis:
John Peter Merryman Boncori, Head of Microwaves and Remote Sensing, National
Space Institute Microwaves and Remote Sensing, DTU
John was the principal supervisor of the thesis and I would like to express my gratitude
for the huge efforts he has made in giving detailed supervision and useful feedback on
the results during the project. With his extensive understanding of microwave remote
sensing his input regarding decisions on the simulations and the data was invaluable as
these played a central role in the thesis. The many discussions we have had about how
to best approach the problem, over the past months have been insightful and interesting
and taught me many interesting details on microwave remote sensing.
Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor MSO and Head of Section, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science Visual Computing, DTU
Anders Bjorholm Dahl co­supervised the thesis and was responsible for supervising the
machine learning part of the project. I would like to thank Anders for his running feedback
on the project that helped improving the machine learning and image analysis parts of the
thesis significantly. I have been very glad that his open attitude towards supervising many
different projects enabled me to get to know him, his field and his department better. I have
learned a lot regarding the field of computer vision due to this, which I am very happy for.
Morten Hannemose, Postdoc, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci­
ence Visual Computing, DTU
Morten Hannemose co­supervised the thesis as well and his strong background in the
field of deep learning for computer vision has been a great asset to the project. Through­
out the project, Morten has given useful and practical feedback on the implementations
of the deep learning models. The project has benefited greatly from his ability to dissect
information and suggest meaningful ways to solve problems and I would like to thank him
for this.
Additional acknowledgements:
I would like to thank my good friends, Kristian A. Sørensen (MSc. Eng), Simon K. Lumpemba
(MSc. Eng) and Øyvind A. Winton (MSc. Eng, student) for their willingness to discuss my
findings and the challenges I faced during the length of the project. During the 5 years
of my study, they have all played a pivotal role in forming me as an engineer. They all
show an exemplary ability to patiently listen to my sometimes very long verbally expressed
streams of thought, for which I am very grateful. Finally, I would like to express my deep
gratitude to my girlfriend and my family for warmly supporting at all times, and especially
in the times of academic deadlock.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry
3
2.1
SAR acquisition geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Interferometric SAR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Coherence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Machine learning
12
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Implemented U­Net architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Data
24
4.1
SAR data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Auxiliary data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Method
30
5.1
Landslide simulation approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.2
Data­set handling for machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Results
41
6.1
Simulated landslides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Real landslides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7
Discussion
52
7.1
Simulation performance and synhtetic data quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.2
Real landslide performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.3
Limitations and possible improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
8
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
On the 17 th of June 2017 a rock avalanche took place in Karrat Fjord in Western Green­
land, causing a tsunami that flooded a nearby village and took the lives of four of its
inhabitants. The landslide was unique in size and impact in contemporary times and was
first described by Bessette­Kirton et al. (2017). Figure 1.1, which is based on results by
Bessette­Kirton et al. (2017), Gauthier et al. (2018) and Svennevig et al. (2020), shows
the area of Western Greenland surrounding Karrat Fjord. In the lower part of the figure an
aerial image of the slope where the 2017 landslide took place is shown. Several lesser
landslides also occurred on the same slope before the 2017 event. Adopting the terminol­
ogy in Bessette­Kirton et al. (2017), which is used in the figure as well, the catastrophic
landslide from 2017 will be called the main landslide and the smaller landslide to the right
will be called the east landslide happened in 2016. The west landslide, left of the main
landslide is a unstable part of the slope which has not a yet developed into a catastrophic
landslide, but rather it is a slowly moving lump of material. Bessette­Kirton et al. (2017)
propose that the movement of the west landslide started somewhere between May 2015
and May 2016.
Figure 1.1: The top graphic was created by Svennevig et al. (2020), and was slightly edited
for the purpose here. It shows the general area of interest and the specific place where
the Karrat Fjord landslide took place in 2017. In the bottom an aerial image, created by
Gauthier et al. (2018), shows the outline of the main, east and west landslides, described
in Bessette­Kirton et al. (2017).
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
1
==PAGE:8==
The 2017 Karrat Fjord event brought an increased focus on monitoring rock avalanches
and landslides in general in Greenland, to better understand landslides in the Arctic envi­
ronment and to better assess the hazard. The most feasible way to monitor landslides in
a large and remote area like Greenland is by means of remote sensing. Satellite remote
sensing is particularly well suited as satellites regularly passes over the polar regions, and
can provide an on­going data stream of the slopes in Greenland. One obstruction to some
types of remote sensing from satellite is the frequent cloud­cover and the lack of daylight
during the winter season in Greenland. Radar based remote sensing methods are able
to operate in this setting, as they can sense through clouds and does not rely on naturally
occurring sunlight. In the context of landslides, the so called Synthetic Aperture Radar
(SAR) based remote sensing becomes particularly interesting, especially because of the
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) techniques that allow precise measure­
ments of ground motion and texture by comparing the phase content of two or more SAR
acquisitions. InSAR coherence, a statistical similarity measure of the phase content in a
pair of images, is of particular interest. InSAR coherence, simply called coherence in the
following, can be used to detect changes in the surface texture of the observed area, a
property which is exploited in so called Coherent Change Detection (CCD) techniques,
see Jung and Yun (2020). However the latter typically operate on a pixel by pixel basis,
without exploiting the spatial correlation between changes.
The field of machine learning is the broad field of data­driven algorithms that can learn to
solve various tasks automatically and has many methods well suited for landslide moni­
toring. Various authors have applied machine learning techniques to estimate landslide
susceptibility, for example Catani et al. (2013), but more recently Ji et al. (2020) showed
that an attention boosted Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was capable of outlining
landslides in high resolution optical imagery. The latter case shows the strength of using
deep learning techniques, a sub­field of machine learning, as these methods are capable
of looking for very complicated patterns in vast amounts of data. Despite the use of radar
remote sensing, landslides are small in size compared to the size of the mountainous ar­
eas of Greenland, so monitoring landslides in this context effectively calls for automation.
In this thesis the combination of coherence and deep learning techniques is exploited to
explore the feasibility of automatically detecting catastrophic landslides such as the June
2017 Karrat fjord event. In general the field of combining deep learning and InSAR tech­
niques is still very new, and using such an approach for landslide monitoring is not yet
described in literature. To this end, a challenge lies in training the CNNs, which requires
large data­sets of known landslides and associated InSAR measurements, which are not
available for Greenland.The challenge is solved here by synthesising a data­set that can
be used for deep learning. As the deep learning methods rely heavily on the data, the
simulation method is of central importance.
The thesis is structured by first introducing the fundamental theoretical concepts in Chap­
ter 2 and 3 needed for understanding the method and results. The various types of data
sources are presented in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 introduces the central methodology of
the landslide simulation approach and the creation of a data­set useful for machine learn­
ing. The results are presented in Chapter 6 with two subsections for the results on the
simulated and the real landslides respectively. The results and method are discussed in
Chapter 7 and finally some conclusive remarks are made in Chapter 8.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry
The following section presents the fundamentals of microwave remote sensing needed
to understand the results presented later. The section revolves around the Synthetic­
aperture Radar (SAR) technology and more specifically the data products, 2D represen­
tations of the sensed area. SAR was invented by Wiley (1985) in 1951, and since then
has become a very useful tool in remote sensing from space, as SAR has the capability
to measure the ground through clouds and during nighttime. Today there is a new surge
of interest in the SAR industry as many start­up companies have based their business
around high­resolution satellite­borne SAR constellations. The section first describes the
fundamental principle behind the SAR technology and then goes on the describe how it
can be used for another technique called Interferometric SAR (InSAR) and finally how
coherence, a statistical correlation measure between two SAR acquisitions, can be com­
puted and used.
2.1
SAR acquisition geometry
Fundamentally the idea behind SAR is to place a form of radar on a moving platform, a
satellite in this project, and to utilise the relative movement with respect to the ground
to improve the spatial resolution compared to conventional real aperture. An illustration
of this concept is seen in Figure 2.1 which shows the satellite platform moving in the so
called azimuth direction and looks in the range direction, towards the house. In the sketch
the satellite is left looking, with respect to its’ flight direction. The range to a given target,
for an example the house, represents the so called slant range which is the direct line of
sight distance to the target, whereas the ground range which is the slant range projected
onto the ground. The roff variable is the range offset denoting slant range distance to
the point from which the data is recorded. Disregarding the slow decline in satellite orbits
over time, the satellite operates at a close to almost constant height, H, above the Earth.
In practice they fly between 500 and 800 km altitude.
The SAR works by repeatedly emitting electromagnetic pulses and receiving their echoes.
As the SAR moves in its flight direction it senses the terrain through the echoes, which
can be formed into a SAR image of the ground. The resolution of the SAR is achieved
through some advanced signal processing and the range and azimuth resolution follows
the equations:
ρr =
c
2Bw
,
ρa = l
2
(2.1)
Where the c is the speed of light, Bw is the bandwidth of the pulse and l is the antenna
length. The first equation is the range resolution which is inversely proportional with the
bandwidth and the second equation is the azimuth resolution which does not decrease
with range, which is one of the unique qualities of SAR.
One resolution cell of the SAR, typically of the size of tens of meters, covers various
different scatters on ground. If there is a single target inside a resolution cell which reflects
the pulse well, such as a metal roof slanting towards the SAR, the overall reflection from
that resolution cell will be dominated by the strong reflection. This effect can be used
to calibrate the instruments, by constructing so called corner reflectors which are built
to send strong reflections back to the space­borne SAR. In the opposite case where a
resolution cell is very homogeneous and the objects within it resembles each other, such
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: Space­borne Synthetic Aperture Radar geometry and terminology. Image
creadit: Mohr (2005).
as agricultural fields or the ocean, the intensity of the reflection are affected by random
effects. For an example, all the scatterers on a wheat field will reflect the electromagnetic
signal differently, as the plants are not identical. As the reflections are averaged together
inside resolution cell covering the wheat field, the total intensity of the reflection will be
affected by the random reflections from each plant. In practice this is what gives rise
to speckle which is a noise like phenomenon in SAR imagery that makes neighbouring
resolution cells in homogeneous areas vary a lot in the intensity of the reflected pulse.
In the homogeneous areas we can apply the central limit theorem to obtain an expression
for the probability density function (PDF) of the complex SAR pixels. The complex pixel
value u(r, x) a function of slant range and azimuth, can be written as the superposition of
N targets in the pixel (resolution cell), (Mohr, 2005):
u(r, x) =
N
∑
i
ai exp{jφi} = X + jY
(2.2)
Where ai and φi is the amplitude and phase of the individual scatterer, j = √−1 and X
and Y are the real and imaginary random variables describing the resolutions cell. Under
the assumptions that N is sufficiently large and no single scatterer dominates the pixel,
the φi are uniformly distributed and ai and φi are uncorrelated, the central limit theorem
applies and X and Y are Gaussian distributed. Using the two latter assumptions, it can
be shown that u(r, x) is a complex circular Gaussian random variable (Bamler and Hartl,
1998).
The special geometry of the SAR satellite brings about some challenges, due to the chang­
ing topology around the globe. In the presence of a slope the measurements of the SAR
are distorted to a certain degree, and depending on which way the slope is facing with
respect to the SAR, the distortion is categorised into two different effects: foreshorten­
ing and shadowing. Both effects are seen in Figure 2.2. The issue is best understood
by looking at Figure 2.2a, where the curved diagonal lines represents the signal emitted
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
4
==PAGE:11==
(a) A sketch showing the reason for
the foreshortening and shadowing
effects present in SAR imagery.
(b) Sketches of the concepts of layover and shadow in
SAR imagery.
Figure 2.2: Foreshortening, shadow and layover. Image credit Mohr (2005)
from the SAR propagating through space, θ is the incidence angle and ∆r is a small slant
range distance between the emitted signals. The three points on ground are equidistant
in ground range, but as it can be seen the points are not equidistant in the slant range,
which is the observed distance between points on ground. This effect is called foreshort­
ening and in the extreme case it can result in a third phenomena called lay­over, where
the echo from point B is received before the echo from point A. The points cannot be
separated and so it is useful to mask these points as they cannot be interpreted unam­
biguously. Lay­over occurs then the angle of incidence θ is smaller than the terrain slope
angle towards the radar, which means that it will occur more frequently in the near range
of the radar than in the far range. Shadowing is shown in Figure 2.2b and occurs because
the terrain blocks the line of sight to the slope facing away from the radar, which is more
frequently happening in the far range of the SAR acquisitions as the terrain will cast longer
shadows as the incidence angle becomes greater. All three effects are very pronounced
in mountainous areas and therefore of great importance in regions like Greenland.
2.2
Interferometric SAR
Interferometric SAR (InSAR) or SAR Interferometry exploits the phase of the complex
SAR signals, derived from two or more SAR images covering the same area. The phase
of a single SAR image contains deterministic and stochastic contributions. InSAR reveals
the deterministic contributions, including those due to ground motion, in cases where the
stochastic contributions are statistically correlated. The following section presents the
underlying theory of InSAR and follows the notation and derivations used in Bamler and
Hartl (1998) extensively.
The geometry of a InSAR pair of acquisitions can be seen in Figure 2.3, which should be
seen as an extension of the geometry presented in Figure 2.1. In Figure 2.3 the numbers
1 and 2 refers to two different positions of a SAR satellite. They have to be separated in
space by a distance B, called the baseline, such that the target on ground is viewed from
two different angles. This can be obtained by having to sensors on the same platform
separated by some distance B, called single­pass interferometry. Alternatively a single
sensor can be used by viewing the same area twice from two slightly different orbits sepa­
rated by some distance B. The latter is called repeat­pass interferometry and is the most
used technique in the active space­borne sensors today. The θn is the off­nadir angle,
LOS stands for line of sight and are the vectors pointing from the sensor to the target,
LOS1 is the unit vector of LOS1 and B⊥is the perpendicular baseline. As described
before, the signal that the SAR receives is complex in nature, consisting of both a phase
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.3: The geometry of two passes by the same satellite over the same area. The
flight direction is into the page, as denoted by the ⊕symbol. Image credit: Lippert (2020)
and a amplitude part. From the two passes we obtain the SAR images
u1(r, x) = |u1(r, x)| exp{jφ1(r, x)},
u2(r, x) = |u2(r, x)| exp{jφ2(r, x)}
(2.3)
from which we can form the interferogram
v(·) = u1(·)u2(·)∗= |u1(·)u2(·)| exp{jφ(·)}
(2.4)
where φ(·) = φ1(·)−φ2(·) and super script ∗denotes the complex conjugate. Bamler and
Hartl (1998) shows that for a point scatterer the phase of the SAR image is proportional
to the range plus some shift in the scatterer itself:
φ1 = −4π
λ r1 + φ1,scat,
φ2 = −4π
λ r2 + φ2,scat
(2.5)
Assuming the the scattering phase is the same in both SAR images we obtain the flatten­
ing phase,
φflat = 4π
λ ∆r
(2.6)
where ∆r = r1 −r2 = LOS1 −LOS2. The flattening phase is often removed before
further processing.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
6
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Coherence
The magnitude of the complex coherence |γ| is a measure of the similarity of the phase
content in the two SAR images. The definition of coherence is
γ =
E[u1u∗
2]
√
E[|u1|2]E[|u2|2]
(2.7)
With u1 and u2 defined as in equation (2.3). In the presence of noise |γ| < 1 and in
the case of no similarity between the phase content in the two images, |γ| = 0. Bamler
and Hartl (1998) shows that by characterising the PDF of the phase in terms of |γ| and
the expected interferometric phase, the interferometric phase will be uniformly distributed
when |γ| = 0, as seen in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: The distribution of the interferometric phase as a function of the correlation
coefficient γ. Image credit: Bamler and Hartl, 1998
The sensitivity towards phase changes between the two acquisitions means that the com­
plex coherence has many applications, especially because its sensitivity is on the scale
of the wavelength of the emitted pulses. Even though a typical resolution cell is in the
order of tens of meters, the resolution of the sensed phase changes are in the order of
centimetres or lower. As explained earlier in Section 2.1, the phase content of a reso­
lution cell is determined by the land cover inside the cell. The phase content of a patch
of bare soil will be different from the phase content of a forest. But as coherence is sen­
sitive to the change in phase content, then it inherently reacts to changes in the sensed
land­cover related to the textural changes of the surface. An unchanged surface such as
an urban environment will therefore have high coherence, while forest, where the leaves
and branches are changing with the direction of the wind and the time of season, are
incoherent.
2.3.1
Sources of decorrelation
In this project the aim is to look for large changes in the phase content representing land­
slides. In principle this should be a simple task in Greenland, as a landslide has a limited
geographical extent and its surroundings are very stable due to the low amount of vegeta­
tion. However this is not the case, as there are also seemingly stable scatterers which has
a highly changing phase content. In Figure 2.5 various sources of loss of coherence or
decorrelation are seen in the Greenlandic environment. The area shown is Karrat Fjord,
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
7
==PAGE:14==
used as an example and test area throughout the report, but here it is useful as it shows
the various sources for loss of coherence while also showing loss of coherence due to a
larger landslide. The left image shows the optical image of the area some weeks after the
landslide, the centre figure shows the coherence magnitude and the right image shows
a land­cover classification map. The classification map is based on the optical imagery
and was created with the ESA’s Sentinel 2A Scene Classification (SC) algorithm obtained
through the SentinelHub EO browser. The details of this scene classification algorithm
is not covered in this project as it is only used for qualitative explanation of decorrela­
tion. The white areas in the centre image of Figure 2.5 are the coherent areas, which
can be correlated to the mountain sides in the left optical image which must have a stable
surface, one of the explanations being that the surface is non­vegetated, as seen in the
right classification image. In Figure 2.5 the four main sources of loss of coherence are
described as follows:
Figure 2.5: Different sources for decorrelation in the Karrat Fjord area, cross comparison
of the same areas from three different perspectives. The optical imagery is was taken
with the Sentinel­2 satellite on the 10th of July 2017, after the catastrophic Karrat Fjord
landslide event on the 17th of June 2017. The middle image is the coherence formed
from the a pair of acquisitions obtained on the 15th of June and the 21st of June 2017,
and the landslide event can be seen. The classification map on the right is based on
the optical imagery and made with ESA’s scene classification algorithm which, described
in Richter and Schläpfer, 2011. The details can be seen at: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/
sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-2-msi/level-2a/algorithm. Note the classes not present in
the image was removed from the legend
• Box 1 in the coherence magnitude map (centre image) shows an are of decorrela­
tion due to snow and/or ice.
• Box 2 encloses the decorrelation due to the 2017 Karrat Fjord landslide. The land­
slide is difficult to spot in the optical imagery (left image) but noticeable in coherence
magnitude (centre image). The landslides are shown again in Figure 2.6, showing
the named landslides of Karrat Fjord in coherence imagery. As it is seen, landslides
shows up as spatially localised areas of low coherence values with various shapes.
• Box 3 shows the decorrelation due to the constant changes in the surface waves of
the ocean. The ocean causes the largest and most consistently decorrelated area
in the coherence imagery (centre image) used in this project.
• Box 4 The top left box show loss of coherence magnitude due to the viewing ge­
ometry of the satellite, and the area is decorrelated due to the shadowing effect
described in Section 2.1. The low coherence magnitude values in this area are less
consistent and sometimes includes higher coherence magnitude values, compared
to the ocean and ice areas.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.6: The left image shows the coherence imagery of the main landslide and the
right shows the east landslide. The west landslide, which slightly changes shape, is seen
in both images. The images acquisition dates and ground track details can be found in
Table 4.2 of Section 4.1.2, with SAR image pair (3) being the main landslide acquisition
and (2) being the east landslide acquisition.
A final source of decorrelation that is also worth mentioning is the decorrelation resulting
from having a too long baseline, see Figure 2.3. In repeat­pass interferometry this can
happen if there is a relatively long time between the two acquisitions, which is termed
a long temporal baseline. As an example, using two images one year apart will most
likely result a coherence image wherein everything is very decorrelated. For this reason,
temporal baselines on the order of days to a few months are used in most applications.
2.3.2
Coherence estimation
In order to work with coherence in practice we have to replace the expected values in
equation (2.7) with a parameter which can be measured from a pair of SAR images. A
common assumption is that u1 and u2 are ergodic in mean in order to substitute the en­
semble averages in the realisation space with spatial averages in the images space. The
resulting estimator is the so called sample coherence, which is given by:
ˆγ =
∑L
i
∑M
k u1,i,ku∗
2,i,k
√∑L
i
∑M
k |u1,i,k|2√∑L
i
∑M
k |u2,i,k|2]
(2.8)
The assumption implies that the estimate should be computed locally by taking the sums
over a finite kernel in the neighbourhood of the resolution cell in question. Here L and M
represents the number of local pixels averaged in the two dimensions, an operation similar
image convolutions described later in Section 3.1. Different kernel/window sizes can be
used, but often a rectangular kernel of the size of (range, azimuth) = (L, M) = (14, 4) or
(8, 2) is used, as SLC imagery is oversampled in the range direction. Using a rectangular
kernel results in approximately square pixels which are easier to interpret. The process
causes a spatial correlation in the resulting neighbouring pixels and is therefore proceeded
by a decimation step, where every 14th pixel in the range direction and every 4th pixel in the
azimuth direction are kept, in the case of a kernel of size (14, 4). The complex coherence
estimate obtained in this way consists of the estimated coherence magnitude and the
filtered interferometric phase.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.7: Coherence image of (600 × 600) ocean patch and the corresponding mag­
nitude distribution along with an fitted Empirical Probability Distribution Function and the
Empirical Cumululative Probability Distribution .
The drawback of this method is that it overestimates the coherence, especially in areas
with low coherence (Touzi et al., 1999). In theory the coherence magnitude should be 0
in areas like the ocean, but this is not the case in reality. This can be seen by plotting
the histogram of values over a ocean patch, as shown in Figure 2.7. Here it is seen
that the mean of the coherence magnitude values over a large area of the ocean is not
zero, but rather around 0.15. Touzi et al. (1999) showed that the bias depends on the
number of looks used in the estimation, such that if (L, M) are increased then the bias will
become smaller. On the other hand increasing the kernel size also increases the chance
of breaking the stationarity assumption on u1, u2 and u1u∗
2 which renders the coherence
estimate meaningless. One such case is if the SAR images contains systematic phase
variation which is the case in InSAR, and so it is often preferred to remove the known
deterministic phase by subtracting the flattening phase in equation (2.6). This requires
knowledge of the position of the pixels in the first and second SAR image with respect to
each other, which can be obtained using a Digital Elevation Model (DEM). This is another
drawback as the DEM of the area might be too crude or have missing values.
Touzi et al. (1999) presents several approaches to reducing or removing the bias. One of
the simplest approaches is averaging the estimated coherence magnitude samples ˆγ as
¯γ = 1
N
N
∑
i
ˆγ
(2.9)
Where N is the number of samples of the (L, M)­multi­looked coherence. As N increases
the resulting distribution becomes normal Gaussian distribution with E[ˆγ] and variance
var(E[ˆγ]/N, where var(a) = E[a2] −E[a]2. One common setting for this approach is to
average every pixel (sample) in the image by running a (3 × 3) averaging kernel over the
estimated coherence map, also referred to as box­filtering.
2.3.3
Interferometric processing chain
The InSAR processor used in this project is based on the commercial GAMMA­software
developed by Werner et al., 2000 and maintained by by the Swiss company GAMMA Re­
mote Sensing, capable of forming interferograms and making coherence estimates. The
processing chain needed for computing interferometric phase and coherence magnitude
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
10
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.8: Flow chart of a interferometric processing chain
from a pair of SAR acquistions is illustrated in the flow chart in Figure 2.8. The first step of
the processing chain makes a Look Up Table (LUT) which manages the mapping between
the geometry of the first Sentinel­1 acquisition and the second one. In order to make the
LUT it is necessary to project a coordinate grid in the geometry of the 1st acquisition into
a latitude and longitude grid, which involves using the DEM heights. Hereafter the coordi­
nates of the 1st acquisition can be projected into the geometry of the 2nd acquisition. The
LUT mapping between points in the 1st and 2nd acquisition geometry enables the next
step in the flow chart. Coregistration is the process of registering what point a data point
in the first SAR acquisition corresponds to in the second SAR acquisition, making the
pair directly comparable. Coregistration consists of a re­sampling step, where the data
of the 2nd acquisition is re­sampled onto a grid, together with a mosaicing step where
out­of­range values removed and the special burst structure of the SAR data used here
is processed, see Section 4.1.2 for details. The coregistered and mosaiced SAR images
are then combined into an interferogram, step 3, from which the wrapped interferogram
phase and the coherence magnitude are computed through multi­looking, step 3 and 4.
The multi­looking factors used here are (range looks, azimuth looks) = (8, 2) which gives
approximately sqaure pixels of size (30 × 30) [m]. Finally in step 5 the coherence and
wrapped phase are geo­coded so the data is more easily interpreted and compared to
other data sources.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
11
==PAGE:18==
3
Machine learning
In this section the foundations of the machine learning part of the project are introduced
and explained. The increasing popularity of machine learning in the last decade has en­
sured a vast amount of background material available online. Especially the field of deep
learning, a data driven modelling approach consisting of millions of model parameters,
has become very popular and its various branches are well covered in countless scientific
papers as well as online resources.
The most common way to approach image analysis tasks in deep learning is through the
so called Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), for which image convolutions, known
from general image analysis theory, are of prime importance. Section 3.1 covers the
basic theory behind 2D image convolutions and how these are structured into a deep
learning architecture. In section 3.1.2 the specific model architecture of interest in this
work is presented. In section 3.2 specific methods related to learning model parameters
from data is introduced. The last section will describe the specific performance metrics
used to evaluate the performance of the models. All implementations were carried out in
python and specifically the deep learning library PyTorch was used.
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
Neural networks are collections of model parameters, also called weights, which con­
ceptually are ordered in parallel and in series, called layers and connections in machine
learning terms. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) were first invented in the 1980’s
and especially since 2010 it has become the state­of­the­art method many image analysis
tasks. For an introduction to the structure of basic CNN’s see Bengio and Lecun (2009).
Five important concepts for understanding CNN’s are described in the first subsection:
convolutions, transpose convolutions, feature maps, max­pooling and some convolution
settings. In subsection 3.1.2, a special variant of the CNN architecture is presented ca­
pable of semantic segmentation.
3.1.1
Convolutions
The fundamental operation of CNN’s is a convolution, a well defined mathematical op­
eration. A convolution kernel and some terminology is summarised in Figure 3.1. The
figure shows dummy image in blue, with each pixel intensity represented with a number.
The convolution kernel is the red solid box, which covers some shaded pixel values. The
small numbers seen inside the kernel are the kernel weights, which are to be learned from
data. Each pixel value inside the kernel is multiplied by the corresponding kernel weight
and added together to achieve the output 12 seen in the green box. After the computation
the kernel moves to the next pixel and repeats the procedure, creating the green box.
The green box is often called a feature map, emphasising some feature in the original im­
age. One example of a feature map could be a blurred version of the input image, or an
edge detected version of the input image. In the deep learning context, however, these
features are derived completely from the data and do not necessarily offer an intuitive
interpretation, i.e. the CNN could learn that a blurred version of the input image is a good
feature, but it most likely learns features which are very hard to interpret. As seen in the
figure moving the kernel one pixel to the left means that the kernel will extend beyond
the limits of the blue image, an issue solved by padding the image. The padding value
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
12
==PAGE:19==
could be 0, a reflection of the blue pixels or something else, needed to avoid a reduc­
tion in the output resolution. The arrows in Figure 3.1 illustrates the different strides that
can be used, skipping some pixel positions and effectively reducing the size of the green
box even more. For example if the stride in Figure 3.1 was 2 instead 1 the green output
box would only consist of its four corner values. The control of the output resolution is
important in managing the memory requirements of the network.
Figure 3.1: The concept of image convolutions.
In normal colour images there would be 3 different colours, also called channels: red,
green and blue. The convolutional kernel is then extended to operate on the three chan­
nels in parallel. This 3­dimensional kernel is often called a filter.
Another relevant operation is the so called transpose convolution which, in contrast to the
normal convolution, up­samples the image information it is operated on. Since successive
convolutions will reduce the spatial size of the input image data, transpose convolutions
are important as they can up­sample the data into its’ original size. A sketch of a transpose
convolution is seen in Figure 3.2 where the kernel on the very left is multiplied by each of
its own elements to achieve the following four matrices. Finally all four are added together
to obtain the up­sampled image data.
Figure 3.2: An illustration of transpose convolution
The final operation worth mentioning here is the pooling­operation. There exists various
types of pooling, but the relevant type here is the max­pooling operation. It works like
the convolution but instead of returning a weighted sum if the values inside the kernel,
max­pooling simply returns the maximum value inside the kernel, considered to be the
most important feature of that neighbourhood. The max­pooling operates on the output
of the convolutions, corresponding to the green square in in Figure 3.1 and serves to
down­sample the data. For example, a (3 × 3) max­pooling on the green square would
return the single number 19.
3.1.2
U­Net for semantic segmentation
By setting up convolutions and transpose convolutions to operate in parallel and in series
a so called network­architecture can be constructed, which can solve the task of semantic
segmentation. Semantic segmentation is the task of outlining specific objects images is
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
13
==PAGE:20==
called semantic segmentation, corresponding to providing each pixel in an image with a
label. One of the first CNN architectures to solve this challenge was the U­Net, introduced
in Ronneberger et al. (2015). Here the segmentation task was to outline cells, as seen
in Figure 3.3. The left image in the Figure is a microscopy image of biological cells, the
centre image is the ground truth masks for the cells and the right image is the binary
segmentation categorising each pixel in the image as either a cell called the foreground
or a background pixel.
Figure 3.3: An example of biomedical segmentation from the original U­Net study. Image
credit: Ronneberger et al., 2015
The fundamental idea in the U­Net is to down­sample the input data through some normal
convolutional layers followed by up­sampling operations. The original U­Net architecture
implemented this idea and structured their network visually as a ”U”.
The structure is seen in Figure 3.4, consisting of a contracting part, the left side of the ”U”
and a expanding part, the right side of the ”U”. The operations in the network are repre­
sented by arrows. As the network contracts the input data, the resolution decreases. In
order to sustain high resolution features from the contracting part, the feature maps are
saved and appended on to the corresponding level in the expanding part. This is repre­
sented by the grey arrows going across. The blue arrows represents (3 × 3) convolutions
and the red arrows are (2 × 2) max­pooling operations and the green arrows are (2 × 2)
up­convolution layers. The grey arrows are copy operations that takes the layers at some
point in the contracting part of the network and concatenates them onto the layers at a
later point, in the expanding part of the network. The grey numbers denotes the feature
map sizes at the different layers of the network. The input image size is (572 × 572) with
a single channel (grey scale) which is reduced down to the layer in the bottom of the ”U”
with the size (30 × 30) and 1024 feature maps.
3.2
Learning
This section establishes how the weights in the CNN’s can be selected such that they
become capable of making relevant segmentation. The modelling or learning part of the
deep learning method is governed by measuring the error between a given prediction
and some target or ground truth. This measurement is then used to change the weights
appropriately in order to obtain a better prediction. For this approach to work, there has to
be a well established connection between the input image to the model and the expected
output, i.e. the ground truth. A data­set with such qualities is called a training data­set and
it is central in the deep learning approach. The function measuring the correctness of the
prediction is called a loss­function and determines how the weights should be updated.
First, two relevant activation functions are described, then the loss function and how it is
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
14
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4: The original U­Net architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015). The ”ReLU” func­
tion is given by equation (3.2)
used to update the weights in the network and finally how this updating process can be
optimised.
3.2.1
Activation functions
Activation functions are responsible for introducing non­linearities in deep­learning models
and also has the role of scaling the weights in the model in each layers of the network,
see Szandała (2021) for a thorough introduction. There are many choices of activation
functions, the ones relevant here are the sigmoid function
α(z) =
1
1 −exp{−z},
(3.1)
which outputs values between [0; 1] when given some input number z. The sigmoid can
be interpreted as a type of probability in the binary case. The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
is defined as
α(z) = max{0, z},
(3.2)
which outputs 0 if z is negative and z if z is positive. Different variants of the ReLU function
are very popular, especially in larger and more complex models due to some convenient
properties when differentiated, see Nair and Hinton (2010) for details.
3.2.2
Loss Function
The loss function is one of the most important parts of deep learning models as it deter­
mines what is considered a good prediction and therefore acts a the steering wheel of the
whole modelling process. Let L(w) be such a loss function, whose value depends on the
specific setting of the weights, w, involved in a given prediction. The general approach to
find the optimum selection of the model weights is by minimizing the loss function,
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
15
==PAGE:22==
∇wL(w) = 0
(3.3)
But since the functions we are trying to estimate are non­linear and does not have a well
defined global minima, this has to be done in steps. An update to the weights, in its
simplest form is
∆w = −η∇wL(w)
w′ = w + ∆w
(3.4)
where w′ is the updated weights and η is a small constant called the learning rate. The
process of computing every single weight perturbation in ∇wL(w) can be implemented
by recursively applying the chain rule of differentiation.
In binary classification tasks the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) loss function is often used,
as it leads to faster training and improves generalisation Simard et al., 2003. In the binary
segmentation task we are trying to assign a label 0 or 1 to a given pixel. In the context of
a single pixel the BCE loss function can be defined as (Bishop, 2006)[p. 205­206],
L(w) = −ln p(t|w) = −
N
∑
n=1
{tn ln yn + (1 −tn) ln (1 −yn)}
(3.5)
where n = 1, ..., N corresponding to the number of data­points, yn is probability of a pre­
dicted output label of the model and t = (t1, ..., tN)T where tn ∈[0, 1] is the corresponding
target. In a binary setting there are two classes either 0 or 1. Taking the gradient of the
BCE loss function
∇L(w) =
N
∑
n=1
(yn −tn)ϕn
(3.6)
Where ϕ is a feature vector that maps yn = σ(ϕw), with σ() defined as in equation (3.1).
The BCE loss will go towards zero from infinity as the probability of a correct pixel la­
belling/classification goes towards 1, and so the lower the BCE loss is, the better the
model is at predicting.
3.2.3
Optimiser
An optimiser is the mathematical object or algorithm which ties together updating the
model weights together with the output of the loss function. There has been developed
many optimisers in machine learning but only a few will be mentioned here, and only the
last one will be dealt with in more detail. The optimisers are guided by the gradient of the
loss function, mentioned on a general level in equation 3.4
The relevant optimiser, which is one of the most popular optimisers today, is the Adaptive
Moment Estimation (Adam) optimiser, invented by Kingma and Ba (2015). Compared to
3.4, the update step in Adam is more involved and requires computing the first and second
moments of the gradient. These are defined as
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
16
==PAGE:23==
mt = β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
(3.7)
vt = β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
(3.8)
Where mt is an estimate of the mean or the first moment of the gradient, vt is an estimate
of the uncentered variance or the second moment of the gradient and gt is the gradients
with respect to the loss function all at time­step t. The variables β1 and β2 are hyper­
parameters. Kingma and Ba (2015) suggests β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 and notes that in
this case mt and vt are biased towards zero. In order to make unbiased estimates they
then derive
ˆmt =
mt
1 −βt
1
(3.9)
ˆvt =
vt
1 −βt
2
(3.10)
Using these bias corrected moments, the Adam update rule then becomes,
∆w = −
η
√ˆvt + ε ˆmt
(3.11)
Where ε = 10−8 is a constant added to avoid division by zero. Common values for the
exponential decay hyper­parameters are β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and the learning rate,
η = 10−3, but these vary depending on the problem.
An improved variant of the Adam optimiser was proposed by Loshchilov and Hutter (2019),
who introduced a weight decay into the Adam formulation to regularise the problem, see
Nielsen (2015)[chapter 3] for a general introduction to regularisation. Loshchilov and Hut­
ter (2019) named this algorithm AdamW and has an update step defined as:
∆w = −ηβ1mt−1 + (1 −β1)(gt + αwt−1)
√ˆvt + ε
(3.12)
Where α ∈R is a regularisation hyper­parameter. In addition they proposed adaptively
changing the learning rate by so­called cosine annealing, given Loshchilov and Hutter
(2017). This method updates the learning rate during training and at some point ”restarts”,
falling back to the initial learning rate. This can be implemented as,
ηt = ηmin + 1
2(ηmax −ηmin)
(
1 + cos
[ Tcur
Tmax
π
])
,
(3.13)
where ηmin and ηmax are the ranges for the learning rate, Tcur is the number of epochs,
see Figure 3.10, since the last time the learning rate was restarted and Tmax is the number
maximum number of epochs before the learning rate gets restarted. This means that when
Tcur = 0 then η = ηmax and when Tcur = Tmax, η = ηmin.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
17
==PAGE:24==
3.2.4
Data setup
Deep learning is a data driven method relying on the access to a data­set consisting of
data samples and corresponding ground truths, such as labels or segmentations. The
deep learning model is then trained to predict the ground truth based on the data sam­
ples. This also means that the modelling will is confined to predictions lying within the
boundaries of the information provided by the data samples. A full data­set is normally
split into three sub data­sets: a training data­set, a validation data­set and a test data­set.
The training data­set is the data set which the network uses to learn the specific features
specific to the related problem. This has to be the large and represent enough of the true
variability of the data to enable the model to derive general features from it.
The validation data­set is used to validate the performance of the network, i.e. evaluate
the learned features. The validation data­set is kept seperate from the training data, and
is not used to derive any features from. This means that the performance of the model on
the validation data­set is an indicator of how generalisable the features, that the network
has learned, are. Different ways of splitting the full data­set into a training and validation
part exists, but here the method called hold­out is used, where a certain part of the full
data­set dedicated to validation. This is typically around 10−30% and in hold­out the part
is selected once and not changed. This has the drawback that particular bad and rare data
samples might be present in the validation data­set, samples that are not presented well
in the training data­set, such that the validation performance of the model is lower than it
could have been. The opposite could also be the case, so the validation data­set gives
an overly optimistic view of the performance. The validation data­set is used for selecting
hyper­parameters, such as the learning rate. This is done training the model and varying
the hyper­parameters until a setting that yields a good validation result is obtained.
The test data­set is typically an even smaller part of the full data­set, also separated from
the two others as hold­out. The test data­set is usually only used after a hyper­parameter
setting has been selected and the model has finished training. The prime role of the test
data­set is to serve as an independent check of the model. The test data­set should not
be used for hyper­parameter tuning.
3.2.5
Mini­batch descent
Due to the physical memory limits of computers, the model cannot be presented to all the
data in an image data­set all at once. There exists various ways to iterate through the
data­set in smaller chunks and one way is by mini­batches, see Dekel et al. (2012). Mini­
batches are small subsets of the training data­set as seen in Figure 3.5. Each mini­batch
will have a significant bias, because it only represents a small part of the total data, giving
rise to worse model weight updates per mini­batch compared to updates based on the full
training data­set. However, the overall descend towards minima in loss function space is
much faster when using mini­batches.
Figure 3.5: Sketch of mini­batch data­set structure in machine learning.
Often the network architecture is implemented with so­called batch normalisation. Batch
normalisation normalises the input for a given layer in the network by calculating the mean
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
18
==PAGE:25==
and standard deviations of each input variable based on a given mini­batch. This causes
the network to become faster and more stable, see Ioffe and Szegedy (2015) for details,
and it does so .
3.3
Performance metrics
In the segmentation task that is presented here, the naive approach to assess the quality
of a predicted image segmentation, would be to count how many of the total pixels in
the image that were labelled with the correct label. To measure the correctness of the
model, we could then count the number of correct pixel labels. In the landslide use­case
this approach does not work very well, as there are seldom more than 5% of landslide
(positive) pixels in a given image. This issue is called class­imbalance and is a common
issue in many real world deep learning applications.
It is of interest to quantify the correctness of the segmentations and this section presents
some specific performance metrics, which deals with the class­imbalance problem and
aids the overall assessment of the quality of the models.
3.3.1
Intersection over Union
Intersection Over Union (IoU), which is also known as the Jaccard’s index, is a metric
developed to measure the similarity between two or more sample sets. In the project
the two sample sets compared will be the pixels of the true segmentation mask and the
pixels of the predicted segmentation mask. The formal definition of the IoU score given
to sample sets A and B is
IoU(A, B) = |A ∩B|
|A ∪B| =
|A ∩B|
|A| + |B| −|A ∩B|.
(3.14)
The intuition of the IoU score is illustrated in Figure 3.6, where is is seen that the score
compares the intersection, the nominator in equation (3.14), and the union, the denom­
inator in equation (3.14). The perfect prediction will have IoU = 1, and a completely
non­overlapping prediction will have IoU = 0, in many cases an IoU > 0.5 is considered
decent but this depends on the problem.
Figure 3.6: An illustration of the IoU score
Another way to write the IoU score is in terms of true positives (TP), true negatives (TN),
false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN), summarised in Figure 3.7.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
19
==PAGE:26==
IoU(A, B) =
TP
TP + FN + FP
(3.15)
Where the TP pixels corresponds the purple intersection in Figure 3.6, the FP pixels are
the blue prediction pixels outside the intersection, and the FN pixels are the red ground
truth pixels outside the intersection. This terminology will be used more in the following
Section 3.3.2, and it is more clearly seen how the formulation in equation (3.15) can be
implemented in code, as it can be directly related to logical statements. Furthermore it
is also seen that the IoU score is insensitive to the number of true negatives, which is
the reason why it works well in for quantifying model performance in the case of class
imbalance with many negative samples in the data.
Figure 3.7: The confusion matrix in a binary classification task
The output of the U­Net is pixel­wise predictions consisting of continuous values between
0 and 1, in the same shape of the input. The pixel value 0 is a negative or background pre­
diction and a pixel value of 1 is a positive or landslide prediction. This means that in order
to compute the IoU score it is necessary to separate the continuous predictions into two
discrete sets of positive predictions and negative predictions, such that the intersection
and the union can be computed. This is done by rounding the prediction output values to
0 or 1, by setting values > 0.5 to 1 and otherwise to 0.
3.3.2
Precision­recall curves
Another way to assess the quality of the predictions made by a model is through a Precision­
recall curve. Precision and recall are two different measures based on the number of TP,
FN and FP of the predictions. Precision can defined as
Precision =
TP
TP + FP ,
(3.16)
and it measures how precise the model was in its’ prediction. In other words it says
something about how many of the predictions that were correct out of the total possible
predictions. A precision score of 1.0 would mean that all the predicted pixels belonged to
the positive class. It does not reveal anything about the number false negatives. This is
what the recall is for,
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.17)
measuring how large the amount of true positives was compared to the total amount
of available positive predictions. It does not reveal anything about how many of these
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
20
==PAGE:27==
predictions that were false positives. A recall of 1.0 means that all positive pixels were
detected, but this might include false positives.
Figure 3.8: An illustration of a precision­recall curve
The precision and recall are inversely proportional and their values depends on the thresh­
old for counting something as a positive. The rounding of the U­Net sigmoid activated
output, equation (3.1), is done by assigning a landslide label to a pixel if the model pre­
dicted the pixel value > 0.5. By varying this threshold, T, for what is regarded as being
a positive prediction and computing the precision and recall with each new threshold, a
so­called precision­recall curve can be obtained, sketched in Figure 3.8. The curve goes
from counting every prediction as positive T ⪆0, giving a recall≈1 and a low precision,
to counting almost no predictions as positive T ≈1 where recall is low and precision≈1.
Figure 3.8 illustrates a theoretical perfect model in purple, the no­skill model, and an ex­
ample model which is somewhere in between. The no­skill model has no predictive power,
randomly assigning classes to samples. The value of the no­skill model depends on the
class imbalance in the data­set, in the sketch the no­skill model corresponds to a data­set
where there is an equal amount of positive and negative samples. The perfect model has
perfect predictive power and is not achievable in real life applications. Good models will
look like the red curve in the sketch, and the closer they are to a perfect model the better.
One way of summarising the quality of the precision­recall curve is to compute the area
under the curve (AUC), which should become larger as the predictions improve.
3.4
Implemented U­Net architecture
The architecture used in this project, seen in Figure 3.9, is a simplified version of the
original U­Net implementation, seen in Figure 3.4 in Section 3.1.2. This simplified archi­
tecture comes from Cordeiro, 2020, who used it for segmenting clouds in optical satellite
data. The input is represented by the green rectangle on the top left and has the spatial
dimensions (x, y). Each of the blue rectangles are feature maps, the number above the
rectangle denotes the number of feature maps in that layer. The architecture is not as
deep as the original implementation of the U­Net. The blue arrows represents convo­
lutions, the orange arrows represent max­pooling and the black arrows are transposed
convolutions. The dashed blue arrows, going across the ”U”, are responsible for passing
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.9: A simplified version of the U­Net architecture, which is the architecture used
in the project. Image credits: Cordeiro, 2020
on higher resolution features to the expanding part of the network. The ”In_channels”
on the left side of the Figure is the input image, with some number of channels and on
the right side the output is called ”Out_channels”. The output in this implementation has
the same spatial dimensions as the original input, but with only 1 channel. The contract­
ing and expanding parts, a terminology mentioned in Section 3.1.2 is here arranged into
larger blocks, seen as larger grey and green blocks in Figure 3.9, and are called contract­
ing blocks and expanding blocks respectively. They manage a collection of operations,
a convenient abstraction for implementation purposes. The specific settings used in the
implementation are summarised below. All terminology is introduced in Sections 3.1.1
and 3.2.5.
Contracting block:
• Convolution: 3 × 3 −kernel, padding = 3, stride = 1
• Batch normalisation
• ReLU Activation
• Convolution: 3 × 3 −kernel, padding = 1, stride = 1
• Batch normalisation:
• ReLU Activation
• Max­pool: 3 × 3 −kernel, padding = 1, stride = 2
Expanding block:
• Convolution: 3 × 3 −kernel, padding = 3, stride = 1
• Batch normalisation
• ReLU Activation
• Convolution: 3 × 3 −kernel, padding = 1, stride = 1
• Batch normalisation
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
22
==PAGE:29==
• ReLU Activation
• Transpose convolution: 3 × 3 −kernel, padding = 1, stride = 2
3.4.1
Implemented loss function
The Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) loss function, described in Section 3.2, was chosen
to measure the performance of the U­Net models. In terms of pixels, the total area of
landslides is only a small fraction compared to the total area of the slopes on which they
occur. This area imbalance is normally referred to as a ”class­imbalance”, as we would
expect the network to classify most pixels to be background (non­landslide) pixels and a
few to be landslide­pixels. Due to this data­set imbalance the BCE function was called
with positive weights for the landslide pixels to avoid the BCE function favouring predicting
everything as background. The positive weight parameter for the BCE function is the
inverse of the ratio number reported later in Table 5.2.
The models operated on the data­set in mini­batches, introduced in Section 3.2.5 with a
batch size of 190 samples per mini­batch. The optimisation of the weights in the network
was carried out using the Adam­ or the AdamW­optimisers, introduced in Section 3.2.3.
Some models were trained with static learning rates and other with adaptive learning rate,
implemented through cosine annealing. The choices are reported in connection with the
results in chapter 6.
3.4.2
Training process summary
All concepts in the chapter can be put together in the training loop, seen in Figure 3.10,
with the specific choices for optimiser and loss function shown. The figure illustrates how
the full data set is split into a training and validation and fed into the data­loader which
manages the mini­batches. The inner part of the Figure is a loop over all batches and
when the model has seen all the batches in the training data­set, for each mini­batch in
the training data­set the weights are updated. After seeing all of the training data, the
current performance is evaluated by looping over the mini­batches in the validation data­
set. The optimisers (Adam or AdamW) are only enabled in the training phase, meaning
that the weights are only updated in this phase. The time it takes to visit all mini­batches
of the training and the validations data­set is denoted an epoch. After 1 epoch has passed
the average epoch performance is evaluated, the learning rate can be updated through
equation 3.13 if this is enabled and statistics for monitoring the network performance can
be saved or plotted. The network is trained by repeating this process for several epochs.
Figure 3.10: A simplified overview of the elements of training process and the execution
order.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
23
==PAGE:30==
4
Data
This section describes the data used for this project. Various sources of data were used,
namely SAR data to derive the coherence estimates and and auxiliary data, namely a
Digital Elevation Model, a ocean­mask, etc. As detailed in Section 3.2.4, a data­set of
known landslides and corresponding segmentations are required to train CNNs. Since
such a data­set is not available for Greenland, a publicly available landslide inventory
was used (Ji et al., 2020), as detailed in Section 4.2.4 and in Chapter 5. All geographical
data used in the project was projected into the NSIDC Sea Ice Polar Stereographic North
(EPSG:3413) projection to reduce the amount of geometric distortion.
4.1
SAR data
The prime data source of the project is the Synthetic Aperture Radar data obtained by the
Sentinel­1 satellite constellation. The two Sentinel­1 satellites orbits the Earth passing
over a given point on ground approximately every 6th day. In the following section first
presents some specifics of the satellite constellation along with the Single Look Complex
(SLC) data format which is used in interferometric applications. Hereafter the auxiliary
data sources are presented and finally some details about landslides in Greenland.
4.1.1
The Sentinel­1 satellite
The Sentinel­1 satellites, Sentinel­1A and Sentinel­1B, orbits the Earth at ≈693 km al­
titude each with a repeat cycle of 12 days and carries a C­Band SAR. Sentinel­1A was
sent into orbit on April 3rd 2014 and Sentinel­1B on the 25th of April 2016, each with an
expected lifetime of seven years. The details of the SAR instrument are summarised in
Table 4.1. The Sentinel­1 SAR supports different electromagnetic polarisation settings,
both single polarisations: horisontal send, horisontal receive (HH) and vertical send, ver­
tical receive (VV). It also supports dual polarisation HV or VH. Here it is only HH which is
relevant.
The SAR operates at different acquisition modes and here the relevant mode is the In­
terferometric Wide Swath (IW) mode, which has a 250 km swath and 5 × 20 m spatial
resolution. The IW mode uses a specific ScanSAR mode called Terrain Observation with
Progressive Scan (TOPS) mode. This special scanning pattern is illustrated in Figure
4.1, where it is seen how the SAR scans the ground as the satellite platform moves in
the azimuth direction. The SAR sweeps its’ sensor in the positive azimuth direction to
generate Burst 1 in Swath 1, where after it scans Burst 1 in Swath 2, as seen in Figure
4.1. When the first bursts of all three swaths have been acquired the SAR goes on to
Centre frequency
5.405[GHz]
Look direction
Right (relative to flight direction)
Incidence angle range
20 deg −46 deg
Resolution (range × azimuth)
2.7 × 22 [m]; 3.5 × 22 [m]
Pixel spacing (range × azimuth)
2.3 × 14.1 [m]
Table 4.1:
Some of the relevant parameters characterising the Sentinel­1 aperture.
Source: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-1-sar/sar-instrument
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
24
==PAGE:31==
acquire the second bursts. There is some overlap between the bursts and swaths which
is accounted for in the InSAR processor, described in Section 2.3.3.
Figure 4.1: The burst structure of a Sentinel­1 SLC is due to the TOPS scanning mode
depicted in this image. (Image credit: Merryman Boncori, 2019)
The satellites both acquire data on descending, north to south, and ascending orbits,
south to north. Ascending and descending orbits have different viewing geometries and
has to be treated accordingly. The project was limited to the use of ascending orbits, as
these are the only ones available during the main landslide event.
4.1.2
Single Look Complex
The data acquired from the Sentinel­1 satellites comes in different processing levels and
the Single Look Complex (SLC) data is a level­1 product, necessary for InSAR processing.
The data consists of three swaths each with about 9 bursts in each, and as the name
suggests the SLC data consist of complex numbers, i.e. it has a phase and an amplitude.
The SLC data was obtained through the Alaska SAR Facility (ASF), which makes querying
and searching for Sentinel­1 easy (DAAC, n.d.). The data is ordered into frame and path
numbers, such that the Sentinel­1 acquisitions can be identified by a specific frame and
path number. There area of interest is illustrated in Figure 4.2, which is a larger area
on the west coast of Greenland. Here especially path 90 and frame 232 is of particular
interest as it us in this frame covers the main landslide. The frame numbering changes
a little over time, such that the best corresponding frame covering the east landslide is
231, see Table 4.2. The burst and swath structure resulting from the TOPS mode is seen
illustrated in red boxes. The most relevant part of the area in the frame is swath 2, as
swath 1 and 3 are mainly covering the ocean and the Greenland ice sheet respectively.
All 9 bursts of swath 2 was used to get as many slopes as possible. Due to the diagonal
orientation of the swaths some parts of the formed coherence sticks outside swath 2, and
are not considered and corresponding some values are missing in the other side.
As explained in detail in the following Chapter 5, the simulations involved the use of var­
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.2: The coherence data based on the 15/06/17 and 21/06/17 SAR acquisitions
are plotted on top of a regular map. The details of the exact geographical data extent
along with the orbit direction, path and frame number are shown as well.
ious SAR acquisitions, summarised in Table 4.2. The data listed in the Table is struc­
tured into the pairs used to from interferograms, all being 6­day pairs, obtained by pairing
Sentinel­1A and 1B acquisitions. The ID 1 SAR pair, also called acquisition (1), was se­
lected as it resulted in wide­spread decorrelation in the area of interest, which can be used
for landslides simulations, as explained in Section 5.1.4. Acquisition (2) spans the east
landslide, see Figure 4.3, and was used to test the quality of the models. Acquisition (3)
was used as it contains the main landslide, see Figure 2.6, and was also useful to provide
a coherence context for the simulations, further described in Section 5.1.
ID
Acquisition date (DD/MM/YY)
Beam mode
Path
Frame
Flight direction
Scene name
1
01/10/16
IW
90
231
Ascending
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20160110T204727_20160110T204754_009437_00DAD1_E620
1
11/11/16
IW
90
231
Ascending
S1B_IW_SLC__1SSH_20161111T204657_20161111T204724_002916_004F24_1185
2
11/11/16
IW
90
231
Ascending
S1B_IW_SLC__1SSH_20161111T204657_20161111T204724_002916_004F24_1185
2
17/11/16
IW
90
231
Ascending
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20161117T204739_20161117T204806_013987_01688C_D4A7
3
15/06/17
IW
90
232
Ascending
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20170615T204657_20170615T204724_006066_00AA6E_0C9D
3
21/06/17
IW
90
232
Ascending
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDH_20170621T204740_20170621T204807_017137_01C922_FB4D
Table 4.2: The list of SLC acquisitions used to form interferometric pairs. The pairs are
grouped by the ID in the first column. The path and frame columns refers to the path and
frame number given in the Alaska SAR Facility data search application.
As explained in Section 2.3.3 the SLC’s can be combined into an interferogram and the
coherence magnitude and wrapped interferometric phase can be derived. Theses were
projected into the WGS 84 / NSIDC Sea Ice Polar Stereographic North (EPSG:3413)
coordinate reference system. The final resolution of the data is (32 × 32) [m].
4.2
Auxiliary data
The auxiliary data in this project serves two purposes, first some auxiliary data sources
like Digital Elevation Models (DEM) and orbit parameters are needed in the interferogram
formation but secondly, auxiliary data was used as input to the U­Net and in the simu­
lation process, described in Section 5.1. While the orbit data is only used in the InSAR
processing, the DEM was also used as input in the modelling setup. All auxiliary map
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: The coherence images formed from the SAR acquisitions (1), (2) and (3),
shown with stereographic coordinates.
data mentioned here was interpolated to the same grid as the coherence map, shown in
Figure 4.2, using a bicubic interpolation scheme implemented through the RegularGrid­
Interpolator() function from the open­source python library scipy.
4.2.1
Arctic Digital Elevation Model (DEM)
The Arctic Digital Elevation Model (DEM) was an initiative made during the two year U.S.
Chairmanship in the Arctic council, aiming to make a high resolution DEM of the entire
arctic region. The ArcticDEM was initiated in 2015 and ended in 2017, where­after the
DEM was no longer updated. Most of the data was created with imagery from the optical
imaging satellites WorldView­1, WorldView­2, and WorldView­3 operated by DigitalGlobe,
now a part of Maxar techonologies. The DEM data is provided in both tiles, which are
temporal averages of the DEM over a given area, and in stripmaps which is updated
many times during the two year period. The tiles are more convenient in this project as
they have less missing values and covers larger areas. The final release of the DEM,
release version 7, is used. The ArcticDEM comes in 2­meter resolution but a reduced
(32 × 32) meter resolution version of the ArcticDEM was used, this is sufficient given the
spatial resolution of interferograms derived from Sentinel­1 SLC products. The elevation
units of the ArcticDEM is in meters referenced to the WGS­84 ellipsoid and comes in the
NSIDC Sea Ice Polar Stereographic North (EPSG:3413) projection. The DEM was used
to derive slope and aspect angle maps, useful in the analysis and selection of valid data
in the area of interest.
A DEM was prepared covering the general area based on stitching together Arctic DEM
(32 × 32) meter mosaics and filling missing values with other DEM’s.
4.2.2
Ice and Ocean Masks
The ocean mask was obtained through the MEaSUREs Greenland Ice Mapping Project
(GIMP) (Howat et al., 2014), which can be downloaded from https://nsidc.org/data/NSIDC-
0714/versions/1. The project provides a complete ocean and ice mask for the whole of
Greenland and was created based on panchromatic band imagery data from the USGS
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
27
==PAGE:34==
Landsat 7 and the SAR amplitude image data from the Canadian Space Agency’s RADARSAT­
1 obtained between July 1999 and 30 September 2001. The provided (30 × 30) meter
resolution ocean mask was interpolated onto the coherence data grid and used to mask
out the areas in the ocean.
For the ice masking the PROMICE ice extent product was used created by Citterio and
Ahlstrøm, 2013. It is a data product offered by The Geological Survey of Denmark (GEUS),
and can be found at http://www.promice.org/PromiceDataPortal/#Iceextent. The mask is
derived from aerophotogrammetric maps made in the mid 1980’s and the resolution used
in this project is 100 × 100 meters.
4.2.3
R­index
Notti et al. (2014) introduced the R­index (RI) a range­index which is a ratio between
the slant range distance to a target and the ground range distance, which the topological
effects of layover and shadowing depend on, mentioned in Section 2.1. RI is useful for
filtering out places in the area of interest which for topological reasons cannot be sensed
or are simply too distorted. The RI can be computed from the DEM derived slope and
aspect angles and the LOS parameters of the satellite. Notti et al. (2014) defined RI as
RI = −sin [(S sin(A + ω)) −α] · Sh · L
(4.1)
Where S is the slope, A is the aspect angle, ω = 4.712 −θ where θ is the azimuth,
α is the incidence angle. Sh is 0 if the area is in shadow and otherwise 1 and L is 0
if area is in layover and otherwise 1. Notti et al. (2014) computes Sh and L based on
shadow models, found in Geographical Information System (GIS) software. RI can take
on negative values and up to 1, values below 0 are severely affected by the topological
effects layover, foreshortening, and shadowing.
4.2.4
The Bijie landslide data­set
Very few larger data­sets of landslides exists, especially data­sets with geometric informa­
tion about the shape and size of a given landslide. Ji et al., 2020 made The Bijie landslide
dataset, consisting of 770 samples of landslides in Bijie city in the Guizhou province, and
made it publicly available through their university website http://gpcv.whu.edu.cn/data/.
Bijie city is an area which is particularly landslide­prone due to unstable geology and high
yearly rainfall. The data­set includes several different types of landslides detected through
high resolution optical imagery and labelled by geologists. Each landslide in the data­set
is represented with an optical image, with a 0.2×0.2 meters resolution, a DEM of the same
area, with 2 × 2 meter resolution and a binary mask classifying each pixel in the image as
either landslide or background. This data­base of validated landslides is available through
their university website http://gpcv.whu.edu.cn/data/. It was only the landslide masks that
were used in this thesis as these provided a set of convex polygons, that represents the
shape variability of real landslides.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.4: Eight samples of the polygons from the Bijie landslide data set.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
29
==PAGE:36==
5
Method
This chapter introduces the method used to synthesise landslides in real coherence im­
agery and how this synthesized data is organised into a data­set. The chapter first in­
troduces how the landslides are simulated, then goes on to describe how the synthetic
data­set is structured to be compatible with machine learning methods.
5.1
Landslide simulation approach
As the U­Net based model should in theory be able to approach human­like performance
for general feature detection in imagery, the creation of the simulations was guided by dis­
secting the information needed for a human operator to detect the Karrat Fjord landslides
in coherence imagery.
The basic idea behind the simulations is to place a polygon from the Bijie landslide data­
set, mentioned in Section 4.2.4, on a slope in a coherence magnitude image and fill it
with low coherence values. The rationale is that a catastrophic landslide, such as that
of the 2017 Karrat fjord event, will cause a localised loss of coherence (a ”hole”), when
considering an image before and after the event, described in section 2.3.1.
The Greenland environment is barren and has little vegetation at the latitudes consid­
ered, supported by Figure 2.5, where there are no occurrences of vegetation. The main
categories of land cover is ice, snow, gravel, rocks and ocean. This is an important ob­
servation as it reduces the sources of loss of coherence to snow and ice, water bodies,
shadowing and ground motion, see Section 2.1 for details. The latter is what we are after
and by designing the data­set in a specific way, the model will learn to find localised losses
of coherence corresponding to landslides of a certain size. This is explained further in the
following sections.
5.1.1
Simulation procedure overview
Figure 5.1 shows the simulation process. The red boxes show the components needed
for the actual landslide simulation: a polygon and some simulated values to place inside
the polygon. The next step is to place each polygon on a given slope in either the phase or
coherence image, based on SAR acquisition (3), covering the area of interest described in
Section 4.1.2. The coherence based on SAR acquisition (3) had mostly coherent slopes,
a necessity to provide a clear contrast between slope and landslide, as seen in Figure
2.6.
To find out what exact location the landslide should have, a set of locations in the back­
ground map are selected in the valid landslide location box. The valid location selection
process involves using terrain parameters, ice and ocean masks to assign the most rea­
sonable locations for a landslide to occur in the background image, as detailed in Section
5.1.2. When a landslide has been simulated, and a location has been assigned to that
landslide simulation, a polygon filled with simulated coherence and/or phase values is
placed in the background image, based on SAR acquisition (3). Finally, the area around
the landslide is cropped to make a (256×256) image patch with a landslide in it. Note that
there is no DEM landslide simulator but a subset of the DEM, corresponding to the coher­
ence patch, is also cropped out, the reason for this is elaborated in Section 5.2.1. Further
details of the simulation process are described in the following Subsections 5.1.2­5.1.4
and the resulting data­sets are summarised in Section 5.1.5.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.1: This chart describes the landslide simulation process. The left red boxes are
showing the components necessary for simulating a landslide pattern: a polygon shape
and a simulator responsible for the values inside the polygon. The yellow boxes on the
right consist of the background map, in which the landslide simulation should be placed
and the valid landslide locations used for finding a reasonable location for the landslide.
The green boxes are the last steps of the simulation process resulting in a landslide image
patch.
5.1.2
Positioning landslides
The positioning of the landslides in the natural environment is a crucial step as there are
certain places that landslides would not happen, or would not be detectable in coherence
imagery. Also landslide susceptibility maps, like the ones presented in Althuwaynee et al.
(2012), shows that landslides have a higher chance of occurring some places than others.
The most important factors are altitude, slope, orientation of the terrain, natural drainage,
surface geology, tectonic activity and weather. Svennevig et al. (2020) also speculate that
permafrost degradation can be a cause specific to Greenland. It was decided to limit the
location of the simulated landslides based on ocean­ and ice/snow­masks, altitude, slope,
aspect and RI, equation 4.1, to avoid the most obvious pitfalls. These choices restricts
the positioning of the landslides in the following ways:
Ocean mask : The ocean mask described in Section 4.2.2 was used to avoid placing
landslides on the surface of the water.
Ice/snow mask : The ice/snow mask described in Section 4.2.2 was used as it is as­
sumed the decorrelation resulting from a landslide event would be indistinguishable
from the decorrelation already present as a result of the static bodies ice or snow,
see Section 2.3.1. The ice/snow mask was smoothed to avoid small ice/snow free
areas at high altitudes, too small to accommodate a landslide.
Slope angle : Since catastrophic landslides do not occur on flat stretches of terrain the
valid locations for landslides were limited to be areas with a slope > 15°. The slope
was derived from the DEM.
Aspect angle : To constrain the problem to slopes with similar geometry as Karrat Fjord,
only slopes with aspect angles between [157.5°; 247.5°] corresponding to south and
southwest facing slopes. This choice was based on the average aspect angle of
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
31
==PAGE:38==
slope in Karrat Fjord where the real landslides occurred. The aspect was derived
from the DEM.
Altitude : The most dangerous landslides, especially the tsunamigenic ones, would not
be landslides occurring very close to the shore ­ the landslide locations were all
places > 50 meters above the ocean surface.
RI : To reduce the areas affected by topological distortions, as described in Section 2.1,
only areas with 0.05 ≥RI ≤0.95 was kept.
These conditions result in the the valid landslide locations seen in Figure 5.2. The parts of
the polygons that overlapped with ocean or ice were removed, but in practice it was difficult
to completely avoid placing landslides such that they did not overlap already decorrelated
areas, especially the decorrelated areas which were not caught by the ocean, ice and RI
masks.
Figure 5.2: Shows the valid locations in white, and the invalid locations as black on the left,
and the corresponding coherence image (3) on the right, both given with stereographic
coordinates.
5.1.3
Resizing landslides
The sizes of landslides naturally follows a power law distribution, as described in Stark
and Hovius (2001), which is also the case for the sizes of the landslide polygons found
in the Bijie landslide data­set. As it is preferable to have a model that is equally likely
to predict a small and a large landslide the size distribution had to be changed. Each
polygon from the Bijie landslide data­set, described in Section 4.2.4, was resized into
various sizes between [0.2; 4.2][km2], a limit chosen based on the order of magnitude of
the apparent area of the main and east landslide events and supported by the findings
in Stark and Hovius (2001). To change the size distributions the resized polygons were
filtered by sub­sampling the smallest and medium sized polygons, and adding more larger
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
32
==PAGE:39==
polygons. The resulting size distribution, is shown in the right panel of Figure 5.3, with
the original in the left panel. Resizing the smallest landslides resulted in pixelated edges,
which was remedied by smoothing the polygons and then rounding them back into into
discrete values of 0’s and 1’s. The resized polygons was placed at the found positions,
described in Section 5.1.2.
Figure 5.3: The area distribution of the polygon shapes, before resizing on the left and
after resizing on the right.
5.1.4
Coherence and phase simulators
The coherence and phase simulators are responsible for making the contents of the land­
slide polygons meaningful by encoding a realistic landslide pattern into the polygon. Two
of the simulators involves fitting theoretical probability distributions to observations, for
general details on probability distributions see Blitzstein and Hwang (2014), and the third
simulator uses SAR acquisition (1). The two first simulators only simulate coherence,
while the latter is capable of simulating both coherence and phase values. The coher­
ence simulation models can be separated into two main categories: parametric and semi­
parametric models. The goal of the coherence simulation models is to simulate the sam­
ple coherence, equation 2.8, of areas with a underlying 0­coherence, since a catastrophic
landslide results in total loss of coherence. Although closed form expressions for the prob­
ability distribution of the sample coherence magnitude are available in literature (Touzi et
al., 1999)[equation 4], they depend on the true underlying coherence, which would be
0, and on the number of averaged independent samples (looks). The latter depends on
the specific implementation of the multi­looking filters in the InSAR processor, which are
not known in detail in the case of a commercial software tool. The independent number
of looks also depends on the slope of the terrain, since this affects the ground resolu­
tion in both range and azimuth. It was therefore decided to investigate different empirical
approaches to derive the probability distribution of the sample coherence. These are
detailed in the following.
Weibull Probability Distribution Function (parametric):
A Weibull Probability Distri­
bution Function (PDF) was fitted to a histogram of pixel values found inside a (600 × 600)
coherence image patch of the ocean, using the scipy software library implementation of
the Weibull probability distribution function, found here. The resulting distribution function
can be seen in the left panel of Figure 5.4. The area is a part of ocean found within the
area of interest in Figure 4.2. The Weibull PDF was chosen as the fit had a lower sum of
squared errors compared to other relevant theoretical distributions, as seen in the right
panel of Figure 5.4. Samples were drawn from the Weibull PDF without any spatial cor­
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
33
==PAGE:40==
relation, such that each landslide pixel was independent and identically distributed. The
spatial correlation in the Weibull model is compared to the spatial correlation of the real
ocean can be seen in Figure 5.5. This shows that the Weibull model has no correlation
beyond lag 0, while the real ocean has some correlation in both azimuth and range. This
correlation is introduced by the InSAR processor and cannot be removed but should be
kept in mind for interpretation of the results. The Weibull PDF has a shape parameter
α = 2.859, location parameter loc = −0.007 and a scale parameter scale = 0.373. In this
approach, the effects of terrain slope on the spatial correlation of the sample coherence,
are neglected.
(a) Weibull fitted PDF to the distribution of an
ocean patch
(b) The Sum of Squared Errors (SSE) of some
other candidate PDF’s fitted to the ocean coher­
ence magnitude distribution
Figure 5.4
Figure 5.5: The auto­correlation in the azimuth (left) and range direction (right) of the
Weibull and Gamma models and the ocean patch which the models are based on, called
”real” in the plot.
Gamma Probability Distribution Function (parametric):
A Gamma PDF was fitted to
the histogram of the coherence pixels inside the main landslide, using the scipy software
library implementation of the Gamma PDF, found here. The resulting distribution is seen
in Figure 5.6. Only the main landslide was used as it contained a higher number of pixels,
making the fit more robust, while also reserving the east landslide for testing purposes.
As in the Weibull case the Gamma model does not introduce spatial correlation and the
landslide pixels generated in this way are independent and identically distributed. The
spatial auto­correlation of the Gamma model is also shown in Figure 5.5, and is totally
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
34
==PAGE:41==
uncorrelated beyond lag 0 as expected. The Gamma PDF has a shape parameter α =
45.347, a location parameter loc = −0.520 and a scale parameter scale = 0.010. In this
approach, the effects of terrain slope on the spatial correlation of the sample coherence,
are neglected.
(a) Gamma fitted PDF to the distribution of the
main landslide
(b) The Sum of Squared Errors (SSE) of some
other candidate PDF’s fitted to the coherence
magnitude distribution of the main landslide
Figure 5.6
Long temporal baseline coherence (semi­parametric):
This simulation model is based
on computing a coherence map over the area of interest, with a very long temporal base­
line, resulting in a coherence image where almost everything is decorrelated. The co­
herence was formed based on SAR acquisition (1), see Table 4.2. As the coherence
images from SAR acquisitions (1) and (3) are interpolated to the same grid, it is possible
to transfer coherence from long temporal baseline coherence image (1) to the background
coherence image (3). This model has the benefit that the geometric distortions, introduced
from sensing the the terrain and from the averaging in the commercial InSAR processor,
will be encoded in the loss of coherence signal. Similarly, the phase simulator uses the in­
terferometric phase obtained from the SAR acquisition (1), which can then be transferred
to the InSAR phase background image from acquisition (3). The decorrelation simulated
by this model was compared to the decorrelation of the main Karrat Fjord landslide. This
was done by taking the coherence image (1) pixels found inside the shape of the main
landslide and compare them to the pixels found inside the real main landslide, found in
coherence image (3). The histogram of the simulated landslide decorrelation is shown
together with the histogram of the main landslide in Figure 5.7, revealing that the sim­
ulated pixels have higher values on average. Therefore the simulations were shifted by
0.02, scaled by 0.91 and then power transformed between [0.95; 1.1], making the simulated
landslide distributions vary around the true main landslide distribution. Formally:
Gd(κ)′ = {Gd(α, loc, scale) · 0.91 + 0.02}κ ,
κ = [0.95; 1.1]
(5.1)
Where Gd is the original distribution of the decorrelated slope pixels inside the main land­
slide polygon with the parameters α = 33.748, loc = −0.461, scale = 0.024 and Gd(κ)′ is
the scaled version as a function of κ. The right panel of Figure 5.7 illustrates the bound­
ing distributions obtained by power transforming Gd(α, loc, scale) with 0.95 and 1.1. The
phase values were not transformed as it was unclear how to correctly implement the cor­
responding phase transformation.
Comparing the spatial correlation of the main landslide to the corresponding area of sim­
ulated decorrelation, was done by computing the auto­correlation functions in the range
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
35
==PAGE:42==
and azimuth directions. The auto­correlation functions are plotted in Figure 5.8, showing
high correspondence between the real and simulated spatial correlations in both range
and azimuth directions. The 95% confidence interval cones suggests that the correlations
happening before lag 6 in range and lag 5 in azimuth are very likely to be real correlations
and not the result of statistical coincidence.
Figure 5.7: The left panel: The histogram of the landslide pixels generated by the decorre­
lated coherence map model in blue and the Main Karrat landslide pixel values in orange.
The fitted curves was found by comparing to other relevant PDF’s as in the Weibull and
Gamma cases. The right panel: blue and green shows the lower and upper limits for
the scaling done on the decorrelated slope pixels to make them vary around the known
landslide distribution.
Figure 5.8: The auto­correlation function with confidence intervals of the landslide pixels
generated by the long temporal baseline coherence model in blue and the main landslide
in orange. The left plot shows the auto­correlation in the range direction and the right plot
shows the auto­correlation in the azimuth direction.
5.1.5
Overview of synthetic data­sets
Four different synthetic data­set types were created based on the simulation process de­
scribed above, each exploring the importance of different aspects of the simulation. The
actual assembly of the data­sets are described in Section 5.2. To keep track of the dif­
ferent data­set types, a naming convention is introduced. The naming is constructed as
follows: number of input channels + the simulation model used + the acquisition month
of the data set. For an example 2WeibullJune summarises the fact that the data­set con­
tained two input data types: coherence, and the DEM, the simulator was the Weibull
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
36
==PAGE:43==
simulator, and the background image was acquired in June, i.e. SAR acquisition (3). The
naming and settings of all four data­sets are summarised in Table 5.1. All of the data­sets
used the coherence magnitude and the DEM, and the final 3DecorrJune also included the
phase as an input.
Simulation ID
Background image
(SAR pair ID)
Number of
input channels
Coherence simulator model
(shape, location, scale)
Phase simulator model
2WeibullJune
3
2
W(2.859, −0.007, 0.373)
­
2GammaJune
3
2
G(45.347, −0.520, 0.010)
­
2DecorrJune
3
2
Coherence(SAR acq. (1)) ∼Gd(κ)’
­
3DecorrJune
3
3
Coherence(SAR acq. (1)) ∼Gd(κ)’
Phase(SAR acq. (1))
Table 5.1: Overview of the different synthetic data­sets developed in this project. W(...) is
the Weibull distribution, G(...) is the Gamma distribution and Gd(κ)’ is the scaled Gamma
distribution, as explained in Section 5.1.4.
It should be noted that the U­Net models trained on the respective data­sets will inherit
the same name as the data­set as they are closely related, the context should make it
clear whether it is the model or the data­set that is being addressed.
5.2
Data­set handling for machine learning
The process described in the prior section, taking a polygon, simulating a landslide pattern
inside the polygon and cropping out a (256×256) subset of the full coherence background
image around it, results in what will be called a patch or a data sample. In short, a patch
is a (256×256) coherence, phase or DEM image with a landslide placed somewhere in it.
This section describes how these patches are organised into a complete data­set, which
can be used for training the U­Net model described in Section 3.1.2.
5.2.1
Input and output channels
The input for the original U­Net implementation was grey­scale images, described in Ron­
neberger et al. (2015). The information in images is given in several colour channels, 1
channel for grey­scale images and 3 channels for normal colour images: red, green and
blue. Here the notion of a channel is adopted, but rather than referring to a specific colour,
the channels refers to a specific source of data. The U­Net models used in this project
requires the input to be in the form of images with at least one channel, corresponding to
matrices of dimensions N × M × C, where N is the number of rows, M is the number of
columns and C is the number of channels. The number of channels in the input image
patch then determines the amount of information that is available to the U­Net model.
The term image is misleading (coherence, phase and DEM data does not make up an
image in the traditional sense of the word), but convenient terminology and will be used
throughout.
As described in the beginning of Section 5.1 there are various factors that enables a hu­
man operator to classify a localised loss of coherence as a landslide. In this regard the
operator will often dissect information such as coherence maps, ground motion measure­
ments, optical images, land­cover maps, past images of the slope and the the terrain. In
contrast to human operators neural networks can extract information from the input chan­
nels that might not be obvious, as it can look for very complicated 2D patterns across
various sources of information, but its access to information will be more limited than in
the case of the operator. It was decided to work with combinations of up to three input
channels for the network:
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
37
==PAGE:44==
Coherence magnitude : Coherence is the fundamental data source of the project and
provides information about texture changes of the sensed surface. The coherence
images gives the most obvious landslide signals, manifested as spatially localised
losses of coherence.
Interferometric phase : The wrapped interferometric phase contains information about
ground motion of the observed surface. Although the phase is relatively noisy the U­
Net model might be able to extract information the phase, aiding it in the distinction
between landslide and non­landslide pixels.
Digital Elevation Model : The DEM provides information about the terrain. The DEM
along with derived products such as slope, aspect and curvature are considered to
be important in predicting landslides, as seen through the work of Althuwaynee et
al. (2012), Ermini et al. (2005), Ercanoglu and Gokceoglu (2002) and Catani et al.
(2013) to name a few. Notice that no DEM landslide simulator has been developed
and so the DEM input channel will be a static context of the observed surface. The
reasoning for using the unchanged DEM as an input channel is that it provides a
terrain context, which can be exploited to learn that landslides occurs in certain
parts of the slopes.
The developed U­Net models either takes in input containing the coherence magnitude
and the DEM or all three of the above data sources. In the latter case, the input is organ­
ised such that the network is presented to a (256 × 256) simulated landslide coherence
patch in the first image channel, a (256 × 256) simulated landslide phase patch in the
second channel and a (256 × 256) static DEM patch in the third channel. This results
in a 3­channel input ”image” or three dimensional matrix, made from stacking the coher­
ence, phase and DEM patches on top of each other obtain an input image with the shape
(256×256×3). Similarly the 2­channel input image would have the shape (256×256×2)
containing a coherence and a DEM patch.
In the context of binary semantic segmentation, as described in Section 3.1.2, the output
of the U­Net model is prediction of a binary mask with the shape 256 × 256 × 1, where
1’s indicates a landslide pixel and 0’s indicates everything else (the background). After
sigmoid activation, see equation (3.1), the raw output of the U­Net, however, will be a
decimal number between 0 and 1, so to obtain the discrete binary mask the raw output
has to be rounded, most commonly done by setting values > 0.5 to 1 and values ≤0.5 to 0
which is also the case here. The input and raw output of the model is shown illustrated in
Figure 5.9. The predicted output is not meaningful but an illustration of the segmentation
that the model outputs, before it is rounded to discrete values of 0’s or 1’s.
Figure 5.9: An example of the three input channels and an example ”raw” output of the
model, after sigmoid activation, see equation (3.1). The prediction here is not meaningful,
but used for illustration purposes.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
38
==PAGE:45==
5.2.2
Preprocessing
The common practice in the field of deep learning is to scale the input data to avoid ac­
cidentally putting more emphasis on a specific input. If one input channel is on a very
different numerical scale than the others it can result in the network penalising or reward­
ing that input channel more than the others. To avoid changing the original coherence
magnitude signal which lies in the range [0, 1], it was decided to normalise the remaining
inputs to this range also. The maximum DEM values are on the order of 103, three orders
of magnitude larger than the coherence, so the DEM was scaled by,
DEM ′ =
DEM −min(DEM)
max(DEM) −min(DEM)
(5.2)
to obtain DEM values between [0, 1]. For consistency, the same was done with the inter­
ferometric phase. In order to scale the interferometric phase while retaining the angular
information, the phase was split into its sine and cosine components and thereafter scaled,
φ′ =
[cos φ + 1
2
, sin φ + 1
2
]
(5.3)
The scaling factors centres the unit circle on (x, y) = (1, 1) with a radius of 0.5. This
has the drawback that it transforms a single source of information into two, the sine and
cosine in the parenthesis. Both terms were included as input channels, meaning that the
phase patch will in practice takes up two channels in addition to the coherence and DEM
channels. The resulting input for the U­Net model, when the phase is included is then
(256 × 256 × 4).
5.2.3
Training and validation split
By repeating the simulation process detailed in Section 5.1 for various positions on slopes
all over the area of interest, it is possible to generate a data­set made up of several ”im­
ages” with either 2 or 3 data channels (in practice 4, when using the phase as well). The
total data­set consists of 8000 input images. When simulating a data­set, the size of the
data­set essentially becomes a hyper­parameter in the modelling and will affect the per­
formance of the U­Net models. A too small data­set would allow the U­Net models to
overfit the data too easily. A too large data­set is practically inconvenient and since the
data is simulated the best way to increase the performance of the U­Net models would
be to improve the quality of the simulations rather the quantity.
To avoid motivating the U­Net models to always predict a landslide on a slope, only half
of the 8000 input images had landslide simulation in them, and the other half did not. To
assess the performance of the U­Net models it is also necessary to split the full data­set
into a training and a validation set. The latter is not used for training the weights of the
network, but only to evaluate how it performs on data it has never seen while training.
The full data­set was split into a training and validation part with a 75% to 25% ratio,
resulting in a training data­set with 6000 image patches, and a validation data­set with
2000 image patches. The training/validation split was reflected in both the choice of Bijie
landslide polygons, and the positioning in the background image, such the the training
and validation data­set did not contain the same polygons or the same slopes. Some
summary statistics of number of landslide events and their areas in the final synthetic
data­sets are seen in Table 5.2.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
39
==PAGE:46==
Total landslides
Area µ ± σ, [km2]
Area ratio
Training
11675
2.11 ± 0.10
0.03
Validation
5798
1.94 ± 0.81
0.01
Table 5.2: The area is the mean area of all landslides in the full data­set and their standard
deviation. The area ratio is computed by taking the total landslide area in the data­set and
diving by the the total area of data­set, i.e 256 × 256 × 8000.
5.2.4
Test data
Usually test data is the data used to make the final assessment of the quality of a model,
as the validation data is used to also tune the hyper­parameters of the network, for ex­
ample the learning­rate, see Section 3.2. Here the test data is the two real Karrat Fjord
landslides, used for evaluating the real landslide performance of the U­Net models. As
the goal of the project is to detect the two real landslides, there is special emphasis on
their performance on these two test landslides. The two landslides were segmented man­
ually and the target segmentation is shown in Figure 5.10. As the main landslide is used
to dictate some of the parameters in the simulator models, specifically the Weibull and
the long temporal baseline simulators, it is actually only the east landslide which is a true
test sample. A difference in noise levels between the coherence images, based on SAR
acquisitions (2) and (3), can be noticed by looking at Figure 4.3, where acquisition (2) is
darker than (3). Acquisition (2) containing the east landslide, is less coherent than the
coherence from acquisition (3), which contains the main landslide, meaning that it might
be harder to detect the east landslide in any case.
Figure 5.10: The two real landslides and their target segmentation masks. DEM is shown
for reference. Notice that the east landslide acquisition is more noisy.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
40
==PAGE:47==
6
Results
This section presents the results of four different models, obtained by training a U­Net
on each of the four data­sets, obtained from the the simulations presented in Table 5.1.
The section is structured into two main parts, first the results on the simulated landslides
are presented, followed by the results on the real landslides. The simulation part is a
precursor to the real landslide results presented in Section 6.2, which serves to check the
validity of the presented simulations.
6.1
Simulated landslides
The four models given in Table 5.1 were trained on their respective synthetic data­sets,
using the Adam optmiser mentioned in Section 3.2.3, with η = 10−3 and a batch­size of
190 for 120 epochs. Table 6.1 summarises the training process by reporting the learning
rates, total number of epochs and the validation loss and IoU accuracy for the different
models. The 2GammaJune model achieves the smallest validation loss after 120 epochs
and performs best in terms of IoU accuracy. The 3DecorrJune model is the overall worst,
with a loss 10 times higher than the other at epoch 120 and a IoU accuracy of 0.07.
Model
Validation Loss
Validation Accuracy (IoU)
Learning Rate
Epochs
2WeibullJune
0.2609
0.2508
1 × 10−3
120
2GammaJune
0.2497
0.2517
1 × 10−3
120
2DecorrJune
0.2664
0.2486
1 × 10−3
120
3DecorrJune
2.1688
0.0728
1 × 10−3
120
Table 6.1: Shows the validation loss and accuracy for the different models evaluated on
the synthetic data­set, along with the learning rate used during training. The last column
shows the total number of epochs.
The loss and IoU accuracy curves from the training process of the models are shown
in Figure 6.1. In the left panel the loss curves are shown in colour pairs: training loss is
transparent and validation loss is opaque. The right panels shows the IoU accuracy score
with the same colour coding. The models did not converge in training loss but seemed to
converge to some degree in the validation loss. The models also display spiky unstable
behaviour in the validation loss, while being more stable in training loss. The models did
not converge in IoU accuracy and similar to the loss curves, it seems that the IoU training
curves are more stable compared to the validation IoU, which has some large outliers.
In Figure 6.2 sample output from the models are shown. The first and second columns are
the input coherence and DEM for reference, notice that the phase input for the 3Decor­
rJune model has been omitted here. The raw predictions are shown in column 3 and the
predicted segmentation after thresholding are compared to the ground truth in column 4.
Column 4 compares the predictions and the ground truth in terms of true positives (TP),
false positives (FP), false negatives (FN) and true negatives (TN) as explained earlier
in Section 3.3.1. Note that the ground truth polygon changes colour depending on the
prediction. TP pixels are coloured yelllow, FN pixels are coloured green, FP pixels are
coloured red and TN pixels are coloured black. Given the performance metrics used here,
introduced in Section 3.3, the true negatives are not included in the colour bar.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.1: On the left the loss curves from the training of all the models are shown, and on
the right the corresponding IoU accuracy score. Validation and training curves are paired
in colours corresponding to the model they belong to. Opaque curves are the validation
scores and the transparent curves are training scores.
Qualitatively column 4 in Figure 6.2 shows that the 2GammaJune model has the lowest
amount of false positives (red pixels) and the 3DecorrJune model has the most. All four
models seem to classify the bulk of the ground truth pixels correctly (yellow), although the
first three models misses a small area in the top polygon (green).
Figure 6.3 shows the histograms computed of the predicted pixels from the validation sam­
ples in Figure 6.2 together with the histograms of the corresponding ground truth pixels.
For all four models, the distributions of the predicted pixels agree with the distributions of
the true pixels to a high degree. It can be observed that the different coherence magni­
tude distributions are non­zero distributions with slightly varying biases, but overall looks
similar. The phase distribution is non­uniform, as would be the case for 0­coherence, as
mentioned in section 2.2.
Except the 3DecorrJune model, the other models showed reasonable results on their
segmentations of the simulated landslides. Nevertheless, this does not reveal much about
how well suited the simulations are for learning the models to detect reals landslides.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
42
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.2: Prediction samples from the various synthetic validation data­sets, sum­
marised in Table 5.1. The output of the models are shown in the right­most column,
where TP = yellow, FP = red, FN = green and TN = black. The DEM is shown for
reference. Note that the phase input of the 3DecorrJune is not shown.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.3: Histograms of the predicted pixels and the true pixels in the simulated samples
shown in Figure 6.2
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
44
==PAGE:51==
6.2
Real landslides
The predicted segmentations of the main landslide and east landslide are presented in
in Figure 6.4 and 6.5. The most reasonable prediction is seen in row three of Figure
6.4, where the 2DecorrJune model correctly labels most of the main landslide pixels .
The 3DecorrJune model also predicts the main landslide pixels correctly, but wrongly
labelled all of the ocean pixels and some other decorrelated areas as landslide pixels.
The 2WeibullJune and the 2GammaJune models fails to predict the main landslide all
together. In the east landslide case, all models except the 3DecorrJune model fails to
predict the east landslide, but as with the main landslide, the 3DecorrJune model has
many false positives.
Figure 6.4: Model predictions on the main landslide event, at epoch 120. The output
column on the right shows TP = yellow, FP = red, FN = green and TN = black.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.5: Model prediction on the east landslide event, at epoch 120. The output column
on the right shows TP = yellow, FP = red, FN = green and TN = black.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
46
==PAGE:53==
6.2.1
Early stopping the models
Despite the predictions seen on the validation data­set in 6.1, it is clear that the none of the
models does a very good job at predicting both the real landslides. The following results
compares the four models real landslide performance during their training. This was done
by computing the real landslides IoU accuracy of each model after every finished epoch.
The resulting plots for the main and east landslides, can be seen in Figure 6.6. The left
plot shows the IoU per epoch for the main landslide and the corresponding plot for the
east landslide is seen on the right. The 2GammaJune and 2WeibullJune models scores
the lowest IoU scores in both cases, while the 2DecorrJune and 3DecorrJune scores the
highest.
Figure 6.6: The real landslide IoU accuracy scores for each model, computed at every
epoch epochs. The left plot is the IoU per epoch curves for the main landslide and the
right plot is the IoU per epoch curves for the main landslide
The scattered IoU scores and the trend­lines are summarised in Table 6.2. The table
confirms the plots in Figure 6.6 in terms of the superior performance of the 2DecorrJune
and 3DecorrJune models. The last columns 5­8 reveals that the highest IoU score ob­
tained during training was found by the 3DecorrJune model at epoch 101 when predicting
the main landslide. The 3DecorrJune model also obtained the best average IoU of both
landslide prediction in epoch 101. The 2DecorrJune obtained a similar performance, but
scored significantly lower in the east landslide case as seen in row 2 column 5. Column
4 reports the slope of the trend­line revealing that the 2DecorrJune and 3DecorrJune
are increasing in their ability to predict the real landslides, while the 2GammaJune and
2WeibullJune are slightly decreasing.
To further assess the real landslide prediction potential of the models, the models were ex­
tracted at the epoch where they obtained the best average IoU score on the real landslides
and a precision­recall curve, introduced in Section 3.3.2, was computed for each of these
”best” models. The resulting precision­recall curves are seen in Figure 6.7. The left plot
shows the precision­recall curves based on the pixel­wise predictions on the main land­
slide and the right plots shows the precision­recall curves based on the predictions on the
east landslide. In the case of the main landslide, all four models are better than randomly
guessing (the no­skill line), but the 2DecorrJune and 3DecorrJune models are superior by
comparison scoring 0.950 and 0.951 in AUC. This can be seen as the curves of the 2Decor­
rJune and 3DecorrJune models are closer to the theoretical best precision­recall curve,
described in Section 3.3.2. By comparison, all four models shows inferior performance
in the case of the east landslide, where the 2GammaJune and 2WeibullJune models are
reduced to randomly guessing, i.e. they lie on top of the no­skill line. The AUC of the
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
47
==PAGE:54==
Model ID
IoU, µ
IoU, σ
a, slope
IoU (min, max)
(epoch, epoch)
IoU, best average
epoch
2DecorJune (main)
0.098
0.058
1.3 × 10−3
(0.005, 0.228)
(110, 108)
0.128
104
2DecorJune (east)
0.012
0.010
0.1 × 10−3
(0.001, 0.045)
(110, 115)
3DecorJune (main)
0.105
0.058
1.0 × 10−3
(0.028, 0.259)
(3, 101)
0.169
101
3DecorJune (east)
0.029
0.019
0.2 × 10−3
(0.004, 0.080)
(12, 101)
2GammaJune (main)
0.027
0.006
−1.6 × 10−5
(0.020, 0.082)
(89, 96)
0.043
96
2GammaJune (east)
0.007
0.001
−1.4 × 10−6
(0.003, 0.013)
(61, 94)
2WeibullJune (main)
0.026
0.004
−5.7 × 10−5
(0.010, 0.042)
(97, 99)
0.025
99
2WeibullJune (east)
0.007
0.001
−6.8 × 10−6
(0.002, 0.010)
(97, 44)
Table 6.2: The summary of the IoU per epoch scores of the different models, which are
plotted in Figure 6.6. The first column gives the model IDs and the landslide that the
model tried to predict, the second gives the mean IoU of all epochs and column three
is the standard deviation of the different IoU epoch scores. Column four gives the slope
of the linear fit, shown in Figure 6.6. Columns five and six reports the mininmum and
maximum IoU values and in which epoch these were obtained. Columns seven and eight
shows the best average IoU of both landslides together and the epoch in which it was
obtained.
3DecorrJune model is reduced to 0.851, slightly lower than before, and the 2DecorrJune
is reduced significantly to an AUC of 0.225.
Figure 6.7: Pixel­wise precision recall curves for the ”best” versions of the four models.
The main landslide curves are shown in the plot on the left and the east landslide curves
are shown on the right. The area­under­the­curve (AUC) score is reported in the legend.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
48
==PAGE:55==
6.2.2
Improved models
Due to the results so far, it was decided that the information content in the 2WeibullJune
and 2GammaJune simulations was not sufficient to learn the models to detect real land­
slides. In contrast, the 2DecorrJune and 3DecorrJune simulations looked to represent
real landslides to a higher degree. The models in Figure 6.1 were not converged fully
after 120 epochs and for that reason it was decided to further train the models. Addition­
ally, it was decided to run the 2DecorrJune and the 3DecorrJune models with the AdamW
optimiser, equation (3.12) and cosine annealing, equation (3.13), as mentioned in Section
3.2.3, to reduce overfitting and explore the loss function space more efficiently. Training
the 2DecorrJune for 860 epochs and 3DecorrJune for 400 epochs with η = 10−3, α = 0.01,
Tmax = 10 and a batch­size of 190, the models converged in training loss. The left panel
of Figure 6.8 shows the training and validation loss curves of both models. Both the loss
and accuracy curves displays very spiky behaviour, and seems to do so in a periodic way.
It is seen that the 3DecorrJune model reaches convergence in training loss (transparent
orange) much quicker than 2DecorrJune, but has a larger offset between its training and
validation loss (opaque orange) curves. The 2DecorrJune model has a smaller offset
between its training (transparent blue) and validation loss (opaque blue) curves and ap­
pears slightly less spiky. In addition the validation loss of the 2DecorrJune model begins
to move upwards after epoch 600. This upward movement was interpreted as overfitting,
supported by the the plateau trend­line in black, which shows the linear trend of validation
curve after the ”burn­in” period, i.e. the first part of the curve where the loss decreases
quicker. The constant dotted line is the median of the plateau added to aid the visual
inspection.
Figure 6.8: On the left the loss curves from the final 2DecorrJune and 3DecorrJune models
are shown and on the right their IoU accuracy curves. There black lines are to aid visual
inspection of the curve.
As the 2DecorJune model experienced overfitting in the last part of its training, it was
decided to select the model which scored the lowest validation loss. It was decided to do
the same for the 3DecorJune model. This resulted in selecting the models at:
• 2DecorrJune: Epoch = 592 with BCEval = 0.216 and IoUval = 0.592
• 3DecorrJune: Epoch = 351 with BCEval = 0.489 and IoUval = 0.415 ,
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
49
==PAGE:56==
The precision­recall curves resulting from these ”early­stopped” models are shown in Fig­
ure 6.9. The results from the main landslide prediction is shown on the left and the results
from the east landslide are shown on the right. The 2DecorrJune model achieves high
AUC scores in both cases. In the main landslide case the curves are relatively similar,
wheras in the east landslide cases the 2DecorrJune model performs significantly better.
In the latter case both models start off at a low precision, increasing towards the middle.
See Section 3.3.2 for details.
Figure 6.9: Pixel­wise precision recall curves of the final 2DecorrJune and 3DecorrJune
models. The main landslide result is seen in the left plot and the east landslide result is
shown in the right plot.
Based on the results so far it was decided to select the 2DecorrJune model at epoch
592 as a final model. The segmentations of this model are shown in Figures 6.10 and
6.11. The upper row in both cases shows the output after rounding the output of the raw
prediction to 0 or 1 in the last column. The main landslide prediction suffers from some
false positive outliers, most prominently in the top part of the image. It also has false
positive predictions beneath the landslide, close to the ocean. In the east landslide case
there are no outliers away from the landslide polygon, but the prediction is missing the
lower left corner of the east landslide polygon and extends beyond it in the top of the
landslides, resulting in false positive predictions. The bottom row of Figures 6.10 and
6.11 shows the ocean and ice mask layered on top of the coherence and raw prediction
images. By removing the predictions in the ice and ocean areas it is possible to remove
the bulk of the false positives. After this masking a few outliers persisted, which were
removed by thresholding the raw prediction output by only keep predictions with values
> 0.95, i.e. pixels where the model is very certain of its predictions. The masking and
thresholding results in the final segmentations in the lower right panels of Figures 6.10
and 6.11. The masking and thersholding increases the IoU of the main landslide to 0.794
and the east landslide to 0.644 as reported in the title text of the images.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
50
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.10: The final 2DecorrJune model prediction of the main landslide event. The
second row of images shows the predictions after removing invalid areas and threshold­
ing. The output column on the right shows TP = yellow, FP = red, FN = green and
TN = black.
Figure 6.11: The final 2DecorrJune model prediction of the east landslide event. The
second row of images shows the predictions after removing invalid areas and threshold­
ing. The output column on the right shows TP = yellow, FP = red, FN = green and
TN = black.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
51
==PAGE:58==
7
Discussion
This section discusses the main outcomes of the report. First the quality and motivations
behind the various simulations are discussed together with an assessment of ability of the
models to generalise the shape information provided in the landslides polygons. Here­
after, the real landslide performance is discussed along with the motivation behind choos­
ing the 2DecorrJune model as the final model for landslide segmentations is elaborated.
The final section discusses the limitations and possible improvements of the project.
7.1
Simulation performance and synhtetic data quality
The various simulations proposed in this thesis showed that the histogram approach to
simulating landslides was too simplistic, but in summary the different simulations did pro­
vide valuable insight for designing the simulations altogether. The motivations of four
different simulation types can be listed as follows,
2WeibullJune: The most general of the two histogram approaches as this simu­
lation method only relied on the pixel intensities of ocean pixels in the coherence
image. A catastrophic landslide should result in total loss of coherence, resembling
the total loss of coherence seen over the ocean. This gave insight into the connec­
tion between completely decorrelated areas and the decorrelation inside landslides.
2GammaJune: The motivation behind this simulation was to impose a stronger
bias in the data­set to look for pixel intensity distributions similar to that of the main
landslide. This is not a good idea in general, as the model could become prone to
overfitting the main landslide distribution but helped exploring the plausibility of the
histogram approach.
2DecorrJune: This simulation was chosen as it had a spatial correlation similar to
that of the main landslide, seen in Figure 5.8, considered as an important part of a
realistic landslide, based on results from the histogram based simulations.
3DecorrJune: The interferometric phase was included in the input to the model to
investigate whether if the model could exploit extra information.
The main issue of the histogram based approaches was that they imposed looking for
signals which did not resemble real landslides. This could be seen as the models per­
formed relatively well on the simulated landslides, as shown in Section 6.1 but completely
failed to detect the real landslides as it was shown in Section 6.2. To better understand
whether it was the shape of the landslides or the noise signal inside them that caused
the poor performance, an experiment was devised. This experiment consisted of simulat­
ing landslide pixels, from the Weibull distribution seen in Figure 5.4a, and inserting them
into the real landslide shapes, shown in Figure 5.10. In this way, one hundred ”fake”
landslides were made, with the shape of the real landslides but with Weibull noise inside.
Figure 7.1 shows that 2WeibullJune model was able to correctly predict these ”Weibull
noise”­versions of the landslides, with a consistently higher accuracy compared to the
real landslide performance. The lower IoU level of the fake east landslides seems to con­
firm the observation, made in Section 5.2.4, that SAR acquisition (2) is more noisy, and
hence the east landslide is more difficult to distinguish from the background.
This experiment tells us that the histogram models correctly digested the shape informa­
tion provided in the simulated data­set, generalising it to detect other shapes that has
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure 7.1: The distribution of the 2WeibullJune prediction scores obtained on the 100
Weibull noise versions of the real landslides.
similar noise signals inside them. The histograms shown in Figure 6.3 further strength­
ens this observation, as all the models found pixels with distributions corresponding to the
distribution they were told to find.
Mentioned briefly in Section 6.1 the loss and accuracy curves did not converge and the
decision to go forward and evaluate the non­converged models would normally be inap­
propriate. However, the fact that the histogram approaches did not encode any spatial
correlation in their simulations meant that a significant improvement in their real landslide
predictions was not expected and therefore the histogram based models were discarded.
To qualify this decision, the ”real landslide prediction”­capabilities, of all four models were
evaluated in Section 6.2, Figure 6.6.
Summarising the real landslide performances of each model across many epochs, in Fig­
ure 6.6, gave an impression of the amount of relevant information, present in the respec­
tive synthetic data­set. Since the models are only allowed to learn features from their
synthetic data­sets, it follows that if a data­set does not provide information relevant for
predicting real landslides, the model will not learn features relevant for predicting real
landslides. From Figure 6.6 it could be concluded that the Weibull and Gamma mod­
els were not able to extract any meaningful information from their synthetic data­sets.
In contrast, the DecorrJune models improved as training progressed, implying that their
synthetic data­sets held information relevant for the detection of real landslides. This
point was further emphasised by picking out a specific model at a specific epoch, where
it achieved the highest IoU result on the real landslides. Selectively choosing models that
performs best on the test­data, the two real landslides, is in general a bad idea, but served
as a way to sample a best­case scenario performance of each model. These best­case
scenario models were then evaluated with precision­recall curves seen in Figure 6.7, and
further exposed the inaptitude of the histogram based models, as these only performed
slightly better than randomly guessing on average for the two real landslides.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
53
==PAGE:60==
7.2
Real landslide performance
7.2.1
Detecting the two real landslides
By discarding the Weibull and Gamma models it was possible to focus on the two Decorr
models. To examine the potential of these two models they were trained for a longer
time. The 2DecorrJune model was trained for almost 24hrs and the 3DecorrJune model
for 11hrs in total, corresponding to 860 and 400 epochs respectively. The 2DecorrJune
model was trained for a longer time, as it converged more slowly than the 3DecorrJune
model, as the loss curve plots in Figure 6.8 reported. Despite their difference in conver­
gence time, the essential difference between the two models was their difference in vali­
dation loss. The loss and accuracy curves in Figure 6.8 alone shows that the 2DecorrJune
model was the superior of the two. As also described in Section 6.2.2, to avoid choosing
a model that overfitted the data­set, the 2DecorrJune model was stopped early based
on its validation loss, resulting in choosing the model at epoch 592 as the final modal.
The two models were then compared by picking the early stopped 3DecorrJune model
with the lowest validation loss and computing their precision­recall curves, seen in Figure
6.9. These precision­recall curves revealed that the 2DecorrJune model outperformed the
3DecorrJune in both the main and east landslides cases. Figure 7.2 investigates the differ­
ence in the two models performance further by plotting the output segmentation at various
thresholds, T. The first three columns are the three lowest thresholds and the remaining
columns are larger thresholds at regular intervals. When the threshold T = 0 all pixels are
predicted to be landslides. As the threshold for what is counted as a landslide pixel is in­
creased, it is seen that the bulk of the real landslide predictions of the 2DecorrJune model
survives all the thresholds, meaning that it is very certain of these predictions, compared
to the surrounding pixels. In contrast, the 3DecorrJune model completely looses the east
landslide prediction around T = 0.4. In general it has a higher number of false positives,
persisting for a wide range of T’s, indicating that the 3DecorrJune model is more certain
that the surviving false positives are landslide pixels, rather than the actual east landslide
pixels.
The power transformation applied in equation (5.1) in the DecorrJune simulations forms
a vague connection to the real landslide, suggesting that the performance on the east
landslide should be considered the most true test sample of the two real landslides, as no
information about the east landslide was provided at any point in the simulation process.
This is further emphasised by the fact that the InSAR acquisition (2) containing the east
landslide was noticeably more noisy, as mentioned in Section 5.2.4, so it should be more
difficult to predict for this reason as well.
All these observations points to the fact that including the phase did not improve the ability
of the model to predict the two real landslides, and one reason for this might very well
be the noisy nature of the InSAR phase. Based on the better performance on the east
landslide, given by the precision­recall curve and the generally lower validation loss level
the early stopped 2DecorJune model was selected as the best candidate for segmenting
the two known real landslides.
7.2.2
Post­processing of the Karrat Fjord landslide detections
The real landslide segmentation performed by the 2DecorrJune model was presented
in Figures 6.10 and 6.11. The segmentation of the east landslide scored the highest
IoU= 0.573 and had no decoupled false­positives with respect to the ground truth land­
slide polygon. The largest error in the east landslide is in the top part of the landslide,
where the model predicted false positive landslide pixels. The segmentation of the main
landslide was of slightly poorer quality, having an IoU= 0.504, mainly due to the decoupled
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure 7.2: Real landslide segmentations at various thresholds, corresponding to the
thresholds used in the precision­recall curves in Figure 6.9
false­positive prediction in the top part of the image. In addition the model also predicts
false positives, protruding from the bottom of the true polygon shape into the ocean. Re­
gardless, the raw prediction of the main landslide reveals that the the model is much more
certain of the predictions inside the ground truth polygon, than of the false positives fur­
ther up the slope from the landslide. Taking only the landslide pixels predicted with a
value above 0.95, interpreted as a very high certainty, the number of false positives were
reduced significantly. The few remaining false positive pixels was then removed by dis­
carding predictions in the ocean and on ice, using the ocean and ice masks introduced in
Section 4.2.2. This increased both the main and the east landslide IoUs significantly.
Assessing how often the 2DecorrJune model predicts ice or ocean pixels as landslide
pixels in general, can be done by counting the fraction of false positives that are known
to be ice or ocean pixels. This revealed that 38.7% of the total false positives were due to
ice and 2.1% due to ocean. On one hand it would be preferable to bring down the number
of false positive ice predictions, but on the other hand it also means that it is possible to
remove 38.7% of the false positives in post­processing.
7.2.3
Training phase instabilities
Figure 7.3 shows a zoom in version of Figure 6.8, focusing on the loss of the 2DecorrJune
model. The spiky behaviour in the validation loss seems to be periodic in nature and
correlate with the smaller spikes in the training loss (transparent blue). The validation
loss seems very sensitive to smaller changes in training loss and just before epoch 500,
600 and after epoch 700 the large validation loss spikes are followed by validation loss
minima. The most obvious reason for this is the use of cosine annealing, equation (3.13),
which will decrease the learning rate for 10 epochs, and then restart it back to its original
value, as explained in Section 3.2.3. When it returns to the large learning rate, the step
taken might cause an increase in loss, serving as an ”exploratory” step to find a better
minima region, in which it can then descend down by reducing the learning rate again.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7.3: A zoom in version of the 2DecorrJune loss curve, showing epochs 200­860
in Figure 6.8.
In combination with bad data samples this might further increase the large peaks seen
in the loss curves. One of the main challenges in the positioning of the landslides, in­
troduced in Section 5.1.2, was to automate the process enough to be able to produce
several data­sets with a sufficient size, while making sure that every landslide in the data­
set was positioned meaningfully. Reducing the valid slopes to the south and south­west
facing slopes greatly decreased the total valid area in the full InSAR image, acquisition
(3), making it difficult to have enough space on the slopes to place the larger polygons.
One example of a landslide placed in a way that makes it hard to expect a very precise
segmentation is shown in Figure 7.4, where the model has segmented the ground truth
of the simulation but also most of the decorrelation already found on the slope.
Figure 7.4: A simulated landslide place on top of an already decorrelated area.
7.3
Limitations and possible improvements
This section addresses some of the most obvious limitations and possible improvements
to the overall proposed method. Regarding practical implementations of the proposed
method, various challenges would have to be solved, and some of these are described
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
56
==PAGE:63==
here.
7.3.1
Detecting slowly moving landslides
The 2DecorJune model never seemed to detect the slowly moving western landslide,
outlined in Figure 2.6. One reason for this could be that the lower bound of the landslides
sizes was bounded between [0.2; 4.2][km2] where the area of the east landslide is found
close to the lower bound of this range. In the apparent size of the western landslide in
the coherence image is about half of the eastern landslide, which makes it highly unlikely
that the model would predict this as a landslide. Bugs in earlier parts of the project code
restricted the maximum size to be smaller than the main landslide size causing the models
to never predict the main landslide, so the size sensitivity of the models was considered
to be important.
7.3.2
Deep learning architecture and loss function
There exists many architectures capable of carrying out semantic segmentation, and the
state of the art architectures are relatively complex, compared to the U­Net. At the time
U­Net achieved significantly better results than its contemporary alternatives as stated in
Ronneberger et al. (2015), but since then several other state­of­the­art networks, such
as DeepLab v3 (Chen et al., 2017) have been proposed. To avoid over­complicating the
project, to save time and to minimise the risk of code bugs these were not considered.
The late occurrence of overfitting noticed in the end of the training of the 2DecorrJune
model, seen in Figure 6.8, might also have benefited from the choice of a simpler net­
work, as the more complex networks are more prone to overfit the training data. Due
to the strong dependence on the quality of the simulations, the specific choice and ex­
perimentation with network architecture was not a key focus. Some of the architectural
improvements considered was creating a deeper network, and improving the implemen­
tation of up­sampling, explained in Section 3.1. It is well understood that the processes of
up­sampling causes the network to produce checker­board pattern in the output image,
this is explained and discussed in Odena et al. (2016) and Sugawara et al. (2019) and
can be seen in Figure 7.5. The Figure exemplifies the checker­board pattern at an early
stage of the training as this artefact lessens at later stages. The reason for this is that
as the model becomes more certain of its predictions, meaning that all values inside the
predicted area goes toward 1, after sigmoid activation (equation (3.1)), resulting in small
absolute differences between neighbouring checker­board lines. While the issue is un­
likely to affect the final result dramatically, it would have been preferable to correct the
up­sampling implementation.
Figure 7.5: Ground truth (left) and a prediction at an early stage of training (right)
Another way to improve the proposed models would be to change the loss function. One
promising loss function relevant to this use­case is focal loss, introduced by Lin et al.
(2018). The focal loss is good in cases of large class imbalances where the positive
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
57
==PAGE:64==
samples only makes up a fraction of the total samples, there are very few landslide pixels
compared to the background in our case. Focal loss aids the model in focusing on the
few positive samples which could improve predictions.
The U­Net could probably also benefit from increasing the size of the data­set and encode
more variability into the simulations, such as augmenting the landslide polygons more. A
larger data­set representing more variability would most likely require deepening the net­
work to have more layers than the simple architecture that was proposed, but expanding
the size of the data­set often results in greatly increased performance in deep learning,
and would be worth experimenting with.
7.3.3
Performance metrics and restructuring the data­set
Since the 2DecorrJune synthetic data­set to some degree represents real landslides as
seen in coherence imagery, it would be interesting to make a fuller investigation of the
model performance on the synthetic data­set. The first improvement in this regard should
be to restructure the synthetic data­set into a training, validation and a test part. If the
2DecorrJune synthetic data truly inherits some of the characteristics of real landslides,
reserving some of the synthetic data for testing would offer a way to investigate how well
the model generalises.
Another improvement in this regard would be to consider more ways to evaluate the model
performance. The main performance metrics used in the report were IoU, precision­recall
curves, AUC, introduced in Section 3.3. These metrics are well suited for analysing perfor­
mance in imbalanced data­sets, where there are fewer positive classes than negatives,
because they do not consider true negatives. Chicco and Jurman (2020) argues that
a better choice of metric in binary classification is the Matthews correlation coefficient
(MCC),
MCC =
TP × TN −FP × FN
√
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
(7.1)
where TP, TN, FN and FP was introduced in Section 3.3.1. MCC outputs −1 as the
worst score and 1 as the best score, and since it takes TN into account yields a more
full perspective of the performance of a binary classifier. This would be necessary in a
practical application to assess how well the 2DecorrJune model handles true negative
predictions in general, and hence reduce the chance of flagging none existing landslides.
Another way to assess the model performance would have been to compare it to other
methods, capable of image segmentation, but as most of the work was concerned with
the development of the simulations it was not feasible to do so within the time frame of
the project.
7.3.4
Synthetic data improvements
With the apparent success of the simulation approach it would be interesting to increase
the size of the data­set significantly, extending it to include descending orbits, several
more SAR acquisitions along the whole coast of Greenland at several points in time and
augmenting the Bijie polygons shapes, introduced in Section 4.2.4, by rotating, adding
them together and stretching them.
The models were only trained on ascending orbit data from a confined area in Western
Greenland acquired in the month of June. It would have been interesting to include sev­
eral background coherence images from other times of the year, to make the models more
robust in the presence of noise in the coherence imagery. At the moment the acquisitions
used do not cover the total possible noise variability in coherence acquisitions in general
and in order to find landslides in any given coherence image, it would be beneficial to
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
58
==PAGE:65==
include more acquisitions. Furthermore, the decision to restrict the data to come from
ascending orbits limits the model to predict landslides in ascending orbit data. The inclu­
sion of descending orbit data would increase the number of visible slopes, as many of the
areas in shadow or layover in the ascending geometry would be visible in the descend­
ing geometry. In addition it would also approximately double the effective area in which
simulated landslides could be placed, which would make landslide positioning easier and
more robust.
In terms of the models, additional input data could also have served to increase their
predictive power. One obvious improvement is that the ice mask used, mentioned in
Section 4.2.2 was based on data obtained in the 80’s, and as mentioned in Citterio and
Ahlstrøm (2013), the ice sheet has decreased since. Changing to a more recent ice mask
would be better, but still would not describe the seasonal changes of the ice and snow,
which happens all the time. A solution would simply have been to try and train the model
to also classify ice and snow in the image along with the landslides, although that would
require a ground truth of the observed ice extent to work in practice. Another solution to
this could have been to restrict the data collection to the summer season, where there is
daylight, and input an optical image to the network as well. As it was briefly described in
Section 2.3.1, the optical Sentinel­2 imagery hold information enough to make land cover
maps, see Figure 2.5.
As described in equation (5.1), Section 5.1.4, the DecorrJune coherence simulator applies
a power transform to the distribution of the coherence pixels from InSAR pair (1), such that
it varies around the observed distribution of the main landslides coherence pixels. Ideally,
the phase part should have been transformed accordingly, which could possible have
been done using De Moivre’s theorem, see Arfken and Weber (2001). Having said that,
the transformation was probably unnecessary altogether, as the pixel intensity distribution
of the long temporal baseline coherence already changed naturally from slope to slope as
seen in Figure 7.6. It shows the pixel intensity distribution of the main landslide together
with the long temporal baseline coherence inside some of the simulated landslides, before
the transformation was applied. This gives the impression that the natural variability in
the long temporal coherence data would have covered the possible range of real pixels
intensities sufficiently.
7.3.5
Alternative approaches to building a training data­set
Svennevig (2019) presents a data­set of approximately 700 extinct landslides with cor­
responding polygons drawn manually. These landslides was primarily detected in high
resolution DEM’s. Initially it was thought that using this as a training data­set, despite
its small size, could potentially have allowed for building a model capable of predicting
extinct landslides. If such a model was developed and was working with a high enough
precision it could have been possible to exploit the fact that the ArcticDEM has been up­
dated several times since between 2015 and 2017. If this ”extinct landslides” model was
evaluated at earlier ArcticDEM versions and then again on later ArcticDEM versions, the
difference in the number of predicted landslides between the two, would be landslides
that happened in between the early and late ArcticDEM versions. This could have been
the basis for building a data­set of contemporary landslides in Greenland also imaged
by the Sentinel­1 satellites. The reason for not following this approach was mainly the
time­frame, along with the complexity of building a model to make a data­set for another
model.
An alternative to this could have been to use the global landslide data­set from NASA,
Kirschbaum et al. (2010). This provides the approximate position, time and sometimes a
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 7.6: Pixel distributions of the main landslide together with the pixel distributions
from different long temporal baseline simulations, before the equation (5.1) transformation
was applied.
polygon of detected landslides all over the world. Collecting SAR data from the respective
landslides and structuring it into a labelled data set could have been a way to establish a
training set for the thesis. This approach was also discarded for several reasons. First of
all, many landslides happen in vegetated areas, which would make the landslide almost
”invisible” from a coherence magnitude point of view. Secondly the NASA data­set is a part
of a citizen science project and is based on observations made by ordinary people, and
the reported positions has up to 50 km uncertainty (Kirschbaum et al., 2010). Thirdly it was
considered too difficult to gather all the needed DEM data in a good and consistent enough
resolution within the time­span of the project. Finally, a rough estimate of the total number
of reported landslides revealed that the NASA data­set would most likely hold a total
2000 landslides above the tree line which occurred within the time­span of the Sentinel­1
mission, and a even fewer number if one were to limit the project geographically. The
uncertainty of the position of the landslides and the estimated number of total landslides
led to the conclusion that this data­set would not be worth pursuing in this project.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
60
==PAGE:67==
8
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to explore machine learning approaches for detecting
catastrophic landslides in Greenland based on routinely acquired satellite InSAR image
data. A simple U­Net model architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015) (Cordeiro, 2020) was
suggested for solving the binary segmentation task, classifying pixels as either landslide
pixels or background pixels. The main challenge was the absence of a landslide inventory,
for the area of interest, western Greenland, as there are only two known catastrophic
landslides spanned by InSAR satellite imagery, the June 2017 Karrat Fjord main landslide
and the November 2016 Karrat Fjord east landslide described in Svennevig et al. (2020).
This elicited the need for alternative ways of obtaining a training data­set. It was decided
to investigate the viability of a simulation approach, which became of principal importance
as deep learning models, such as the U­Net, primarily rely on the quality of the training
data presented to them.
The basic idea of the simulation approach was to place synthetic landslides in real In­
SAR imagery. This was done by creating spatially localised loss of InSAR coherence
magnitude, with various different shapes. The latter were selected based the Bijie land­
slide inventory (Ji et al., 2020) and augmented to fit into the InSAR data, as described in
Section 5.1.3. Through experimentation, four different simulation methods were devised,
presented in Section 5.1, each containing an InSAR coherence magnitude­ and/or phase­
simulator, responsible for imitating the coherence magnitude and/or corresponding phase
pixel values found in real landslides, described in Section 2.3. Overall, the presented sim­
ulators followed two different procedures for simulating the value of a landslide pixel: a
parametric procedure, drawing pixel values from empirically fitted probability distribution
functions and a semi­parametric procedure utilising real loss of coherence from a long­
temporal baseline SAR image pair, explained in detail in Section 5.1.4 and summarised
in Section 5.1.5. As explained in Section 5.2, the simulation process resulted in four sim­
ulated data­sets each containing 8000 image patches with simulated landslides and each
separated into a training and a validation data­set. The two known landslides were held
out as test data.
Several U­Net models were developed based on the four different synthetic data­sets as
described in Section 5.1.5. The only difference between the U­Net models, that were com­
pared, were the data­sets which they trained on. All the U­Net models were able to distin­
guish the simulated landslides in the validation data­set to some level that in itself would
have justified the further work on refining the models. Despite the good performance on
the simulated landslides, however, the parametric simulation based U­Net models failed
to detect the June 2017 Karrat Fjord main landslide and the November 2016 Karrat Fjord
east landslide in the testing phase of the model evaluation.
This lead to an investigation of the quality of the simulations in terms of how well the syn­
thetic data provided information relevant for learning model features needed for detecting
real landslides, reported in Section 6.2.1. This analysis clarified that the synthetic data,
based on the parametric simulation approaches, caused the corresponding models to
”un­learn” the ability to detect the real landslides, as training progressed. This lead to the
conclusion that the parametric based approaches were not realistic enough, and it was
decided to not refine these models further. The same issue did not occur in the models
that had trained on the semi­parametric simulation based synthetic data­sets, and these
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
61
==PAGE:68==
improved in predicting the two real landslides as training progressed, reported in Figure
6.6.
The capability of the models trained on the semi­parameric simulations, was explored by
training the two models for a longer time, with better optimisers and an adaptive learning
rate and then comparing them. The comparison of the two models is presented in Section
6.2.2 and revealed that the model which took InSAR coherence magnitude and Digital El­
evation Data as input, outperformed the other model and was selected to perform a final
segmentation of the two real landslides. After post­processing the predicted segmenta­
tions of the two real landslides, this model achieved an IoU score of 0.794 and 0.644 in the
main and east landslide cases respectively, seen in Figures 6.10 and 6.11.
The approach presented here showed the plausibility of training a U­Net model capable of
detecting two contemporary real landslides in Greenland based on landslides simulated
in InSAR data. Further work on the project would incorporate a more robust means of
simulating landslides, including their positioning, orientation and increasing the spatial and
temporal extent of the InSAR imagery in which they are placed. A deeper investigation
of the model performance on such a synhtetic data­set would also be of interest. On the
model side, improvements to sophisticate the deep learning architecture could potentially
increase the accuracy of the predictions. Finally, exploring the possibility of additional
input sources for helping the model to better differentiate between sources of decorrelation
could increase the overall performance, as mentioned in Section 7.2.1.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
62
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Althuwaynee, O. F., B. Pradhan, and S. Lee (2012). “Application of an evidential be­
lief function model in landslide susceptibility mapping”. eng. In: Computers and Geo­
sciences 44, pp. 120–135. ISSN: 18737803, 00983004. DOI: 10.1016/j.cageo.2012.03.
003.
Arfken, G.B. and H.J. Weber (2001). Mathematical methods for physicists. eng. Academic
Press, 1112 s. ISBN: 0120598264.
Bamler, R. and P. Hartl (Aug. 1998). “Synthetic aperture radar interferometry”. In: Inverse
Problems 14.4, R1–R54. DOI: 10.1088/0266-5611/14/4/001. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1088/0266-5611/14/4/001.
Bengio, Y. and Y. Lecun (2009). “Convolutional Networks for Images, Speech, and Time­
Series”. eng. In:
Bessette­Kirton, E. et al. (2017). Preliminary Analysis of Satellite Imagery and Seismic
Observations of the Nuugaatsiaq Landslide and Tsunami, Greenland. URL: https://
www.usgs.gov/natural-hazards/landslide-hazards/science/preliminary-analysis-satellite-
imagery-and-seismic?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects (visited on
10/21/2020).
Bishop, C. M. (2006). Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer.
Blitzstein, J. K. and J. Hwang (2014). Introduction to probability. eng. CRC Press, pp. 1–
571. DOI: 10.1201/b17221.
Catani, F. et al. (2013). “Landslide susceptibility estimation by random forests technique:
Sensitivity and scaling issues”. eng. In: Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences
13.11, pp. 2815–2831. ISSN: 16849981, 15618633. DOI: 10.5194/nhess-13-2815-2013.
Chen, L. et al. (2017). “Rethinking Atrous Convolution for Semantic Image Segmentation”.
eng. In:
Chicco, D. and G. Jurman (2020). “The advantages of the Matthews correlation coefficient
(MCC) over F1 score and accuracy in binary classification evaluation”. eng. In: Bmc
Genomics 21.1, p. 6. ISSN: 14712164, 2314436x. DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-6413-7.
Citterio, M. and A. P. Ahlstrøm (2013). “Brief communication the aerophotogrammetric
map of Greenland ice masses”. eng. In: Cryosphere 7.2, pp. 445–449. ISSN: 19940424,
19940416. DOI: 10.5194/tc-7-445-2013.
Cordeiro, M. (2020). Creating a Very Simple U­Net Model with PyTorch for Semantic Seg­
mentation of Satellite Images. URL: https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/creating-a-
very-simple-u-net-model-with-pytorch-for-semantic-segmentation-of-satellite-images-
223aa216e705.
DAAC, ASF (n.d.). Sentinel­1 SAR data. Retrieved from https://asf.alaska.edu/ASF DAAC
on October 10th 2020, processed by ESA. URL: https://www.esa.int/Applications/
Observing_the_Earth/Copernicus.
Dekel, O. et al. (2012). “Optimal distributed online prediction using mini­batches”. eng. In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 13, pp. 165–202. ISSN: 15337928, 15324435.
Ercanoglu, M. and C. Gokceoglu (2002). “Assessment of landslide susceptibility for a
landslide­prone area (north of Yenice, NW Turkey) by fuzzy approach”. eng. In: Environ­
mental Geology 41.6, pp. 720–730. ISSN: 14320495, 09430105. DOI: 10.1007/s00254-
001-0454-2.
Ermini, L., F. Catani, and N. Casagli (2005). “Artificial Neural Networks applied to land­
slide susceptibility assessment”. eng. In: Geomorphology 66.1­4, pp. 327–343. ISSN:
1872695x, 0169555x. DOI: 10.1016/j.geomorph.2004.09.025.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
63
==PAGE:70==
Gauthier, D. et al. (2018). “Karrat Fjord (Greenland) tsunamigenic landslide of 17 June
2017: initial 3D observations”. eng. In: Landslides 15.2, pp. 327–332. ISSN: 16125118,
1612510x. DOI: 10.1007/s10346-017-0926-4.
Howat, I. M., A. Negrete, and B. E. Smith (2014). “The Greenland Ice Mapping Project
(GIMP) land classification and surface elevation data sets”. In: The Cryosphere 8.4,
pp. 1509–1518. DOI: 10.5194/tc-8-1509-2014. URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/
8/1509/2014/.
Ioffe, S. and C. Szegedy (2015). Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training
by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. arXiv: 1502.03167 [cs.LG].
Ji, S. et al. (2020). “Landslide detection from an open satellite imagery and digital elevation
model dataset using attention boosted convolutional neural networks”. In: DOI: 10.1007/
s10346-020-01353-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-020-01353-2.
Jung, J. and S. Yun (2020). “Evaluation of Coherent and Incoherent Landslide Detection
Methods Based on Synthetic Aperture Radar for Rapid Response: A Case Study for
the 2018 Hokkaido Landslides”. In: Remote Sensing 12.2. ISSN: 2072­4292. DOI: 10.
3390/rs12020265. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/2/265.
Kingma, D. P. and J. L. Ba (2015). “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”. eng.
In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, Iclr 2015 ­ Conference
Track Proceedings.
Kirschbaum, D. B. et al. (2010). “A global landslide catalog for hazard applications: Method,
results, and limitations”. eng. In: Natural Hazards 52.3, pp. 561–575. ISSN: 15730840,
0921030x. DOI: 10.1007/s11069-009-9401-4.
Lin, T. et al. (2018). Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection. arXiv: 1708.02002 [cs.CV].
Lippert, E. Y. H (2020). Implementation of a Sentinel­1 TOPS DInSAR processor suitable
for Persistent Scatterer InSAR.
Loshchilov, I. and F. Hutter (2017). “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts”.
eng. In: 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, Iclr 2017 ­ Confer­
ence Track Proceedings.
– (2019). “Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization”. und. In:
Merryman Boncori, J. P. (2019). “Measuring Coseismic Deformation With Spaceborne
Synthetic Aperture Radar: A Review”. In: Frontiers in Earth Science 7, p. 16.
Mohr, J. J. (Aug. 2005). SAR Light ­ an introduction to Synthetic Aperture Radar.
Nair, V. and G. E. Hinton (2010). “Rectified linear units improve Restricted Boltzmann
machines”. eng. In: Icml 2010 ­ Proceedings, 27th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 807–814.
Nielsen, M. A. (2015). Neural Networks and Deep Learning. eng. Determination Press.
URL: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/index.html.
Notti, D. et al. (2014). “A methodology for improving landslide PSI data analysis”. eng.
In: International Journal of Remote Sensing 35.6, pp. 2186–2214. ISSN: 01431161,
13665901. DOI: 10.1080/01431161.2014.889864.
Odena, A., V. Dumoulin, and C. Olah (2016). Deconvolution and Checkerboard Artifacts.
URL: https://distill.pub/2016/deconv-checkerboard/.
Richter, R. and D. Schläpfer (2011). “Atmospheric/Topographic Correction for Satellite
Imagery”. In: ATCOR­2/3 UserGuide DLR IB 565­01/11.
Ronneberger, O., P. Fischer, and T. Brox (2015). “U­Net: Convolutional Networks for
Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1505.04597. arXiv: 1505.04597. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
Simard, P. Y., D. Steinkraus, and J. C. Platt (2003). “Best practices for convolutional neural
networks applied to visual document analysis”. In: Seventh International Conference on
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
64
==PAGE:71==
Document Analysis and Recognition, 2003. Proceedings. Pp. 958–963. DOI: 10.1109/
ICDAR.2003.1227801.
Stark, C. P. and N. Hovius (2001). “The characterization of landslide size distributions”.
eng. In: Geophysical Research Letters 28.6, pp. 1091–1094. ISSN: 00948276, 19448007.
DOI: 10.1029/2000GL008527.
Sugawara, Y., S. Shiota, and H. Kiya (2019). “Checkerboard artifacts free convolutional
neural networks”. eng. In: Apsipa Transactions on Signal and Information Processing
8, pp. 1–9. ISSN: 20487703. DOI: 10.1017/ATSIP.2019.2.
Svennevig, K. (2019). “Preliminary landslide mapping in Greenland”. eng. In: Geologi­
cal Survey of Denmark and Greenland Bulletin 43, e2019430207. ISSN: 19044666,
16048156. DOI: 10.34194/GEUSB-201943-02-07.
Svennevig, K. et al. (2020). “Evolution of events before and after the 17 June 2017 rock
avalanche at Karrat Fjord, West Greenland ­ A multidisciplinary approach to detecting
and locating unstable rock slopes in a remote Arctic area”. eng. In: Earth Surface Dy­
namics 8.4, pp. 1021–1038. ISSN: 2196632x, 21966311. DOI: 10.5194/esurf-8-1021-
2020.
Szandała, T. (2021). “Review and comparison of commonly used activation functions for
deep neural networks”. eng. In: Studies in Computational Intelligence 903, pp. 203–
224. ISSN: 18609503, 1860949x. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-15-5495-7_11.
Touzi, R et al. (1999). “Coherence estimation for SAR imagery”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 37.1, pp. 135–149. DOI: 10.1109/36.739146.
Werner, C. et al. (2000). GAMMA SAR and Interferometric Processing Software (Special
Publication) ESA SP.
Wiley, C. A. (1985). “Synthetic aperture radars”. In: IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems 3, pp. 440–443.
Landslide mapping using machine learning applied to remote sensing imagery
65
==PAGE:72==
”Youth is the spirit of persistence ­ to keep making an effort to grow and to become more capable
despite all obstacles. Those who keep striving for improvement remain youthful no matter how old
they are.” ­ Daisaku Ikeda
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, building 348.
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
