==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Investigation of residential electricity
consumption profiles with a focus on the
energy system flexibility potential
Francesco Gaballo (s190390)
Pietro Nonis (s190300)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby (Direction)
Phone: +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis investigates Danish residential electricity consumption, and assess its flex-
ibility potential. The Demand Response provision is assessed starting from consump-
tion analysis, and evaluated across socio-economic characteristics of households. The
study evaluated residential sector as adapt for system flexibility provision thanks to
the consumption characteristics and flexible technologies adoption. This potential
is quantified as first from the consumer’s perspective and then in terms of system
benefits and environmental sustainability.
A large smart meter dataset provides the opportunity to evaluate the influence
of the dwelling socio-economic aspects on an hourly base. Through time series anal-
ysis, a description of consumption profiles and trends is carried out, and with it an
assessment of heating and vehicles charging consumption. Findings show that elec-
tric vehicles impact on night demand, while significantly increasing peak demand
and peak to average ratio. Electric heating consumption is evenly distributed along
the day, but determines a consistent seasonal variation. Implementation of smart
load scheduling models for these two flexible technologies show large room for savings
(6-42%) on the variable costs of power when using a Real Time Pricing tariff.
Latest projections scenarios of electric vehicles, heat pumps and smart control
systems adoption are used to forecast Danish residential sector characteristics. The
flexibility potential of the sector is assessed as a function of socio-economic features.
Houses inhabited by single grown adults are likely to provide the most flexibility in
terms of peak reduction and peak timing variation from smart use of heat pumps.
It is also found that a smart use of electric vehicles is more advantageous in young
households, while elders benefit the most from heating. Soft-linking the aggregated
flexible loads with Balmorel energy system model provided modest system cost re-
duction for Denmark (-1%, 80 M€). On the other hand, a consistent cut of fuel costs
and CO2 emission is found.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Technology, Management and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Sustainable Energy - Energy Systems
Analysis.
The thesis was conducted during the autumn semester of 2021 and it
corresponds to 30 ECTS points for each of the students. It has been carried out
under the supervision of Henrik Klinge Jacobsen, Frits Møller Andersen and Philipp
Andreas Gunkel from DTU Management.
Kongens Lyngby, March 15, 2021
Francesco Gaballo (s190390)
Pietro Nonis (s190300)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This project would not have been possible without the support of many people. Many
thanks to our supervisors, Henrik K. Jacobsen, Frits M. Andersen and Philipp A.
Gunkel who help us in designing, developing and reviewing this project. This thesis
has been a great journey. We learned more than we could expect in many topics, but
most of all we enjoyed to work and research. Many moments have been challenging,
in particularly given the forced distancing.
We are very grateful as first to our families, parents and sisters, which have always
supported us, no matter how far we were.
We are very thankful to our friends, close and far away.
Special thanks to who
always enjoyed with us this bumpy road. Honorable mentions for Arnau, Matteo,
Sofie, Giulia, Serena, Benedetta, Beatrice and all M.G.P.D: Cabe, Aguz and Sirak.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement and executive summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Principles, philosophy and context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
A system overview
5
2.1
Demand Response typologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Technologically . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Economically . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Focus: Danish tariffs structure for households . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Investigation of Danish households power consumption
13
3.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Analysis of consumption for heating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.6
Analysis of consumption for EV charging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.7
Chapter discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Private Optimization
39
4.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Chapter discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Long term forecasting and Scenarios delineation
57
5.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.2
Current state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Scenarios definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
Chapter discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
69
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.3
Chapter discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
7
Socio-economic optimization
93
7.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
7.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
7.3
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.5
Chapter discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
8
Discussion and conclusion
107
8.1
Methodological considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
8.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
Bibliography
113
Appendix
122
Consumption investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
Scenarios definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
AAHP
Air-to-Air Heat Pump
AMI
Advanced Metering Infrastructure
ASHP
Air-to-Air Summer House Heat Pump
AWHP
Air-to-Water Heat Pump
BEV
Battery Electric Vehicle
CAC
Central-Air Conditioning
COP
Coeaﬀicient Of Performance
CPP
Critical Peak Pricing
DH
District Heating
DHW
Domestic Hot Water
DR
Demand Response
DSM
Demand Side Management
DSO
Distribution System Operator
EE
Energy Eﬀicient
EH
Electric Heating
EV
Electric Vehicle
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation
GHG
Green House Gases
HEMS
Home Energy Management System
HP
Heat Pump
ICE
Internal Combustion Engine
LMS
Load Management Systems
NAM
Norm Activation Model
OLS
Ordinary Least Squares
PHEV
Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicle
PTA
Peak To Average Ratio
RBC
Rule Based Control
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
RTP
Real Time Pricing
TAM
Technology Acceptance Model
TES
Thermal Energy Storage
TOU
Time-of-Use
TSO
Transmission System Operator
V 2G
Vehicle-To-Grid
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Electricity generation is one of the preeminent causes of air pollution and in the last
decades the awareness about this issue has increased substantially. For this reason,
the tendency lead to worldwide growing investments in renewable energies. Denmark
is a leading country in terms of Renewable Energy Generation. The wind energy gen-
eration per capita exceeds the one of any other OECD (Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development) Countries. Sustainability and green energy are a
Danish passion and commitment; and today around 30 % of all energy used in the
country comes from renewable sources. Figure 1.1 shows the source of energy gener-
ation over the last 20 years in Denmark, where is noticeable the significant reduction
of energy generation from coal and oil in favor of biofuels, solar and wind sources.
However, wind and solar energy generation occurs when the resources are available
and do not follow load variations. Electricity demand must be balanced with gen-
eration, and this constitutes one of the dominant challenges, as Variable Renewable
Energy (VRE) is becoming increasingly prominent in Danish power systems.
Figure 1.1: Total energy supply (TES) of Denmark by source in equivalent ktoe.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
The decoupling of electricity generation and consumption can be achieved through
network expansion or through the use of flexible resources as local generation, energy
storage or Smart Energy Management. In particular, Demand Response (DR) mech-
anisms seems to be a high potential solution not requiring too high investments in
terms of infrastructure. Electricity consumption can be categorized in three main
sectors: industrial, services, and residential. The latter accounts for a total yearly
consumption of 10 TWh/year, in Denmark. On the other side, residential loads are
characterized by high granularity and time variability, and have 24-7 availability for
flexible operation.
This makes the sector particularly attractive for demand side
flexibility.
1.1
Problem statement and executive summary
The purpose of the present thesis is the examination of residential sector electricity
consumption and how the development of new technologies and control systems can
shape the electricity demand of the future. In particular, an evaluation of the sector
potential DR provision has been carried out. To reach this goal the study does not
intend to apply a specific method, analysing a specific typology of consumer and the
role of it in the sustainable transition. The intention of the developed research is to
perform an examination enclosing different fields of the Energy Systems Analysis.
• Chapter 2 investigates how residential sector can contribute in green transition.
This lead to the investigation of how electricity can be used in a more eﬀicient
way, which in turn lead to the analysis of the requirements and effects of DR on
the system. Two particular technologies: electric vehicle (EV) and heat pump
(HP), are considered particularly suitable for the analysis and identified as high
potential flexibility appliances driving DR in dwellings.
• Chapter 3 starts the research method with an inspection of how electricity is
consumed on a household scale. This is investigated more in depth through the
availability of a wide dataset, collecting hourly power consumption across socio-
economic categories. The results of this analysis, generate peculiar consumption
insights, attributable to the characteristics of each category. This is a crucial
differentiation, and is kept through the entirety of study.
• Chapter 4 aims to design an optimization model for private consumers, dispos-
ing of these flexible technologies. This will be developed as a technical problem,
observing each technologies’ operation and constraints and evaluate the overall
effect of these new consumption patterns. The propensity in investment in flex-
ible technologies of the same socio-economic consumers category is evaluated
and the outcome numbers of the scenarios are reallocated in the categories. In
this way, an analysis of which categories are the ones expected to provide more
flexibility to the power system is possible.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Problem statement and executive summary
3
• Chapter 5, consequently forecasts of diffusion of the flexible technologies above
cited are retrieved, following the inspection of literature studies carried on this
topic. The predictions will lead to the development of scenarios regarding the
rapidity of diffusion of EVs and HPs among Danish residential sector, as well
as the adoption of compelling Smart Grid technologies.
• Chapter 6, later on, bearing in mind the outcomes of analyses previously carried,
outlines the optimal consumption pattern across household categories, preserv-
ing once again socio-economic differentiation.
• Finally in Chapter 7, the obtained consumption patterns, together with tech-
nologies adoption scenarios allow to assess how residential flexibility will impact
the energy system. The aggregated sector flexible consumption is simulated in
Balmorel system model in order to appraise the effects regarding generation,
emissions and other criteria evaluating the state of the power system.
The investigation can be reformulated in the following research questions:
• What are the main characteristics of Danish Households consumption?
• How is consumption affected by socio-economic and technical characteristics of
household?
• Can residential sector provide flexibility?
• Which households categories are more likely to provide it?
• How to enable Demand Response potential in the future? Which are the barri-
ers?
• Which will be the system benefits of residential flexibility under different de-
ployment scenarios?
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Principles, philosophy and context
The philosophy and reasoning of this research thesis find their roots in the studies
undertaken in the Master program of Sustainable Energy. The latter aims to assess
the role of Energy System in transition to a greener and more sustainable society.
Energy sustainability is, thus, the underlying theme of the project. United Nations in-
cluded ”Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all”
between the ”Global Goals for Sustainable Development”. These are also fundamen-
tal themes of the latest Europe Green Deal [1], which considers the de-carbonisation
of the energy sector as a key step towards a carbon-neutral Europe.
The project aims at applying and developing various of the topics learned in
the course of the studies.
The multi perspective approach will try to provide a
comprehensive view of the sector and system interactions, allowing to address the
main aspects of system flexibility, and in particular of residential DR provision.
Flexibility is a widely used term, defined in general as: ’The ability to change to
suit new conditions or situations’. Referring to energy systems, and in particular the
residential sector, the definition can be interpreted as: the modification of generation
injection and/or consumption patterns in reaction to an external signal (price signal
or activation) in order to provide a service within the energy system. [2]. As will
be primarily covered in Chapter 2, the activation of this type of flexibility is often
referred to as DR mechanisms.
Residential sector is particularly interesting to analyse, especially under a socio-
economic point of view. Indeed, if in other sectors the moving factor is often eco-
nomical, in the residential one a strong influence can be attributed to consumer’s
sensitivity to issues such as societal and environmental sustainability.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
A system overview
Electricity consumption in residential sector represents a significant part of the total
electricity consumption in Denmark, specifically, with a slight yearly variation, resi-
dential consumption reaches nearly 10 TWh annually, accounting in the last decade
around 30% of the total electricity consumption [3]. Residential electricity consump-
tion is predicted to increase in the future due to progressive augment in number of
electric appliances in dwellings. Among those, new technologies as electric vehicles
and heat pumps seem particularly adapt to take part at a smart use of electricity.
This particular circumstance makes Demand Response in residential sector especially
attractive.
Demand response can be defined as an induced variation in electricity use of
consumers from their normal consumption patterns, as a result of differences in the
price of electricity over time. DR can also respond at the definition of ”an incentive
payments inducing lower demand in moments of high wholesale market prices or if
the system reliability is jeopardized”[4].
DR is thus one of the ways to establish
a sustainable and reliable electricity supply, reducing unnecessary investments in
terms of generation, interconnection capacities and reducing peak consumption [5].
Moreover, higher RES exploitation and in general a more intelligent way of using
electricity. In the next subsection the role and the typologies of Demand Response
are briefly described.
2.1
Demand Response typologies
DR in general take place as programs used by electric system operators as resource op-
tions for balancing supply and demand. The optimal provision of these resources, and
in general customer consumption management can vary depending on the distribution
network structure. It is possible to detect three main typology of DR distinguishing
them based on method of activation:
• Reliability DR, this method is based on a direct activation signals that aim,
in moment of insuﬀicient generation, to avoid the interruption of the service.
• Economic DR, the principle of this method is, as the name suggests, the
economic participation in the energy markets of DR assets, that will fulfill the
requirements of the market.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 A system overview
• Pricing-based DR, similarly to what happens in Economic DR the costumers
will react to price signals through real-time price tariffs or peak prices incentives.
The third type of response however arises without the participation in energy market,
differently from the first two, which requires large loads and direct resource provi-
sion. This makes Pricing-based DR particularly suitable for residential sector, and
specifically for household customers. A set of considerations can be taken when in-
vestigating DR deployment in residential sector, and can be summarized in two main
groups:
• Technological considerations regarding technologies enabling DR and provid-
ing the infrastructure to fully exploit flexible resources.
• Economical considerations on power tariff designs and price schemes for trans-
mitting price signals to end-users.
The next subsections attempts to develop these two contexts.
2.2
Technologically
Demand Response requires at first an information system providing a fast communi-
cation between distribution and households. This system has first the aim of trans-
mitting the price signals, while providing the distribution to bid for the appropriate
capacity in the market. Beside this, it provides a variety of benefits. In the last
decade smart metering infrastructures have been developed in many countries with
the aim of digitalize and facilitate the power system information flow [6]. The higher
availability of real time information, along with the predicted larger electrification are
making residential sector adapt and interesting for DR applications. Specific tech-
nologies as heat pumps and electric vehicles will be particularly helpful in expanding
demand responding house environment.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Technologically
7
2.2.1
Smart grids and smart meters
Smart grids are a complex system of electric power grid connecting, through the use
of advanced energy management techniques, automatic controllers to electric users
modern sensors. The aims of smart grid connection are various, among those, op-
timization of electricity demand, energy and network availability, and continuous
interconnected information are the main one. Focusing on the residential sector en-
ergy management, smart grids main purpose is to favour a more precise operation
for the network and distribution operators (TSOs and DSOs). These are the entities
which will have to face and handle the aggregated consumption of households.
Smart metering infrastructure has a key role in the demand management infor-
mation system, allowing the power system players to access a massive amount of
recorded fine grained data. Denmark had the goal of rolling out smart meters to
all type of consumers, residential in particular, by the end of 2020 [7], [8]. Besides
the value for system operators, the contribution of the smart metering in enhancing
eﬀiciency, sustainability and competitiveness of demand side has been an important
research topic worldwide. Both academic research and industries have focused on
development and implementation of statistical and econometric techniques to exploit
the potential of this new information system. A variety of experimental projects and
research can be found in literature covering smart grids analysis and smart metering
infrastructure. In Denmark, the Centre for IT Intelligent Energy systems (CITIES)
[9], developed a number of projects investigating statistical techniques for smart me-
ter data to enhance the stability and the eﬀiciency of cities power grid, as well as
money-saving opportunities for users [10]. Similarly in Switzerland, The Bits to En-
ergy Lab, which is a joint research project of ETH Zurich, ST Gallen University,
Bamberg University and Nurnberg University, focuses on energy consumption data
for exploring approaches that can serve the sustainable energy development through
behavioral intervention and customers segmentation [11].
The use of smart metering appliances is also the prerequisite of hourly tariff designs
in the retail market, establishing the use of dynamic prices and possibly near real-time
signals. In this way, this achievement will provide not only a more precise metering of
the consumption in real time, but will also allow consumers to contribute indirectly
to energy markets, by changing their consumption according to variable tariffs. [12].
Lastly, the communication enabled by smart grids allows a smart relation between
utilities and its costumers or users, creating an opportunity for the development of
smart buildings and communities.
Heading back to the focus of this thesis, smart grids and smart meters are the
technological groundwork to allow Demand Response activation in the residential sec-
tor. Smart technology ranges from smart meters to technologies that automatically
control the use of an appliance, for instance, when an EV is charged, basing this deci-
sion on prices or other signals criteria. Specific types of end-consumers technologies,
such as heat pumps and electric vehicles, are often indicated as promising technolo-
gies for DR automation [12], [13] and [14]. In the following, a brief description of
the technologies analysed in the thesis is carried and the reason why heat pumps and
==PAGE:20==
8
2 A system overview
electric vehicles play an important role in enabling flexibility in residential sector is
briefly explained.
2.2.2
Heat Pumps
Electricity and more generally energy consumption in residential sector, as previously
stated, constitutes a significant share of total in Denmark, and in general worldwide.
Of the total energy demand of the sector, more than 70% is attributable to the sole
heat demand in EU28 [15]. This high energy demand is predicted to experience a
strong electrification, mainly due to higher eﬀiciencies compared to other heating
sources. Therefore, residential sector and more specifically heating in it, has large
potentiality for what concern energy savings and load shifting [16]. In particular, com-
bining use of electricity for heating purposes, with heat storage, has been revealed
as a particularly promising way of providing flexibility to the system [17]. Thermal
storage, thus covers as well a key role allowing the decoupling of electric and heat
demand. In Bloess et al. (2018) [16], a categorization of the most important resi-
dential power-to-heat options is carried out. At first centralized and decentralized
options are distinct, contrast that can be recalled in Danish system in district heating
connection and individual heating for the flat, house or block. In both cases the most
eﬀicient way is identified with the use of heat pumps to convert power to heat. The
role of individual heat pump is examined in Hedegaard et al. (2013) [18], results of
the study show how heat pumps, even not under flexible operation, can positively
influence the system, facilitating larger wind power investments and reducing system
costs, fuel consumption, and CO2 emissions. The findings of the study, moreover,
state how aggregated demand profile of individual heat pumps is good suiting for the
integration of wind power. Furthermore, paired with investment in individual heat
storages HPs help to load shaving and their operation is prioritised in low electricity
price periods. Ultimately flexible operation of HPs are confirmed providing system,
a cost reduction. A more detailed explanation of HP characteristics, operation and
technical constraints will take place in Chapter 4
2.2.3
Electric vehicles
The electrification of transport sector is also considered a fundamental step in sys-
tem decarbonization. Moving to a low carbon future within the transport sector will
require a substantial shift away from fossil fuels toward more sustainable means of
transport. As will be appraised further in Chapter 5, the Danish and European future
of transportation is more and more headed to an electric driven fleet [19], [20]. Many
nations are investing in improving their charging infrastructure, incentivising electric
vehicle purchasing through offering grant schemes and tax relief to consumers. Also
if the main benefit of this transition is the fuel substitution and consequent emissions
reduction, a variety of additional advantages are expected, among which flexibility
provision. Electric vehicle owners, and in particular residential customers will have
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Economically
9
in their hands a high potential shiftable load that can participate in all the DR ap-
plications above reviewed. The use of electric vehicles at the same time will carry
challenges. As highlighted by [21] and [22], the passive charging of vehicles could un-
dermine sustainability effort, requiring unnecessary grid and generation investments.
As found in literature, and as will be demonstrated in this work, the presence of an
electric vehicles almost doubles the household consumption [23]. This impact high-
lights the need of an adequate charging power management. A consistent body of
literature demonstrate how electric vehicles load management can help minimize the
drawback of electric vehicles adoption. Gunkel et al. (2020) [21], provided a system
overview of how different types of charging strategies will impact the power system
in the future. The study finds that different types of smart charging can provide high
economical savings in simulated future European system. More technically, a range
of studies have explored potential charging management schemes to minimize power
losses and voltage deviation [22] [24]. Lastly, regulatory focused publications provide
showed how a smart integration of EVs will benefit both utilities and consumers, gen-
erating new business opportunities for the first and enhancing savings for the second
[14]. The latter will be particularly relevant for this thesis and will be analysed closer
in Chapters 4 and 6.
2.3
Economically
The deployment of Demand Response in residential sector will also depend on main
economical factors. In order to activate flexibility, consumers should be encouraged
to participate in the smart management of their own consumption. In this sense,
tariffs rewarding an eﬀicient use of electricity are a central element to enable Demand
Response.
2.3.1
Different typologies of tariffs and prices signals
Acknowledging the Price-based as the appropriate DR typology for the residential
sector, the main role of residential power tariffs should be to direct power market
needs to consumers through price signals. Power tariffs are structured in different
components, such as supply and distribution tariffs, obligations and taxes, as will
be evaluate further. Traditionally, tariffs are fixed, meaning that the tariff will not
change the price for electricity at the variation of power system conditions. However,
from economic theory, market eﬀiciency and equity are best served when the price
customers pay, for shared infrastructure, reflects as closely as possible the costs that
consumer imposes [12]. As also stressed by the Council of European Energy Regula-
tors (CEER), customers should pay for grid services in proportion to how much and
when they use the grid [25]. Embracing this theme, consumers that participate in
DR, favouring system and grid benefits, should be rewarded of their contribution.
From another side, as already acknowledged, Price-Based DR is mainly relying on
price signals, these have to provide time specific indication to the end-users. Different
==PAGE:22==
10
2 A system overview
typologies of prices signals are designed to accomplish this need.
The underlying
theme in developing tariffs for a smart use of energy is the improvement in time
granularity. In Denmark, generally the more implemented tariffs to enable demand
response are time-of-use tariffs (TOU), critical peak pricing (CPP), and real time
pricing (RTP).
TOU aims to decrease the consumption at peak hours in favor of an increase of
the demand in normal and low price hours. Normally the daily 24 hours are grouped
in three levels: low, normal an peak hours these have different rates that reflect
the average costs in the three.CPP focuses at periods when prices in the market are
really high, due to large demand or lack of production capacity, the main difference
with TOU is the fact that retailers or utilities call on consumers to react at short
notice in a limited number of days/hours per year. During non peak periods often
is given as a price discount to consumers.
Lastly in RTP, the price of electricity
is a direct reflection of the market price, normally on hourly scale, where the price
are determined on a day-ahead or hour-ahead basis. Compared to TOU where the
differentiation is between low, normal and high prices the direct connection of market
price and electricity price allows RTP to remove welfare losses generated by this
difference. [26]
Summarizing, while residential DR deployment relies on time specific price signals,
the development of adequate types of tariffs is also moved by a regulatory need of
more eﬀicient and equal consumers payment schemes.
Together with the prolific
research on new price schemes, these elements give expectation that more and more
companies will implement these types of tariffs schemes.
2.4
Focus: Danish tariffs structure for households
In Denmark, electricity customers are committed by two contractual associations: the
distribution network company and the supplier. Distribution system operator compa-
nies (DSOs) are often having the property or the exclusive operation of distribution
network branches, or regional infrastructures. In this way they become monopolies as
they have the control over the key input, in this case the distribution infrastructure.
Monopolies of this type are usually highly regulated, or partially owned by the govern-
ment, as in the case of the Danish TSO Energinet. The usual type of regulation aims
at recovering the costs of the operation, while allowing enough profits to maintain
healthy investments rates. A clearer overview of the components of the total price of
electricity in residential sector is listed below.
• The Supply tariff - encloses the production cost of electricity and related
price and represents what is also called the cost of energy.
• Distribution grid tariff - embody the costs for providing the distribution on
low voltage levels, Transmission tariff accounts the same costs for high voltage
levels as well as all the ancillary services costs.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Focus: Danish tariffs structure for households
11
• Public Service Obligation (PSO) this element is a portion of the bill in-
serted with the intent of supporting renewable energy and decentralized pro-
duction, as well as R&D in power system.
• Electricity taxes are applied to all the bills, the list of taxes comprehend
multiple voices: electricity tax, electricity distribution charge, energy savings
tax, supplementary charge. Electricity tax is the major component of energy
taxation, and partial reduction in particular classes of customers is envisaged
e.g. in households with electric heating the consumption exceeding the 4000kWh
per year is subject to a lower tax level.
• Value added tax (VAT) is a fixed percentage added to the full price of goods
and services, hence also on electricity price.
However, Danish electricity retail prices are between the highest in Europe, as it
is possible to see in Figure 2.1, the cost of electricity represents just around 20% of
the total, while the energy taxes are three times the European average [3]. Figure 2.1
gives an idea in terms of proportion between taxes and other costs, in electricity prices
for household consumers across Europe. Residential customers can decide freely only
on the supply part of the retail cost, which is, in particular in Denmark, just a small
portion of the entire retail price. This portion constitutes around one fifth of the
total price.Denmark, in line with other European countries, is implementing tariffs
that follows regulators recommendations. Simple, transparent and non distortionary
distribution tariff designs are on the agenda of the major Danish distributors. [8]
An example of distribution tariff aiming at the reduction of peak demand is rep-
resented by Radius, a distribution company, offering a different approach in terms
of distribution tariff with the intent of encouraging behavioural change. Customers
pay an overprice for the use of the network in peak hours. The individuated three
predefined peak hours are from 5 p.m. to 8 p.m. of each day, in winter months.
By shifting demand away from these hours, the distribution company can avoid or
diminish costs for grid reinforcements, resulting in savings also for the consumers.
However, due to the fact that Supply tariff, compared to other countries, repre-
sents a smaller portion of the total price customer choice of tariff will have a lower
impact on the overall electricity bill. The high taxation is addressed by the Danish
government for a reduction. Danish recent energy policy agreement seeks to reduce
the standard electricity tax and the electrical heating tax. Moreover, Danish recent
policy agreements open for a reform process also of the taxation scheme, by “explor-
ing the possibility of a dynamic electricity tax” (Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy
and Utilities, 2018a) [27]. However, given the actual tariff situation, the variability
of the electricity bill of residential customers is almost negligible and a behavioral
response to different tariff methodologies is diﬀicult to appraise.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 A system overview
Figure 2.1: Electricity prices for household consumers, first half 2020 (EUR per
kWh)
Source: Eurostat (nrg/pc/204).
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Investigation of Danish
households power
consumption
The purpose of this first analysis Chapter is to provide a comprehensive insight into
Danish residential power consumption profiles. As first a set of descriptive parame-
ters has been calculated across time and across household typologies, as well as an
evaluation of different indicative fluctuations. The assessed results permit to evaluate
which household characteristics are critical in determining the consumption behavior.
This chapter also represents the first important step to study the flexibility potential
of danish residential sector, as it yields useful information regarding the household
distribution of flexible technologies and relative usage across categories. Nevertheless,
the description of the dataset used in the through the whole study is included.
3.1
Literature review
A wide set of studies considering residential electricity consumption and socioeco-
nomic characteristics data can be found in literature. Andersen et al.(2019)[28] an-
alyzed both the annual and the hourly consumption of 667.000 households smart
meters for the whole 2017. The effect of socio-economic characteristics on both the
hourly and total annual consumption is tested through the generation of econometric
models. Linear model coeﬀicients are defined for categories of consumers and relative
characteristics classes and tested for the annual consumption. A non linear model for
the consumption time series is used to differentiate hourly, monthly and the type of
days (working/not working). For what regards the annual consumption level, results
showed that the type of dwelling, the number of adults, the presence of children in the
household and the heating system are significative factors. The hourly consumption
is significantly affected by the electric vehicle presence, the age of households and the
presence of children. The study concludes that increasing the electrification of heating
and transport sector might change considerably the consumption profile especially for
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
the evening and night loads. Moreover, the authors underline the necessity of evalu-
ating the effect of different household types on the Demand Response flexibility. As
the real-time and fixed tariff different is moderate, the economic eﬀiciency led by real
time pricing is not likely to be hindered by distributional concern. In Kipping and
Trømborg (2016) [29] model hourly electricity consumption in Norway and Sweden
using smart meter, weather, and survey data. The analysis regarding measurement
data of 470 households in Hønefoss (Norway) and of 200 households in Vesterberg
(Sweden), aims to generate specific demand profiles base on the dwelling types and
finally asses potentials for load-shifting. In Anderson et. al(2017) [30], the authors
try to go through the reverse process, aiming to asses the feasibility of the determina-
tion of dwellings characteristics starting from their consumption profiles. The results
of the study found promising relations between households characteristics and load
profile features, suggesting the use of this type of relation for census in absence of
administrative data. The Irish Household Budget Survey collected 5891 households’
consumption micro data, which has been analyzed by Chesser et al.
(2019) [31].
The authors studied how energy demand is affected by micro-RES distribution, and
how incentives are used by the different household categories. The study concluded
that the main factors affecting the consumption are the number of people living in
the house, the household disposable income, and the number of bedrooms.
Simi-
larly, in Italy, Copiello and Gabriellli (2017) [32] analyzed determinants of energy
consumption in residential buildings, using ten years of annual recordings (from 2004
to 2013) from the whole national area, including market, climate, buildings, house-
hold and technological development data.
The study focused both on the energy
demand drivers, and in particular also on market effects such as price elasticities and
direct rebound effect estimation. The study results show that the building dimension
drives the electricity consumption, and the technological development is related to a
reduction of the energy loads. However authors underline how the market economic
parameters such as the elasticity of income and price are very significant in shaping
the power demand and its changes in time.
3.2
Method
Power consumption time series have been evaluated under different aspects. As first,
as set of global characteristics have been examined, namely the total, peak and average
consumption and the peak to average ratio. This four parameters have been evaluated
statistically with a focus on significant categories. Linear regressions on panel data
have then been estimated to determine how these parameters vary in relation to socio-
economic features of the categories. In a second moment, a time-specific analysis has
been carried over three time frames: yearly weekly and daily pattern. After this,
a closer look into the technological features of the data has been taken.
A focus
on consumption for heating and vehicles has been finally taken in terms of total
demand and daily pattern.
These information will cover a particular role in the
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Method
15
system flexibility modeling and then be recalled through the whole study. Hereby the
main statistical models used for the analysis.
3.2.1
Consumption parameters
In the following lines, a list of the consumption parameters examined, with relative
explanation is redacted. Each of the parameter is calculated for all the categories.
• Total consumption sum of each hourly consumption along the year.
• Peak consumption represents the highest electricity hourly demand in the
year. It indicates the electricity grid and generation capacity required to meet
electricity demand at all times.
• Average consumption has been calculated for the whole year and seasonally
in order to isolate the consumption attributable to seasonal temperature and
lighting conditions.
• Peak to Average ratio (PTA) is calculated as the ratio between the peak
consumption and the yearly average. Given the fluctuating nature of residential
sector demand, this factor often reflects the level of grid oversize. If pt is the
consumption of a specific category or aggregation of categories at hour t:
max
t∈{1,8760} pt
∑8760
t=1 pt
8760
(3.1)
3.2.2
Linear regression models
The informative content of each of the socio-economic and technological features (vari-
ables) in explaining the characteristic consumption parameters (i.e. total consump-
tion, peak consumption, average, etc.) has been evaluated through a binary variable
regression on qualitative explanatory variables. With binary variable regression it
is intended a panel data regression that estimates the relationship between one or
more socio-economic and technological features with the specific consumption param-
eter. The panel dataset has been built by gathering all the consumption parameters
above studied for each of the socio-economic categories, and subsequently generating
a binary variable for each of the represented features, five socio-economic and two
technological. Each binary variable (or dummy), will represent one feature and will
be coded with 1 if the case falls in that category (feature) and with 0 if not. More
specifically, considering the dummy Apartment, in all cases in which the data are re-
ferring to one Apartment the dummy will be coded as 1, for the other cases, in which
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
the data refer to House the dummy will be coded as 0. The ordinary least squares
(OLS) regression models have been built for each couple of parameters and features,
depending on the number of alternatives of each variable. The single binary version
of the regression is shown in the Equation 3.2 and the model has been estimated on
variables having just a two level alternative, as could be the already mentioned house
typology (House,Apartment), or presence of children (with,without) or presence of
electric heating.
parameter = β0 + β1 · xd + u
xd ∈{0, 1}
(3.2)
Where, intuitively, the intercept β0 can be interpreted as the average level of the
parameter for the class corresponding to xd=0, while the coeﬀicient β1 as the average
difference between the two classes, and u is the error term. For the age variable, as
exception, a three levels binary variable regression has been used, to reflect the three
level alternatives. The base level alternative, represented by a2 = 0 and a3 = 0 has
been taken as the youngest class a1.
parameter = β0 + β1 · a2 + β2 · a3 + u
a1, a2 ∈{0, 1}
(3.3)
Where, β0 is the average value of the parameter for age group 1 and β1 and β2 the
average differences between group a1 and a2 and between a1 and a3 respectively.
3.2.3
Trend decomposition
A time series decomposition has been performed in order to investigate the yearly
and weekly power fluctuations. A multiplicative model has been used, meaning that
the original time series is decomposed into three components as in Equation 3.4: the
trend, the seasonal and the residual.
Power consumption(t) = Trend(t) · Seasonal(t) · Residuals(t)
(3.4)
The trend component is computed as the moving average of a period length. For
example in the case of a weekly seasonality decomposition, the trend is the constantly
updated average price over the past 168 hours.
The seasonal component is then
taken as the average fluctuation of one period cleared from the trend component and
repeated for the whole time span. In previous case, the weekly average oscillation is
computed and repeated 52 times. The residuals are then taken as the ratio between
the original time series and the product of trend and seasonal components. As will
be explained further, in order to clear out both the two characteristic fluctuations,
the daily and the weekly one, two decompositions have been nested. With nested is
meant decomposing firstly with a week period, then decomposing the resulting trend
with a daily period. For what regards the daily fluctuations, the power pattern has
been built by aggregating the 24 hourly consumption measurements over the whole
year, season or day type, depending on the different analyses. The pattern has then
been shown in most of the cases through a line plot interpolating the expected value
of each hour distribution, evidencing its 95% confidence interval.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Data
17
3.2.3.1
Time series clustering
A clustering technique has been applied to daily time series to assess the typologies of
daily consumption patterns. Specifically, yearly consumption time series have been
re-sampled in 24 hours time frames. The whole set of 365 daily patterns have been
clustered representative macro-trends through a standard k-means algorithm. This
method is particularly suited for vectors, and applied in load consumption analysis
[33]. Briefly, in this case the 24-dimension daily consumption vectors are firstly as-
signed to random average clusters. Each daily pattern is then iteratively reassigned to
the cluster with the nearest mean vector, until convergence. The number of clusters
k has been evaluated and selected through the maximization of the silhouette score.
3.3
Data
As mentioned before to enable Demand Response aiming at obtaining flexible loads,
the role of metering consumption is central. Historically, the energy consumption
data were collected biannually, and the improvement reached with the hourly report-
ing of smart meters offered a variety of new analyses opportunities. These data have
then been provided to the national institute of statistics Statistiks Danmark and used
for academic research, as well as grid planning and load forecast. The analysis con-
ducted in the present thesis relies on these fine-grained hourly data, which provide
the necessary time dependent and high frequency consumption characteristics. Most
of data used in the study, and particularly in this first chapter, have been obtained
from one single main source. This leading available dataset collects hourly power me-
ter records of Danish households, aggregated in socio-economic categories. The time
series cover the whole year 2017, and have been collected by Danish TSO Energinet,
provided to Danmarks Statistik and subsequently to DTU for research purposes. The
population of interest is the whole Danish residential sector, and the acquired sample
consists of a totality of 666284 households aggregated into 50 categories.
3.3.1
Dataset description
The dataset provides 8760 observations of 288 variables. The observations are the
hourly measurements of the whole 2017, starting from 01.00 of 1st January, to 23.00 of
31 December. The 288 variables are the result of three hourly reports for each of the 96
socio-economic aggregations. The original data acquired consumption measurement
from each household provided with smart meter. These data have been aggregated
into labeled categories in order to be GDPR compliant. The mentioned categories
differ by socioeconomic characteristics and technical ones. The social features are the
dwelling typology, age of adult in the household, children presence, number of adults.
The technical ones are the presence or absence of Heat Pumps and Electric Vehicles.
The combination of these 7 features result in 96 categories of aggregation, however,
as explained further, missing data reduce their number to 50. As mentioned, for each
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
of these categories, three data are provided hourly. Two of them are endogenous,
namely the total amount of aggregated power of a category and number of active
meters. The third one is the derived average consumption for each category, taken as
the ratio between total power and number of active meters. The list of features and
relative code labels provided in the dataset are shown in Table 3.1. The same labels
will be adopted consistently through the entire study, and will be recalled in the study
with the aim of clarification. The name of a household group is built by joining the
different class codes, for example h 1v mb a2 uEV 2 1(h1vmba2uEV21), identifies the
category of inhabitants 1 adult living in detached house, with age between 30 and 65
years old, with children without electric heating and without electric vehicle.
Feature
Levels
Code
Age groups
3
a1 < 30, 30 < a2 < 65, a3 > 65
Children presence
2
mb=with children, 0b=without
Number of adults
2
1v=single , 2v=two or more
House type
2
h=detached house A=Apartement
Electric Vehicle
2
uEV=absence, mEV=presence
Electric heating
2
1=absence, 2=presence
Table 3.1: Socio-economic features and relative code labels.
3.3.2
Missing values, data cleaning and preparation
The combination of the above shown features would bring to 96 household typologies.
However only 50 categories provide values through the year. The two problematic
features are the technological ones. Indeed, out of the 48 possible categories with
EV, only 6 household typologies are present. In particular 4 of house classes and 2
apartment ones. Furthermore out of the 4 house categories with EVs, the categories
represented are 2 adults of second age class with or without children and with or
without electric heating. Therefore the only age category represented in the dataset
owing a EV is the one of adults between 30 and 65 years. Taking into account the
categories with electric and without electric vehicles, 4 of the 24 are missing. These
are found to be all apartments. The categories are then reduced from 96 to 50, and
counting the three variables for each of them (i.e. total consumption, average and
available meters), the total amount of variables is then reduced to 150.
Looking
at the number observations, the only missing record is the first hour of the year,
so the total time series length is 8759 hours. As previously reported, the totality
of the sample consists of 666284 households, of which 482205 houses and 184079
apartments.
However the total number of hourly available meters differs sensibly
from hour to hour. It has to be noticed that the populations of each category have
notably different sizes. The category characterized by 2 adults of age between 30
and 65 years old, living in detached house with children, without electric heating or
electric vehicle (h2vmba2uEV21) is the most represented with 129180 smart meter
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Results
19
measurements. The least represented is instead of single adult over 65 years old with
children living in detached house with electric heating but without electric vehicles.
3.4
Results
3.4.1
Consumption parameters analysis
As first, the set of consumption parameters, previously stated, has been calculated for
each of the socio-economic and technological categories of households. Consequently,
the statistical significance of their impact on power consumption is evaluated. In
Table 3.2, the average, standard deviation, maximum and minimum value of the
consumption parameters across the categories is reported. Furthermore for each pa-
rameter the categories having maximum and minimum values are stated.
Mean
Std
Max
Max cat.
Min
Min cat.
Total [MWh]
5.06
3.10
14.03
α
1.03
ω
Peak [kW]
1.59
0.98
4.43
α
0.27
ω
Average [kW]
0.57
0.35
1.60
α
0.12
ω
PTA [-]
2.77
0.47
4.64
β
2.06
ψ
Winter avg. [kW]
0.82
0.57
2.28
α
0.12
ω
Spring avg. [kW]
0.58
0.35
1.52
α
0.12
ω
Summer avg. [kW]
0.37
0.19
1.01
α
0.11
ω
Fall avg [kW]
0.55
0.33
1.58
α
0.12
ω
Table 3.2: Consumption parameters summary and significant categories.
Category α is identified as detached houses inhabited by two grown adults (30-65
years old) with children, electric vehicles and heating.
Category β is identified as apartments with two grown up adults (30-65 years old)
with children, with vehicles and without electric heating.
Minimum categories ω and ψ are identified as apartments inhabited by single adult
young (18-29 years old) and grown respectively, without both children, electric
heating and vehicles.
The results illustrated show how the categories having lowest and highest Total
demand, respectively α (A1v0ba1uEV11) and ω (h2vmba2mEV22), are also the ones
having extreme results in terms of seasonal average and Peaks. The only parameter
in which the two categories are not representing the extreme cases are the PTA
parameter, for which β (A2vmba2mEV11) and ψ (A1v0ba2uEV11) represent the
extreme cases. In terms of features affecting the parameters considered as expected
all the minimum values are in categories with 1 adult living in apartment without any
children and without electric heating or electric vehicles. Regarding age, the lowest
consumption is at the youngest age group even if the middle age group express a
lower PTA value, suggesting a higher but more constant demand. For what concern
instead the maximum values of the parameter, these are retrieved in the category with
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
2 adults living in houses with children, with EVs and EH, belonging to the second
age class (30-65).
Remarkably maximal PTA corresponds to a different category
compared to the other consumption parameters. This is identified as the category
with 2 adults belonging to the second age group, living in apartments with children,
with EV but without electric heating. A possible explanation is given by the fact
that the highest ratio given by the parameter is in cases of not really high average
consumption in parallel with consistently higher demand during the charging of the
electric vehicles the appliance with highest consumption.
A full overview of each
category’s consumption parameters can be found in Appendix.
3.4.2
Total consumption
Looking at the parameter across socio-economic and technical features, a more de-
tailed picture can be drawn. Table 3.3 collects the average aggregated total consump-
tion of each of the feature, not examining the other feature related.
Feature
Yearly consumption
[kWh/year]
Age <30
3790
30<Age<65
5908
Age>65
5011
Ch. presence
5641
Ch. absence
4573
Single
3842
Couple
6024
Apartment
3512
House
6283
El Heating
7542
No El Heating
3117
Electric Vehicle
8651
No Electric Vehicle
4587
Table 3.3: Average total yearly consumption by socio-economic or technical feature.
Results show firstly how the age with higher average yearly electricity consumption
is the one of adult inhabitants between 30 and 65 years. The children presence appear
to affect significantly the yearly demand, specifically of more than 1000 kW/year. The
presence of more than one adult in the dwelling is also an affecting feature, this time
the difference in yearly consumption exceeds the 2000 kW/year. A more expected
result regard the higher average consumption of houses compared to apartments,
this is generally attributable to higher average size of the first type of dwelling that is
translated to a larger number of electrical appliances and consequent higher electricity
demand. For what concern electric heating and electric vehicles the feature is not
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Results
21
describing a characteristic of a socio-econonic category or technical of the dwelling,
but the presence of high electricity consuming technologies that inevitably affect the
yearly demand. In this sense the results of difference in consumption given by presence
of EH or EV are the more expected and amount averagely in more than 4000 kW/year
in both cases. Has to be stated that if the socio-economic categories equipped with
EH are almost the all 24, EV presence is less significant in the data and this is
translated in less relevance of the results regarding the consumption discrepancy of
the latter. Results here found regarding total consumption, reflect what found in the
investigation in Møller et al. (2019) [28].
3.4.3
Peak consumption
In Figure 3.1 it is possible to see which dates have been the most common in terms
of Peak consumption. The most common hour in 2017 has been the 24th of Decem-
ber at 5 PM, where 9 categories peaked simultaneously for a total of 423599 smart
meters at that hour. A potential reason could be the occurrence of Christmas eve
holiday. The second largest peak occurrence happened on the 6th of January 2017
at 6PM, where 5 categories peaked together. It has to be underlined, that the total
smart meters number has to be taken as the averaged behaviour of the class, and
representing the magnitude of the peak in terms of total number of households. The
furthest peak occurrence from winter happened on the 7th of May at midnight. This
interesting timing can be explained by the fact that the category that peaked, namely
A2v0ba2mEV11, is a category that holds Electric Vehicles, and this could explain the
night peak driven by charging. This occurs also the 24th of March at 1 AM where
another yearly peak for a category equipped with EV. In these two cases the yearly
peak seem driven by EV charging behavior. These two categories are, however, poorly
represented in terms of number of measuring smart meters, and this could limit the
validity of the results. A more detailed view on the major peaks categories can be
found in the Appendix.
Figure 3.1: Peak consumption occurrencies during year 2017. The entity of the
peak is represented by the amount of household typologies
contributing..
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
3.4.4
Peak to Average ratio
In Figure 3.2 and 3.3 it is possible to see the load duration curves of the categories
having the extreme values in terms of parameters above cited. The category previ-
ously identified as β (A2vmba2mEV11), having max PTA value, has interestingly low
demand for the majority of hours in the year. This low consumption is translated in a
flattened load duration curve in comparison the one of α (h2vmba2mEV22) category
registering highest total and peak consumption. Figure 3.2, shows how the number
of hours at high consumption, with demand similar to the peak hour is really low
in category β, thus the average consumption is particularly lower than the peak one.
If in the Peak parameter analysis the main focus was the maximal peak, here more
attention is given to the category having the highest PTA result. For the category
having max result in terms of PTA appear plausible to state that the yearly peak
occurs in a hour of contemporary multiple charging of EVs with a peak consumption
value of 3.133 kW.
Opposite conclusion can be extracted from the load duration curves in Figure 3.3,
where the category with lowest value of PTA does not show a high discrepancy in
terms of peak yearly consumption and average consumption. In this category neither
electric heating or electric vehicles are present.
Figure 3.2: Load duration curves of maximum classes: maximum consumption (pre-
viously named α=h2vmba2mEV22) and maximum peak to average ratio
(β=A2vmba2mEV11).
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Results
23
Figure 3.3:
Load
duration
curves
of
minimum
classes:
min
consump-
tion
(ω=A1v0ba1uEV11)
and
minimum
peak
to
average
ratio
(ψ=A1v0ba2uEV11).
3.4.5
Seasonal averages
Seasonal averages are examined to verify the presence of a direct relationship be-
tween season climatic differences and electricity demand in households. Apart from
categories of households equipped with electric heating, where a higher consumption
during winter in easily predictable, in other categories a significant difference in sea-
sonal is less obvious. In Figure 3.4 boxplots of the seasonal distribution of electricity
consumption across categories is depicted, the summary results of the three quartiles
help to understand the distribution of consumption in the four seasons. The average
seasonal consumption of the categories are sorted in four equal sized group and 25%,
hence 50 values, is placed in each group. During winter the whiskers, representing
the first and the last 25% of results, are more heightened. To examine the effect of
electric heating and electric vehicles on this higher discrepancy in consumption the
same boxplot graph is shown for the categories having only ’conventional’ appliances,
hence no electric heating and no electric vehicles.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
Figure 3.4: Box plots for seasonal average consumption of all categories.
Figure 3.5: Box plots for seasonal average consumption of all categories without EH
and EVs.
Figure 3.5 confirm how mainly electric heating and electric vehicles are conveying
the higher consumption during winter. Nonetheless, the winter months are the one
with higher electricity consumption even in ’conventional’ appliances. This higher
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Results
25
consumption is plausibly attributable to higher utilization of lighting system, and in
general higher utilization of electric load in consequence of the more time spent home
in the cold months.
3.4.6
Linear regression models
In order to evaluate the statistical significance of the features impact on consumption
parameters, a set of linear regression models has been built on the dataset.
The
OLS (Ordinary Least Squared error) regression models applied resulted in a series
of indicators for each of the consumption parameters previously evaluated. A series
of statistical tests is conducted in order to determine whether the predictor variable,
in the specific case the socio-economic features, have significant relationship with
the outcome variable, the parameter analysed. The assumed null hypothesis H0 is
no relationship between the two variables. A p-value of 0.05 is decided to evaluate
the rejection of the null hypothesis, if the resulting p-value will be below 0.001 the
null hypothesis will be strongly rejected, therefore there will be a strong relationship
between the feature examined and the parameter considered. In Table 3.4 it is possible
to see which features are statistically significant for each parameter, the results of the
tests are available in Appendix.
Children
House
Single
Age2
Age3
EV
EH
Total
No
Strong yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Strong yes
Peak
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Strong yes
Strong yes
Average
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Strong yes
PTA
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Winter AVG
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Strong yes
Spring AVG
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Strong yes
Summer AVG
Yes
Strong yes
Strong yes
Yes
No
Strong yes
Yes
Fall AVG
No
Strong yes
Yes
No
No
Strong yes
Strong yes
Table 3.4: Statistical significance of β1 coeﬀicient
H0 : β1 coeﬀicient is not significant
p-value < 0.05: rejected, p-value < 0.001: strongly rejected, p-value > 0.05 not
rejected.
The results show a strong relationship of some of the feature with the consumption
parameters, some instead does not show statistic evidence in influencing the parame-
ters. Total consumption seem mainly affected by house as dwelling type and by the
presence of electric heating, electric vehicles and number of adults are also affecting
the total consumption in a minor way. Age and presence of children do not appear in-
stead to be statistically relevant in influencing the yearly consumption. As expected,
the yearly peak is highly impacted by the presence of EV and HP technologies. The
average consumption appear to be affected by the same features affecting the total,
with the main difference of houses not strongly affecting the average, however the
p-value in this case is 0.0011 just above the threshold. The PTA parameter appear to
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
be just affected by the presence of electric vehicles but not by the presence of electric
heating. Regarding seasonal averages the most interesting results regard the strong
relationship between house dwelling type, number of adults and EV presence in Sum-
mer average consumption, which is also the only parameter affected by presence of
children.
A full depiction of the Linear Regression models statistics can be found in Ap-
pendix.
3.4.6.1
Smart meters availability
For the sake of information, a short analysis on the number of smart meters available
has been conducted.
• The average number of available smart meters along the year has been 636144,
corresponding to 95,5% of 666284 total maximum available meters at the end
of the year. The weekly maximum number of meters has increased by 31782
units from January to December 2017, and this could be taken as an estimate
of total meters installed during the year.
Figure 3.6: Availability of residential smart meters over 2017 taken as ratio between
total available meters and maximum yearly meters.
• In Figure 3.6 the portion of available smart meters on the total installed is shown
through the year. Four major short-time disconnection events happened on the
13th and 24th of March, 8th of april and 29-30th of May. A more consistent
reduction in connected meters has developed through the first half of august, in
particular from the 1st to the 14th. Lastly, the availability of meters does not
present a seasonal variation.
• The category with the highest normalized deviation of available meters, taken
as the ratio between the drop in available meters and the average number of
actively metering, is A2vmba2mEV11. This category had a drop of half of its
meters, and it is the same category having maximal PTA parameter, and not
highly populated.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Results
27
• The class with the highest frequency of complete availability, i.e. hours in which
all smart meters are available is h1vmba3uEV22 with a totality of 8151 hours,
very close to the whole year.
Several classes, 9 in particular, had the total
availability of smart meters for only one hour at a year.
• The category with minimum number of active smart meter is h1vmba3uEV22,
with max number of metering smart meters of 13 and minimum of 10 throughout
the year, therefore the statistic significance of the results regarding this category
is limited and will be kept in mind .
3.4.7
Times series analysis
The time-dependent characteristics of power consumption profiles have been evaluated
under different aspects. Residential power time series are typically composed by three
main elements:
• Yearly fluctuation of 8760 hours period
• Weekly fluctuation of 168 hours period
• Day fluctuation of 24 hours period
These three components have been analysed separately in the following sections.
3.4.7.1
Yearly trend analyis
Two seasonal decomposition have been performed, one with a period of 24 hours,
and one with 168 hours. The resulting trend lines represents the yearly consumption
cleared from the daily and weekly fluctuations. These new time series allow to evalu-
ate from a clearer point of view the seasonal variation of loads. Parameters analysis
showed strong significance in seasonal consumption for EV and EH presence. Hence,
in Figure 3.7, the yearly trend of aggregated categories without EH and EV in blue,
with EH in red and EV in green, are represented. It is possible to notice how the
highest seasonality in trends is for categories with EH, due to seasonal utilization of
heating. In summer months, the difference in consumption between categories with
and without electric heating could be attributable to the use of electric boilers for
DHW (domestic hot water) purposes. A seasonality is noticeable also in the EV trend,
even if less evident compared to electric heating. In particular in July it is possible
to identify a minimum, likely attributable to low use of vehicles due to summer holi-
days. The big disproportion of available measurements among the three aggregations,
results in a more smooth yearly trend for categories without EH and EV.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
Figure 3.7: Difference in yearly trend consumption between aggregated categories
with cobined weekly and daily decomposition.
3.4.7.2
Weekly consumption pattern
The weekly fluctuation can be seen for the different days in the week in Figure 3.8.
The average consumption is represented removing the daily fluctuation.
As it is
possible to notice the consumption in the weekend is significantly higher due to the
more time spent in the dwelling.
Figure 3.8: Weekly trend cleaned from daily fluctuation.
In particular, two peaks are happening on Saturday evening and Sunday morning.
These are the weekend periods where consumption is most different from the rest of
the week. The highest peak, during Sunday morning, can also be evaluated by plotting
the daily distribution of consumption for week days and weekend days. Figure 3.9
shows a clear difference in width between consumption confidence bands of week
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Results
29
and weekend day, between 9 AM and 2 PM, usual working hours in the week days,
suggesting a broader difference in consumer habits during the weekend. Another clear
shift in consumption can be seen between 6 and 8 AM. During weekdays, demand
starts increasing in the early morning, from 5 to 8. In the weekends, the morning
increase is higher and starts later, from 6 to 9. The aggregated peak demands are
both at 18 in the afternoon, and very similar in magnitude, once again the confidence
interval of weekend demand at peak is larger. It appears that this set of findings are
reflecting coherently the average household routines during the week.
Figure 3.9: weekday end weekend difference in daily consumption.
3.4.7.3
Daily consumption pattern
Last , the daily power consumption fluctuations have been investigated. In order
to visualize the impact of the four socio-economic features, daily patterns have been
aggregated into classes and the hourly distribution. The aggregated consumption in
each hour is represented in the following plots as a line interpolating the hourly mean
consumption values, and the distribution 99% confidence intervals.
Age Figure 3.10 shows the average daily consumption of the categories differing
for age class. The age groups one and two, respectively below 30 years and between
30 and 65, have very similar consumption patterns but a consistently different level.
While the young group average consumption ranges between 0.3 and 0.65 kW, the
adults are between 0.5 and 1kW circa.
Age group 3, over 65 years old, shows a
different pattern. The morning peak is later compared to age group 2, and more
marked compared to group 1. Between 8AM and 13 the consumption of elders is
high enough to be equivalent to the one of age group 2. For the rest of the day, the
three groups show statistical difference in hourly consumption. Lastly, while classes
a1 and a3 peak demand seems evenly distributed between 17 and 18, class a3 peak is
more frequently happening at 18.
Children presence Figure 3.11 displays, following the same method, the daily
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
Figure 3.10: Difference in daily
consumption distribution
across age groups.
Figure 3.11: Difference in daily
consumption distribution
for presence of children.
trend of aggregated categories with and without children are depicted. The hours
preceding the morning peak have similar levels of consumption, as the confidence
intervals intersect each other.
From the morning peak on, the two line separate,
reaching the maximal difference in the evening peak.
Number of adults Figure 3.12 represents the daily consumption pattern of ag-
gregated categories with one adult and two adults. Results show how the presence of
the second adult produces a constantly higher consumption through the whole day
and the maximum consumption difference results in the evening peak. The timing of
peaks is very similar.
Dwelling type.
In Figure 3.13 the daily consumption trend of categories of
consumers living in apartments and houses is depicted. As happened with the number
of adults, the dwelling type seems not to modify the timing of peaks but creates a
constant shift of nearly 0.3kW in consumption throughout all day hours. This hourly
shift results in a total yearly difference of 2.77 MWh between the two dwelling types.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Results
31
Figure 3.12: Difference in daily
consumption distribution
across age groups.
Figure 3.13: Difference in daily
consumption distribution
for dwelling type.
3.4.7.4
Consumption patterns clustering
In order to more precisely evaluate daily patterns characteristics, a clustering tech-
nique has been applied. Specifically, yearly consumption time series have been re-
sampled clustered in 5 representative macro-trends.
By looking at the curves in
Figure 3.14, it is possible to distinguish two main daily pattern types.
The first
differentiation is identified as the working/holiday alternation already seen in the
weekly trend analysis. The clustering further splits the workdays in two main groups,
identifying winter and summer consumption. Weekends and in general holidays are
instead clustered on three different levels, highlighting how the consumption of these
days has more variability through the year. The workdays, characterized by a peak
in the morning and a lower consumption during the working hours, have been split
by the clustering in two main groups, i.e. high level and low level. The weekends
and the holidays are also split into three main levels. It can be expected that the
differentiation in consumption level will be affected mainly by weather conditions,
hence corresponding to the different seasons throughout the year.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
Figure 3.14: Clustering of daily consumption patterns.
Figure 3.15: Yearly consumption trend with days identified by cluster.
In Figure 3.15 the days are color labeled with their relative cluster color. It is
more evident how the five main clusters correspond to five precise day types. Green
and Red clusters identify very accurately winter and summer workdays respectively.
Black cluster spotted summer holidays, while yellow and blue the weekends. The
eﬀiciency of the day type classification is quite satisfying. It is possible to notice a
clear alternation of weekdays and weekends through the working periods, both dur-
ing summer and winter. The algorithm utilized also classified all of July and half of
August as holiday period, giving no space for distinction between weekdays and week-
ends. There are two isolated holiday periods classified as weekends, corresponding to
the week 15 (in which Easter holidays fell in 2017) and week 40, in which the Danish
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Analysis of consumption for heating
33
autumn holiday/Efteraarsferie falls. The last week of the year is classified as weekend
day type. Week 21, 22 and 24 are also partially classified as holiday behavior. The
weekend of week 15 is classified as winter weekend, as the consumption level is still
high, as well as week 43 that signs the beginning of the winter period.
3.5
Analysis of consumption for heating
The presence or absence of electric heating, contained as a feature of the available
data, allows to evaluate the time wise characteristics of the household heating con-
sumption. However, looking at the typologies of heating, a differentiation between
electric boilers and heat pumps is not present for each of the socio-economic cate-
gories. This information is however contained as an aggregated additional data. The
number of dwellings having an electric heating source are shown in Table 3.5.
Dwellings electric heating
Total
37479
Heat pumps
3988 (10.64%)
Electric boilers
33491 (89.36%)
Table 3.5: Type of heating in available smart metered dwellings.
As it is possible to deduce from the numbers, the influence of electric boilers will
be much more of the one of heat pumps. In this sense the data of Statistics Denmark
referring to the number of buildings and their heating source show how nowadays
the conventional electric heating system are still substantially more diffused than
heat pump systems. A more detailed picture of the Danish residential heating sector
will be drawn in Chapter 5. A study from EA Energianalyse [20] assess how the
yearly average heat demand of a single detached house in Denmark is approximately
18.1MWh.
When considering individual electric heating plants, this heat amount
is converted in an equivalent electric consumption depending on the eﬀiciency of
the plant typology.
Following Danish Energy Agency Technology Catalogue [34],
the eﬀiciency of an electric boiler is 100%. This means that 1kW of electricity is
converted in 1 kW of heat. The same catalogue also reports the eﬀiciencies of the
two typology of heat pumps taken into account in the present study. When referring
to heat pumps, the eﬀiciency is also called Coeﬀicient of Performance (COP). For
air-to-air heat pumps, COP reaches values between 4 and 5. However no domestic
hot water can be heated by this appliances and are often paired with electric boilers
that provide the hot water used in the dwelling decreasing the eﬀiciency of the overall
system. Air-to-water heat pumps have instead a COP of approximately 4 and can
also feasibly heat the domestic water [34]. In [20] is also stated how often the real
COP is below the one reported in the technology catalogues, and report a average
yearly value for both heat pumps system of 2.8 circa in Denmark, also confirmed in
the analysis conducted in Petrovic et al. (2016) [35]. This COP value means that for
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
each kW of electricity consumed 2.8 kW of heat are produced. The electric heating
influence on household consumption has been evaluated by computing the difference
between equivalent categories with and without heating. Specifically, the presence
or absence of electric heating consumption have been confronted across 20 socio-
economic groups, recalling that 4 of the categories with electric heating are missing.
The time series representing each of these differences has been further studied. As
first, the total yearly average consumption of the electric heating appliances retrieved
is 4.68 MWh. This consumption is significantly below the expected value of 18.1
MWh found in [20]. As further discussed, this difference could be due to three main
factors. Electric heating is usually paired with other types of sources, heat pumps
contribute in lowering electricity-to-heat thanks to their COP, and a considerable
number of summer houses is present in Denmark. The yearly consumption of an air
to water heat pump, taking into account the average heat demand of a single house
and COP, results in 6.4 MWh/year. A variation of COP across seasons and Danish
regions is also examined in Petrovic et al. (2016) [35]. However, not disposing of
geographical differentiation of dwellings and to simplify the analysis, in the present
study an average yearly COP of 2.8, found in the inquiry mentioned above, is taken as
a reference. The relation between socio-economic features and electricity consumption
used to provide heat has been investigated. Following the same method, the difference
in consumption between equivalent categories with and without heating has been
taken as main indicator. In Figure 3.16 the yearly consumption of the categories
having electric heating as heating source is then showed. The red portion of the bar
represents the consumption of electric heaters, while the blue portion the consumption
of what can be identified as conventional appliances.
Figure 3.16: Categories with electric heating electricity consumption.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Analysis of consumption for heating
35
As expected, a higher consumption is detected in houses compared to apartments,
rising with the number of dwelling inhabitants.
It is also visible how electricity
demand for heating purposes increases with age groups. Precisely, comparing category
with same characteristic apart from age of inhabitants, the consumption of electricity
for heating purposes in dwellings inhabited by elders (age above 65 years) is generally
the highest. Lastly, following the same analysis carried in Chapter 3.4.7, the effect
of heating on daily consumption pattern is evaluated. Figure 3.17 shows the yearly
averaged daily consumption pattern of dwelling with and without electric heating.
The latter leads to a consistent increase in consumption, as already found previously
in demand parameters analysis. Also if the daily pattern is similar in shape, the
morning peak appear particularly marked with EH.
Figure 3.17: Difference in daily consumption distribution for households with and
without electric heating.
The analysis carried is applied to model household heating behaviors. A series of
consideration have to be highlighted. Firstly, to assess the consumption of a category
using electric heating would be very important which is the electric appliance used.
In particular, a differentiation between electric boilers and heat pumps is necessary
due to the high difference in eﬀiciency of the two. Another complication coming from
the analysis of the available data is given by the fact that electric boilers are mainly
diffused in summer/holiday houses [36], as will be further evaluated in Chapter 5. In
fact, while the average heating demand of first houses in Denmark is well represented
in literature, the assessment of heating demand of holiday homes is more diﬀicult.
The heating consumption variability in summer houses does not just depend on the
size of the house, but also by the utilization of the latter. An additional important
consideration is that electric boilers were banned in 1988 as primary heating source
for first houses. Therefore, these can be paired with other appliances increasing even
more the uncertainty of heat demand coverage of the latter.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Investigation of Danish households power consumption
3.6
Analysis of consumption for EV charging
Electric Vehicles are the second technological focus of this work. However, as already
mentioned, only the measurements of 6 socio-economic categories with electric vehi-
cles are collected. Additionally, looking at the sample size of each of these category,
only three of them gather a significant amount of smart meters (> 40). These two
considerations imply that the analysis has been taken as valid only for what concerns
the average behaviour of EV equipped households. Hence, the same method applied
to heating in section 3.5 cannot be carried for EVs. For the sake of the further flex-
ibility assessment, other implications and necessary consideration will be presented
in Chapter 6. In particular, different methods addressing heating and charging be-
haviours across categories will have to be applied. The aggregated consumption of the
electric vehicles could then be retrieved from difference in EV owners and not, in the
same way as with the electric heating. This difference can give an indication of the
magnitude of the aggregated charging load. Analysing the average consumption of all
EV owners, it is found that the presence of the latter adds on average 4064 KWh/year.
This constitutes an increase of 88%, almost doubling the household consumption. As
before, the effect of charging on households daily consumption patterns is evaluated.
Figure 3.18, displays yearly averaged daily consumption distribution with and with-
out EV. As for heating, electric vehicles lead to a consistent increase in consumption.
In this case however, the daily pattern shape seems quite different. Both the evening
peak and the morning one are particularly marked. However, the main difference
seems to be the consistently higher consumption during night hours.
Figure 3.18: Average daily consumption distribution for categories with and with-
out electric vehicles.
==PAGE:49==
3.7 Chapter discussion
37
3.7
Chapter discussion
In the present Chapter an analysis of the power consumption of Danish households
is carried out.
A large dataset of smart meters measurements are examined.
A
socio-economic and technological analysis has been possible, thanks to household
categories aggregation. Different consumption parameter have been calculated for
each category, in particular Total consumption, Yearly and Seasonal average, Peak
and Peak to Average (PTA) ratio.
The category with highest total, average and
peak consumption is found to be the detached houses of two adults of age between
25 and 64 years, living with children, owing an EV and with electric heating. PTA
has been considered a relevant parameter for consumption analysis and flexibility
assessment. The parameter was revealed to be differently distributed across categories.
The category having max PTA is found to be apartments inhabited by two adults
with age between 30 and 65 years, with children, owing an electric vehicle and without
electric heating.
Linear regression statistically confirmed the relation between PTA and EV pres-
ence in households. The lowest values for all parameters treated appear in apart-
ments. This type of dwelling, as expected, presented a lower electricity consumption
compared to detached houses. Specifically, category with lowest parameters is sin-
gle adult between 18 and 24 years, without children no EV and no electric heating.
Furthermore, the statistical analysis revealed that PTA is not impacted by electric
heating and dwelling type, which instead significantly affect total and average con-
sumption. Age and children presence do not appear to have effect on any particular
consumption parameter. Consumption trends have been evaluated in yearly, weekly
and daily time frames. The winter weekend afternoon (17-18) revealed the highest
consumption in all categories. Yearly patterns remarked the high seasonal variability
for electric heating equipped household. Daily pattern shapes and distributions re-
vealed differences for age and children presence, while other socio-economic features
only changed consumption level. A k-mean clustering has been applied to aggregated
daily patterns revealing a high eﬀiciency in linking daily patterns with day typologies
across the year.
Lastly, heating and vehicles charging consumption have been evaluated in yearly
consumption and daily patterns. While electric heating showed to contribute evenly
across the day, EVs increased significantly the consumption in night hours. EV pres-
ence is found to almost double (+88%) the yearly consumption of an average house-
hold. One of the main limitation of the analysis, in in particular of the socio-economic
characterization, has been the poor representation of some categories. As first, a con-
sistent number of categories had a too small sample size, or number of smart meters.
Secondly the two technological features, particularly EV presence, were represented
by a limited amount of categories. For a matter of statistical significance, therefore,
some of the categories have been considered to be not suﬀiciently populated to rep-
resent a general behavior and load profile. The major impact is on electric vehicles
charging analysis, which has not been possible across socio-economic categories. This
issue will be discussed in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Private Optimization
The present Chapter is intended to investigate the possibility of managing residential
electric technologies according to power prices. This investigation is carried out to
answer one of the main research question, specifically if households, and in general
residential sector can provide flexibility to the system. The perspective undertaken
in the present Chapter is the one of households, also referred to as Private Perspec-
tive. Consumers participation in Demand Response provision is here assumed mainly
driven by an economical return. Therefore the method is intended to numerically
assess households’ costs savings. Heat pump and electric vehicles consumption in
households have been modeled through a cost-minimizing linear optimization (Load
Scheduling). The two implemented programs aim to emulate the choice of consumers
which desire to optimize the consumption cost still following their needs. Optimizing
the overall power cost would result, eventually, in shifting the consumption when the
market price is lower. Whilst this effect is here evaluated in terms of technologies,
in Chapter 6 will be aggregated and allocated to socio-economic categories of house-
holds. The induced Demand Response is expected to generate positive effects for the
system, as will be numerically assessed in Chapter 7.
Figure 4.1: Consumption analysis to private optimization framework.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Private Optimization
4.1
Literature review
The method used to determine the load scheduling has been applied in parallel for heat
pumps and electric vehicles. The approach first aims at reviewing the different control
methods associated with the technologies and the broad spectrum of research and
application in literature. Consequently, the technical characteristics of the systems
are assessed, as well as the typical usage behavioural constraints. Lastly, a set of
linear programming models are proposed, to generate the set of examined technologies’
flexible behaviour.
4.1.1
Heat pump systems
In this section a brief introduction on heat pump typologies and a description of
a heat pump system is carried out. The projections in Denmark show how mainly
air-to-air and air-to-water heat pumps, will propagate in Danish residential heating
systems, and for this reason these two systems are the one modelled. In the following
lines the exemplary layout of an air-to-air and an air-to-water residential system will
be described. In both systems air is the heat source, the sink will be instead air for the
first type and water for the second. In air-to-air systems, heat is drawn from outdoor
environment and supplied locally through the utilization of an air heat-exchanger
that will simply blow warm air in the ambient to be heated, therefore no water tank,
and water distribution system will be required. On the other side, as already stated,
air-to-air heat pumps are not able provide heat to large environments. In most of the
cases this technology covers between 60% and 80% of the necessary space heating of
an entire dwelling, and therefore is paired with another heating source. Air-to-water
heat pumps require a water based distribution system. The heat drawn outdoor is
provided to a water tank through the utilization of an air-water heat exchanger, a
tank for DHW is installed and the system can also comprehend a storage tank that
will buffer the space heating demand. The water system is connected with radiators
or floor heating responsible to provide heat internally. The highest performance is
reached through the utilization of floor heating, this thanks to lower temperatures
that have to be reached [37]. The really high eﬀiciencies compared to other heating
sources, the high potential space heating coverage, till 98% of heat demand, where
the remaining part is still covered by electric heater allows AWHP to be the only
heating source of a dwelling. Air-to-water heat pumps are, on the other side, still
fairly expensive, the investment costs are anyway lower compared to previous years
and are predicted to decrease even more in future [34].
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Literature review
41
Figure 4.2: Schematic representation of air-to-water heat pump system in house-
hold. Source: DEA Technology Catalogue.
In Figure 4.2 a schematic representation of the components of a air to water system
from [34] is displayed, the analysis and description of each element of the system is
out of scope, however confronting the simple representation with the one in Figure
4.3 [34], it is possible to have a visual understanding of the difference in complexity of
the two systems that explain the distant investment cost and heat demand coverage.
Figure 4.3: Schematic representation of air-to-air heat pump system in household.
Source: DEA Technology Catalogue.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Private Optimization
4.1.1.1
Control system and flexibility in heat pumps
In a smart system, flexibility provided by heat pumps in residential sector depends
on multiple factors and system components. The vast literature regarding control
systems in heat pumps is mainly associated to air-to-water system, having higher
flexibility potential compared to air-to-air. The first factor to take into account is
the role of the control system, component required to enable the flexibility. This will
manage the communication between heat pump building energy management system
and power system. To determine potential flexibility, other technical aspects will be
also determinant. Thermal demand, heat pump size, presence of a thermal storage
and its size, dynamic system properties and ultimately the requirements of the power
system are the main vehicles of flexibility potential for heat pumps. In Rolando et al.
(2018) [38], the authors examined the effect of different control methods applied to
the use of heat pumps. Rule Based control (RBC) is a method based on a series of
’if condition-then action’ rules. This control system rely on relatively low complexity
rules typically involving numerical control parameters and threshold values.
The
RBC system does not rely on a mathematical model, however results show a good
performance of the system overall. This type of control system is used in many study
to assess the effect of heat pump flexibility on the system, as Andersen et al. (2017)
[39]. More advanced control systems, as Model Predictive Controls, approach the
building control system as an optimization problem. The objective function of the
optimization will be the minimization of the energy consumed while maintaining the
comfort requirements inside the dwelling. The diﬀiculties in obtaining a detailed MPC
models for each building, anyway, limited the spreading of this type of control system,
and also in future this type of control system is foreseen to remain associated with a
minority of smart heating systems. Fischer et al. (2017) [37], the authors investigate
three main focus of a heat pump control system. The targets of the control can be
conveyed by grid stability, where the heat pumps functioning aims to provide ancillary
services to the grid allowing stable and cost eﬀicient operation of the grid. Renewable
energy focus, where the operation of heat pump intend to increase the utilization of
electricity generated by renewable sources, with a reduction of the feed-in peaks
and smoothing of the load curve. Price focused where under a variable electricity
price tariff, the consumer will be, through the prices, encouraged to follow a certain
type of consumption behavior. The role of electricity prices in price focused control
is to transfer information about the power system conditions.
These can regard
critical events, capacity limits of predictable load, congestion of the grid or surplus
of renewable energy generation, as largely explained in Chapter 2.
In this study
the use of heat pumps associated with a control system is assumed following Price
focus, where the private consumers aim to minimize the costs related to electricity
consumption of the heating system. In Fischer et al (2014) [40], the same author
investigates the effect of Price focused controls for heat pumps in a multi-family
household in Germany, the results show how the operation under variable energy
prices will partially shift the activity of heat pumps systems towards night, when the
electricity prices are lower. An interesting consideration carried in the study, is that
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Literature review
43
due to lower temperature of the source in night hours, the overall eﬀiciency of the
heat pump system is reduced of about 5%. The reduction in eﬀiciency shows how
the price focused control results in a higher economic benefit for the consumer even
if the overall consumption is increased due to the worsening of eﬀiciencies. In the
same article, the role of thermal storage is also investigated, and the results show, as
expected, a higher reaction to price signals and thereby decreasing of operational costs
in systems provided of thermal storage. The increasing of storage size, is anyway not
arbitrarily positive, in fact a larger storage size will correspond to augmented energy
losses by the system. Not taking into account the initial higher investment costs,
above a certain size the losses overcompensates the benefits of additional flexibility,
confirming the importance of an accurate designing of heat pump systems.
4.1.2
Electric Vehicles
Electric vehicles charging is considered in this paper the other main source of flexibility
in residential sector. Electric cars in general function through electric motors powered
by batteries. The range of travel of the vehicle depends on the capacity of the battery.
Different types of electric vehicle exist on the market. In the present study plug-in
electric, also called Battery Electric Vehicles (BEV), and plug-in hybrid (PHEV) will
be examined. Briefly:
• Plug-in electric do not rely on any other power source, they do not need
petrol or diesel, hence the driving distance of these cars depends just on the
energy stored in the electric battery.
• Plug-in hybrid - Hybrid vehicles are vehicles running on electricity, nonethe-
less having also a traditional internal combustion engine running on petrol or
diesel so that when the electric battery is out of charge the vehicle can still
run on the other fuel. The PHEV can be plugged, as the name suggests, to an
electricity source to charge the battery.
Likewise heat pumps, electric vehicles optimal charging scheduling has been modeled
as a linear programming algorithm. Also in this case, charging strategies are reviewed
under three different scopes: users need, cost optimization and grid flexibility sup-
port. Similarly to the heat pumps case, the electric vehicles charge management in
households is assumed to consist in limiting or postponing the EV charge with no
extra infrastructure more than communication and control system. The flexibility
provided by the vehicles depends then on usage patterns, plugged-in duration and
the daily energy driving consumption, but also on technical parameters, like for ex-
ample battery capacity and maximum charging power. Differently from heat pump,
the EV’s technical description has not been reported in depth. The major technical
characteristics, as well as operation differences between plug in hybrids (PHEV) and
pure battery vehicles (BEV) have been considered.
A variety of methodologies is described in literature to determine the optimal
charging of EVs under different conditions and vehicle typologies.
The optimal
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Private Optimization
scheduling problem is largely addressed as a linear optimization, with some excep-
tion further explored. Commonly the objective of the optimization is to minimize
the cost of the charging, here taken as the product between the charging consump-
tion and the energy price per every hour, under a Time of Use or Real Time type
of tariff, similarly to the heating scheduling. Many studies analysed both the simple
charge-only electric vehicles but also Vehicles to Grid (V2G), which are considered
beyond the scope of this study. Heuristic methods are used to address large scale
modeling and regional aggregations [41], typically for power grid parameters assess-
ments and technology specific bottom up approaches, which differ from the analysis
carried in the present study. Looking at energy systems modeling, which is one of
the final scopes of this study, Gunkel et al.(2020) [21] analyzed the sustainability of
the transport sector electrification, modeling three different degrees of flexibility for
vehicles. The authors developed a dataset to represent the aggregated virtual power
storage of vehicles. The optimal charging is scheduled both on the energy price and
on the degradation costs. The three methods of charging are following an increasing
iteration with the system. The passive one charges the vehicles at their maximum
charging capacity from the moment the vehicles are connected to the electrical outlet
of the house. The second modeled behaviour is a smart charging that minimizes the
overall price of electricity, always guaranteeing the maximal state of charge at the
end of the period of non utilization of the car.
Nonetheless, a share of inflexible
charge is considered, utilized for emergency trip, is immediately committed in case
the state of charge is below the threshold. The third method is finally taking into
account an active behavior of the car. This V2G type of charging permits to program
the charge and discharge of the battery. In this way, the vehicle serves as an electric-
ity storage the system. Through price signals the power system will then have the
possibility to activate both the charging and discharging, and the vehicle will act as
reserve for a larger set of ancillary services typologies. The results in [21] show how
the different flexibility scenarios could affect the system costs, influence the energy
mix and impact both market prices and CO2 emissions. This is assessed through a
simulation of the energy system model Balmorel [42] from 2020 to 2050, for different
scenarios depending on transmission investments and grid expansion. System wise,
the authors underline the necessity of inter-regional flexibility to maintain small price
spatial fluctuations.
Marinelli et al.(2019) [22] analysed a full scale electric vehicles penetration sce-
nario, focusing on optimal scheduling and battery degradation under driving con-
straints. The study took place in Bornholm island, off-coast Denmark, where charging
behaviours have been empirically collected and estimated. The research had at dis-
posal the plug in data of 10’000 vehicles and 11 usage behaviour groups. The study
also considers the major technical consequences in terms of batteries degradation,
both as function of the number of cycles and also on the calendar aging, underlying
the loss in profit that this phenomenon generates under high rate cycling. The eval-
uation of the cost reduction potential is carried considering Danish power prices and
taxes, and the authors stress the need for more variable tariffs and taxes in order to
encourage the vehicles to grid integration.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Literature review
45
Regarding driving behaviours, Andersen et al.(2018) [43] carried a statistical anal-
ysis of usage pattern to estimate the added value of having multiple usage profiles
instead of one aggregated probabilistic pattern. The study showed that using the
user-level driving profiles could let the vehicle connection to be extended by one hour
on average, resulting in an longer flexibility provision and an higher yearly profit.
Similarly, the present study models separately 20 users profiles and then aggregate
the outcome, instead of using one single probabilistic usage pattern. Kristoffersen
et al.(2019) [44] presented a framework to optimize the charging and discharging of
electric vehicles. The study takes the perspective of an aggregator which has a vehicle
fleet at disposal and can manage both charging and discharging following consumers
driving patterns. The result of the research show that the flexibility is provided by
vehicles almost exclusively through charging-only vehicles. In particular, only the
0.02% of the charging is used for discharging, explained by the high battery costs and
by the taxes and end-users charges which make V2G non profitable for the house-
holds. Moreover, the increasing of the overall charging power increases with the EV
fleet size proportionally.
The study investigates also the aggregation role in the power market, showing that,
if it is a price-maker (i.e. by managing a large number of vehicles) there is the need
of a quadratic programming model. Indeed, multivariate linear regression model is
also implemented to forecast the electricity price variations dependent on the demand
variation. However, as a limitation, it is underlined that the load-price dependency
is not suﬀiciently accurate. The authors also suggest to model a balancing market
participation of the aggregator, which could interact with the market in a different
way, and could allow the capacity-offering payment and other ancillary services pro-
vision. Several other methods are reported in the literature to address load-price non
linear dependencies, between which the double layer linear programming seems the
most used, such as in [45] and [46]. The aggregator perspective analysis will not be
considered in the present study, as the main focus is the household consumption mod-
eling, which regards single charging point vehicles. However it is a very reasonable
possibility that future households will have the possibility to subscribe to charging
management services provided by the distribution and supply companies, and the
scheduling problem will assume the form of the aggregated management. Loads-price
non linear dependencies are addressed in literature through more relaxed formula-
tions of linear programming, or meta heuristics techniques.
In the present study,
the mutual interaction between flexible scheduling and prices will be addressed with
another method, as suggested by [13] and used in [39], [47], [48],[49]. The method
aims at soft linking the developed short term operational model, also called Private
Optimization, with a energy system model (i.e. Balmorel [42]), iteratively computing
to a stable price-load projection, as will be thoroughly explained in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Private Optimization
4.2
Method
4.2.1
Heat pumps
One of the most important factor to take into account to determine the electricity
consumption of heat pumps systems is the heat demand of the dwelling examined.
Heat demand is the total yearly energy necessary to warm a certain dwelling. This
depends clearly on the climate conditions where the dwelling is situated, building
characteristics as size and insulation, but also from inhabitants habits. The climate
conditions are in this study are assumed as homogeneous in the entire Denmark, to
avoid a differentiation between areas. The average heat demand of a detached house in
Denmark is quantified in [20], as already mentioned, in 18.1 MWh/year. This will be
converted in a total electricity consumption depending on the eﬀiciency of the electric
heating source in use. AWHP electricity consumption, as stated in Section 3.5, is
treated as 6400 kWh/year, as an average yearly consumption habits characteristics of
categories found in Chapter 3 are maintained scaling the average value. AAHP for the
different heating coverage are assumed having average consumption of 4200 kWh/year
still maintaining the category differentiation. Summerhouses, constitutes a significant
number of dwellings in Denmark as reported in Chapter 5. As already mentioned the
heat demand in summerhouses in diﬀicult to assess, in a survey specifically aiming
in assessing air-to-air heat pump consumption in summerhouses Christensen et al.
(2011) [50] found a large variety of consumption among the interviewed. Furthermore
the installation of air-to-air, in substitution of electric boiler, resulted in some cases
in a higher use of the dwelling and metering data do not show significant reduction of
electricity consumption. The results of the survey together with the consumption data
analysed made reasonable to assume the electricity consumption of air-to-air systems
in summerhouses around 3200 kWh/year still maintaining the category differentiation.
4.2.1.1
Flexibility potential
A way to assess flexibility in heat pumps is quantifying the maximum hourly delay
of operation, depending on the factor above described. In Hong et al (2013) [51]
simulation on the potential operation time-shift of heat pumps on a vast number of
conditions is carried. A first differentiation between detached house and flat is carried
out, then different levels of insulation and TES sizes are included in the simulations.
The threshold used in the analysis is maintaining an inside temperature of at least 18°
established by Fanger [52] as minimum comfort temperature. For detached houses of
with no insulation conditions the maximal time shift without any storage was found
to be 1 hour, and between 1 and 2 hours in flat. The addition of insulation and
thermal storage play an important role enabling advance times of 5-hours in winter
and 6-hours in summer. Similar results are also reported in Andersen et al. (2017)
[39], where more generally is expressed how the timing of heating consumption can
be shifted by 1–6 h. The role of the heat pump nominal power will determine the
maximal hourly consumption of the technology. For air-to-water systems, the power
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Method
47
will determine also the variation in energy content of the heat storage as difference
between heat demand and heat supplied by the AWHP. For air-to-air systems, instead,
not being provided with thermal storage the flexibility in terms of hourly shift is
assumed depending just on the insulation of the dwelling, hence relying only on the
intrinsic thermal inertia of the building.
4.2.1.2
Technical parameters and model
The technical parameters regarding technologies are retrieved from the DEA technol-
ogy catalogue [34]. For the model of the heat pump systems a ON/OFF control is
assumed where the heat pump will react to the power system signals if associated to
a control system. For Passive consumers the functioning of heat pump is assumed
to follow the same pattern as the one found in Chapter 3. This represents in the
model the consumption behavior of a consumer not influenced by price signals. For
technologies with activated flexibility, this will be calculated as the shifting from the
passive behavior and will be different for the air-to-air and the air-to-water systems,
following the specific flexibility time shifting potential. In case of air-to-water heat
pumps, the presence and size of heat storage play an important role in the model
affecting the potential flexibility of the system. The delineation of an overall opti-
mal heat pump and TES system for the danish residential system is not possible, as
stated before the characteristics of each building, consumer and location will vary
the optimal configuration of the heating system. For the reasons above mentioned
the role of TES in the model implemented will be simply considered as a component
of the system providing larger potential flexibility, hence a larger period where the
peak load can be shifted. It is assumed that in summer houses, taking into account
the lower heat demand, and probable investment only air-to-air HPs will be installed
which will gradually substitute electric boilers.The specifics of the three technologies
assumed as average installation in Danish household are summarized in the following
lines. In air-to-water technology, the modelled nominal power is 3kW, the maximum
load time-shift 3 hours, and the average electricity consumption across categories
6400kW/year. In air-to-air technology, instead, the modelled nominal power is 1kW,
and the maximum load time-shift 1 hour, and the average electricity consumption
across categories 4200kW/year. Summer houses are modelled just as air-to-air, how-
ever the average electricity consumption across categories is 3200kW/year. The tech-
nologies are implemented as three separate models, however the Equation represented
will be valid for all of them model, bearing in mind the difference in maximum power,
heat demand and flexibility potential. Summerhouses with air-to-air technology are
modelled on the base of air-to-air model, nonetheless having a different heat demand.
The main differences in the implementation of the two technologies are thus modelled
as different capacity, hence maximum power of the heating system, the heat demand
satisfaction and load time-shift.
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Private Optimization
Sets:
T
Yearly hours
AW
Air to Water heat pumps
AA
Air to Air heat pumps
AS
Air to Air heat pumps Summer Houses
Parameters:
COPh
Coeﬀicient of performance [-]
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS]
Φmax
h
Nominal power [kW]
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS]
∆h
Flexibility timespan [hours]
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS]
χh,t
Passive heating demand [kW]
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS], ∀t ∈T
λt
Power market prices
∀t ∈T
λgas
h,t
Gas price
∀t ∈T, ∀h ∈[AA, AS]
Variables:
Φh,t
Heating power scheduled[kW]
∀e ∈[AW, AA, AS], ∀t ∈T
Φgas
h,t
Gas fuel consumption[kW]
∀e ∈[AA, AS], ∀t ∈T
Model:
min
T
∑
t=1
λt ∗Φh,t + λgas
h,t · Φgas
h,t
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS], ∀t ∈T
(4.1)
st.
∆h
∑
δ=0
Φh,t+δ ≥
∆h+
∑
δ=0
χh,t+δ
∀h ∈[AW]∀t ∈T
(4.2)
∆h
∑
δ=0
Φh,t+δ ≥
∆h
∑
δ=0
χh,t+δ −
Φgas
h,t
COPh
∀h ∈[AA, AS]∀t ∈T
(4.3)
Φh,t ≤Φmax
h
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS]∀t ∈T
(4.4)
T
∑
t=1
Φh,t =
T
∑
t=1
χh,t
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS]∀t ∈T
(4.5)
Φh,t, Φgas
h,t ≥0
∀h ∈[AW, AA, AS]∀t ∈T
(4.6)
Heat pumps model objective function and constraints
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Method
49
The optimal load scheduling of heat pump systems associated with an HEMS is
described by the model above depicted. In Equation 4.1, the Objective function of
the models is represented, aiming at the cost minimization of the energy bill, λgas
h,t
represents the cost of the other heating source in air-to-air systems, here for simplicity
indicated as gas, this cost will be always higher than the electricity price multiplied
for the COP value of the technology in order to minimize Φgas
h,t , fuel consumption of
the second source. In Equation 4.2, the constraint regarding flexibility shift for the
AW heat pumps is depicted, the consumption of a certain hour t has to be lower or
equal the consumption of passive use in the range of hours ±∆h. Equation 4.3 reflect
the same constraint for AA and AA in summer house, where the consumption has
to be lower compared to the electricity demand of passive consumers subtracting the
one of a certain other source. This to assure that if the passive consumption is too
high in certain periods the air-to-air heat pump will try to cover entirely the demand,
but if the heat provided is not enough the other source will cover the remaining part.
Constraint 4.4 is verified that the consumption from each HP technology is below the
maximum consumption of the specific technology in the three models. Equation 4.5
verify that the yearly electricity consumption of passive use and smart use coincide.
Finally in constraint 4.6 the non negativity constraint of the variables in the model
is verified.
4.2.2
Electric vehicles
Flexibility provided by electric vehicles depends mainly on two factors: usage con-
straint and vehicles technical characteristics. The defined model used survey driving
patterns data for the first, and average retail market specifics for the second. All
parameters are differentiated by the two main EV technologies, BEVs and PHEVs,
as they will be represented by two specific sets of parameters and Equations. The
resulting models are the result of the main modelling tips acknowledged from the
reviewed studies, simplified to a reasonable extent for the scope of this work.
4.2.2.1
Driving patterns
As for heat pumps was the heating demand of the dwelling, for EVs the driving
behaviour defines the actual power demand of vehicles typologies. Driving pattern
data for this study has been retrieved from the Western Denmark Transport Survey
carried by the Transport Department of Technical University of Denmark [53]. 8717
driving patterns have been surveyed and clustered by Kristoffersen et al [44] into
twenty BEV aggregate user types and ten PHEV user types. This driving patterns
compose the set of vehicle usage types E.
Cars availability factors and temporal
charging constraints are then generated following these driving profiles. In particular,
the kilometers covered by each vehicle type Ωand the home presence A are the final
information derived from the dataset. The vehicle has been assumed to be available
(A = 1) for house charging from the last drive in the afternoon until the first drive
of the day, considering that the car is not present at home in between. Lastly, since
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Private Optimization
these data are differentiated for weekday and weekend, they have been concatenated
in weekly and repeated for the whole year. An overview of the driving patterns for
all vehicles that can be seen in Figure 4.4, where the cumulative distance driven by
every car type is showed for each hour of the weekday.
Figure 4.4: Driving patterns from TU survey in cumulated distance of each of the
30 typologies of vehicles.
4.2.2.2
Technical parameters and model
Power parameters are defined to generate the remaining power constraints. For stan-
dard electric vehicles, the model parameters are represented in the model below.
Two maximum charging power size have been considered for the residential charging,
specifically 3.7kW and 11.1kW, corresponding to the single-phase and three-phase
outlet respectively, according to the IEC61851 standard. Regarding higher charging
rates, also if already implemented in consumers car, it has been estimated that less
than 5% of future customers will install the 22kW stand [20]. The value of maximum
charging power has resulted to impact fundamentally the output of the optimization,
both in term of cost reduction that in term of peak consumption [22]. Indeed, the
average time for a vehicle to charge increases almost three times going from 11.1kW
to 3.7kW. On the other side, if taking the view of the single household, the 11kW
case could result in undesirable concentration effect, from which the need of taking
the aggregator perspective. For this reason, 3.7kW has been taken as the leading
home-charging power for the model to comply to grid distribution constraints. An
average battery size βe of 60kWh has been taken for BEVs and 10kWh for PHEVs,
as from main retail market trends. The overall eﬀiciency of the charging and bat-
tery management system ηch has been taken at 90%, as measured in [22]. Lastly,
the eﬀiciency of the drive train ηcar has been assumed to be 6 km per each kWh for
BEVs and 5 for PHEVs. An emergency factor µ has been introduced to determine the
minimum SoC of the battery before departure. A summary of the model parameters
is described in the following.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Method
51
Sets:
T
Yearly hours
B
Pure battery driving types BEVs
P
Plug in hybrid driving types PHEVs
Parameters:
ηcar
e
Electric motor eﬀiciency [km/kWh]
∀e ∈[B, P]
ηch
e
Charging power eﬀiciency [-]
∀e ∈[B, P]
Φmax
Maximum charging power [kW]
∀e ∈[B, P]
βe
Battery size [kWh]
∀e ∈[B, P]
µe
Minimum charge factor [-]
∀e ∈[B, P]
Ae,t
Availability binary indicator ∈{0,1}
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
ϵe,t
Exit event binary flag ∈{0,1}
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
Ωe,t
Driven distance[km]
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
λt
Power market prices
∀t ∈T
λoil
e,t
Alternative fuel price
∀e ∈P, ∀t ∈T
Variables:
Φe,t
Charging power scheduled [kW]
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
Φoil
e,t
Alternative fuel consumption [kW]
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
SoCe,t
State of charge [kWh]
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
Model:
min
T
∑
t=1
λt · Φe,t + λoil
e,t · Φoil
e,t
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
(4.7)
st. SoCe,e = SoCe,t−1 + Φe,t · ηch −Ωe,t
ηcar
∀t ∈T, ∀e ∈B
(4.8)
SoCe,t = SoCe,t−1 + Φe,t · ηch + Φoil
e,t −Ωe,t
ηcar
∀t ∈T, ∀e ∈P
(4.9)
Φe,t ≤Φmax
e,t
· Ae,t
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
(4.10)
SoCe,t ≥ϵe,t · βe · µe
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
(4.11)
Φe,t, Φoil
e,t,e,t ≥0 ; 0 ≤SoCe,t ≤βe
∀e ∈[B, P], ∀t ∈T
(4.12)
EV model objective function and constraints
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Private Optimization
The EV charging scheduling is defined by the model above depicted. The Ob-
jective Function in 4.7 minimizes the charging cost, where the first addend is the
pure power cost and the second is the alternative fuel cost, absent for BEVs. The
first constraint in Equation 4.8 is the balance Equation of the vehicle, where the
difference in the state of charge between two consecutive periods is determined by
the distance driven or the charging power inflow. In Equation 4.9 the same balance
Equation is defined for the set of PHEVs, where an addend is added to represent
the conventional fuel consumption. The third constraint in Equation 4.10 is limiting
the charging power to the maximum charging power when the vehicle is at home
(Ae,t = 1), and zero otherwise. The last constraint in 4.11 is assuring that at least
the emergency battery level µ is charged before departure event ϵ = 1 of each pattern.
For what regards the implementation of the PHEV vehicles, an additional variable
Oilt that allows conventional fuel consumption has to be included in the model to
make it feasible for the classes of vehicles that have driving needs larger than their
battery. Thus, battery power consumption is always preferred to fuel, as the latter is
associated to a fictional cost in the objective function that is always higher than the
power price.
4.2.3
Implementation
The linear program is scheduling the loads following Day Ahead market prices, simu-
lating an HEMS that continuously foresees the prices of the short term future (1-24h).
On the other side, actual costs and savings have been calculated based on real market
prices. The models above depicted are run for the two Danish power market regions
DK1 and DK2. The market data have been retrieved for 2020, while the forecasted
year prices are taken from system model simulations, as will be further explained
in Chapter 7. The two optimization models have been implemented in open source
programming language Julia. Specifically, the mathematical programming has been
developed using the domain-specific modeling language JuMP for mathematical opti-
mization [54], and Gurobi solver [55].
4.3
Results
The results of this chapter are intended to demonstrate the applicability of a smart
use of the technologies examined. The private perspective is here undertaken, the
potential savings are calculated comparing the costs in conventional use of the ap-
pliances (no EMS, no Price response) with smart consumption resulting from the
optimization. As first a brief visualization of the two scheduling behaviors is pro-
posed. Consequently numerical results of the savings are displayed for each of the
technology modelled.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Results
53
4.3.1
Scheduling behavior
The performance of the two models is displayed in Figures 4.5 and Figure 4.6. The
operation of the air to water heat pump and the battery electric vehicles have been
taken as representative for the technologies’ models.
The price optimal loads are
plotted, as well as the passive consumption, and power prices of two relevant 48 hour
time span.
Figure 4.5: Julia output plot of load scheduling of HPs in representative 48h time
span.
The heat pump load scheduling pattern represented in Figure 4.5, show the behav-
ior of an heat pump connected with a HEMS. A characteristic price response behavior
can be found at hour 19, where at a local peak price corresponds a load reduction
in the Smart use not found in the Passive. At hour 41 a local load peak occurs, in
Smart use, to let the system reduce the consumption in the successive three hours.
This can be considered a good example of required heat demand satisfaction.
Figure 4.6:
Julia output plot of load scheduling of EVs in representative 48h time
span.
The vehicle charging scheduling is represented in Figure 4.6. Vertical lines are
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Private Optimization
drawn to highlight the action of the availability factor and exit flag. As can shown
by the black vertical lines, the passive behaviour consists in charging the battery as
soon as arrive home. The optimal scheduling instead is planning the charge in the
lowest price hours, typically in the night and closer to the morning departure. It is
interesting to see how at hour 27 the charging starts even if the price is not completely
lowered.
4.3.2
Savings from DR for technologies
The savings have been numerically calculated for each of the five technologies, and
represent the annual cost difference between a passive and a smart use. The values
are reported in Table 4.1. The heat pumps savings calculation, as well as the ones of
the hybrid electric vehicles is not taking into account the costs related to the use of
the alternative heating sources or fuel. The price of the alternative source is however
prioritizing the use of electricity in the optimization. In case heat demand for air-to-
air heat pumps and driving needs for hybrid vehicles are not completely satisfied in a
certain period, the other source or fuel will be used to satisfy it, allowing the problem
feasibility.
AW
AA
AS
BEV
PHEV
DK1
9.0%
7.1%
6.0%
39.0%
41.8%
DK2
9.1%
7.3%
6.1%
39.1%
42.1%
Table 4.1: Percentage savings of variable cost of power for the use of five modeled
technologies.
Electric vehicles show a higher potential reduction due to the higher flexibility. For
the same reason, as expected, air-to-water show a higher power costs reduction com-
pared to air-to-air. Looking at differences between technologies, BEVs and PHEVs
appear to have comparable savings with slightly higher reduction for the latter.
4.4
Chapter discussion
This chapter aimed to assess the optimal use of flexible technology and to quantify
the related savings. The linear programming models developed simulate the smart
use of the technologies examined, including the major technical and use constraints
found in literature. The outcomes have been evaluated both timewise and through
cost reduction calculation. The results show how the more the technology is able
to shift its load, thus acting as flexible load, the more the use of EMS system is
meaningful. BEV and PHEV associated with control system show the highest saving
and the longest shifts in peaks.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Chapter discussion
55
A first element to be discussed regards the percentage variations in electricity
costs. Even if they have been taken as indicators of the potential savings, they do
not reflect the actual power bill for two reason. As first, they are only accounting the
technology. This means that a house that have both an HP and an EV will have a
weighted percentage saving. Moreover, the conventional appliances load is not taken
into account, and is left to analyse in Chapter 6. Secondly, the tariff composition
effect has to be considered. As evaluated previously, the fixed part in the electricity
bill, mainly taxes, constitute the major share of the power cost, almost 80%, as stated
in [3]. This will inevitably reduce the savings potential.
The implementation of the private optimization models presented several limita-
tions. Possible improvements are here listed. Concerning heat pumps, the imple-
mentation of multiple possible storage sizes in the air to water model, for instance,
could have given a more realistic representation of the diversity across houses. In
relation to the simulations that will be performed in next Chapter, an improvement
of the COP and a decrease of heat demand, related to better insulation of dwellings
throughout the years, could have been a reasonable assumption. This development
in the years would have also led to an higher flexible potential, especially for air-
to-water systems. Looking at the EV charging model, the main limitations concern
the temporal differentiation. The implementation of seasonal driving patterns would
have allowed more specific results for different periods of the year. A temporal work-
day/holiday classification, as found in Chapter 3, would have provide more accurate
differentiation in the consumption pattern. In regards of the model parameters, the
use of an exit flag does not take into account the randomness of consumers morning
behavior. Thus the model often choose to charge the vehicle close to the departure
time. In general stochastic methods could have represented better the random nature
of consumer behaviours, both for heat pumps and EVs. Load scheduling is highly
influenced by prices distribution. A deeper investigation of this effects will be carried
out in Chapter 7. However, it could have been relevant to implement special signals
for yearly peak consumption or particularly stressful grid conditions. It is expected
that when flexible loads will be aggregated, EVs in particular will generate demand
concentration effects in low price hours. These phenomenon has to be handled and
limited through small scale distributional constraints that have been considered out
of the study scope.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Long term forecasting
and Scenarios
delineation
After investigating Danish residential consumption in Chapter 3 and generating smart
scheduling profiles in Chapter 4, this Chapter provides an overview of the scenarios
delineation process that has been undertaken as next. This step takes a central role
in the upcoming parts of the study. Long term forecasts will provide the necessary
information to project the residential demand characteristics, as well as quantify the
effects of Demand Response deployment under different system conditions. As first,
the concept of scenario is introduced in relation to energy systems modelling. After
this, the scenario delineation process begins with a clear description of the current
state of heating and electric transportation in Denmark, and respective policies and
incentives.
Finally, the developed scenarios and their underlying assumptions are
described. The projections delineated by the scenarios will be used in Chapter 6.1.2
to evaluate the effect of flexible technologies respectively on socio-economic household
categories and in Chapter 7 to evaluate the impact of DR on the power system.
5.1
Literature review
The word scenario is used in research, foresight, planning, policy and business strat-
egy within the energy domain. A unique and common definition of scenario does
not exist, hence the use and purpose outline a specific definition that reflects the
desired function. Common characteristics are anyway shared in all these definitions:
Scenarios are usually description of potential futures within the pathways that may
convey from the present to those particular future conditions [56]. Normally scenarios
are adopted with the aim of prediction, exploration and anticipation. The Predictive
scenarios are the one used to describe the most likely future, hence the foreseen fu-
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Long term forecasting and Scenarios delineation
ture following the trend of the present as a result of ’business as usual’. Explorative
scenarios define a certain number of potential futures as desired, feared or possible
and will analyse the actual trend that will conduct to these futures. Ultimately An-
ticipative (or normative) scenarios delineate desired or feared futures and working
backwards find the possible trend to reach the particular futures.
A large body of literature has been produced on long term forecasting and scenario
delineation, showing that the interest in long term effects is a focal point of energy
systems modelling. The energy sector is in fact investment-intensive and the long
term financial and environmental feasibility of energy projects plays a critical role
in planning. For this reason, several modelling tools and system models have been
developed throughout the years.
In this study, in particular, the energy system
model Balmorel [42] has been utilized to determine the long term effects of the danish
residential Demand Response deployment, as will be thoroughly explained in Chapter
7. Long term projections are fundamental for assessing future challenges in the energy
systems, from the grid development planning, to the market regulations and policies
design. The modeling and analysis of consumption time series are facilitating the
estimation and understanding of future system characteristics. Hourly consumption
data, together with long term projections, can consolidate the forecasting of future
consumption patterns under different system scenarios.
Recently, Andersen et al. (2019) [57], used the hourly electricity demand of Danish
sectors of 2015 to transform the long term annual projections to hourly projections
until 2040. The authors analysed the drivers of the different demand sectors and
their future changes in Danish distribution areas. Individual heat pumps, electric
vehicles and large data centers are recognized as major actors in the future Danish
electrification. The authors built an econometric model of the power load based on
consumption profiles distribution of different consumer categories. A long term fore-
casting is then carried considering the new categories of customers for the household
sector including heat pumps and electric vehicles. A previous study by Andersen et al.
(2017) [39], more focused on residential sector, analysed the results from a Demand
Response experiment called MOVEPOWER. In the program, households customers
of Danish company SydEnergi were proposed to participate in shifting their consump-
tion with either an economic and or environmental incentive. The study individuated
heat pumps and EVs owners as new categories of household consumption, investigat-
ing the significance of their contribution in residential demand. Finally, the authors
studied the effect of the projected number of individual HPs and Evs on the hourly
load in 2030.
The volume of the potential flexibilty pool primarily depends on the number of
appliances. Home Energy Management Systems (HEMS), however, will decide how
much of these potential will be activated. The use of frameworks for modeling the
acceptance level of these type of technologies is largely applied in literature. Models
such as Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [58] define primary factors in deter-
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Current state
59
mining users acceptance of new technologies. These are identified as the perceived
usefulness, grading how much the technology will benefit the user, and the perceived
ease-of-use, or level of effort in using a particular system or technology. This factors
combined with behavioural and attitudinal intentions, impressions of the technol-
ogy, and with external factors will regulate the technology acceptance. Broman Toft
et al. (2014) [59] studied Smart Grid technologies adoption by applying the TAM
together with the Norm Activation Model (NAM), in order to determine the role
of responsibility values in the acceptance modelling. The study tested survey data
from Denmark, Norway and Switzerland, and confirmed that consumers acceptance
of Smart Grid Technologies is driven by usefulness and ease-of-use. The study also
successfully verified that societal and environmental values play a critical role in the
behaviour modeling of these responsible technologies. The use of models in determin-
ing scenarios of technology acceptance and adoption is a common and widespread
practice. However, this study does not take the burden of collecting and examining
in depth these factors. Anyway, acceptance scenarios are further delineated in order
to take into account such a critical aspect.
Methods for long term loads forecasting have been a major topic in energy system
modelling research. Lindberg et al. (2019) [13] reviewed methodologies for forecasting
long term hourly electricity demand, elaborating on drivers that determine the hourly
profile and the consumption level. Moreover, the review evaluates specifically how
flexibility deployment is taken into account in the long term forecasting methods anal-
ysed. Two of the main approaches identified by Lindberg et al. are the ”soft-linking
energy system models for long term developments and power market models for ad-
equate short-term resolution” and ”aggregating simulated individual load profiles or
average profiles in a bottom-up approach”. The approach developed in this thesis
is intended to investigate the feasible application of these modeling and forecasting
methods to residential flexibility.
5.2
Current state
As already acknowledged in Chapter 2, heat pumps and electric vehicles are identified
as the appliances that are going to majorly impact the Demand Response potential
from the residential sector. For this reason it is considered essential to have a clear im-
age of the current state of residential sector in terms of household heating and private
transportation. In the following, a closer view on Danish heating and transportation
consumption is taken. Heating sources in the Danish households and private vehicles
stock in Denmark are investigated. This overview will give the idea of the actual resi-
dential sector and represents a starting point for the modelling of DR potential. From
these considerations in fact three scenarios are outlined, namely Slow, Expected and
Rapid Electrification. These scenarios consist of projections of heat pumps and elec-
tric vehicles stocks among Danish households, gathered from the analysis of different
sector studies and forecasts. The majority of the projections are retrieved from the
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Long term forecasting and Scenarios delineation
recent Danish Energy Agency Energy Outlook 2020 [19], and Technology Catalogue
2020 [34]. Other main resource studies examined are the Energianalyse Electrification
Perspectives study [20], Energinet Transport note 2019. [60] and Statistik Denmark
open database [36].
5.2.1
Heating in danish residential sector
A collection of studies are available to outlines the current state of heating sources in
Denmark. In the DEA Energy Outlook[61], the energy consumption for space heating
is analysed across the different heating sources. From the study, it is assessed that in
2018 the major role in energy consumption was played by the district heating (DH),
followed by gas and biomass. According to the study, these sources are expected to
continue to have a main role in the system, however a growing one will be played
by heat pumps in individual heating. Large scale heat pumps are also foreseen to
have a constantly escalation as source of heat for DH, confirming the trend to go
towards more electrified heating systems. However, the diffusion of large scale heat
pumps are beyond the scope of the present study, as the electricity consumption is not
be accounted in the residential sector electricity demand. District heating is hence
the primary source of heating in Denmark, and in 2017 it was assessed that 65% of
citizens were served by this heating source [36]. In high density areas, a centralized
heating system present advantages compared to individual heating . The eﬀiciency
of the heat production in combined heat and power plants is higher, and costs for
consumer are lower. However, the adoption of DH as heat source is less attractive,
or in some cases not even accessible, for areas with low population densities, as the
infrastructure investment per household is considerably higher. Furthermore, due to
the high cost of warm water connection installations, residential areas with a high
concentration of detached houses are less suitable for the use of DH, compared to
areas with fewer buildings of larger dimension and higher number of inhabitants, e.g.
blocks of apartments. For this reason, the diffusion of district heating in detached
houses has been assumed to be limited and thus individual heating plants will continue
to be an important presence in Denmark. From Statistics Denmark database [36] an
overview of buildings space heating sources in Denmark has been retrieved. Data are
sorted by building typology and results interesting to analyse how the the source of
heating is highly dependent on it.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Current state
61
Detached or semi-
Multi-dwelling
Other residential
Summer
detached houses
buildings
buildings
houses
District heating
677620
78043
3074
1911
C.H. oil-fired boiler
140746
4205
44824
4425
C.H. natural gas
327765
8434
3442
234
C.H solid fuel
52117
571
34087
439
Electric boilers
90114
1756
7268
172536
Oil stoves
3852
145
741
6327
Solid fuel stoves
7032
86
2182
12275
Heat pumps
71908
656
18420
17809
Solid fuel stoves
1532
193
118
2424
Others/Unknown
4695
3597
2943
9428
Total
1377381
97686
117099
227808
Share
75.70%
5.4%
6.4%
12.5%
Table 5.1: Building typologies and relative heating sources in absolute and percent-
age numbers..
Table 5.1 show the different heating source divided for building typology, the latter
are grouped to follow a similar categorization of the one of the smart meter dataset
analysed in this study. Weekend/Summer houses are differentiated from the other
dwelling typology, the use of summer houses is in fact regulated by the Danish law
stating that utilization of the property for other than recreational purposes is illegal.
Therefore, these typology of dwellings will be unoccupied for long periods during
the year, as a result, electricity and heat consumption in summerhouses cannot be
considered as the one in first house dwelling. The number of summerhouses or second
home in Denmark is between 210000 and 230000 accounting on 7-9% of the total
number of dwellings, hence these should be considered in the overview of heating in
residential sector. The vast majority of Summer houses have electric boilers as heating
source. Figure 5.1 displays the share of heating source in residential buildings.
For what concerns heat pumps, data retrieved from Statistics Denmark refer to
air-to-water technology being the only heat pump technology able to cover entirely
the heat demand of a dwelling. However, looking at number of plants, it is possible
to notice how air-to-water systems are present in only around 6% of the residential
building as heating sources. The numbers of Statistics Denmark , are confirmed in
the analysis carried by Energianalyse in [20], where in 2017 the number of air-to-
water heat pumps in Denmark was 10600, where the difference in the numbers can
be explained by the diffusion of this technology between 2017 and 2020. Furthermore
another important information that can be acquired from the data available is the
confirmation of almost no use of air-to-water heat pumps as heating source for multi-
dwelling houses. This limitation is theoretically explained in Petrovic et al. (2016)
[35], that finds reasons in spatial and technical restriction, and confirmed by numerical
data. A limit in inspecting the data available from [36] is the fact that the entire
analysis is carried for number of buildings and not dwelling, a multi-dwelling house
may thus comprise a highly variable number of apartments and thus a highly variable
energy consumption of the building. Even with an analysis carried by number of
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Long term forecasting and Scenarios delineation
Figure 5.1: Share of buildings in residential sector per type of heating source.
houses the issue persists, different size of the household, use of the dwelling (first
or summer house) and habits of the inhabitants can affect significantly the heat
demand. For these reasons it is important to take into account not just the number
of buildings but also the size of the latter. Statistics Denmark provides also data
of the squared meters heated by each of the sources above stated (Table available
in Appendix).
The data are important to confirm in which typology of building
the diffusion of air-to-water heat pumps is more likely. As already suggested by the
building number, the share of area heated by heat pumps in multi-dwelling houses
is almost negligible 0.30%, the share is instead significant, almost 8%, for detached
houses. This information is crucial and will be kept in mind for the building typology
more involved in the diffusion of air-to-water heat pumps.
5.2.2
Private transportation in danish residential sector
To assess the state of private transportation of a Country, the number of the total
stock of cars has to be assessed, this in Denmark is nearly 2.7 million cars following
Statistics Denmark data [36]. ACEA (European Automobile Manufacturers Associa-
tion) conducted a study in 2018 to determine the average number of cars per 1000
inhabitants in Europe [62]. In this ranking the European average is 610 cars per 1000
inhabitants, Denmark is among the countries with lower numbers with an average
of 525. The reasons of this low amount of cars compared to other countries in Eu-
rope must be sought for instance in the high quality of public transportation, the
high taxation of purchase and possession of a vehicle, the diffuse use of bicycles as
mean of transportation. In 2018 the government announced the ambition to ban in
2030 the sale of gasoline and diesel cars that represents today the majority of the
stock. In 2020 the share of the stock of danish cars is divided in 98.5% ICE (Internal
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Scenarios definition
63
Combustion Engine) 0.8% BEV (Battery Electric Vehicles) and 0.7% PHEV (Plug-in
Hybrid Electric Vehicles), with a total fleet of electric cars of nearly 20000 vehicles
[19]. Compared to other Nordic countries EVs are still not really popular in Denmark,
in 2018 was found that just 0.7% of the newly registered vehicles in Denmark were
battery electric, where in Norway the share was of 31.2% for the same period [63]. It
has to be stated that sales of EVs in the last years have been highly dependent on
taxation level, and yearly sales changed drastically in number from year to year. In
2015 a record in sales of electric vehicles, of almost 5000 EVs, was registered due to
a tax break. From 1 January 2016 electric cars were no longer exempt from taxation,
and that heavily reflected in a diminishing in sales that endured also in 2017 with
sales of less than 1500 EVs in 2016 and less than a thousand in 2017. Year 2018, 2019,
2020 registered instead a promising increase in sales in Denmark with 2018 +356%
compared to previous year,+99% in 2019, and +246% in 2020 [63].
5.3
Scenarios definition
In this section the above mentioned three different Explorative scenarios, Slow, Ex-
pected and Rapid electrification, projection of investment, in residential sector, in po-
tential flexible appliances considered in this study (HPs and EVs) will be described.
Firstly, should be borne in mind that, regardless the scenario considered, the ex-
pectancy for the future of danish residential sector is a more electricity based system.
Therefore in each of the cases considered there will be an increase in number of heat
pumps and electric vehicles. The projection will be thus dependent on the quickness
in diffusion. As foreseen in [20] three levels of diffusion will be examined, the out-
comes of these levels will depend on factors as policies, R&D in these technologies or
higher taxation of non-electricity based appliances. Clearly an intermediate scenario
could arise, or even at the occurrence of not predicted events, more extreme outcomes.
The causes leading to the scenarios are out of scope in the present inquiry, therefore,
the aim is the analysis of the effect that each scenario would generate on the power
system. As will be further better explained, the potential flexibility of HPs and EVs
are dependent on the use of the same. In the worst case, indeed, the increase in
electricity consumption could worsen the stability of the power system, increasing
the electricity demand during peak hours. The control of use of these electric appli-
ances, particularly high consuming compared to conventional appliances, is therefore
crucial. Different typology of consumers will be included depending on how much the
latter will be prone to control their own electricity consumption, or on the presence
of automatic systems that will manage the use of these appliances. The principle
here considered, and thus, the main focus of these automatic controls will be trying
to minimize the electricity bill not changing drastically habits of consumers.
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Long term forecasting and Scenarios delineation
5.3.1
Heat pumps projections
Figure 5.2: Scenarios of Heat Pumps diffusion in Danish residential sector .
Figure 5.2 shows the three scenarios of diffusion of heat pumps compared to the
total heating systems in the residential sector.
It is possible to see how also the
number of heating systems is increasing throughout the years, one of the reasons is
the role of air-to-air HP systems usually paired with other heating sources, and thus
increasing the total number of heating systems. District heating, as already stated, is
the most diffused heat source in Denmark, providing heat to almost half of the Danish
houses, however in Danish household that are and will not be provided with district
heating system, heat pump will play an important role. Slow Electrification scenario
is the most conservative one, predicting a number of 500 thousand air-to-air and 290
thousand air-to-water heat pump in 2030 that will become respectively 600 and 335
thousand in 2040. Expected scenario represents the expectancy of authorities and of
agency designated to draw up scenarios, the number of heat pumps in this scenario
will be 650 thousand for air-to-air and 300 thousand for air-to-water in 2030, and
respectively 750 and 450 thousand in 2040. Ultimately Rapid Electrification foresees
a rapid grown in purchase of electric appliances and predict in 2030 800 thousand
air-to-air and 350 thousand air-to-water, growing in number till reaching 850 and
680 thousand in 2040. Within Rapid Electrification Scenario, in 2040, dwellings not
served by district heating will commonly have a heat pump as heating source, with
air-to-water heat pumps as unique heating source and air-to-air heat pumps paired
with another heating source. Regarding instead the number of conventional electric
boilers, this is considered as inversely proportional to the diffusion of heat pumps.
Following this reasoning, the more it will be advantageous to invest in heat pump,
the more rapid will be the substitution of conventional electric boilers with HP.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Scenarios definition
65
Figure 5.3: Electric boilers plants and air-to-air HP plants scenarios.
In Figure 5.3 it is possible to see the projection of number of electric boilers for the
three scenarios considered. Within Rapid Electrification scenario it is assumed that
the number of electric boilers will reach 0 in 2040. The reasoning and the numbers
are assumed regarding space heating, thus the eventual remaining electric boilers will
be used for DHW purposes and not to provide space heating to the dwellings.
5.3.2
Electric vehicles projections
Figure 5.4: Scenarios of diffusion of electric vehicles in Danish system.
Regarding instead EVs, the danish government announce the ambitious goal of in-
creasing the number of EVs in Denmark reaching 1 million electric of hybrid cars on
Danish road in 2030, and secured financing for 775 thousand [7]. Two between the
study regarding projection examined outlined great discrepancy in terms of future
numbers of EVs in Danish society. The DEA projection seemed quite conservative in
[61], by contrast the projections of Energinet in [60] predict high high increase of sales
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Long term forecasting and Scenarios delineation
in the next few years that will result in 3 millions of EVs (BEV and PHEV) on the
Danish streets in 2040. In Figure 5.4 displays the three scenarios projection of number
of EVs untill 2040. As previously stated the incentive programs of the government
as well as an increase of CO2 tax on ICE vehicle can determine which of the scenario
represented will be converted in reality. Taking a look at the different projections
of the three scenarios, for Slow Electrification scenario the predicted number in 2030
of BEV is 350 and 35 thousand PHEV, that will convert in 800 and 250 thousand
in 2040. For expected scenario these prediction grow to 550 and 250 thousand in
2030, becoming respectively 2.1 million and 400 thousand in 2040. Lastly for rapid
electrification scenario, still referring respectively for BEV and PHEV, the number
foreseen are 700 and 300 thousand in 2030, becoming 2.3 million and 700 thousand
in 2040.
5.3.3
Scenarios of Demand Response activation
To evaluate how potential flexibility will be actually activated three possible types of
consumer response to price signals have been investigated. The first typology anal-
ysed is the ’Passive’ consumer. This class of consumers will not provide any kind of
response to market prices or new tariffs incentives of the future, therefore there will
be no change in consumption habits. The households belonging to this class equipped
with electric vehicles and or heat pumps will not provide any price response and will
not own any smart energy management system. EVs e.g will be charged as soon
as the consumers arrive home according to their driving pattern. [64]. Overall, the
majority of consumers are expected to belong to this group in all of the scenarios
treated in this study. A second considered class represents the ’Behavioral Response’
consumers. This typology of consumers is composed by households served with a
variable price tariff such as a Time of Use (TOU) or Real Time Pricing (RTP) tariffs.
The users will have access to information regarding the system state and price and
will be encouraged by retail power prices to shift the consumption of conventional ap-
pliances in off-peak period. Ultimately the ’Automatic Response’ class will represent
the customers equipped with smart chargers, smart heating controllers, load manage-
ment systems (LMS) or, in general, Home Energy Management Systems. This type
of consumers respond to prices with an optimal load scheduling. The HEMS will op-
timize the electricity costs, constrained by households comfort or driving needs. This
private benefit will also have a positive effect on the system, and this will be evalu-
ated in Chapter 7. It is assumed that the aggregation of these consumer types will
generate a uniform pool of flexible loads. These are assumed to act homogeneously to
delineate the total flexible load. Specifically, the households providing flexibility will
be aggregated in two main groups, one for each of the Danish power market regions.
This will be thoroughly explained in Chapter 7.
The projections of these homogeneous behaviours will be called Adoption scenarios.
The latter will be identified by three levels (10%, 25%, 40%), each corresponding to
a share of the total residential sector. In particular, these three levels will try to
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Chapter discussion
67
quantify three degrees of HEMS acceptance in households. The share will translate
them in an amount of flexible technologies responding to price signals.
5.4
Chapter discussion
In this Chapter forecasting of future deployment of EVs an HPs, in the Danish res-
idential sector is assessed. These two technologies will play a constantly increasing
role, respectively in terms of private transportation and individual heating in Dan-
ish households.
Firstly, the present number and the selling trend of the latter is
estimated in the Danish society. This in order to determine which are the starting
conditions of the projections and also to appraise if the transition towards their use
is already in act. The tendency of consumer in the last few years confirmed how con-
sumers are purchasing an increasing number of electric vehicles and heat pumps, and
how the electricity consumption of houses is set to grow in future. The governmental
choices seemed, especially for EVs, to play a crucial role in the number of appliances
purchased. This has been taken into account when estimating the future number of
these two technologies. In response to this uncertainty, three scenarios of growth in
numbers are delineated. The main reasoning behind the definition of Slow, Expected
and Rapid Electrification reflects the overall level of electrification of Danish dwelling.
This transition is expected to flourish commonly in both residential transports and
heating. Finally three levels of adoption of control systems associated with these
technologies are outlined in order to quantify the acceptance of Demand Response.
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Flexibility assessment
across
socio-economic
categories
The amount of demand time-shiftable, also known as deferrable loads, as consequence
of a price signal is treated and will be in the following named as flexible load or flex-
ible power consumption.
Acknowledging the results obtained through the private
economic optimization in Chapter 4, this section aims at describing the aggregation
process by means of which, flexible power consumption profiles have been combined
and integrated in the original households power demand. Each socio-economic cate-
gory of households has been associated to a particular usage pattern of heating and
vehicle charging. Consequently, the projections and scenarios of technologies adop-
tion, analysed in Chapter 5, have been reallocated to the different socio-economic
categories. Two different methodologies are developed respectively for the two flex-
ible technologies, both investigating the contribution of each household typology in
the flexible loads provision. Ultimately, a numerical analysis of the latter is imple-
mented, with this, it is intended to answer to one of the thesis research questions,
in particular which socio-economic categories of households are more interested in
investing in new technologies (EVs and HPs), and if this technologies are directly
related to the availability to react to price signals of the categories.
6.1
Method
The results obtained in preceding Chapter 4 provided a numerical evaluation of how
the set of modeled flexible technologies could be scheduled to contribute in lowering
the average household cost of power. The performed simulation led to optimal loads
scheduling for year 2017, according to the hourly prices retrieved from NordPool
==PAGE:82==
70
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
market database. In the present chapter, the linear optimization model will serve
to determine how the different household categories will use the flexible load in the
future. The principal focus of the methods applied are the socio-economic profiles
of each category. As illustrated in Figure 6.1 the set of analysed features covers the
age of the household, the number of adults, the presence of children and the dwelling
type. This information is centrally employed to generate the characteristic use of the
two spheres modeled, specifically heating and vehicles, for the households typologies.
Once these behaviours are outlined, the model implemented in the private economic
optimization (PEO) will provide the optimal profiles of consumption for each category.
Figure 6.1: Households flexibility assessment framework.
Moreover, new numbers of EVs and Heat Pumps in 2025, 2030, 2040 distinctive
of the three electrification scenarios, shown in Chapter 5, as well as the adoption
of automatic controllers, or energy management systems (EMS) are divided in the
categories following the propensity in investing identified in different studies. These
elements will formerly determine the comprehensive impact of each category in terms
of flexibility provision, and its aspects will be numerically evaluated in the results. The
socio-economic categories had to be treated under a different method with regard to
heating and vehicles charging. Indeed, the data available from the main Danmarks
Statistik dataset, describing Danish residential sector electricity consumption, already
provided a differentiation between household categories for electricity consumption of
heating appliances. At the same time, missing categories were retrieved, as explained
in Chapter 3. Nevertheless, this same method was not applicable for EVs modelling,
due to small diffusion among categories and subsequent statistical insignificance. The
two technologies will then be treated separately in the following sections, although
proceeding in parallel, sharing two main method steps.
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Method
71
• Section 6.1.2 and 6.1.3 individuates what are the distinctive HP and EV charg-
ing behaviours for each household category.
• Section 6.1.4 allocates the projected number of Heat Pumps and Electric Vehi-
cles (for the three scenario outlined in Chapter 5) to each category.
Conclusively, the secondary output of this process is the overall aggregated flexible
residential demand needed for the System-wise socio-economic optimization that will
follow in Chapter 7. The approach has been implemented as a parametric compu-
tation of the final flexible profile distribution depending on the household typology,
prices, scenarios parameters and adoption shares. This allowed to apply the para-
metric algorithm to different scenarios configuration and through the succession of
iterations of the simulation. A closer look at the implementation is available in the
supplementary material in Appendix.
6.1.1
Socio-economic characteristics of Danish households
Firstly, general data regarding Danish population has been retrieved and integrated
with the ones already discussed in section 2. It turned out to be important to have
a clear image of how Danish residential system is composed in terms of household
inhabitants, following the socio-economic category differentiation presented in the
main dataset. For a clearer exposition, the set of socio-economic features included in
the original dataset, broadly analyzed in Chapter 3, together with their categorical
labels, are here recalled in Table 6.1 . The resulting number households’ of socio-
economic categories is then 24.
Feature
Levels
Code
Age groups
3
a1 < 30, 30 < a2 < 65, a3 > 65
Children presence
2
mb=with children, 0b=without
Number of adults
2
1v=single , 2v=two or more
House type
2
h=detached house A=Apartement
Table 6.1: Socio-economic features and relative codes.
Every year Statistics Denmark releases data about composition of house inhabi-
tants, dividing them following different parameters. In Table 6.2 it is possible to see
the number and share of single adults and couple in households also in light of the
presence or absence of children.
1vmb
1v0b
2vmb
2v0b
167117
1051692
542634
744981
6.67%
41.96%
21.65%
29.72%
Table 6.2: Differentiation of households and children presence.
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
Furthermore the age of Danish population is taken into account, Statistics Den-
mark provides additionally the share of population based on age, thus it is possible
to calculate the volume of each of the three categories of age needed. The results can
be seen in the following Table. 6.3
a1<30
30<a2<65
65<a3
522153
2988481
1155991
8.97%
51.32%
19.85%
Table 6.3: Danish population across age groups.
No data regarding composition of these aggregated factor are however available,
to simplify the analysis then the share of family nucleus are treated as the same in all
of the age categories. A last differentiation found in the data available is the one be-
tween houses and apartments. Statistics Denmark reports data referring to building
in residential sectors, nonetheless this variable is beyond the interest of the present
analysis for the reason that each technology examined will have technical characteris-
tics allowing diverse diffusion in house or apartments. Specifically, in the apartments
categories EVs will be most likely charged at public charging station. Therefore, the
consumption of the charging process, in this case, will not be accounted as dwelling
consumption. In regards of heat pumps instead, air to water are assumed installed
only in houses due to spatial and technical constraints. Dwelling type, thus, seems
to be a driving category characteristic, however, technical aspects of the technology
as above mentioned (e.g.
the propensity to invest of a specific category) play an
important role.
6.1.2
Heat Pumps
To have a good representation of the portion of electricity consumption in residential
sector used for heating purposes, is crucial to differentiate not just the technology of
heating system with electricity as source, but also the use that consumers make of
the dwelling. As was stated before, hence, the use of the dwelling as a first house or
summer house will characterize the yearly consumption.
6.1.2.1
Heat pump consumption classes
The heat demand covered by these technologies is thus different: air-to-water heat
pumps are the only technology considered covering the entire heat demand of a single
detached first house, air-to-air heat pumps are paired with other heating sources as it
happens also for electric boilers. In relation to summer or holiday houses, these have
to be handled differently compared to conventional dwellings, due to the fact that
heat demand will be different in terms of magnitude and periods. Data coming from
Danmarks Statistik helps to better understand which type of heating source is present
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Method
73
in holiday houses, and shows how the majority of summer house use conventional
electric heaters (electric boilers) as heating source. Because of this, the reasoning
behind the modelling of conventional electric heating and summer houses will be
linked. The first class implemented is the air-to-water heat pumps. This technology,
due to the size of the investment, properties and needs of the heating system, will
just regard single detached houses and not apartments. In specific cases, air-to-water
technology is being installed also in multi-dwelling buildings, however this case regards
a small amount of plants, as the analysis carried out in Chapter 2 highlights, thus,
the diffusion in apartments for this technology will be disregarded. The second class
regards air-to-air heat pump, which, considering the less demanding investment in
terms of cost and infrastructure, will spread in both apartments and houses, once
again following the assumed tendency to invest of the 24 categories of householders.
Summer houses class will have a lower heat demand compared to first houses, however,
the consumption will not differ significantly from the consumption of air-to-air heat
pumps, mainly due to the fact that substitution of electric boilers with air-to-air
heat pumps often doesn’t result in a reduction in electricity uptake and in use of the
heating system for the entire year as anti-freezing measure, as more in detail discussed
in Chapter 3. The possible electric based heating technologies in this class will be
either air-to-air heat pumps or conventional electric boilers. Once more, air to water
heat pumps are not included in this consumption class for the same cost and properties
limits of apartments. In Table 6.4 the yearly electricity average consumption of the
classes above listed is reported.
Air-to-Water
Air-to-Air
Air-to-Air Summer Houses
6400 kW
4200 kW
3200 kW
Table 6.4: Yearly average consumption of classes included in the analysis.
6.1.2.2
Socio-economic categories
For each of the three classes of consumers, the defined 24 categories will be main-
tained. Because of the previously mentioned technical and cost limits, as previously
stated, air-to-water technology has been assumed not to be present in the apartments,
therefore households installing this technology will only be houses. In Figure 6.1, the
schematic process of category differentiation and private optimization is represented.
The optimal profile consumption of the categories across the three classes are ob-
tained through the optimization. Statistics Denmark data, regarding householders
family nucleus, define the number of dwelling for each of the 24 categories, making it
possible to understand how heat pumps would be shared if the distribution was homo-
geneous among the categories. However, as previously mentioned, the propensity to
invest in heat pump is not treated as the same across the socio-economic categories.
The results of the studies examined [65],[66] see customers between 25 and 64 years
old as the most keen to invest, and demonstrate that the majority of heat pumps is
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
and will be purchased by this age class representing more than 50% of the population.
Acknowledging the results of the above mentioned studies, the diffusion of the new
heating technologies are distributed among the 24 categories. In regards to the age
factor, the categories are divided once, therefore the aging of population is not taken
into account. Finally, conventional electric heating systems aren’t considered to be
paired with a control system and for this reason will not be accounted in the analysis
of flexible loads.
Figure 6.2: Yearly consumption Air-to-Air heat pumps for each socio-economic cat-
egory.
In Figure 6.2 it is possible to see the different yearly average consumption for
air-to-air technologies across the 24 socio-economic categories. The with highest con-
sumption is seen in house of 2 elders with children, respecting all the factor examined
in the time series section.
6.1.2.3
Limitation of the applied method
The representation of flexible heating across socio-economic categories presents mul-
tiple limits. A first limitation is given by the fact that the time-series of electricity
consumption of heat pumps is calculated from electricity consumption data of dwelling
provided of electric heating, and not from specific data metering consumption of a
heat pump throughout the year. Moreover, data available were including also con-
ventional electric boilers for summer houses: this decrease the difference between
consumption of summer months compared to winter one due to the fact that in cold
season summer houses are often empty and in warm months are inhabited so that
heating is often turned on also during Spring and Summer. Furthermore, for a more
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Method
75
detailed analysis, the worsening of eﬀiciency of heat pumps in night hours due to
the lower outside temperature, and more in general, a yearly variation of heat pump
eﬀiciency should be accounted.
6.1.3
Electric Vehicles
As reported in section 5, the modelling of electric vehicles driving preferences and
optimal charging patterns led to a price dependent charging pattern, representing
the optimal charging scheduling of 30 different driving behaviours. The necessary
data has been collected mainly from two sources: Statistics Denmark and the TU
transport survey [67]. The role of these data in the analysis will be further described
in the following.
6.1.3.1
Driving habits and socio-economic characteristics
The purpose of this subsection is to delineate an average charging pattern for each
category. As the optimal charging patterns have been calculated singularly for each
driving pattern, the method adopted is referring to driving-charging pattern as a
couple of uniquely identified time series. The assumption taken is that, since electric
cars development has always been focused on battery size, the driving range constraint
will be negligible in the near term future.
Consequently, electric vehicles driving
behaviours will, under this assumption, correspond to the one of classical fuel-driven
(ICE) vehicles. Hence, the body of literature and data can still be taken as valid and
representative, even if in 2025 this could still represent a usage difference between
ICE and EV vehicles. The undertaken approach is the one explained in the following
points.
• Collect the share travel types per each age group.
• Obtain the relationships between number of adults, number of cars, and relative
type of travels in dwellings.
• Determine how the children presence and the type of dwelling affect the pat-
terns.
• Assign to each of the driving-charging pattern a label corresponding to the type
of travel.
• The final driving-charging pattern of a household category is calculated as the
average of the charging patterns based on the trip typology shares.
As first, each of the 20 driving-charging patterns for BEVs and 10 patterns for PHEVs
has been associated to particular journey typologies, depending on the total distance
driven, the departure time, and the hours spent travelling. The four journey typolo-
gies considered are Commute, Business, Leisure and Errands, in concordance with
==PAGE:88==
76
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
the acquired data. Secondly, travel behaviours across age groups are investigated.
The Danish transport survey [67] explores the difference in journey trends across age
categories, referring to a list of journey categorization. These travel groups are gath-
ered into the four main representative journey typologies above mentioned. From
these shares the driving patterns are assumed to be mainly related to the age of
the householder. Regarding the relation between driving habits and the number of
adults of the household, a modest body of literature has been found. Jakobsson et al.
(2016) [68] analysed the impact on driving behaviours of multi-car houses in Sweden
and Germany. The study indicates that the second car of a household has fewer long-
distance driving days and more regular driving compared to the first car or single
cars. In particular, while for first cars 51% of vehicles drive frequently long range
distances, between second cars the 20% only. From Denmark Statbank, in particular
from dataset BIL82[63], it is acknowledged that the share of households with two
or more adults having more than two vehicles is the 35%. Acknowledging these two
results, the long distance drives frequency is reduced by the conditional probability of
having two cars and driving less frequently long distances, or the 10.5%. Regarding
the driving behavior in presence of children, Bergstadt et al. (2011) [69] found that
the number of weekly trips made by households in presence of a kid increases of 46%
(from an average of 9.1 to 13.3) for and of 35% for cohabitating households with more
than one adult (from 9.6 to 13.0). Acknowledging this, the high frequency commute
and errand trips trips shares has been increased for the same amounts respectively
for single with children and cohabitating with children, at the expenses of leisure and
business trips. Regarding the dwelling type, the main impact has been counted on
the number of vehicles adopted, but it has been assumed that there is no distance
in driving patterns between people of the same socio-economic group that lives in
an house or an apartment.
The resulting trips typology distribution, later called
parameter Sc,t for each of the household categories, is then shown in Table 6.5.
(%)
commute
errands
leisure
business
1vmba1
45.41
41.03
12.07
1.50
1vmba2
53.00
32.56
13.40
1.05
1vmba3
5.11
60.74
33.59
0.56
2vmba1
36.18
39.00
22.44
2.37
2vmba2
42.24
31.62
24.52
1.63
2vmba3
4.07
54.03
41.29
0.61
1v0ba1
31.10
28.10
36.30
4.50
1v0ba2
36.30
22.30
38.40
3.00
1v0ba3
3.50
41.60
54.00
0.90
2v0ba1
27.83
30.00
38.14
4.03
2v0ba2
32.49
24.33
40.50
2.69
2v0ba3
3.13
41.56
54.50
0.81
Table 6.5: Parameter Sc,t across categories, individuating the share of travel types
for each socio-economic group.
1-2v: number of adults, 0b-mb: children presence, a: age.
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Method
77
Figure 6.3: Optimal charging pattern distribution for the different travel types.
Finally, the driving-charging pattern of each category has been calculated as a
weighted average.
Summarizing the variables and parameters used, for a clearer sight:
c
the 24 modeled household categories
p
the 20 BEV ty and 10 PHEV driving-charging patterns
t
the 4 journey typologies and driving pattern clusters
Ph,c
charging power for a socio-economic category c
Ph,p
flexible charging power for vehicle type p from PEO
Sc,t
share of journeys of type t for household category c
popp,t
population of vehicles of a pattern p, included in type
Mathematically the resulting aggregated driving pattern is calculated as in Equa-
tion 6.1. Where Ph,c is the hourly power consumption for each category, Ph,p the
power consumption of each of the 30 patterns.
Wc the weight, representing how
much a vehicle pattern contributes to the charging behaviour of a category. This
weight is the product between the parameters of Table 6.5 and the contribution of
each pattern in determining a travel typology. This last factor is calculated as the
ratio between the population of a driving pattern popp, and the total population of
the corresponding journey typology group popt, as in Equation 6.2. The charging
pattern of a category is at the end the weighted average of all patterns, weighted on
==PAGE:90==
78
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
the share of the journey types and on the contribution of each pattern in the journey
type population.
Ph,c =
30
∑
p=1
Ph,p · Wp,c
(6.1)
Wp,c = Sc,t ·
popp,t
∑
p∈t
popp,t
(6.2)
The final aggregated charging time series for each of the remaining categories is deter-
mined by the sum of each charging pattern, weighted on the different shares of driving
habits. The values of charging pattern weights Wp, c can be found in Appendix.
6.1.3.2
Limitation of the applied method
This method shares several limitations with the EV model developed in the private
optimization carried in Chapter 4. A first potential weakness, is to consider only
a week/weekday pattern, with no seasonal differentiation. This simplification can
result in inaccuracy. Especially in Denmark, in fact, it is made a large use of bikes
for everyday commuting. It is expected that car driven distances see a considerable
decrease during warmer periods, in particular in non-rural areas, however this tempo-
ral differentiation has not been implemented. The behaviour of households as been
assumed to be constant. This is considered an important limitation, and a further re-
search should investigate the behavioral change of household in both driving pattern
and electric vehicles investment. Furthermore, holiday periods are disregarded to sim-
plify the analysis, and the results for this reason could be less valid in specific weeks
such as Christmas, Easter and Summer holidays normally between the last week of
July and the first of September. Another limit of the model is not to consider any
difference in driving behaviour between houses and apartments. This factor has yet
been investigated in the next section, included in the number of vehicles allocation.
6.1.4
Numbers of EV and HP across household categories
Once the optimal use of EVs and Heat pumps is defined for each category, the number
of heating plants and vehicles of each category has to be determined.
This is a
key factor to be analysed in order to evaluate how categories will provide Demand
Response, as it will determine the size f the potential flexibility pool. For the exact
purpose of establishing the role of each category, the total number of the flexible
technologies will be the one investigated in Chapter 5. Depending on the scenario, on
the other hand the contribution of each category on this number will be determined
exploring the propensity in investing in these technology driven by the same socio-
economic factors describing the 24 categories.
==PAGE:91==
6.1 Method
79
6.1.5
Heat pumps
Different studies analyse the tendency of spreading of energy eﬀicient appliances
through different socio-economic categories, in order to have a better understand-
ing of which categories will be the one more interested in the investment of EVs and
HPs. Baldini et al. (2018) [70] proposed a model to foresee the propensity of invest-
ing in energy eﬀicient (EE) appliances in the danish residential system. The model is
based on the use of housing type quantity of inhabitants, age, and end-use behaviour
as predictors. Propensity curves are computed to study how predicted probabilities
of choosing an EE appliance change in relation to explanatory variables. A first re-
sult is a higher penchant of single houses and farmhouses in purchasing compared to
apartments, likewise the number of inhabitants of the dwelling shows a proportional
tendency in investing. Regarding age, the study states that older categories have a
higher propensity to choose EE appliances, while house owners younger than 30 years
are significantly less likely to invest. Other studies indicate how age as a predictor
is sensitive to the specific EE technology considered, older consumers are more likely
to invest in EE light bulbs and low cost EE appliances. By Ameli et al. (2015) [65]
a similar inquiry is carried in different Countries across the world, and the results
show how the propensity to purchase heat pumps and high cost EE appliances is
lower in people above 60 years compared to younger adults, same results are found
in [66] for the German case. In Table 6.6 the projection of 2020, 2025, 2030, 2040
are presented: the total number represents the Expected scenario for air-to-air heat
pumps, the latter is divided by the purpose of use of heat pump in first dwelling and
summer houses representing the two classes of consumption for the technology.
2020
2025
2030
2040
Air-to-air
first dwelling
199190
440605
596655
688450
Air-to-air
summer houses
17810
39395
53345
61550
Total
217000
480000
650000
750000
Table 6.6: Projection of Expected electrification for air-to-air HPs divided between
first dwelling and summer houses.
The results of the studies above mentioned, are therefore taken into account, when
the projection of number of HPs, referring to each particular scenario outlined for the
Danish system, are allocated to in the socio-economic categories.
In Appendix is
reported the number of air-to-air heat pumps for first dwelling throughout the years
across the categories for the Expected electrification scenario. The same ratio between
socio-economic categories diffusion is maintained also for summer houses and for air-
to-water heat pumps with the difference that air-to-water system will refer only to
houses. Air-to-air system will enter in houses and apartments, with an assumed ratio
of new appliances, of 60% in houses and 40% in apartments. The assumption made is
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
that the total number will depend on the scenario treated, yet the propensity defining
the share of the total for each category will remain the one outlined.
6.1.6
Electric Vehicles
In order to approach the exiguity of data regarding Danish adoption of electric vehicles
across socio-economic households categories, the data sourcing has been focused either
on the Nordic region EV adoption, or on Danish distribution of classic fuel-driven
vehicles.
The latter under the assumption that, in the long run, electric vehicles
distribution across categories will eventually become similar to the one of the ICE
vehicles, assuming that the price variance of EVs will reach the one of conventional.
Statistics Denmark already in 2018 marked that nine out of ten Danish citizens could
handle the daily commute in an electric car, based on most common electric car ranges
[71]. As already mentioned, since electric car producers are focusing on improving
battery sizes and energy densities, as well as engine eﬀiciencies [72], in this research
it is assumed that, in the long term, driving range will no more be a constraint for
vehicle purchase. Among the variety of EV adoption studies, looking specifically into
socio-demographics, Chen et al. (2020) [73] analysed how EV adoption relates to socio-
demographic, technical, economic, and behavioral factors in the Nordic countries. The
study performed a hierarchical regressions out of 4885 sampled households across
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Iceland. The socio-demographic variable
influencing positively the adoption of electric vehicles have been found to be the
income and number of children, being male and being young. Interestingly enough,
the residence in a non-rural area has not been found to have a positive effect on EV
adoption[73]. Acknowledging these results, the households with more than one young
(less than 65+) adult, with children living in houses has been taken as the socio-
economic group that will adopt the highest number of EV, both for BEV and PHEV.
Moreover, the regional distribution of new electric vehicles has been considered equal
for rural and non-rural areas, and corresponding to the actual distribution of vehicles
for regions in power zones DK1 and DK2 reported in following Table 6.7.
Hovedstaden
Sjelland
Syddanmark
Midtjylland
Nordjylland
DK2
DK2
DK1
DK1
DK1
Families with cars
490150
302240
439463
454290
210244
Table 6.7: Regional distribution of cars, from Danish Digital Motor Register.
Looking at the remaining socio-economic features, in particular the number of
adults, Denmarks Statistik from the Digital Motor Register, in publication BIL82 [63],
provides the number of cars for families and single-person households, conditionally
on children presence. This data, reported in Appendix, show that, overall, couple
families have, on average 1.28 cars per household, while single-person households
on average 0.45 cars per household. Consistently to this outcome, for every vehicle
allocated to a single households, 2.3 have been allocated to the respective equivalent
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Method
81
family household category. Concerning the same theme, Jakobsson et al. (2016) [68]
studied the adoption of electric vehicle in multi car households. The study targeted
multi-car owners as one of the major socio-economic groups for battery electric vehicle
adoption. Indeed, thanks to their lower average usage range, second cars are shown to
be economically better as electric driven vehicles than conventional. Lastly, the ratio
between adopted BEV and PHEV has been considered constant among categories
and proportional to the totality of the vehicles per every year.
This assumption
is an important simplification and limitation of the model, as it is expected that
the difference in adoption between EVs and PHEV will vary across categories. The
final distribution of electric vehicles among categories across years, for the expected
electrification scenario, is shown in Appendix.
6.1.6.1
Difference in vehicles availability between houses and apartments
Differently from the majority of the research belonging to the EV grid integration
literature, this study specifically wants to investigate the impact of EV on household
consumption. Hence, the charging consumption of the total projected fleet has to be
differentiated and cleaned from the cars that will not be charged at home. A further
assumption taken is that disposal of public charging station won’t influence the num-
ber vehicles charged at home, although this factor could create a significant difference
between city, peripheral and rural areas. However, it has been assumed a constant
ratio of public and residential charging station for the two modeled areas. The public
charging stations will then not be considered when in the household metered consump-
tion. Literature on difference between public and house charging is less consistent,
and even more limited are the studies covering the distinction between the choice
of home or public charging across socio-economic categories. An overall assumption
had to be made about how many of the owned vehicles will be charged at home. A
German survey analysed by Klein et al.(2010) [74] revealed how the possibility of
home charging is perceived by consumers as an advantage for purchase of EVs, hence
it is assumed that home charging will be the preferred option over public charging.
Even if this choice has not been examined across categories, the dwelling type differ-
ence between detached houses and apartments has to be taken in consideration. The
availability of home charging for apartments has been considered to be significantly
smaller compared to houses, considering that in metropolitan areas the majority of
cars will be charged in parking lots and in public or collective stations.
Overall,
in this study, a home charging factor of 80% for homes and 10% for apartments,
reducing consistently the overall available flexible loads in terms of residential contri-
bution. The simplicity of this assumption underlines the need of additional studies to
understand completely the role of socio-economics in the house charging choice. Con-
clusively, it is expected that public charging stations will be most probably managed
by aggregators [44] which will operate under DSOs contracts and provision. However,
it is probable that the same aggregators or, more generally, power distributors, will
eventually offer households charging management options, maybe depending on their
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
socio-economic profiles, age or family types. This will eventually affect the household
consumption, but this perspective has been considered out of the scope for this study.
6.2
Results
The numerical results of the applied methods of analysis are summarised in the fol-
lowing. These will be divided in terms of effect on daily average consumption, timing
of peaks and, ultimately, quantifying the potential savings from Demand Response.
The differentiation between socio-economic categories of household is a present target
in all the results.
6.2.0.1
Daily average consumption
In this subsection is evaluated the effect of flexible appliances on the average daily
consumption.
The aggregated behavior across categories is examined to have a
first overview of the new flexible daily consumption pattern. The consumption at-
tributable to ’conventional’ loads, is used as base daily demand at which the con-
sumption of the flexible technologies is added. With this approach it is possible to
compare the effect of EVs, HPs and of the combination of both on the daily trend. In
Figure 6.4 and 6.5 the aggregated average daily consumption in 2025 and 2030 with
no, one, or both flexible technologies are depicted. A main common result found in
2025 and 2030 is the minor role, in terms of dwelling consumption, of ’conventional’
appliances in presence of one or both of the flexible technologies. The blue line delin-
eate in fact the average daily consumption in categories with no EVs and no HPs. The
base load corresponds to the average consumption of households with no EVs or heat
pumps in 2017. This assuming that the consumption from ’conventional’ appliances
will not significantly change throughout the years. The orange line delineates instead
the daily average consumption of categories installing heat pumps with HEMS. Here
a difference between 2025 and 2030 is detectable: if in fact the peak hour in 2025
appears to remain at 17 and 18, with a flattening of the curve indicating a lower
Peak to Average (PTA) value, in 2030 is possible to detect a delay in the hour of
maximum consumption that appears to happen at 19. In general, the effect of heat
pumps on daily consumption emerge to be an increase in average consumption and
an overall flattening of the curves in both the years analysed, with a less evident slope
of the curve in proximity of the peak. The green line defines the daily consumption
of categories with EVs: here it is possible to see how the pattern during the day
is totally different due to the charging of the vehicles. The average peak is during
the night in both years, and the magnitude of the peak appears to decrease from
2025 to 2030 with average peak that goes from nearly 2.5 kW to around 2.1 kW. In
2030, consumption in afternoon hours appear to be more indented with succession of
a series of relative peaks. Ultimately, the red line define the trend of daily average
consumption of categories equipped with both technologies. Here technology driving
the consumption curve are the electric vehicles, reflecting the consumption trend in
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Results
83
case of categories equipped just with EVs. Heat pumps are instead contributing in
increasing the leveling up the average consumption at each hour. The resulting shape
of the curves in both years are really similar to the trend of categories equipped just
with EVs, nevertheless with a higher consumption each hour due to the contribution
of heat pumps.
Figure 6.4:
Daily aggregated average of
flexible loads and base load
in 2025.
Figure 6.5: Daily aggregated average of
flexible loads and base load
in 2030.
6.2.0.2
Peaks timing
Another interesting characteristic of flexible consumption is the effect on peak demand
timing. This aspect is particularly affected by the use of Energy Management Systems
which will try to avoid peak consumption in real time tariffs, as thoroughly explained.
To evaluate the effect of activated flexibility, the frequency of peak hours with and
without HEMS, have been compared. The impact of appliances is analysed before
singularly, and yet together. This main factor is calculated by collecting each daily
peak hour across all categories for one year. The results are depicted through two
main plots. The first one, in Figure 6.6, refers to relative frequency of the use of
technologies as was found in the measurement data of 2017, assuming the absence
of price response. The second plot, in Figure 6.7, shows the peak relative frequency
of the simulated flexibility activation. Through the comparison of the graph it is
possible to see the effect of price response on the timing of then peaks. In case of no
activated flexibility the graph shows how 17 and 18 are by by far the most recurrent
hours for consumers with no flexible appliances and also for consumers equipped
with heat pumps. For consumers with EVs and both flexible technologies, instead
the most common hours remain the same, however night peaks appear with a certain
frequency.
A very different peaks frequency is found with a flexible behaviour of
the two technologies. For consumers using HPs with HEMS, the most frequent peak
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
hours remain between 17 and 18, however the frequency in these hours significantly
decrease. This happens in favour of a spread distribution of peaks around the evening.
Also the morning heating peak occurs more frequently. EVs paired with the use of
EMS present instead a higher change in peak timing.
As was found in the daily
average consumption analysis, where the highest average consumption was found at
3 in the night, this is also confirmed to be the most frequent hour for the peaks.
Similar conclusion can be conducted also for peak timing of consumers equipped with
both EVs and HPs, where once again the first technology drives the peak timing.
Figure 6.6:
Frequency of peaks with-
out flexibility.
Figure 6.7: Frequency of peaks with
activated flexibility.
6.2.0.3
Peak timing across categories
The effect of flexibility activation is studied for single categories. The mode of peak
timing and the standard deviation are listed in Table 6.8 for each category dividing
them following the distinctive socio-economic factors.
For inflexible consumption,
results obtained previously are confirmed for each of the 24 categories of household.
Peaks are most frequent at 17 and 18 and the standard deviation of peak timing is
very low. When introducing flexible loads, peaks statistics are changing. Concerning
flexible heating activation most of the peaks among categories are remaining at same
hour, with some variation of mode, in particular in houses inhabited by single people.
The standard deviation highlights two main trends. Houses, compared to apartments,
are in fact showing a more variable peaks distribution during the day. In particular,
the category mostly affected by flexible heating, both in mode and variation of peaks,
are again houses with single occupant, while the ones less affected are the apartments
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Results
85
occupied by couples. EVs determine the shifting of the peak during night hours in
all the categories and the distribution of the peak is more variable compared to heat
pumps.
No flexibility
Flexible HP use
Flexible EV charging
mode
std
mode
std
mode
std
a1
18
0.49
21
5.90
2
5.99
a2
18
0.25
17
6.54
2
5.79
Ch
a3
17
0.44
9
6.26
2
5.98
a1
17
0.87
17
4.40
2
6.01
a2
18
0.42
20
5.93
2
6.31
Singles
No Ch
a3
18
0.43
16
5.65
2
5.99
a1
18
0.24
20
5.09
2
6.04
a2
18
0.52
17
6.02
2
6.18
Ch
a3
17
0.25
17
5.53
2
6.02
a1
17
0.24
17
5.18
3
6.09
a2
17
0.58
17
5.37
2
6.14
Houses
Couples
No Ch
a3
18
0.48
17
4.42
2
6.75
a1
18
0.31
18
3.85
2
6.17
a2
18
0.21
18
2.58
2
6.16
Ch
a3
17
0.38
9
5.06
2
6.14
a1
17
0.20
18
2.93
2
5.80
a2
17
0.46
18
1.44
2
5.93
Singles
No Ch
a3
18
0.93
18
4.02
2
5.78
a1
18
0.37
18
2.32
2
5.81
a2
18
0.10
18
1.77
2
5.85
Ch
a3
17
0.17
17
3.18
2
5.75
a1
17
0.23
17
2.24
3
6.02
a2
17
0.32
17
0.98
2
6.00
Apartments
Couples
No Ch
a3
17
1.12
17
1.83
2
6.25
Table 6.8: Mode and standard deviation of peak timing across categories, for acti-
vated flexibility.
6.2.1
Consumption parameter analysis
In addition to peak timing, the effect of DR activation is also evaluated through
consumption parameters as carried in Chapter 3. Specifically, the investigated pa-
rameters are the peak consumption level and the PTA parameter. This section wants
in fact to reassess the parameters studied in the consumption investigation after the
introduction of flexibility. The two technologies, as explained in the method, have to
be examined separately. Heat pumps consumption parameters can be compared with
the results previously obtained. Vice versa the EVs effect analysis is more limited
due to the low number of categories retrieved from 2017 data. As main considera-
tion, the electric heating socio-economic present in the measurements data of 2017
comprehended the twelve house categories and only eight categories out of twelve for
apartments. The effects of a flexible heating system between 2017 and 2025-2030
showed as first a reduction of peak values for apartments (-9% on average) and an
==PAGE:98==
86
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
increase for houses (+14%). The absence of air-to-water heat pumps (Φmax= 3kW),
appear to favour also the PTA parameters in apartments, for a reduction of -7% on
average. In particular, elders resulted to have the lowest variation in peak and PTA
compared to the parameters found in Chapter 3 For the EVs, only four categories
out of 24 were present in the measurements comparison. Examining the effect of
EVs, both peak and peak to average encountered a significant increase for all the 4
socio-economic categories that have been possible to compare. In particular an in-
crease of PTA of +25% and +40% on average for apartments and houses respectively.
This results seems highly influenced by the simplification and aggregation of driving-
charging behaviours. When analysis simultaneous use of HP and EV, the parameters
comparison showed very contrasting outcomes across socio-economic categories. The
poor representation of these classes already mentioned in Chapter 3 appeared not to
give significant results ones again. When an
6.2.2
Savings from DR for categories
In this subsection, on the same line of Chapter 4, the potential saving of use of EMS is
calculated. The main difference with previous chapter is the allocation of the savings.
If in the Private section the savings were calculated per technology, here the savings
will be quantified across the 24 socio-economic categories. The yearly power cost
reduction is calculated as the total consumption difference between flexible and non
flexible use of the technologies. As in previous Chapter, the amount of savings is
quantified under the assumption of a RTP tariff. Table 6.9 provides an overview of
the savings for each category calculated from 2020 prices.
EVs are confirmed as the technologies generating the highest profitability associ-
ated with HEMS use, averaging a saving across categories of 27.7% in 2020. The
highest savings occur in apartments inhabited by young singles with no children, cat-
egory that reaches 35.4% of saving. This category is also the category having highest
savings in case of contemporary presence of EVs and HPs with a 24.4% cost reduction.
This was found to be the category with lowest yearly base consumption identified in
Chapter 3. Focusing on heating, HPs are commonly more profitable for elder cat-
egories with average saving of 5.4% for elders, 4.3% for grown and 3.9% for young
inhabitants. The couples of elders living in detached houses with kids are the category
with highest savings from heating with a reduction of 10%. A significant difference
in saving can be seen between houses and apartments which save an average of 6.2%
and the 2.9% respectively. The opposite occurs for electric vehicles. Being the EV
consumption similar in apartments and houses, the saving in percentage will be less
relevant in houses. For households equipped with both EVs and HPs, the categories
show a tendency mainly driven by EVs once more.
==PAGE:99==
6.2 Results
87
EVEH
EV
EH
a1
-17.1%
-24.8%
-5.8%
a2
-15.1%
-21.7%
-5.1%
Ch
a3
-20.1%
-26.6%
-4.0%
a1
-20.3%
-28.6%
-5.4%
a2
-17.8%
-25.9%
-5.0%
Singles
No Ch
a3
-21.1%
-30.5%
-7.5%
a1
-17.2%
-22.5%
-5.6%
a2
-15.1%
-19.0%
-6.3%
Ch
a3
-19.4%
-22.4%
-10.0%
a1
-17.6%
-25.0%
-5.3%
a2
-16.1%
-21.6%
-6.1%
Houses
Couples
No Ch
a3
-19.7%
-26.1%
-8.0%
a1
-21.8%
-31.9%
-2.6%
a2
-20.2%
-29.8%
-2.4%
Ch
a3
-20.7%
-29.8%
-2.8%
a1
-24.4%
-35.4%
-3.7%
a2
-23.1%
-33.6%
-3.6%
Singles
No Ch
a3
-22.1%
-34.0%
-2.2%
a1
-19.4%
-29.2%
-0.7%
a2
-18.3%
-26.9%
-3.9%
Ch
a3
-19.9%
-27.1%
-5.3%
a1
-22.1%
-32.1%
-2.1%
a2
-19.1%
-30.3%
-2.1%
Apartments
Couples
No Ch
a3
-20.1%
-29.9%
-3.3%
Table 6.9: Variable power cost savings in percentage from Demand Response acti-
vation for 2020.
==PAGE:100==
88
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
6.3
Chapter discussion
In the present chapter the results from Chapter 4, have been allocated in the differ-
ent socio-economic categories. The two developed methods, for the two technologies,
investigated the influence of households characteristics on consumption pattern and
consequently on flexibility provision. Socio-economic differentiation of flexible con-
sumption has then been the focus of this Chapter.
This has been studied under
different aspects: consumption patterns, peak timing, consumption levels and esti-
mated power savings. Firstly, the change in daily consumption patterns has been
evaluated. Electric vehicles are confirmed to play the dominant role in DR across
the categories. This is evident in terms of higher maximal consumption and flexi-
bility potential as regards of time shift, as found in Chapter 4. Heat pumps have
instead a role in spreading the consumption during the day, reducing its variability.
However, the effect of the latter is always overcome by vehicles in case of presence
of both technologies. Investigating maximum consumption, EV flexible peaks are
very concentrated at night (02 - 03 AM). This is found to happen mainly because of
prices distribution, particularly low at night. It is expected that such a consistent
shift in loads will affect night power prices, reducing load concentration. This effect
has not been evaluated in this study thoroughly, but will be tackled in the following
Chapter. Such a variation is not expected to occur from heat pumps, since this tech-
nology didn’t show load concentration effects, due to the short flexibility time span
modelled.
From numerical results, this technology showed the ability to decrease
peak consumption, not drastically modifying the daily consumption pattern. Peak
timing of flexible activated heat pumps resulted in an interesting distinction between
houses and apartments. The peaks timing of the latter appeared to be less deviated
compared to houses. This can be related to the specific technologies in use in the
two dwelling typology and by the generally lower heat demand of apartments. With
respect to consumption levels, the main parameters studied have been the peak level
and PTA. These outcomes showed again a different effect of heating on houses and
apartments. The latter seemed to benefit from heat pumps flexibility, while houses
showed a worsening.
The method used to determine EV flexibility provision is focusing on the differ-
ences in the timing of the consumption, while not giving importance to the driven
distance of each category. As expected, this results in a lacking characterization of
the charging consumption across categories of households. However, there are only
four categories with electric vehicles to compare, and it has to be reminded that all
of them have sample sizes of less than 30 households. For this, no other significative
conclusion can be drawn on the effectiveness of the method in representing the annual
demand.
Regarding savings, these resulted more consistent in socio-economic categories hav-
ing lower base consumption. The influence of smart charging on the total electricity
bill emerge to be higher for inhabitants consuming less electricity from conventional
appliances. The results found for heat pumps in regards to age are confirmed also
in savings, where the connection of HPs with HEMS lead to higher cost reduction in
==PAGE:101==
6.3 Chapter discussion
89
elders. For this age group, the electricity consumption for heating purposes consti-
tutes a larger share of the total. Some of the considerations carried out in the savings
analysis of Chapter 4 are here maintaining their validity. Once again, the values are
important to have an idea of the cost reduction, but will not be directly reflected in
the electricity bill of the consumer, for the reasons previously mentioned.
6.3.1
Discussion focus: Investment tendency across categories,
policies and sustainability
The analysis carried revealed how some of the socio-economic categories are expected
to provide more flexible consumption compared to others. Specifically, grown adults
(age class 25-64 years old), living in detached house, with or without children, namely
the categories with the larger installation of EVs and HPs. Flexible use of vehicles
and heat pumps show substantial differences, in particular in respect to the loads
variance. In fact EV have higher variability compared to heat pumps, as the internal
temperature of a dwelling have to be maintained to a certain range all along day and
night. Therefore, apart extreme cases of really consistent differences in household
size, the electricity consumption of heat pumps cannot differ as much as the con-
sumption of electricity used to charge EVs. However, besides these two technologies,
smart automation adoption across categories still plays a critical role in the flexibility
achievable. As reviewed in Chapter 2, control systems in households are crucial to
reach positive outcomes for the power system. Klinge et al. (2015) [5] examined
the effect of DSM in Danish household electricity demand, and the study highlighted
how flexibility potential appeared to be really limited. According to the authors, the
reason has to be searched in the households low expectancy to react to price changes
for electricity in the short run, due to tax and energy duty share of electricity price
accounting for around 80% of household tariff, reducing the fluctuating share of the
cost.
A variety of Danish government policies that will be evaluated further, stipulate
a lower taxation for electricity used for heating purposes in households, and with
a larger EV adoption it is expected that lower taxation will be applied also at the
charging of the vehicles. In this scenario, the variable part of electricity price will
represent a significantly higher share, increasing the profitability of installation of
a control system aiming to minimize the electric bill.
For these reason, it is pre-
dictable that the higher will be the electricity consumption, and the electricity bill
in a dwelling, the more the householder will be prone to invest in a control system
for DSM optimizing its energy use. Dynamic electricity taxation as a tool for lower-
ing fixed costs of power, in favor of price variability and price signals, has also been
mentioned previously in the work. Albertsten et al. (2020) [75] are proposing three
different dynamic residential taxation schemes for Denmark. The authors evaluated
fixed (excise) tariffs dynamically defined per every hour, one based on consumption
and one based on CO2 emission of power plants. Moreover, the study proposes one
Ad-Valorem tax (i.e. depending on the spot price), as previously seen in literature.
==PAGE:102==
90
6 Flexibility assessment across socio-economic categories
Regarding taxes predictability and transparency for customer protection, the per unit
tax on consumption generated the most predictable tax rates. The same scheme gave
the best has been recommended also for what concerns state revenue collection, yet
with the drawback of having a high social CO2 cost compared to the Ad-Valorem.
Also if the dynamic taxation topic attracts a consistent research interest, as noted
by the authors, no time-dependent electricity taxation has been implemented world-
wide. To the best knowledge of this study, no variable electricity taxation has been
planned to happen in the Danish residential power sector. As reported in [75], ”the
Danish Government requires a tractable approach to estimate the impact of dynamic
taxation on residential consumer flexibility at a system-wide level”. However, on a
different level, the Danish TSO Energinet gives the opportunity of an hourly power
settlement from the end of 2020, consequently to the mandatory installation of smart
meter on national level. The flex-billing products and options are let to be offered
by the each electricity supplier, under the principles of the Danish Supply Agency.
In any case, the short term development of tariff design by Energinet and DSOs is
primarily focused on tariff principles connecting across the levels in the electricity
system. [8]
Conclusively, several of the reviewed works, in particular survey researches, reveal
how sustainability and environmental values of the households play a fundamental
role as predictors in the adoption of energy eﬀicient and smart technologies. These
values are found to create a positive spillover-effect on EV adoption [76] [73], but
are also correlated to a broader set of investments and behaviours, such as solar PV
panels and other renewable energy systems, recycling and eating less [73]. A field
experiment study by Møller et al.(2019) [77] provide statistical significance of the
use of simple SMS could be effective to provide some residential Demand Response
in Denmark. Interestingly, the highest results in terms of consumption adjustment
were obtained when pecuniary incentives were associated with environmental motives.
Conclusions regarding the tendency in investment indicate how people awareness play
a crucial role in the process of a sustainable transition, and how the economic interests
cannot be the only driving purpose. The importance of responsibility values towards
society and environment in Smart Grid technologies adoption was also highlighted by
[59]. Also on a broader view, European studies confirm how consumers engagement
and awareness will be critical in determining the success of Smart Grid and Demand
Response projects [78].
6.3.1.1
Policies
Denmark falls into the top ranks worldwide Countries for environmental policies that
aim the phasing out fossil-fuel. Greenhouse-gas emission have fallen of about 20%
since mid-90s, confirming how the strong Danish commitment of the last decades is
showing results. In the following lines a brief list of the scheduled environmental
policies, measures, and subsidies in residential sector is made and the effectiveness
discussed in the light of the results obtained in the present analysis. In terms of socio-
economic differences exist social policies to guarantee to all citizens fundamental rights
==PAGE:103==
6.3 Chapter discussion
91
in case of encountering of social problems as unemployment, sickness or dependency.
This typology of policies are not targeting energy poverty, but some of them provide
financial support to energy related costs. An example is the heating supplement given
to the weakest part of the pensioners, and it helps covering part of the heating bill.
Different subsidies are also introduced with the aim of fulfilling the Energy Savings
Obligation of the European Directive of 2012 [7]. In terms of households and regarding
in general energy savings in infrastructures, a competitive subsidy related to building
is been introduced for the period 2021-2024. The scheme allocates DKK 200 million
for each year of the period. The scheme aims at achieving energy savings in buildings.
Financial aid is predicted to owners renovating their buildings in accordance with a
specific list of energy savings measures belonging to the subsidy scheme. In order
to achieve as much savings as possible, the projects will compete in relation to the
amount of energy savings per square meter in the application. Furthermore the energy
label for buildings is planned to be used in the scheme, and data from the label used
for documentation. To help realization of energy savings in private buildings there
will also be focus on campaigns aiming at support realizing the potential for energy
savings. A subsidy is also introduced to provide an aid for the substitution of oil
burners with heat pumps in buildings outside the district heating and gas grid areas
allocating DKK 20 million for each year in the period 2021-2024. The latter has the
aim to accelerate the process of substitution of oil and gas burners used as individual
heating system with heat pumps. Regarding EVs as part of a green mobility plan,
apart for the already mentioned exemption from registration tax for electric vehicles
until the end of 2020, to stop the sale of new diesel and petrol cars in 2030, it will
be investigated whether the Commission for Green Transition of passenger cars can
advance its work so that the final report is available. As soon as possible thereafter,
a political agreement must be reached to provide a sense of security to the industry
and car owners and to ensure that the green transition can be undisturbed.
==PAGE:104==
92
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 7
Socio-economic
optimization
The flexible consumption patterns obtained in previous Chapters, together with tech-
nologies adoption scenarios, allow to assess how residential flexibility will impact the
energy system. The aggregated sector flexible consumption is included in Balmorel
system model in order to appraise the effects regarding generation and transmission
costs, power prices, emissions and other criteria evaluating the state of the power
system.
7.1
Literature review
Different types of energy system models are defined. The macro-characteristic of the
different models available are thoroughly described in Connolly et al. (2010) [79].
The investigation of the paper goes through a long list of energy tools and models
concluding how the no energy tool addresses all possible issue related to the integra-
tion and the modelling of renewable energy. However, it is possible to find suitable
energy models aiming to reach specific objectives and assessments based on the needs
of the investigation. In this study, Balmorel system model has been considered fit-
ting for the residential flexibility analysis. Balmorel is ”a partial equilibrium model
for the analysis of electricity and combined heat and power sectors” [42].
Adopt-
ing the specifics of an energy model outlined in [79], Balmorel can be defined as a
simulation, scenario, partial equilibrium, bottom-up, operation optimisation and in-
vestment model. It covers international geographical areas, has a maximum of 50
years scenario and hourly simulation resolution. In the present study the focus will
be on the power system evaluating cost linked to generation and transmission of
electricity in Denmark. Several are the examples in literature where this optimiza-
tion tool has been used for modeling and forecasting of energy systems. Hedegaard,
Ravn et al. (2012) [80] studied the large scale implementation of electric vehicles
in Northern European Countries. The study modeled an increasing share of electric
passenger vehicles from 2015 to 2030, finding that EVs intelligent charging signifi-
cantly increased the wind power investments and reduced coal and gas capacities.
Another use of Balmorel to investigate EV charging behaviours is made by Gunkel
==PAGE:106==
94
7 Socio-economic optimization
et al.(2020) [21]. The study provides results on system costs, energy mix and impact
on spot prices all over central-north Europe in different charging and transmission
scenarios. Another study from Hedegaard et al. (2013) [81] investigated the influence
of individual heat pumps on wind power integration, evaluating both socio-economic
feasibility and private households savings. Moreover, McKenna et al. (2021) recently
analysed the impact of price-induced residential demand flexibility. The study used
Balmorel model of Austria and included empirical estimates of price responsiveness
and energy eﬀiciency from 1500 households. The study found substantial savings of
4-7% in system costs. Differently form the scope of this thesis, Balmorel has also
been used by Múnster et al. (2012) [82] to study the future role of district heating
and by Jensen et al. (2017) [83] to study the impact of CO2-costs on biogas usage.
Many studies use, implement or improve specific add-ons for the model, to implement
specific analysis matters or specific modelling cases, such as in [21], [80], [81], [83].
Balmorel is formulated in the GAMS modelling language [84] and approximately 10
different versions have been created so far.
7.2
Method
7.2.1
Model setup
Balmorel system model optimization periods and geographical boundaries, as well as
a variety of other parameters had to be setup. The optimization period in the model
is one year divided into weekly and hourly time periods. The yearly optimization
then invests in generation units if they reduces system costs, including their annual-
ized investment costs. The complete time and space accuracy of the model couldn’t
be exploited for the computational time issues. Due the amount of scenarios and
iterations to be simulated there has been the need to limit the model accuracy. As
a first consideration, Denmark market has been the focus of the optimization, hence
the Danish power system has been simulated, as well as the ones of the neighbouring
countries, (i.e. Germany, Norway and Sweden) in order to take account of the foreign
power transmission. Four years have been simulated, i.e. 2020, 2025, 2030 and 2040,
following scenarios foresight. Time aggregation has been been necessary in order to
have a good solution of the model in a reasonable time span. The strategy taken in
this study has been to simulate four entire representative weeks, chosen as the peak
week in residential demand, the lowest and two in the middle of spring and autumn.
The chosen weeks are then the 6th, 12th, 25th, and 40th, for which all 168 hours have
been run in order to have an large enough number of data observations, and to see
the effects of the weekday/weekend differentiation included in the flexible demand
profiles. The foresight feature implemented in the model has not been used because
of computation time constraints. This components is letting the model adjust the
investments based on foreseen costs.
==PAGE:107==
7.2 Method
95
7.2.2
Add-on implementation
The flexible loads profiles found in Chapter 6 have been aggregated and added to
the demand through the implementation of a model add-on. Numerous add-ons are
already present in Balmorel to include specific technologies modelling. The add-on
has been implemented as a stand alone optimization algorithm in Julia and Pyhton
languages. The scope of the first is to determine the optimal load scheduling of flexible
technologies (as in Chapter 4), while the second aggregates these profiles following
scenarios’ outlines. Specifically, starting from the profiles of each category, the total
flexible demand is calculated following the method applied in previous Chapter 6.
The flexible demand profiles are scaled by the respective number of vehicles and heat
pumps actively responding to price signals, as explained further. All the total flexible
demand of each category is aggregated into two time series, one for DK1 and one for
DK2, and included in Balmorel add-on inputs. These time series provide to the model
the hourly demand deviation generated by flexible loads. In practice, this time series
constitute a exogenous parameter named DERESEV HP. This parameter is read
and added in Balmorel electricity demand Equation QEEQ. The DERESEV HP
parameter is set for regions and allows to include the flexible residential profiles to
all the regions present in the model.
7.2.3
Soft-linking with private optimization
The load scheduling and aggregation determines total residential flexible demand
based on spot prices. At the same time, flexible loads have an influence on the prices
accordingly.
This mutual effect has been taken into account through an iterative
method that aims to reach a stable and common solution of electricity demand and
electricity prices in both the perspectives. In this way, the private economic opti-
mization is soft-linked to the system model, as already experimented in literature
[13]. The steps of this iterative process will be elucidated in the following. In Figure
7.1 a schematic representation of the linking is depicted.
==PAGE:108==
96
7 Socio-economic optimization
Figure 7.1: Scheme of the linking of the two optimization perspectives.
• Step0 - Electricity prices of 2020 and projection of future prices DEA, are
used as input for the private economic optimization, this step will be present
just in the first iteration.
• Step1- Following prices and category differentiation the private optimization is
operated, finding the optimal consumption for each socio-economic.
• Step2 - Optimal consumption of each consumer category, output of the private
optimization, is multiplied by the share of adoption finding the aggregated total
flexible demand of the residential sector.
• Step3 - The aggregated consumption of residential sector is inserted in Bal-
morel which optimizes the power system response taking into account the new
conditions. The new electricity prices output of the Balmorel simulation are
available.
• Step4 - The electricity prices coming as output of the Balmorel optimization
are employed as new input of the private optimization: this will give as result a
different behavior of consumer based on the optimization of the new electricity
prices.
Steps 1 to 4, above described, are iterated till the electricity prices, the input
of the private optimization and the output of the socio-economic one, will converge,
stating that private and socio-economic perspective are based on the same system
conditions.
==PAGE:109==
7.3 Scenarios
97
7.3
Scenarios
7.3.1
Reference scenario
The base scenario has been built from the 2019 Flex4Res version of the model re-
trieved from the community source [42]. In Balmorel the demand-side sectors are
defined through two parameters: an hourly variable component defining the consump-
tion pattern, and a total yearly demand component providing the demand adjustment
across years. The combination of the two parameters provide the demand profile for
each modeled year. It has to be noticed that in the model residential and electric
vehicles demand are two different inputs, hence they had to be treated separately.
However, for both of them, the hourly demand variation has not been changed. For
what concerns vehicles, the total amount of yearly consumption present in the re-
trieved version has been compared with the numbers outlined in the electrification
scenarios. For each of the latter, the reference scenario yearly demand has been built
following the development trend of vehicles stock outlined in Chapter 5.
For the
pure residential demand, the effect of heat pumps has been included in the same
way, adding their yearly consumption. This with the main assumption that the vast
majority of heat pumps will not substitute district heating as heating source, but
individual heating plants which don’t influence Balmorel electricity and heat demand
(e.g. gas, pellet boilers, etc.).
7.3.2
Scenarios implementation
Scenarios are depending on two main factors: Electrification and Adoption.
The
definition of a scenarios results by the integration of the two factors as accurate
described in Chapter 5, and here briefly recalled. Electrification represents the three
projection scenarios: Slow, Expected and Rapid Electrification, outlying the number
of vehicles and heat pumps in the simulated years. Adoption describes three levels
of Demand Response acceptance in Danish households. This has to be seen as level
of deployment of Home Energy Management Systems in residential sector. The two
aspects respectively affect the total demand and the hourly variation of the flexible
loads. In this way, it is possible to quantify their different influence on system costs.
Table 7.1 displays an overview of the investigated scenarios simulations. For each of
the scenario, 3 to 4 iterations have been run to reach prices and demand convergence.
The implementation of two factors is also described in the following.
==PAGE:110==
98
7 Socio-economic optimization
Electrification
Slow
Expected
Rapid
0%
BaseSlow
Base
BaseRapid
10%
-
Expected 10
-
Adoption
25%
Slow 25
Expected 25
Rapid 25
40%
-
Expected 40
-
Table 7.1: Overview of investigated scenarios and used abbreviations.
Electrification Scenarios
The yearly demand of electric vehicles and heat pumps
has been added or subtracted (respectively for Rapid and Slow electrification) to
the configuration of the retrieved model version. These three reference scenarios are
representing the system with the three electrification levels and no Adoption (0%).
These will be taken as benchmark for different Demand Response levels in the same
electrification scenario.
Adoption Scenarios
The adoption factor will account the portion of potential
flexible load made actually available for Demand Response. The factor thus, drives
potential flexible load to become real flexible load by reacting to price signals. The
level of adoption examined are taken as the 10%, 25% and 40% share of total number
of EVs and HPs.
7.4
Results
The results have been divided in two main sections, one comparing the reference
scenario with the main one (Expected 25%), and one comparing the effect of different
levels of the two factors, Electrification and Adoption. The leading scenario, taken as
the most balanced, is the expected electrification with 25% adoption. The results of
the simulations will mainly refer to this as the most probable. The reasoning behind
this choice is the fact from the Electrification point of view, this reflect the most
expected (as the name suggests) outcome, and from the Adoption point of view a
25% share, even if conservative, appear to be a reasonable share of customer that will
commit completely the use of flexible technologies to DR, through the use of EMS.
7.4.1
Flexibility addition effect
The results of the comparion between the reference scenario with the main one, (Ex-
pected electrification with 25% adoption) are retrieved and displayed in the following.
==PAGE:111==
7.4 Results
99
7.4.1.1
Generation costs
As first the effect on generation costs have been assessed.
The total system cost
variation for generation includes generation investments, operational fixed and vari-
able costs, and fuel costs. Overall, the introduction of flexible appliances results in
a decrease of the costs throughout the years. Specifically capital generation costs
encounter a slight decrease in all the years simulated, with percentage values contin-
uously decreasing going through the last year, 2040. The reduction is however very
small in percentage (0.4% at max., or 2,23 M€), and decreasing in entity, as can be
seen in bottom left of Figure 7.2.
Generation operational fixed costs (Power plants OM Fixed) are also decreased,
also if the variation is still very moderate.
In the best case, in 2030, these costs
are reduced by 3M€, corresponding to the 0.3%. A change of similar entity is seen
by operational costs, where the highest decrease is in 2020, specifically of 242 k€.
However, the reduction follows different trends through years, pointing out different
investment in technologies and relative use.
While the generation capital and operational costs seems to be slightly affected
by flexibility activation, fuel costs present a larger scale of variation. Fuel costs are
an indicator of the technologies generation mix, and a reduction shows a lower use of
expensive fuels, generally fossil ones. This happens to be particularly impacting in
percentage term in 2030, reducing by 5% the total annual fuel cost. This corresponds
to a yearly amount of 3.27 M€ saved.
Overall, looking at the type of capacities installed, the flexibility activation seems
to allow a better deployment of renewables technologies in the near future, both in
terms of capacity installed and fuel use. This effect is however progressively.
7.4.1.2
Transmission investments
Transmission investments has been activated for all scenarios. Investment in trans-
mission doesn’t always occur, but only in the years where an expansion of the grid
is required. The simulated scenario reduced capital transmission costs of 0.7M€ in
2030 and 0.2M€ in 2040 compared to the reference.
In Figure 7.3 transmission operational, and capital costs through the simulated
years are displayed. While transmission investments are always reduced, transmission
operational costs are impacted differently throughout the years. The results show
how in some years transmission lines are sensibly more exploited with activation of
flexibility, resulting in higher OM costs (+1.4% in 2020, +0.8% in 2030).
7.4.1.3
CO2 costs and total emissions
Regarding emissions, from results emerge also a decrease across all the years simulated
confirming the positive outcomes already suggested by the results regarding fuel. In
particular in 2040, the already low emissions are reduced of 69 ktons, constituting
a 40% decrease. Even if the CO2 price per ton is increasing through the years, the
==PAGE:112==
100
7 Socio-economic optimization
Figure 7.2: Annual generation costs and percentage difference from reference (Base)
to main scenario (Expected electrification with 25% adoption).
Figure 7.3: Transmission investments and O&M costs for reference (Base) to main
scenario (Expected electrification with 25% adoption).
==PAGE:113==
7.4 Results
101
reduction is reflected also in the total CO2 yearly costs.
The reduction in CO2
costs represent the highest savings, for a total of 6.6 M€ in 2030 and 7.2M€ in 2040.
This externality cost, acknowledging an increasing CO2 cost in future, is positively
impacted by residential flexibility.
Figure 7.4: CO2 costs relative to annual equivalent emissions.
7.4.1.4
Power prices
Power Prices see an average increase in 2020, that is maintained also in 2025 and 2030.
In 2040 instead, an average decrease in the two region in all seasons is encountered,
apart from an increase in winter in DK2 of 1.06%. For most of the times DK1 appears
to benefit more of the introduction of flexibility in terms of average electricity price
compared to DK2. Winter periods are characterized initially by a decrease compared
to the base, that is reduced through the years reaching higher average electricity price
in DK2 in 2030 and 2040. In Table 7.2 the percentage variation of electricity prices
throughout the years is shown.
[%]
2020
2025
2030
2040
DK1
-0.09
-0.29
-0.29
-0.05
Winter
DK2
-0.68
-0.86
0.69
1.06
DK1
0.41
0.21
0.56
-0.03
Spring
DK2
0.5
0.36
0.59
-0.9
DK1
0.27
0.1
0.16
-1.21
Summer
DK2
0.5
0.06
0.59
-0.4
DK1
0.32
0.05
0.06
-0.79
Fall
DK2
0.25
0.1
-0.17
-0.69
Table 7.2:
in prices across years and season for the two power market regions.
In terms of average daily prices it is possible to have a clearer idea of the devel-
opment of the latter in the years 2020 and 2025. The average daily price of 2030
==PAGE:114==
102
7 Socio-economic optimization
and 2040 are not considered due to too different technology developed in the two sce-
narios that can lead to a different distribution of electricity prices and thus Demand
Response.
The distribution of average daily prices can be seen in Figures 7.5, where daily
pattern is depicted.
A reduction in daily peak can be noted in both years.
The
effect of night load shifting can be observed particularly in 2025. The late evening
consumption, as well as the first hours of the day, record a electricity price increase.
These two mentioned effect, together, bring to an overall decrease of price variability,
while the average price is increased for the most part of the day.
Figure 7.5: Average daily electricity prices in 2020 and 2025 of Base and Ex-
pected25% scenarios.
7.4.2
Scenario Analysis
In the present section the different scenario outcomes in terms of different adoption
and electrification are evaluated.
7.4.2.1
Adoption effect
Firstly the cost of the three adoption levels are displayed. As expected, for an increase
of the flexibility pool, a decrease of overall future system costs is encountered. The
benefits of an increasing number of activated DR loads is shown in most of the costs.
==PAGE:115==
7.4 Results
103
Figure 7.6: Adoption scenarios total cumulated costs in M€.
Model
BASE
EXP103
EXP253L
EXP401
Generation investments (M€)
1818.8
1816.6
1813.6
1812.5
Generation OM (Fixed) (M€)
3507.2
3504.1
3500.3
3498.1
Generation OM (Variable) (M€)
787.4
787.0
787.2
786.0
Generation fuel costs (M€)
680.2
676.3
665.7
663.0
Transmission investments (M€)
52.1
50.8
49.5
51.3
Transmission operational costs (k€)
11.9
11.9
11.8
11.6
Generation CO2 costs (M€)
316.3
309.5
300.1
295.6
Total cumulated costs (M€)
7162.0
7144.3
7116.4
7106.6
Table 7.3: Cumulated system costs across adoption scenarios.
As it is possible to see in the Table 7.3, a higher adoption leads to an overall
system costs reduction, however the distribution of costs is not linear in all the terms,
confirming how the system react differently in the years to the new loads distribution.
In particular, in terms of Generation costs, the investments in new plants appear to
decrease with the increase of adoption, as it happens also for fuel costs and CO2
costs. The generation overall costs appear to be significantly influenced. Compared
to the Base scenario, going from a 10% to 40% adoption, cost reduction is almost
three times larger.
The only element seeing a diverse trend are the transmission
investments, which point out a higher need of spatial flexibility for higher residential
Demand Response. As it is possible to see in Figure 7.6 the reduction of total system
costs in the three adoption level is comparable, with higher variation in reduction
between Expected 10% and Expected 25% compared to Expected 40% and 25%.
==PAGE:116==
104
7 Socio-economic optimization
7.4.3
Electrification effect
The electrification scenarios, as explained, are compared with the correspondent Base
scenario. Similarly to what deduced for the adoption levels, an increase of potentially
flexible appliances increases the cost reduction. However, the additional information
retrieved is the effect of the variation of base consumption.
Figure 7.7: Electrification scenarios total cumulated costs in M€.
The Rapid Electrification scenario presents highest reduction of nearly 80 M€ of
cumulated costs. The reduction, as awaited, is also present in Expected and Slow in
smaller sizes. A high electrification of the sector leads to higher capacity investments
against a lower transmission costs. As it was for the adoption, the difference in price
reduction between scenarios doesn’t appear to be too large. However, results confirm
the tendency of proportional savings and number of flexible appliances. Looking at
cost magnitudes across three electrification levels, cumulated cost increase of 640M€
in case of no residential Demand Response, while of 570M€ in flexible scenarios.
SLOWB
SLOW25
BASE
EXP25
RAPIDB
RAPID25
Gen. investments (M€)
1798.2
1794.1
1818.8
1813.6
1846.1
1839.5
Gen. O&M (Fixed) (M€)
3490.9
3487.9
3507.2
3500.3
3556.9
3545.4
Gen. O&M (Variable)(M€)
779.5
779.3
787.4
787.2
792.1
790.4
Gen. fuel costs (M€)
499.8
495.9
680.2
665.7
830.3
792.2
Trans. investments (M€)
58.6
57.1
52.1
49.5
49.4
48.1
Trans. O&M costs (k€)
11.8
11.8
11.9
11.8
10.9
10.7
Gen. CO2 costs (M€)
257.7
253.6
316.3
300.1
451.3
431.5
Total costs (M€)
6884.5
6867.8
7161.9
7116.3
7526.1
7447.1
Table 7.4: Cumulated system costs across electrification scenarios.
==PAGE:117==
7.5 Chapter discussion
105
7.5
Chapter discussion
The present chapter assessed the effects of activated flexibility on the system, following
different level of Adoption of DR and Electrification. Overall, the introduction of the
flexible technologies examined, EVs and HPs, showed a higher eﬀiciency in the energy
system, translated in lower costs and lower CO2 emissions.
In particular, fuel costs found a high reduction, compared to generation invest-
ments and OM. Transmission capacity resulted in a lower investment, and higher
utilization. CO2 emissions and relative externality costs have been consistently re-
duced by residential flexibility. Looking at magnitude, however, the overall cumulated
saving is 46 M€ in the most likely scenario, equivalent to a modest 0.65%. The effect
of the socio-economic evaluation thus appear to be less significant compared to the
private savings. Also looking at the best scenario (Rapid Electrification), the costs
of the energy system has been reduced of a maximum of 1%, or 80M€. However, the
resulting trend is significant to appraise a positive effect of the introduction of flexible
loads in residential sector.
Reviewing studies with similar focus, the system benefit found in this thesis seems
slightly lower. Above cited Gunkel et al. (2020) [21], studied the effects of having an
entirely flexible EV fleet. The author found that the benefits of smart vehicles charg-
ing are more consistent for the system, (i.e. -3.7/-5.5%), when simulating the impact
on European scale. Mckenna et al. (2021) found higher system cost savings (i.e. -4/-
7%) when modeling full residential demand side flexibility in Austria. When modeling
flexible individual heat pumps effect in 2030 with 50-60% wind power, Heldegaard
et al. (2013) [81] found a total saving in system costs of 0.9%. The results of these
studies highlight the difference in effects of the two technologies. The savings found
in this thesis, however, were expected to be lower to main reasons. A first difference
is that the study focus on residential sector. Therefore, the full technology poten-
tial in terms of flexibility provision has been reduced by many factors. As analyzed
thoroughly, the smart use of flexible appliances is assumed to be limited by Smart
Grid technologies acceptance, as explained in Chapter 5. In this sense, the scenarios
developed, and in particular the ones projecting technologies adoption, considered a
high uncertainty in HEMS deployment. The most probable share of flexibly active
vehicles in the future residential sector has been taken as 25%, and this can be con-
sidered a conservative but reasonable assumption. Numerically, the total EV fleet
has been first allocated to residential sector, thus treating just the share that will be
charged at home. Specifically, only the 80% of the vehicles of house owners and 10%
of apartment ones have been included in residential demand. Of this partial fleet, the
actively flexible vehicles have been considered to be between the 10% and the 40%
maximum, identified as adoption levels. This assumption generates an ulterior con-
sistent reduction in terms of Demand Response pool, leading to a lowering of system
savings. On the other hand, the total consumption is significantly affected also by
the portion of vehicles not participating in DR. These are in fact included in the total
demand with the aim of assessing the influence of the use of technology in what was
called in Chapter 4, Passive use.
==PAGE:118==
106
7 Socio-economic optimization
Digging into the results, firstly the three Adoption levels are confronted in terms of
resulting costs for the system. Promising outcomes show how, increasing the share of
flexible activated technologies, the total costs of the system see a slight reduction. Fur-
thermore, the analytical findings highlight how with a constant 25% adoption level,
the best results, in terms of savings, derived from Rapid Electrification scenario,
which was the most daring projection of potential flexible technologies introduced.
This outcome highlights how the increasing total number of flexible technologies is
reflected in a reduction of the total system costs. Specifically the higher electrifi-
cation appear to be translated in higher investments in terms of generation costs.
Moreover, the higher fuel costs reflects the enhanced use of conventional source gen-
eration also demonstrated by the higher generation CO2 costs. On the other hand,
the investments in transmission see a reduction that is translated in lower flexibility
on the spatial level. Regarding this particular outcome, a more precise investigation
could have been carried out through the comparison of effects of enabled and disabled
transmission expansion as in [21]. The higher system savings in proportion to the
Electrification level has, anyway, high relevance.
This highlights how, even main-
taining a constant share of Adoption, the increasing total number of flexible loads
impacts positively the system.
The average electricity price is also influenced, the price peak found in the winter
period, see a reduction with on the other side an increase in the average prices. The
two technologies, as already evinced in Chapter 4 have a diverse role in price impact.
Overall, EVs influence more compared to HPs, due to higher power and flexibility time
shift. This can be seen as a limitation of how the scenarios were redacted. Given the
different grid effect, a specific scenario for each of the two technologies would have
allowed to appreciate the effect on system cost separately. It has been interesting
to find how the reduction does not always regard the same cost area, suggesting a
different reaction of the system to the new conditions of each scenario. A reason be-
hind this behavior of the model can be found in the settings used for the simulations.
The foresight mode, that allows the system to foresee future conditions and to cope
future requirements, has not been included, due to computational time limitations.
Bypassing the use of this feature, especially for the last years simulated, reduce the
validity of the results which have to be evaluated with a critical eye. On the coun-
terpart, keeping a relatively high time accuracy in terms of seasonal differentiation,
allowed to detect a singularity of the peak price in winter period, highlighting the
contribution of residential flexible appliances in its reduction.
==PAGE:119==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion and
conclusion
The structure of the present thesis, embodied as an application of different methods
and analyses, requires a conclusive overall depiction. The residential sector analysis
generated a variety of findings and considerations. Flexibility modelling and scenario
required connected methods that have to be critically analyzed in their totality. In
order to have a connected vision of the findings, the research questions will be here
gathered and answered. In this way, a recollection of all research steps will provide
a clear view of the study path.
After this, methodological considerations will be
proposed.
What are the main characteristics of Danish households
consumption?
The hourly measurements of a large sample of Danish residential smart meters has
been analysed to provide a detailed picture of this power sector. Danish household
electricity demand is characterized by a high seasonal variation, with usual peaks
in coldest months(from December to February) and the lowest consumption in the
holiday period (July and beginning of August).
The average winter consumption
is more than twice the summer one. The daily consumption pattern shows a major
evening peak occurring between 17 and 18 and morning increase from 7 to 9. The time
series analysis conducted showed a clear distinction between weekend and weekday
patterns, where in the latter the morning consumption is delayed. The average yearly
household consumption is 5 MWh, while the average daily consumption is 13.7 kWh.
Smart meters availability and deployment have also been evaluated and show that
Smart Grid infrastructure is already largely present in the country.
How is consumption affected by socio-economic and technical
characteristics of household?
Consumption indicators, evaluated through linear regression models, showed that
some of the socio-economic features are impacting consumption with statistical sig-
==PAGE:120==
108
8 Discussion and conclusion
nificance. In particular, the methods applied showed how the presence of electric
vehicles and electric heating is very significant in determining the consumption levels
and also the timing. While electric heating has a constant effect along the day, EVs
presence increases the night consumption, and delays sensibly the daily peak. Among
the socio-economic features, the dwelling type resulted to be determinant for the most
of the studied consumption indicators. Also the number of adults in the household
showed statistical significance. A difference in consumption between apartments and
houses is clear and the second result to consume 2.8 MWh/year more. The category
with the highest yearly consumption, highest peak demand has been identified as de-
tached houses inhabited by grown couples (30-65), with children. The lowest power
demand is among young singles living in apartments without children.
Can residential sector provide flexibility?
Load scheduling optimization provided numerical evidence of the possibility to man-
age loads with a reduction in yearly power cost for private consumers. The developed
mathematical linear programming models provided the optimal load scheduling of
heat pumps consumption and electric vehicles charging. With further considerations
and with the limits of having an hourly tariff, households equipped with these two
technologies will have an incentive to respond to price signals and lower their electric-
ity bills. Power cost reductions, in case of smart use of the technologies have been
assessed between 6% and 9% for heat pumps and between 39% and 42.1% for EVs.
This calculated on the specific consumption of the appliance and accounting for the
the variable portion of electricity price. The size of the effect of automatic control
and price signals on household consumption estimated in the present study could be
considered conservative. Conventional appliances could provide additional flexibility,
but with much less volume than the two here studied.
Which households categories are more likely to provide it?
Research on categories investment and behaviours shaped at first the distribution
of electric appliances across different households groups. Additional data retrieved
helped in allocating the flexibility potential according to socio-economic characteris-
tics. Young singles in apartments without kids have the highest financial incentive
for a flexible charging of EVs (35.4% savings). Overall, elderly, above 65 years old,
obtain a higher return in providing flexibility through heat pumps compared to the
other age groups (5.4% vs 3.9%). As second, categories flexibility modelling produced
the profiles of flexible loads provision. This pattern shows how some of the categories
are likely to contribute more in lowering peak demands. Singles in houses showed a
higher variation in timing of peaks, suggesting a more responsive consumption. More-
over, flexible use of heating will generate positive effects for apartments in terms of
peak reduction and peak to average ratio, the opposite occurs for houses.
==PAGE:121==
8 Discussion and conclusion
109
How to enable Demand Response potential in the future? Which
are the barriers?
The analysis of flexible technologies acceptance barriers has been a side focus of this
work. This factor, indeed has been considered particularly critical when modelling
future scenarios. Literature on these topics provided a variety of findings. The role of
home Energy Management Systems resulted to be fundamental in residential flexibil-
ity sources provision. Smart Grids technical development is crucial to obtain a more
electrified system and to ultimately facilitate a higher penetration of RES (Renewable
Energy Sources) in power generation. On the other side, the need for appropriate
tariffs schemes is fundamental to deliver the price signals to households. Tariff based
on RTP (Real Time Pricing) are the most beneficial in terms of minimization of
welfare losses. Reducing tax elements, together with variable grid tariffs may in the
future provide larger relative price variation for end customers. Policies and incen-
tives appear to be compelling for the increase in number of flexible technologies. The
process of going towards electric appliances for private transportation and heating in
residential sector is already on its way. However, the rapidity of this transition will
depend on governmental choices and regulations. Incentive programs in installation
of home charging stations associated with control system in detached houses, are
considered to be a highly effective intervention. Regarding heat pumps, incentives
and tax reduction already in place are expected to produce a positive outcome in the
future. Overall, consumer engagement in responding to price signals through control
systems is regarded as very effective in abating DR barriers.
Which will be the system benefits of residential flexibility under
different deployment scenarios?
Residential flexibility on a system wide scale has been simulated through the imple-
mentation of a Balmorel model addon specially generated for the purpose. Consid-
erations about Demand Response barriers led to to the design of 8 scenarios, dif-
ferentiated by transport/heating electrification rate and smart technologies adoption
share. Benefits of residential DR are various and present in almost all of the sys-
tem parameters analysed. Between generation costs, fuel expenses seems the majorly
decreased. The fuel costs reduction indicates an increased exploitation of RES in
generation, this is also reflected in the reduction of CO2 emissions and costs. System
prices will likely see a decrease in variance along the day, but with a general rise
on average. For different levels of adoption and electrification, the system seems to
benefit in a comparable way. The socio-economic advantages appear to be limited
anyway, in percentage and absolute costs reduction. Recalling the savings amount
from the private household perspective, the modest system benefit obtained lead to
the conclusion that the residential flexibility deployment will be mainly directed by
consumers.
==PAGE:122==
110
8 Discussion and conclusion
8.1
Methodological considerations
After having recalled the main research findings and underlining the study structure,
some consideration on the method has to be finalized. Indeed, the results obtained
cannot be generalized without highlighting the main methods limitations.
8.1.1
Data
Following the structure of the thesis, the approach used in residential consumption
investigation allowed a more detailed analysis of some aspects of the data. Social
characteristics such as age group, number of adults or dwelling type were well rep-
resented in the available data. Other aspects, such as influence of electric heating
typology or type of dwelling (first or summer house) have been more diﬀicult to anal-
yse. This is due to the scattered data sources and the different information focus.
It is confidently expected that in the near future a variety of additional data will
be collected and linked to the household consumption smart metering profiles. This
will eventually enable a broad range of research opportunities. On the same topic,
an important component of the research has been the data collection, in particular
for what regards the scenario delineation. Overall, a broad variety of studies about
Danish system future projections has been retrieved and analysed, highlighting the
prosperous research activity on these topics in this country. On the other hand, in
some part of the research, outsourcing data from different origins resulted in a partial
lack of consistency, which has been critically considered and narrowed.
8.1.2
Method and further improvements
Looking at the research structure, the overall work can be clearly divided in two main
parts. Firstly the consumption analysis, including descriptive methods and data anal-
ysis tools. Secondly, the flexibility potential assessment, which required different steps
and more time for methodology development, due to the linking of the private and
socio-economic models. Propensity in investment across socio-economic households
has been a challenging step of the research. From this depends the whole distribution
of future flexible appliances. A limited number of studies examined the investments
tendency in energy eﬀicient appliances based on different socio-economic factors [32],
[59]. A more specific study on the two technologies (HPs and EVs) would be useful
to have a better understanding of the distribution of new technologies across the out-
lined categories. This would mean a more accurate flexibility potential allocation. A
widely used method such as binary variable linear regression has found to be useful
for detecting the impact of households socio-economic features on power consump-
tion. More complex methods such as time series clustering has also shown success in
detecting time-depending consumption similarities identifying consumers behaviors.
A linear programming model has found to be useful for both modeling of electric vehi-
cles and heating loads scheduling. However, the models suffer from limitations mainly
==PAGE:123==
8.2 Conclusion
111
referable to the degree of detail. Heat pumps modeling as first required a deeper anal-
ysis about technology types and their thermodynamic characteristics. Specifically, a
more systematic representation of the heat demand and heat transient in the dwelling
could culminate in more accurate results. A variety of modelling expedients for ve-
hicles has been found in literature [21], [22], [43] and would have been interesting to
include. In particular the battery degradation effects are found to be very impacting
on charging potential, as well as vehicles to grid V2G appear in other studies to be
a promising charging variant. These constitutes considerable adjustments that could
have been added to BEVs and PHEVs models. Main limiting assumption when mod-
eling load scheduling has been the use of a hourly variable tariff. For this reason the
results cannot be generalized to any type of Time-of-Use (TOU). Including TOU or
other tariffs mentioned in the private economic optimization, would have provide a
wider set of charging and heating behaviours. In this way, categories more inclined to
subscribe these tariff types could have been better represented. The need to evaluate
the overall system effects was addressed by soft linking the private economic model
to Balmorel system model. The add-on is adding to the model demand the time
variable loads calculated through stand alone optimization models. This has been a
feasible implementation, while a completely integrated add-on would have required a
deeper expertise of the model structure and longer implementation time. Moreover,
locational flexibility effects has not been accounted, but only a differentiation in the
two main Danish power regions. Some of the concentration and congestion effects
could have been handled by the introduction of distribution constraints. This is seen
as a useful further improvement. Distributed generation and pro-sumers effects on
flexible appliances have not been taken into account. This can be seen as another of
the main research limitations. Indeed distributed generation technologies have been
found to be highly correlated to electric vehicles and electric appliances adoption.
8.2
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to study the Danish residential consumption and to assess flexibility
potential of the sector. The analysis covered consumption investigation, household
smart loads modelling, flexibility assessment and system-wise evaluation. Embracing
different perspectives gave a comprehensive view of the sector and system interac-
tions, allowing to address the main aspects of the Demand Response provision. The
development of this study has been challenging in many segments, relating different
elements has revealed to be an interesting way of connecting the topics learned along
the Master’s degree. Statistical methods applied to smart meters time series provided
a detailed picture of the actual Danish household consumption across socio-economic
categories. Moreover, the presence of technological features allowed to examine the
role of electric vehicles and electric heating in dwelling consumption. Statistical tests
showed that dwelling typology, number of adult, presence of electric vehicles and
heating impact total, peak and seasonal demand. Peak to Average ratio has been a
meaningful parameter to analyse and EVs presence resulted to be the only impacting
==PAGE:124==
112
8 Discussion and conclusion
factor. Load scheduling programming models have been implemented and involved
a detailed characterization of three types of HP and two types of EV. Results gave
optimal smart use when optimizing power cost in an Real Time Pricing Tariff. The re-
sulting technological savings yield a value of 7.5% on average for heat pumps and 41%
for EV, when considering the variable share of power cost. Demand Response mecha-
nisms have been assessed as profitable for households across different socio-economic
categories. A closer view on the current state and further development of central
technologies, i.e. heat pumps and electric vehicles, allowed to appraise the capability
in terms of flexibility this sector could provide. Results show that, generally, electric
vehicles flexible use will likely increase night demand, while heating will contribute
in flattening the intra-day consumption peaks. Projections scenarios of EVs, heat
pumps and smart control systems adoption are gathered to determine future Danish
residential sector characteristics. In particular, three scenarios of electrification, in
terms of future number of vehicles and heat pumps, and three scenarios of control
systems adoption have been defined. The results outline an interesting picture of
socio-economic differentiation of consumers. Flexibility provision potential has been
quantified for subcategories of demand. In particular, it has been assessed that houses
inhabited by single grown adults will likely to provide the most flexibility in terms
of peak reduction and peak timing variation from the use of heat pumps. Is also
found that a smart use of electric vehicles will likely benefit more young households,
while elders from heating. Including the aggregated flexible loads in Balmorel en-
ergy system model provided modest system cost reduction for Denmark. In the best
case scenario the cost reduction reach 80 M€(-1%) for the whole period simulated.
Nonetheless, consistent reduction of fuel costs, CO2 emissions and related costs have
been appraised.
In the future, households will be able to contribute to a more eﬀicient energy
system, with higher share of RES generation, while receiving an economic benefit. A
greener energy system will be achieved by reducing emissions and supporting renew-
able generation, while having more eﬀicient consumers costs and welfare improvement.
Given the nature of this sector, all these changes will flourish and thrive if supported
by appropriate regulations and incentives. Engaging consumers, raising public aware-
ness of their potential returns will be fundamental in flexibility deployment.
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1]
“The European Green Deal: communication form the commision to the euro-
pean paliament, the european council, the european social commitee,” European
Commission Brussels, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[2]
“Flexibility and aggregation -requirements for their interaction in the market.,”
Eurelectric The Union of the Electricity Industry- Technical Report January,
Brussels, 2014.
[3]
L. Kitzing, J. Katz, S. T. Schröder, P. E. Morthorst, and F. M. Andersen, “The
residential electricity sector in denmark: A description of current conditions,”
2016.
[4]
M. H. Albadi and E. F. El-Saadany, “A summary of demand response in
electricity markets,” Electric power systems research, volume 78, number 11,
pages 1989–1996, 2008.
[5]
H. Klinge Jacobsen and N. Juul, “Demand side management-electricity savings
in danish households reduce load variation, capacity requirements and associ-
ated emission,” DTU International Energy Report 2015 rev, 2015.
[6]
Y. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Hong, and C. Kang, “Review of smart meter data analyt-
ics: Applications, methodologies, and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, volume 10, pages 3125–3148, May 2019.
[7]
E. Danish Ministry of Climate and Utilities, “Denmark’s integrated national
energy and climate plan,” 2029.
[8]
“Faelles dso-tso tarif-samarbejde [dso-tso tarif collaboration],” Energinet, Dansk
Energi, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[9]
C. project, “Cities project: Demonstration case, WP1,” Centre for IT-Intelligent
Energy System in Cities, 2015.
[10]
X. Liu, A. Heller, and P. Nielsen, “Citiesdata: A smart city data manage-
ment framework,” Knowledge and Information Systems, volume 53, number 3,
pages 699–722, 2017.
[11]
“Bits to energy lab projects - Bits to Energy Lab Zurich - ETH Zurich, D-
MTEC,” 2017.
[12]
M. H. Christos Kolokathis and A. Jahn, “Cleaner, smarter, cheaper: Network
tariff design for a smart future,” January 2018.
==PAGE:126==
114
Bibliography
[13]
K. Lindberg, P. Seljom, H. Madsen, D. Fischer, and M. Korpås, “Long-term elec-
tricity load forecasting: Current and future trends,” Utilities Policy, volume 58,
pages 102–119, 2019, issn: 0957-1787.
[14]
J. Hildermeier, C. Kolokathis, J. Rosenowa, M. Hogan, C. Wiese, and A. Jahn,
“Start with smart: Promising practices for integrating electric vehicles into the
grid,” 2019.
[15]
P. Capros, A. De Vita, N. Tasios, P. Siskos, M. Kannavou, A. Petropoulos, S.
Evangelopoulou, M. Zampara, D. Papadopoulos, C. Nakos, et al., “Eu reference
scenario 2016-energy, transport and ghg emissions trends to 2050.,” 2016.
[16]
A. Bloess, W.-P. Schill, and A. Zerrahn, “Power-to-heat for renewable energy
integration: A review of technologies, modeling approaches, and flexibility po-
tentials,” Applied Energy, volume 212, pages 1611–1626, 2018.
[17]
S. Stinner, K. Huchtemann, and D. Müller, “Quantifying the operational flexi-
bility of building energy systems with thermal energy storages,” Applied Energy,
volume 181, pages 140–154, 2016.
[18]
K. Hedegaard and M. Münster, “Influence of individual heat pumps on wind
power integration–energy system investments and operation,” Energy Conver-
sion and Management, volume 75, pages 673–684, 2013.
[19]
“Denmark’s climate and energy outlook 2020,” Danish Energy Agency and En-
erginet, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[20]
“Elektrificering - perspektiver for elektrificeringens indflydelse pa installationsfa-
gene [Perspectives for electrification on the installation subjects],” EA Ener-
gianalyse - TEKNIQ Arbejdsgiverne, October 2019.
[21]
P. A. Gunkel, C. Bergaentzlé, I. G. Jensen, and F. Scheller, “From passive to
active: Flexibility from electric vehicles in the context of transmission system
development,” Applied Energy, volume 277, page 115 526, 2020.
[22]
A. González-Garrido, A. Thingvad, H. Gaztañaga, and M. Marinelli, “Full-scale
electric vehicles penetration in the danish island of bornholm—optimal schedul-
ing and battery degradation under driving constraints,” Journal of Energy Stor-
age, volume 23, 2019.
[23]
M. Yilmaz and P. T. Krein, “Review of the impact of vehicle-to-grid technologies
on distribution systems and utility interfaces,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, volume 28, number 12, pages 5673–5689, 2013.
[24]
Z. Yang, K. Li, and A. Foley, “Computational scheduling methods for inte-
grating plug-in electric vehicles with power systems: A review,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, volume 51, pages 396–416, 2015, issn: 1364-0321.
[25]
“Ceer guidelines of good practice for distribution network tariffs,” Council of
European Energy Regulators, Brussels, Belgium, Tech. Rep., 2017.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
115
[26]
F. Møller Andersen, S. Grenaa Jensen, H. V. Larsen, P. Meibom, H. Ravn,
K. Skytte, and M. Togeby, “Analyses of demand response in denmark,” Risoe
National Lab., Tech. Rep., 2006.
[27]
E. Danish Ministry of Climate and U. C., Sammen om en grønnere fremtid:
Klima- og luftudspil (2018b) [together for a greener future: Climate and air
initiatives], 2018.
[28]
F. M. Andersen, P. A. Gunkel, H. K. Jacobsen, and L. Kitznig, “Residential
electricity consumption and socioeconomic characteristics. an econometric anal-
ysis of danish microeconomic and smart meter data,” Technological University
of Denmark, DTU Management, 2019.
[29]
A. Kipping and E. Trømborg, “Hourly electricity consumption in norwegian
households – assessing the impacts of different heating systems,” Energy, vol-
ume 93, pages 655–671, 2015.
[30]
B. Anderson, S. Lin, A. Newing, A. Bahaj, and P. James, “Electricity consump-
tion and household characteristics: Implications for census-taking in a smart me-
tered future,” Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, volume 63, pages 58–
67, 2017.
[31]
J. H. Michael Chesser, “Household energy consumption: A study of micro re-
newable energy systems in ireland,” The economic and social review, 2019.
[32]
S. Copiello and L. Gabrielli, “Analysis of building energy consumption through
panel data: The role played by the economic drivers,” Energy and Buildings,
volume 145, pages 130–143, 2017, issn: 0378-7788.
[33]
Y. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Hong, and C. Kang, “Review of smart meter data analyt-
ics: Applications, methodologies, and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, volume 10, pages 3125–3148, May 2019.
[34]
D. E. Agency and Energinet, Eds., Technology data for heating installations,
First published 2016 by the Danish Energy Agency and Energinet.
[35]
S. N. Petrović and K. B. Karlsson, “Residential heat pumps in the future danish
energy system,” Energy, volume 114, pages 787–797, 2016.
[36]
“Building stock, last updated 18-01-2020 by statistics denmark,” Statistics Den-
mark, Tech. Rep.
[37]
D. Fischer and H. Madani, “On heat pumps in smart grids: A review (renewable
and sustainable energy reviews),” volume 70, pages 342–357, 2017.
[38]
D. Rolando and H. Madani, “Smart control strategies for heat pump systems,”
Kyla Värmepumpar, 2018.
[39]
F. M. Andersen, M. Baldini, L. G. Hansen, and C. L. Jensen, “Households’
hourly electricity consumption and peak demand in denmark,” Applied Energy,
volume 208, pages 607–619, 2017.
==PAGE:128==
116
Bibliography
[40]
D. Fischer, T. R. Toral, K. B. Lindberg, B. Wille-Haussmann, and H. Madani,
“Investigation of thermal storage operation strategies with heat pumps in ger-
man multi family houses (energy procedia),” volume 58, number 4, pages 137–
144, 2014.
[41]
Z. Yang, K. Li, Y. Guo, S. Feng, Q. Niu, Y. Xue, and A. Foley, “A binary
symmetric based hybrid meta-heuristic method for solving mixed integer unit
commitment problem integrating with significant plug-in electric vehicles,” En-
ergy, volume 170, pages 889–905, 2019.
[42]
F. Wiese, R. Bramstoft, H. Koduvere, A. Pizarro Alonso, O. Balyk, J. G.
Kirkerud, Å. G. Tveten, T. F. Bolkesjø, M. Münster, and H. Ravn, “Balmorel
open source energy system model,” Energy Strategy Reviews, volume 20, pages 26–
34, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://balmorel.com/index.php,%20https:
//github.com/balmorelcommunity/Balmorel.
[43]
P. Andersen, T.Sousa, A.Thingvad, L.S.Berthou, and M.Kulahci, “Added value
of individual flexibility profiles of electric vehicle users for ancillary services,”
volume 2018 IEEE International Conference on Communications, Control, and
Computing Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm), 2018.
[44]
T. K. Kristoffersen, K. Capion, and P. Meibom, “Optimal charging of electric
drive vehicles in a market environment,” Applied Energy, volume 88, number 5,
pages 1940–1948, 2011.
[45]
M. González Vayá and G. Andersson, “Optimal bidding strategy of a plug-in
electric vehicle aggregator in day-ahead electricity markets under uncertainty,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, volume 30, number 5, 2015.
[46]
A. Arif, M. Babar, T. I. Ahamed, E. Al-Ammar, P. Nguyen, I. R. Kamphuis,
and N. Malik, “Online scheduling of plug-in vehicles in dynamic pricing schemes
(sustainable energy, grids and networks),” volume 7, pages 25–36, 2016.
[47]
A. Pina, P. Baptista, C. Silva, and P. Ferrão, “Energy reduction potential from
the shift to electric vehicles: The flores island case study,” Energy Policy, vol-
ume 67, pages 37–47, 2014.
[48]
I. Graabak, Q. Wu, L. Warland, and Z. Liu, “Optimal planning of the nordic
transmission system with 100% electric vehicle penetration of passenger cars by
2050,” Energy, volume 107, pages 648–660, 2016.
[49]
H. Lund and W. Kempton, “Integration of renewable energy into the trans-
port and electricity sectors through v2g,” Energy Policy, volume 36, number 9,
pages 3578–3587, 2008.
[50]
T. H. Christensen, K. Gram-Hanssen, P. E. Petersen, T. F. Larsen, I. E. ApS,
E. Gudbjerg, L. S. Rasmussen, and P. Munter, “Air-to-air heat pumps: A wolf
in sheep’s clothing?” Varmepumper og elforbrug, page 25, 2011.
[51]
J. Hong, N. J. Kelly, I. Richardson, and M. Thomson, “Assessing heat pumps
as flexible load,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part
A: Journal of Power and Energy, volume 227, number 1, pages 30–42, 2013.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
117
[52]
O. Fanger, “Thermal comfort mcgraw-hill book company,” New York, 1972.
[53]
“Transportvaneundersøgelsen,” Department of Transport, Technical University
of Denmark, 2009.
[54]
I. Dunning, J. Huchette, and M. Lubin, “Jump: A modeling language for math-
ematical optimization,” SIAM Review, volume 59, number 2, pages 295–320,
2017.
[55]
L. Gurobi Optimization, Gurobi optimizer reference manual, 2021. [Online].
Available: http://www.gurobi.com.
[56]
S. K. Nielsen and K. Karlsson, “Energy scenarios: A review of methods, uses and
suggestions for improvement,” International Journal of Global Energy Issues,
volume 27, number 3, pages 302–322, 2007.
[57]
F. Andersen, G. Henningsen, N. Møller, and H. Larsen, “Long-term projec-
tions of the hourly electricity consumption in danish municipalities,” Energy,
volume 186, page 115 890, 2019.
[58]
W. P. R. Davis F. D. Bagozzi R. P., “User acceptance of computer technol-
ogy: A comparison of two theoretical models,” Management Science, volume 35,
pages 982–1003, 1989.
[59]
M. B. Toft, G. Schuitema, and J. Thøgersen, “Responsible technology accep-
tance: Model development and application to consumer acceptance of smart
grid technology,” Applied Energy, volume 134, pages 392–400, 2014.
[60]
Energinet, Ed., Transport note, 27-08-2020,Energinet.
[61]
“Denmark’s climate and energy outlook,” Danish Energy Agency and Energinet,
Tech. Rep., 2020.
[62]
Vehicle per capita by country, 2019.
[63]
D. D. M. R. Statistics Denmark, Ed., Car stocks statistics bil62,bil82, Last
updated 18-01-2020 by Statistics Denmark.
[64]
Q. Wu, A. H. Nielsen, J. Østergaard, S. T. Cha, F. Marra, Y. Chen, and C.
Træholt, “Driving pattern analysis for electric vehicle (ev) grid integration
study,” IEEE, 2010, pages 1–6.
[65]
N. Ameli and N. Brandt, “Determinants of households’ investment in energy
eﬀiciency and renewables: Evidence from the oecd survey on household environ-
mental behaviour and attitudes,” Environmental Research Letters, volume 10,
number 4, page 044 015, 2015.
[66]
C. C. Michelsen and R. Madlener, “Homeowners’ preferences for adopting in-
novative residential heating systems: A discrete choice analysis for germany,”
Energy Economics, volume 34, number 5, pages 1271–1283, 2012.
[67]
H. C. O. Baescu, “The danish national travel survey - annual statistical report
2019 data version tu0619v2,” Center for Transport Analytics, August 6th 2020.
==PAGE:130==
118
Bibliography
[68]
N. Jakobsson, T. Gnann, P. Plötz, F. Sprei, and S. Karlsson, “Are multi-car
households better suited for battery electric vehicles? – driving patterns and
economics in sweden and germany,” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, volume 65, pages 1–15, 2016.
[69]
C. J. Bergstad, A. Gamble, O. Hagman, and Merritt, “Affective–symbolic and
instrumental independence psychological motives mediating effects of socio-
demographic variables on daily car use,” Journal of Transport Geography, vol-
ume 19, pages 33–38, 2011.
[70]
M. Baldini, A. Trivella, and J. W. Wente, “The impact of socioeconomic and
behavioural factors for purchasing energy eﬀicient household appliances: A case
study for denmark,” Energy Policy, volume 120, pages 503–513, 2018.
[71]
“Ni ud af ti kan klare pendlingen i elbil, [nine out of ten can handle the commute
in an electric car],” News from Statistics Denmark - Electric cars and commuting
2018, volume No. 457, December 2018.
[72]
J. T. J. Burd, E. A. Moore, H. Ezzat, R. Kirchain, and R. Roth, “Improve-
ments in electric vehicle battery technology influence vehicle lightweighting and
material substitution decisions,” Applied Energy, volume 283, 2021.
[73]
C.-f. Chen, G. Z. de Rubens, L. Noel, J. Kester, and B. K. Sovacool, “Assess-
ing the socio-demographic, technical, economic and behavioral factors of nordic
electric vehicle adoption and the influence of vehicle-to-grid preferences,” Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, volume 121, page 109 692, 2020.
[74]
M. Klein, L. Lüpke, and M. Günther, “Home charging and electric vehicle diffu-
sion: Agent-based simulation using choice-based conjoint data,” Transportation
Research: Transport and Environment, volume 88, page 102 475, 2020.
[75]
L. H. Albertsen, M. Andersen, L. R. Boscán, and A. Q. Santos, “Implementing
dynamic electricity taxation in denmark,” Energy Policy, volume 143, 2020.
[76]
A. Peters, E. van der Werff, and L. Steg, “Beyond purchasing: Electric vehicle
adoption motivation and consistent sustainable energy behaviour in the nether-
lands,” Energy Research Social Science, volume 39, pages 234–247, 2018.
[77]
N. F. Møller, L. M. Andersen, L. G. Hansen, and C. L. Jensen, “Can pecuniary
and environmental incentives via sms messaging make households adjust their
electricity demand to a fluctuating production?” Energy Economics, volume 80,
pages 1050–1058, 2019.
[78]
F. Gangale, A. Mengolini, and I. Onyeji, “Consumer engagement: An insight
from smart grid projects in europe,” Energy Policy, volume 60, pages 621–628,
2013.
[79]
D. Connolly, H. Lund, B. V. Mathiesen, and M. Leahy, “A review of computer
tools for analysing the integration of renewable energy into various energy sys-
tems,” Applied energy, volume 87, number 4, pages 1059–1082, 2010.
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
119
[80]
K. Hedegaard, H. Ravn, N. Juul, and P. Meibom, “Effects of electric vehicles on
power systems in northern europe,” Energy, volume 48, number 1, pages 356–
368, 2012, 6th Dubrovnik Conference on Sustainable Development of Energy
Water and Environmental Systems, SDEWES 2011.
[81]
K. Hedegaard and M. Münster, “Influence of individual heat pumps on wind
power integration – energy system investments and operation,” Energy Conver-
sion and Management, volume 75, pages 673–684, 2013.
[82]
M. Münster, P. E. Morthorst, H. V. Larsen, L. Bregnbæk, J. Werling, H. H.
Lindboe, and H. Ravn, “The role of district heating in the future danish energy
system,” Energy, volume 48, number 1, pages 47–55, 2012.
[83]
I. G. Jensen and L. Skovsgaard, “The impact of co2-costs on biogas usage,”
Energy, volume 134, pages 289–300, 2017.
[84]
Gams development corp. gams software gmbh, 2021. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.gams.com.
==PAGE:132==
120
==PAGE:133==
Appendix
==PAGE:134==
122
Appendix
Consumption investigation
Peak to
Average
Available meters
Max
Average
Min
Mean
Std
Winter
Spring
Summer
Fall
Max
Min
h1vmba1uEV21
0.858
2.909
0.295
0.125
0.112
0.343
0.292
0.249
0.298
162
137
h1vmba2uEV21
0.901
2.564
0.351
0.144
0.156
0.409
0.345
0.301
0.352
23620
17095
h1vmba3uEV21
1.045
2.691
0.388
0.136
0.164
0.475
0.381
0.318
0.382
124
85
h2vmba1uEV21
1.134
2.734
0.415
0.173
0.161
0.489
0.412
0.351
0.409
390
287
h2vmba2uEV21
1.588
2.988
0.531
0.229
0.219
0.629
0.517
0.448
0.534
129180
88407
h2vmba3uEV21
1.723
2.914
0.591
0.217
0.258
0.707
0.577
0.498
0.586
2205
1589
h2vmba2mEV21
2.242
2.341
0.958
0.367
0.365
1.109
0.939
0.798
0.989
466
286
h1v0ba1uEV21
0.464
2.094
0.222
0.066
0.115
0.261
0.220
0.187
0.220
1304
979
h1v0ba2uEV21
0.612
2.214
0.276
0.083
0.148
0.327
0.271
0.235
0.274
52422
37937
h1v0ba3uEV21
0.531
2.284
0.232
0.069
0.125
0.273
0.225
0.200
0.232
65645
48115
h2v0ba1uEV21
0.831
2.459
0.338
0.128
0.157
0.391
0.331
0.290
0.341
1744
1308
h2v0ba2uEV21
1.387
3.173
0.437
0.161
0.205
0.524
0.422
0.368
0.436
77518
54840
h2v0ba3uEV21
1.150
2.999
0.383
0.140
0.175
0.462
0.368
0.323
0.383
89794
63736
h2v0ba2mEV21
1.767
2.321
0.761
0.266
0.266
0.888
0.721
0.647
0.793
190
131
h1vmba1uEV22
2.645
3.315
0.798
0.448
0.115
1.287
0.777
0.391
0.747
14
12
h1vmba2uEV22
2.208
2.581
0.856
0.399
0.232
1.326
0.874
0.457
0.775
1630
1334
h1vmba3uEV22
2.334
2.770
0.842
0.389
0.207
1.255
0.843
0.475
0.807
13
10
h2vmba1uEV22
2.644
3.099
0.853
0.405
0.175
1.285
0.885
0.500
0.751
30
26
h2vmba2uEV22
2.896
2.522
1.148
0.511
0.317
1.717
1.169
0.659
1.060
8868
7181
h2vmba3uEV22
3.500
2.499
1.400
0.614
0.393
2.141
1.418
0.787
1.270
235
194
h2vmba2mEV22
4.428
2.764
1.602
0.686
0.386
2.289
1.548
1.010
1.577
54
40
h1v0ba1uEV22
1.557
2.625
0.593
0.301
0.147
0.981
0.601
0.280
0.518
115
93
h1v0ba2uEV22
1.746
2.473
0.706
0.333
0.210
1.130
0.718
0.350
0.633
5268
4441
h1v0ba3uEV22
2.180
2.684
0.812
0.421
0.204
1.352
0.824
0.352
0.733
5568
4707
h2v0ba1uEV22
2.132
2.607
0.818
0.371
0.217
1.248
0.862
0.447
0.723
146
125
h2v0ba2uEV22
2.525
2.476
1.020
0.451
0.301
1.563
1.033
0.560
0.933
7531
6336
h2v0ba3uEV22
2.704
2.623
1.031
0.489
0.278
1.635
1.038
0.527
0.937
7948
6668
h2v0ba2mEV22
4.021
2.818
1.427
0.697
0.204
2.234
1.422
0.707
1.361
21
16
A1vmba1uEV11
0.559
3.001
0.186
0.083
0.075
0.203
0.183
0.170
0.190
431
373
A1vmba2uEV11
0.630
2.691
0.234
0.106
0.096
0.260
0.231
0.211
0.236
14411
11463
A1vmba3uEV11
0.743
2.882
0.258
0.104
0.100
0.288
0.256
0.232
0.255
39
30
A2vmba1uEV11
0.763
2.998
0.254
0.120
0.086
0.283
0.250
0.229
0.256
313
261
A2vmba2uEV11
0.847
2.648
0.320
0.146
0.118
0.359
0.317
0.283
0.322
17644
13507
A2vmba3uEV11
0.985
2.832
0.348
0.143
0.127
0.392
0.348
0.314
0.339
344
279
A2vmba2mEV11
3.133
4.638
0.676
0.414
0.157
0.742
0.706
0.565
0.691
20
11
A1v0ba1uEV11
0.270
2.288
0.118
0.042
0.062
0.125
0.117
0.109
0.120
8675
6231
A1v0ba2uEV11
0.321
2.064
0.156
0.049
0.089
0.168
0.153
0.145
0.156
54792
41104
A1v0ba3uEV11
0.495
3.421
0.145
0.047
0.076
0.160
0.140
0.132
0.146
38324
29658
A2v0ba1uEV11
0.536
3.014
0.178
0.085
0.071
0.194
0.178
0.156
0.183
8869
5437
A2v0ba2uEV11
0.573
2.557
0.224
0.094
0.100
0.250
0.221
0.199
0.227
24916
17053
A2v0ba3uEV11
0.683
2.750
0.248
0.101
0.106
0.288
0.241
0.213
0.252
12658
9915
A2v0ba2mEV11
2.000
4.541
0.440
0.262
0.110
0.513
0.462
0.375
0.412
22
15
A1vmba2uEV12
1.739
2.758
0.630
0.309
0.142
1.000
0.632
0.337
0.560
175
155
A2vmba2uEV12
2.313
2.642
0.876
0.406
0.220
1.317
0.875
0.512
0.807
220
199
A1v0ba1uEV12
1.256
2.712
0.463
0.262
0.089
0.807
0.460
0.190
0.404
103
85
A1v0ba2uEV12
1.359
2.668
0.509
0.260
0.141
0.847
0.502
0.242
0.454
939
828
A1v0ba3uEV12
1.510
2.609
0.579
0.297
0.139
0.948
0.593
0.257
0.525
627
567
A2v0ba1uEV12
1.561
2.958
0.528
0.295
0.090
0.878
0.531
0.247
0.462
70
60
A2v0ba2uEV12
1.902
2.711
0.702
0.338
0.183
1.113
0.702
0.375
0.624
289
254
A2v0ba3uEV12
2.016
2.685
0.751
0.382
0.167
1.202
0.746
0.375
0.689
198
174
Table 1: Consumption analysis parameter for households categories.
==PAGE:135==
Consumption investigation
123
Age3
EV
HP
p int
p coeff
R2
LL
p int
p coeff
R2
LL
p int
p coeff
R2
LL
Total
6.19E-13
0.941
0.0001
326.8
2.71E-14
0.002
0.176
331.6
1.18E-09
5.53E-09
0.510
344.6
Peak
4.04E-13
0.802
0.001
-69.2
8.39E-15
0.0001
0.259
-61.7
1.87E-09
1.27E-07
0.444
-54.5
Average
6.19E-13
0.941
0.0001
-18.5
2.71E-14
0.002
0.176
-13.7
1.18E-09
5.53E-09
0.510
-0.69
PTA
6.68E-36
0.912
0.0002
-32.6
6.64E-39
0.008
0.136
-28.9
7.48E-34
0.405395
0.014
-32.2
WintAVG
3.90E-11
0.965
3.97E-05
-42.5
4.59E-12
0.028
0.095
-40.0
3.95E-08
4.66E-13
0.667
-15.0
SprAVG
7.10E-13
0.938
0.0001
-18.7
3.55E-14
0.003
0.166
-14.1
1.18E-09
2.33E-09
0.527
0.02
SumAVG
1.31E-15
0.746
0.002
12.0
1.04E-18
3.19E-06
0.366
23.4
6.14E-12
0.004675
0.154
16.2
FallAVG
3.28E-13
0.905
0.0002
-14.9
7.37E-15
0.0004
0.229
-8.4
1.17E-09
2.43E-07
0.429
-0.97
Table 2: Summary statistics for bivariate regression models as R2 statistic and Loglikelihood estimation, including
intercept and coeﬀicient p-values.
Children
House
Single
Age2
p int
p coeff
R2
LL
p int
p coeff
R2
LL
p int
p coeff
R2
LL
p int
p coeff
R2
LL
Total
1.6E-11
0.23
0.03
327.5
3.9E-07
0.001
0.200
332.4
1.5E-14
0.01
0.12
330.1
7.3E-10
0.09
0.06
328.3
Peak
6.0E-12
0.14
0.04
-68.1
1.7E-07
0.007
0.140
-65.5
5.5E-15
0.01
0.147
-65.2
6.9E-10
0.08
0.06
-67.6
Average
1.1E-11
0.23
0.03
-17.8
3.9E-07
0.001
0.200
-12.9
1.5E-14
0.01
0.124
-15.2
7.3E-10
0.09
0.06
-17.0
PTA
2.4E-32
0.22
0.03
-31.8
1.1E-32
0.060
0.071
-30.7
1.3E-34
0.10
0.054
-31.2
2.5E-33
0.92
0.01
-32.6
WintAVG
2.0E-09
0.48
0.01
-42.2
8.5E-06
0.003
0.166
-37.9
4.7E-12
0.05
0.074
-40.5
1.6E-08
0.19
0.03
-41.6
SprAVG
1.9E-11
0.23
0.02
-18.0
4.2E-07
0.001
0.195
-13.3
1.8E-14
0.01
0.123
-15.4
7.9E-10
0.09
0.05
-17.2
SumAVG
2.4E-15
0.02
0.10
14.80
1.9E-09
0.001
0.238
18.8
6.0E-19
0.01
0.248
19.1
5.0E-12
0.01
0.11
15.0
FallAVG
5.7E-12
0.16
0.03
-13.9
2.5E-07
0.001
0.211
-9.01
5.1E-15
0.01
0.13
-11.2
5.3E-10
0.06
0.07
-13.1
Table 3: Summary statistics for bivariate regression models as R2 statistic and Loglikelihood estimation, including
intercept and coeﬀicient p-values.
==PAGE:136==
124
Appendix
24/12/2017 17.00
06/01/2017 18.00
2017/01/05 18:00
Category
Meters
Category
Meters
Category
Meters
h1vmba3uEV21
123
h2vmba3uEV22
224
h1vmba2uEV22
1555
h2vmba2uEV21
127255
h1v0ba2uEV22
5057
h2vmba2mEV22
51
h2vmba3uEV21
2170
h2v0ba2uEV22
7199
h2v0ba1uEV22
137
h1v0ba2uEV21
51723
A1vmba2uEV12
168
A2v0ba2uEV12
278
h1v0ba3uEV21
64770
A1v0ba2uEV12
904
h2v0ba2uEV21
76516
h2v0ba3uEV21
88599
A1vmba3uEV11
39
A2v0ba3uEV11
12404
Table 4: Categories in the three major peaks of 2017. The number of available
meters at that hour indicates the contribution in the peak..
Scenarios definition
Year of construction
1900-1949
1950-1999
2000-2009
2010-2020
Total
51847
14281
3191
2593
HP
7515
2786
973
1740
Share
14.49%
19.51%
30.49%
67.10%
Total
273440
606645
65172
43257
HP
16901
22750
5422
12354
Share
6.18%
3.75%
8.32%
28.56%
Total
27967
150039
34232
22630
HP
432
1239
331
2570
Share
1.54%
0.83%
0.97%
11.36%
Total
45450
20895
4546
3110
HP
316
67
21
134
Share
0.70%
0.32%
0.46%
4.31%
Total
2069
1783
755
941
HP
189
178
71
206
Share
9.13%
9.98%
9.40%
21.89%
Total
16000
159406
27970
15019
HP
904
9074
1928
5605
Share
5.65%
5.69%
6.89%
37.32%
Table 5: Installation of residential heat pumps in Denmark from 1900 to 2020.
==PAGE:137==
Scenarios definition
125
Farm
houses
Detached
houses
Terraced,
linked or
semi-detached
houses
Multi-dwelling
houses
Other
residential
building
Weekend
cottages
10^3
m^2
Share
10^3
m^2
Share
10^3
m^2
Share
10^3
m^2
Share
10^3
m^2
Share
10^3
m^2
Share
District
heating
427
1.98
74229
44.57
26547
68.27
82431
90.54
132
20.53
199
1.17
C.H.
oil boiler
8208
37.99& 19661
11.81
1086
2.79
2152
2.36
142
22.08
539
3.16
C.H.
nat. gas
580
2.68
40841
24.52
7939
20.42
5074
5.57
80
12.44
43
0.25
C.H.
solid
6974
32.28
8809
5.29
184
0.47
194
0.21
104
16.17
47
0.28
Electric
boilers
957
4.43
9931
5.96
2113
5.43
614
0.67
102
15.86
13028
76.41
Oil
stoves
98
0.45
391
0.23
36
0.09
50
0.05
2
0.31
389
2.28
Solid
stoves
285
1.32
784
0.47
40
0.10
21
0.02
10
1.56
837
4.91
Heat
pumps
3691
17.08
11212
6.73
822
2.11
271
0.30
61
9.49
1727
10.13
Others
No/Ukw
387
1.79
575
0.41
117
0.30
232
0.25
10
1.56
242
1.42
Total area
21607
-
166533
-
38884
-
91039
-
643
-
17051
-
Table 6: Area heated by building typology and heating source.
==PAGE:138==
126
Appendix
Farm
houses
Detached
houses
Terraced,
linked or
semi-detached
houses
Multi-dwelling
houses
Other
residential
buildings
Weekend
cottages
District
heating
2037
506029
171591
78043
1037
1911
C.H.
oil-fired boiler
43712
134124
6622
4205
1112
4425
C.H.
natural gas
2915
273045
54720
8434
527
234
C.H
solid fuel
33360
51288
829
571
727
439
Electric
boilers
5726
73692
16422
1756
1542
172536
Oil stoves
693
3525
327
145
48
6327
Solid fuel
stoves
1974
6693
339
86
208
12275
Heat pumps
17653
66838
5070
656
767
17809
Solid fuel
stoves
100
1326
206
193
18
2424
Others/Unknown
1967
3971
724
3597
976
9428
Total
110137
1120531
256850
97686
6962
227808
Share
6.05%
61.57%
14.11%
5.37%
0.38%
12.52%
Table 7: Total number of constructed buildings in residential sector (C.H. states for Central Heating), source [36].
==PAGE:139==
Scenarios definition
127
Share of journeys
6 −17yrs
18 −30yrs
31 −50yrs
51 −65yrs
>= 66yrs
Workplace (commute)
1.5%
25.2%
30.3%
30.8%
3.5%
Schoolveducational
43.6%
11.1%
1.0%
0.4%
0.0%
SUM Commute
45.1%
36.3%
31.4%
31.1%
3.5%
SUM Errands
10.8%
22.3%
30.3%
28.1%
41.6%
Home, perm. residence
0.7%
0.7%
0.3%
0.2%
0.1%
After-school, youth club
1.9%
−
−
−
−
Nursery, crèche, day care
0.7%
−
−
−
−
Visit familylfriends
12.9%
14.6%
10.0%
8.6%
14.5%
Do sports
9.4%
5.3%
4.5%
4.7%
7.2%
Entertainment (incl. church)
6.2%
7.2%
5.9%
5.7%
7.3%
Allotment/summer cottage
0.7%
0.3%
0.4%
0.8%
1.6%
Leisure round trip
5.0%
6.0%
8.0%
11.0%
15.3%
Holiday, excursion
3.6%
1.8%
2.7%
2.5%
2.8%
Meetings in private context
0.2%
1.0%
0.8%
1.1%
2.0%
Other leisure activity
2.6%
1.4%
1.3%
1.7%
3.3%
SUM Leisure
43.9%
38.4%
34.0%
36.3%
54.0%
SUM Business trips
0.1%
2.9%
4.2%
3.9%
0.8%
SUM Commercial Tr.
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.6%
0.1%
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
100 %
Table 8: Original travel types shares by age group from TU survey, source [67].
Stock (2020)
Total
Couple families
Single people
Without cars, total
1178935
185060
979308
With 1 car, total
1359183
710279
648829
With 2 cars, total
462811
419214
43596
With 3 cars, total
61009
56076
4933
With more than 3 cars
13384
12101
1283
Table 9: Families disposal of vehicles by stock and family type, source [63].
Total
10^3 m^2
Total Share
District heating
183965
54.79%
C.H. oil-fired boiler
31788
9.47%
C.H. natural gas
54557
16.25%
C.H. solid fuel
16312
4.86%
Electrical boilers
26745
7.97%
Oil Stoves
966
0.29%
Solid fuel stoves
1977
0.59%
Heat pumps
17784
5.30%
Others
481
0.14%
No/Unknown
1182
0.35%
Table 10: Total heated area by heating source [36].
==PAGE:140==
128
Appendix
Apartments
2020
2025
2030
2040
Houses
2020
2025
2030
2040
A1v0ba1uEV22
265
587
796
918
h1v0ba1uEV22
398
881
1193
1377
A1v0ba2uEV22
4250
9400
12730
14689
h1v0ba2uEV22
6374
14102
19096
22033
A1v0ba3uEV22
797
1763
2387
2754
h1v0ba3uEV22
1195
2644
3580
4131
A1vmba1uEV22
863
1908
2583
2981
h1vmba1uEV22
1294
2861
3876
4472
A1vmba2uEV22
13800
30524
41335
47695
h1vmba2uEV22
20700
45787
62004
71543
A1vmba3uEV22
2587
5724
7750
8943
h1vmba3uEV22
3881
8585
11626
13415
A2v0ba1uEV22
1672
3698
5007
5778
h2v0ba1uEV22
2507
5546
7511
8666
A2v0ba2uEV22
26746
59161
80113
92439
h2v0ba2uEV22
40119
88741
120171
138659
A2v0ba3uEV22
5015
11093
15022
17332
h2v0ba3uEV22
7522
16639
22532
25998
A2vmba1uEV22
1184
2619
3547
4093
h2vmba1uEV22
1776
3929
5320
6139
A2vmba2uEV22
18946
41907
56750
65480
h2vmba2uEV22
28419
62861
85124
98221
A2vmba3uEV22
3552
7858
10641
12278
h2vmba3uEV22
5328
11787
15961
18417
Total
79677
176242
238661
275380
Total
119513
264363
357994
413071
Table 11: Expected scenario projections for first dwelling air-to-air HPs, divided in the modeled 24 socio-economic
categories.
==PAGE:141==
Flexibility across categories
129
Flexibility across categories
==PAGE:142==
130
Appendix
hysc
hmsc
hosc
hypc
hmpc
hopc
hys
hms
hos
hyp
hmp
hop
ev1
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev2
4.0%
4.5%
11.2%
7.5%
8.2%
13.8%
12.1%
12.8%
18.0%
12.7%
13.5%
18.2%
ev3
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev4
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev5
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev6
4.0%
4.5%
11.2%
7.5%
8.2%
13.8%
12.1%
12.8%
18.0%
12.7%
13.5%
18.2%
ev7
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev8
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev9
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev10
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev11
0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.7%
0.5%
0.2%
1.4%
0.9%
0.3%
1.2%
0.8%
0.2%
ev12
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev13
4.0%
4.5%
11.2%
7.5%
8.2%
13.8%
12.1%
12.8%
18.0%
12.7%
13.5%
18.2%
ev14
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev15
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev16
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev17
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev18
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev19
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev20
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev21
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev22
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev23
0.7%
0.5%
0.3%
1.2%
0.8%
0.3%
2.3%
1.5%
0.5%
2.0%
1.3%
0.4%
ev24
6.0%
6.7%
16.8%
11.2%
12.3%
20.6%
18.2%
19.2%
27.0%
19.1%
20.3%
27.3%
ev25
20.5%
16.3%
30.4%
19.5%
15.8%
27.0%
14.1%
11.2%
20.8%
15.0%
12.2%
20.8%
ev26
0.7%
0.5%
0.3%
1.2%
0.8%
0.3%
2.3%
1.5%
0.5%
2.0%
1.3%
0.4%
ev27
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev28
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev29
20.5%
16.3%
30.4%
19.5%
15.8%
27.0%
14.1%
11.2%
20.8%
15.0%
12.2%
20.8%
ev30
6.0%
6.7%
16.8%
11.2%
12.3%
20.6%
18.2%
19.2%
27.0%
19.1%
20.3%
27.3%
Table 12: Coeﬀicients vehicle pattern representation for each of the household socio-economic categories.
h=house,
a=apartments, y=young, m=grown, o=old, s=single,c=children presence.
==PAGE:143==
Flexibility across categories
131
aysc
amsc
aosc
aypc
ampc
aopc
ays
ams
aos
ayp
amp
aop
ev1
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev2
4.0%
4.5%
11.2%
7.5%
8.2%
13.8%
12.1%
12.8%
18.0%
12.7%
13.5%
18.2%
ev3
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev4
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev5
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev6
4.0%
4.5%
11.2%
7.5%
8.2%
13.8%
12.1%
12.8%
18.0%
12.7%
13.5%
18.2%
ev7
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev8
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev9
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev10
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev11
0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.7%
0.5%
0.2%
1.4%
0.9%
0.3%
1.2%
0.8%
0.2%
ev12
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev13
4.0%
4.5%
11.2%
7.5%
8.2%
13.8%
12.1%
12.8%
18.0%
12.7%
13.5%
18.2%
ev14
10.3%
8.1%
15.2%
9.8%
7.9%
13.5%
7.0%
5.6%
10.4%
7.5%
6.1%
10.4%
ev15
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev16
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev17
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.3%
0.1%
0.8%
0.5%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.1%
ev18
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev19
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev20
7.6%
8.8%
0.9%
6.0%
7.0%
0.7%
5.2%
6.1%
0.6%
4.6%
5.4%
0.5%
ev21
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev22
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev23
0.7%
0.5%
0.3%
1.2%
0.8%
0.3%
2.3%
1.5%
0.5%
2.0%
1.3%
0.4%
ev24
6.0%
6.7%
16.8%
11.2%
12.3%
20.6%
18.2%
19.2%
27.0%
19.1%
20.3%
27.3%
ev25
20.5%
16.3%
30.4%
19.5%
15.8%
27.0%
14.1%
11.2%
20.8%
15.0%
12.2%
20.8%
ev26
0.7%
0.5%
0.3%
1.2%
0.8%
0.3%
2.3%
1.5%
0.5%
2.0%
1.3%
0.4%
ev27
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev28
11.4%
13.2%
1.3%
9.0%
10.6%
1.0%
7.8%
9.1%
0.9%
7.0%
8.1%
0.8%
ev29
20.5%
16.3%
30.4%
19.5%
15.8%
27.0%
14.1%
11.2%
20.8%
15.0%
12.2%
20.8%
ev30
6.0%
6.7%
16.8%
11.2%
12.3%
20.6%
18.2%
19.2%
27.0%
19.1%
20.3%
27.3%
Table 13: Coeﬀicients vehicle pattern representation for each of the household socio-economic categories.
h=house,
a=apartments, y=young, m=grown, o=old, s=single,c=children presence.
==PAGE:144==
132
Appendix
DK1
DK2
BEV
PHEV
BEV
PHEV
2020
2025
2030
2040
2020
2025
2030
2040
2020
2025
2030
2040
2020
2025
2030
2040
h1vmba1uEV21
41
327
1801
6876
41
262
819
1310
29
235
1293
4935
29
188
588
940
h1vmba2uEV21
102
819
4502
17191
102
655
2047
3274
73
588
3232
12339
73
470
1469
2350
h1vmba3uEV21
51
409
2251
8595
51
327
1023
1637
37
294
1616
6169
37
235
734
1175
h2vmba1uEV21
281
2249
12367
47219
281
1799
5621
8994
202
1614
8876
33891
202
1291
4035
6455
h2vmba2uEV21
703
5621
30917
118047
703
4497
14053
22485
504
4035
22191
84728
504
3228
10087
16139
h2vmba3uEV21
351
2811
15459
59023
351
2249
7027
11243
252
2017
11095
42364
252
1614
5043
8069
h1v0ba1uEV21
192
1535
8445
32245
192
1228
3839
6142
138
1102
6061
23144
138
882
2755
4408
h1v0ba2uEV21
480
3839
21113
80612
480
3071
9597
15355
344
2755
15153
57859
344
2204
6888
11021
h1v0ba3uEV21
240
1919
10556
40306
240
1535
4798
7677
172
1378
7577
28929
172
1102
3444
5510
h2v0ba1uEV21
313
2507
13790
52653
313
2006
6268
10029
225
1800
9898
37791
225
1440
4499
7198
h2v0ba2uEV21
784
6268
34475
131632
784
5015
15671
25073
562
4499
24744
94479
562
3599
11247
17996
h2v0ba3uEV21
392
3134
17238
65816
392
2507
7835
12536
281
2249
12372
47239
281
1800
5624
8998
A1vmba1uEV11
41
327
1801
6876
41
262
819
1310
29
235
1293
4935
29
188
588
940
A1vmba2uEV11
77
614
3377
12893
77
491
1535
2456
55
441
2424
9254
55
353
1102
1763
A1vmba3uEV11
51
409
2251
8595
51
327
1023
1637
37
294
1616
6169
37
235
734
1175
A2vmba1uEV11
281
2249
12367
47219
281
1799
5621
8994
202
1614
8876
33891
202
1291
4035
6455
A2vmba2uEV11
527
4216
23188
88535
527
3373
10540
16864
378
3026
16643
63546
378
2421
7565
12104
A2vmba3uEV11
351
2811
15459
59023
351
2249
7027
11243
252
2017
11095
42364
252
1614
5043
8069
A1v0ba1uEV11
192
1535
8445
32245
192
1228
3839
6142
138
1102
6061
23144
138
882
2755
4408
A1v0ba2uEV11
360
2879
15834
60459
360
2303
7197
11516
258
2066
11365
43394
258
1653
5166
8266
A1v0ba3uEV11
240
1919
10556
40306
240
1535
4798
7677
172
1378
7577
28929
172
1102
3444
5510
A2v0ba1uEV11
313
2507
13790
52653
313
2006
6268
10029
225
1800
9898
37791
225
1440
4499
7198
A2v0ba2uEV11
588
4701
25856
98724
588
3761
11753
18805
422
3374
18558
70859
422
2699
8436
13497
A2v0ba3uEV11
392
3134
17238
65816
392
2507
7835
12536
281
2249
12372
47239
281
1800
5624
8998
Table 14: Expected scenario projections for first EV and PHEV, divided in the 24 modeled socio-economic categories.
==PAGE:145==
Flexibility across categories
133
2020
2025
2030
2040
Techn
EVEH
EV
EH
EVEH
EV
EH
EVEH
EV
EH
EVEH
EV
EH
a1
-17.1%
-24.8%
-5.8%
-16.4%
-23.7%
-5.5%
-24.3%
-33.1%
-9.8%
-24.3%
-32.9%
-10.8%
a2
-15.1%
-21.7%
-5.1%
-14.4%
-20.7%
-4.6%
-21.3%
-29.3%
-8.3%
-21.2%
-29.0%
-9.0%
Ch.
a3
-20.1%
-26.6%
-4.0%
-19.1%
-25.0%
-4.4%
-27.7%
-35.6%
-7.5%
-27.8%
-36.0%
-8.1%
a1
-20.3%
-28.6%
-5.4%
-18.3%
-26.6%
-4.1%
-26.5%
-37.5%
-7.8%
-26.5%
-37.7%
-8.8%
a2
-17.8%
-25.9%
-5.0%
-16.1%
-24.0%
-3.9%
-23.6%
-33.8%
-7.5%
-23.6%
-33.9%
-8.3%
Singles
No ch.
a3
-21.1%
-30.5%
-7.5%
-19.7%
-28.3%
-7.4%
-28.7%
-39.9%
-12.4%
-28.8%
-40.5%
-13.0%
a1
-17.2%
-22.5%
-5.6%
-16.0%
-21.2%
-4.6%
-22.7%
-29.9%
-6.8%
-22.4%
-29.8%
-7.1%
a2
-15.1%
-19.0%
-6.3%
-14.5%
-17.9%
-6.2%
-21.4%
-25.5%
-10.1%
-21.4%
-25.4%
-10.6%
Ch.
a3
-19.4%
-22.4%
-10.0%
-18.8%
-20.9%
-10.3%
-27.0%
-30.0%
-15.1%
-27.0%
-30.5%
-15.4%
a1
-17.6%
-25.0%
-5.3%
-15.9%
-23.1%
-4.1%
-23.5%
-32.8%
-7.6%
-23.6%
-33.1%
-8.5%
a2
-16.1%
-21.6%
-6.1%
-15.2%
-20.0%
-5.9%
-22.4%
-28.3%
-9.9%
-22.4%
-28.4%
-10.5%
Houses
Couples
No ch.
a3
-19.7%
-26.1%
-8.0%
-18.6%
-24.1%
-8.0%
-26.9%
-34.1%
-12.6%
-26.9%
-34.6%
-13.0%
a1
-21.8%
-31.9%
-2.6%
-19.4%
-29.2%
-1.4%
-26.5%
-40.9%
-0.1%
-25.8%
-40.8%
-0.2%
a2
-20.2%
-29.8%
-2.4%
-17.2%
-26.6%
-0.8%
-23.2%
-36.7%
-0.3%
-22.5%
-36.4%
-0.2%
Ch.
a3
-20.7%
-29.8%
-2.8%
-20.0%
-29.3%
-1.9%
-30.5%
-44.6%
-1.8%
-30.9%
-45.7%
-1.9%
a1
-24.4%
-35.4%
-3.7%
-21.7%
-32.3%
-2.5%
-28.8%
-45.5%
-1.0%
-28.0%
-46.1%
-2.4%
a2
-23.1%
-33.6%
-3.6%
-19.9%
-30.2%
-1.9%
-26.6%
-42.3%
-0.3%
-25.8%
-42.7%
-1.2%
Singles
No ch.
a3
-22.1%
-34.0%
-2.2%
-20.6%
-32.4%
-1.1%
-30.5%
-47.6%
-0.7%
-30.9%
-48.8%
-0.7%
a1
-19.4%
-29.2%
-0.7%
-18.1%
-27.0%
-0.8%
-26.0%
-38.5%
-0.7%
-25.8%
-38.8%
-0.6%
a2
-18.3%
-26.9%
-3.9%
-16.8%
-24.5%
-3.8%
-23.5%
-34.8%
-4.6%
-23.3%
-34.9%
-4.7%
Ch.
a3
-19.9%
-27.1%
-5.3%
-19.5%
-26.4%
-5.3%
-29.0%
-40.3%
-5.9%
-29.6%
-41.5%
-6.2%
a1
-22.1%
-32.1%
-2.1%
-20.0%
-29.5%
-1.6%
-28.0%
-42.2%
-0.2%
-27.6%
-42.9%
-0.4%
a2
-19.1%
-30.3%
-2.1%
-17.6%
-27.4%
-2.6%
-25.0%
-39.0%
-3.4%
-24.8%
-39.5%
-3.5%
Apartments
Couples
No Ch.
a3
-20.1%
-29.9%
-3.3%
-19.6%
-28.5%
-3.8%
-28.8%
-42.3%
-4.4%
-29.3%
-43.5%
-4.5%
==PAGE:146==
