==PAGE:1==
Investigation of the Association
Between Sense of Muscle
Exhaustion and General
Polysensory Hypersensitivity
Sigríður Katrín Magnúsdóttir
Supervisor: Tine Alkjær
March 17, 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Project period:
August 24th 2020 - March 17th 2021
ECTS:
35
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Biomedical Engineering
Remarks:
A project submitted as a partial fulﬁlment of the
requirements for obtaining the degree of Master of Science
in Biomedical Engineering from the Technical University of
Denmark in collaboration with the Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences at the University of Copenhagen
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Background: Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) patients show increased pain percep-
tion[1][2] and hypersensitivity to diﬀerent sensory stimuli[3][4], indicating central
ampliﬁcation of all sensory modalities, both somatic and non-somatic. Additionally,
discrepancies between subjective and objective signs of muscle fatigue are reported
in FMS patients, and linked to the hyper-responsiveness of the CNS[5], causing a
feeling of fatigue and exhaustion despite no objective sign of fatigue present in the
muscles.
Objective: To investigate the association between self-reported polysensory hy-
persensitivity (PSH) and pressure pain sensitivity and the discrepancy between
objectively and subjectively measured muscle fatigue during a muscle exhaustion
task in FMS patients.
Methods: A polysensory hypersensitivity questionnaire (PHQ) was used to assess
self-reported PSH. Pressure pain sensitivity was evaluated with computerized cuﬀ
pressure algometry (CPA) on the lower leg. An isometric muscle exhaustion test at
90◦shoulder abduction was performed, recording the objective changes in neuromus-
cular activity in the middle deltoid muscle, using surface electromyography (sEMG).
Additionally, diﬀerent pain assessments were collected.
Results: Twenty-eight FMS patients were measured. Time to exhaustion decreased
signiﬁcantly with increased PSH. No correlation was found between the level of PSH
and the normalized root means square (nRMS) amplitude change or the normalized
mean power frequency (nMPF) change from baseline. No correlation was found
between the level of PSH and pressure pain sensitivity.
Conclusion: The results suggest that the level of self-reported PSH can be used as
an indicator of the time to exhaustion in FMS patients. It is, however, not a good
predictor of pressure pain sensitivity and cannot indicate the magnitude of objective
changes of fatigue in the CNS or the muscle.
However, characteristic changes of fatigue in nMPF were correlated to the time to
exhaustion, while no correlation was seen between nRMS amplitude change and time
to exhaustion. This is in agreement with previous ﬁndings[5], supporting the theory
of a hyper-responsive CNS in FMS patients, enhancing the feeling of fatigue, causing
premature termination of a task, without signs of fatigue within the muscle being
evident.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was realised at the Parker Institute, Frederiksberg Hospital, in
the time period from August 24th 2020 to March 17th 2021. It is submitted as a
partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Biomedical
Engineering.
The thesis is structured as a scientiﬁc article, containing an introduction with
the relevant literature review, summarizing the purpose and aim of the thesis, a
methods section, a results section introducing the most important ﬁndings of the
study, discussion and ﬁnally a conclusion and a section on future work. It is assumed
that the reader has knowledge relevant to understand the content of the thesis.
Further elaborations on theory, the study protocol, relevant study documents and
information and explanations concerning diﬀerent parts of the process is included in
the following appendices.
• Appendix A: Theory
An introduction of the ﬁbromyalgia syndrome, its pathophysiology, diagnosis
and treatment.
A brief introduction of muscle fatigue and its myoelectric manifestation mea-
sured with surface electromyography.
• Appendix B: Study Protocol
A copy of the study protocol
• Appendix C: Study Documents
Relevant study documents: FIQ-R Questionnaires (English and Danish ver-
sions), Letter of Invitation, Participant Information Letter, Patient Rights in
a Study, Pain Diary, Informed Consent Form, Polysensory Hypersensitivity
Questionnaire, Numeric Pain Rating Scale, Fibromyalgia Research Project
Reminder.
• Appendix D: SHS translation logbook
A brief history of the translation process of the SHS scale, a letter seeking
permission to translate and use the SHS scale and diﬀerent versions of the
scale made throughout the process: the original version, the translated and
reconciled version, the back translated version and the ﬁnal version.
ii
==PAGE:5==
• Appendix E: Matlab Code
Matlab code for processing the EMG data.
• Appendix F: Additional Results
Tables and ﬁgures introducing additional results obtained from the dataset and
used in relation to the discussion section.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my professor and supervisor, Tine Alkjær.
You have provided invaluable guidance, encouragement, and advice, not only through
writing this thesis but throughout my whole time as a biomedical engineering student.
You have always been ready to help me and answer any questions that I might have
had. I am very fortunate to have a mentor who cares so much about my work and
who inspires me every day.
Throughout this project, several people have advised me, enriched my work, and given
valuable guidance, which I would like to thank. Kirstine Amris, Marius Henriksen
and Pernille Hurup Duhn, thank you all for welcoming me into the research group, for
taking the time to teach me, discuss and answer every question I had along the way.
Additionally, I would like to thank Marius for his invaluable help with the statistical
analysis. I want to thank Christine Tara Lang for the Sensory Hypersensitivity
Scale’s back-translation and Jack Kvistgaard Olsen for teaching me how to use the
Computerized CuﬀPressure Algometer. A special thanks to Elisabeth Bandak for
always being ready to lend a limb in the name of science and bringing good spirit
into the laboratory every time. Tobias Christiansen, Stefan Skrydstrup Skammelsen,
and Emilie Eskildsen Zwicky, I would like to thank you for the days spent in the
laboratory in the fall, learning to use/play with the diﬀerent instruments, and helping
each other learn and become better biomechanists. Likewise, a very special thanks to
all the participants who found the time to take part in the experiment contributing
to my thesis, this project and ﬁbromyalgia research.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my husband, Skúli. Without you, none
of this would have happened. Thank you for going along with the crazy idea of
me returning to university and studying for ﬁve more years. Thank you for your
motivation, for always listening to what I need the most, believing in me when I did
not, and putting up with the ’stressed-out student version of me’ for the past years.
To my kids, you have not made things easier, but I thank you still for keeping me
grounded, by simply being a wonderful distraction from my list of things to do and
reminding me to enjoy the best things in life.
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
2.1
FIQ-R questions used for identiﬁcation of eligible participants
. . . .
7
2.2
Electrode placement on the middle deltoid muscle . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Participant demographics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Simple statistics of the parameters tested in the hypotheses tests . . .
21
3.3
Correlation statistics for the relationship between PSH and time to
exhaustion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Correlation statistics for the relationship between PSH and nRMS
amplitude nMPF changes from baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Correlation statistics for the relationship between PSH, PDT and PTT 27
4.1
Correlation statistics for the relationship between the time to exhaus-
tion and nRMS amplitude and nMPF changes from baseline . . . . .
32
D.1 Changes made to speciﬁc questions in the SHS during translation
. .
98
D.2 Changes made to speciﬁc questions in the SHS after back translation
99
F.1
PSH related summary results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
F.2
Correlation statistics for the relationship between time to exhaustion
and individual PSH scale modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
F.3
Correlation statistics for the relationship between time to exhaustion
and pain related measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
F.4
Pain related summary results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
The DoloCuﬀPain Measuring System device . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Pressure pain measurements of a single participant
. . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Matlab ﬁgure representing the diﬀerent factors used for data analysis
16
2.4
Incorrectly recognized Pain Detection Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1
The relationship between the level of PSH and the time to exhaustion
23
3.2
The relationship between the level of PSH and the nRMS amplitude
change from baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
The relationship between the level of PSH and the nMPF change from
baseline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
The relationship between the level of PSH and the PDT
. . . . . . .
26
3.5
The relationship between the level of PSH and the PTT
. . . . . . .
27
4.1
The relationship between the time to exhaustion and the nRMS
amplitude change from baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
The relationship between the time to exhaustion and the nMPF change
from baseline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
A.1 Schematic view of the pain pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.2 Graphical representation of allodynia and hyperalgesia
. . . . . . . .
43
A.3 Fibromyalgia tender point locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.4 The 2010 ACR Widespread Pain Index diagram . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.5 Schematic view of possible sites of neuromuscular fatigue . . . . . . .
52
A.6 Possible factors aﬀecting CNS fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
F.1
The relationship between the PDT and the time to exhaustion . . . . 122
F.2
The relationship between the PTT and the time to exhaustion . . . . 122
F.3
The relationship between diﬀerent pain measurements obtained before
the muscle exhaustion task and the time to exhaustion (1) . . . . . . 123
F.4
The relationship between diﬀerent pain measurements obtained before
the muscle exhaustion task and the time to exhaustion (2) . . . . . . 124
vi
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
List of Tables
v
List of Figures
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods
6
2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Oral Information and Screening Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Outcome Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Study Procedures and Experimental Instrumentation . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
Pain Diary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
Pressure Pain Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Polysensory Hypersensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.4
Overall Pain and Shoulder Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.5
Neuromuscular Fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Data Processing and Statistical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
Sample Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.3
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Results
20
3.1
Descriptive Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Outcome Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
PSH and the Time to Exhaustion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
PSH and Neuromuscular Exhaustion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
PSH and Pressure Pain Sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
vii
==PAGE:10==
4
Discussion
28
4.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Conclusion
37
6
Future Work
38
A Theory
39
A.1 Fibromyalgia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A.2 Muscle Fatigue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B Study protocol
61
C Study Documents
79
C.1 FIQ-R Questionnaire - English . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.2 FIQ-R Questionnaire - Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C.3 Letter of Invitation - Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.4 Information Letter - Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.5 Patient rights in a study - Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.6 Pain Diary - Danish
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.7 Informed Consent Form - Danish
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.8 Polysensory Hypersensitivity Questionnaire - Danish
. . . . . . . . .
93
C.9 Numeric Pain Rating Scale - Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.10 Fibromyalgia Research Project Reminder - Danish . . . . . . . . . . .
96
D Translation of the SHS Scale
97
D.1 Translation Logbook and Future Plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
D.2 Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Original . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
D.3 Inquiry about Translation of the Sensory
Hypersensitivity Scale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.4 Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Translated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
D.5 Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Back translated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D.6 Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Final version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
E Matlab Code for Data Processing
110
F Additional Results
120
References
126
viii
==PAGE:11==
1
| Introduction
Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) is a chronic pain condition aﬀecting between 2% and
5% of the European population, mainly women[6][7].
The pathophysiology of FMS is complicated and not yet fully understood. Tissue-
based and laboratory ﬁndings are non-existent[8], and as a result, the validity of the
diagnosis has been questioned[9]. However, recent advancements in neuroimaging
techniques have provided evidence of abnormal sensory processing in the central
nervous system, and abnormalities in the release of neurotransmitters and the neu-
roendocrine system have been found[10][1]. Additionally, research shows that genetic
factors, external stressors, psychiatric aspects, and sleep disturbances all play a
role in the onset or clinical course of the disease[11]. Together, these factors point
towards multiple mechanisms being involved in the onset and pathophysiology of
FMS. It can be suggested that external stressors possibly initiate a cascade of events
in genetically predisposed individuals, which can manifest themselves in alterations
of the nociceptive system of the body and are consequently seen in the clinical
symptoms and decline in function and quality of life.
Clinically, FMS is characterized by widespread, non-inﬂammatory pain and widespread
soft-tissue tenderness with multiple tender points. Despite pain being the central
symptom of FMS, systemic symptoms including fatigue, sleep disturbances, cognitive
dysfunction, and high levels of distress are considered core symptoms[12][13][14].
One of the characteristics of FMS is reduced tolerance to non-painful sensory stimuli
(allodynia), as well as excessive and prolonged pain, which can spread beyond the
location of inﬂiction from a stimulus that typically provokes pain (hyperalgesia)[15].
A study by Jespersen et al.[16] used computerized pressure algometry (CPA) to
compare the pain detection threshold (PDT), the pressure at which pain is ﬁrst felt,
and the pain tolerance threshold (PTT), the pressure at which pain is intolerable,
between patients with FMS and healthy controls. The ﬁndings were that both
PDT and PTT were signiﬁcantly lower in patients with FMS than healthy controls,
indicating allodynia/hyperalgesia in the patient group. Additionally, abnormal brain
processing to painful stimuli has been shown. A study by Gracely et al.[17] used
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to evaluate the pattern of activation
in the brain during painful pressure of the nail bed in both FMS patients and healthy
1
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
controls. The results showed that similar pressure gave more regions of activation in
the brain of FMS patients than in the healthy control group. Additionally, when
the pressure in the control group was increased to match the pain from the pressure
subjectively indicated by the patients, the activation patterns were similar in both
groups. This indicates centrally augmented processing of pain in the FMS group
compared to healthy controls.
In addition to heightened pain perception, research suggest that ﬁbromyalgia pa-
tients have polysensory hypersensitivity (PSH), i.e., general hypersensitivity to nearly
any type of sensory stimuli, such as temperature (both heat and cold)[3], visual[4],
auditory, and olfactory[18][19]. Additionally, FMS patients show abnormal brain
processing to a variety of non-painful sensory stimuli[20], and a preference for lower
levels of external stimuli[4]. These ﬁndings suggest that the problem is not speciﬁc
to pain processing but that it exists within the process of all sensory modalities. The
exact mechanism is unknown, but these characteristics point towards a hyperactive
sensory system, amplifying both somatic and non-somatic sensory stimuli in FMS
patients. According to novel theory, the network of brain regions involved in a
pain response is far less pain-speciﬁc than initially assumed, suggesting that the
’pain neuro-matrix’ may best be described as a ’salience network’[21]. The proposed
salience detection system’s primary function is to facilitate the processing of sig-
niﬁcant (e.g., potentially threatening) sensory input and to select the appropriate
response, regardless of whether this input is conveyed through nociceptive or other
sensory pathways. In patients with FMS, the brain’s ability to integrate and interpret
sensory signals may be overly responsive to certain types of stimuli[22][23]. Thus,
the brain circuits’ aberrant functioning that assigns salience values to sensory stimuli
may contribute to the complex symptom presentation in FMS.
Even with few tissue-based ﬁndings FMS is associated with reduced quality of
life[24][25] and substantial pain-related disability[26]. A study by Amris et al.[26]
found that patients with chronic widespread pain (CWP), such as FMS patients,
have substantial diﬃculties in the performance of activities of daily life (ADL), and
although the average age of the participants in the study was around 45 years, their
motor abilities in ADL was closer to healthy 70 to 80 year old women. Additionally,
studies show that FMS can negatively aﬀect both social and occupational life, as
well as relationships with everyone, from closest family and friends to employers[27].
Therefore, it is clear that despite improvements in the understanding of the underly-
ing mechanisms involved in FMS, the disease burden is substantial, and the need for
eﬀective treatment is considerable.
No single treatment of FMS is consistently successful, and the management remains
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
challenging. Most experts agree that disease management should be multi-focal and
involve patient education, as well as pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatment
strategies necessary to manage key symptoms and enhance the health and function
of each individual[28][29]. EULAR (The European League Against Rheumatism)
recommends non-pharmacologic treatment, such as exercise, to always be considered
as the ﬁrst treatment method of FMS[29].
FMS patients have been shown to have poor physical ﬁtness[30][31] and studies
generally agree that muscle performance in FMS patients is lacking, both in strength
and endurance compared to healthy controls[32]. Exercise is a powerful tool when it
comes to increasing the health and function of individuals[28], and has additionally
been shown to reduce the perception of pain and have a positive eﬀect on mental
health[33][34]. Diﬀerent forms of exercise have been proven helpful for FMS patients.
There is evidence that both aerobic and resistance training result in improvements
in pain and physical function[35]. Additionally, aquatic exercise has been shown
to improve pain and overall well-being of FMS patients[36], as well as mind/body
exercises such as tai chi[37] or yoga[38].
However, treatment eﬀects are often limited, and a large proportion of patients with
chronic pain, such as FMS, respond negatively to physical activity. Much of the
FMS pain has been found to originate from deep tissues, such as muscles. Therefore,
muscle activity, such as during exercise, can possibly contribute to the worsening of
symptoms such as increased pain and premature experience of muscle fatigue. As a
result, the dropout rate of patients from exercise is high[39][40], possibly decreasing
daily activity and further aﬀecting the overall patient health and quality of life
negatively.
Voluntary movements require the activation of muscles through a complex cen-
trally controlled neuromuscular process. The process requires the integration of
sensory information from muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joints to the nervous
system and central commands from the brain to adjust and co-ordinate muscle
activation to produce eﬀective and meaningful movements[41]. During prolonged or
repetitive movements, the neurons and muscles fatigue through a complex physiolog-
ical process, which causes an increase in the perceived eﬀort of muscle contraction
and eventually leads to temporary, activity-induced failure of the muscle to generate
force[42].
Surface EMG is a non-invasive technique used to study skeletal muscle activity by
recording the electrical activity in the underlying muscle ﬁber membrane during
contraction[43]. By using sEMG during fatiguing contractions, the muscle activity
can be monitored continuously, and fatigue observed as a function of time, eventually
leading to failure in performance[44] The physiological changes, underlying neuro-
3
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
muscular fatigue are therefore represented as changes in the electrical activity of the
muscle ﬁber membrane, ultimately seen as changes in the sEMG signal characteristics.
The primary changes in the sEMG signal during fatigue are an increase in the EMG
amplitude and a decrease, or a left shift, of the frequency spectrum[45][46]. The
calculation methods often used to represent these characteristics are the root mean
square (RMS) amplitude and the median power frequencies (MPF), respectvely[46]
[47].
Muscle fatigue can be divided into central- and peripheral fatigue, where central
fatigue occurs in the CNS, including both neural and psychological factors, while
peripheral fatigue involves the intrinsic factors of the muscle[42]. Central fatigue is
characterized by decreased voluntary activation of muscles caused by factors such as
decreased supraspinal activation, decreased motivation, or sensory input from the
muscle. A decrease in the brain’s neural drive leads to a decrease in the number
of action potentials ﬁred by the motor neurons onto the muscle. This phenomenon
can be recorded with surface electromyography (EMG), where it is represented as
a frequency shift of the EMG signal towards lower frequencies when calculated
in the frequency domain after applying a fast Fourier transform[48][49][50]. The
physiological factors contributing to fatigue within the muscle primarily involve a
decrease in the energy supply (ATP) of the muscle or an increase in the concentration
of metabolites produced during muscle work, such as lactic acid, a by-product of ATP
hydrolysis. These changes cause a decrease in the contractile strength of individual
muscle ﬁbers[42][51][52]. In an attempt to counteract the contractile failure of the
working motor units and to be able to keep the required torque and maintain the
same position, the MU recruitment threshold decreases, and as a result, additional
motor units can be recruited in an eﬀort to maintain the contractile strength of the
muscle. These changes are represented as an increase in the amplitude observed with
sEMG[53][44].
Studies have showed altered neuromuscular function in chronic pain conditions[54][55].
A study by Bandak et al.[5] showed that FMS patients have an altered central nervous
response to a muscle fatiguing task. Surface EMG was registered in patients with
FMS during an isometric muscle exhaustion task. The results showed no objective
signs of fatigue within the muscle, while signs of fatigue in the CNS were signiﬁcant.
This indicates that during muscle fatigue, the sensory information from the muscles
is not interpreted or integrated correctly by the CNS, resulting in the experience of
muscle fatigue being ampliﬁed in the brain, despite no signs of fatigue being present
in the muscles, ultimately leading to an early failure of the task due to the feeling of
exhaustion.
It is still unknown whether the intensiﬁed feeling of muscle fatigue is a part of
4
==PAGE:15==
general PSH or not. However, if this is the case, it may explain why a large pro-
portion of patients with FMS responds negatively to physical activity, otherwise
recommended for this patient group.
Based on the previous, the purpose of the study is to investigate if self-reported PSH
is associated with the time to exhaustion, the discrepancy between objectively and
subjectively measured muscle fatigue at the end of an isometric muscle exhaustion
task, or pressure pain sensitivity, in patients with FMS.
Five hypotheses have been formed:
• The relationship between the degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensitiv-
ity and the time to exhaustion in an isometric muscle exhaustion task will be
negative.
• The relationship between the degree of self-reported polysensory hypersen-
sitivity and normalized surface EMG amplitude during an isometric muscle
exhaustion task will be negative.
• The relationship between the degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensi-
tivity and the normalized surface EMG frequency during an isometric muscle
exhaustion task will be negative.
• The relationship between the degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensitiv-
ity and the pain detection threshold level will be negative.
• The relationship between the degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensitiv-
ity and the pain tolerance threshold level will be negative.
The results of this study will contribute to research within the ﬁeld of FMS manage-
ment and could potentially provide knowledge, useful for optimization of exercise
programs for FMS patients, increasing adherence to exercise and, consequently,
improving the patients’ health, both physical and mental.
5
==PAGE:16==
2
| Methods
This study is a cross-sectional, exploratory research of FMS patients, investigating the
association between self-reported PSH and the time to exhaustion, the discrepancy
between objectively and subjectively measured muscle fatigue and pressure pain
sensitivity.
2.1
Participants
The recruitment process starts by identifying a group of eligible participants. Con-
sidered are women diagnosed with FMS, according to 1990 ACR classiﬁcation
criteria[14], identiﬁed via the Danish Fibromyalgia Registry (DANFIB), an existing
clinical database at the Department of Rheumatology at Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg
University Hospital in Copenhagen, Denmark. The participants identiﬁed are entered
into the database between May 20th, 2019, and September 16th, 2020.
The eligibility criteria are as follows:
• Female gender
• Consent to be contacted by the Rheumatology department for recruitment of
patients for research projects has been given
• The Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ-R)[56] has been answered
The FIQ-R is a self-reported questionnaire measuring diﬀerent health domains
believed to be most aﬀected by FMS, including function, symptoms, and the overall
impact the disease has on daily life.
The questionnaire contains two questions speciﬁcally addressing hypersensitivity.
The questions on hypersensitivity (in both English and Danish) have been extracted
and are displayed in table 2.1. As shown in the table, the questions are rated on an
11 point numeric rating scale where 0 indicates "no tenderness/sensitivity" and 10
indicates "very tender/extreme sensitivity". The full versions of the questionnaires,
English and Danish versions, are appended, in sections C.1 and C.2, respectively.
With the aim of the study, comparing FMS patients with high and low self-reported
PSH in mind, the patient’s level of tenderness/sensitivity are dichotomized according
to the median of the scale.
6
==PAGE:17==
2.1. PARTICIPANTS
Table 2.1: The two questions on the FIQ-R questionnaire that were used to ﬁnd eligible participants
for the study. Shown here both in English and in Danish.
Inclusion criteria for participants with high level of tenderness/sensitivity:
• Score ≥9
Inclusion criteria for participants with low level of tenderness/sensitivity
• Score ≤7
To be included in the study, the participants need to score either ≥9 or ≤7 on both
of the previously mentioned questions of the questionnaire.
The women are invited to participate in the study based on their scores on these
speciﬁc questions, with the goal of measuring 50 patients from the group "high level
of tenderness" and 50 age-matched patients from the group "low level of tender-
ness/sensitivity".
For both groups, the exclusion criteria are the same:
• Any shoulder disorder/injury that can aﬀect the patients’ ability to lift the
dominant arm into the test position for muscle fatigue, 90◦abduction.
The author of this paper does not have access to the DANFIB registry and was not
directly involved in creating the list of eligible participants and is therefore blinded to
the participants’ division into groups of high and low levels of tenderness/sensitivity.
140 participants, who met the inclusion criteria, were sent a written invitation letter,
7
==PAGE:18==
2.2. ORAL INFORMATION AND SCREENING PROCEDURES
information letter, and a small pamphlet to introduce participant rights in a health
science research project through digital mail (e-Boks). These are appended (in
Danish) in sections C.3, C.4 and C.5, respectively. The invitation was sent on
December 4th 2020. Five participants were excluded from the research at this point,
as their digital mail address was not available.
At the beginning of January 2021, it became clear that not enough participants
had contacted and volunteered for the study. At this time, only 13 participants
had volunteered. Therefore, a gentle reminder of the study, its purpose, and an
explanation of the precautions taken due to the COVID-19 pandemic were sent to
the group of potential participants that had not responded to the previous invitation.
This reminder was sent on January 19th, 2021, via e-boks. The letter can be read in
appendix C.10 (in Danish). Subsequently, a new wave of participants contacted the
researcher and were measured.
2.2
Oral Information and Screening Procedures
Interested participants, who contacted the investigator were given oral information
via telephone. The following information was given during the session:
• It was made clear that participants could, at any time and without giving any
reason, withdraw from the study without aﬀecting the potential participant’s
right to current or future treatment
• Aim, procedures, potential beneﬁts, and risks when participating in the study,
procedures for random ﬁndings during the project, procedures for securing the
participants’ privacy and data protection, information on the study organization,
funding, as well as contact information for the primary investigator was given.
• It was made clear that the participants would have to remove clothing, pants,
and shirt during diﬀerent measurements, and they were advised to take a pair
of shorts and a sleeveless top with them, if it made them feel more comfortable.
The investigator made sure that participants had received and understood the
information given to them. Additionally, information about the range of motion
(ROM) in the shoulder joint of the dominant arm was collected for eligibility. If the
participant reported that she could not abduct the dominant arm to a horizontal
position, then she was excluded from the study at that point.
Eligible participants were scheduled for a single measurement session, approximately a
week after the oral information was given. The participants were asked to keep a pain
diary for seven days before their measurement visit, and the procedure was explained.
After the oral information session, the pain diary was sent to the participant via
e-mail. The pain diary is appended in section C.6. The pain diary was collected
8
==PAGE:19==
2.3. OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS
from the participant on the day of measurements after an informed consent form
had been signed.
2.3
Outcome Measurements
Main outcomes:
• Changes in the normalized RMS amplitude of the surface EMG in the middle
deltoid muscle between baseline and exhaustion
• Changes in the normalized MPF of the surface EMG in the middle deltoid
muscle between baseline and exhaustion
Other outcomes:
• Daily overall pain from a 1-week pain diary
• Pressure pain sensitivity
• Self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity
• Overall pain and shoulder pain, before and after the isometric muscle exhaustion
task
• Time to exhaustion from an isometric muscle exhaustion task
2.4
Study Procedures and Experimental Instrumen-
tation
Participants who met all inclusion criteria and who did not have exclusions were
scheduled for a measurement visit with the investigator at the Parker Institute,
Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. All measure-
ments were performed in one session of approximately 40 minutes.
As the ﬁrst part of the measurement session, a written informed consent form
(ICF) was signed. The form is appended in section C.7 (in Danish). No informa-
tion/measurements were gathered before the informed consent had been signed.
Consequently, the following evaluations/measurements were completed, in this order:
• ROM of the shoulder conﬁrmed, verifying the ability of the participant to lift
the dominant arm into the test position for muscle fatigue, 90◦abduction
• Pain diary handed in
• Demographic data collected
9
==PAGE:20==
2.4. STUDY PROCEDURES AND EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUMENTATION
• Pressure pain sensitivity measured
• Polysensory Hyperensitivity Questionnaire (PHQ) answered
• NRS pain scale (for overall pain and shoulder pain) answered
• Neuromuscular fatigue measurements
• NRS pain scale (for overall pain and shoulder pain) answered
Diﬀerent measurements of all participants were done in the same order. Pressure
pain sensitivity was measured ﬁrst, followed by the participant answering the PHQ
questionnaire. Lastly, muscle fatigue was measured, answering the NRS pain scale
both before and after the measurement. Neuromuscular fatigue was measured last to
ensure that pain and fatigue from this task would not aﬀect any other test outcomes.
The PHQ questionnaire was answered as the second task of the test session to give
the participants time to rest and recover as much as possible from the pressure
pain sensitivity measurements before performing the muscle exhaustion test for
measurements of neuromuscular fatigue.
2.4.1
Pain Diary
The participants were instructed to ﬁll out a pain diary each evening, before bedtime,
for seven days previous to the measurements. The pain diary represents overall daily
pain intensity and was used to get an idea of the pain magnitude and variations in
the days leading up to the measurements. The pain was rated on an 11-point numeric
rating scale (NRS). The instructions were "Please rate the overall pain intensity that
you have experienced today," and the anchors of the scale are 0 = "No pain", and 10
= "Worst imaginable pain". The pain diary is appended in section C.6 (in Danish).
2.4.2
Pressure Pain Sensitivity
Computerized cuﬀpressure algometry (CPA) was used to obtain quantitative pres-
sure sensory testing through measurements of the pain detection threshold (PDT)
and the pain tolerance threshold (PTT). These were measured with a DoloCuﬀ
Pain Measuring System device (ﬁgure 2.1), as it has been found to show excellent
inter-examiner and intra-examiner reliability of PDTs and PTTs[57].
The DoloCuﬀdevice consists of a double-chambered (13.5cm x 61cm) pneumatic
tourniquet cuﬀ(VBM Medizintechnik GmbH, Sulz, Germany) connected to a
computer-controlled air-compressor (Unique Electronic Aps, Hvidovre, Denmark).
The computer-controlled air compressor ensures a constant compression rate of 1
kPa/s. The device is controlled through software called UEPainW, version 2.0.6.0.
A hand-held electronic VAS scale and a pressure release/stop button are connected to
10
==PAGE:21==
2.4. STUDY PROCEDURES AND EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUMENTATION
the CPA device allowing registration of perceived pain during the test and immediate
termination of stimulation and air release from the tourniquet cuﬀ. During the
measurements, the PDT and PTT were automatically recorded by the software, the
PDT when the VAS scale movement was ﬁrst detected, and the PTT when the stop
button was pressed. A screenshot of one participant’s pressure pain measurements
can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2.
Several safety mechanisms have been implemented into the system to stop the tourni-
quet cuﬀ’s inﬂation in case of any adverse events. The pressure release button is
implemented as a safety mechanism, enabling the participants to terminate inﬂation.
Additionally, the tourniquet cuﬀpressure can be released with the computer program
or a safety button on the primary device. Furthermore, the maximal pressure is set
to 150 kPa.
Figure 2.1: The DoloCuﬀPain Measuring System device,
showing the tourniquet cuﬀ, remote with the VAS scale
and stop button control, air compressor pump and the
registration system. Figure borrowed from [57]
Before starting the measure-
ments, the device was brieﬂy
introduced to the participant,
and her dominant leg was de-
termined by posing the ques-
tion, "Which foot would you
use to kick a ball?" The pres-
sure pain sensitivity measure-
ments were carried out with the
participant lying on a therapy
bench, in the supine position,
and blinded to all measurement
values. The pneumatic tourni-
quet cuﬀwas placed around the
gastrocnemius muscle of the par-
ticipant’s dominant leg.
The
midline of the cuﬀwas placed
on the widest part of the leg and
ﬁtted tightly, ensuring reliable
pressure readings[16].
The participant was introduced to the two thresholds measured; the PDT, where the
ﬁrst sensation of pain was experienced, and the PTT, where the pain could no longer
be tolerated. The hand-held remote, with the VAS and the pressure release button,
was presented. The two extremes on the VAS scale were explained, indicating "no
pain" and the "worst imaginable pain".
The participant was instructed to indicate when the ﬁrst sensation of pain was expe-
rienced (PDT), by starting to move the sliding button on the VAS scale, and then
continue to indicate the level of pain as the pressure in the tourniquet cuﬀincreased.
11
==PAGE:22==
2.4. STUDY PROCEDURES AND EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUMENTATION
Figure 2.2: A screenshot from the UEPainW software showing the three consecutive pressure pain
measurements of a single participant. The green lines show the pressure in the tourniquet cuﬀand
the red lines show the VAS scale ratings of the participant.
She was then instructed to stop the inﬂation by pressing the pressure-release button
when the worst tolerable pain was experienced, and she could no longer endure
(PTT).
The test was performed four times, once for the participant’s familiarization, and
subsequently, three measurements were performed, with a three-minute break in
between. The results from the pressure pain measurements were automatically
documented and saved in a text ﬁle, where the exact pressure and VAS scale ratings
could be extracted. All results from the pressure pain sensitivity measurements are
represented in kPa.
2.4.3
Polysensory Hypersensitivity
PSH was measured by asking the participants to answer the Polysensory Hypersensi-
tivity Questionnaire (PHQ), a self-reported assessment of the individual’s sensitivity
to diﬀerent stimuli.
The PHQ is based on the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale (SHS)[58], which is the
tool initially intended for the evaluation of sensory hypersensitivity in this study.
Permission was received from the authors of the questionnaire to translate the SHS
into Danish and use it for this study. The inquiry about the translation of the SHS
scale is appended in section D.3.
The SHS was translated using the Translation and Cultural Adaptation—Principles
of Good Practice[59]. During one of the later stages of the translation process, the
12
==PAGE:23==
2.4. STUDY PROCEDURES AND EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUMENTATION
cognitive debrieﬁng stage, where a handful of FMS patients were asked to answer and
comment on the questionnaire, multiple problems were evident. The patients had
diﬃculties answering the questionnaire and found it neither clear nor precise enough.
Based on these comments and the expert knowledge on the patient group within the
team of translators, this questionnaire was deemed unsuitable for this study, and
a new questionnaire, the Polysensory Hypersensitivity Questionnaire (PHQ), was
created.
The SHS scale inﬂuenced this new questionnaire, but the changes were so drastic
that it is considered a new questionnaire. The questionnaire contains nine statements
that address self-perceived discomfort from, e.g., light, sound, smell, touch, and taste.
It is based on a 4-point Likert scale, allowing the subject to express how much they
agree/disagree with each questionnaire statement. The available points for the PHQ
scale are 0-27 points. The PHQ is appended in section C.8, in Danish.
A more detailed description of the SHS scale’s translation process that ultimately
led to the creation of the new PHQ questionnaire and future plans are documented
in a logbook, appended in section D.
2.4.4
Overall Pain and Shoulder Pain
Current overall pain and shoulder pain was documented. The participants were
asked to rate their pain on an 11-point numeric rating scale (NRS), with the anchors
0 = "No pain" and 10 = "Worst imaginable pain".
The instructions were printed in Danish but translated to English as follows:
"Please rate your overall pain intensity right now?"
"Please rate the pain intensity in the dominant shoulder right now?"
The NRS scale was answered both before and immediately after the muscle fatigue
measurements. The document is appended in section C.9 (in Danish).
The examiner made sure not to see the participants’ answers to the PHQ and
NRS scales until after all of the measurements were made. This was done to avoid
any bias possible that could transfer onto the muscle fatigue measurements.
2.4.5
Neuromuscular Fatigue
The main outcome measures, normalized RMS amplitude, and normalized MPF at
the end of an isometric muscle exhaustion task, were measured with surface elec-
tromyography (EMG). Surface EMG was recorded with Ag/AgCl surface electrodes
(Ambu BlueSensor N, type N-00-S (44.8 x 22mm), from Ambu A/S, 2750 Ballerup,
Denmark), using a bipolar conﬁguration with an inter-electrode distance of 2 cm.
13
==PAGE:24==
2.4. STUDY PROCEDURES AND EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUMENTATION
The electrodes were connected to a wireless 8-channel Noraxon EMG system (TeleMyo
2400T G2, Noraxon USA Inc, Scottsdale, AZ), containing a 16-bit analog-to-digital
resolution. The surface EMG was sampled at 3000 Hz.
Before attaching the electrodes, the procedure was explained to the participant.
The underlying skin was prepared by removing hair, abrading the skin with very
ﬁne sandpaper, and cleaning it with a small ethanol pad to reduce skin impedance.
The electrodes were placed on the target muscle, the mid-deltoid on the dominant
side, the side that the participant uses to write. According to SENIAM (Surface
ElectroMyoGraphy for the Non-Invasive Assessment of Muscle) guidelines[60], the
electrodes were placed parallel to the muscle ﬁbers. The electrode placement can be
seen in table 2.2. As recommended by the guidelines, the electrodes were applied
with the participant sitting upright with the arm in a neutral position by the side.
The reference electrode was placed on the acromion process.
Table 2.2: Surface EMG electrode placement on the mid deltoid, according to SENIAM guidelines.
Figure borrowed from [60]
Figure
Location
Electrodes were placed on
the greatest bulge of the
muscle, parallel to the mus-
cle ﬁbers, on a line between
the acromion and the el-
bow’s lateral epicondyle.
Correct electrode placement and quality of the EMG signal were conﬁrmed by visual
monitoring of the live EMG signal during abduction of the arm from the neutral
position before measurements were performed.
During the recording, the participant was instructed to sit on a chair, in an upright
position, with both feet on the ground. She was asked to complete an isometric
muscle exhaustion task, maintaining a 90◦shoulder abduction of the dominant arm,
with the elbow extended and hand pronated for as long as possible. The time was
14
==PAGE:25==
2.5. DATA PROCESSING AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
stopped, and the test terminated when the participant could no longer maintain the
test position. An assumption was made that the participant was exhausted at this
point (subjective exhaustion).
The surface EMG of the middle deltoid muscle was measured throughout the hold
period, as well as the time to failure. The procedure was as follows: The EMG
recording was started, and the participant was asked to abduct the arm. When the
arm was in the correct position, a marker was placed on the EMG recording. When
the participant started lowering the arm, another marker was placed on the EMG
recording, and the recording was then stopped.
2.5
Data Processing and Statistical Considerations
2.5.1
Sample Size
Sample size calculations were performed by Marius Henriksen, clinical professor,
research physiotherapist, to determine the number of participants needed in order
to get results that reﬂect the target population as precisely as needed. Using a
two-sample t-test of group diﬀerences for investigating the main outcome, the change
of RMS amplitude (%), a sample of 100 participants gives a power of 87.2% to
detect a mean diﬀerence of 5% in nRMS amplitude between participant groups
(50 participants with low PSH vs. 50 participants with high PSH) and a level of
signiﬁcance of 5% (0.05).
However, not enough participants volunteered for the study, and a sample size of only
28 was reached within the time frame of this project. Since this is an ongoing study
and not all data has been collected, it is not valuable to compare the two groups.
It was therefore decided to change the original hypotheses, for the purpose of this
paper, and represent them as correlations between the level of PSH and normalized
sEMG characteristics ﬁrstly, pressure pain sensitivity secondly, and lastly, time to
exhaustion. The new hypotheses have been previously presented, in the introduction
section, on page 5. The original hypotheses are presented in the study protocol,
appended in section B.
2.5.2
Data Processing
The EMG data from the muscle fatigue measurements were processed with Matlab
R2020a (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA). The code written for the processing
of the sEMG data is appended in section E.
RMS =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
x2
i
(2.1)
15
==PAGE:26==
2.5. DATA PROCESSING AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Figure 2.3: Figure representing the raw EMG signal recorded from a single participant during
the exhaustion test (the blue). Diﬀerent factors used during the analysis of the signal and the
automatic detection of the start/stop are also represented.
MPF
X
i=1
Pi =
n
X
i=MPF
Pi = 1
2
n
X
i=1
Pi
(2.2)
The main outcome measures were the normalized RMS amplitude changes and the
normalized MPF changes of the surface EMG in the middle deltoid muscle between
the start and end of the hold period. The RMS amplitude was calculated over
non-overlapping 1 s epochs using equation 2.1, where xi represents the amplitude at
data point i, and n is the number of data points in the 1 s epoch (here, n = 3000).
The RMS values were then averaged over each of the 5 second periods.
The MPF was also calculated over non-overlapping 1 s epochs, using the frequency
spectrum of the EMG signal, processed with Fast Fourier transform (FFT), for each
of the 5 s periods, using equation 2.2, where Pi is the amplitude at frequency bin i
and n is the length of the frequency bin[61].
nRMS = RMSexhaustion
RMSbaseline
· 100
(2.3)
The RMS amplitude was normalized by taking the average RMS amplitude at the
end of the hold period (deﬁned as exhaustion), divide it with the average RMS of the
ﬁrst 5 s of the hold period (deﬁned as baseline), and multiply by 100 to represent it
as percentages, see equation 2.3. The normalized RMS (nRMS) value now represents
the ratio between RMS at exhaustion and baseline. The same method was used to
ﬁnd the normalized MPF (nMPF).
To make the results more easily understandable, they are represented as the change
in nRMS/nMPF from baseline by subtracting 100% from the nRMS amplitude and
16
==PAGE:27==
2.5. DATA PROCESSING AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
the nMPF. Therefore, all positive values indicate that the nRMS amplitude/nMPF
at exhaustion increases from baseline, and negative values indicate that the nRMS
amplitude/nMPF at exhaustion decreases from baseline. Consequently, zero indicates
that no change was seen in the nRMS/nMPF between the baseline and exhaustion.
Two diﬀerent parameters were used for the detection of the hold period and the
analysis windows. These are represented in ﬁgure 2.3, where the rectiﬁed raw EMG
signal from a single person is plotted in the ﬁgure in blue. During the muscle
exhaustion test, markers were placed on the recording by the researcher when the
arm was in the test position and when the arm was lowered out of the test position.
These are called ’Original Markers’ and are represented as black vertical lines in
ﬁgure 2.3. However, to make the data analysis as objective as possible, a program
was built to detect the start and end of the hold period automatically. To do this,
the RMS amplitude was calculated for the entire signal using 1 s epochs, see the red
line ’RMS Amplitude of Raw Signal’ in the ﬁgure. The program then inspects the
RMS amplitude from start to ﬁnish. It assumes the signal starts low and detects
the starting and endpoints using two criteria. The ﬁrst criterion is that the RMS
amplitude crosses a certain trigger level, here chosen as 30% of the maximum RMS
amplitude, shown with the green horizontal line in the ﬁgure. The second criterion
is that the average RMS amplitude of ﬁve consecutive data points after crossing
the threshold must be higher than the threshold level to be detected as a start and
lower than the threshold level to be detected as a stop. The black stars in the ﬁgure
represent the ’Auto-Generated Markers’, based on these criteria (above/below 30%
for at least 5 s). The program then oﬀsets these points 2 s into the signal. This
marks the start of the 5-second window at the beginning of the signal and the end of
the 5-second window at the end of the signal, as shown by the thin green and orange
boxes. As it is assumed that the participant takes the arm down and stops the
muscle exhaustion test when she feels exhausted (subjective exhaustion), the RMS
amplitude and MPF at the latter box (orange) are assumed to be the characteristic
signals at the time of exhaustion. A 2-second oﬀset was chosen because a manual
inspection of the signal revealed that an oﬀset of two seconds placed the measurement
windows in a relatively stable location of the signal, allowing for good analysis.
All sEMG data was viewed manually, conﬁrming the correct position of the ’Auto-
Generated Markers’. A criteria was set for the position of the ’End Window’, and
its position only accepted if it deviated less than one second to the right from the
manually placed ’Original Marker’. The criteria was based on the assumption that
the researcher should have placed the ’Original Markers’ accurately, but never early
and therefore the ’End Window’ should not deviate more to the right than 1 s. In a
handful of cases, the criteria for the ’Auto-Generated Markers’ was not applicable,
and the ’End Windows’ were incorrectly placed. This was corrected by adjusting the
17
==PAGE:28==
2.5. DATA PROCESSING AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Figure 2.4: A screenshot from the UEPainW software showing pressure pain measurements of
a single participant. The x-axis indicates the time [s], and the y axis the tourniquet pressure
[kPa]. The green lines indicate the pressure in the tourniquet cuﬀ, and the red lines indicate the
participant’s VAS scale ratings. During the second measurement, the PDT pressure was incorrectly
recognized (black arrow), despite the VAS scale returning to zero and ﬁrst consistently increasing
at a higher pressure.
trigger level of the ’Auto Generated Markers’.
The pressure points for pressure pain sensitivity, both PDT and PTT, were extracted
from the UEPainW software and typed into the datasheet. Before transferring
the data points, the recording was viewed ﬁguratively. This was necessary, as in
some cases, the test persons slightly moved the VAS scale on the remote control,
unintentionally, before the PDT was reached and then moved it back, resulting in
the wrong PDT pressure point to be documented by the software. This is easily
detected on the graph in the software itself, as shown in ﬁgure 2.4. During the second
pressure pain measurement, the VAS scale deviates slightly from zero for a short
period of time but is returned to zero again before increasing consistently.
All outcome measurements were combined into an excel datasheet to analyze the
data further and do statistical calculations. This includes the time to exhaustion,
the diﬀerence in the EMG amplitude and frequency between the ﬁrst and last 5 s of
the hold period during the muscle fatigue test, the PDT and PTT values, the pain
diary results, PHQ questionnaire results, and the results from the NRS pain scales
for overall pain and shoulder pain, both before and after the muscle fatiguing task,
as well as the information for the demographic data.
Additionally, all individual outcome measures were typed into the Research Elec-
tronic Data Capture (RedCap) database, a web application used for developing and
managing databases at the Capital Region of Denmark (d. Region Hovedstaden).
18
==PAGE:29==
2.5. DATA PROCESSING AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
2.5.3
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with help from Marius Henriksen, clinical professor,
research physiotherapist at Frederiksberg-Bispebjerg University Hospital. The SAS
statistical software was used to do a non-parametric Spearman’s rank-order corre-
lation test to evaluate each of the hypotheses, describing the bivariate relationship
between the two variables. The independent variable in the tests was the degree of
PSH, which was tried against diﬀerent dependent variables, the time to exhaustion,
normalized sEMG amplitude, normalized sEMG frequency, PDT, and PTT. The
level of signiﬁcance was set at 0.05 for all tests.
Additionally, for exploration purposes, diﬀerent factors inﬂuencing the time to
exhaustion were tested using the same method.
19
==PAGE:30==
3
| Results
3.1
Descriptive Data
Out of the FMS patients invited to participate in the study, 28 participants (age 24-
71), whom all met the inclusion criteria, were measured. Additional six participants
were booked for measurements but canceled before the measurement session took
place and did not want to or could not be booked again before the end of the
measurement period for this project. The reasons given were diﬀerent; two dropped
out because they had decided to cancel all unnecessary appointments because of
the COVID-19 situation, one because she had been invited to participate in another
FMS study at Frederiksberg Hospital (the CannFib study), and three because of
personal reasons.
Summarized information of participant demographics are presented in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Participant demographics
N
Mean
SD
Range
Age [years]
28
49.6
9.4
24 - 71
Height [cm]
28
167.5
7.16
153 - 185
Weight [kg]
28
77.8
19.6
46 - 130
BMI [kg/m2]
28
27.65
6.13
17.1 - 40.12
20
==PAGE:31==
3.2. OUTCOME DATA
3.2
Outcome Data
Summary results of the parameters tested in the hypotheses tests are represented in
table 3.2.
Data from one participant was excluded from the EMG results due to a failure in
the EMG device during the muscle exhaustion test. As a result, time to exhaustion
is also missing for this participant.
The nRMS change and nMPF change, see table 3.2, represent the changes in nRMS
amplitude and nMPF from baseline to exhaustion, indicated as percentages [%].
Therefore, all positive values indicate that the nRMS amplitude/nMPF at exhaustion
increases from baseline, and negative values indicate that the nRMS amplitude/nMPF
is decreased from baseline. Consequently, zero indicates no change in the nRMS
amplitude/nMPF between the baseline and exhaustion.
Table 3.2: Summary results for the diﬀerent parameters tested in the hypotheses tests. PSH is
self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity, PDT is the pain detection threshold and PTT the pain
tolerance threshold. nRMS amplitude change and nMPF change are represented as the percentage
[%] change in nRMS and nMPF between the baseline and exhaustion.
N
Mean
SD
Range
PSH [Total]
28
15.3
6.7
4 - 27
Time to exhaustion [s]
27
155.4
105.4
29 - 454
nRMS change [%]
27
-14.2
19.6
-47.5 - 37.9
nMPF change [%]
27
-25.9
15.0
-52.4 - 1.5
PDT [kPa]
28
12.2
7.2
1.1 - 28.9
PTT [kPa]
28
30.2
11.6
16.4 - 68.0
21
==PAGE:32==
3.2. OUTCOME DATA
3.2.1
PSH and the Time to Exhaustion
Data from 27 participants were analyzed, investigating the relationship between self-
reported PSH and the time to exhaustion. The average time to exhaustion was 155.4
s (range 29-454 s). Additional descriptive data for the self-reported hypersensitivity
and the time to exhaustion is represented in table 3.2.
Table 3.3:
Correlation coeﬃcient, p-value and CIs for the correlation between the level of self-
reported PSH and the time to exhaustion.
PSH
Time to exhaustion
Correlation coeﬃcient [r]
-0.3837
p-value
0.0476
95% CI - Lower bound
-0.6665
95% CI - Upper bound
-0.0044
The study results show that the time to exhaustion decreased signiﬁcantly (p =
0.0476) with increased self-reported PSH. The correlation coeﬃcient (r = -0.3837)
points to the level of PSH being a moderately strong indicator of the time to
exhaustion. A graphical representation of this relationship is shown in ﬁgure 3.1.
The correlation coeﬃcient (r), p-value, and conﬁdence intervals (CI), lower and upper
bounds, are presented in table 3.3.
Additionally, data for the correlation between the time to exhaustion and individual
sensory modalities of the self-reported PSH scale was analyzed. The decrease in the
time to exhaustion was signiﬁcant with increased sensation of pain (p = 0.0488),
smell (p = 0.0299) and sound (p = 0.0280). Other sensory modalities did not
show a signiﬁcant relationship to the time to exhaustion, although the relationship
was negative in all cases. The correlations coeﬃcients, p-values, and CIs of the
correlation between the time to exhaustion and diﬀerent self-reported PSH variables
are represented in table F.2, in appendix F. Additionally, the summary results of
individual PSH scale modalities are represented in table F.1 in the same appendix.
22
==PAGE:33==
3.2. OUTCOME DATA
Figure 3.1: The negative relation between the level of PSH and the time to exhaustion
23
==PAGE:34==
3.2. OUTCOME DATA
3.2.2
PSH and Neuromuscular Exhaustion
Data from 27 participants were analyzed for the correlation between self-reported
PSH and the objective signs of fatigue in the sEMG signal. The average nRMS
change from baseline was −14.2% (range −47.5% to +37.9%), indicating a decrease
in the RMS amplitude from baseline to exhaustion. The average nMPF change from
baseline was −25.9% (range −52.4% to +1.5%), indicating a decrease in the MPF
from baseline to exhaustion. Additional descriptive data for the nRMS amplitude
change and nMPF change from baseline are represented in table 3.2.
Statistical analysis showed no signiﬁcant correlation between the level of self-reported
PSH and the nRMS amplitude change from baseline (p = 0.4793) or between the
level of self-reported PSH and the MPF change from baseline (p = 0.4099). These
relationships are graphically represented in ﬁgures 3.2 and 3.3, respectively. The cor-
relation coeﬃcients, p-values, and CIs, lower and upper bounds, for the relationship
between self-reported PSH and both the nRMS amplitude change from baseline and
nMPF change from baseline are represented in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Correlation coeﬃcients, p-values and CIs for the relation between the level of self-reported
PSH and nRMS amplitude change and nMPF change from baseline.
PSH
nRMS
nMPF
Correlation coeﬃcient [r]
0.14340
0.16664
p-value
0.4793
0.4099
95% CI - Lower bound
-0.250248
-0.227798
95% CI - Upper bound
0.496368
0.514099
24
==PAGE:35==
3.2. OUTCOME DATA
Figure 3.2: The relationship between the level of PSH and the nRMS amplitude change between
baseline and exhaustion
Figure 3.3: The relationship between the level of PSH and the nMPF change between baseline and
exhaustion
25
==PAGE:36==
3.2. OUTCOME DATA
3.2.3
PSH and Pressure Pain Sensitivity
Data from all 28 participants were analyzed, exploring the relationship between the
self-reported PSH and the PDT and PTT. The average PDT was 12.2 kPa (range
1.1-28.9 kPa) and the average PTT 30.2 kPa (range 16.4-68.0 kPa). Additional
descriptive data for the pain measurements are presented in table 3.2.
Statistical analysis showed no signiﬁcant relationship between the level of self-
reported PSH and PDT (p = 0.5781) or the level of self-reported PSH and PTT
(p = 0.4348). However, the PDT has a slightly negative correlation with the level
of self-reported PSH, while the correlation between PTT and self-reported PSH is
almost non-existent. This is graphically represented in ﬁgures 3.4 and 3.5, and can
also be read from the the correlation coeﬃcients in table 3.4.
The correlation coeﬃcients, p-values, and CIs, lower and upper bounds, for the
relationship between self-reported PSH and both the PDT and PTT are shown in
table 3.5.
Figure 3.4: The relationship between the level of PSH and the PDT
26
==PAGE:37==
3.2. OUTCOME DATA
Figure 3.5: The relationship between the level of PSH and the PTT
Table 3.5:
Correlation coeﬃcients, p-values and CIs for the correlation between the level of
self-reported PSH, PDT and PTT.
PSH
PDT
PTT
Correlation coeﬃcient [r]
-0.11078
-0.15494
p-value
0.5781
0.4348
95% CI - Lower bound
-0.464650
-0.499166
95% CI - Upper bound
0.273608
0.231517
27
==PAGE:38==
4
| Discussion
The results of the study showed that, in agreement with the hypothesis, there was a
signiﬁcant negative correlation between the level of PSH and the time to exhaustion
(p = 0.0476), i.e., the more sensitive the FMS participants evaluated themselves to
be to various sensory stimuli, the shorter the time to exhaustion.
Previous research have provided evidence for heightened pain perception in FMS
patients[1][2], as well as general hypersensitivity to diﬀerent types of sensory stim-
uli[3][4]. These results suggest that the hypersensitivity of the CNS in FMS patients
is not speciﬁc to pain processing but that the sensory system as a whole is hyperactive,
causing ampliﬁcation of both somatic and non-somatic stimuli in the CNS. As a
result, it can be suggested that the level of PSH in FMS patients can indicate the
level of hyper-responsiveness of the CNS, including the level of ampliﬁcation of the
feeling of fatigue, ultimately resulting in premature exhaustion and termination of
a task. Time to exhaustion is aﬀected by multiple factors, such as the type and
level of contraction[42], but the results of this study support the theory that the
level of PSH can be used as an indicator of the time to exhaustion, based on the
ampliﬁcation of the feeling of fatigue in the CNS in FMS patients.
This ampliﬁed feeling of fatigue has been reported in a previously mentioned study by
Bandak et al.[5]. The study assessed the objective signs of muscle fatigue with sEMG
during the same muscle exhaustion task as was used in this study and compared to
the perceived feeling of fatigue (subjective fatigue), using the Borg category rating
scale, in both FMS patients and healthy controls. The study found that, at the
time of exhaustion (Borg 10), the FMS patients exhibited fewer objective signs of
fatigue within the muscle than the healthy controls, represented as the absence of
change in the nRMS amplitude of the middle deltoid muscle. Signs of fatigue within
the CNS, represented as a drop in the nMPF were, however, comparable between
the two groups, supporting the theory of a hyper-responsive CNS in FMS patients,
enhancing the feeling of fatigue, causing premature termination of a task, without
objective signs of fatigue within the muscle being evident.
A decrease in MPF and an increase in RMS amplitude of the sEMG signal during
an exhaustive task are considered classic signs of neuromuscular fatigue and have
been used to represent the physiological changes in the CNS and the muscle during
28
==PAGE:39==
fatiguing work, respectively.
During constant force experiments, peripheral fatigue is represented as the increase
in the sEMG amplitude. During a fatiguing contraction, the contractile strength of
individual muscle ﬁbers decreases due to biochemical changes related to the working
muscle. In an attempt to counteract the contractile failure of the working MUs, keep
the required torque and maintain the same position, the MU recruitment threshold
decreases, and as a result, additional and larger MUs can be recruited in an eﬀort to
maintain the overall contractile strength of the muscle. These changes are represented
as an increase in the amplitude observed with sEMG[44][53][62]. A commonly used
factor describing the amplitude variations in the sEMG signal is the RMS amplitude
[46].
Central fatigue is represented as a decrease in the neural drive, causing an impairment
in the activation of the motor neurons driving the MUs of the muscle. Multiple
factors aﬀect the decrease in neural drive during fatiguing contractions, such as
decreased motivation, a decrease in the excitation from the motor cortex and a
decrease in the ﬁring frequency of motor neurons, due to negative feedback from
the muscles[48][49]. The decrease in the neural drive can be detected on the sEMG
as a left shift in the frequency spectrum, calculated in the frequency domain after
applying a fast Fourier transform. Two calculation methods have been found to give
a good indication of the spectral compression during neuromuscular fatigue. These
are mean and median power frequencies. The two methods are similar; however, the
median power frequency (MPF) has been found to be less aﬀected by random noise,
especially of high frequencies, as well as being more aﬀected by muscle fatigue[47]
and is therefore preferred.
As previously mentioned, the study by Bandak et al.[5] found FMS patients to show
less objective signs of muscle exhaustion than healthy controls. If it is assumed that
the level of self-reported PSH represents the level of hyper-responsiveness of the CNS,
FMS patients with low self-reported PSH levels could presumably show objective
signs of muscle fatigue more similar to what is seen in the healthy population than
patients with high levels of self-reported PSH. Based on this, it was hypothesized that
the relationship between the degree of self-reported PSH and the nRMS amplitude
change from baseline to exhaustion and nMPF change from baseline to exhaustion in
an isometric muscle exhaustion task would be negative, indicating that the objective
signs of fatigue would decrease with increased self-reported PSH.
However, the results of the study showed no signiﬁcant correlation between the level
of PSH and the changes in the normalized sEMG signals for either nRMS amplitude
(p = 0.4793) or nMPF (p = 0.4099). However, both the nRMS amplitude change
and the nMPF change decreased with the increased PSH level, i.e., the higher the
level of self-reported PSH, the closer the nRMS amplitude and nMPF were to their
respective baseline values.
29
==PAGE:40==
Therefore, despite these relationships not being signiﬁcant, they both pointed slightly
towards less objective signs of muscle fatigue at the time of exhaustion, both in the
CNS and in the muscle, with increasing level of hypersensitivity, as suspected.
The time under work is one of the factors inﬂuencing fatigue[42]. Based on this,
and the previously presented ﬁndings of a strong negative relationship between the
level of self-reported PSH and the time to exhaustion, further investigation of the
relationship between the time to exhaustion and the objective signs of muscle fatigue,
represented in the sEMG signal, is relevant. Additionally, this analysis made the
results comparable to the previously mentioned study, investigating the objective
signs of muscle fatigue during an isometric muscle exhaustion task, using the same
methods as here[5].
Figure 4.1: The relation between the time to exhaustion and the nRMS amplitude change from
baseline
Testing this relationship, it was clear that a strong signiﬁcant (p < 0.0001) correlation
exists between the time to exhaustion and the nMPF change from baseline, see ﬁgure
4.2. These results showed the characteristic changes in the MPF with fatigue clearly;
the longer the time to exhaustion, the more decrease was seen in the nMPF. This
points towards a strong correlation between the objective signs of CNS fatigue and
the time to exhaustion in patients with FMS.
However, the relationship between the time to exhaustion and the nRMS amplitude
change from baseline of the sEMG was not signiﬁcant (p = 0.8835), see ﬁgure
4.1. This indicates that muscle exhaustion is not well represented in the amplitude
changes, and therefore within the muscle, in patients with FMS. The correlation
coeﬃcients (r), p-values, and CIs, lower and upper bounds, for the relationship
between time to exhaustion and both nRMS amplitude and nMPF changes from
30
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.2: The relation between the time to exhaustion and the nMPF change from baseline
baseline are represented in table 4.1.
In a similar study by Kallenberg et al.[55] the myoelectric manifestation of neuro-
muscular fatigue during a shoulder elevation test was investigated and compared
between subjects with and without chronic pain. The study measured sEMG activity
of the upper trapezius and found that the changes in both RMS amplitude and
MPF were less pronounced in the chronic pain patients than in the control group.
This indicates a changed muscle activation pattern of the upper trapezius muscle in
painful conditions, although the origin cannot be determined.
Additionally, the results found here resemble those presented in the study by Bandak
et al.[5], with ﬁndings of decreased characteristic signs of fatigue within the muscle at
the time of exhaustion, while objective signs of fatigue in the CNS were prominent.
Therefore, this study’s results further support the idea that muscle fatigue is ampli-
ﬁed, along with other sensory signals, in the CNS in FMS patients, and that FMS
primarily is a disease of a hyper-reactive CNS.
It is important to consider the motivational factor when discussing tasks performed
until exhaustion, such as the one discussed here. Fatigue is uncomfortable and even
painful, and it requires will-power to ignore the discomfort and still keep going.
FMS is a chronic pain condition, and FMS patients have been conditioned to listen
closely to their bodies and not overstrain themselves, as this can cause increased
prolonged pain, possibly negatively aﬀect their daily lives. Additionally, it has been
suggested that women with FMS have diﬃculties in distinguishing exertion from
pain[63]. Based on this, FMS patients may have stopped the muscle exhaustion task,
not because they were exhausted, but because they anticipated pain, were in pain,
or feared the repercussions of the task. This may have contributed to the time to
31
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.1:
Correlation coeﬃcients, p-values and CIs for the correlation between the time to
exhaustion and the nRMS amplitude and nMPF changes from baseline.
Time to exhaustion
nRMS amplitude change
nMPF change
Correlation coeﬃcient
0.0299
-0.6667
p-value
0.8835
<0.0001
CI - Lower bound
-0.3541
-0.8351
CI - Upper bound
0.4053
-0.3839
exhaustion and the ﬁndings of this study.
An unexpected ﬁnding of this study was the tendency of the nRMS amplitude
to decrease, and therefore lie under the baseline value at the end of the muscle
exhaustion, as indicated by the negative values of the nRMS amplitude change (see
ﬁgure 3.2). According to the theory and observations, the RMS amplitude should
have increased progressively with increased fatigue during the task, as new MUs
were recruited to the active motor neuron pool because of the decrease in the force
generation of individual muscle ﬁbers[53]. However, the amplitude of an sEMG signal
is aﬀected by multiple factors. One of these is the location of the active motor units
contributing to the force required to sustain the task in relation to the measuring
electrodes. Motor units close to the measuring electrodes contribute more to the
amplitude of the EMG signal than those that lie further away[64]. Additionally, at
submaximal force levels, such as in the muscle exhaustion task performed here, not
all motor units are active at the same time and are therefore able to rotate between
active motor units while still keeping the force level stable[65]. Possibly, the motor
unit recruitment pattern seen in many of the participants measured during this study
was what could be called a ’top-down pattern’. Therefore, motor units close to the
electrodes were active at the very start of the contraction, therefore contributing
much to the amplitude of the signal, but rotate to motor units further away from
the electrodes, decreasing the amplitude of the signal, despite the same force level
being kept. It is, therefore, possible that this unexpected ﬁnding can be explained by
the motor unit recruitment pattern in combination with the hyper-responsiveness of
the CNS, which caused the amplitude to decrease during the contraction when the
active motor units rotated away from the measuring electrodes and the premature
feeling of exhaustion causing termination of the task before additional motor units
32
==PAGE:43==
could be recruited, which again would increase the amplitude.
Electromyography is a valuable tool when studying the activity of skeletal mus-
cles as it can represent changes in the muscle activity of working muscles during
fatiguing exercise. The primary changes in the sEMG signal during fatigue are, as
previously mentioned, an increase in the EMG amplitude and a decrease, or left shift,
of the frequency spectrum[45][46], indicating muscle fatigue and central fatigue, re-
spectively. However, there is no clear division between the fatiguing processes within
the nervous system and the muscle. The development of fatigue is a multi-factorial
process with simultaneous changes within both systems. Any changes in the muscle
can aﬀect the progress of fatigue in the CNS and the other way around, and the
inter-correlation of the factors represented in the complex sEMG signal cannot be
easily distinguished[44].
Therefore, the increase in the number of active MUs and decrease in conduction
velocity in the CNS during submaximal fatiguing work are not the only factors
aﬀecting the changes in the sEMG signal. During fatiguing contractions, the in-
creased concentration of lactate in the muscle ﬁber causes a decrease in the pH
value. As a result, the conduction velocity (CV) of action potentials (APs) along the
muscle ﬁber membrane decreases, ultimately changing the shape of the motor unit
action potentials (MUAP). As the CV decreases, the length of the MUAPs increases,
detected as an additional left shift of the frequency spectrum. This decrease in the
frequency of the power spectrum allows more energy to reach the recording electrodes
on the skin surface, as the tissue between the working muscle and the electrodes acts
as a low-pass ﬁlter, which now allows more energy to ﬂow through the tissue and
to the electrodes and as a result, the amplitude increases[44][66][67]. Additionally,
MUs tend to start to ﬁre more synchronously with increased fatigue, increasing the
amplitude. These changes in the ﬁring frequency are controlled by the CNS[66].
The characteristic decrease in the frequency and increase in amplitude during fatiguing
contractions can, therefore, likely not be explained by changes in either the muscle or
the CNS individually but are a result of a combination of factors within both systems.
The study assessed the relation between PSH and the pressure pain thresholds,
PDT and PTT. These thresholds evaluate the sensitivity to pain in the muscles and
deep tissues, associated with central sensitization[16]. Neither the PDT nor PTT
showed a signiﬁcant relationship with the level of PSH. Therefore, neither PDT nor
PTT seem to be very good indicators of the level of PSH in patients with FMS.
However, a signiﬁcant positive relationship was found between the time to exhaustion
and both the PDT (p = 0.0388) and the PTT (p = 0.0335), see ﬁgures F.1 and F.2,
in appendix F. This could indicate that the higher the PDT and PTT, the longer the
participants could endure the discomfort of the fatigue during the muscle exhaustion
33
==PAGE:44==
4.1. LIMITATIONS
task, therefore increasing the time to exhaustion.
With this in mind, it was found interesting to investigate the correlation between
various pain levels and the time to exhaustion. Multiple assessments of pain levels
were obtained before the muscle exhaustion task was performed; the pain diary
was handed in, the NRS pain scales for both general pain and shoulder pain were
answered, and the PHQ scale answered contains a question on sensitivity to pain. The
relationship between the time to exhaustion and each pain parameter was signiﬁcant
and negative, indicating that the more pain the participants were in before the
muscle exhaustion task, the less time to exhaustion. This is in agreement with other
studies that have shown that chronic pain causes shorter endurance times[68][69].
Graphical representation of these relations and a table representing the correlation
coeﬃcients (r), p-values and conﬁdence intervals (CI), lower and upper bounds, for
these relations are represented in ﬁgures F.3 and F.4 and table F.3, respectively,
in appendix F. Additionally, summary results for pain related measurements are
represented in table F.4, in appendix F.
Putting these results into perspective, it can be hypothesized that the time to
exhaustion requires a balance between the patient’s pain level before starting the
muscle exhaustion task, the level of pressure pain thresholds and motivation. Similar
results were presented in a study by Maquet et al.[70], where FMS patients were
found to have signiﬁcantly shorter times to exhaustion than healthy controls. The
study further proposed that this resulted from decreased motivation following an
increased sense of eﬀort or increased pain.
4.1
Limitations
There were certain limitations to this study that need to be addressed. Firstly, it is
necessary to point out that the results presented here are not the ﬁnal results of the
project but should be looked at as preliminary results, representing the data available
at the end of February 2021. It is clear that because of the limited number of partici-
pants measured within this time frame, any conclusions of this study will be tentative.
The group of participants was very diverse, both in terms of age, body mass, and
BMI. These are all factors that can aﬀect the measurements but were not corrected
for in this project. It is known that isometric force decreases with age, and the
composition of muscles changes with increased atrophy of especially type II muscle
ﬁbers[71]. These factors of the aging muscle could potentially aﬀect both the time to
exhaustion and the sEMG signal, although the eﬀects on the RMS amplitude seem to
be more pronounced with age than changes of the MPF[72]. Increased BMI, in most
cases, represents increased subcutaneous fat tissue and therefore aﬀects the distance
between the muscle and the recording electrode. It is known that the amount of
34
==PAGE:45==
4.1. LIMITATIONS
subcutaneous tissue between the active ﬁbers of the muscle and the electrode acts as
a low-pass spatial ﬁlter, aﬀecting both the amplitude and the frequency of the signal
before it reaches the electrode[44][73]. It is, therefore, possible that this wide range
of body types included in the project caused the characteristics of the sEMG signals
to vary between participants. However, as the sEMG signals were normalized for
each participant individually, the subcutaneous fat tissue thickness should not have
aﬀected the results. Additionally, no changes were made to the group’s medication
previous to the measurement session, which might have aﬀected the results.
There is some room for improvement in the execution of the muscle exhaustion
test. The test, as it is today, gives room for the participant to change/adjust the
position of the arm freely. It is likely that when fatigue increases, the position of the
arm is changed slightly. Today the position of the arm is subjectively evaluated by
the researcher. This is problematic as any change in the arm position can aﬀect the
EMG signal, in addition to the change in the position of the arm being subjective
and not always easily detected. It would therefore be beneﬁcial to standardize the
range in which the arm can be held. This could be done by placing a sensor/button
below the participant’s hand, and as soon as the arm drops a certain amount of
degrees from the horizontal position, the button gets pushed, and a marker is placed
on the EMG recording or by placing the sensor/button above the hand and as soon
as contact is lost the marker gets placed. This type of system could be built and
controlled with simple software, using a micro-controller such as Arduino. Another
option would be to place a goniometer on the test person’s wrist. This would make it
possible to track the position of the arm in the frontal plane, allowing a speciﬁc range
of movement around horizontal, but as soon as the arm is outside of the allowed
range, the test is either terminated, or the participant is reminded to go back into
the required test position. Using any of these methods, the point at which the test
person cannot hold her arm up longer would not be made subjectively by either the
test person or the researcher but be standardized and therefore the same for all test
persons.
There are limitations to using the frequency and amplitude characteristics of the
sEMG signal alone as signs for CNS fatigue and peripheral fatigue, individually.
Any changes in the muscle can aﬀect the progress of fatigue in the CNS and the
other way around, and a clear distinction is not possible through the use of sEMG.
Other methods exist, such as electrode arrays and transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS), which both make it possible to assess the CNS input onto the muscle and
the fatiguing process selectively[74][75].
Additionally, there are certain limitations to transferring the ﬁndings in a study, such
35
==PAGE:46==
4.1. LIMITATIONS
as this one to real-life situations. This study used isometric muscle contractions to
quantify muscle fatigue, despite these not being common in everyday life. The main
cause for measuring the muscle fatigue in this situation is to eliminate factors that
aﬀect and complicate the signal analysis and cause artifacts, such as the movement
between the muscle and the electrodes or artifact from the motion of the cable be-
tween the electrodes and transmitter. Therefore, this method is thought appropriate
as it eliminates these factors while still representing the myoelectric changes in the
sEMG signal.
Lastly, it needs to be remembered that the PHQ scale was developed for this
study speciﬁcally, as other available tools were not considered appropriate. The
PHQ scale has therefore neither been proven reliable or been validated as a tool for
measuring PSH. Furthermore, the results of the PHQ scale have not been compared
to the data available on the participants in the DANFIB database, such as the FIQ-R
scale, and it is therefore not known if the results on the PHQ scale truly represent
the level of PSH of the individual participant.
However, if the PHQ turns out to be a valid and reliable tool, it would be beneﬁcial,
as objective measures of polysensory hypersensitivity could be replaced with the
questionnaire.
36
==PAGE:47==
5
| Conclusion
In conclusion, the results of the study suggest a signiﬁcant negative relationship
between the time to exhaustion and the level of PSH, suggesting that the level of
self-reported PSH can be used as an indicator of the time to exhaustion in FMS
patients. The level of PSH did not show correlation to any other factors tested, the
objective signs of neuromuscular fatigue or the pressure pain thresholds.
However, characteristic changes of fatigue in nMPF were correlated with the time to
exhaustion, while no correlation was seen between nRMS amplitude change and time
to exhaustion. This is in agreement with previous ﬁndings[5], supporting the theory
of a hyper-responsive CNS in FMS patients, enhancing the feeling of fatigue, leading
to premature termination of a task, without signs of fatigue within the muscle being
evident.
Additionally, all pain level assessments performed before the muscle exhaustion task
showed a signiﬁcant negative correlation to the time to exhaustion i.e., the level of
pain before a task negatively aﬀects performance in FMS patients, reducing the time
to exhaustion.
37
==PAGE:48==
6
| Future Work
It is clear that the goal of measuring 100 ﬁbromyalgia patients has not been met.
It is, therefore, necessary to carry out the remaining measurements as quickly as
possible to ﬁnish the project and report the results. However, it is clear from the
relatively small number of positive responses to the study invitations that for this to
be possible, the inclusion criteria need to be extended, and a new group of potential
participants contacted, with the hope of getting enough participants to ﬁnish the
measurements.
When the measurements have been completed, the data processed, and results in-
terpreted, an information letter will be written, explaining the study results and
sent to the study participants who wished to receive these. A list of the participants
already measured, wishing to receive these has been created and can be updated as
the measurements are continued.
There are plans to continue the development of the new Fibromyalgia Polysen-
sory Hypersensitivity Questionnaire (PHQ) further. If the current study results show
a relation between PSH and the discrepancy between subjective and objective signs
of muscle fatigue, a psychometric robust self-report instrument is needed for the
patient group. Therefore, further psychometric analysis should be done on the new
PHQ to keep the instrument and implement it into the DANFIB database.
Once data has been collected from the 100 patients (in the current study), there are
plans to do a Rasch analysis on the data collected in an independent study, as well
as looking into the convergence validity of the questionnaire with the FIQ-R and
PDQ as a part of instrument development.
38
==PAGE:49==
A
| Theory
A.1
Fibromyalgia
Fibromyalgia Syndrome (FMS) is a chronic pain disorder. Clinically, it is char-
acterized by persistent widespread musculoskeletal pain that is non-inﬂammatory
and widespread soft-tissue tenderness with multiple tender points[14][12]. Multiple
illnesses, also characterized by recurrent or persistent pain, such as irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS), chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), migraines, and major depressive
disorder, are co-morbid with FMS, and therefore thought to share at least some of
the physiologic abnormalities with the disease[76]. Despite pain being the central
symptom of FMS, systemic symptoms, such as fatigue, sleep disturbances, cognitive
dysfunction, and high levels of distress, depression, and anxiety are also considered
core symptoms[12][13][14], and evidence suggests that a large majority of FMS patient
suﬀer from pain, fatigue and sleep disturbances[77]. Additionally, patients with FMS
show reduced subjective tolerance to non-painful sensory stimulation, such as visual,
auditory, and tactile stimulation, as well as abnormal brain processing to this type
of stimuli[20].
A study by Amris et al.[26] found that patients with chronic widespread pain
(CWP), such as FMS patients, have substantial diﬃculties in the performance of
activities of daily life (ADL), and although the average age of the participants in the
study was around 45 years, their motor abilities during ADL was closer to healthy 70
to 80 year old women. FMS has been associated with reduced quality of life[24][25]
and studies show that FMS can negatively aﬀect both social and occupational life, as
well as relationships with everyone from closest family and friends to employers[27].
Therefore, it is clear that the disease burden in FMS is substantial, and the need for a
deep understanding of FMS, its cause, and pathophysiology is crucial for developing
impactful strategies towards eﬀective management.
Etiology and Pathophysiology
FMS is classiﬁed as a rheumatologic disease and is considered the second most
common musculoskeletal disorder, after osteoarthritis[78]. According to European
39
==PAGE:50==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
studies FMS aﬀects between 2% and 5% of the general population[6][7], mainly
women[79][80]. The prevalence increases after 30 years of age, and studies show that
FMS more often aﬀects persons of lower education and socioeconomic status[81].
The pathophysiology of FMS is complicated and not yet fully understood. Tissue-
based and laboratory ﬁndings are non-existent in FMS[8], and as a result, the
validity of the diagnosis has been questioned[9]. However, recent advancements in
neuroimaging techniques have provided evidence of abnormal sensory processing in
the central nervous system, and abnormalities in the release of neurotransmitters and
the neuroendocrine system have been found[10][1]. Additionally, research shows that
genetic factors, external stressors, psychiatric aspects, and sleep disturbances all play
a role in the onset or clinical course of the disease[11]. Together, these factors point
towards multiple mechanisms being involved in the onset and pathophysiology of
FMS. It can be suggested that external stressors possibly initiate a cascade of events
in genetically predisposed individuals, which can manifest themselves in alterations
of the nociceptive system of the body and are consequently seen in the clinical
symptoms and a decline in function and quality of life.
Genetic and Environmental Factors
The development of FMS appears to have a strong genetic component. A study
by Arnold et al.[82] concluded that ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients with FMS are
8.5 times more likely to have FMS, as well as being more tender than the family
members of the control group. Additionally, family members of FMS patients have
been found to be more likely to have related disorders, such as CFS and IBS, than a
control group[83].
Additionally, a range of environmental factors are likely involved in triggering the
development of FMS. These can be either mechanical or psychosocial. Mechanical
factors can be diﬀerent types of stressors causing acute pain for a few weeks, which
is then prolonged, such as physical trauma or injury, infections, such as Hepatitis
C or Epstein-Barr virus disease. Common psychosocial stressors are chronic stress,
emotional trauma and abuse (emotional, physical or sexual) [78][84].
Neuro-endocrine and autonomic nervous systems
Because of the involvement of diﬀerent stressors (biological, psychological, and social)
in the development and maintenance of FMS, and because many of the symptoms
commonly observed are consistent with disturbances in the body’s stress systems, the
human stress response has been studied extensively in relation to the disease. These
studies have found abnormal functioning of the two major stress-response systems,
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the sympathetic nervous system
40
==PAGE:51==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
(SNS), and as a result, FMS is considered a stress-related disorder[85]. Although
studies agree that there are perturbations in the function of these systems, the exact
mechanism is still unexplained[86] and the role of these systems in the pathogenesis
and maintenance of FMS, therefore, need to be further studied.
Sleep disturbances
Sleep disturbances are highly associated with FMS and are considered one of the most
common symptoms, with poor sleep quality aﬀecting up to 99% of FMS patients[87].
Sleep disturbances commonly reported are non-restorative sleep, not being able to
stay asleep, and not being able to fall asleep[88]. Sleep studies of FMS patients
conﬁrm reduced sleep quality[89] and even correlate sleep quality with experience of
pain[90], mood disturbances[91] and health-related quality of life[87]. Increasing the
quality of sleep should, therefore, be of primary signiﬁcance in FMS management.
Abnormal pain processing
Figure A.1: Schematic view of the ascending and
descending pain pathways. Figure borrowed from
[11] and slightly adapted
The classic model of acute pain explains
nociception as the detection and trans-
mission of noxious stimuli, or pain, from
peripheral sensors to the cerebral cortex,
where its location and impact is inter-
preted[92][93].
In this process, the perception of pain is
modulated. This happens in the CNS,
through the opposites pro-nociception
and anti-nociception, signaling pathways
that amplify and reduce the nociceptive
signal’s amplitude, respectively. Stimu-
lus onto peripheral tissue causes a sen-
sory signal to be sent to the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord through primary
aﬀerent ﬁbers (A-delta and C ﬁbers),
see ﬁgure A.1.
The signal is modu-
lated through multiple interactions, re-
sulting in pain neurotransmitters (e.g.,
substance P and glutamate) being re-
leased onto the spinal neuron receptors.
The signal continues to the thalamus and
somatosensory cortex of the brain, through the spinothalamic tract, where it is in-
terpreted. This is called pro-nociception. Simultaneously signals descend from the
41
==PAGE:52==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
brain to the dorsal horn, releasing neurotransmitters (e.g., nor-adrenaline (NA) and
serotonin) that counterbalance the pro-nociceptive signal in a process called anti-
nociception. This way, the pro-and anti-nociception are balanced through diﬀerent
neurotransmitters and neuro-chemicals, and normal sensation is sustained[94][35].
A characteristic of nociception is that repeated or prolonged noxious stimuli can
decrease the threshold level of the noxious stimuli through a process called central
sensitization or wind-up. If the tissue injury is removed, this heightened sensitivity
returns to normal over time but can cause plastic changes in the CNS, leaving the
system in a state of excessive pro-nociception andor lack of anti-nociception. FMS
has been found to exhibit both[94][15].
Extensive research over the recent years, using diﬀerent imaging techniques, have
provided evidence that the deﬁning features of FMS, CWP, and tenderness are
consistent with abnormalities in the way the central nervous system of patients with
FMS manages, transmits, and processes pain[2][1]. These abnormalities are charac-
terized by increased pro-nociception through sensitization of nociceptive neurons and
ascending spinal tracts[17][15] and decreased anti-nociception, through the decreased
function of descending pain inhibitory pathways[95], as well as in alterations in
neurotransmitter release[8]. This altered regulation of sensory signals in the CNS
causes lowering of the pain threshold, leading to general hyperactivity and increased
response to stimulation resulting in increased pain and tenderness[1][35][8].
Various neurotransmitters are involved in the central augmentation of pain, and
studies have found that excessive pro-nociception is related to an increase in the
pain neurotransmitters in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). Increased levels of the main
excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate have been found in both the CSF[96] and
brain[97] of FMS patients, and substance P, a neuropeptide that transmits pain into
the CNS, has been found to be 2-3 times higher in FMS patients than in healthy
controls[98].
Decreased anti-nociception, or pain inhibition, also contributes to augmented central
pain through deﬁciencies in the release of neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, that
play a role in the modulation of pain and headaches, mood, and sleep, as well
as through the decreased release of NA and dopamine. The CSF levels of these
neurotransmitters are consistently found to be low in patients with FMS[99][100].
Clinically, central sensitization is presented as allodynia and hyperalgesia. Allodynia
is pain evoked by innocuous stimuli (stimuli that are not painful under normal
circumstances), such as heat, cold, or pressure. At the same time, hyperalgesia is
excessive and prolonged pain, which can spread beyond the location of inﬂiction
from normally noxious stimuli (stimuli that generally provokes pain)[15][92]. These
42
==PAGE:53==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
Figure A.2: Graphical representation of the left shift of the pain sensation, explaining allodynia and
hyperalgesia. The x-axis represents the stimulus intensity while the y-axis represents the sensation
of pain, where 0% indicates no pain and 100% indicates the worst pain possible. The vertical red
dotted line indicates the intensity where stimuli change from being not painful to being painful in
normal sensation. The ﬁgure is borrowed and edited from [101]
phenomena are demonstrated in ﬁgure A.2, where the sensory enhancement and its
eﬀect is seen in the left shift of the pain sensation curve. This shift causes the lower
half of the curve to lie within the range of normally innocuous stimulus while still
presenting pain (allodynia). In contrast, the upper half of the curve shows increased
response or pain sensation to noxious stimuli (hyperalgesia) when compared to the
normal pain curve[93][101].
The central augmentation of pain has been demonstrated in a study by Jespersen
et al.[16], where computerized pressure algometry (CPA) was used to compare pain
detection threshold (PDT), the pressure at which pain is ﬁrst felt, and pain tolerance
threshold (PTT), the pressure at which pain is intolerable, between patients with FMS
and healthy controls. The ﬁndings were that both PDT and PTT were signiﬁcantly
lower in patients with FMS than healthy controls, indicating allodynia/hyperalgesia
in the patient group. Additionally, abnormal brain processing to painful stimuli
was shown in FMS patients. In a study by Gracely et al.[17] functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was used to evaluate the pattern of activation in the
cerebrum during painful pressure of the nail bed in both FMS patients and healthy
controls. The results showed that similar pressure gave more regions of activation in
the brain of FMS patients than in the healthy control group. Additionally, when
the pressure in the control group was increased to match the pain from the pressure
subjectively indicated by the patients, the activation patterns were similar in both
groups. This indicates centrally augmented processing of pain in the FMS group,
compared to healthy controls.
43
==PAGE:54==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
In addition to heightened pain perception, research suggest that FMS patients
have general hypersensitivity to nearly any type of sensory stimuli, such as tempera-
ture (both heat and cold)[3], visual[4], auditory, and olfactory[18][19]. Additionally,
FMS patients show abnormal brain processing to a variety of non-painful sensory
stimuli[20], and a preference for lower levels of external stimuli[4]. Research has
found increased sensitivity to pain and increased sensitivity to diﬀerent sensory
modalities is related[102]. These ﬁndings suggest that the problem is not speciﬁc to
pain processing but that it exists within the process of all sensory modalities.
The exact mechanism of hypersensitivity to diﬀerent sensory stimuli is unknown, but
these characteristics point towards a hyperactive sensory system, with ampliﬁcation
of both somatic and non-somatic sensory stimuli in patients with FMS. Based on this,
a novel theory has ascended, suggesting that the network of brain regions involved in
pain response is far less pain-speciﬁc than initially assumed and suggesting that the
’pain-neuro-matrix’ may best be described as a ’salience network’[21]. This detection
system’s main function is to facilitate the processing of signiﬁcant (e.g., potentially
threatening) sensory input and select the appropriate response, regardless of whether
this input is conveyed through nociceptive or other sensory pathways. It is suggested
that in patients with FMS, the brain’s ability to integrate and interpret sensory
signals may be overly responsive to certain types of stimuli[22][23]. Thus, the brain
circuits’ aberrant functioning that assigns salience values to sensory stimuli may
contribute to FMS’s complex symptom presentation.
This idea has been supported in a recent study by Hubbard et al.[103]. Moderately
painful pressure was applied to the leg of FMS patients, and healthy controls and
fMRI scans were compared between the two groups at the onset and oﬀset of the
pressure. They found that the brain response was higher in the patient group, not
only at the onset but also at the oﬀset of the stimuli. This is consistent with the
idea that the sensory system of FMS patients is continually in a hyperactive state,
and as a result, they are more sensitive to salient events.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of FMS is complicated, and despite recent advances in its understand-
ing, there still remain fundamental problems in the recognition and diagnosis of
the syndrome. The absence of objective physical ﬁndings, through laboratory and
imaging studies, as well as the general nature of the symptoms, has cast doubt on
the diagnosis, which is often delayed or missed altogether, as well as causing a lack
of social acceptance[1][12].
Oﬃcial research classiﬁcation criteria for ﬁbromyalgia were published by the Amer-
ican College of Rheumatology (ACR) for the ﬁrst time in 1990[10]. These were
44
==PAGE:55==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
Figure A.3: Location of each of the 18 tender points used as one of the parameters used for diagnosis
of FMS, according to the 1900 ACR classiﬁcation criteria. Figure borrowed from [104], and slightly
adapted.
not meant as diagnostic criteria but have nevertheless been used in clinical practice
because no speciﬁc laboratory tests exist. The 1990 ACR criteria state that the
diagnosis should be based on patient reports and clinical assessment, with two basic
requirements. The ﬁrst criterion requires the patient to have a history of CWP. For
pain to be chronic, it must have existed for at least three months. Pain is considered
widespread if it is apparent in at least four out of ﬁve regions of the body. Four
of the regions are found by dividing the body into quadrants, using a line in the
sagittal plane, through the mid-line of the body, and another in the horizontal plane
through the waist of the body. The ﬁfth region is along the axial skeleton. The
second criterion requires the patient to report pain when a 4 kg pressure is applied
in a minimum of 11 out of 18 speciﬁc tender points[14], emphasizing the decrease
in the pain threshold. The tender points are displayed in ﬁgure A.3. They all lie
bilaterally, and their locations are the occipital bone, low cervical spine, trapezius
muscle, supraspinatus muscle, second rib, lateral epicondyle of the humerus, gluteus
maximus, greater trochanter of the femur and the medial fat pad of the knee joint[1].
The 1990 ACR criteria were not intended as strict diagnostic criteria in the clinical
practice and have been criticized for ignoring FMS’s key symptoms, such as fatigue,
disturbed sleep patterns, and cognitive dysfunction. Despite the criteria performing
well in specialty clinics, they were not well received by general physicians, most often
45
==PAGE:56==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
diagnosing FMS, who report a lack of knowledge on how to use and interpret tender-
points during diagnosis and a lack of standardization in the method. Additionally,
the criteria are strict, and a ﬂuctuation in symptom severity can result in the patient
failing to meet the criteria at a certain point in time. Therefore, the classiﬁcation
criteria were updated and modiﬁed in 2010, and the focus shifted from the count of
tender points towards subjective pain and the severity of symptoms. According to
the updated criteria, the presence of tender points is no longer necessary to conﬁrm
the diagnosis of FMS but has been replaced with a widespread pain index (WPI),
and self-reported symptom severity (SS) score [105][10].
Figure A.4: A diagram representing the 19 painful areas used in the WPI assessment of the 2010
ACR classiﬁcation criteria. Figure borrowed from [12]
The WPI divides the body into 19 regions (see ﬁgure A.4), and the patients report if
they have had pain in any of these regions within the past week. Each painful region
gives a score of 1, and the WPI, therefore, ranges between 0 and 19. The SS scale
includes two parts; the ﬁrst part assesses the severity of three systemic symptoms;
fatigue, sleep, and cognitive disturbances. These are rated on a 4-point Likert scale
and therefore give a maximum score of 9. The second part is a checklist of 41 somatic
symptoms, such as muscle weakness, ringing in the ears, and IBS, which the patient
uses to check existing symptoms. The list gives a score of 0-3 points, depending on
the number of existing symptoms. No symptoms give a score of 0, 1-10 symptoms a
46
==PAGE:57==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
score of 1, 11-24 symptoms a score of 2 and 25 symptoms or more a score of 3. A
combined SS score is given on a scale of 0-12, based on the sum of the two individual
parts of the SS scale[105].
Therefore, according to the 2010 criteria, a diagnosis is made based on a combination
of the patient’s history, physical examination, and meeting the three diagnostic
conditions:
• WPI ≥7 and SS ≥5 or 3 ≤WPI ≤6 and SS ≥9
• Symptoms must have been present at a similar level for at least three months
• The exclusion of any diﬀerential diagnoses that could cause the symptoms,
ruled out with laboratory evaluation
The 2010 criteria require an assessment by a physician. They are not intended to
replace previous criteria but rather to provide an alternative diagnostic approach.
[105][1].
The same authors published slight modiﬁcations to the 2010 criteria in 2011, to be
used for epidemiological research purposes speciﬁcally, but never for clinical diagnosis,
as it is entirely self-reported. For this purpose, the 2010 diagnostic criteria were
simpliﬁed. The second part of the SS scale was shortened signiﬁcantly, and instead
of holding 41 items of somatic symptoms, it included the existence/absence of three
symptoms, headaches, pain/cramps in the lower abdomen, and depression. One
point is given for each symptom present within the past six months, 3 points in total,
and when added to the 9 points available for the unchanged ﬁrst part of the SS scale,
a total SS score of maximum 12 points is possible. Additionally, a new 31 point
ﬁbromyalgia symptom scale (FS) was introduced, combining the WPI and SS scales,
summing the respective scores, 0–19 on the WPI and 0–12 on the SS scale[106][107].
A revision of the 2010 and 2011 criteria was published in 2016. According to this
latest diagnostic criteria, FMS can be diagnosed when the following criteria are met:
• WPI ≥7 and SS ≥5 or 4 ≤WPI ≤6 and SS ≥9
• Generalized pain is present in at least four out of ﬁve regions of the body
• Symptoms have been present, at a similar level, for at least three months
• FMS diagnosis is valid irrespective of other diagnoses and does not exclude
other illnesses from being present
It is essential to highlight some of the changes made from the 2011 criteria. The
2010/2011 criteria incorrectly classiﬁed a small fraction of patients because the WPI
did not consider the spatial distribution of the pain sites. Considering this, the 1990
criteria of widespread pain was revisited, and a requirement of widespread pain in 4
out of 5 regions was re-entered into the criteria. It is called generalized pain in the
47
==PAGE:58==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
2016 criteria to distinguish it from the 1990 widespread pain index. Consequently,
it is impossible to satisfy the FMS criteria when the WPI ≥4 and the criteria,
therefore, changed to 4 ≤WPI ≤6 and SS ≥9[107].
According to Kirstine Amris, a medical doctor and specialist in internal medicine
and rheumatology at Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg University Hospital, patients in the
clinic are tested and diagnosed based on the combined clinical picture, using both
sets of criteria, the 1990 and the 2016.
It is clear that all of these diﬀerent methods of diagnosing FMS use the clinical
presentation of FMS only and admit the need to assess multiple domains during the
diagnosis.
Management
Despite improvements in the understanding of the mechanisms involved in FMS,
no deﬁnitive treatment or cure has been found. The deﬁning feature, chronic pain,
is complex and challenging to manage, and the myriad of associated symptoms
make it even more complicated. Consequently, no single treatment is consistently
successful, optimal management of FMS is hard to obtain, and a variety of guidelines
exist[108]. Therefore, research suggests that a continuing and highly individualized,
multi-disciplinary management approaches gives the best results, utilizing both
pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatment strategies, with the main goal
of managing key symptoms, enhancing the health and physical function of each
individual, and increasing the quality of life[109][28][29].
According to EULAR (European League Against Rheumatism) [29], initial man-
agement of FMS should always involve patient education and non-pharmacologic
therapies, such as exercise, which is the only management form strongly recommended
by the organization. However, multi-disciplinary management methods have been
found to provide better results[109] and if the previously mentioned management
methods do not improve the wellness of the patient other forms of management,
such as psychological therapies, pharmacotherapies, or multifactorial rehabilitation
programs, should be considered as well[29].
Currently, the most successful pharmacologic treatment for symptom management in
FMS is diﬀerent central nervous agents. They all have in common that they are not
initially meant for use as pain medication but rather as antidepressants, antiepileptic
drugs, or muscle relaxers. However, they all aﬀect neurochemicals, such as serotonin,
nor-adrenaline, and substance P, which are connected to the modulation of pain in
the central nervous system and therefore have shown the ability to reduce pain in
FMS[110].
An inherent problem in FMS’s recommended pharmacologic treatment is that it
often provides little to no help. Additionally, many pharmacologic treatments are
48
==PAGE:59==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
poorly tolerated or have serious side eﬀects, causing a signiﬁcant dropout in the
use of these[111]. However, it has been shown that only a moderate reduction in
pain has a positive eﬀect on symptoms such as fatigue, depression, and sleep and
improves the quality of life[112] and as recommended by EULAR, pharmacologic
treatment should be considered, when necessary[29].
As a result of the moderate eﬀect and side eﬀects of currently used medication in
FMS, patients seek alternative treatment in an attempt to reduce pain and increase
function, even despite lack of research on the safety and beneﬁt of it. To ensure the
health and safety of these patients, it is necessary to investigate these treatment
forms. A large randomized control trial on one such treatment form, Cannabidiol
(CBD), is planned to start in March of 2021 in Denmark (CannFib study), with the
primary aim of investigating the eﬀect of CBD on pain, sleep, function as well as the
quality of life in FMS patients[113]. This study could provide important evidence on
the safety and eﬃcacy or lack thereof of CBD use on the symptoms in FMS patients.
As recommended by EULAR, non-pharmacologic treatment of FMS should always
be considered as the ﬁrst treatment method of FMS as these management methods
are relatively low risk, cost-eﬃcient, and diﬀerent treatment forms are readily avail-
able. The diﬀerent non-pharmacologic interventions include both psychological and
physical interventions[29].
Most experts agree on the importance of patient education, aiming to increase the
patients’ understanding of the interaction between the pathophysiology of FMS and
their behaviors such as sleep and activity, as well as teaching self-management tech-
niques and promoting physical activity and good health-related behaviour[29][114].
Additionally, emphasis should be on validating the symptoms and FMS experience of
the patients by the clinicians, as it has been shown to increase the patient’s overall
quality-of-life[115]. Research suggests that patient education can decrease pain and
fatigue[116] as well as increase self-eﬃcacy and improve quality of life[117].
Since 2018, recently diagnosed FMS patients in Denmark have been invited to partici-
pate in a two-day patient education course. The course introduces them to the disease
and some of the available tools they can use to confront the challenges that inevitably
come with it[118]. After meeting the FMS patients during the measurements, the
authors’ experience is that the patients are thankful for the course. They report
having learned a lot, feeling relieved and happy to meet others battling the same
obstacles, and some have even made friends that they regularly talk to and exercise
with.
Psychological treatments, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), have been
found to reduce pain and disability, as well as to have a positive eﬀect on mood in
FMS, with sustained improvements[119]. CBT is therefore recommended in FMS
management, although the level of recommendation varies[110][29].
49
==PAGE:60==
A.1. FIBROMYALGIA
FMS patients have been shown to have poor physical ﬁtness,[30][31], with both low
levels of respiratory endurance[120] and decreased muscle strength and endurance[32].
The level of physical ﬁtness along with well-being has even been suggested to aﬀect
the severity of FMS[121]. As mentioned before, a study by Amris et al.[26] showed
that FMS patients have substantial diﬃculties performing ADL, showing motor
abilities comparable to a healthy age group much older than their actual age[26].
Therefore, it can be suggested that the decreased level of physical ﬁtness is a factor
in the poor motor abilities of this patient group, and the need for improving the
groups’ physical condition is substantial.
Exercise is a powerful tool when it comes to increasing the health and function
of individuals and is highly recommended in the management of FMS[29] as besides
increasing physical ﬁtness, exercise has been shown to reduce the perception of
pain and have a positive eﬀect on mental health[33][34]. The analgesic eﬀect of
exercise is thought to partially be a result of changes in the CNS, enhancing the
activity of the pain inhibition pathways through increases in neurotransmitters such
as serotonin[122]. Diﬀerent forms of exercise have been proven helpful. There is
evidence that both aerobic and resistance training results in improvements in pain
and physical function[35]. Additionally, aquatic exercise has been shown to improve
pain and overall well-being of FMS patients[36], as well as mind/body exercises
such as tai chi[37] or yoga[38] which do not require rigorous activity or increased pulse.
However, despite multiple treatments showing eﬀect, these are generally modest,
possibly due to the heterogeneity of FMS symptoms. A large portion of patients
with chronic pain, such as FMS, respond negatively to physical activity, resulting
in increased pain and premature experience of muscle fatigue. This results in a
high dropout rate of patients from exercise, potentially decreasing daily activity
and negatively aﬀecting the patient’s overall health and quality of life. Multimodal
therapy, such as a combination of education, CBT, and exercise, is recommended.
The patient should be actively engaged in the rehabilitation process, with individually
adjusted exercise programs, based on the current physical abilities and the severity
of pain and fatigue, with the recommendation to start with low-intensity exercises,
which can be gradually increased if well tolerated[39][123][110].
50
==PAGE:61==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
A.2
Muscle Fatigue
Voluntary movements require the activation of muscles through a complex centrally
controlled neuromuscular process. It involves the integration of sensory information
from muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joints to the nervous system and central
commands from the brain to adjust and coordinate muscle activation in order to
produce eﬀective and meaningful movements[41].
During prolonged or repetitive movements, the muscles fatigue. This is a complex
physiological phenomenon which can be deﬁned as an increase in the perceived eﬀort
of muscle contraction that eventually leads to temporary, activity-induced failure of
the muscle to generate force or sustain a task[42][124]. In a healthy individual, muscle
fatigue can limit performance during physically demanding or prolonged activity but
is usually easily managed by reducing activity or resting. However, during disorders
such as FMS, where muscle fatigue is increased, it can negatively aﬀect daily life
activities[125].
Physiological Changes During Muscle Fatigue
There is no single physiological mechanism that is the cause of muscle fatigue, but
rather multiple distinctive interconnected processes that normally allow the muscle
ﬁbers to induce force but become acutely defective during activity[51].
Motor units (MUs) are recruited in an orderly fashion based on motor neuron
size, with the smallest, fatigue resistant, type I units recruited ﬁrst. As the eﬀort
progresses, larger muscle units are recruited, type IIa and type II, increasing the
contraction and generation of force. This allows careful control of the amount of
muscle tissue activated and, as a result, the force produced. When a MU has been
recruited, the muscle force can be further controlled by the ﬁring rate; more force is
produced with higher ﬁring rates[126][127]. The neuromuscular system will adapt in
various ways in an eﬀort to sustain the required force or to continue the task, depend-
ing on the requirements. During maximal force production, all MUs are activated,
the frequency rate is high, and the time to exhaustion is short. However, during
sub-maximal fatiguing contractions, not all MUs are active simultaneously, and the
muscle can rotate between working MUs, resting some while using others, therefore
increasing the time to exhaustion[65]. These diﬀerent physiological mechanisms,
based on the diﬀerent intensity of muscle contraction in the working muscle, are
some of the factors that make muscle fatigue task-dependent.
Task dependency of muscle fatigue means that, depending on the task, the factors
causing fatigue vary and potentially also the mechanism causing the fatigue. Some
of these task variables can be easily controlled during exercise, such as the intensity,
duration, speed, and repetition of movement. However, other potentially inﬂuencing
factors aﬀecting the onset and progression of fatigue are not as easily controlled.
51
==PAGE:62==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
These are sex, age, body composition, muscle groups involved, and ﬁber type of these
muscles, to name a few. Additionally, motivation is an important factor in fatigue, as
it allows the individual to keep the activity up, despite it being uncomfortable. These
features all aﬀect the physiological changes under fatiguing conditions[42][124][128].
The physiological factors contributing to fatigue are usually grouped as central
fatigue, and peripheral fatigue, also referred to as muscle fatigue. Central fatigue
originates within the CNS, including both neural and psychological factors, causing
a decrease in the neural drive onto the muscle. In contrast, peripheral fatigue occurs
at or distal to the neuromuscular junction and involves the intrinsic factors of the
muscle. Figure A.5 represents the diﬀerent sites of neuromuscular fatigue, both
central fatigue (1)-(3) and peripheral fatigue (4)-(9)[129]. The diﬀerent possible sites
of neuromuscular fatigue are also indicated in body text, by their respective numbers
in parentheses, as they are discussed.
Figure A.5: Schematic view of the possible sites of neuromuscular fatigue. 1) Primary motor cortex
2) Corticospinal tract 3) A MU nerve 4) Neuromuscular propagation 5) Excitation-Contraction
coupling 6) Metabolic substrate concentration 7) Intracellular medium 8) Contractile element
performance 9) Blood ﬂow. Figure borrowed from [129]
Muscle forces, during voluntary movements, are generated by the contractile mecha-
nisms in the muscle ﬁbers. Still, this mechanism is preceded and controlled by the
neural drive to the muscles, which through relevant excitatory and inhibitory inputs
sends appropriate signals onto the MUs, the functional unit of muscle contraction.
52
==PAGE:63==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
Therefore, the processes at any level within the CNS, the primary motor cortex,
the corticospinal tract, or the motor neuron pool aﬀect central neuromuscular fa-
tigue[125], see ﬁgure A.6.
Research shows that the excitation from the motor cortex decreases during sustained
isometric contractions (1). The causes of this decrease are not well understood, but
diﬀerent hypotheses have been proposed[129]. Diﬀerent neurotransmitters within
the CNS, such as serotonin, dopamine, and nor-adrenaline, play an essential role in
all communication between the neurons in the brain, also during exercise. Studies
suggest that the concentration of serotonin in the brain increases during exercise.
Serotonin is known to cause negative eﬀects on arousal and mood, lethargy, and
sleepiness. As a result, serotonin is thought to play a role in fatigue by increasing
the perception of eﬀort. However, there is some conﬂicting evidence on the eﬀect
of this increase on performance, indicating that the complexity of the system and
the interaction of diﬀerent factors aﬀect central fatigue[125][130]. Other neurotrans-
mitters within the brain, such as dopamine and nor-adrenaline, are also thought to
play a role in central fatigue. It is, therefore, likely that central fatigue is controlled
by a complicated interaction between diﬀerent neurotransmitters, depending on the
circumstances[131].
Figure A.6: Schematic view of diﬀerent factors aﬀecting CNS
fatigue. Figure borrowed from [125]
Fatigue at the spinal level
can be caused by multiple
factors, both within the cor-
ticospinal tract (2) and in
the activation of the alpha
motor neurons (3). During
maximal contractions, mo-
tor neurons’ ﬁring frequency
decreases as they become
less excitable to excitatory
input after repetitive activa-
tion, such as during a pro-
longed contraction.
Addi-
tionally, a group of aﬀer-
ent sensory neurons increase
feedback signals from the
working muscle onto the mo-
tor neuron and aﬀect its ac-
tivity. Group III and IV af-
ferents detect ischemia, hy-
poxemia, and potassium and lactate accumulation in the working muscle. Conse-
quently, they increase their feedback signal to the motor neuron, resulting in the
53
==PAGE:64==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
slowing down of the motor neuron’s ﬁring rate and, therefore, a decrease in the
contraction force. Similarly, group Ia aﬀerent sensory neurons from the muscle
spindles decrease their ﬁring rate during a prolonged isometric contraction, increasing
the presynaptic inhibition and decreasing the ﬁring rate of the motor neuron[125][129].
The physiological factors contributing to fatigue within the muscle involve alterations
in the neuromuscular propagation, excitation-contraction coupling, the availability
of metabolic substrates, the state of the intracellular medium, performance of the
contractile apparatus, and blood ﬂow[129]. These will be discussed brieﬂy in the
following sections.
During fatigue, the transmission of action potentials (AP) from the primary motor
neuron and into the muscle cell, or the neuromuscular propagation (4), is altered.
Fatiguing conditions have been found to cause a decrease in the propagation of APs
at the nerve ending, reduction or complete depletion of neurotransmitters at the
neuromuscular junction, decrease in the amplitude of motor end-plate potentials,
and the sensitivity of the post-synaptic receptors on the sarcolemma[129]. These
factors could all aﬀect the signaling in the neuromuscular junction and, therefore,
the muscle contraction during fatiguing conditions.
It seems clear that the availability of metabolic substrates (6) is necessary for force
production; a decrease in the energy supply would cause muscle fatigue and, conse-
quently, a decrease in force production. Evidence supporting this has been provided,
suggesting that impairment of the energetic processes, such as the depletion of the
glycogen and phosphocreatine storages and lactate accumulation, during longer and
shorter high-intensity exercises, respectively, coincides with the feeling of fatigue
and a negative eﬀect on performance. Contradicting this is research showing that
ATP remains relatively stable during exercise, despite an increase in fatigue. This
indicates a complicated relationship between metabolic factors and neuromuscular
fatigue, likely dependent on the type of exercise[132].
During sustained contraction and fatigue, the state of the intracellular medium
changes (7); the muscles’ energy supply (ATP) decreases, while the concentration of
by-products of ATP hydrolysis, such as inorganic phosphate (Pi) and hydrogen ions
(H+) increases in the sarcoplasm. Additionally, during a sustained isometric con-
traction where oxygen is limited, the concentration of H+ increases even further due
to lactate production. These by-products of energy production inhibit cross-bridge
formation in the working muscle, causing a decrease in contractile force[42][51][52].
The concentration and speed at which the lactic acid builds up depend on multiple
factors, such as the type and size of the dominant muscle ﬁbers in the working muscle,
contraction level, and contraction type. For recovery, lactate and other metabolic
products need to be removed from the site surrounding the working muscle and
oxygenated blood for aerobic ATP production brought into it[67].
54
==PAGE:65==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
The excitation-contraction coupling process (5) is the complicated signaling process
between the action potential generation in the sarcolemma and the start of the
muscle contraction. The propagation of the APs along the sarcolemma and the
transverse tubules is an essential factor as well as the diﬀerent factors related to Ca2+,
an indispensable factor in the performance of the contractile apparatus (8). The
excitation-contraction coupling process is aﬀected by the Ca2+ permeability of the
sarcolemma, its movement inside the sarcoplasm, and eﬄux from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR), as well as the ease at which it binds to the myoﬁbrils. Fatigue has
been shown to increase phosphate concentration and decrease Ca2+ release from
the SR. Increased phosphate concentration decreases the activity of the contractile
apparatuses and, therefore, the force production directly by reducing the number
of cross-bridges, although this eﬀect is probably small. However, an increase in
phosphate concentration can reduce the sensitivity of myoﬁbrils to Ca2+, which may
aﬀect force production more. The decreased release of Ca2+ from the SR can result
in a reduction in the ability of actin and myosin to create cross-bridges and therefore
aﬀects force generation directly[128][129][133].
During a sustained isometric contraction, blood ﬂow is highly restricted (9) due
to intramuscular pressure, causing a decrease in necessary substrate supply, such
as oxygen, to the working muscle, removal of waste products from the muscle and
heat dissipation. This causes increased concentration of lactic acid and a decreased
intracellular pH value, resulting in a decrease in the conduction velocity (CV) of the
muscle ﬁbers and a drop in force[67][129]. It has been shown that even at low force
levels, about 10–15% of MVC, blood supply may be reduced, likely as a result of an
increase in the intramuscular pressure, which then rises above perfusion pressure[134].
It is clear that multiple factors can aﬀect neuromuscular fatigue, and it is diﬃ-
cult to separate central and peripheral fatigue, as well as the diﬀerent factors within
each of them. The development of central and peripheral fatigue mutually inﬂuences
the other, and exercise performance is therefore limited by a combination of factors.
Electromyography and the Myoelectric Manifestation of Mus-
cle Fatigue
Surface EMG is a non-invasive technique used to study the activity of skeletal muscles,
such as the changes in the muscle activity during fatiguing exercise, through the
recording of the electrical activity in the underlying muscle ﬁber membrane during
contraction[43].
During voluntary movement, action potentials (AP) travel along motor neurons into
the motor end-plate where acetylcholine (ACh) is released into the neuromuscular
junction. The ACh binds to receptors on the muscle ﬁber membrane. This brieﬂy
55
==PAGE:66==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
modiﬁes the muscle ﬁber’s diﬀusion characteristics, Na+ ions ﬂow out of the muscle
ﬁber and K+ into it, depolarizing the membrane. This depolarization is propagated
along the muscle ﬁber membrane. When the muscle ﬁber is depolarized, Ca2+ is
released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in the muscle ﬁber, and the contractile
elements of the muscle ﬁber get activated. The sEMG electrodes, therefore, do not
record the contractile activity of the muscle directly, but the depolarization of the
muscle ﬁber membrane during contraction[135].
Surface EMG has the advantage of being non-invasive and relatively easy to use.
Additionally, it can provide real-time monitoring of muscles during tasks and a
correlation between the physiological changes in the muscle and movement[67].
However, there are certain limitations to sEMG that need to be kept in mind when
working with it. Some of these factors can be easily controlled by the researcher,
such as the area and shape of the electrode, the inter-electrode distance, the location
of the electrodes on the muscle, and appropriate skin preparation, to name a few[136].
Other factors are not as easily controlled, such as the amount and type of active MUs
and their depth and location, but inﬂuence both amplitude and frequency in the
sEMG signal. The number of MUs aﬀects the amplitude of the signal, and the type
of muscle ﬁbers aﬀects the speed at which physiological changes happen within the
muscle ﬁber, such as the increase in pH during contraction. The relative location of
the electrode pair in relation to the working muscle aﬀects the signal. Deeply located
MUs contribute little to the sEMG but contribute fully to the produced force. Their
contribution to the sEMG is ﬁltered out by the low-pass ﬁlter provided by the tissue.
As mentioned earlier, at low force levels, the muscle can rotate between diﬀerent MU,
possibly recruiting MU further away from the surface EMG and seen as a decrease
in the sEMG signal, while the force remains the same. Therefore, the recruitment
pattern of the muscle has a lot to say about the signal detected with the sEMG[64].
A motor unit consists of multiple muscle ﬁbers and the combined AP of all working
ﬁbers called motor unit action potential (MUAP). During a contraction, multiple
MUs work simultaneously, and an EMG signal recorded at the skin surface, therefore,
records the composite activity of multiple MUs working simultaneously[137]. The
signal, therefore, represents the recruitment and ﬁring characteristics of multiple
active MUs within the range of the recording electrodes. This results in some limi-
tations in interpreting the EMG signal, as it is diﬃcult to unscramble the complex
sEMG signal and distinguish between the diﬀerent superimposed factors represented
as diﬀerent characteristics of the signal.
Additionally, during dynamic contractions, many factors aﬀect both the generation
and the detection of the surface EMG signal. The main factors are the signal
being non-stationary as a result of the highly variable MU pool during movement,
the relative shift between the muscle and the detection electrodes in addition to
56
==PAGE:67==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
movement-related artifacts[64]. Therefore, a sustained isometric contraction provides
a valuable information to assess the properties and degree of fatigability of a muscle.
Although, in daily life, dynamic contractions are often more relevant.
Muscle fatigue is often associated with the failure to maintain the force required to
perform or sustain a task. However, when looking at the myoelectric manifestation
of muscle fatigue, with the use of surface Electromyography (sEMG), it is clear that
physiological changes associated with fatigue are progressing from the very start
of the contraction before the inability to perform is seen. By using sEMG during
fatiguing contractions, the muscle activity can be monitored continuously, and fatigue
is seen as a function of time, eventually leading to failure in performance[44]. The
diﬀerent physiological factors contributing to this complex multi-factorial process
were discussed earlier, but now the changes detected in the surface EMG signal will
be addressed.
During fatiguing work, the physiological changes are represented as changes in the
muscle’s electrical activity, ultimately measured as changes in the sEMG signal
characteristics. The primary changes in the sEMG signal during fatigue are an
increase in the EMG amplitude and a decrease, or a left shift, of the frequency
spectrum[45][46].
Central fatigue is characterized by decreased voluntary activation of muscles caused
by factors, such as decreased supraspinal activation, decreased motivation, or aﬀerent
feedback from the muscle. A decrease in the brain’s neural drive leads to a decrease
in the number of action potentials ﬁred by the motor neurons onto the muscle. As
a result, the time between the two signals detected with the electrode pairs when
using a bipolar conﬁguration of the surface EMG increases, captured as a frequency
shift towards lower frequency spectrum, when calculated in the frequency domain
by using a fast Fourier transform[48][49][50]. Two calculation methods have been
found to give a good indication of the spectral compression during neuromuscular
fatigue. These are mean and median power frequencies. The two methods are similar;
however, the median power frequency (MPF) has been found to be less aﬀected by
random noise, especially of high frequencies, as well as being more aﬀected by muscle
fatigue[47][61] and is therefore preferred.
During constant force experiments, peripheral fatigue is represented as the increase
in the sEMG amplitude. During a fatiguing contraction, the contractile strength of
individual muscle ﬁbers decreases due to biochemical changes related to the working
muscle. In an attempt to counteract the contractile failure of the working MUs and
to be able to keep the required torque and maintain the same position, the MU
recruitment threshold decreases, and as a result, additional MUs can be recruited
in an eﬀort to maintain the contractile strength of the muscle. These changes are
represented as an increase in the amplitude observed with sEMG[44][53]. The change
57
==PAGE:68==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
in RMS amplitude is commonly used to describe amplitude variations in the sEMG
signal[46].
However, there is no clear division between the fatiguing processes within the CNS
and the muscle. The development of fatigue is a multi-factorial process with simulta-
neous changes within both systems. Any changes in the muscle can aﬀect the progress
of fatigue in the CNS and the other way around, and the inter-correlation of the
factors represented in the complex sEMG signal cannot be easily distinguished[44].
Therefore, the increase in the number of active MUs and decrease in the CV in
the CNS during submaximal fatiguing work are not the only factors aﬀecting the
changes in the sEMG. During fatiguing contractions, the increased concentration of
lactate in the muscle ﬁber causes a decrease in the pH value. As a result, the CV of
APs along the muscle ﬁber membrane decreases, ultimately changing the shape of
the MUAP. As the CV decreases, the length of the MUAP increases, detected as
an additional left shift of the frequency spectrum. This decrease in the frequency
shift of the power spectrum allows more energy to reach the recording electrodes on
the skin surface, as the tissue between the working muscle and the electrodes act as
a low-pass ﬁlter, which now allows for more energy to ﬂow through the tissue and
to the electrodes and as a result, the amplitude increases[44][66][67]. Additionally,
MUs tend to start to ﬁre more synchronously with increased fatigue, increasing the
amplitude. These changes in the ﬁring frequency are controlled by CNS[66].
It is, therefore, clear that the decrease in the frequency during fatiguing contractions
can not be explained by changes in either the muscle or the CNS individually but is
a result of a combination of factors within both systems.
Diﬀerent methods have been used to distinguish between central and peripheral
fatigue. A study by Kallenberg et al.[75] used an electrode array to measure activity
in the upper trapezius muscle during shoulder elevation. Muscle activity is controlled
by the recruitment of MUs and their ﬁring rate, which both can be detected with
electrode arrays, as the number of MUAPs per time unit. The study showed that
the ﬁring rate of MUAP, detected with non-invasive assessment, such as sEMG, is
a suitable parameter of the CNS eﬀect on the muscle force at relatively low force
levels.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has been used to indicate fatigue within
the CNS. TMS stimulates the nerve cells in the motor cortex to send excitatory
signals, motor evoked potentials (MEP), to a muscle. The protocols of such studies
use supramaximal TMS stimulation during voluntary contractions and investigate
the eﬀect on force production. During unfatigued maximal voluntary contraction,
no increase in force is seen during the TMS stimulation because the motor cortical
output was maximal. However, with increased CNS fatigue, an increase in force
production is brieﬂy seen after the TMS stimulation, indicating suboptimal activity
58
==PAGE:69==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
of the CNS[138].
Muscle Performance in Chronic Pain Conditions
According to EULAR (European League Against Rheumatism)[29] initial manage-
ment of FMS should involve non-pharmacologic therapies, such as exercise. However,
treatment eﬀects are often limited, and a large proportion of patients with chronic
pain, such as FMS, respond negatively to physical activity. Much of the FMS pain
has been found to originate from deep tissues, such as muscles. Therefore, muscle
activity, such as during exercise, can possibly contribute to the worsening of symp-
toms such as increased pain and premature experience of muscle fatigue. As a result,
the dropout rate of patients from exercise is high[39][40], possibly decreasing daily
activity and further aﬀecting the overall patient health and quality of life negatively.
Studies generally agree that muscle performance in FMS patients is lacking, both in
strength and endurance[32], compared to healthy controls. Muscle strength has been
found to be decreased, both in static and dynamic contractions[139]. A study by
Maquet et al.[50] showed that grip strength (27% lower), isokinetic muscle strength
at diﬀerent speeds (26% to 54% lower), muscle fatigue resistance (40% lower), and
static muscle endurance (81% lower) were all reduced in FMS patients, compared to
healthy controls. However, the reduction in static muscle endurance was found to be
the largest, indicating that the low force aerobic exercises are more aﬀected than
anaerobic.
In a study by Öberg et al.[140] healthy participants showed a close relationship
between the subjective and objective signs of fatigue during an isometric shoulder
abduction task. The subjective and objective signs were measured with the Borg
pain rating scale and the mean power frequency spectra, and the RMS amplitude,
respectively. Similar results have been presented for the upper trapezius during an
isometric elevation task[141].
However, when the development of fatigue in chronic pain patients was investigated,
the myoelectric signals of fatigue were found to be decreased. The study measured
participants with unilateral myalgia of the trapezius muscle using sEMG. The partic-
ipants held both arms in the horizontal position, in the scapular plane for 5 minutes
without weight, for 3 minutes with a weight of 2 kg, and 2 minutes with a weight of
1 kg. The sEMG MPF and RMS were compared between sides. Both sides showed
classic signs of muscle fatigue, an increase in the RMS and a decrease in the MPF,
with both increasing time and load. However, smaller changes were found on the
aﬀected side, in both the MPF and RMS in all tests, except for the MPF at 0 kg
weight, where no change was found for either side. This indicates that there is a
diﬀerence in the muscle activation pattern in painful conditions[54].
59
==PAGE:70==
A.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE
A study by Maquet et al.[70] measured sEMG of the upper trapezius muscle dur-
ing an isometric abduction task in a group of FMS patients and compared it to a
control group. The study results showed that the FMS patients had a signiﬁcantly
shorter time to exhaustion than the control group. Additionally, both the RMS
amplitude increase and mean power frequency decrease were signiﬁcantly smaller in
the FMS patients than in the control groups at the time of termination. However,
as the characteristic trend of RMS amplitude increase and mean power frequency
decrease was seen in the FMS group, the diﬀerence between the groups was thought
to represent the diﬀerence in time to exhaustion. The article then suggests that the
decreased time to exhaustion could be explained by the decreased motivation of the
FMS patients due to increased sense of eﬀort or increased pain.
The results of a similar study by Bandak et al.[5] were that objective signs of fatigue
at exhaustion were decreased, although this was only evident in the RMS amplitude,
not in the MPF. The study used sEMG to register muscle activity in the deltoid
muscle of patients with FMS during an isometric muscle abduction until exhaustion
and compared it to a control group. The results showed no objective signs of fatigue
within the muscle of the FMS patients, represented as the absence of RMS amplitude
increase, while signs of fatigue in the CNS were signiﬁcant, represented as a decrease
in MPF. This was considered to point towards a failure in the CNS and explained
as the failure of the CNS to interpret or integrate the sensory information from the
muscles correctly, and the experience of muscle fatigue being ampliﬁed in the brain,
despite no objective signs of fatigue being present in the muscles, ultimately leading
to an early failure of the task due to the feeling of exhaustion.
60
==PAGE:71==
B
| Study protocol
61
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
The Association Between Muscle Exhaustion and Polysensory Hypersensitivity 
in Patients with Fibromyalgia: 
A cross-sectional exploratory study 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Director:  
Marius Henriksen, PT, PhD1 
Investigator:   
Kirstine Amris, MD, DMSc1 
Investigator:   
Tine Alkjær, MSc, PhD1,2 
Investigator:   
Pernille Hurup Duhn, MD, PhD fellow1  
Investigator:  
Sigríður Katrín Magnúsdóttir, master’s student DTU/KU 
 
 
Affiliations: 
1The Parker Institute, Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark 
2Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 
Sponsor:  
Parker Instituttet, Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg Hospital, Nordre Fasanvej 57, Vej 8, Indgang 19, 
2000 Frederiksberg 
 
 
Version 1.0 
Date: 12.11.2020 
 
 
 
62
==PAGE:73==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
2 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. BACKGROUND 
Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) is a common chronic pain condition, affecting 2-8% of the 
population, mainly womeni ii. Clinically, fibromyalgia is characterized by widespread, non-
inflammatory, pain and widespread soft-tissue tenderness with multiple tender points. Other 
core symptoms include fatigue, sleep disturbances, cognitive dysfunction, and high levels of 
distressiii iv v and despite few tissue-based objective findings, FMS is often associated with 
substantial pain-related disabilityvi.  
One of the characteristics of FMS is reduced tolerance to non-painful sensory stimuli 
(allodynia) as well as excessive and prolonged pain, which can spread beyond the location of 
infliction, from a stimulus that normally provokes pain (hyperalgesia)ix. In a study by Jespersen 
et al.vii. computerized pressure algometry (CPA) was used to compare pain detection threshold 
(PDT), the pressure at which pain is first felt, and pain tolerance threshold (PTT), the pressure 
at which pain is intolerable, between patients with FMS and healthy controls. Their findings 
were that both PDT and PTT are significantly lower in patients with FMS, compared to healthy 
controls, indicating allodynia/hyperalgesia in the patient group. This pain hypersensitivity is 
thought to be the result of abnormalities in the processing of pain in the central nervous system 
(CNS), including sensitization of nociceptive neurons and ascending spinal tractsviii ix and 
dysfunction of descending pain inhibitory pathwaysx. 
Additionally, general hypersensitivity to different sensory stimuli, such as visual, auditory, and 
olfactory, has been reported in patients with FMSxi xii as well as abnormal brain processing to 
these non-painful sensory stimulixiii. The exact mechanism is not known but these 
characteristics point towards a hyperactive sensory system, with amplification of both somatic 
and non-somatic sensory stimuli in patients with FMS. According to novel theory, the network 
of brain regions involved in a pain response is far less pain-specific than initially assumed and 
suggests that the ‘pain neuro-matrix’ may best be described as a ‘salience network’xiv. The 
main function of the proposed salience detection system being to facilitate the processing of 
significant (e.g. potentially threatening) sensory input and to select the appropriate response, 
regardless of whether this input is conveyed through nociceptive or other sensory pathways. In 
patients with FMS the ability of the brain to integrate and interpret sensory signals may be 
overly responsive to certain types of stimulixv xvi Thus, aberrant functioning of the brain circuits 
that assign salience values to sensory stimuli may contribute to the complex symptom 
presentation in FMS.  
 
Despite improvements in the understanding of the underlying mechanisms involved in FMS, 
the management remains challenging. The management should involve both patient education 
as well as pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatment strategies to manage key symptoms 
and enhance health and function of the patientsxix. 
FMS patients have been shown to have poor physical fitnessxvii xviii. Exercise is a powerful tool 
when it comes to increasing the health and function of individuals and is highly recommended 
63
==PAGE:74==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
3 
 
in the management of FMSxix xx as besides increasing physical fitness it has been shown to 
reduce the perception of pain and have positive effect on mental healthxxi xxii. Different forms 
of exercise have been proven helpful. There is evidence that both aerobic and resistance 
training result in improvements in pain and in physical functionxxiii. Additionally, aquatic 
exercise has been shown to improve pain and overall well-being of FMS patientsxxiv as well as 
mind/body exercises such as tai chixxv or yogaxxvi.  
However, treatment effects are in general modest and a large proportion of patients with 
chronic pain, such as FMS, respond negatively to physical activity, resulting in increased pain 
and premature experience of muscle fatigue. This results in a high dropout rate of patients from 
exercisexxvii which can decrease daily activity and affect overall health and quality of life of the 
patient negatively.  
 
Voluntary movements require the activation of muscles through a complex neuromuscular 
process. It requires the integration of sensory information from muscles, tendons, ligaments, 
and joints to the nervous system and central commands from the brain to adjust and coordinate 
muscle activation in order to produce effective and meaningful movementsxxviii. During 
prolonged or repetitive movements the muscles fatigue. This is a complex physiological 
phenomenon causing an increase in the perceived effort of muscle contraction and eventually 
leading to temporary, activity-induced failure of the muscle to generate forcexxix.  
Muscle fatigue can be divided into central and peripheral fatigue, where central fatigue occurs 
in the CNS, including both neural and psychological factors, while peripheral fatigue involves 
the intrinsic factors of the muscle. Fatigue within the CNS results in slowing down of the firing 
rate of spinal motorneurons onto motor units. This phenomena is seen on surface EMG 
recordings as a frequency shift towards lower frequencies. The physiological factors 
contributing to fatigue within the muscle primarily involve a decrease in the energy supply 
(ATP) of the muscle or an increase in the concentration of metabolites produced during muscle 
work, such as lactic acid, a by-product of ATP hydrolysis. These cause an inhibition of the 
contractile process, leading to reduced frequency of action potentials, which can be recorded 
with EMGxxx xxxi xxxii.  
A study by Bandak et al.xxxiii showed that FMS patients have an altered central nervous 
response to a muscle fatigue task. Surface EMG was registered in patients with FMS, during 
an isometric muscle exhaustion task. The results showed no objective signs of fatigue within 
the muscle, while signs of fatigue in the CNS were significant. This indicates that during 
muscle fatigue, the sensory information from the muscles are not interpreted or integrated 
correctly by the CNS, resulting in the experience of muscle fatigue being amplified in the brain, 
despite no objective signs of fatigue being present in the muscles, ultimately leading to an early 
failure of the task due to the feeling of exhaustion.  
It is still unknown whether the intensified feeling of muscle fatigue is a part of general 
polysensory hypersensitivity (PSH) or not. However, if this is the case, it may explain why a 
large proportion of patients with chronic pain responds negatively to physical activity, 
otherwise recommended for this patient group. The results of this study will contribute to 
64
==PAGE:75==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
4 
 
research within the field of FMS management and help optimize the treatment of patients by 
creating an appropriate exercise program that can increase adherence to exercise, and as a 
consequence improve the patients’ health, both physical and mental. 
2. PURPOSE, HYPOTHESES AND OUTCOMES 
2.1. PURPOSE 
The purpose of the study is to investigate if self-reported PSH is associated with pressure pain 
sensitivity and the relationship between objectively and subjectively measured muscle fatigue 
at the end of an isometric muscle exhaustion task. 
2.2. HYPOTHESES 
Two hypotheses have been formed: 
 Fibromyalgia patients with a high degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity 
will show greater discrepancy between objective and subjective measurements of 
muscle fatigue at the end of an isometric muscle exhaustion task, than patients with a 
low degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity.  
 Fibromyalgia patients with high self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity will show 
higher sensitivity to pressure than patients with a low degree of self-reported 
polysensory hypersensitivity. 
2.3. OUTCOMES 
Main outcomes: 
 Relative changes in the normalized root mean square (RMS) amplitude and median 
power frequency (MDF) of the surface EMG of the middle deltoid muscle from baseline 
(first 5 seconds) to exhaustion (last 5 seconds). 
Other outcomes: 
 Pressure pain sensitivity 
 Self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity 
 Time to exhaustion during an isometric muscle exhaustion task 
 Shoulder pain changes with an isometric muscle exhaustion task 
 Variation in daily overall pain from a 1-week pain diary 
3. STUDY DESIGN 
3.1. PROTOCOL DESCRIPTION 
This is a cross-sectional, exploratory research of FMS patients, investigating the association 
between self-reported PSH and objectively and subjectively measured muscle fatigue to an 
isometric muscle exhaustion task and pressure pain sensitivity.  
3.2. PARTICIPANTS 
In total, 100 women diagnosed with FMS, according to 1990 ACR classification criteriav, are 
identified, through the Danish Fibromyalgia Registry (DANFIB), an existing clinical database 
65
==PAGE:76==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
5 
 
at the department of Rheumatology at Frederiksberg University Hospital in Copenhagen, 
Denmark, and invited to participate in the study.  
As the aim of the study is to compare fibromyalgia patients with high and low self-reported 
PSH the eligibility criteria are as follows: 
Female fibromyalgia patients diagnosed at Frederiksberg Hospital that have given consent to 
be contacted by the Rheumatology department, with the purpose of participating in research 
projects and have previously answered the Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ-
R)xxxiv.  
This questionnaire contains questions specifically addressing hypersensitivity. The questions 
are rated on a scale from 0 to 10 and read as follows: 
“Please rate your level of tenderness to touch” 
“Please rate your level of sensitivity to loud noises, bright lights, odors and cold”xxxiv  
The Danish FIQ-R scale is appended (section 9), where the questions attaining to 
hypersensitivity have been highlighted. 
The patient’s level of tenderness and sensitivity are dichotomized according to the median of 
the scale. 
Inclusion criteria for participants with high level of tenderness/sensitivity: 
 score ≥ 9 on both questions 
Inclusion criteria for participants with low level of tenderness/sensitivity 
 score ≤ 7 on both questions 
The women are invited to participate in the study based on their score on these specific 
questions, 50 patients from the group “high level of tenderness/sensitivity” and 50 age-matched 
patients from the group “low level of tenderness/sensitivity”. 
For both groups, the exclusion criteria are the same. 
Exclusion criteria: 
 Any shoulder disorder/injury that can affect the ability of the patient to lift the dominant 
arm into the test position for muscle fatigue, 90° abduction.  
 Current pregnancy or breastfeeding 
 Alcohol, medicine and/or drug abuse 
 
All participants receive written and oral information about the purpose of the study, the study 
protocol, the duration, and the expectations. They will be offered time to consider participation 
and asked to sign an informed consent form (appended in section 10) before any study related 
procedures are performed. 
66
==PAGE:77==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
6 
 
3.3. RECRUITMENT 
The participants will be recruited from the DANFIB database. Participants recruited are entered 
into the database between May 20th 2019 and September 16th 2020. 
3.4. SCREENING PROCEDURES 
Potential participants are contacted and screened as follows: 
 Letter of invitation sent via digital mail (e-Boks) along with a written information 
letter (see sections 11 and 12, respectively). 
 Potential participants contact the research team in case they are interested. 
 Potential participants are contacted by the research team for an oral information 
session (see section 4.1), as well as to collect information about range of motion 
(ROM) in the shoulder joint of the dominant arm, for inclusion and asking the 
potential participants to keep a pain diary. 
 Eligible participants are invited to a single measurement session (see section 4.2 
regarding measurements). 
4. STUDY PROCEDURES 
4.1. ORAL INFORMATION 
The oral information will be given via telephone, approximately one week before the scheduled 
measurement visit. 
The information given will include that 
 Participation in the study is voluntary 
 Participants can, at any time and without giving any reason, withdraw from the study 
without affecting the potential participant’s right to current or future treatment   
Further, the oral information will include: aim, procedures, potential benefits and risks when 
participating in the study, procedures for random findings during the project, procedures for 
securing the participants privacy and data protection, information on the study organisation, 
funding, as well as contact information for the primary investigator and other key investigators.  
The investigator will make sure that participants have received and understood the information 
given to them. Furthermore, the investigator will make sure they are aware that they have the 
right to withdraw from the study at any time. 
Additionally, the participants are asked about their ROM in the shoulder joint and to keep a 
pain diary for 7 days prior to their measurement visit (see section 5.1). The pain diary will be 
collected from the participant on the day of measurements, after the informed consent form has 
been signed. 
4.2. MEASUREMENTS 
Participants who meet all inclusion criteria and who do not have exclusions will be scheduled 
for a measurement visit with an investigator (or his/her delegate) at the Parker Institute.  
67
==PAGE:78==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
7 
 
As the first part of the measurement session written informed consent is signed. No 
information/measurements will be gathered before informed consent has been signed. 
The following evaluations/measurements will be completed, in this order: 
 ROM of the shoulder joint confirmed, verifying the ability of the participant to lift the 
dominant arm into the test position for muscle fatigue, 90° abduction 
 Pain diary handed in 
 Pressure sensitivity measurements 
 Self-reported Polysensory Hypersensitivity Questionnaire (PHQ) 
 NRS scale (for overall pain and shoulder pain) 
 Muscle fatigue measurements 
 NRS scale (for overall pain and shoulder pain) 
The muscle fatigue is measured last to make sure that the pain and fatigue will not affect 
outcomes of any of the other tests. The questionnaire is answered as the second task of the test 
session to give the patients time to rest and recover as much as possible from the pressure 
sensitivity measurements. 
While the PHQ is presented and answered, the examiner leaves the laboratory to avoid any bias 
from the examiner seeing the results of the PHQ questionnaire and the NRS pain ratings, that 
could affect the muscle fatigue measurements.  
All measurements are performed in one session of approximately 1.5 hours at the Parker 
Institute, Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
5. OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS 
5.1. PAIN DIARY 
The pain diary represents overall daily pain intensity and is used to get an idea of pain variations 
in the days leading up to the measurements. The participants are instructed to fill out a pain 
diary each evening before bedtime. The pain is rated on an 11- point numeric rating scale 
(NRS). The instructions are “Please rate the overall pain intensity that you have experienced 
today” and the anchors of the NRS are 0 = “No pain”, 10 = “Worst imaginable pain”. The pain 
diary is appended in section 13. 
5.2. PRESSURE PAIN SENSITIVITY 
Computerized cuff pressure algometry (CPA) is used to obtain quantitative pressure sensory 
testing through measurements of pain detection threshold (PDT) and pain tolerance threshold 
(PTT). These are measured with a DoloCuff Pain Measuring System device, as it has been 
found to show excellent inter-examiner and intra-examiner reliability of pressure pain threshold 
and pressure pain tolerancexxxv. 
The DoloCuff device consists of a double-chambered (13.5cm x 61cm) pneumatic tourniquet 
cuff (VBM Medizintechnik GmbH, Sulz, Germany) connected to a computer-controlled air-
compressor (Unique Electronic Aps, Hvidovre, Denmark). The computer-controlled air 
68
==PAGE:79==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
8 
 
compressor ensures a constant compression rate of 1 kPa/s. The device is controlled through a 
software called LePainW, version 2.0.6.0.  
A hand-held electronic VAS scale and a pressure release button is connected to the CPA device 
allowing registration of perceived pain during the test and immediate termination of stimulation 
and release of air from the tourniquet cuff.  
Several safety mechanisms have been implemented into the system, to stop the inflation of the 
tourniquet cuff, in case of any adverse events. The pressure release button is implemented as a 
safety mechanism, enabling the patients to terminate the inflation. Additionally, the tourniquet 
cuff can be terminated from the computer program or from a safety button on the main device. 
Furthermore, the maximal pressure is set to 150 kPa.  
Before measuring the device is briefly introduced to the patient and the patients’ dominant side 
is determined by posing the question, “Which foot would you use to kick a ball?” The pressure 
sensitivity measurements are carried out on a therapy bench with the patient in the supine 
position and blinded to all results from the measurements. The pneumatic tourniquet cuff is 
placed over the gastrocnemius muscle of the dominant leg. The midline of the cuff is placed 
on the widest part of the muscle and fitted tightly around the leg, ensuring reliable pressure 
readings.  
The patient is introduced to the two thresholds measured; the PDT, where the first sensation of 
pain is experienced, and the PTT, where the pain can no longer be tolerated. The hand-held 
remote, with the VAS and the pressure release button is presented. The two extremes on the 
VAS scale are explained, 0 indicating “no pain” and 10 indicating “worst imaginable pain”.  
As the pressure in the tourniquet cuff increases the patient is instructed to indicate when pain 
is first felt by moving the sliding button on the VAS scale from 0, and to stop the inflation with 
the pressure-release button when she can no longer endure.  
The measurements are performed four times. The first measurement is used to introduce the 
participant to the assessment and to make sure she understands the procedure. Subsequently, 
three consecutive measurements are performed, with a three-minute break in between.  
5.3. POLYSENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY 
Self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity is measured by asking the patients to answer the 
Polysensory Hypersensitivity Questionnaire (PHQ), a self-reported assessment of an 
individual’s sensitivity to different stimuli. The questionnaire contains 9 statements that 
addresses self-perceived discomfort attaining to light, sound, smell, touch, and taste. It is based 
on a 6-point Likert scale, allowing the subject to express their level of discomfort with each 
statement in the questionnaire.  
The PHQ is based on the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale (SHS)xxxvi. Permission was received 
from the authors of the questionnaire to translate the SHS scale into Danish and use it for the 
purpose of this study. It was translated using the Translation and Cultural Adaptation—
Principles of Good Practicexxxvii. During the cognitive debriefing stage of the translation 
process multiple problems were evident. As a result, based on patient feedback and the expert 
69
==PAGE:80==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
9 
 
knowledge of the patient group within the translator group, the questionnaire was shortened 
and simplified. The questionnaires are appended in section 14 and 15, the original English SHS 
scale and final Danish version of the scale, respectively. 
5.4. OVERALL PAIN AND SHOULDER PAIN 
A document with two questions relating to overall pain and shoulder pain is provided. As 
before, patients are asked to rate their pain on an 11- point numeric rating scale (NRS) with 
the anchors 0 = “No pain”, 10 = “Worst imaginable pain”. The instructions are: 
“Please rate the overall pain intensity right now?” 
“Please rate the pain intensity in the dominant shoulder right now?” 
The NRS scale is answered both before and immediately after the muscle fatigue 
measurements. 
See section 16 for the document the patients receive (in Danish). 
5.5. MUSCLE FATIGUE 
Surface EMG is recorded with Ag/AgCl surface electrodes (Ambu BlueSensor N, type N-00-
S (44.8x22mm), from Ambu A/S, 2750 Ballerup, Denmark), using a bipolar configuration with 
an inter-electrode distance of 2 cm.  
The electrodes are connected to a wireless 8-channel Noraxon EMG system (TeleMyo 2400T 
G2, Noraxon USA Inc, Scottsdale, AZ), containing a 16-bit analogue-to-digital resolution. 
Surface EMG is sampled at 3000 Hz. 
Muscle fatigue is measured using surface EMG measurements. The procedure is explained to 
the patients and the electrodes placed on the target muscle, the mid-deltoid on the dominant 
side, the side that the patient uses to write. The electrodes are placed parallel to the muscle 
fibers, according to SENIAM (Surface ElectroMyoGraphy for the Non-Invasive Assessment 
of Muscle) guidelines, after the skin has been shaved, abraded and cleaned with an ethanol pad. 
The electrode placement can be seen in Table 1. As recommended by the guidelines, the 
electrodes are applied with the patients sitting upright with the arm in a neutral position by the 
side. The reference electrode is placed on the acromion process. 
Table 1 - EMG electrode placement on the mid deltoid muscle, according to SENIAM guidelines. 
Location 
Figure 
Electrodes are placed on the greatest bulge of the muscle.  
They are placed parallel to the muscle fibers, from the acromion to 
the lateral epicondyle of the elbow. 
 
70
==PAGE:81==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
10 
 
Correct electrode placement and quality of the EMG signal is confirmed by visual monitoring 
of the live EMG signal when abducting the arm from the neutral position before measurements 
are performed. 
During the recording, the patient is instructed to sit on a chair, in an upright position, with both 
feet on the ground. She is asked to complete an isometric muscle exhaustion task, maintaining 
a 90° shoulder abduction of the dominant arm, with the elbow extended and hand pronated for 
as long as possible. The time is stopped, and the test is terminated when the patient can no 
longer maintain the test position.  
The surface EMG of the middle deltoid muscle is measured throughout the hold period, as well 
as time to failure. The procedure is as follows: The EMG recording is started; the patient is 
asked to abduct the arm. When the arm is in the right position a marker is placed on the EMG 
recording and the time count is started. When the patient lowers the arm, another marker is 
placed on the EMG recording and it is then stopped.  
6. DATA 
PROCESSING 
AND 
STATISTICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 
6.1. SAMPLE SIZE 
Normalized root mean square (RMS) amplitude and median power frequency (MDF) of sEMG 
in the middle deltoid muscle during the last 5 seconds before exhaustion will be compared 
between two groups, a group with a high level of sensory hypersensitivity and a group with a 
low level of sensory hypersensitivity. 
For a two-sample t-test of group differences in the main outcome change in nRMS (%) a total 
sample of 100 patients will give a power of 87.2% to detect a mean difference of 5% nRMS 
between patient groups (50 patients with low PSH vs. 50 patients with high PSH) with a level 
of significance of 5% (0.05). 
6.2. DATA PROCESSING 
Based on the score on the two questions attaining to sensitivity on the FIQ-R the group is 
divided into two;  
 High degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity  
 Low degree of self-reported polysensory hypersensitivity 
The EMG data will be processed with MATLAB2020a (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA).  
The root mean square (RMS) amplitude and the median power frequency (MDF) will be 
calculated in consecutive, nonoverlapping 1 s epochs, using fast fourier transformation (FFT).  
Initial root mean square (IRMS) and initial median power frequency (IMDF) will be calculated 
as the mean of the first 5 s of abduction and set to 100% for normalization. Normalized RMS 
(nRMS) amplitudes and MDF (nMDF) frequencies at the end of the hold period will be 
calculated as the mean of the last 5 s.  
71
==PAGE:82==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
11 
 
The average PDT and the PPT measurements (in kPa) from the three pressure sensitivity tests 
will be used to compare the two groups. 
6.3. GROUP COMPARISONS 
Comparisons between the two groups will be done using a two-sample t-test. 
Statistical significance will be set at p<0.05. 
7. REGULATORY STANDARDS AND DATA MANAGEMENT 
7.1. NOTIFICATION TO THE DANISH DATA PROTECTION AGENCY 
This study will follow the common rules regarding data protection i.e. the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) and be conducted in accordance with Danish law, the Helsinki 
declaration, and local research ethics committee requirements. This process will ensure that the 
data management of the study comply with the data protection regulation.  
Participant medical information obtained by this study is confidential, and disclosure to third 
parties other than those noted below is prohibited. 
With the participant’s permission, information may be shared with his or her personal physician 
or with other medical personnel responsible for the participant’s welfare. 
Publication of data from this study will not include names, recognizable photos, personal 
information, or other data that compromises the anonymity of participating participants. 
7.2. QUALITY ASSURANCE 
All data will be entered into a study database for analysis and reporting. Any data captured 
electronically will be stored electronically in a separate database according to standard 
procedures at secured servers. Upon completion of data entry, the databases will be checked to 
ensure acceptable accuracy and completeness.  
Individuals involved in study evaluations will be trained to perform the efficacy evaluations 
and activity measurements described in the protocol.  
7.3. FINANCING AND INSURANCE INFORMATION 
This study has not received external funding.  
The participants are insured by the Danish Patient Insurance Association. Financing and 
insurance issues are addressed in the written information material.    
The research partners involved in the study have no conflicts of interest to declare. 
7.4. PUBLICATION 
All positive, negative and nonconclusive results will be published in relevant international 
scientific peer-reviewed journal and presented at national and international conferences. The 
study findings will be conveyed in a transparent way.  
72
==PAGE:83==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
12 
 
8. ETHICS 
8.1. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
All potential participants are informed, both orally and in writing, about the study purpose, its 
process and potential risks, as well as costs and benefits of participation. All participants are 
informed of their rights to withdraw from the study at any time without this influencing any 
future investigations and/or treatments at any site or by some of the members of the study 
group. After the information is delivered, read and understood, the participant gives voluntary 
informed consent by signing a consent form before study participation can take place. The 
potential participants have at least 24 hours to consider participating in the study. 
It is the investigators’ opinion that the knowledge and potential individual benefit gained by 
participation in this study is commensurate with the efforts and difficulties associated with 
participation. Below are specific research ethics considerations related to information, consent, 
interventions, and outcome assessments. 
8.2. STANDARD TREATMENT 
There are no restrictions about medical treatment/other treatments. 
8.3. ORAL INFORMATION 
The oral information is based on the written information and will be given in an easily 
understandable language without technical or value-laden terms. The information will be given 
in a considerate way that is tailored to each potential study participants. The aim is that the 
conversation takes place without interference. It is the responsibility of the interviewer to 
ensure that the potential participant has understood the information. The information interview 
is performed by the investigator or in her absence by a designated delegate. 
8.4. WRITTEN INFORMATION 
Written information material has been prepared and is attached to this protocol (section 11) 
8.5. INFORMED CONSENT 
Consent to participation in the study is given based on the written and oral information. 
An informed consent form (ICF) has been prepared. The form must be signed and dated by the 
participants prior to participation in the study. A copy of the form is provided to the 
participants. The investigator or her designated delegates can receive the signed consent form.  
The source documentation and case report forms (CRFs) will document for each participant 
that informed consent was obtained prior to participation in the study. The signed ICF must 
remain in each participant’s study file and must be available for verification by study monitors 
at any time. 
8.6. RESEARCH ETHICS – THE MEASUREMENTS  
The measurements regarding pain sensitivity, the questionnaire and surface EMG are non-
invasive and not associated with any predictable harms or risks to the participants.  
73
==PAGE:84==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
13 
 
8.6.1. PRESSURE PAIN SENSITIVITY 
When measuring pain sensitivity, a mild, short-term pain occurs, which disappears as soon as 
the participant senses the pain threshold is reached and the pressure is relieved. 
8.6.2. MUSCLE FATIGUE MEASUREMENTS 
To get good surface EMG measurements, hair must be removed, skin abraded and cleaned with 
an ethanol pad. This can cause a short-term light burning sensation, which is considered 
harmless. The electrodes can leave the skin slightly red, which is considered harmless. 
All measurements are obtained according to well-known methods and are considered justifiable 
from a health research ethics perspective. 
8.7. RESEARCH ETHICS APPROVAL 
A protocol synopsis was sent to the National Committee on Health Research Ethics (d. national 
videnskabsetisk komité) to inquire about need to apply for approval for the study.  
The committee assessed the study to be a questionnaire study with only a modest experimental 
intervention and therefore not subject to notification to the committee and allowing it to be 
implemented without permission from the health research ethics committee (Journal-nr: H-
20046520). The assessment is appended in section 17 
Furthermore, the study will be conducted in accordance with Danish law, the Helsinki 
declaration, and local research ethics committee requirements. 
 
74
==PAGE:85==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
14 
 
9. DANISH VERSION OF THE FIQ-R 
10. INFORMED CONSENT FORM 
11. LETTER OF INVITATION 
12. LETTER OF INFORMATION 
13. PAIN DIARY 
14. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE – ENGLISH 
15. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE - DANISH 
16. NRS PAIN SCALE 
17. RESEARCH ETHICS APPROVAL 
 
75
==PAGE:86==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
15 
 
 
 
References 
i Frederick Wolfe et al. “The prevalence and characteristics of fibromyalgia in the general 
population”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism: Official Journal of the American College of 
Rheumatology 38.1 (1995), pp. 19–28. 
ii Ann Vincent et al. “Prevalence of fibromyalgia: a population-based study in Olmsted County, 
Minnesota, utilizing the Rochester Epidemiology Project”. In: Arthritis care & research 65.5 
(2013), pp. 786–792. 
iii Carmen M Galvez-Sánchez and Gustavo A Reyes del Paso. “Diagnostic Criteria for 
Fibromyalgia: Critical Review and Future Perspectives”. In: Journal of Clinical Medicine 9.4 
(2020), p. 1219. 
iv Daniel J Clauw. “Fibromyalgia: an overview”. In: The American journal of medicine 122.12 
(2009), S3–S13 
v Frederick Wolfe et al. “The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the 
classification of fibromyalgia”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism: Official Journal of the American 
College of Rheumatology 33.2 (1990), pp. 160–172. 
vi Kirstine Amris et al. “Observation-based assessment of functional ability in patients with 
chronic widespread pain: a cross-sectional study”. In: Pain 152.11(2011), pp. 2470–2476. 
vii Anders Jespersen et al. “Computerized cuff pressure algometry: A new method to assess 
deep-tissue hypersensitivity in fibromyalgia”. In: Pain 131.1-2 (2007), pp. 57–62. 
viii Richard H Gracely et al. “Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence of augmented 
pain processing in fibromyalgia”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism 46.5(2002), pp. 1333–1343. 
ix Mira Meeus and Jo Nijs. “Central sensitization: a biopsychosocial explanation for chronic 
widespread pain in patients with fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome”. In: Clinical 
rheumatology 26.4 (2007), pp. 465–473. 
x Nancy Julien et al. “Widespread pain in fibromyalgia is related to a deficit of endogenous 
pain inhibition”. In: Pain 114.1-2 (2005), pp. 295–302 
xi Michael E Geisser et al. “A psychophysical study of auditory and pressure sensitivity in 
patients with fibromyalgia and healthy controls”. In: The Journal of Pain 9.5 (2008), pp. 417–
422 
xii Julia L Wilbarger and Dane B Cook. “Multisensory hypersensitivity in women with 
fibromyalgia: implications for well being and intervention”. In: Archives of physical medicine 
and rehabilitation 92.4 (2011), pp. 653–656. 
76
==PAGE:87==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
16 
 
 
xiii Marina López-Solà et al. “Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging responses to 
nonpainful sensory stimulation in fibromyalgia patients”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatology 66.11 
(2014), pp. 3200–3209. 
xiv Valéry Legrain et al. “The pain matrix reloaded: a salience detection system for the body”. 
In: Progress in neurobiology 93.1 (2011), pp. 111–124. 
xv David Borsook et al. “Pain and analgesia: the value of salience circuits”. In: Progress in 
neurobiology 104 (2013), pp. 93–105. 
xvi Chelsea M Kaplan et al. “Functional and neurochemical disruptions of brain hub topology 
in chronic pain”. In: Pain 160.4 (2019), p. 973. 
xvii Sharon R Clark et al. “Fitness characteristics and perceived exertion in women with 
fibromyalgia”. In: Journal of Musculoskeletal Pain 1.3-4 (1993), pp. 191–197. 
xviii Inmaculada C Álvarez-Gallardo et al. “Physical fitness reference standards in fibromyalgia: 
The al-Ándalus project”. In: Scandinavian journal of medicine &science in sports 27.11 
(2017), pp. 1477–1488. 
xix Gary J Macfarlane et al. “EULAR revised recommendations for the management of 
fibromyalgia”. In: Annals of the rheumatic diseases 76.2 (2017), pp. 318–328 
xx Angela J Busch et al. “Exercise therapy for fibromyalgia”. In: Current pain and headache 
reports 15.5 (2011), p. 358. 
xxi Pablo Tomas-Carus et al. “Eight months of physical training in warm water improves 
physical and mental health in women with fibromyalgia: a randomized controlled trial”. In: 
Journal of rehabilitation medicine 40.4 (2008), pp. 248–252. 
xxii Angela J Busch, Tom J Overend, and Candice L Schachter. “Fibromyalgia treatment: the 
role of exercise and physical activity”. In: Int J Clin Rheumtol 4.3 (2009), pp. 343–80. 
xxiii Steven Chinn, William Caldwell, and Karina Gritsenko. “Fibromyalgia pathogenesis and 
treatment options update”. In: Current Pain and Headache Reports 20.4 (2016), p. 25. 
xxiv Julia Bidonde et al. “Aquatic exercise training for fibromyalgia”. In: Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews 10 (2014). 
xxv Chenchen Wang et al. “A randomized trial of tai chi for fibromyalgia”. In: New England 
Journal of Medicine 363.8 (2010), pp. 743–754. 
xxvi James W Carson et al. “A pilot randomized controlled trial of the Yoga of Awareness 
program in the management of fibromyalgia”. In: Pain 151.2(2010), pp. 530–539. 
xxvii Kaisa Mannerkorpi and Maura Daly Iversen. “Physical exercise in fibromyalgia and related 
syndromes”. In: Best Practice & Research Clinical Rheumatology 17.4 (2003), pp. 629–647. 
xxviii William D McArdle, Frank I Katch, and Victor L Katch. Essentials of exercise physiology. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006. 
77
==PAGE:88==
RESEARCH PROTOCOL – EXPLORATORY STUDY 
17 
 
 
xxix Roger M Enoka and Douglas G Stuart. “Neurobiology of muscle fatigue”. In: Journal of 
applied physiology 72.5 (1992), pp. 1631–1648 
xxx Roger M Enoka and Jacques Duchateau. “Muscle fatigue: what, why and how it influences 
muscle function”. In: The Journal of physiology, 586(1):11–23, 2008. 
xxxi Harvey W Wallmann. “Muscle fatigue”. In: Sports-Specific Rehabilitation, pp. 87–95. 
Elsevier, 2007. 
xxxii Jane A Kent-Braun. “Central and peripheral contributions to muscle fatigue in humans 
during sustained maximal effort”. In: European journal of applied physiology and 
occupational physiology 80.1 (1999), pp. 57–63. 
xxxiii Elisabeth Bandak et al. “Muscle fatigue in fibromyalgia is in the brain, not in the muscles: 
a case–control study of perceived versus objective muscle fatigue”. In: Annals of the rheumatic 
diseases 72.6 (2013), pp. 963–966. 
xxxiv Robert M Bennett et al. “The revised fibromyalgia impact questionnaire (FIQR): validation 
and psychometric properties”. In: Arthritis research & therapy 11.4 (2009), R120 
xxxv Jack Kvistgaard Olsen et al. “Reliability of pain measurements using computerized cuff 
algometry: a DoloCuff Reliability and Agreement Study”. In: Pain Practice 17.6 (2017), pp. 
708–717. 
xxxvi Eric A Dixon et al. “Development of the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale (SHS): a self-
report tool for assessing sensitivity to sensory stimuli”. In: Journal of behavioral medicine 39.3 
(2016), pp. 537–550. 
xxxvii Diane Wild et al. “Principles of good practice for the translation and cultural adaptation 
process for patient-reported outcomes (PRO) measures: report of the ISPOR task force for 
translation and cultural adaptation”. In: Value in Health 8.2 (2005), pp. 94–104. 
78
==PAGE:89==
C
| Study Documents
79
==PAGE:90==
C.1. FIQ-R QUESTIONNAIRE - ENGLISH
C.1
FIQ-R Questionnaire - English
REVISED FIBROMYALGIA IMPACT QUESTIONNAIRE (FIQR)
Last Name:
First Name:
Age:
Directions: For each question, place an “X” in the box that best indicates how much your fibromyalgia made it
difficult to do each of the following activities during the past 7 days
Brush or comb your
hair
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Walk continuously for
20 minutes
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Prepare a homemade
meal
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Vacuum, scrub or
sweep floors
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Lift and carry a bag full
of groceries
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Climb one flight of
stairs
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Change bed sheets
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Sit in a chair for 45
minutes
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Go shopping for
groceries
No difficulty
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very difficult
Function sub-total
(for internal use only)
Directions: For each question, check the one box that best describes the overall impact of your fibromyalgia
over the last 7 days:
Fibromyalgia prevented me from
accomplishing goals for the week
Never □□□□□□□□□□□
Always
I was completely overwhelmed by
my fibromyalgia symptoms
Never □□□□□□□□□□□
Always
Overall Impact sub-total
(for internal use only)
80
==PAGE:91==
C.1. FIQ-R QUESTIONNAIRE - ENGLISH
Directions: For each of the following 10 questions, select the one circle that best indicates the intensity of your
fibromyalgia symptoms over the past 7 days
Symptom sub-total
(for internal use only)
FIQR TOTAL SCORE
(for internal use only)
Please rate your level of
pain
No pain
□□□□□□□□□□□
Unbearable pain
Please rate your level of
energy
Lots of energy
□□□□□□□□□□□
No energy
Please rate your level of
stiffness
No stiffness
□□□□□□□□□□□
Severe stiffness
Please rate the quality of
your sleep
Awoke
well rested
□□□□□□□□□□□
Awoke very tired
Please rate your level of
depression
No depression □□□□□□□□□□□
Very depressed
Please rate your level of
memory problems
Good memory
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very poor memory
Please rate your level of
anxiety
Not anxious
□□□□□□□□□□□
Very anxious
Please rate your level of
tenderness to touch
No tenderness □□□□□□□□□□□
Very tender
Please rate your level of
balance problems
No imbalance
□□□□□□□□□□□
Severe imbalance
Please rate your level of
sensitivity to loud noises,
bright lights, odors and cold
No sensitivity
□□□□□□□□□□□
Extreme sensitivity
81
==PAGE:92==
C.2. FIQ-R QUESTIONNAIRE - DANISH
C.2
FIQ-R Questionnaire - Danish
EW/SA/2017 - Baseret på Bennet et al. ”The Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQR): validation and psychometric properties”. 
Arthritis Research and therapy 2009;11:R120 
REVIDERET FIBROMYALGIA IMPACT QUESTIONNAIRE (FIQR) 
 
 
 
 
Instruktion: For hvert af de følgende 9 spørgsmål, sæt kryds i det felt, som bedst beskriver i hvor høj  
grad fibromyalgi gjorde det vanskeligt for dig at udføre hver af følgende aktiviteter i løbet af de seneste  
7 dage. Hvis du ikke har udført en af de angivne aktiviteter indenfor de seneste 7 dage, angiv da hvor vanskeligt  
det var sidste gang, du udførte aktiviteten. Hvis du ikke kan udføre aktiviteten, sæt kryds i det sidste felt. 
 
Børste eller rede dit 
hår 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Gå uafbrudt i 20 
minutter 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Tilberede et hjemme- 
lavet måltid  
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Støvsuge, vaske eller 
feje gulv 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Løfte og bære en fyldt 
indkøbspose 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Tage trapperne en 
etage op 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Skifte sengetøj 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Sidde i en stol i 45 
minutter 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
Gå på indkøb efter 
dagligvarer 
Ikke vanskeligt  □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Meget vanskeligt 
 
 
 
Sub-total (kun til internt brug) 
 
 
Instruktion: For hvert af de følgende 2 spørgsmål sæt kryds i det felt, som bedst beskriver, 
hvordan fibromyalgien har påvirket dig i løbet af de seneste 7 dage. 
 
Fibromyalgien forhindrede mig i 
at opfylde mål for ugen 
 
Aldrig □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
Hele tiden 
Jeg var fuldstændig overvældet af 
fibromyalgi-symptomer 
 
Aldrig □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
Hele tiden 
 
 
 
Sub-total (kun til internt brug) 
82
==PAGE:93==
C.2. FIQ-R QUESTIONNAIRE - DANISH
EW/SA/2017 - Baseret på Bennet et al. ”The Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQR): validation and psychometric 
properties”. 
Arthritis Research and therapy 2009;11:R120 
Instruktion: For hvert af de følgende 10 spørgsmål sæt kryds i det felt, som bedst beskriver 
intensiteten af følgende almindelige fibromyalgi symptomer i løbet af de seneste 7 dage. 
 
Angiv graden af smerte 
 
Ingen smerte 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
Uudholdelige  
smerter 
 
Angiv graden af energi 
 
Masser af 
energi 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
 
Ingen energi 
 
Angiv graden af stivhed 
 
 
Ingen stivhed 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
 
Svær stivhed 
 
Angiv kvaliteten af din søvn  
Vågnede 
veludhvilet 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
Vågnede                
uudhvilet 
 
Angiv graden af nedtrykthed 
 
 
Ikke nedtrykt 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
 
Meget nedtrykt 
 
Angiv graden af 
hukommelsesproblemer 
 
God 
hukommelse 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
Meget dårlig 
hukommelse 
Angiv graden af angst 
 
 
Ingen angst 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
 
Megen angst 
Angiv graden af ømhed ved 
berøring 
 
 
Ingen ømhed 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
 
Megen ømhed 
 
Angiv graden af 
balanceproblemer 
 
Ingen balance-
problemer 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
Svære balance-
problemer 
Angiv graden af 
overfølsomhed for høje 
lyde, skarpt lys, lugte og 
kulde 
 
Ikke 
overfølsom 
 
□ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □
 
 
Extrem overfølsom 
 
 
Sub-total (kun til internt brug) 
 
 
 
 
FIQR TOTAL (kun til internt brug) 
83
==PAGE:94==
C.3. LETTER OF INVITATION - DANISH
C.3
Letter of Invitation - Danish
 
Forespørgsel om deltagelse 
 
 
 
 
Sammenhængen mellem muskeludtrætning og generel 
multisensorisk overfølsomhed hos patienter med Fibromyalgi 
 
Vi vil gerne spørge, om du vil deltage i et videnskabeligt studie, der udføres af Parker Instituttet i 
samarbejde med Reumatologisk Afdeling på Frederiksberg Hospital.  
 
Med forsøget vil vi undersøge sammenhængen mellem oplevet muskeludtrætning, objektive tegn på 
muskeltræthed og generel multisensorisk overfølsomhed, dvs. overfølsomhed overfor mange 
forskellige sanseindtryk (fx lys, lugt og smag). 
 
Hvis du vælger at deltage i projektet, vil du blive indkaldt til en undersøgelse af ca. 1-1,5 times 
varighed på Parker Instituttet, Frederiksberg Hospital, Nordre Fasanvej 57, vej 8, indgang 19, 2000 
Frederiksberg.  
 
Deltagelsen indebærer udfyldning af smertedagbog i 7 dage forinden forsøgsdagen. På selve 
forsøgsdagen gennemføres følgende målinger: 1) Måling af trykfølsomhed, ved en trykpåvirkning af 
lægmuskulaturen. 2) Besvarelse af spørgeskema, der omhandler din oplevelse af forskellige 
sanseindtryk. 3) Måling af muskeludtrætning under muskeludtrætningsopgave, ved hjælp af 
elektroder placeret på huden over den arbejdende muskel. 
 
Før du beslutter, om du vil deltage i forsøget, skal du fuldt ud forstå, hvad projektet går ud på, og 
hvorfor vi gennemfører forsøget. Vi vil derfor bede dig om at læse vedlagte deltagerinformation 
grundigt igennem. 
 
Det er frivilligt at deltage i forsøget. Du kan når som helst, og uden at give en grund, trække dit 
samtykke tilbage. Det vil ikke få konsekvenser for din fremtidige behandling. Hvis du beslutter dig 
for at deltage i forsøget, vil vi bede dig om at underskrive en samtykkeerklæring. Husk, at du har ret 
til betænkningstid, før du beslutter, om du vil underskrive samtykkeerklæringen. 
 
Hvis du gerne vil deltage i studiet, beder vi dig kontakte undertegnede på følgende telefon 
nummer, tlf. 51 78 12 78, eller på e-mail: sigridur.katrin.magnusdottir@regionh.dk 
 
Med venlig hilsen 
Sigridur Magnusdottir (Sigi) 
Kirstine Amris, projektansvarlig læge 
 
Bilag 
 Deltagerinformation 
 Forsøgspersoners rettigheder i et biomedicinsk forskningsprojekt – den Centrale Videnskabsetiske Komité.  
Parker Instituttet, 
Ndr. Fasanvej 57 
Vej 8, indgang 19 
2000 Frederiksberg 
 
Web www.parkerinst.dk
Dato: 30. november 
2020 
84
==PAGE:95==
C.4. INFORMATION LETTER - DANISH
C.4
Information Letter - Danish
 
 
 
 
 
Deltagerinformation 
 
 
Information om deltagelse i et videnskabeligt 
forskningsprojekt om sammenhængen mellem 
muskeludtrætning og generel multisensorisk 
overfølsomhed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parker 
Instituttet,  
Ndr. Fasanvej 57 
Vej 8, indgang 19 
2000 Frederiksberg
 
Telefon 51781278
Web www.parkerinst.dk 
 
Dato: 30. november 
2020 
85
==PAGE:96==
C.4. INFORMATION LETTER - DANISH
30-11-2020, 1. udgave 
2
 
Forsøgets titel: Undersøgelse af sammenhæng mellem selvopfattet muskeludtrætning og 
generel multisensorisk overfølsomhed 
 
Engelsk titel: Investigation of the association between sense of muscle exhaustion and 
general multisensory hypersensitivity 
 
Vi vil gerne spørge, om du vil deltage i et videnskabeligt forsøg, hvor vi undersøger 
sammenhængen mellem muskeludtrætning og generel multisensorisk overfølsomhed, dvs. 
overfølsomhed overfor mange forskellige sanseindtryk (fx lys, lugt, smag). 
Forsøget foregår på Parker Instituttet, Reumatologisk Afdeling, Frederiksberg Hospital og 
forsøgsansvarlig er Marius Henriksen, Klinisk Professor, Fysioterapeut, Ph.d. Forsøget 
udføres af Sigridur Magnusdottir, kandidatstuderende på uddannelsen Medicin og Teknologi, 
KU/DTU.  
Før du beslutter, om du vil deltage i forsøget, skal du fuldt ud forstå, hvad forsøget går ud på, 
og hvorfor vi gennemfører forsøget. Vi vil derfor bede dig om at læse denne 
deltagerinformation grundigt, hvor der er beskrevet hvad forsøget går ud på, og hvad det 
indebærer for dig. Hvis du vælger at deltage i forsøget, vil denne deltagerinformation blive 
uddybet mundtlig, hvor du også kan stille de spørgsmål, du har om forsøget.  
Det er frivilligt at deltage i forsøget. Du kan når som helst og uden at give en grund trække dit 
samtykke tilbage, uden at dette vil påvirke fremtidige behandling. Hvis du beslutter dig for at 
deltage i forsøget, vil vi bede dig om at underskrive en samtykkeerklæring. Husk, at du har ret 
til betænkningstid, før du beslutter, om du vil underskrive samtykkeerklæringen. 
 
Baggrund og formålet med forsøget 
Muskelaktivering i forbindelse med muskelarbejde er en kompleks proces, der styres af 
centralnervesystemet. Centralnervesystemet bruger sanseinformation fra muskler, sener, 
ledbånd og led under muskelarbejde til at justere og koordinere muskelaktivering for at 
producere effektive og meningsfulde bevægelser.  
 
I en tidligere undersøgelse har vi vist, at centralnervesystemets respons på en 
muskeludmattelsesopgave er ændret hos patienter med generaliserede kroniske smerter 
(f.eks. fibromyalgi) sammenlignet med raske, smertefri individer. Fysiologisk produceres der 
mælkesyre (laktat) under udmattende muskelarbejde, hvilket vil føre til ændringer i 
musklernes elektriske aktivitet. Disse ændringer kan registreres ved hjælp af elektromyografi 
(EMG), hvor elektroder, der påsættes uden på huden over musklerne, kan måle den elektriske 
aktivitet fra musklerne, når de arbejder. I vores tidligere eksperiment, hvor patienter med 
fibromyalgi fik registreret deres EMG under en muskeludmattelsestest, så vi ikke den 
forventede sammenhæng mellem tegn på muskeludtrætning på EMG og patienternes 
oplevelse af at være udmattede, som man finder hos raske. Dette tyder på, at 
sanseinformationen fra musklerne under muskelarbejde hos patienter med fibromyalgi bliver 
overfortolket og er en mulig medvirkende årsag til en forstærket oplevelse af muskeltræthed 
under muskelarbejde.  
 
Det er muligt, at dette fænomen hænger sammen med en generel overfølsomhed og 
overfortolkning 
af 
sanseindtryk 
(multisensorisk 
hypersensitivitet), 
som 
mange 
fibromyalgipatienter lider af. Det vil vi gerne undersøge med dette forsøg. 
 
86
==PAGE:97==
C.4. INFORMATION LETTER - DANISH
30-11-2020, 1. udgave 
3
Hvis forstærket oplevelse af muskeludtrætning er en del af en generel multisensorisk 
hypersensitivitet, kan dette fænomen muligvis forklare hvorfor en stor del af patienter med 
kroniske smerter reagerer negativt på fysisk aktivitet, der ellers er anbefalet som behandling 
til denne patientgruppe. Resultaterne af undersøgelsen vil derfor kunne bidrage til udvikling 
af individuelt tilpassede behandlingsmodeller og en mere målrettet behandlingsindsats til 
patienter med fibromyalgi.  
 
Formål med forsøget 
Formålet 
med 
undersøgelsen 
er 
at 
undersøge 
sammenhængen 
mellem 
oplevet 
muskeltræthed, objektive tegn på muskeltræthed på EMG under en isometrisk 
muskeludmattelsesopgave, 
selvrapporteret 
multisensorisk 
overfølsomhed 
og 
tryksmertefølsomhed hos patienter med generaliserede kroniske smerter.  
 
Hvem kan deltage 
Kvinder 
med 
diagnosen 
”fibromyalgi” 
der 
har 
gennemgået 
udredningsforløb 
i 
fibromyalgienheden, Frederiksberg Hospital.  
For at kunne deltage skal du kunne tale og forstå dansk, ikke have sygdomme i og/eller skade 
på muskler, sener og/eller skulderen, som gør at du ikke kan løfte armen op til vandret, ikke 
være gravid eller ammende, ikke være misbruger af alkohol, medicin og/eller narkotika.  
 
Hvad indebærer det at deltage 
Hvis du vælger at deltage i projektet, vil du blive indkaldt til en undersøgelse af ca. 1-1,5 times 
varighed i perioden november 2020 - februar 2021. Alle målinger vil blive foretaget på Parker 
Instituttet, Frederiksberg Hospital, Nordre Fasanvej 57, vej 8, indgang 19, 2000 
Frederiksberg.  
 
Smertedagbog 
Du skal udfylde en smertedagbog i 7 dage forinden forsøgsdagen, hvor du angiver din generelle 
smerteintensitet i løbet af hver dag, på en skala fra 0 til 10, hvor 0 er ingen smerte og 10 er 
værst tænkelig smerte.  
 
På forsøgsdagen gennemføres følgende målinger: 
Tryksmertefølsomhed 
Tryksmertefølsomhed måles ved en trykpåvirkning af lægmuskulaturen lige under knæleddet. 
Trykket bliver givet af et DoloCuff apparat. DoloCuff fungerer ligesom et blodtryksmålings 
apparat, hvor luft langsomt bliver pustet ind i en manchet til du mærker en let smerte, hvilket 
du indikerer ved at rykke på en knap. Målingen gentages 3 gange. Du vil til en hver tid have en 
stop knap i nærheden, hvis du ønsker at stoppe målingen. Til selve målingen skal dit underben 
være bart, så DoloCuff manchetten kan fastsættes omkring underbenet på det område, hvor 
målingen foretages. 
Spørgeskema 
Du skal besvare et spørgeskema der omhandler din oplevelse af sanseindtryk som fx lys, lyd, 
lugt, berøring og smag. 
Muskeludtrætning 
Du skal udføre en muskeludtrætningsopgave, hvor du holder din dominante arm vandret ud 
fra kroppen indtil udmattelse. For at undersøge graden af oplevet muskeludmattelse og målt 
muskeludmattelse under forsøget bliver de elektriske signaler i den arbejdende muskel (m. 
87
==PAGE:98==
C.4. INFORMATION LETTER - DANISH
30-11-2020, 1. udgave 
4
deltoideus) målt ved hjælp af overflade-EMG via elektroder placeret på huden, over den 
arbejdende muskel. Der løber ingen elektrisk strøm fra elektroden ind i dig. 
Før og efter muskeludtrætningsopgaven vil du blive bedt om at angive dit generelle 
smerteniveau, samt regionale smerteniveau omkring skulderen, på en skala fra 0 til 10, hvor 
0 er ingen smerte og 10 er værst tænkelig smerte.  
 
Dine oplysninger 
Alle de oplysninger, der indsamles som led i projektet, bliver behandlet fortroligt og 
anonymiseret, så de ikke er personhenførbare. De behandles under hensyn til tavshedspligt 
og opbevares i et aflåst rum på Parker Instituttet.  
 
Tidsrammen for undersøgelsen 
For den enkelte deltager omfatter det en undersøgelse af ca. 1-1,5 times varighed i perioden 
november 2020 til februar 2021. Alle personoplysninger vil blive slettet, 5 år efter forsøgets 
afslutning. 
 
Bivirkninger, risici og ulemper 
Målemetoderne der anvendes (tryksmertefølsomheds- og elektromyografiske målinger) er 
ikke forbundne med nogen bivirkninger.  
Trykket fra trykfølsomhedsmålingerne giver let smerte, som forsvinder så snart trykket er 
stoppet. Huden vil forud for påsætning af elektroder til EMG-måling skulle barberes og slibes 
let med fint sandpapir med efterfølgende aftørring med sprit for at nedsætte modstand. Dette 
kan svie og forårsage kortvarig lokal irritation. Udtrætning af en muskel kan være ubehageligt 
og du vil kunne opleve let ømhed efter forsøget og 1-2 dage efter.  
Bortset fra den tid du skal afse til at deltage, vil deltagelse i projektet ikke være forbundet med 
nogen risici eller ulemper.  
Vælger du at deltage i forsøget, vil vi bede dig om ikke at indtage alkohol i 12 timer inden 
forsøget. 
 
COVID-19 forholdsregler 
For at forebygge smittespredning af COVID-19 vil den forsøgsansvarlige bære både mundbind 
og visir under hele forsøget, samt handsker ved kontakt. Du bedes også bære mundbind under 
hele forsøget, samt rengøre hænder grundigt både før og efter målingerne. Rengøring af 
overflader og udstyr, som bruges under forsøget, samt udluftning i lokalet, sker både før og 
efter hver målesession.  
 
Aktindsigt 
Ligesom du har ret til at kende indholdet i din journal, har du også mulighed for at se 
forsøgsprotokollen som ligger til grund for forsøget. 
 
Adgang til forsøgsresultaterne 
Forsøgets resultater, såvel positive som negative, vil blive offentliggjort, og resultaterne 
forventes at blive publiceret i anerkendte internationale videnskabelige tidsskrifter, ligesom 
resultaterne vil blive formidlet til relevante faglige fora. Data vil forventes tilgængelige i foråret 
2021.  
 
 
 
88
==PAGE:99==
C.4. INFORMATION LETTER - DANISH
30-11-2020, 1. udgave 
5
Erstatning og klagesag 
Som ved al hospitalsbehandling er du under forsøget dækket af Patientforsikringen, og du har 
mulighed for at søge erstatning, hvis der opstår skader i forbindelse med forsøget. Skulle der 
opstå en skade, beder vi dig hurtigst muligt henvende dig til den klinisk ansvarlige læge. Hvis 
du så ønsker at klage over behandlingen, kan dette ske ved henvendelse til Patientombuddet. 
Du kan få yderligere information og de nødvendige blanketter hos den klinisk ansvarlige læge. 
 
Vi håber, at du med denne information har fået tilstrækkeligt indblik i, hvad det vil sige at 
deltage i forsøget, og at du føler dig rustet til at tage beslutningen om din eventuelle deltagelse. 
Vi beder dig også om at læse det vedlagte materiale ”Forsøgspersonens rettigheder i et 
sundhedsvidenskabeligt projekt”. 
 
Hvis du vil vide mere om forsøget, er du meget velkommen til at kontakte forsøgsudføreren. 
 
Vi håber at høre fra dig 
 
Med venlig hilsen 
Sigridur Magnusdottir (Sigi)  
Tlf. 51 78 12 78 
e-mail: sigridur.katrin.magnusdottir@regionh.dk 
 
89
==PAGE:100==
C.5. PATIENT RIGHTS IN A STUDY - DANISH
C.5
Patient rights in a study - Danish
Forsøgspersoners rettigheder i et sundhedsvidenskabeligt forskningsprojekt 
Som deltager i et sundhedsvidenskabeligt forskningsprojekt skal du vide, at: 
 
• din deltagelse i forskningsprojektet er helt frivillig og kun kan ske efter, at du har fået både skriftlig og 
mundtlig information om forskningsprojektet og underskrevet samtykkeerklæringen. 
 
• du til enhver tid mundtligt, skriftligt eller ved anden klar tilkendegivelse kan trække dit samtykke til 
deltagelse tilbage og udtræde af forskningsprojektet. Såfremt du trækker dit samtykke tilbage påvirker 
dette ikke din ret til nuværende eller fremtidig behandling eller andre rettigheder, som du måtte have. 
 
• du har ret til at tage et familiemedlem, en ven eller en bekendt med til informationssamtalen. 
 
• du har ret til betænkningstid, før du underskriver samtykkeerklæringen. 
 
• oplysninger om dine helbredsforhold, øvrige rent private forhold og andre fortrolige oplysninger om dig, 
som fremkommer i forbindelse med forskningsprojektet, er omfattet af tavshedspligt. 
 
• behandling af oplysninger om dig, herunder oplysninger i dine blodprøver og væv, sker efter reglerne i 
databeskyttelsesforordningen, databeskyttelsesloven samt sundhedsloven. Den dataansvarlige i 
forsøget skal orientere dig nærmere om dine rettigheder efter databeskyttelsesreglerne. 
 
• der er mulighed for at få aktindsigt i forsøgsprotokoller efter offentlighedslovens bestemmelser. Det vil 
sige, at du kan få adgang til at se alle papirer vedrørende forsøgets tilrettelæggelse, bortset fra de dele, 
som indeholder forretningshemmeligheder eller fortrolige oplysninger om andre. 
 
• der er mulighed for at klage og få erstatning efter reglerne i lov om klage- og erstatningsadgang inden 
for sundhedsvæsenet. Hvis der under forsøget skulle opstå en skade kan du henvende dig til 
Patienterstatningen, se nærmere på www.patienterstatningen.dk 
 
 
 
De Videnskabsetiske Komiteer for 
Region Hovedstaden (6 komiteer) 
Tlf.: +45 38 66 63 95 
E-mail: vek@regionh.dk 
Hjemmeside: 
https://www.regionh.dk/til-
fagfolk/Forskning-og-
innovation/Kliniske-test-og-
forsoeg/Sider/De-Videnskabsetiske-
Komitéer.aspx 
De Videnskabsetiske Komiteer for 
Region Syddanmark (2 komiteer) 
Tlf.: + 45 76 63 82 21 
E-mail: komite@rsyd.dk 
Hjemmeside: 
https://komite.regionsyddanmark.dk
/wm258128  
Den Videnskabsetiske  Komité for 
Region Nordjylland Tlf.: +45 97 64 
84 40 
E-mail: vek@rn.dk 
Hjemmeside: 
http://www.rn.dk/vek  
Den Videnskabsetiske Komité for 
Region Sjælland 
Tlf.: +45 93 56 60 00 
E-mail: RVK- 
sjaelland@regionsjaelland.dk 
Hjemmeside: 
https://www.regionsjaelland.dk/sund
hed/forskning/forfagfolk/videnskabs
etisk-komite/Sider/default.aspx  
De Videnskabsetiske Komiteer for 
Region Midtjylland (2 komiteer) 
Tlf.: +45 78 41 01 83 
/ +45 78 41 01 82 / +45 78 41 01 81 
E-mail: komite@rm.dk 
Hjemmeside: 
http://www.komite.rm.dk 
 
National Videnskabsetisk Komité 
Tlf.: +45 72 21 68 55 
E-mail: kontakt@nvk.dk 
Hjemmeside: http://www.nvk.dk 
 
 
Dette tillæg er udarbejdet af det videnskabsetiske komitésystem og kan vedhæftes den skriftlige information om det 
sundhedsvidenskabelige forskningsprojekt. Spørgsmål til et konkret projekt skal rettes til projektets 
forsøgsansvarlige. Generelle spørgsmål til forsøgspersoners rettigheder kan rettes til den komité, som har godkendt 
projektet. 
 
Revideret 21. september 2019 
90
==PAGE:101==
C.6. PAIN DIARY - DANISH
C.6
Pain Diary - Danish
Smertedagbog 
 
Smertedagbog 
 
Vi vil, i forbindelse med din deltagelse i studiet ”Sammenhængen mellem muskeludtrætning og 
generel multisensorisk overfølsomhed hos patienter med Fibromyalgi” bede dig om at holde 
smertedagbog i en uge forinden din målesession.  
 
Hver aften, inden sengetid, skal du vurdere og angive den generelle smerteintensitet du har oplevet i 
løbet af dagen, hvor 0 er ”ingen smerter” og 10 er ”værst tænkelige smerter”. 
Dato: ______________ 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter  
 
 
 
 
           værst tænkelige 
Dato: ______________ 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter  
 
 
 
 
           værst tænkelige 
Dato: ______________ 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter  
 
 
 
 
           værst tænkelige 
Dato: ______________ 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter  
 
 
 
 
           værst tænkelige 
Dato: ______________ 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter  
 
 
 
 
           værst tænkelige 
Dato: ______________ 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter  
 
 
 
 
           værst tænkelige 
Dato: ______________ 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter  
 
 
 
 
           værst tænkelige 
 
 
Hvis du ikke har mulighed for at printe denne, eller har nogle spørgsmål, er du velkommen til at 
kontakte undertegnede på telefon, tlf. 51781278 eller e-mail: 
sigridur.katrin.magnusdottir@regionh.dk 
 
Med venlig hilsen 
Sigridur Magnusdottir (Sigi)  
Parker Instituttet, 
Ndr. Fasanvej 57 
Vej 8, indgang 19 
2000 Frederiksberg 
 
Web www.parkerinst.dk 
91
==PAGE:102==
C.7. INFORMED CONSENT FORM - DANISH
C.7
Informed Consent Form - Danish
 
(S2) 
Informeret samtykke til deltagelse i et sundhedsvidenskabeligt forskningsprojekt. 
 
Forskningsprojektets titel: Sammenhængen mellem muskeludtrætning og generel multisensorisk 
overfølsomhed hos patienter med Fibromyalgi.  
 
 
Erklæring fra forsøgspersonen: 
Jeg har fået skriftlig og mundtlig information og jeg ved nok om formål, metode, fordele og  
ulemper til at sige ja til at deltage.  
Jeg ved, at det er frivilligt at deltage, og at jeg altid kan trække mit samtykke tilbage uden at  
miste mine nuværende eller fremtidige rettigheder til behandling.   
Jeg giver samtykke til, at deltage i forskningsprojektet og har fået en kopi af dette samtykkeark  
samt en kopi af den skriftlige information om projektet til eget brug. 
 
Forsøgspersonens navn: ________________________________________________________ 
 
Dato: _______________   Underskrift: ____________________________________________ 
 
Hvis der kommer nye væsentlige helbredsoplysninger frem om dig i forskningsprojektet vil du blive 
informeret. Vil du frabede dig information om nye væsentlige helbredsoplysninger, som kommer frem i 
forskningsprojektet, bedes du markere her: __________ (sæt x) 
 
 
Ønsker du at blive informeret om forskningsprojektets resultat samt eventuelle konsekvenser for dig?: 
 
Ja _____ (sæt x)         Nej _____ (sæt x) 
 
 
Erklæring fra den, der afgiver information: 
Jeg erklærer, at forsøgspersonen har modtaget mundtlig og skriftlig information om forsøget.  
 
Efter min overbevisning er der givet tilstrækkelig information til, at der kan træffes beslutning om 
deltagelse i forsøget.   
Navnet på den, der afgiver information: Sigridur Katrin Magnusdottir 
 
Dato: _______________   Underskrift: ____________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Samtykkeerklæring: Version 1, Dato: 05-11-2020 
92
==PAGE:103==
C.8. POLYSENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY QUESTIONNAIRE - DANISH
C.8
Polysensory Hypersensitivity Questionnaire - Dan-
ish
Sensorisk Hypersensitivitetsskala 
 
Dette spørgeskema handler om overfølsomhed for sanseindtryk (sensorisk hypersensitivitet) 
og er lavet for at indsamle information om det ubehag, der kan optræde ved udsættelse for 
forskellige former for sanseindtryk fx lys, lyd, lugt, og smag. 
Din deltagelse i dette studie er frivillig og din besvarelse af spørgsmålene i spørgeskemaet er 
fortrolig og vil kun være tilgængelig for de forskere, der er involveret i studiet. 
 
Angiv i hvilken grad du er generet eller føler ubehag i forbindelse med følgende sanseindtryk, 
ved at afkrydse den boks der passer bedst. 
 
UDSAGN 
Slet ikke 
Lidt 
Moderat 
Meget 
Jeg er generet af allergisymptomer (fx 
snue, tæthed i næse, nyseture, 
øjenirritation, vejrtrækningsbesvær, 
hudkløe, hududslæt/nældefeber, eksem) 
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor varme og får 
det ofte ubehageligt i omgivelser, hvor 
andre tilsyneladende ikke bliver 
generet/påvirket. 
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor kulde og får 
det ofte ubehageligt i omgivelser, hvor 
andre tilsyneladende ikke bliver 
generet/påvirket. 
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor skarpt lys og 
oplever ofte ubehag, når andre 
tilsyneladende ikke bliver generet/påvirket.
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor 
smertepåvirkning og det som gør meget 
ondt på mig, gør tilsyneladende ikke så 
ondt på andre. 
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor lugte og 
oplever ofte ubehag, når andre 
tilsyneladende ikke bliver generet/påvirket.
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor lyd og 
oplever ofte ubehag, når andre 
tilsyneladende ikke bliver generet/påvirket. 
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor smage og 
synes mange ting smager grimt eller 
mærkeligt/ anderledes, når andre 
tilsyneladende ikke bliver generet/påvirket 
 
 
 
 
Jeg er følsom/sensitiv overfor berøring fx 
fra andre mennesker eller af tøj eller dyne 
som opleves ubehageligt/smertefuldt. 
 
 
 
 
 
Total score: 9 x 3 = 27 
93
==PAGE:104==
C.9. NUMERIC PAIN RATING SCALE - DANISH
C.9
Numeric Pain Rating Scale - Danish
Smerteskala – Før muskeludtrætning 
 
 
Angiv hvor stærke dine smerter er generelt her og nu. Hvor 0 er ”ingen smerter” og 
10 er ”værst tænkelige smerter”. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter 
 
 
 
 
 
  værst tænkelige smerter 
 
 
 
Angiv hvor stærke smerterne er i din skulder på den dominante side her og nu. Hvor 
0 er ”ingen smerter” og 10 er ”værst tænkelige smerter”. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter 
 
 
 
 
 
  værst tænkelige smerter 
 
 
 
94
==PAGE:105==
C.9. NUMERIC PAIN RATING SCALE - DANISH
Smerteskala – Efter muskeludtrætning 
 
 
Angiv hvor stærke dine smerter er generelt her og nu. Hvor 0 er ”ingen smerter” og 
10 er ”værst tænkelige smerter”. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter 
 
 
 
 
 
  værst tænkelige smerter 
 
 
 
Angiv hvor stærke smerterne er i din skulder på den dominante side her og nu. Hvor 
0 er ”ingen smerter” og 10 er ”værst tænkelige smerter”. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ingen smerter 
 
 
 
 
 
  værst tænkelige smerter 
 
 
95
==PAGE:106==
C.10. FIBROMYALGIA RESEARCH PROJECT REMINDER - DANISH
C.10
Fibromyalgia Research Project Reminder - Dan-
ish
Kære modtager 
 
For nogle uger siden sendte vi et brev til din e-Boks, hvor vi inviterede dig til at deltage i et 
videnskabeligt forskningsprojekt om fibromyalgi. Vi har ikke hørt fra dig endnu, og skriver 
derfor, for at minde om projektet og for at høre om du kunne være interesseret i at deltage.  
Formålet med projektet er at undersøge sammenhængen imellem oplevet muskeltræthed, 
objektive tegn på muskeltræthed og overfølsomhed over for mange typer af sansepåvirkninger 
(også kaldet multisensorisk hypersensitivitet) hos fibromyalgipatienter. Hvis den oplevede 
muskeludtrætning hænger sammen med generel multisensorisk hypersensitivitet, kan dette 
fænomen muligvis forklare hvorfor en stor del af patienter med kroniske smerter reagerer 
negativt på fysisk aktivitet, der ellers er anbefalet til denne patientgruppe. Resultaterne af 
undersøgelsen vil derfor kunne informere fremtidig fibromyalgiforskning som kan være med 
til at forbedre behandling af patienter med kroniske smerter. 
Forsøget foregår på Parker Instituttet, Reumatologisk Afdeling, Frederiksberg Hospital og 
indebærer en enkelt målingssession på omkring 40 minutter. 
Forskningen er ikke omfattet af nuværende COVID-19 restriktioner og derfor må projektet og 
målingerne gerne gennemføres. For at forebygge smittespredning er følgende forholdsregler 
taget i brug: Den forsøgsansvarlige bærer både mundbind og visir under hele forsøget, samt 
handsker ved kontakt. Du bedes også bære mundbind under hele forsøget, samt at rengøre 
hænder grundigt både før og efter målingerne. Rengøring af overflader og udstyr, som bruges 
under forsøget, samt udluftning i lokalet, sker både før og efter hver målesession. Ingen vil 
være til stede i lokalet under målesessionen, udover deltageren og den forsøgsansvarlige. 
Hvis du kunne tænke dig at deltage, må du gerne svare tilbage på denne mail med dit 
telefonnummer, så vil vi kontakte dig for at finde tidspunkt til din målingssession. Hvis du 
gerne vil deltage, men ikke har mulighed for det indenfor de næste par måneder, må du gerne 
lade os vide det, så vil vi kontakte dig igen på et senere tidspunkt. Hvis du ikke er interesseret 
i at deltage i projektet, beder vi dig besvare denne email med ”nej tak” til 
sigridur.katrin.magnusdottir@regionh.dk.  
Hvis du gerne vil vide mere om forsøget, eller har nogle spørgsmål, er du meget velkommen 
til at kontakte.  
Med venlig hilsen  
Sigridur Magnusdottir (Sigi)  
Tlf. 51 78 12 78  
E-mail: sigridur.katrin.magnusdottir@regionh.dk 
96
==PAGE:107==
D
| Translation of the SHS Scale
D.1
Translation Logbook and Future Plans
The tool originally intended for evaluation of sensory hypersensitivity in the study
was the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale (SHS)[58]. The SHS is a self-reported assess-
ment of the individual’s sensitivity to diﬀerent stimuli. The questionnaire contains
25 statements that address self-perceived discomfort to light, sound, smell, touch,
and taste. It is based on a 5-point Likert scale, allowing the subject to express their
level of discomfort with each statement in the questionnaire.
Following is a logbook written in relation to the translation process of the SHS
questionnaire.
September 11th 2020
The questionnaire was translated using the Translation and Cultural Adaptation –
Principles of Good Practice guidelines[59]. This is an 8 step process involving
• Preparation
• Forward translation
• Reconciliation
• Back translation
• Back translation review
• Harmonization
• Cognitive debrieﬁng
• Review of the cognitive debrieﬁng results and ﬁnalization.
The translation process of the questionnaire was discussed during a preparation
meeting. It was decided that three native speakers of Danish will translate the
questionnaire from the original language (English) to the target language (Danish),
individually (forward translation). The original SHS questionnaire is appended in
section D.2.
97
==PAGE:108==
D.1. TRANSLATION LOGBOOK AND FUTURE PLANS
Additionally, a letter will be written to the authors of the questionnaire, seeking
permission for the translation and use of the scale.
September 14th 2020 Inquiry about the translation and use of the SHS scale
was sent to the authors of the questionnaire. The letter is appended in section D.3.
September 16th 2020 Permission was received from the authors of the ques-
tionnaire to translate it into Danish and do any research with the SHS scale.
September 25th 2020 The three translators met to discuss and compare the
diﬀerent translations, detecting errors and divergence between individual translations
or interpretations of the original (reconciliation).
Discussions were had on the purpose of repetitive questions and how diﬀerent ques-
tions would be understood by the patient group. Based on the experience and expert
knowledge of the patient group within the group of translators it was discussed that
patients would likely ﬁnd some of the questions unclear and have trouble answering
them.
Question 12 (about pain) was discussed in particular and based on vast understanding
of the patient group the question was modiﬁed during the translation, see table
D.1. This phrasing is thought to be better understood by the patients and to better
capture the neurophysiological concept of pain sensitization.
Table D.1: The question from the SHS questionnaire that was changed during the translation to
better suit the patient group
English (original)
Danish (translated)
I can tolerate a large amount of pain
Jeg er ikke særlig følsom overfor smerter
A consensus was reached and the translated versions were combined into a single
questionnaire, see appendix D.4, where the question that was rephrased is marked
with yellow.
September 29th 2020 The Danish version of the questionnaire was sent to a
native speaker of English for translation into the original language, English (back
translation).
October 9th 2020 The questionnaire was received from back translation. The
back-translated questionnaire is appended in section D.5.
October 23rd 2020 The back translation was compared to the original version of
the questionnaire in a meeting (back translation review) and a ﬁnal version created
98
==PAGE:109==
D.1. TRANSLATION LOGBOOK AND FUTURE PLANS
Table D.2: The question from the SHS questionnaire that was changed during the comparison of
the questionnaires after back translation
English (original)
Danish (translated)
Danish (ﬁnal)
There are many foods
that taste bad to me
Der er meget mad, jeg
ikke kan lide
Der er mange fødevarer,
jeg synes smager grimt
(harmonization). Only minor changes were made when comparing the back trans-
lation to the original version. Additionally a change was made to the wording of
question 21, better representing the original version of the question. The change
history of question 21 is seen in table D.2. The ﬁnal version of SHS questionnaire is
appended in section D.6, where question 21 has been highlighted.
November 6th and 9th 2020 Six ﬁbromyalgia patients answered, reviewed and
gave feedback on the questionnaire, individually (cognitive debrieﬁng).
November 10th 2020 Meeting was held after the cognitive debrieﬁng of the ques-
tionnaire for review and ﬁnalization of the questionnaire. During this meeting it
became clear that the patients had multiple comments, stating the questions were
neither clear nor precise enough, conﬁrming the feeling of the translators. Based on
these comments and the expert knowledge on the patient group, this questionnaire
was proved unsuitable for the patient group and a new questionnaire was made. This
new questionnaire is inﬂuenced by the SHS scale, but the changes are so drastic that
it is now considered a new questionnaire.
The new questionnaire was written in Danish. It is simpler and contains more uniform
questions on sensory hypersensitivity. The questionnaire contains nine questions and
uses a 4-point Likert scale rating system, the same rating system as is used in the
Pain DETECT questionnaire (PDQ), which is a common tool used in the arthritis
department of Frederiksberg hospital.MISSING A REFERENCE HERE
November 13th 2020
The new questionnaire is sent to a single patient (which also read the through the
translation of the SHS questionnaire) for read-through.
November 19th 2020
Feedback is received from the patient. The feedback is positive and in the opinion
of the patient the new questionnaire is much better and only minor changes are
necessary, in the phrasing of some of the questions.
November 23rd 2020
The following plan is made:
99
==PAGE:110==
D.1. TRANSLATION LOGBOOK AND FUTURE PLANS
• Minor changes are made, based on the suggestions made by the patient.
• The rating scale is adjusted from the 6-point Likert scale to a 0-4 verbal rating
scale (VRS). This is based on a previous Rasch analysis done on the PDQ
6-point scale. This analysis showed ‘threshold disordering’ when the 6-point
scale was used, indicating that the patients had diﬃculty distinguishing between
the middle ratings of the scale.
• Once data has been collected from the 100 patients (in the current study)
a Rasch analysis will be done on the data from the questionnaire (in an
independent study) as well as looking into the convergence validity of the
questionnaire with the FIQ-R and PDQ as a part of an instrument development.
• If the current study ﬁnds that there is a relation between PSH and the discrep-
ancy between subjective and objective signs of muscle fatigue, a psychometri-
cally robust self-report instrument is needed. Further psychometric analysis
should then be done, the instrument consequently be kept, and it implemented
into the DANFIB database.
The questionnaire is now considered ready to use for the purpose of this study. The
name Fibromyalgia Polysensory Hypersensitivity Questionnaire (PHQ) has been
decided.
100
==PAGE:111==
D.2. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
ORIGINAL
D.2
Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Original
Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale 
 
This questionnaire deals with hypersensitivity of sensory inputs (sensory hypersensitivity). The 
purpose of the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale is to collect data on self-perceived multisensory 
discomfort with different stimuli, such as light, sound, smell, touch and taste. 
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary, your responses to the questionnaire will be 
confidential and only available to the researchers involved in this study.  
 
 
Indicate your agreement/disagreement with the following statements by checking the right box 
Questions 
Strongly 
Disagree
Disagree 
Neutral
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree
I suffer from allergies 
 
 
 
 
 
I am allergy-free 
 
 
 
 
 
I have a number of allergies 
 
 
 
 
 
I often feel too hot in an environment 
where others don’t seem to be bothered 
 
 
 
 
 
I am easily disturbed by high 
temperatures 
 
 
 
 
 
I often feel too cold in an environment 
where others don’t seem to be bothered 
 
 
 
 
 
I am easily disturbed by low 
temperatures 
 
 
 
 
 
My eyes are sensitive to sunlight 
 
 
 
 
 
I am sensitive to bright light 
 
 
 
 
 
I am not really bothered by bright lights 
 
 
 
 
 
I am quite sensitive to pain 
 
 
 
 
 
I can tolerate a large amount of pain 
 
 
 
 
 
Things that would ordinarily hurt others 
are not painful to me 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101
==PAGE:112==
D.2. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
ORIGINAL
Questions (continued) 
Strongly 
Disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
I often react to odors that other[s] do 
not initially notice 
 
 
 
 
 
I seem to notice smells that other 
people do not 
 
 
 
 
 
I rarely notice smells 
 
 
 
 
 
When I read, it must be totally quiet 
 
 
 
 
 
I cannot study or read if there are is 
any conversation or noise around 
 
 
 
 
 
I can work even in noisy circumstances
 
 
 
 
 
I tend to be a picky eater 
 
 
 
 
 
There are many foods that taste bad to 
me 
 
 
 
 
 
I can eat almost anything 
 
 
 
 
 
I am generally unable to wear clothes 
made of rough material 
 
 
 
 
 
I am sensitive to rough textures 
 
 
 
 
 
I can wear almost any kind of fabric 
without it bothering me 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102
==PAGE:113==
D.3. INQUIRY ABOUT TRANSLATION OF THE SENSORY
HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE
D.3
Inquiry about Translation of the Sensory
Hypersensitivity Scale
 
 
 
 
                                              
Inquiry about translation and use of the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale questionnaire 
 
Name: Sigríður Katrín Magnúsdóttir                                                                                                     09/14/2020 
Institution: University of Copenhagen / Parker Institute, Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg Hospital 
City, Country: Copenhagen, Denmark 
 
Dear Sir 
 
On behalf of a research group at the Parker Institute, Bispebjerg-Frederiksberg Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark and University of Copenhagen, Denmark, I would like to inquire about a 
translation of the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale (SHS) into Danish.  
 
I am a master student at the University of Copenhagen, completing a master’s thesis in Biomedical 
Engineering. As a part of my thesis, which is carried out in collaboration with a research group at 
the Parker Institute/University of Copenhagen, I need to use a Danish translation of the Sensory 
Hypersensitivity Scale. The research is conducted on Danish speaking Fibromyalgia patients, 
investigating the association between sense of muscle exhaustion and general polysensory 
hypersensitivity.  
Our intention is to translate the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale into Danish, using the Principles 
of Good Practice for the Translation and Cultural Adaptation Process for Patient-Reported 
Outcomes (PRO) Measuresi. The results of the questionnaire will subsequently be used to examine 
the level of polysensory hypersensitivity among the study participants and further investigate any 
differences in sense of muscle exhaustion between groups during an isometric muscle exhaustion 
test.  
 
The thesis is supervised by Tine Alkjær, Associate Professor at the University of Copenhagen, 
who is cc to this email. Members of the research group are Kirstine Amris, MD, DMSc, The Parker 
Institute; Pernille Hurup Duhn, MD, PhD fellow and Marius Henriksen, Professor, The Parker 
Institute. 
 
I would like your permission to translate and use the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale questionnaire 
in my research study, in addition to attaching it to my thesis, as an appendix.   
I would like to translate, use, and print your questionnaire under the following conditions: 
 The questionnaire will only be used for my research study and not for any other purposes. 
 A copyright statement will be included on all copies of the instrument. 
 At your request, I will send a copy of my completed research study to you upon 
completion of the study. 
If you find these terms and conditions acceptable, please indicate so by replying to me through e-
mail: jrm828@alumni.ku.dk 
 
Sincerely, 
Masters student 
 
Sigríður Katrín Magnúsdóttir 
 
 
i Wild, D., Grove, A., Martin, M., Eremenco, S., McElroy, S., Verjee-Lorenz, A., & Erikson, P. (2005). Principles of good practice for 
the translation and cultural adaptation process for patient-reported outcomes (PRO) measures: report of the ISPOR task force for 
translation and cultural adaptation. Value in health, 8(2), 94-104. 
103
==PAGE:114==
D.4. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
TRANSLATED
D.4
Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Translated
Sensorisk Hypersensitivitetsskala 
Dette spørgeskema handler om overfølsomhed for sanseindtryk (sensorisk 
hypersensitivitet) og er lavet for at indsamle information om det oplevede ubehag ved 
forskellige former for sanseindtryk fx lys, lyd, lugt, og smag. 
 
Din deltagelse i dette studie er frivillig og din besvarelse af spørgsmålene i spørgeskemaet 
er fortrolig og vil kun være tilgængelig for de forskere, der er involveret i studiet.
 
Angiv hvor enig/uenig du er med følgende udsagn ved at afkrydse den boks, der passer 
bedst. 
Spørgsmål 
Meget 
uenig 
Uenig 
Neutral
Enig 
Meget 
enig 
Jeg lider af allergier 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg har ingen allergier 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er allergisk over for flere ting 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg føler mig ofte for varm i 
omgivelser, hvor andre tilsyneladende 
ikke bliver generet 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg bliver let generet af høje 
temperaturer 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg føler mig ofte for kold i omgivelser, 
hvor andre tilsyneladende ikke bliver 
generet 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg bliver let generet af lave 
temperaturer 
  
  
  
  
  
Mine øjne er følsomme overfor sollys 
  
  
 
  
  
Jeg er følsom overfor skarpt lys 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg generes ikke ret meget af skarpt 
lys 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er temmelig følsom overfor 
smerter 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er ikke særlig følsom overfor 
smerter 
  
  
  
  
  
Ting, som gør ondt på andre, gør ikke 
ondt på mig 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
104
==PAGE:115==
D.4. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
TRANSLATED
Spørgsmål (forts.) 
Meget 
uenig 
Uenig 
Neutral
Enig 
Meget 
enig 
Jeg reagerer ofte på lugte, som andre 
ikke lægger mærke til 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg lægger mærke til lugte, som andre 
ikke lægger mærke til 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg lægger sjældent mærke til lugte 
  
  
  
  
  
Der skal være helt stille, når jeg læser 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan ikke studere eller læse, hvis 
der er nogen former for samtale eller 
støj omkring mig 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan arbejde selvom der er støj 
omkring mig 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er tilbøjelig til at være kræsen 
  
  
  
  
  
Der er meget mad, jeg ikke kan lide 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan spise næsten alt 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan generelt ikke gå med tøj, der 
er lavet af grove materialer 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er følsom overfor ru materialer  
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan gå med tøj af stort set alle 
slags materialer, uden at det generer 
mig 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
105
==PAGE:116==
D.5. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
BACK TRANSLATED
D.5
Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Back translated
Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale 
This questionnaire concerns hypersensitivity to sensory input (sensory hypersensitivity) 
and is used to collect information on the discomfort caused by different types of sensory 
input e.g. light, sound, smell and taste. 
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary and your answers to the questions in the 
questionnaire are confidential and will only be available to the researchers involved with 
the study.
 
Indicate how much you agree with the following statements by marking the box which best 
describes you.
Questions 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
agree, 
nor 
disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
I suffer from allergies 
  
  
  
  
  
I have no allergies 
  
  
  
  
  
I have several allergies 
  
  
  
  
  
I often feel hot in situations where 
others do not seem to be affected 
  
  
  
  
  
I am easily irritated by high 
temperatures 
  
  
  
  
  
I often feel cold in situations where 
others do not seem to be affected 
  
  
  
  
  
I am easily irritated by low 
temperatures 
  
  
  
  
  
My eyes are sensitive to sunlight 
  
  
 
  
  
I am sensitive to bright lights 
  
  
  
  
  
I am not particularly affected by bright 
lights 
  
  
  
  
  
I am quite sensitive to pain 
  
  
  
  
  
I am not particularly sensitive to pain 
  
  
  
  
  
Things that cause pain to others do 
not cause pain to me 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
106
==PAGE:117==
D.5. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
BACK TRANSLATED
Questions (continued) 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
agree, 
nor 
disagree
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
I often react to smells that others do 
not notice 
  
  
  
  
  
I notice smells that others do not 
notice 
  
  
  
  
  
I rarely notice smells 
  
  
  
  
  
It needs to be totally quiet when I read 
  
  
  
  
  
I cannot study or read if people talk, or 
there is noise, around me 
  
  
  
  
  
I can work even though there is noise 
around me 
  
  
  
  
  
I tend to be fussy 
  
  
  
  
  
There are many foodstuffs that I do 
not like 
  
  
  
  
  
I can eat almost everything 
  
  
  
  
  
I can generally not wear clothes made 
from rough material 
  
  
  
  
  
I am sensitive to rough materials  
  
  
  
  
  
I can wear clothes of pretty much any 
material without it affecting me 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
107
==PAGE:118==
D.6. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
FINAL VERSION
D.6
Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale -
Final version
Sensorisk Hypersensitivitetsskala 
Dette spørgeskema handler om overfølsomhed for sanseindtryk (sensorisk 
hypersensitivitet) og er lavet for at indsamle information om det oplevede ubehag ved 
forskellige former for sanseindtryk fx lys, lyd, lugt, og smag. 
 
Din deltagelse i dette studie er frivillig og din besvarelse af spørgsmålene i spørgeskemaet 
er fortrolig og vil kun være tilgængelig for de forskere, der er involveret i studiet.
 
Angiv hvor enig/uenig du er med følgende udsagn ved at afkrydse den boks, der passer 
bedst. 
Spørgsmål 
Meget 
uenig 
Uenig 
Neutral
Enig  
Meget 
enig 
Jeg lider af allergier 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg har ingen allergier 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er allergisk over for flere ting 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg føler mig ofte for varm i 
omgivelser, hvor andre tilsyneladende 
ikke bliver generet 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg bliver let generet af høje 
temperaturer 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg føler mig ofte for kold i omgivelser, 
hvor andre tilsyneladende ikke bliver 
generet 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg bliver let generet af lave 
temperaturer 
  
  
  
  
  
Mine øjne er følsomme overfor sollys 
  
  
 
  
  
Jeg er følsom overfor skarpt lys 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg generes ikke ret meget af skarpt 
lys 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er temmelig følsom overfor 
smerter 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er ikke særlig følsom overfor 
smerter 
  
  
  
  
  
Ting, som gør ondt på andre, gør ikke 
ondt på mig 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
108
==PAGE:119==
D.6. SENSORY HYPERSENSITIVITY SCALE -
FINAL VERSION
Spørgsmål (forts.) 
Meget 
uenig 
Uenig 
Neutral
Enig  
Meget 
enig 
Jeg reagerer ofte på lugte, som andre 
ikke lægger mærke til 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg lægger mærke til lugte, som andre 
ikke lægger mærke til 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg lægger sjældent mærke til lugte 
  
  
  
  
  
Der skal være helt stille, når jeg læser 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan ikke studere eller læse, hvis 
der er nogen former for samtale eller 
støj omkring mig 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan arbejde selvom der er støj 
omkring mig 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er tilbøjelig til at være kræsen 
  
  
  
  
  
Der er mange fødevarer jeg synes 
smager grimt 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan spise næsten alt 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan generelt ikke gå med tøj, der 
er lavet af grove materialer 
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg er følsom overfor ru materialer  
  
  
  
  
  
Jeg kan gå med tøj af stort set alle 
slags materialer, uden at det generer 
mig 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
109
==PAGE:120==
E
| Matlab Code for Data Process-
ing
110
==PAGE:121==
3/5/21 7:59 PM
D:\Fatigue.m
1 of 2
clear
clc
close all
 
% Reading data from specific measurement
[filename,pathname]=uigetfile('*.mat');
cd(pathname), load(filename)
 
% Sampling rate (Fs) read from data file.
% Due to scientific format of variable 'samplingRate' in the data file it
% needs to be reformatted to double to be usable as an index
Fs = str2double(sprintf('%g',samplingRate));
 
% Markers read from data file.
% Due to scientific format of variable 'Markers' in the data file it
% needs to be reformatted to double to be usable as an index
originalMarkers = [str2double(sprintf('%g',Markers(1))), str2double(sprintf('%g',
Markers(2)))];
 
RMSwindowLengthSec = 1; % For how long time window to calculate RMS value
                        % -in seconds
numberOfEpochs = 5;     % How many epocs of length 'RMSwindowLengthSec' to
                        % make an average for the RMS signal
markerOffset = 2;       % Offset (in seconds) of marker from auto-detected
                        % threshold of start and end of signal
 
displayPreviewPlot = 1; % Display plot to preview data (1/0 for on/off)
showOriginalMarkers = 1; % Show markers from measurment session
 
% Frequency analysis of the data.
% Calculations of the median power frequency, RMS amplitude (both for the 
% sections being analysed and the entire signal for visualization) and
% spectrum for epochs of 1 s length. Also returns markers found
% automatically and the trigger level used to find the automatic markers.
[mdpf, RMSamp, RMSampALL, ff, spect, autoMarkers, trigger_level]=analysis(Data{1,1},Fs,
RMSwindowLengthSec,numberOfEpochs,markerOffset);
 
% Display of preview plots
if displayPreviewPlot
    % Call to the preview plot function
    plotPreview(Data{1,1},originalMarkers,showOriginalMarkers,autoMarkers,
trigger_level,Fs,RMSampALL,RMSwindowLengthSec,numberOfEpochs, markerOffset);
end
 
% Displays the average median power frequencies [Hz], average RMS
% amplitude [uV] and hold time [s] for the first and last 5 s of the
% hold period.
avg_mdpf = [mean(mdpf(1:5));mean(mdpf(6:10))];
avg_RMSamp = [mean(RMSamp(1:5));mean(RMSamp(6:10))];
HoldLength_s = (autoMarkers(2)-autoMarkers(1))/Fs;
111
==PAGE:122==
3/5/21 7:59 PM
D:\Fatigue.m
2 of 2
fprintf('Hold length: %d seconds \n \n', HoldLength_s)
fprintf('Average RMS amplitude: \t Start: %.4f uV \n \t \t \t \t \t \t End: \t %.4f uV 
\n \n', avg_RMSamp)
fprintf('Average MDPF: \t Start: %.4f Hz \n \t \t \t \t End:    %.4f Hz \n', avg_mdpf)
 
 
 
112
==PAGE:123==
3/5/21 7:59 PM
D:\analysis.m
1 of 2
function [mdpf, RMSamp, RMSampALL, ff, spect, autoMarkers, trigger_level]=analysis
(rawEMG,Fs,RMSwindowLengthSec,numberOfEpochs,markerOffset)
% The analysis function is responsible for initial data processing and calls
% other programs to do further processing.
% Inputs: Raw EMG signal, sampling frequency, length of the window to
% calculate the RMS value in seconds, the number of epochs to calculate the
% RMS value and the chosen marker offset.
% Outputs: Median power frequency, the RMS amplitude, resulting frequencies
% and spectra for each of the 5 epochs in the beginning and end of the hold
% period (according to markers). Calculated markers from auto-detection of
% start and end of the hold period and the trigger level used (in percent).
 
% Note: The total number of epochs processed is 2x 'numberOfEpochs'. Half
% from the beginning of the hold and half from the end.
 
% RMS window length in number of samples
RMSwindowLength = RMSwindowLengthSec * Fs;
 
% Initialise variables with space for the total epochs being analysed
mdpf = zeros(numberOfEpochs*2,1); % Median power frequencies
RMSamp = zeros(numberOfEpochs*2,1); % RMS amplitudes in beginning and end
RMSampALL = zeros(floor(length(rawEMG)/RMSwindowLength),1);% All RMS values
ff = zeros(Fs/2,numberOfEpochs*2); % Frequency vector
spect = zeros(Fs/2,numberOfEpochs*2); % Spectra vector
 
% Calculate the RMS value of the entire raw EMG signal with non overlapping
% windows of length 'RMSwindowLength'.
i=1;
while i*RMSwindowLength < length(rawEMG)
    % Segment i being pulled from the total EMG signal for analysis
    EMG_segment_i = rawEMG((i-1)*RMSwindowLength+1:i*RMSwindowLength);
    % Calculation of the RMS amplitude of segment i
    RMSampALL(i) = sqrt(mean(EMG_segment_i.^2));
    i = i+1;
end
 
% Settings for auto-detection of start and end of the hold period
thresholdPercent = 0.2; % Threshold, in percent of the signals maximum
                        % amplitude, to trigger that the signal is high/low
thresholdDuration = 5; % The number of consecutive datapoints the signal 
                       % needs to have over/under the threshold percent to
                       % be accepted as the start/end point of hold period
 
% Call to the program auto-detecting the start and end of the hold period
[iBegin, iEnd, trigger_level] = Trigger(RMSampALL,thresholdDuration,thresholdPercent);
 
% Calculation of the auto-detected markers from seconds to index number
autoMarkers = [(iBegin*RMSwindowLengthSec + markerOffset)*Fs, (iEnd*RMSwindowLengthSec 
- markerOffset)*Fs];
 
113
==PAGE:124==
3/5/21 7:59 PM
D:\analysis.m
2 of 2
% Loop over and analyse each epoch of the signal according to the auto-
% generated markers. Results stored for each iteration.
% Start period of the hold
for i = 1:numberOfEpochs
    % Call to the signal analysis program
    [imdpf, iamp, f, ispect] = analyseSegment(autoMarkers(1)+(i-1)*Fs+1, autoMarkers(1)
+i*Fs, rawEMG, Fs);
    mdpf(i)=imdpf;
    RMSamp(i)=iamp;
    ff(:,i)=f;
    spect(:,i)=ispect;
end
 
% End period of the hold
for i = 1:numberOfEpochs
    % Call to the signal analysis program
    [imdpf, iamp, f, ispect] = analyseSegment(autoMarkers(2)+(i-1)*Fs+1-
Fs*numberOfEpochs, autoMarkers(2)-Fs*numberOfEpochs+i*Fs, rawEMG, Fs);
    mdpf(i+numberOfEpochs)=imdpf;
    RMSamp(i+numberOfEpochs)=iamp;
    ff(:,i+numberOfEpochs)=f;
    spect(:,i+numberOfEpochs)=ispect;
end
 
114
==PAGE:125==
3/5/21 8:01 PM
D:\analyseSegment.m
1 of 1
function [mdpf, RMSamp, f, P1] = analyseSegment(start, stop, EMG_signal, Fs)
% analyseSegment analyses a segment of the full EMG signal, calculates and
% returns the MDPF, RMS amplitude, frequency range and spectrum. The
% segment is defined by the start and stop inputs.
 
% Fetching from total EMG signal the segment that will be analysed
EMG_segment = EMG_signal(start:stop);
 
% Length of the EMG segment being analysed
L = length(EMG_segment);
 
% Calculating the RMS amplitude of the current segment
RMSamp = sqrt(mean(EMG_segment.^2));
 
% Creating a Hanning window for the segment being analysed
h=hanning(L);
% Applying Hanning window to the EMG segment
EMG_seg_h=h.*EMG_segment;
 
% FFT of the EMG segment with Hanning window
Y=fft(EMG_seg_h);
 
% Calculate the two sided spectrum P2
P2=abs(Y/L);
% Calculate the single sided spectrum P1
P1 = 2*P2(1:L/2);
 
% Frequency domain f for the spectrum P1
f = (Fs*(0:(L/2)-1)/L)';
 
% Median power frequency calculated
tmp = cumsum(P1)/sum(P1); % normalized sum of spectral components
[~,idx] = min(abs(tmp-0.5)); % Finds the index at which 50% of the power 
                             % lies below and 50% above
 
mdpf=f(idx); % Finds the frequency corresponding to the index found above
 
 
 
 
 
115
==PAGE:126==
3/5/21 8:02 PM
D:\Trigger.m
1 of 2
function [iBegin, iEnd, trigger_level]=Trigger(var, duration, percent)
% Trigger analyses the incoming signal, 'var', and determines if and when
% the signal rises/falls over a certain threshold, defined by 'percent'.
% The signal is only considered to be triggered high/low if the average of
% the signal stays above/below the threshold level for the duration of
% 'duration'. Trigger returns a list of indexes in the signal for all the
% places where the signal meets the criteria set by 'duration' and
% 'percent' when the signal rises, 'iBegin', and falls 'iEnd' as well as
% the calculated 'trigger_level'.
 
% Initialisation of variables
iBegin = [];   % Start points
iEnd =[];      % End points
FLAG = 0;       % Flag to indicate if there is potentially a signal found
 
% Calculation of the trigger level of the signal
trigger_level=percent*(max(var)-min(var));
 
% Add extra points at the end of the signal having the same value as the
% last data point in the signal to ensure long enough signal to be able to
% detect the falling signal within the length specified by the 'duration'
% variable. Implemented to account for occations where recording was
% stopped very shortly after signal reaches a zero/low state and a
% falling signal would not be correctly detected by the algorithm.
var = [var ; ones(duration,1)*var(end)];
 
% Loop checks every point in the signal to see if it meets the 'signal
% rising' or 'signal falling' criteria.
for i = 1:length(var)-duration
    if var(i,:) >= trigger_level && mean(var(i:i+duration,:)) >= trigger_level && 
FLAG==0;
        % Signal is rising. The start point is stored in 'iBegin' and FLAG
        % is set to 1 to indicate that it has risen.
        iBegin = [iBegin i];
        FLAG = 1;
    end
    if var(i,:) < trigger_level && mean(var(i:i+duration,:)) < trigger_level && 
FLAG==1;
        % Signal is falling. The end point is stored in 'iEnd' and FLAG is
        % set to 0 to indicate that it has fallen.
        iEnd = [iEnd i];
        FLAG = 0;
    end
end
 
% If the signal does not fall when the loop reaches the end of the signal,
% the FLAG is set to 0 and the end point of the signal is stored in the
% 'iEnd' variable.
if FLAG ==1
    iEnd = [iEnd length(var)];
116
==PAGE:127==
3/5/21 8:02 PM
D:\Trigger.m
2 of 2
    FLAG = 0;
end
 
 
117
==PAGE:128==
3/5/21 8:02 PM
D:\plotPreview.m
1 of 2
function plotPreview(rawEMG,Markers,showOriginalMarkers,autoMarkers,trigger_level,Fs,
RMSampALL,RMSwindowLengthSec,numberOfEpochs,markerOffset)
% plotPreview is used to investigate the rawEMG signal and placements of
% the markers comparing the auto-generated markers to the markers set by
% the researcher. The function plots the raw EMG signal, the RMS of the EMG
% signal and both types of markers with indicators showing the time periods
% of the data analysis.
 
% Plot of raw EMG
figure
rawX = linspace(0,length(rawEMG)/Fs,length(rawEMG))';
plot(rawX,abs(rawEMG))
hold on
 
% Calculate the span of the areas being analysed further
markerSpanSec = numberOfEpochs*RMSwindowLengthSec;
 
% Plotting the RMS value of the entire signal
xAxisRMSamp = linspace(RMSwindowLengthSec,length(RMSampALL)*RMSwindowLengthSec,length
(RMSampALL));
plot(xAxisRMSamp,RMSampALL,'r','Linewidth',1.5)
xlabel('Time [s]','FontSize', 14)
ylabel('Amplitude [\muV]','FontSize', 14)
 
% Converting the auto detected marker from data point (index) number to
% location in seconds
autoMarkersSec = autoMarkers/Fs;
 
% Plotting the threshold level
plot([0 length(rawEMG)/Fs],[trigger_level trigger_level],'g')'
 
% Plotting the auto-generated markers
plot(autoMarkersSec(1)-markerOffset,RMSampALL((autoMarkersSec(1)-markerOffset)
/RMSwindowLengthSec),'k*','MarkerSize',10)
plot(autoMarkersSec(2)+markerOffset,RMSampALL((autoMarkersSec(2)+markerOffset)
/RMSwindowLengthSec),'k*','MarkerSize',10,'HandleVisibility','off')
 
% Plotting the areas used for analysis in the beginning and end of the
% signal
plot([autoMarkersSec(1), autoMarkersSec(1), autoMarkersSec(1)+markerSpanSec, 
autoMarkersSec(1)+markerSpanSec], [0,max(abs(rawEMG)),max(abs(rawEMG)),0],'color',
[0.4660 0.6740 0.1880],'LineWidth',1.5)
plot([autoMarkersSec(2), autoMarkersSec(2), autoMarkersSec(2)-markerSpanSec, 
autoMarkersSec(2)-markerSpanSec], [0,max(abs(rawEMG)),max(abs(rawEMG)),0],'color',
[0.8500 0.3250 0.0980],'LineWidth',1.5)
 
% Plotting the markers created by the researcher, if selected
if showOriginalMarkers
    plot([Markers(1),Markers(1)],[0,max(abs(rawEMG))],'k','LineWidth',1.1)
    plot([Markers(2),Markers(2)],[0,max(abs(rawEMG))],'k','LineWidth',
118
==PAGE:129==
3/5/21 8:02 PM
D:\plotPreview.m
2 of 2
1.1,'HandleVisibility','off')
    % Creating legend with extra markers
    lgd = legend('Raw EGR Signal','RMS Amplitude of Raw Signal','Trigger Level','Auto 
Generated Markers','Start Window','End Window','Original 
Markers','Location','NorthWest');
    lgd.FontSize = 12;
else
    % Creating legend without extra markers
    lgd = legend('Raw EGR Signal','RMS Amplitude of Raw Signal','Trigger Level','Auto 
Generated Markers','Start Window','End Window','Location','NorthWest');
    lgd.FontSize = 12;
end
end
 
 
 
119
==PAGE:130==
F
| Additional Results
Table F.1: Summary results of individual PSH scale modalities
N
Mean
SD
Range
Allergies
28
1.9
1.0
0.0 - 3.0
Heat
28
1.7
1.2
0.0 - 3.0
Cold
28
1.6
1.2
0.0 - 3.0
Light
28
2.0
1.0
0.0 - 3.0
Pain
28
2.0
1.0
0.0 - 3.0
Smell
28
1.5
1.3
0.0 - 3.0
Sound
28
1.9
1.2
0.0 - 3.0
Taste
28
0.9
1.2
0.0 - 3.0
Touch
28
1.8
1.2
1.0 - 3.0
120
==PAGE:131==
Table F.2: Correlation coeﬃcients, p-values and conﬁdence intervals of the correlation between the
time to exhaustion and diﬀerent self-reported PSH modalities.
Time to exhaustion
Correlation
coeﬃcient [r]
p-value
95% CI
Lower bound
95% CI
Upper bound
Allergies
-0.1200
0.5546
-0.4782
0.2724
Heat
-0.1871
0.3537
-0.5295
0.2077
Cold
-0.0650
0.7499
-0.4343
0.3230
Light
-0.1033
0.6117
-0.4650
0.2881
Pain
-0.3819
0.0488
-0.6653
-0.0022
Smell
-0.4163
0.0299
-0.6875
-0.0431
Sound
-0.4206
0.0280
-0.6903
-0.0483
Taste
-0.0587
0.7735
-0.4291
0.3287
Touch
-0.2707
0.1739
-0.5900
0.1219
Combined
-0.3837
0.0476
-0.6665
-0.0044
Table F.3: Correlation coeﬃcients, p-values and conﬁdence intervals of the correlation between the
time to exhaustion and pain related measurements.
Time to exhaustion
Correlation
coeﬃcient [r]
p-value
95% CI
Lower bound
95% CI
Upper bound
Shoulder pain
- before
-0.6375
0.0002
-0.8191
-0.3399
General pain
- before
-0.4371
0.0217
-0.7007
-0.0684
Pain diary score
- average
-0.4378
0.0214
-0.7012
-0.0693
PHQ
- pain modality
-0.3819
0.0488
-0.6653
-0.0022
121
==PAGE:132==
Figure F.1: The relation between the PDT and the time to exhaustion
Figure F.2: The relation between the PTT and the time to exhaustion
122
==PAGE:133==
(a) The relationship between the shoulder pain before the muscle exhaustion task and the time to exhaustion
(b) The relationship between the general pain before the muscle exhaustion task and the time to exhaustion
Figure F.3: The relationship between the two diﬀerent pain measurements obtained immediately
before the muscle exhaustion task and the time to exhaustion (1)
123
==PAGE:134==
(a) The relationship between the average pain diary score and the time to exhaustion
(b) The relationship between the pain modality of the PHQ and the time to exhaustion
Figure F.4: The relationship between the two diﬀerent pain measurements obtained immediately
before the muscle exhaustion task and the time to exhaustion (2)
124
==PAGE:135==
Table F.4: Summary results of pain related measurements
N
Mean
SD
Range
Average pain diary score
28
6.2
1.3
4.4 - 9.4
General pain - before
28
5.0
1.9
1.0 - 9.0
General pain - after
28
5.5
2.3
1.0 - 10.0
Shoulder pain - before
28
4.4
2.8
0.0 - 10.0
Shoulder pain - after
28
6.8
2.6
1.0 - 10.0
125
==PAGE:136==
References
[1]
Jacob Ablin, Lily Neumann, and Dan Buskila. “Pathogenesis of ﬁbromyalgia–a
review”. In: Joint Bone Spine 75.3 (2008), pp. 273–279.
[2]
Marina López-Solà et al. “Towards a neurophysiological signature for ﬁbromyal-
gia”. In: Pain 158.1 (2017), pp. 34–47.
[3]
Jules Alexandre Desmeules et al. “Neurophysiologic evidence for a central
sensitization in patients with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism 48.5
(2003), pp. 1420–1429.
[4]
Ann J McDermid, Gary B Rollman, and Glenn A McCain. “Generalized hyper-
vigilance in ﬁbromyalgia: evidence of perceptual ampliﬁcation”. In: PAIN®
66.2-3 (1996), pp. 133–144.
[5]
Elisabeth Bandak et al. “Muscle fatigue in ﬁbromyalgia is in the brain, not in
the muscles: a case–control study of perceived versus objective muscle fatigue”.
In: Annals of the rheumatic diseases 72.6 (2013), pp. 963–966.
[6]
Gareth T Jones et al. “The prevalence of ﬁbromyalgia in the general population:
a comparison of the American College of Rheumatology 1990, 2010, and
modiﬁed 2010 classiﬁcation criteria”. In: Arthritis & rheumatology 67.2 (2015),
pp. 568–575.
[7]
Jaime C Branco et al. “Prevalence of ﬁbromyalgia: a survey in ﬁve European
countries”. In: Seminars in arthritis and rheumatism. Vol. 39. 6. Elsevier.
2010, pp. 448–453.
[8]
Firdous Jahan et al. “Fibromyalgia syndrome: an overview of pathophysiology,
diagnosis and management”. In: Oman medical journal 27.3 (2012), p. 192.
[9]
Frederick Wolfe. “Fibromyalgia wars”. In: The Journal of Rheumatology 36.4
(2009), pp. 671–678.
[10]
Enrico Bellato et al. “Fibromyalgia syndrome: etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis,
and treatment”. In: Pain research and treatment 2012 (2012).
[11]
Laurence A Bradley. “Pathophysiology of ﬁbromyalgia”. In: The American
journal of medicine 122.12 (2009), S22–S30.
[12]
Carmen M Galvez-Sánchez and Gustavo A Reyes del Paso. “Diagnostic Criteria
for Fibromyalgia: Critical Review and Future Perspectives”. In: Journal of
Clinical Medicine 9.4 (2020), p. 1219.
[13]
Daniel J Clauw. “Fibromyalgia: an overview”. In: The American journal of
medicine 122.12 (2009), S3–S13.
126
==PAGE:137==
REFERENCES
[14]
Frederick Wolfe et al. “The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria
for the classiﬁcation of ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism: Oﬃcial
Journal of the American College of Rheumatology 33.2 (1990), pp. 160–172.
[15]
Mira Meeus and Jo Nijs. “Central sensitization: a biopsychosocial explanation
for chronic widespread pain in patients with ﬁbromyalgia and chronic fatigue
syndrome”. In: Clinical rheumatology 26.4 (2007), pp. 465–473.
[16]
Anders Jespersen et al. “Computerized cuﬀpressure algometry: A new method
to assess deep-tissue hypersensitivity in ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Pain 131.1-2 (2007),
pp. 57–62.
[17]
Richard H Gracely et al. “Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence of
augmented pain processing in ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism 46.5
(2002), pp. 1333–1343.
[18]
Julia L Wilbarger and Dane B Cook. “Multisensory hypersensitivity in women
with ﬁbromyalgia: implications for well being and intervention”. In: Archives
of physical medicine and rehabilitation 92.4 (2011), pp. 653–656.
[19]
Michael E Geisser et al. “A psychophysical study of auditory and pressure
sensitivity in patients with ﬁbromyalgia and healthy controls”. In: The Journal
of Pain 9.5 (2008), pp. 417–422.
[20]
Marina López-Solà et al. “Altered functional magnetic resonance imaging
responses to nonpainful sensory stimulation in ﬁbromyalgia patients”. In:
Arthritis & Rheumatology 66.11 (2014), pp. 3200–3209.
[21]
Valéry Legrain et al. “The pain matrix reloaded: a salience detection system
for the body”. In: Progress in neurobiology 93.1 (2011), pp. 111–124.
[22]
David Borsook et al. “Pain and analgesia: the value of salience circuits”. In:
Progress in neurobiology 104 (2013), pp. 93–105.
[23]
Chelsea M Kaplan et al. “Functional and neurochemical disruptions of brain
hub topology in chronic pain”. In: Pain 160.4 (2019), p. 973.
[24]
Jeanine A Verbunt, Dia HFM Pernot, and Rob JEM Smeets. “Disability and
quality of life in patients with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Health and Quality of Life
Outcomes 6.1 (2008), p. 8.
[25]
Carol S Burckhardt, SR Clark, and RM Bennett. “Fibromyalgia and quality
of life: a comparative analysis.” In: The Journal of rheumatology 20.3 (1993),
pp. 475–479.
[26]
Kirstine Amris et al. “Observation-based assessment of functional ability in
patients with chronic widespread pain: a cross-sectional study”. In: Pain 152.11
(2011), pp. 2470–2476.
127
==PAGE:138==
REFERENCES
[27]
Lesley M Arnold et al. “Patient perspectives on the impact of ﬁbromyalgia”.
In: Patient education and counseling 73.1 (2008), pp. 114–120.
[28]
Angela J Busch et al. “Exercise therapy for ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Current pain
and headache reports 15.5 (2011), pp. 358–367.
[29]
Gary J Macfarlane et al. “EULAR revised recommendations for the man-
agement of ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Annals of the rheumatic diseases 76.2 (2017),
pp. 318–328.
[30]
Sharon R Clark et al. “Fitness characteristics and perceived exertion in women
with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Journal of Musculoskeletal Pain 1.3-4 (1993), pp. 191–
197.
[31]
Inmaculada C Álvarez-Gallardo et al. “Physical ﬁtness reference standards in
ﬁbromyalgia: The al-Ándalus project”. In: Scandinavian journal of medicine
& science in sports 27.11 (2017), pp. 1477–1488.
[32]
Nancy J Olsen and Jane H Park. “Skeletal muscle abnormalities in patients
with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: American Journal of the Medical Sciences 315.6 (1998),
pp. 351–358.
[33]
Pablo Tomas-Carus et al. “Eight months of physical training in warm water
improves physical and mental health in women with ﬁbromyalgia: a randomized
controlled trial”. In: Journal of rehabilitation medicine 40.4 (2008), pp. 248–
252.
[34]
Angela J Busch, Tom J Overend, and Candice L Schachter. “Fibromyalgia
treatment: the role of exercise and physical activity”. In: Int J Clin Rheumtol
4.3 (2009), pp. 343–80.
[35]
Steven Chinn, William Caldwell, and Karina Gritsenko. “Fibromyalgia patho-
genesis and treatment options update”. In: Current Pain and Headache Reports
20.4 (2016), pp. 25–35.
[36]
Julia Bidonde et al. “Aquatic exercise training for ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 10 (2014).
[37]
Chenchen Wang et al. “A randomized trial of tai chi for ﬁbromyalgia”. In:
New England Journal of Medicine 363.8 (2010), pp. 743–754.
[38]
James W Carson et al. “A pilot randomized controlled trial of the Yoga of
Awareness program in the management of ﬁbromyalgia”. In: PAIN® 151.2
(2010), pp. 530–539.
[39]
Kaisa Mannerkorpi and Maura Daly Iversen. “Physical exercise in ﬁbromyalgia
and related syndromes”. In: Best Practice & Research Clinical Rheumatology
17.4 (2003), pp. 629–647.
128
==PAGE:139==
REFERENCES
[40]
Roland Staud. “Is it all central sensitization? Role of peripheral tissue noci-
ception in chronic musculoskeletal pain”. In: Current rheumatology reports
12.6 (2010), pp. 448–454.
[41]
William D McArdle, Frank I Katch, and Victor L Katch. Essentials of exercise
physiology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006.
[42]
Roger M Enoka and Douglas G Stuart. “Neurobiology of muscle fatigue”. In:
Journal of applied physiology 72.5 (1992), pp. 1631–1648.
[43]
Roberto Merletti and Philip J Parker. Electromyography: physiology, engi-
neering, and non-invasive applications. Vol. 11. John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[44]
Roberto Merletti and Dario Farina. “Myoelectric manifestations of muscle
fatigue”. In: Wiley Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering (2006).
[45]
Carlo J De Luca. “Myoelectrical manifestations of localized muscular fatigue in
humans.” In: Critical reviews in biomedical engineering 11.4 (1984), pp. 251–
279.
[46]
Roberto Merletti, Marco Knaﬂitz, and Carlo J De Luca. “Myoelectric man-
ifestations of fatigue in voluntary and electrically elicited contractions”. In:
Journal of applied physiology 69.5 (1990), pp. 1810–1820.
[47]
Foster B Stulen and Carlo J De Luca. “Frequency parameters of the myoelectric
signal as a measure of muscle conduction velocity”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering 7 (1981), pp. 515–523.
[48]
Janet L Taylor and Simon C Gandevia. “A comparison of central aspects of
fatigue in submaximal and maximal voluntary contractions”. In: Journal of
applied physiology 104.2 (2008), pp. 542–550.
[49]
Simon C Gandevia. “Spinal and supraspinal factors in human muscle fatigue”.
In: Physiological reviews (2001).
[50]
Didier Maquet et al. “Muscle performance in patients with ﬁbromyalgia”. In:
Joint Bone Spine 69.3 (2002), pp. 293–299.
[51]
Harvey W Wallmann. “Muscle Fatigue”. In: Sports-Speciﬁc Rehabilitation.
Elsevier, 2007, pp. 87–95.
[52]
Jane A Kent-Braun. “Central and peripheral contributions to muscle fatigue
in humans during sustained maximal eﬀort”. In: European journal of applied
physiology and occupational physiology 80.1 (1999), pp. 57–63.
[53]
B Bigland-Ritchie, F Furbush, and JJ Woods. “Fatigue of intermittent sub-
maximal voluntary contractions: central and peripheral factors”. In: Journal
of Applied Physiology 61.2 (1986), pp. 421–429.
129
==PAGE:140==
REFERENCES
[54]
Tommy Öberg et al. “Electromyographic changes in work-related myalgia
of the trapezius muscle”. In: European journal of applied physiology and
occupational physiology 65.3 (1992), pp. 251–257.
[55]
Laura AC Kallenberg et al. “Myoelectric manifestations of fatigue at low
contraction levels in subjects with and without chronic pain”. In: Journal of
Electromyography and Kinesiology 17.3 (2007), pp. 264–274.
[56]
Robert M Bennett et al. “The revised ﬁbromyalgia impact questionnaire
(FIQR): validation and psychometric properties”. In: Arthritis research &
therapy 11.4 (2009), R120.
[57]
Jack Kvistgaard Olsen et al. “Reliability of pain measurements using comput-
erized cuﬀalgometry: a DoloCuﬀReliability and Agreement Study”. In: Pain
Practice 17.6 (2017), pp. 708–717.
[58]
Eric A Dixon et al. “Development of the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale (SHS):
a self-report tool for assessing sensitivity to sensory stimuli”. In: Journal of
behavioral medicine 39.3 (2016), pp. 537–550.
[59]
Diane Wild et al. “Principles of good practice for the translation and cultural
adaptation process for patient-reported outcomes (PRO) measures: report of
the ISPOR task force for translation and cultural adaptation”. In: Value in
health 8.2 (2005), pp. 94–104.
[60]
Recommendations for sensor locations in shoulder or neck muscles. url:
http://www.seniam.org/deltoideusmedius.html (visited on 08/09/2020).
[61]
Angkoon Phinyomark et al. “The usefulness of mean and median frequencies
in electromyography analysis”. In: Computational intelligence in electromyo-
graphy analysis-A perspective on current applications and future challenges
(2012), pp. 195–220.
[62]
B Maton. “Human motor unit activity during the onset of muscle fatigue in
submaximal isometric isotonic contraction.” In: European journal of applied
physiology and occupational physiology 46.3 (1981), pp. 271–281.
[63]
Liv Giske et al. “Attenuated adrenergic responses to exercise in women with
ﬁbromyalgia–a controlled study”. In: European journal of pain 12.3 (2008),
pp. 351–360.
[64]
Roberto Merletti et al. “Muscle force and myoelectric manifestations of muscle
fatigue in voluntary and electrically elicited contractions”. In: Surface Elec-
tromyography: Physiology, Engineering, and Applications (2016), pp. 273–
310.
[65]
Parveen Bawa et al. “Rotation of motoneurons during prolonged isometric
contractions in humans”. In: Journal of neurophysiology 96.3 (2006), pp. 1135–
1140.
130
==PAGE:141==
REFERENCES
[66]
David A Winter. Biomechanics and motor control of human movement. John
Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[67]
Mario Cifrek et al. “Surface EMG based muscle fatigue evaluation in biome-
chanics”. In: Clinical biomechanics 24.4 (2009), pp. 327–340.
[68]
Barbro Larsson et al. “Mechanical performance and electromyography during
repeated maximal isokinetic shoulder forward ﬂexions in female cleaners with
and without myalgia of the trapezius muscle and in healthy controls”. In:
European journal of applied physiology 83.4 (2000), pp. 257–267.
[69]
Gert-Åke Hansson et al. “Electromyographic fatigue in neck/shoulder muscles
and endurance in women with repetitive work”. In: Ergonomics 35.11 (1992),
pp. 1341–1352.
[70]
Didier Maquet et al. “Fibromyalgia and related conditions: electromyogram
proﬁle during isometric muscle contraction”. In: Joint Bone Spine 77.3 (2010),
pp. 264–267.
[71]
Alberto Rainoldi et al. “Applications in rehabilitation medicine and related
ﬁelds”. In: Electromyography Physiology, engineering and non invasive appli-
cations. Hoboken, New Jersey, USA: J. Wiley/IEEE Press Publication (2004),
pp. 403–433.
[72]
Chandan Kalra, Dinesh Kant Kumar, and Sridhar Arjunan. “Age and gender
related diﬀerences in surface electromyograms for various force levels of
contraction”. In: J. Med. Biol. Eng 32 (2012), pp. 405–410.
[73]
Madeleine M Lowery et al. “A multiple-layer ﬁnite-element model of the
surface EMG signal”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 49.5
(2002), pp. 446–454.
[74]
Janette L Smith et al. “Sustained contraction at very low forces produces
prominent supraspinal fatigue in human elbow ﬂexor muscles”. In: Journal of
Applied Physiology 103.2 (2007), pp. 560–568.
[75]
Laura AC Kallenberg and Hermie J Hermens. “Behaviour of a surface EMG
based measure for motor control: Motor unit action potential rate in relation
to force and muscle fatigue”. In: Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology
18.5 (2008), pp. 780–788.
[76]
Arthur J Barsky and Jonathan F Borus. “Functional Somatic Syndromes”. In:
Ann Intern Med 130 (1999), pp. 910–921.
[77]
Leslie A Aaron, Mary M Burke, and Dedra Buchwald. “Overlapping con-
ditions among patients with chronic fatigue syndrome, ﬁbromyalgia, and
temporomandibular disorder”. In: Archives of internal medicine 160.2 (2000),
pp. 221–227.
131
==PAGE:142==
REFERENCES
[78]
Daniel J Clauw. “Fibromyalgia and related conditions”. In: Mayo Clinic
Proceedings. Vol. 90. 5. Elsevier. 2015, pp. 680–692.
[79]
Frederick Wolfe et al. “The prevalence and characteristics of ﬁbromyalgia in
the general population”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism: Oﬃcial Journal of the
American College of Rheumatology 38.1 (1995), pp. 19–28.
[80]
Ann Vincent et al. “Prevalence of ﬁbromyalgia: a population-based study in
Olmsted County, Minnesota, utilizing the Rochester Epidemiology Project”.
In: Arthritis care & research 65.5 (2013), pp. 786–792.
[81]
Luiz Paulo Queiroz. “Worldwide epidemiology of ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Current
pain and headache reports 17.8 (2013), pp. 1–6.
[82]
Lesley M Arnold et al. “Family study of ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Arthritis & Rheuma-
tism 50.3 (2004), pp. 944–952.
[83]
Kenji Kato et al. “Chronic widespread pain and its comorbidities: a population-
based study”. In: Archives of Internal Medicine 166.15 (2006), pp. 1649–1654.
[84]
Robert M Bennett et al. “An internet survey of 2,596 people with ﬁbromyalgia”.
In: BMC musculoskeletal disorders 8.1 (2007), pp. 1–11.
[85]
Manuel Martinez-Lavin. “Biology and therapy of ﬁbromyalgia. Stress, the
stress response system, and ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Arthritis research & therapy 9.4
(2007), pp. 1–7.
[86]
Gail K Adler, Valdis F Manfredsdottir, and Katharine W Creskoﬀ. “Neuroen-
docrine abnormalities in ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Current pain and headache reports
6.4 (2002), pp. 289–298.
[87]
Alice Theadom, Mark Cropley, and Kirsty-Louise Humphrey. “Exploring the
role of sleep and coping in quality of life in ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Journal of
psychosomatic research 62.2 (2007), pp. 145–151.
[88]
Dana N Rutledge, Kim Jones, and C Jessie Jones. “Predicting high physical
function in people with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Journal of Nursing Scholarship 39.4
(2007), pp. 319–324.
[89]
Jose Kunnel Paul et al. “Characterization of ﬁbromyalgia using sleep EEG
signals with nonlinear dynamical features”. In: Computers in biology and
medicine 111 (2019), p. 103331.
[90]
Mehmed Yücel Aˇgargün et al. “Sleep quality and pain threshold in patients
with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Comprehensive psychiatry 40.3 (1999), pp. 226–228.
[91]
Silvia M Bigatti et al. “Sleep disturbances in ﬁbromyalgia syndrome: relation-
ship to pain and depression”. In: Arthritis Care & Research: Oﬃcial Journal
of the American College of Rheumatology 59.7 (2008), pp. 961–967.
132
==PAGE:143==
REFERENCES
[92]
Kiran Chekka and Honorio T Benzon. “Taxonomy: deﬁnition of pain terms
and chronic pain syndromes”. In: Essentials of Pain Medicine. Elsevier, 2018,
pp. 21–24.
[93]
Alban Latremoliere and Cliﬀord J Woolf. “Central sensitization: a generator
of pain hypersensitivity by central neural plasticity”. In: The Journal of Pain
10.9 (2009), pp. 895–926.
[94]
I Jon Russell and Alice A Larson. “Neurophysiopathogenesis of ﬁbromyalgia
syndrome: a uniﬁed hypothesis”. In: Rheumatic Disease Clinics 35.2 (2009),
pp. 421–435.
[95]
Nancy Julien et al. “Widespread pain in ﬁbromyalgia is related to a deﬁcit of
endogenous pain inhibition”. In: Pain 114.1-2 (2005), pp. 295–302.
[96]
Paola Sarchielli et al. “Sensitization, glutamate, and the link between migraine
and ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Current pain and headache reports 11.5 (2007), pp. 343–
351.
[97]
Richard E Harris et al. “Elevated insular glutamate in ﬁbromyalgia is associated
with experimental pain”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism: Oﬃcial Journal of the
American College of Rheumatology 60.10 (2009), pp. 3146–3152.
[98]
I Jon Russell et al. “Elevated cerebrospinal ﬂuid levels of substance P in
patients with the ﬁbromyalgia syndrome”. In: Arthritis & Rheumatism: Oﬃcial
Journal of the American College of Rheumatology 37.11 (1994), pp. 1593–1601.
[99]
I Jon Russell et al. “Cerebrospinal ﬂuid biogenic amine metabolites in ﬁ-
bromyalgia/ﬁbrositis syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis.” In: Arthritis and
rheumatism 35.5 (1992), pp. 550–556.
[100]
I Jon Russell. “Neurochemical pathogenesis of ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Zeitschrift
für Rheumatologie 57.2 (1998), pp. 63–66.
[101]
Fernando Cervero and Jennifer MA Laird. “Mechanisms of touch-evoked pain
(allodynia): a new model”. In: Pain 68.1 (1996), pp. 13–23.
[102]
Monica Perkins, Marien de Bruyne, and Melita J Giummarra. “A pain in the
bud? Implications of cross-modal sensitivity for pain experience”. In: Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics 78.8 (2016), pp. 2348–2356.
[103]
Catherine S Hubbard et al. “Aberrant Salience? Brain Hyperactivation in Re-
sponse to Pain Onset and Oﬀset in Fibromyalgia”. In: Arthritis & rheumatology
72.7 (2020), pp. 1203–1213.
[104]
Paul J Millea and Richard L Holloway. “Treating ﬁbromyalgia”. In: American
family physician 62.7 (2000), pp. 1575–1582.
133
==PAGE:144==
REFERENCES
[105]
Frederick Wolfe et al. “The American College of Rheumatology preliminary
diagnostic criteria for ﬁbromyalgia and measurement of symptom severity”.
In: Arthritis care & research 62.5 (2010), pp. 600–610.
[106]
Frederick Wolfe et al. “Fibromyalgia criteria and severity scales for clinical and
epidemiological studies: a modiﬁcation of the ACR Preliminary Diagnostic
Criteria for Fibromyalgia”. In: The Journal of rheumatology 38.6 (2011),
pp. 1113–1122.
[107]
Frederick Wolfe et al. “2016 Revisions to the 2010/2011 ﬁbromyalgia diagnostic
criteria”. In: Seminars in arthritis and rheumatism. Vol. 46. 3. Elsevier. 2016,
pp. 319–329.
[108]
Winfried Häuser, Kati Thieme, and Dennis C Turk. “Guidelines on the man-
agement of ﬁbromyalgia syndrome–a systematic review”. In: European journal
of pain 14.1 (2010), pp. 5–10.
[109]
Piercarlo Sarzi-Puttini et al. “Treatment strategy in ﬁbromyalgia syndrome:
where are we now?” In: Seminars in arthritis and rheumatism. Vol. 37. 6.
Elsevier. 2008, pp. 353–365.
[110]
Don L Goldenberg, Carol Burckhardt, and Leslie Croﬀord. “Management of
ﬁbromyalgia syndrome”. In: Jama 292.19 (2004), pp. 2388–2395.
[111]
Andrea T Borchers and M Eric Gershwin. “Fibromyalgia: a critical and
comprehensive review”. In: Clinical reviews in allergy & immunology 49.2
(2015), pp. 100–151.
[112]
R Andrew Moore et al. “Fibromyalgia: moderate and substantial pain intensity
reduction predicts improvement in other outcomes and substantial quality of
life gain”. In: PAIN 149.2 (2010), pp. 360–364.
[113]
Marianne Uggen Rasmussen. “Clinical Trial Protocol”. In: (2020). url: https:
//www.clinicaltrials.gov/ProvidedDocs/79/NCT04729179/Prot_SAP_000.
pdf.
[114]
Winfried Häuser et al. “Fibromyalgia”. In: Nature reviews Disease primers 1.1
(2015), pp. 1–16.
[115]
Carroline P Lobo et al. “Impact of invalidation and trust in physicians on
health outcomes in ﬁbromyalgia patients”. In: Prim Care Companion CNS
Disord 16.5 (2014), pp. 10–4088.
[116]
Angela Pfeiﬀer et al. “Eﬀects of a 1.5-day multidisciplinary outpatient treat-
ment program for ﬁbromyalgia: a pilot study”. In: American journal of physical
medicine & rehabilitation 82.3 (2003), pp. 186–191.
134
==PAGE:145==
REFERENCES
[117]
CS Burckhardt et al. “A randomized, controlled clinical trial of education
and physical training for women with ﬁbromyalgia.” In: The Journal of
Rheumatology 21.4 (1994), pp. 714–720.
[118]
“Hjælper tidlig rådgivning, når du har ﬁbromyalgi?” In: (2019). url: https:
/ / www . gigtforeningen . dk / nyheder / 2019 / 2 - halvaar / hjaelper - tidlig -
raadgivning-naar-du-har-ﬁbromyalgi/ (visited on 02/02/2021).
[119]
Kathrin Bernardy et al. “Cognitive behavioural therapies for ﬁbromyalgia”.
In: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 9 (2013).
[120]
Nathaly Gaudreault and Pierre Boulay. “Cardiorespiratory ﬁtness among
adults with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Breathe 14.2 (2018), e25–e33.
[121]
Fernando Estévez-López et al. “Independent and combined association of
overall physical ﬁtness and subjective well-being with ﬁbromyalgia severity:
the al-Ándalus project”. In: Quality of Life Research 24.8 (2015), pp. 1865–
1873.
[122]
Kathleen A Sluka and Daniel J Clauw. “Neurobiology of ﬁbromyalgia and
chronic widespread pain”. In: Neuroscience 338 (2016), pp. 114–129.
[123]
Akiko Okifuji et al. “Management of ﬁbromyalgia syndrome in 2016”. In: Pain
management 6.4 (2016), pp. 383–400.
[124]
Roger M Enoka and Jacques Duchateau. “Muscle fatigue: what, why and how
it inﬂuences muscle function”. In: The Journal of physiology 586.1 (2008),
pp. 11–23.
[125]
Janet L Taylor et al. “Neural Contributions to Muscle Fatigue: From the
Brain to the Muscle and Back Again”. In: Medicine and science in sports and
exercise 48.11 (2016), pp. 2294–2306.
[126]
CJ Heckman and Roger M Enoka. “Physiology of the motor neuron and the
motor unit”. In: Handbook of Clinical Neurophysiology. Vol. 4. Elsevier, 2004,
pp. 119–147.
[127]
Sandee Jungblut. “The correct interpretation of the size principle and its
practical application to resistance training”. In: Med Sport 13.4 (2009), pp. 203–
209.
[128]
David G Allen, Graham D Lamb, and H Westerblad. “Skeletal Muscle Fatigue:
Cellular Mechanisms”. In: Physiological Reviews 88.1 (2008), pp. 287–332.
[129]
S Boyas and A Guével. “Neuromuscular fatigue in healthy muscle: underlying
factors and adaptation mechanisms”. In: Annals of physical and rehabilitation
medicine 54.2 (2011), pp. 88–108.
[130]
Romain Meeusen et al. “Central fatigue”. In: Sports Medicine 36.10 (2006),
pp. 881–909.
135
==PAGE:146==
REFERENCES
[131]
Bart Roelands and Romain Meeusen. “Alterations in central fatigue by phar-
macological manipulations of neurotransmitters in normal and high ambient
temperature”. In: Sports Medicine 40.3 (2010), pp. 229–246.
[132]
Kent Sahlin, Michail Tonkonogi, and Karin Söderlund. “Energy supply and
muscle fatigue in humans”. In: Acta Physiologica Scandinavica 162.3 (1998),
pp. 261–266.
[133]
Håkan Westerblad, Joseph D Bruton, and Abram Katz. “Skeletal muscle:
energy metabolism, ﬁber types, fatigue and adaptability”. In: Experimental
cell research 316.18 (2010), pp. 3093–3099.
[134]
Nina K Vøllestad. “Measurement of human muscle fatigue”. In: Journal of
neuroscience methods 74.2 (1997), pp. 219–227.
[135]
D Farina, R Merletti, and DF Stegeman. “Biophysics of the generation of
EMG signals”. In: Electromyography: physiology, engineering, and noninvasive
applications (2004), pp. 81–105.
[136]
Carlo J De Luca. “The use of surface electromyography in biomechanics”. In:
Journal of applied biomechanics 13.2 (1997), pp. 135–163.
[137]
Mamun Bin Ibne Reaz, M Sazzad Hussain, and Faisal Mohd-Yasin. “Techniques
of EMG signal analysis: detection, processing, classiﬁcation and applications”.
In: Biological procedures online 8.1 (2006), pp. 11–35.
[138]
Janet L Taylor, Gabrielle Todd, and Simon C Gandevia. “Evidence for a
supraspinal contribution to human muscle fatigue”. In: Clinical and experi-
mental pharmacology and physiology 33.4 (2006), pp. 400–405.
[139]
Margareta H Lindh et al. “Studies on maximal voluntary muscle contraction in
patients with ﬁbromyalgia”. In: Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation
75.11 (1994), pp. 1217–1222.
[140]
Tommy Öberg, Leif Sandsjö, and Roland Kadefors. “Subjective and objective
evaluation of shoulder muscle fatigue”. In: Ergonomics 37.8 (1994), pp. 1323–
1333.
[141]
A Hummel et al. “Relationship between perceived exertion and mean power
frequency of the EMG signal from the upper trapezius muscle during isometric
shoulder elevation”. In: European journal of applied physiology 95.4 (2005),
pp. 321–326.
136
