==PAGE:1==
15th February 2021
Continuous Catalytic Hydrogenation of
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients in a
Trickle Bed Reactor
Cirkeline Laura Strange Psilander, s140289
Emma Kathrine Jørgensen, s123393
Supervisors
Martin Høj
Akhilesh Nair
Anker Degn Jensen
External: Tommy Skovby
.
==PAGE:2==
asd
empty page
ii
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This masters thesis is completd in collaboration between DTU Chemical Engineering and Lundbeck
Lumsås. The research is a part of an ongoing Ph.D. project titled "Hydrogenation in ﬂow" by Akhilesh
Balachandran Nair, with whom we have been working closely throughout the project.
The aim of "Hydrogenation in ﬂow" is to design and demonstrate a multi-functional ﬂow reactor system
that can handle a wide range of substrates, catalysts and reaction conditions applicable in the production
at Lundbeck in Lumsås. The scope of that project is to build a pilot scale three-phase reactor for
hydrogenation purposes in site in Lumsås. Preliminary, the possibilities of three-phase hydrogenations
of active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) in existing three-phase reactors will be studied. The results
from this study will aﬀect the design of a specialised multi-functional reactor for the API production at
Lundbeck. The two reactors chosen for that project are the trickle bed reactor (TBR) and slurry reactor.
The focus of this masters thesis is to investigate the possibilities of hydrogenations in a TBR.
The TBR used during this project is the Pyrolysis Oil Converter (POC), which was originally designed for
two syntheses: the conversion of oxygenated compounds into either hydrocarbons through hydrodeoxy-
genation and the conversion of oxygenated compounds into synthesis gas through steam reforming. The
POC was constructed by the workshop at DTU Chemical Engineering as a part of the Ph.D. projects
of Peter Mølgaard Mortensen and Rasmus Trane-Restrup titled "Catalytic Upgrading of Bio-oil" and
"Steam Reforming of Bio-oil into Hydrogen Rich Gas", respectively. However, the POC is not limited to
these two syntheses and is considered applicable for the experimental part of this project.
We would like to give thanks to thank Anders Kjersgaard for the technical support provided for a
wide variety challenges with the POC and to Malene Hessellund Dinesen for the support she provided
in the lab. Moreover, we want to thank Narayan Rajagopalan from CoaST for providing us with SEM
images and Asger Malte Laulund-Sommer from DTU Fotonik for providing us with TEM images, which
both have been invaluable.
A special thanks goes to Akhilesh Balachandran Nair, Martin Høj, Anker Degn Jensen and Tommy
Skovby for great general guidance and support.
Emma K. Jørgensen
Cirkeline L. S. Psilander
iii
==PAGE:4==
empty page
iv
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Several pharmaceutical companies are in these years modernising their way of producing pharmaceuticals.
A great part of this modernisation is the change of the conventional batch production to a continuous
production. This development is encouraged by the FDA and is meant to lower the risk of drug shortage
and to lower the production cost. The Danish pharmaceutical company, Lundbeck, is a part of this
development at strive to obtain successful continuous productions of their APIs.
This project investigates the possibility of continuously hydrogenating an API in a trickle bed reactor
(TBR) with a catalyst. The project is given by Lundbeck and their aim is to gain more knowledge
about the process and ultimately deciding whether a TBR would be the right ﬁt for their future production.
An experimental study was conducted with a precursor to Sertindole, a Lundbeck API, in a TBR reactor
at various conditions. It was found possible to reach conversions close to 100% for precursor solution
concentrations of 0.03 M at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min in a reactor with a diameter of 8 mm. These
results were reached at pressures down to 30 bar at a hydrogen ﬂow of 400 NmL/min and temperatures
down to 70 ◦C. Both Pt/C and Pt/Al2O3 catalysts were used and conversions close to 100% was achieved
for both. However, the Pt/C catalyst was found to be most suitable due to a less rapid deactivation than
for the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst.
It was further concluded that a single TBR will not be the ideal ﬁt for continuous catalytic hydrogenation
of APIs when the catalyst is deactivating fast. It is therefore recommended to investigate the possibilities
of continuous catalytic hydrogenation of Sertindole or similar in a slurry reactor before any conclusions
regarding the ﬁnal reactor design is made.
v
==PAGE:6==
empty page
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Nomenclature
ix
2
Introduction
1
2.1
Hydrogenation of pharmaceuticals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.2
Continuous manufacturing of pharmaceuticals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
What to consider when choosing a reactor for continuous hydrogenation of pharmaceuticals
3
3
Literature review and theory
4
3.1
The current batch process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Current continuous reactors on the market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Continuous multi-phase reactors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.1
Continuous slurry reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.2
Catalytic static mixer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Three-phase heterogeneous catalytic hydrogenation in a trickle bed reactor
. . . . . . . .
11
3.4.1
Eﬀects of pressure on the mass transfer coeﬃcient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4.2
Eﬀects of surface tension on gas-liquid mass transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4.3
Eﬀects of viscosity on mass transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4.4
Determination of mass transfer parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.4.1
Gas-liquid interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.4.2
Liquid-solid interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.5
Results for API conversion and selectivity in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.6
Preliminary conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Experimental study of the hydrogenation reaction
19
4.1
Experimental setup and methods of analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
The up-stream process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
The Reactor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.3
The down-stream process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Experimental method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.1
Precursor solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.2
Catalytic beds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Catalyst synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.4
Running the POC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.5
Operating conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Analysis methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Initial experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Experimental overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Experimental results
42
5.1
Exp 1 and 8: Pt/Al2O3 deactivation study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Exp 2: Initial Pt/C deactivation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Exp 3: Flow rate study with Pt/C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Exp 4: Steady state and pressure study with Pt/C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5
Exp 6: Deactivation at lower temperatures with Pt/C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
Exp 7 and 9: Flow, pressure and temperature experiment with Pt/C . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.7
Exp 12: Concentration study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.8
Exp 5, 10 and 11: Deactivation and reactivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
vii
==PAGE:8==
5.9
Determining the reaction order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.10 Determining the rate of deactivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.11 Characterization of the Pt catalysts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Transport modelling of a Trickle Bed Reactor
72
7
Conclusion
76
8
Future work
77
References
78
A Appendix - Hydrogen solubility in acetic acid
82
B Appendix - Initial experiments
83
C Appendix - Troubleshooting
84
D MATLAB scripts
87
viii
==PAGE:9==
1
Nomenclature
Table 1: Nomenclature list sorted in chronological order.
Abbreviation
Description
Unit
FDA
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
-
API
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
-
TBR
Trickle Bed Reactor
-
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
-
Lu23-148
Sertindole precursor
-
PAT
Process Anaytical Technology
-
FBR
Fixed Bed Reactor
-
CSTR
Continuous Stirred-Tank Reactor
-
CSM
Catalytic static mixers
-
kL
Liquid mass transfer coeﬃcient
m/s
a
Interfacial area per volume of bed
m2/m3
DEA
Diethanolamine
-
kg
Gas mass transfer coeﬃcient
m/s
rA
Rate of change of hydrogen concentration
kmole
m3s
CA
Bulk gas phase concentration of hydrogen
kmole/m3
CAi
Hydrogen concentration in the gas of the gas/liquid interface
kmole/m3
ϵb
Bed void fraction
-
ρp
Density of the catalyst pellet
kg/m3
H
Hydrogen solubility in acetic acid
-
CAi,l
Hydrogen concentration in the liquid of the gas/liquid interface
kmole/m3
CAb
Hydrogen concentration in the bulk liquid
kmole/m3
kc
Catalyst surface mass transfer coeﬃcient
m/s
CAs
Hydrogen concentration on the catalyst surface
kmole/m3
η
Eﬀectiveness factor
-
k
Reaction rate constant
s−1
CBs
Precursor concentration on the catalyst surface
kmole/m3
rB
Rate of change of precursor concentration
kmole
m3s
CB
Precursor concentration in the bulk liquid
kmole/m3
P
Pressure
bar
T
Temperature
◦C
DIM-NA
Refametinib Iodo-nitroaniline Key Intermediate
-
POC
Pyrolysis Oil Converter
-
GC
Gas Chromatography
-
Milli-Q water
Highly puriﬁed water
-
HPLC
High Performance Liquid Chromatography
-
TEM
Transmission Electron Microscope
-
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope
-
t0
Start time
s or min
vm
Volume of adsorbed CO gas
cm3
NA
Avogado’s number
6.022E+23 mole−1
A
Speciﬁc Pt surface area
m2/g Pt
n
Chemisorption stoichiometry/reaction order
-/-
m
Mass of sample
g
ix
==PAGE:10==
am
Surface area occupied by a Pt atom
wt
Pt loading
%
D
dispersion
%
M
Atomic mass of Pt
g/mole
SATP
Standard Ambient Temperature and Pressure
25 ◦C, 100.000 kPa
EDS
Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy
-
X
Conversion
%
S
Selectivity
%
Y
Yield
%
kd
Deactivation rate constant
s−1
a(t)
Catalytic Activity
mole/s
t
Time
s
W
Catalytic Mass
kg
v0
Liquid ﬂow rate
m3/s
Eg
Energy dissipation
bar/s
Gl
Superﬁcial Mass Velocity
kg/(m2s)
µL
Viscosity of acetic acid
kg/(m s)
rhoL
Density of acetic acid
kg/m3
DAB
Hydrogen diﬀusion constant
m2/s
Error
Relative error of measured and predicted values
%
x
==PAGE:11==
2
Introduction
In order to prevent shortage of pharmaceuticals and to keep the prices as low as possible for the sake
of general health there is a need for modernising the way pharmaceuticals are manufactured. This is
commonly achieved by multiple companies by changing their productions from the conventional batch
processes to continuous ones.
H. Lundbeck A/S (Lundbeck) joined this development in 2004 when the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) began the encouragement of the pharmaceutical industry to investigate alternative production
procedures, especially continuous production. [1, 2] Lundbeck is a Danish pharmaceutical company
specialized in treatments for the central nervous system and produce active pharmaceutical ingredients
(APIs) for several psychological and neurological diseases.
The purpose of this project is to investigate the possibility of conducting a continuous heterogeneous
catalytic hydrogenation reaction of a organic molecule in a trickle-bed reactor (TBR). This will include a
study of diﬀerent parameters regarding hydrogenation such as hydrogen mass transfer, reaction kinetics
and catalyst deactivation in order to obtain an optimal basis for reactor selection. Further, a review is made
of the currently applied methods and technologies in the industry regarding continuous heterogeneous
catalytic hydrogenation. A thorough theoretical and practical review of the reaction in speciﬁcally a TBR
is made in order to determine whether this method would be a feasible way to perform heterogeneous
catalytic hydrogenation reactions in continuous manufacturing.
In addition to the theoretical and experimental study of hydrogenation reactions in TBRs a 1-D transport
model is developed to describe the mass transport of reactants.
This project is conducted in joint collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and
Lundbeck where the research was done at DTU.
2.1
Hydrogenation of pharmaceuticals
A hydrogenation is a chemical reaction where molecular hydrogen reacts with a given organic compound
for reduction or saturation purposes by either splitting a double bond or reducing a functional group.
These reactions require the presence of a catalyst in order for the reaction to take place without high
temperatures. The most widely used catalysts are noble metals, nickle and copper. The speciﬁc reaction
determines which catalyst will be most suitable. [3, 4]
Most pharmaceutical molecules are complex and contain multiple functional groups that potentially can
be reduced through hydrogenation. The selectivity of the reaction can be inﬂuenced by the used solvent,
the operating pressure, the temperature and the catalyst, ensuring that only the desired reaction occurs.
The hydrogenation that will be considered in the experimental part of this project is the reduction of
a double bound in the piperidine ring of the precursor to Sertindole (Lu23-148), which is illustrated in
Figure 1.
Figure 1: The hydrogenation reaction of the Sertindole precursor (Lu23-148)[5].
1
==PAGE:12==
This reaction is chosen by Lundbeck to be a representative hydrogenation reaction and since Sertindole is
no longer protected by patents this reaction can contribute to create transparency in this study.
2.2
Continuous manufacturing of pharmaceuticals
According to the FDA, continuous manufacturing is a process where the input material is fed continuously
to a system while the output material is continuously removed from the system. The term can either be
applied to individual unit operations or whole production lines. [2]
As demand for pharmaceuticals increase, a way to prevent shortage of pharmaceuticals is desired,
which is why pharmaceutical companies are being encouraged to optimise their productions by the FDA.
One major way to achieve an eﬃcient and sustainable optimization is to convert the classical batch
production to a continuous production for several reasons, of which some are listed below:
• A continuous production line is operated without any downtime between the diﬀerent steps of the
production since no cleaning of the equipment is required. This is in contrast to batch production,
where each unit has to be cleaned between every batch.
• On-line analysis of intermediates and products is possible due to Process Analytical Technology
(PAT) to test whether the products are within their optimal speciﬁcations. PAT is a mechanism
to design, analyse and control pharmaceutical productions by measuring deﬁned critical process
parameters. This ensures that the analysis can be done on-line and in real time, which makes it
possible to adjust the necessary parameters i real time. In batch production, these analyses are
performed after a given step is ﬁnished. This causes down time because the analysis has to be
performed before the next step of the production can be initiated. [6]
• Less product is discarded as oﬀ-spec due to process failures. In case of process failures, whole
batches of product have to be discarded in batch productions. With continuous manufacturing
the time stamp track-and-trace method allows a portion of product from a given timestamp to be
discarded instead of a whole batch. PAT contributes to this possibility due to the real-time analysis
that ensures better process control and enables recognition of inconsistencies in the production and
the ability to make fast improvements. [6, 7]
• The up-scaling process from pilot plant productions to full-scale productions can be cumbersome and
time consuming. A change in equipment sizes can lead to changes in the production. Continuous
process equipment often have similar size and dimensions to the pilot equipment because continuous
production in general requires smaller equipment depending on the ﬂow of the process. This can
make the scale-up part of production planning cheaper and less time consuming. In addition, the
equipment takes up less physical space compared to batch productions, which also plays a role in
the economical sustainability of continuous production. [2, 7]
• The production capacity is more ﬂexible with continuous production. The capacity of the production
can be increased and decreased within the limitations of the residence times of the given process in
order to meet the demand. This makes it possible not to produce more than necessary as well as
to produce more if the demand increases. Versatile equipment will make a production line more
sustainable as no changes to the equipment is necessary when the demand changes. This fast way
of meeting varying demands will naturally reduce the likelihood of drug shortage. [2]
• Temperature and concentration gradients within a unit is easier to control compared to the batch
production due to the smaller size of the equipment. [1]
• Production in a continuous ﬂow can force the pharmaceutical companies to carry out every step of a
production at the same location. Historically, it has not been uncommon for companies to perform
2
==PAGE:13==
some operations at one location and then transport the intermediates to another location where
other operations are performed. This can cause costly hold-up times and can be largely avoided by
producing continuously at one location. [2]
To produce continuously is not a novel concept and has been carried out by the chemical and petrochemical
industries for many years. However, it is still in the early stages for the ﬁne chemicals and pharmaceutical
industries, as it is expensive to reinvent a production. New equipment has to be bought and the process
parameters for the ﬂow chemistry has to be found. These changes can be time consuming and costly but
have shown to be economically feasible in the long run. In addition, the new production lines have to be
approved by the FDA and other local drug administrations before the production can be initiated, which
is one of the reasons why continuous productions are novel in the pharmaceutical industry. Previously,
the FDA did not approve continuously produced drugs due to the uncertainty of whether the process
control and analysis could be reliable in continuous productions, but this has changed and they are now
encouraging pharmaceutical companies to reorganize their productions into continuous ones by providing
resources and information to help facilitate the transition.[2, 7]
2.3
What to consider when choosing a reactor for continuous hydrogenation
of pharmaceuticals
In the ﬁne chemicals and pharmaceutical industry, other considerations have to be made compared to the
bulk chemicals industry. The pharmaceutical industry produces in many cases too sparse an amount of
each API for it to take up a production line. For this reason, the reactor beneﬁts greatly from being
designed in a way that makes it possible to perform hydrogenations of several diﬀerent molecules. As
mentioned, the selectivity of the hydrogenation is determined by the solvent, catalyst, pressure and
temperature which can diﬀer greatly, meaning that the reactor must be ﬂexible regarding temperature
and pressure ranges.
A hydrogenation reaction requires a catalyst and to change it quickly can be diﬃcult. A slurry catalyst is
easier to change since it can be ﬁltered oﬀ. However, this step can be challenging and time consuming.
In a continuous reactor a stationary bed of catalyst is preferred since the catalyst has to be ﬁxed in the
bed to prevent it from being carried over to the next step with the ﬂowing ﬂuids. Changing this kind of
catalyst can be time consuming and expensive, especially in a continuous reactor where shutting a single
unit operation down potentially causes a shut-down of the whole production line. It should therefore
be prioritised to ﬁnd a universal catalyst that can aid several diﬀerent hydrogenations. This will avoid
to pack the bed with a new catalyst when a new production is initiated and enable the reactor to be
designed in a way that allows for the catalyst to be changed easily.
The possibility of deactivation of the catalyst must also be considered. Here a method to reactivate the
catalyst in a economically eﬃcient way is important. Furthermore, the reactor must be easy to operate
and attain a robust and reliable control system to avoid instabilities and runaway reactions, which can
occur when reactions are highly exothermic.[4]
3
==PAGE:14==
3
Literature review and theory
Some fundamental knowledge on the subject is required before the experimental and modelling tasks can
be optimally approached.
First the current batch-based hydrogenation process of the Sertindole precursor is reviewed. This will
establish a frame of reference between the current batch process and the investigated potential continuous
process.
The further literature review into the application of continuous reactors for hydrogenation is split into
three sections; the ﬁrst examining the current reactors on the market able to run the hydrogenation
reaction continuously based on how the hydrogenation of Sertindole is performed currently. The second
section examines common tendencies for three-phase catalytic hydrogenation, and the third section studies
hydrogenations performed in trickle bed reactors, speciﬁcally.
3.1
The current batch process
The current batch-based hydrogenation of the Sertindole precursor is carried out in a 1000 L mixed
autoclave similar to a pressurized stirred tank reactor. The temperature range in the tank during the
hydrogenation is 34-45◦C and the pressure range is 8.8-9.8 bar. Higher pressures have shown to produce
undesired by-products.
The hydrogenation process has been tested with three diﬀerent catalysts; Rh, Pd, and Pt. Here Pt proved
to be the catalyst with which the desired selectivity was obtained. The catalyst for the process was then
chosen to be 5 wt% Pt/C with a size of 10-100 microns.
In the full-scale batch production 36-38 kg of the 5 wt% Pt/C was fed to the autoclave together with the
app. 80 kg precursor and 420 L acetic acid, giving a precursor concentration of app. 0.4 M. The catalyst
was ﬁltered oﬀlater in the puriﬁcation process. A batch is run for 5-6 hours. Exceeding that duration
will result in the formation of by-products.
The concentration of the solvent has also shown to be essential for the process. It has been found that
concentrations less than 80% of acetic acid favoured the synthesis of by-products, and that the eﬀect of
the catalysis decreases signiﬁcantly. Because concentrations higher than 98% also favoured by-products,
the concentration range of acetic acid was chosen to be 85-98%.
Experiments in the full-scale production showed that the mass transfer from the gas-phase to the liquid-
phase was the limiting factor and that good mass transfer was diﬃcult to achieve. Diﬀerent degrees of
ﬁlling of the tank were investigated and the hydrogen was both fed from the top of the tank and through
a pipe that was submerged in the liquid. It was then found that the highest conversion resulted from a
degree of ﬁlling, where the impeller on the agitator was at the same position in the tank as the surface of
the liquid. The hypothesis to why this is the case is that the location of the impeller caused the liquid to
splash and thereby mix with the gas causing better mass transfer.
With eﬃcient mixing of the gas and the liquid proven to be essential for the hydrogenation, it is also
deemed desired in a continuous reactor for three-phase catalytic hydrogenation. [5]
4
==PAGE:15==
3.2
Current continuous reactors on the market
While several continuous reactors exist on the market today, the applicability for use in hydrogenation
processes limits the list to an apprehensive size. In the following section an extraction of 12 selected
reactors with distinctive diﬀerences are analysed.
The reactors listed in Table 2 range from lab-scale reactors to full-scale reactors and can all potentially
be applied for continuous hydrogenation. Some of the reactors are not made for three-phase reactions but
are still included since it is assumed that a mixing of the gas and liquid phase can be achieved in those,
as in the current method. The reactors vary in how a catalyst can be used. Some require to be packed
with a catalyst and some require the catalyst to be mixed with the solvent as a slurry, which will then
have to be ﬁltered oﬀafter the reaction.
Table 2: Overview of the highlighted ﬂow reactors for heterogeneous catalysis
currently on the market.
Vapourtec - Fixed bed reactor
This is a lab-scale ﬁxed bed reactor (FBR) for heterogeneous
reactions[8]. The reactor is a glass tube that can handle temper-
atures up to 150◦C and the maximum pressure depends on the
diameter of the tube, which can be varied but no range is provided
by Vapourtec. The gas is mixed with the liquid in a gas liquid
reactor consisting of tube reactor coils prior to entering the FBR
[9]. Both modules can be scaled and used in sequence.
ThalesNano - Phoenix Flow Reactor
This is a lab scale tubular reactor that can be used for heterogen-
eous hydrogenations. The max temperature is 250◦C, the max
pressure is 200 bar in the reactor and the max ﬂowrate is 0.6 L/h.
The gas can be mixed with the liquid before it enters the reactor
in a separate gas module. It is stated that the reactor can be
scaled-up, but the limit of this is not mentioned [10].
HEL - FlowCAT
The FlowCAT is a continuous tubular lab-scale reactor that can
handle both heterogeneous and homogeneous reactions. Mixing
of liquids and gasses are achieved by passing the ﬂuids through
the inert packing material that serves as static mixers. The max
pressure is 200 bar, the max temperature is 550◦C and the max
reactor volume is 60 mL. No ﬂow range is mentioned [11].
CRD - Chameleon CSTR
This consists of four continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs)
in series that can run continuously with a slurry catalyst. The
temperature, pressure and capacity ranges are not stated, since
the reactors are fully customisable [12].
5
==PAGE:16==
CRD - Salamander Electric Fixed Bed Reactor
This is a continuous FBR with a max pressure of 200 bar and
a max temperature of 900◦C. The capacity is stated in terms of
reactor volume and not in ﬂow rate with the max reactor volume
being 1 L. CRD claim to have scaling experience and have coupled
many of these reactors in series for previous costumers [13].
Fluitec - ContiplantPILOT and ContiplantMODULE
This is a continuous plug ﬂow reactor (PFR) for both pilot- and
full-scale applications. The scalability is simple since the pilot-scale
reactors can be operated in series and thereby the capacity can
range between 20-2000 kg/h. Fluitec oﬀers a wide variety of static
mixers that can be inserted in the tubular reactors and thereby
ensure mixing. The capacity of one single pilot-scale module is
1-20 kg/h, which can be used as a full-scale reactor if this capacity
meets the demand. The max pressure is 60 bar at 300◦C and
the max temperature is 300◦C. The illustrated unit is the sterile
ContiplantMODULE [14].
Corning - G1 SiC reactor
This is a reactor with a construction similar to a plate heat ex-
changer. The canals where the ﬂuid ﬂows have a unique shape
ensuring good mixing and mass transfer. The max pressure is
17 bar, the max temperature is 200◦C and the capacity is 1.8-12
L/h. It is not stated whether the reactor can operate with a slurry
catalyst, but it is deemed possible with a catalyst of a small enough
particle size. It is scaleable and compatible with other Corning
products developed for ﬂow chemistry [15].
Chemtrix - Plantrix MR260
This reactor is similar to the Corning G1 SiC reactor, but with
another unique canal pattern that also ensures supposedly good
mixing and mass transfer. The max pressure is 25 bar, the max
temperature is 200◦C and the capacity of this model is 1-36 L/h.
Whether the reactor can operate with a slurry catalyst is not
mentioned for this reactor either, but it could also potentially
work with a slurry catalyst of a small enough particle size. There
are other models in the same series with both higher and lower
capacities, making the reactor simple to scale [16].
6
==PAGE:17==
AM Technology - Coﬂore Agitated Tube Reactors
This is an agitated tube reactor that supposedly ensures good
mixing and mass transfer and is mentioned to be good for hydro-
genations. The max pressure is 50 bar, the max temperature is
200◦C and the capacity is in the range of 6-1800 L/h. This reactor
is made for pilot-scale applications, but it is also available in both
lab- and full-scale versions with smaller and larger capacity ranges,
respectively [17].
D&M Continuous Solutions - PFR-High Pressure Liquid Gas
Reactions
This is a PFR that can handle gasses and liquids simultaneously.
It can only run with a small amount of solids and is therefore more
suitable for packed bed catalysis than slurry catalysis. The max
pressure is 103 bar, the max temperature is 150◦C and the reactor
capacity is 400 mL. No ﬂow range is mentioned [18].
Buss-SMS-Canzler - Reacom and Reasil
This is a large scale horizontal continuous reactor containing either
one or two shafts for mixing and kneading and the ﬂows can
be both co- and counter-current.
The reactor is designed for
viscous applications and can handle heterogeneuous reactions. The
temperature range is 20-350◦C, the pressure range is 1 mbar-5 bar
and the capacity is 2-15000 kg/h [19]
Buss-SMS-Canzler - Reactotherm
This reactor is also a horizontal continuous reactor like the Reacom
and Resil described above. The Reactotherm is developed for pilot
scale applications and is equipped with just one shaft. It can be
customised and no speciﬁcations are mentioned [19].
While the amount of reactors on the market for potential use as continuous multi-phase reactors is
relatively limited, several of the reactors listed above are deemed suitable for continuous API productions.
The lab-scale reactors from Vapourtec, ThalesNano and HEL have wide and ﬁtting ranges for API
productions regarding the operating conditions. Due to their relatively small reactor volumes, they could
be applicable for research and development purposes, while not being suitable for full-scale productions.
The reactors from Fluitec, CRD, AM Technology and DM Continuous Solutions are all tubular reactors
that can be operated as packed bed reactors at suitable operating conditions, and one of these would
potentially be the most ﬁtting one for continuous hydrogenation of pharmaceuticals in a full-scale
production.
7
==PAGE:18==
3.3
Continuous multi-phase reactors
A reactor where three phases can be present at once is necessary for hydrogenation reactions. Therefore,
a multi-phase reactor is needed.
In the case where the liquid precursor to Sertindole is hydrogenated, the hydrogen is provided as a gas
and the catalyst a solid. For a gas-liquid-solid reaction there are several interfaces in which mass transfer
must occur. The three-phase hydrogenation reaction includes four steps [20, 21, 22]:
1. Transport of H2 from bulk gas phase to gas-liquid interface
– Absorption of H2 in the liquid at the interface, establishing equilibrium
2. Diﬀusion of H2 from gas-liquid interface into liquid phase
3. Diﬀusion of H2 and precursor from liquid phase onto the external particle surface
4. Diﬀusion of H2 and precursor into catalyst pores and subsequent chemical reaction
Figure 2: Visualisation of the four transport steps mentioned above, where
the green section between the gas and liquid phase represents the gas-liquid
interface. The absorption is not shown on this ﬁgure.
The most widely used multi-phase reactors for hydrogenation are slurry reactors and trickle bed reactors
which both can be operated as either semi-batch or continuous processes. Only the continuous process is
relevant in this project.
A continuous ﬂow reactor is deﬁned as a reactor that receives feed continuously and continuously produces
output. These kind of reactors are almost always run at steady state. Trickle bed reactors are reactors
consisting of a vertical tube with a packed catalyst inside. These are in their construction similar to the
packed bed reactors with the major diﬀerence being the ﬂuid ﬂow. The TBR is the reactor chosen for
this project and will be described in depth in Section 3.4.
The following sections investigates the reactor characteristics of slurry reactors as well a third option for
multi-phase reactors; using catalytic static mixers inserted into a tubular reactor.
8
==PAGE:19==
3.3.1
Continuous slurry reactor
Continuous slurry reactors can be similar to CSTRs, bubble columns and ﬂuidised bed reactors in regard
to that the catalyst is suspended in the liquid and that the gas is blown through the slurry.
The autoclave reactor that Lundbeck currently uses for their hydrogenation reactions is a slurry reactor.
This is, however, not continuous. With the main challenge of the hydrogenation in the autoclave reactor
being the gas-liquid mass transfer, this is likely to become a challenge in a continuous slurry reactor even
though the challenge has been overcome in the autoclave reactor.
An additional advantage of using slurry reactors is the fact that these types of reactors are already well
known in large-scale production and the shift from batch to continuous production requires no major
changes to the process. This is supported by Buisson et al.[23] which concluded that continuous slurry
reactors allowed for production of up to thousands of tons per year while still maintaining the same mass
transfer properties as for smaller productions.
This type of reactor also has eﬀective heat removal which prevents hot spots from forming. This could
otherwise cause intermediates or byproducts to be produced instead of the intended product. Preventing
hot spots from forming can thus lead to higher selectivity for the process [23].
In mechanically agitated slurry reactors the gas-liquid and liquid-solid mass transfer coeﬃcients can
be determined by varying the catalyst loading and/or catalyst particle size. This, however, requires
the use of a shell type catalyst in order to avoid the eﬀects of inter-particle diﬀusion aﬀecting the results [21].
While there exists diﬀerent kinds of slurry reactors, the most commonly used are presented in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Diﬀerent types of slurry reactors: A) Stirred tank reactor; B) Loop
reactor; C) Bubble column reactor; D) Three-phase ﬂuidized bed reactor .[24]
9
==PAGE:20==
3.3.2
Catalytic static mixer
Avril et al.[25] invented a novel method for continuous hydrogenation using catalytic static mixers (CSM)
in a tubular reactor.
Tubular reactors are a well known technology with simple reactor geometry, making them easy to imple-
ment in most chemical industries. Furthermore, the ﬂow mechanics of tubular reactors are thoroughly
researched, making the modelling of such reactors simpler. CSM rods can be 3D printed which allows
for specialised mixers. The catalyst can be applied using rapid coating technology such as metal cold
spraying or, alternatively, using electroplating for more costly catalysts such as Pt [25]. This reduces
manufacturing and changeover costs as well as simplifying the changeover processes considerably.
The ﬂuid mechanics of CSM reactors have already been investigated thoroughly and the mixer geometry
can be modiﬁed to best ﬁt the viscosity of certain reactants and/or products, for instance. Finally,
scaling up a tubular reactor is cheaper than other types of reactors, e.g. the scale-up of a batch reactor [25].
Figure 4 shows an example of a 3D-printed static mixer inside a tube produced by CSIRO FloWorks and
developed speciﬁcally for hydrogenation purposes [26].
Figure 4: CSIRO FloWorks-3D printed catalytic static mixers (CSM) [26]
asd
10
==PAGE:21==
3.4
Three-phase heterogeneous catalytic hydrogenation in a trickle bed re-
actor
A TBR is a vertical packed bed reactor operated with a co-current downﬂow. A vertical packed bed
can also be operated at an upﬂow, which provides large holdup and an optimal liquid side mass transfer
and axial mixing compared to downﬂow. Upﬂow is, however, surpassed by downﬂow in regard to the
interfacial area between the gas and the liquid phase.
The co-current downﬂow TBR has low gas and liquid throughput limitations, albeit within the boundaries
of the desired ﬂow pattern[27].
Among other things, the downﬂow TBR can be found in the industry being applied for immobilised
enzyme reactions, hydrodesulfurisation of petroleum, oxidation of organic compounds as well as selective
hydrogenation[28].
Designing an eﬃcient TBR is a complicated process that involves knowledge of hydrodynamic parameters
i.e. ﬂow patterns, liquid holdup, pressure drop as well as the interfacial parameters which include the
gas-liquid interfacial area and the gas-, liquid- and solid-side mass transfer coeﬃcients[29].
Venkata et al. found that non-foaming TBR systems can be operated within a series of ﬂow rate boundaries
including trickle ﬂow, spray ﬂow, pulse ﬂow, and dispersed bubble ﬂow, with the found boundaries listed
in Table 3 below. These systems behave diﬀerently depending on what ﬂow pattern is present in the
reactor[28, 29, 30, 31].
Table 3: Overview of the diﬀerent ﬂow patterns and their corresponding gas
and liquid mass ﬂow rate boundaries in kg/(m2s) [28].
Flow pattern
Gas mass ﬂow rate
Liquid mass ﬂow rate
Trickle ﬂow
G<1
L
√
G<4
Spray ﬂow
G>1
L
√
G<4
Pulse ﬂow
G>0.3
L
√
G>4
Dispersed bubble ﬂow
G<0.3
L
√
G>4
Generally, only trickle ﬂow and pulse ﬂow are used in industry. In the case of trickle ﬂow, the liquid is
spread over the bed packing as a thin ﬁlm while the gas ﬂows through the packed bed. In pulse ﬂow,
the liquid periodically blocks the void space in the bed packing, causing a buildup of liquid which is
subsequently removed by a local pressure buildup just above the liquid buildup. This results in alternating
gas-rich and liquid-rich mixtures throughout the reactor[28, 30].
Like in all processes in industry, the goal for a selective hydrogenation reaction in a TBR is to be as cost
eﬃcient as possible. In order to measure this, the interfacial parameters are often used as indicators
as they relate to the heat and mass transfer rates between the phases. The interfacial parameters do,
however, behave diﬀerently depending on the kind of ﬂow pattern[28, 30].
11
==PAGE:22==
3.4.1
Eﬀects of pressure on the mass transfer coeﬃcient
High pressures are used to increase the concentration of the gas phase reactant in the liquid phase[27, 30]
and the gas-liquid interfacial area and mass transfer to the liquid side has been shown to increase with an
increase in gas pressure[32, 33]. As a result, part of the gas phase is dispersed in the liquid ﬁlm as small
bubbles, which provide more interfacial area between gas and liquid. The bubble size is determined by
two opposing forces, one being the viscous stress exerted by the liquid and the other being the Laplace
pressure. The Laplace pressure is the pressure diﬀerence from the inside to the outside of the curve of
a bubble submerged in a liquid and is caused by the surface tension at the interface between gas and
liquid phase. The viscous shear stress deforms and breaks the bubbles while the surface tension stabilises
them[32, 34].
The gas-liquid mass transfer coeﬃcient, kLa, depends on pressure solely due to the pressure dependence
of the interfacial area and as such, kL can be considered pressure independent[32]. During the presence
of small bubbles in the liquid phase, the mass transfer is aﬀected by two mechanisms described by step 1
and 2 in Section 3.4.4.
Wammes et al.[27] found that the hydrodynamic variables and, thus, probably the interfacial area depend
not directly on pressure but on the density of the gas phase, which is aﬀected by the pressure.
3.4.2
Eﬀects of surface tension on gas-liquid mass transfer
While rarely discussed in the literature on mass transfer in trickle bed reactors, surface tension indirectly
aﬀects the kLa as most correlations have found kLa to be a function of pressure drop, which is in turn a
function of surface tension[35]. A decrease in surface tension is cause for better wetting in the packed
bed, which results in a more evenly distribution of the liquid phase on the solid surface. The better
distribution of liquid leads to stronger gas-liquid interactions which is what prompts the higher pressure
drop[35].
3.4.3
Eﬀects of viscosity on mass transfer
Viscosity has also been found to aﬀect the mass transfer of a trickle bed reactor system. Borren et al.[35]
found that for small bed particles, a two phase system of glycerine/N2 over a packed bed had a pressure
drop 3.2 times larger than the corresponding pressure drop for a two phase system of water/N2. Although,
for larger bed particles they found only a slightly higher pressure drop for the glycerine/N2 system than
for the water/N2 system. As such, for the smaller particles the increased viscosity results in a larger
gas-liquid mass transfer coeﬃcient.
Morsi et al.[29] also found that for diethanolamine (DEA) in ethanol and DEA in etheleneglycol, the mass
transfer coeﬃcient, kLa, is higher for the viscous solvent than for the non-viscous solvent, the diﬀerence
between the two being approximately a factor 2.
12
==PAGE:23==
3.4.4
Determination of mass transfer parameters
As brieﬂy mentioned in Section 3.3 there are several interfaces in which mass transfer must occur in a
gas-solid-liquid reaction. The three-phase hydrogenation reaction includes four steps and displayed with
respect to the concentration in the diﬀerent phases in Figure 5 [20, 21, 36, 22]:
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: A visualization of the concentrations in the diﬀerent phases as well
as the interfaces [22].
The mechanism controlling the hydrogenation reaction rate varies depending on gas and liquid loading,
catalyst type, size, geometry and the properties of the system [35, 37]. In most TBR systems, the gas
phase reactant is present in considerable stoichiometric excess, however, it has low solubility in the liquid
phase [37]. Most literature [23, 20, 21, 38, 32, 39, 40, 36] agree that the reaction rate of the three-phase
catalytic hydrogenation in a TBR system is determined by the mass transfer as this is the limiting factor.
According to Fogler [22], the rate of transport for the four steps listed in Section 3.3 can be described
relative to the catalyst mass, for the gas reactant and liquid reactant, respectively.
Step one for the gas reactant, transport from the bulk gas phase to the gas-liquid interface it can be
described by Equation (1).
−r′
A = kga
1
(1 −ϵb) ρp
[CA −CAi]
(1)
Where ρp is the density of the catalyst pellet, ϵb is the bed void fraction and CA and CAi are the bulk
gas phase concentration and concentration at the interface, respectively.
Step two, the equilibrium at the gas-liquid interface can be described by Henry’s law shown in Equation
(2).
CAi,l = CAi
H
(2)
Where CAi,l is the concentration in the liquid at the interface and H is Henry’s constant.
13
==PAGE:24==
Step three, the transport from interface to bulk liquid can be described by Equation (3).
−r′
A = kla
1
(1 −ϵb) (CAi,l −CAb)
(3)
Where kl is the liquid phase mass transfer coeﬃcient and CAb is the concentration in the bulk liquid.
Finally, step four, which is the transport from bulk liquid to the external catalyst surface and subsequent
diﬀusion and chemical ﬁrst order reaction can be described by Equations (4)-(5).
−r′
A = kca (CAb −CAs)
(4)
Where kc is the liquid-solid mass transfer coeﬃcient and CAs is the concentration at the liquid-solid
interface.
−r′
A = ηkCAsCBs
(5)
Where η deﬁnes the inﬂuence of external diﬀusion (1 −η is the resistance of internal diﬀusion), also called
the eﬀectiveness factor, expressed in Equation (6) and k is the speciﬁc reaction rate.
η =
Reaction rate under the inﬂuence of external diﬀusion
Reaction rate without the inﬂuence of external diﬀusion
(6)
Furthermore, the transport of the liquid reactant from the bulk liquid to the solid catalyst surface and
the subsequent chemical reaction following the diﬀusion into the pores can be described by Equations (7)
and (8).
−r′
B = kcac (CB −CBs)
(7)
−r′
B = ηkCAsCBs
(8)
3.4.4.1
Gas-liquid interface
Generally, the literature agree that in the case of mass transfer limitations, they are the results of
the mass transfer limitation of gas into the liquid ﬁlm in the gas-liquid interface[27, 32, 36, 37, 38].
Metaxas et al.[38] found that for a gas-liquid-solid system of H2, benzene and Ni/Al2O3, respectively,
the hydrogen gas-side mass transfer coeﬃcient is approximately 1.5-2 orders of magnitude larger than
the mass transfer coeﬃcient of liquid-side hydrogen. Furthermore, gas-side mass transfer coeﬃcient for
benzene is 1-1.5 orders of magnitude larger than the liquid-side mass transfer coeﬃcient for benzene.
This further corroborates the hypothesis of gas-liquid mass transfer being the limiting factor and that the
mass transfer limitation is due to the liquid-side in the gas-liquid interface[38].
The gas-liquid mass transfer coeﬃcient can be determined in a TBR where no reaction takes place. In
literature[27, 29, 20, 21], a common method for determining the mass transfer coeﬃcient is measuring the
physical adsorption/desorption of oxygen or CO2 in water as it ﬂows through the TBR. More techniques,
including fast chemical reactions and the sulphite method can also be used for this[20, 41] but will not be
examined further in this study.
14
==PAGE:25==
3.4.4.2
Liquid-solid interface
The liquid-solid mass transfer coeﬃcient can also be determined experimentally using techniques such
as the dissolution method, the electro-chemical method, the ion-exchange method and the dynamic
adsorption method[20], although, all of these methods do not use the actual reaction system[20]. However,
regardless of whether the rate controlling mechanism is the limited hydrogen solubility, diﬀusion or
the intrinsic reaction rate, most literature[40, 42] agree that the liquid-solid interface and thereby the
liquid-solid mass transfer is generally of little interest.
3.4.5
Results for API conversion and selectivity in the literature
Similar work in the literature is scarce, in part because running API production as a continuous process
is new and, in part, because TBR is not the only potentially viable unit operation for the continuous
manufacturing of API. Table 4 contains an overview of the most relevant information from other, similar
studies of continuous API production for comparison. Table 5 illustrates the organic reactants (and some
products) mentioned in Table 4.
15
==PAGE:26==
Table 4: Overview of similar studies in the literature and their results. *Converted assuming market grade mesh.**Coated tube reactor. N/A indicates information not
available from the article.
Author
Liquid
reactant
Catalyst
type
P
[bar]
T
[◦C]
Reactant
conc.
Catalyst
quantity
[g, w%]
Liquid ﬂow
[mL/min]
X
[%]
S
[%]
Particle
size
Said et al.[43]
DIM-NA
Raney-Co
40
60
0.1 M
70, 50%
11-30
99.9
<50
564 µm
Al-Herz et al.[44]
1-heptyne
Pd/Al2O3
atm
20
5% v/v
N/A, 2%
10
100
95
Trilobe
L=5 mm,d=1.2 mm
Sepúlveda
et al.[45]
Glycerol
Cu/Al2O3
18
220
25%
2, N/A
0.08
100
66
180-437* µm
Manuale et al.[39]
Glycerol
Cu/Al2O3
14
210
80% v/v
4, 13%
0.15
100
96.8
231-437* µm
Carangio et al.[46]
Aliphatic Nitro
Intermediate
3111A
Raney-Ni
50
51
0.25 M
43, N/A
20
>99
89
N/A
Wörz et al.[47]
Citral
Pd/SiO2
40
100
1.2
37, 0.7%
0.75
83
94
3-3.5 mm
Bai et al.**[48]
Cinnamaldehyde
Pt/SiO2
10
90
0.1 M
190·10−3, 12.5%
0.2
98.8
90
N/A
Clark et al.[49]
[4-(3.4-Dichlorophenyl)
-3.4-dihydro-2H-
naphthalenyidene]
-methylamine
Pd/C
175
40
0.2 M
0.5, 5%
0.4
99
99
N/A
The reactants mentioned in Table 4 as well as some corresponding products and side products are shown in Table 5.
16
==PAGE:27==
Table 5: A visualization of reaction compounds mentioned in Table 4.
DIM-NA
Compounds and reaction(s) from
Said et al.[43]
1-Heptyne
Reactant from the reaction de-
scribed in Al-Hertz et al.[44], im-
age from NIST[50]. The reaction
product is heptene.
Glycerol
Reactant from the reaction de-
scribed in Sepúlveda et al.[45]
and Manuale et al.[39], image
from NIST[51].
Aliphatic
Nitro
Intermedi-
ate
Compounds and reaction(s) from
Carangio et al.[46] Intermediate
2 is the desired product while in-
termediate 3 is an unwanted side
product.
Citral
Compounds and reaction(s) from
Wörz et al.[47]
Cinnamaldehyde
Compounds and reaction(s) from
Bai et al.[48]
17
==PAGE:28==
[4-(3.4-Dichlorophenyl)-
3.4-dihydro-2H-
naphthalenyidene]-
methylamine
Compounds and reaction(s) from
Clark et al.[49]
3.4.6
Preliminary conclusion
There are several reactors on the market that could be suitable for three-phase reactions and thereby
hydrogenations. The reactors that could be the best ﬁts are the tubular reactors from Fluitec, CRD, AM
Technology, and DM Continuous Solutions, which are all tubular reactors that can be operated as packed
bed reactors at suitable operating conditions for the continuous hydrogenation of pharmaceuticals in a
full-scale production.
Literature suggests that mass transfer limitations will be the biggest obstacle during hydrogenation of
precursor to Sertindole, although many factors are in play.
The temperatures shown in Table 4 suggest a range from 50 to 100 ◦C for API conversion. The pressures
in Table 4 suggest a pressure range of 0 to 40 barg. Furthermore, Table 4 also shows a preference for noble
metal catalysts, with Pt, Pd and Cu being the most commonly used in these cases. The most common
support for API hydrogenation is Al2O3, followed by SiO2. A single study used a carbon support.
18
==PAGE:29==
4
Experimental study of the hydrogenation reaction
This section will present and describe the setup including the TBR that was used for the experimental
part of this project. In addition, the sampling, preparation of the packed bed and the analysis method of
the samples will be described.
4.1
Experimental setup and methods of analysis
The experimental setup was originally developed as a pyrolysis oil converter [52], hence the name POC
setup. It was designed to operate at signiﬁcantly higher temperatures than necessary for the hydrogenation
of the pharmaceutical ingredients.
Figure 6 depicts the setup. The reactor inside the vertical oven can be seen to the left and the down-stream
section can be seen to the right.
Figure 6: The POC. Left on the picture; the reactor inside the vertical oven, right on the
picture; the down-stream section.
A P&I diagram of the setup is shown in Figure 7. The blue section refers to the section where gas is fed
to and removed from the reactor and the yellow section refers to the part of the system where the liquid
reactant and product is present. The setup was made to be able to preheat the reactants before entering
the reactor using electrical preheaters E1 and E2, however, this is not necessary for this hydrogenation
reaction and thus they are both bypassed. Furthermore, a gas chromatograph (GC) is connected to the
POC, making it possible to analyse the product on-line. This is, however, not utilised during this project
due to great similarities in boiling points between the reactant and the product. The analysis is in stead
performed by liquid chromatography (HPLC).
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 7: P&I diagram of the experimental POC setup. The gas line is
circled by blue while the liquid line is circled by yellow.
20
==PAGE:31==
4.1.1
The up-stream process
The up-stream section refers to the section of the setup prior to the reactor and contains both a liquid
and a gas line. The liquid reactant, i.e. the precursor solution, is pumped from the storage cabinet,
through pump LP1 (Figure 7), and into the back pressure valve, V19. The back pressure valve com-
presses the liquid phase to a pressure larger than the pressure in the reactor, in order to ensure that
there is no back ﬂow through the system. The liquid then bypasses the preheater, E2, as it is not
necessary to preheat the reactant and ﬁnally, the liquid enters the reactor from the top. Figure 8 shows
the up-stream section for the liquid excluding the preheater which can be seen on the right side of Figure 9.
Figure 8: Bottom of the up-stream part of the setup, containing the liquid
feed section.
The storage cabinet that contains the precursor solution can be seen on the left side of Figure 8 and the
pump LP1 (Figure 7) is placed just below the storage cabinet. As showed both in Figure 8 and on the
P&I diagram in Figure 7, the POC was originally designed with two liquid lines, one for oil and one
for water. Both liquid lines are equipped with back pressure valves, pressure indicators, pressure relieve
valves, and ﬂow controllers. These liquid ﬂow controllers (FIC5 and FIC6) have been disconnected due to
malfunction, which implies that the gas/liquid separator dP1 does not have a safety limit. Therefore, the
degree of ﬁlling in the separator must be monitored manually. The safety limit in the separator can be
set to a desired column pressure, which sets the ﬂow in FIC5 and FIC6 to zero when reached to ensure
that no liquid overﬂow can occur in the separator.
There are four diﬀerent gas connections to the POC. The gasses used for this project are H2 and N2,
where H2 is used for the reaction and N2 is used to leak test the system.
The gasses are supplied from ﬂasks that are stored remotely and enter the pressure shell at the bottom,
where it ﬂows up in the annulus between the pressure shell and the reactor tube before entering from the
top where it mixes with the liquid. Figure 9 shows the up-stream section for the gas where the gas inlets
and the gas ﬂow controllers FIC1-FIC4 can be seen on the left side. The possible gas supplies for the
POC are H2, O2, and N2, the O2 line has been disconnected to ensure that no ﬂammable and oxidising
gas can be present in the system at the same time. The pressure controller, that controls the pressure in
21
==PAGE:32==
the reactor is placed in the middle of the gas-feed section and is measuring the pressure in both the gas
feed section and the top of the reactor.
Figure 9: Top of the up-stream part of the setup, containing the gas section.
The electrical preheaters E1 and E2 are placed on the right side of the gas-feed section, as can be seen on
Figure 9. There is an electrical preheater for each liquid line, but no preheater for the gas line.
When the liquid has been heated in the preheaters or as in this case, bypassed the prehetaer, it enters the
reactor from the top.
4.1.2
The Reactor
The TBR is a vertical tube placed inside a pressure shell which is inside a vertical oven that can be
opened lengthwise as is shown in Figure 10b. The tubular reactor containing the packed bed, that is to
be inserted into the pressure shell, is typically made of quartz or stainless steel, which can withstand
the high temperatures. In this project only tubes made of quartz were applied. Figure 10a depicts a
cross-sectional drawing of the reactor where the placement of the reactor tube inside the pressure shell is
visualized.
The ﬂow path of both the liquid and gas feed in the reactor can be seen in Figure 10a with the
blue and red lines depicting the gas and liquid ﬂows, respectively. The liquid enters the reactor from the
top while the gas enters the pressure shell from the bottom, from where it is led trough the shell on the
outside of the reactor tube. The gas then enters the reactor tube from the top, co-current with the liquid.
The reactor has a theoretical pressure limit of 125 bar at 500 ◦C and the maximum operational temperat-
ure is 550 ◦C. The total length of the pressure shell is 996 mm (including the ﬂanges) and the length of
the tubular reactor is 800 mm. The external diameter of the tube is 10 mm and the internal diameter is
8 mm. A support pin is placed inside the quartz tube 425 mm from the bottom where the catalytic bed
can be packed on, which in this case can be either an Al2O3-supported Pt catalyst or a carbon-supported
Pt catalyst.
22
==PAGE:33==
Not the entire reactor is heated by the vertical oven, with only the midmost 600 mm being actively heated.
The temperature in the reactor is measured at four diﬀerent locations; one at the bottom via a thermo
element placed in a designated pocket as visualized on Figure 10a (T4). The remaining temperature
measurements are measured at three locations between the pressure shell and the oven, which is at the
top of the heated part (T1), at the center point (T2) and at the bottom (T3) of the heated part.
The temperature inside the pressure shell is usually lower than the temperature of the oven and the
temperature set point must therefore be higher than the desired temperature inside the reactor.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: a) Cross-sectional drawing of the reactor, b) picture of the reactor placed in the opened
oven.
23
==PAGE:34==
The temperature in the packed bed is signiﬁcant for the reaction, since the reaction takes place inside the
packed bed. Mortensen, P. [52] studied the temperature proﬁle for an identical reactor tube with an input
temperature of 250 ◦C (T2 on Figure 7). This showed that the temperature was nearly constant from a
few centimeters below the support pin in the tube to approximately 10 centimeters above the support
pin. A temperature of 250 ◦C is too high for the hydrogenation of the precursor, for which the initial
experiments will be carried out at bed temperature of app. 70 ◦C. To achieve this temperature inside the
bed, the temperature proﬁle of the reactor was tested for an input temperature of 86 ◦C. This initial
input temperature was chosen as earlier experiments have indicated, that the resulting bed temperature
would reach the desired app. 70 ◦C.
The temperature proﬁle of the reactor for an input temperature of 86 ◦C with a gas ﬂow of 1000 mL/min
and a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min by measuring the temperature from 20 cm beneath the support pin to 40
cm above the support pin. The data results are illustrated in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Temperature proﬁle of the reactor aimed for a bed temperature of 70 ◦C with input temp.
of 86 ◦C. Position 0 cm on the x-axis refers to the position just below the support pin in the internal
reactor tube. The bed is positioned from 0 cm to 20 cm.
The test results indicate that the isothermal zone is located at a diﬀerent position in the reactor compared
to the zone found by Mortensen, P. [52] for 250 ◦C. The isothermal zone lies between 14 cm and 28 cm
above the support pin with a temperature of app. 70 ◦C. The temperature reaches 70 ◦C app. 6 cm
above the support pin and is app. 67 ◦C at the location of the support pin. The bed therefore experiences
a temperature diﬀerence of app. 7 ◦C across its length of 20 cm bed with a mean of 71 ◦C.
The temperature is lower at the bottom of the bed, which can be due to faulty insulation of the bottom
of the pressure shell where the insulation has been removed. This would cause the lower part of the
reactor to be cooler that the top, leading to a shorter isothermal zone. The insulation at the bottom
of the pressure shell has been replaced since this initial test. The actual isothermal zone is therefore
expected to lie closer to the position of the support pin than this test indicates.
24
==PAGE:35==
4.1.3
The down-stream process
In the down-stream process, the liquid product is separated from the gas and recovered while the gas is
sent to the exhaust.
First, the gas and liquid mixture ﬂows through the packed bed and exits at the bottom of the reactor.
From there, it ﬂows into a separator (S1 on Figure 7) where gas and liquid are separated. The gas
phase exits at the top of the separator while the liquid stays in the separator column until an automatic
magnetic valve, V38, opens based on the liquid holdup in the separator. The liquid passes through a
ﬁlter, F8, prior to passing the magnetic valve, which is used to maintain the desired pressure within
the system. The liquid then passes another back pressure valve, V39, before exiting the system and is
released into sample bottles or a waste container through valves V43-V52.
The down-stream section of the setup can be seen in Figure 12 below where the separator (S1 on Figure
7) and the appertaining diﬀerential pressure gauge can be seen in the bottom left corner followed by the
ﬁlter (F8), the magnetic valve (V38), the back pressure valve (V39) and the condenser, which in this case
is bypassed. The valves V43-V52 are placed in the cabinet on the right on Figure 12.
Figure 12: The down-stream part of the set-up
25
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Experimental method
This section will cover the experimental method including the preparation of the precursor solution
and the catalytic beds, how the POC has been operated in regard to the speciﬁc reaction and at what
operating conditions.
4.2.1
Precursor solution
The precursor solutions were prepared by mixing a given amount of precursor with milli-Q water and
glacial acetic acid on a magnetic stirrer until the precursor powder was fully dissolved, which took about
30 minutes. It is known that the concentration of acetic acid has to be around 85 wt% in order to
favour the desired reaction, being the reason behind mixing the glacial acetic acid with milli-Q water.
The precursor is a ﬁne, yellow powder and the precursor solution has a transparent yellow colour that
intensiﬁes with increasing concentration and exposure to light.
Several diﬀerent concentrations of the precursor solution have been prepared. The concentrations and
corresponding amount of precursor, milli-Q water and glacial acetic acid respectively is shown in Table 6
Table 6: The diﬀerent precursor solution concentrations that have been used
during the experiments.
Precursor [g]
Milli-Q water [mL]
Glacial acetic acid [mL]
Precursor concentration [M]
0.67
22.5
127.5
0.01
8
90
510
0.03
10
22.5
127.5
0.15
20
22.5
127.5
0.3
4.2.2
Catalytic beds
The activity of a number of diﬀerent beds was investigated during the experiments and all the used beds
are shown in Table 7.
Table 7: Speciﬁcations of the diﬀerent catalytic beds used. *SA = Sigma-Aldrich, S = Synthesized in-house.
ID
Type
Source*
wt%
Weight [g]
Particle size [µm]
Bed height [cm]
Support height [cm]
1
Pt/Al2O3
SA
0.2
2.0009
2-4 mm
10
6.5
2
Pt/Al2O3
SA
1
5.0019
300-600
14.5
6.5
3
Pt/Al2O3
SA
5
5.2867
300-600
14.5
6.5
4
Pt/Al2O3
SA
1
5.3533
300-600
14.5
6.5
5
Pt/Al2O3
SA
1
4.9971
300-600
14
6.5
6
Pt/Al2O3
S
5
5.0055
425-600
18
0
7
Pt/C
S
5
3.5948
425-600
20
0
8
Pt/C
S
5
1.6874
425-600
10
0
9
Pt/C
S
5
1.7822
425-600
10
0
10
Pt/C
S
5
3.6859
425-600
20
0
11
Pt/Al2O3
SA
1
5.0010
425-600
14
0
12
Pt/C
S
5
3.3563
425-600
20
0
13
Pt/C
S
5
3.2313
425-600
20
0
14
Pt/C
S
5
3.2405
425-600
20
0
The beds were packed by adding quartz wool equalling approximately a centimeter in height and then
adding the catalyst on top of that. An extra layer of support was added to the top to some of the beds in
26
==PAGE:37==
order to heighten the bed for hydrogen solubility purposes. Finally, an extra layer of quarts wool was
added on top of the beds.
The ﬁrst bed stands out from the rest, since the catalyst was 2-4 mm 0.2 wt% Pt/Al2O3 spheres that
were packed together with 300-600 µm Al2O3 particles, which was added to reach a more optimal wetting.
Bed 2, 4 and 5 were made with 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 powder from Sigma-Aldrich, which was pelletized and
crushed into the right particle size. Bed 3 was also made with a Pt/Al2O3 powder from Sigma-Aldrich,
but with 5 wt% platinum instead, which showed to be more challenging to pelletize and crush into the
desired particle size. This could be caused by diﬀerent strength properties for the used Al2O3 supports in
the 1 wt% and 5 wt% catalysts.
A 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 was then synthesized in-house since it was found crucial to test an increased catalyst
activity, which is the catalyst that was used in bed 6. The catalyst synthesis method is described in
Section 4.2.3.
A 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst was synthesized subsequent to the experiments that were conducted with the
Pt/Al2O3 catalysts in order to study the impact of the support on the deactivation. This catalyst was
used in beds 7-10 and 12-14. Bed 12 was packed with en additional layer of 1 cm quarts wool in order to
obtain wetting of the catalyst, which had shown to be a challenge in bed 9 and 10 due to the hydrophobic
nature of the applied carbon.
4.2.3
Catalyst synthesis
The synthesised 5 wt% catalysts were made by dissolving the H2PtCl6·6H2O in milli Q water and pouring
it over the support, which then was dried. Thereafter the catalyst was calcined in a furnace to ﬁnally be
reduced in the POC. Two diﬀerent methods were tried,; namely the deposition impregnation method and
incipient wetness impregnation method. Both are described below.
Following the deposition impregnation method [53], 1.34564 g solid H2PtCl6·6H2O containing 37.5 wt%
platinum was added to a suspension of 190 mL milli-Q water. With a desired ratio of 20 mL water pr
gram of support, 9.5 g of 300-600 micron Al2O3 particles was added. The mixture was left over night in a
beaker on a magnetic stirrer at 50 ◦C to dry. The resulting solids were then calcined in an tube furnace at
550 ◦C for 8 hours with an airﬂow of 29% O2 and 71% N2. While the support had the right particle size
before being added to the suspension, the particles were crushed into dust by the magnetic stirrer as it
was left over night. Thus, after the calcination the catalyst was pelletized, crushed and sieved. However,
the mortar turned the pellets into dust without producing any particles in the correct size range, making
the catalyst unﬁt for use in the TBR as the ﬁne dust would cause a plug, blocking gas and liquid ﬂow
through the reactor. It was therefore decided not to continue with this method and a new batch was
synthesised using the incipient wetness method.
The incipient wetness impregnation method was used to synthesise a 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst. The
ﬁrst step of the synthesis was to determine the necessary amount of milli-Q water pr gram of support to
ensure complete wetting, which proved to be 1.5 mL/g Al2O3 and 2.3 mL/g carbon. During the next step
of the 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 synthesis 6.5 g 425-600 micron Al2O3 particles were distributed on the bottom of
a beaker and were impregnated with 1.0107 g H2PtCl6·6H2O in 9.75 mL milli-Q water using a pipette.
The mixture was gently stirred with a spoon to make sure the solution was suﬃciently distributed on the
support. The impregnated support was then dried in a hotplate at 60 ◦C for 30 minutes before being
calcined. The calcination was done at 100 ◦C for 4 hours before ramping up to 550 ◦C for 8 hours. The
27
==PAGE:38==
catalyst bed was packed, inserted into the reactor and reduced under 400 mL/min hydrogen ﬂow for 3
hours at 350 ◦C and atmospheric pressure. This method produced better results than the deposition
impregnation method, since this method did not cause any crushing of the particles.
The same method was followed when synthesising the 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst, but more milli-Q water pr
gram of support was necessary due to the hydrophobic nature of the carbon support and the high pore
volume compared to the Al2O3 support.
4.2.4
Running the POC
Before initialising an experiment, the reactor has to be pressurised and heated. This is done by setting
the pressure and temperature set points to the desired values in the POC software, and then turn the
hydrogen ﬂow on.
It is important to ensure that the pipes in the liquid feed section are ﬁlled with liquid to avoid a gas
build-up in the system that can make it impossible for the liquid to enter the reactor. This in spite of the
pressure of the liquid being higher than the gas pressure, which is set by increasing the back pressure of
the upstream liquid system with the back pressure valve, V19 on Figure 7.
When the reactor is suﬃciently pressurised and heated, the liquid ﬂow is initiated by turning the pump
(LP1) on, setting it to the desired ﬂow rate and opening valve V26. The liquid ﬂows through the reactor
co-current with the gas and is subsequently separated from the gas in the separator (S1), which at its
current state is empty at approximately -31 mmH2O. A magnetic valve (V38) and a back pressure valve
(V39) are placed after the separator (S1) and ensure that the pressure in the system is maintained.
The magnetic valve (V38) is programmed to automatically open and close when the liquid column,
measured in mmH2O, reaches a given set point and the liquid is led out of the system. However, this
feature was not applied because the actual zero of the separator was given as -31 mmH2O, and no values
lower than zero could be chosen in the software.
In the case where the magnetic valve is operated automatically, it is important that the back pressure
valve (V39) is set to a position that will lead the liquid out of the system without causing a signiﬁcant
pressure drop. The speciﬁc position is challenging to determine and is diﬀerent for each pressure, which
is why the back pressure valve was manually opened after every sample with gentle care to ensure that
no pressure drop occurred.
The sampling frequency with which the down-stream liquid line is emptied depends on the speciﬁc
experiment being conducted. A rule of thumb is that steady state is reached in a packed bed reactor
when a liquid volume corresponding to six times the volume of the packed bed has passed through the
system. For a 20 cm bed in a tube with diameter 8 mm, as used in this project, a corresponding liquid
volume of 60 mL needs to pass the bed to reach steady state.
It was therefore ensured that a minimum of 60 mL precursor solution had passed trough the reactor
before conditions were changed, and samples were taken at every 30-60 mL, depending on the experiment.
In addition, it is made sure that the down-stream liquid line is empty at the end of an experiment, and
that all residue cleaning liquid was removed before a new experiment was initialised.
The samples were stored in brown glass bottles in a refrigerator when it was not possible to analyse them
in the HPLC straight away. This was done in order to avoid side reactions, as especially the precursor is
light sensitive.
28
==PAGE:39==
4.2.5
Operating conditions
The signiﬁcant parameters that were to be chosen for the hydrogenation experiments were; the temperature,
the pressure, and the ﬂow rates of both hydrogen and the liquid precursor solution. The chosen values
and/or ranges are presented in this section.
Temperature
During the literature study it was found that other APIs had been hydrogenated in TBRs at temperatures
ranging from 50-100 ◦C. The values from these studies are shown in Table 4. The temperature in the
current batch process is 34-45 ◦C, which indicates that this range is a possible reaction temperature for
the same platinum catalyst. Temperatures ranging from 50 ◦C to above 100 ◦C will be tested in order to
quantify the possible conversion at a given temperature.
Flow rates and concentrations
Both the liquid and gas ﬂow rates have to lie within a given range in order for the ﬂow to be a trickle ﬂow.
These relations are presented in Table 3 and state that the superﬁcial mass ﬂow rate of the gas, G, has to at-
tain a value less than 1 kg/m2s and the liquid superﬁcial mass ﬂow rate, L, has to satisfy L
√
G < 4 kg/m2s.
Another rule of thumb is that the superﬁcial mass ﬂow rate of the gas has to lie within 0.001 and
25 kg/m2s. The liquid superﬁcial mass ﬂow rate has to lie within 1 and 50 kg/m2s. Here the lower
values typically are seen in lab- and pilot-scales and the higher values are used in full-scale productions [54].
The mass ﬂow controllers in the POC have an upper limit of 1500 mL/min. The hydrogen ﬂow rate
within this limit is chosen with 1000 NmL/min at 60 bar, resulting in a superﬁcial mass ﬂow rate of
0.1714 kg/m2s. Some of the experiments where carried out at 30 bar, and for these the hydrogen ﬂow
rate was set to 400 NmL/min.
The ﬂow rate of the precursor solution will be varied during the experiments and will lie within the range
of 0.25 to 2 mL/min, resulting in superﬁcial velocities in the range of 0.0829-0.6635 kg/m2s.
Both the gas and liquid ﬂow lie within the trickle zone at these conditions.
While several experiments were conducted with varying concentrations, the majority of the experiments
were conducted with a concentration for the precursor solution of 0.03 M. This is signiﬁcantly lower than
the app. 0.4 M, which is what the concentration was in the batch production. This decision is made due
to precursor shortage, as no more precursor will be produced.
Pressure
The mass transfer of hydrogen into the liquid phase is, as earlier mentioned, dependent on the pressure of
the hydrogen and thereby the solubility of hydrogen in the liquid phase.
The compositions of the liquid and vapor phase in hydrogen/acetic acid systems were obtained at 75 ◦C
[55]. The amount of dissolved hydrogen in the liquid phase at gas ﬂow rates of 1000 NmL/min at 60 bar
and of 400 NmL/min at 30 bar were determined for pressures ranging from 2.7 to 90 bar.
The amount of dissolved hydrogen in the liquid phase −that is necessary for a full conversion of a
precursor solution −is found for a given concentration at a 0.5 mL/min liquid ﬂow rate. This is done
under the assumption of a 1:1 stoichiometry for pressures ranging from 2.7 bar to 90 bar, following the
method described in Appendix A.
Table 8 displays the excess of available hydrogen for the diﬀerent applied concentrations of precursor for
29
==PAGE:40==
a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 400 NmL/min at 30 bar at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min. For a precursor
concentration of 0.03 M, the excess of available hydrogen is also presented for a hydrogen ﬂow rate of
1000 NmL/min at 60 bar, as this is the only precursor concentration applied for this hydrogen ﬂow rate.
The values indicate the ratio between dissolved hydrogen and precursor, meaning that for concentrations of
0.01 M and a pressure of 2.7 bar, there is 3.3 times more dissolved hydrogen than precursor at equilibrium.
Table 8: Theoretical excess ratio of available hydrogen at thermodynamic
equilibrium for diﬀerent precursor concentrations at speciﬁc pressures.
Pressure [bar]
0.01 M
(30 bar)
0.03 M
(30 bar)
0.03 M
(60 bar)
0.1 M
(30 bar)
0.3 M
(30 bar)
2.7
3.3
1.1
3
0.44
0.11
10.7
10
3.4
8
1.3
0.34
17.8
15
5.0
12
2.0
0.50
29.6
23
7.8
20
3.1
0.78
43.6
36
12
30
4.8
1.2
56.7
36
12
30
4.8
1.2
62.6
51
17
42
6.8
1.7
90
74
25
61
9.8
2.5
An excess ratio of minimum 1 is suﬃcient for a reaction not to be limited by hydrogen mass transfer.
According to the theoretical values from Table 8 a pressure of 10 bar should therefore be suﬃcient for the
reaction not to be limited by hydrogen mass transfer when the precursor concentration is 0.1 M or less at
a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min and the hydrogen ﬂow rate is 400 NmL/min at 30 bar or higher. This is
valid under the assumption that the liquid is saturated with hydrogen before entering the catalytic bed.
The experiments will be carried out at higher pressures than 10 bar until an experiment that investigates
the eﬀect of the pressure has been made. The upper limit in the POC is 100 bar and the highest pressure
that will be tested is chosen to be 90 bar.
30
==PAGE:41==
4.3
Analysis methods
Several diﬀerent analyses are needed in order to gain better insight into the chemistry. For the sake of
reproducibility, the procedures for these analyses are explained in this section and includes descriptions
of the conditions under which these analyses have been conducted.
HPLC was done in order to quantify the precursor and Sertindole in the samples taken from the POC
during experiments. No further analysis of the precursor and Sertindole is necessary.
Characterisation of the catalyst is necessary in order to gain a better understanding of the deactivation..
CO chemisorption is used to investigate the Pt dispersion, surface area and particle size on several
diﬀerent catalysts in order to attempt to explain the diﬀerent properties. TEM is also used to investigate
particle size and to see whether a change of the platinum particles can be observed after deactivation has
occurred.
SEM was used to get a clearer image of the catalyst surface thus also a better understanding of the
process. Images from before and after a catalyst was used in an experiment can be useful in determining
if API is adsorbed to the surface of the catalyst among other things.
HPLC
The HPLC works by passing the sample mixture in liquid solvent through a column containing a solid
material, that can adsorb the diﬀerent compounds in the sample. As the various compounds interact
diﬀerently with the solid adsorbent material in the column, the compounds elute at diﬀerent times,
thereby making it possible to distinguish them from each other.
The elution at the HPLC column dead time, t0, (or hold-up time) consists of the compounds that did not
interact with the stationary materia. Two eluent solutions were used to make a gradient, were the ﬁrst
solution was a 50/50 mixture of MeOH and acetonitrile and the second solution was a 25/75 mixture
of MeOH and acetonitrile. The compounds in the samples were detected with an UV detector at a
wavelength of 220 nm.
Before samples could be analysed using the HPLC, the samples were diluted to a concentration of
approximately 0.05 g/mL as this concentration was found to be in the best region for optimal HPLC
results. This was identiﬁed by running calibration samples at diﬀerent, known concentrations through the
HPLC to ﬁnd a relationship between concentration and HPLC peak area. The relationship for precursor
and Sertindole was determined to follow the expressions in Equations (9) and (10).
Cprecursor = Aprecursor
1032.8
(9)
Csertindole = Asertindole
587.94
(10)
Where C is the concentration in mM and A is the HPLC peak area in mAU·min. The chromatogram of
the precursor and Sertindole standard with a concentration of 0.025 g/mL of both is shown in Figure 13.
The samples from experiments run with 0.03 M precursor were diluted by taking 1 mL sample and mixing
it with 9 mL 1:1 MeOH/milli Q water solution. Then, 0.4 mL of the diluted sample was diluted further
by adding another 9.6 mL 1:1 MeOH/milli Q water solution. 1 mL of the resulting 0.05 g/mL dilution
was transferred to a small HPLC sample bottle ready for analysis.
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 13: HPLC chromatogram of a Sertindole (the peak to the right) and precursor (the peak
to the left) standard at 0.025 g/mL concentration. Note that the chromatogram was taken at a
wavelength of 240 nm instead of the 220 nm used for analysis in this project, however, no similar
chromatogram was available at 220 nm and visually it makes no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in this case.
Dilution and HPLC inaccuracies during HPLC analysis
Due to the HPLC sample preparation procedure, that results in a dilution factor of 250, there is potentially
a considerable source of error from even small inaccuracies. Furthermore, the accuracy of the HPLC
apparatus is unknown and as such, the magnitude of these potential errors were investigated. Four
samples from the POC were sampled three times, resulting in a total of 12 HPLC samples (shown in
Figure 14) in order to examine the error related to the HPLC analysis.
Figure 14: Three HPLC samples were produced from each POC sample.
The error consists of the potential dilution error and the potential error that stems from the HPLC itself.
The variance in HPLC area was calculated for each of the four samples and are shown in Table 9. The
results are shown as actual values as well as the percentage of deviation from the average each sample.
32
==PAGE:43==
Table 9: Examination of collective dilution and HPLC variance.
SampleID
Test 1
[mAU]
Test 2
[mAU]
Test 3
[mAU]
Average
[mAU]
VAR.S
[mAU]
VAR.S
[% of avg.]
STD.S
[mAU]
STD.S
[% of average]
CE20
77.2
75.9
75.6
76.3
0.72
0.95%
0.85
1.11%
CE21
80.0
81.3
82.3
81.2
1.32
1.63%
1.15
1.40%
CE22
92.2
94.4
97.4
94.6
6.85
7.24%
2.62
2.77%
CE23
97.6
99.4
101
99.4
6.85
6.90%
1.69
1.70%
The maximum variance is 7% calculated based on a small sample size, which is an acceptable error margin,
especially considering that it includes both the dilution error and the HPLC error. The corresponding
standard deviation was 2.8% at maximum.
Plots of HPLC peaks for samples are shown in Figures 15a, 15b, 15c and 15d. From these plots, it is
evident that no signiﬁcant deviations are visible. In combination with the maximum calculated variance
of 7%, it can be concluded that the magnitude of the dilution and HPLC errors are within acceptable
margins and does not lead to skewed results.
(a) Plots of the HPLC peaks for three dilutions of sample
CE20.
(b) Plots of the HPLC peaks for three dilutions of sample
CE21.
(c) Plots of the HPLC peaks for three dilutions of sample
CE22.
(d) Plots of the HPLC peaks for three dilutions of sample
CE23.
Figure 15: The HPLC peaks for the four samples, each from which three HPLC samples were
prepared. The experiment was conducted using 0.03 M precursor, 5.0019 g 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst,
100 ◦C and 60 bar. Samples CE20 and CE21 was run with a liquid ﬂow of 1 mL/min while samples
CE22 and CE23 were performed using a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min. No Sertindole was found in any of
the samples.
33
==PAGE:44==
CO adsorption
The platinum dispersion on the synthesized catalysts can be found using CO chemisorption, where the
dry catalyst is placed in a tube and CO gas is sent into the tube in pulses. The CO will adsorb to the
Pt particles with a chemisorption stoichiometry of approximately 1 for Pt and CO[56, 57], meaning the
catalyst surface area, particle size and thus the dispersion can be calculated with the assumption of
1:1 adsorption. The chemisorption stoichiometry is the average number of gas atoms adsorbed on each
surface metal atom for a monolayer coverage. A ﬁxed input of 283 µL CO is sent into the tube per pulse.
Using the volume of the adsorbed CO gas, vm, the speciﬁc surface area, A, is given in Equation (11). NA
is Avogadro’s number, n is the chemisorption stoichiometry, m is the mass of the catalyst sample, am is
the surface area of a occupied by a Pt atom, M is the atomic mass of Pt and wt is the metal loading of
the catalyst in %.
A =
vm
22414NAn 1
mam
100
wt
(11)
The factor of 22414 is derived from the ideal gas law at 0 ◦C and 1 atm. Additionally, the metal dispersion
can also be calculated based on the adsorbed gas volume using Equation (12).
D =
vmn
22414m

wt
100M
(12)
The volume of the adsorbed CO, vm, is found by calculating the diﬀerence in CO input and output. The
CO output is measured in ampere. As the input pulse is a known, ﬁxed volume, the amount of adsorbed
CO can be calculated as in Equation (13). The numerator in Equation (13) is equal to the pulse of the
adsorbed CO. j is number of pulses and i indicates pulse index.
vm =
Pj
i=1 (Average pulse signal [A]) −(Pulse signal i [A])
Average pulse signal [A]
(CO volume per pulse [µL])
(13)
The input pulse signal is known in µL but not in ampere. It is found in ampere by ﬁnding the average
signal of the last, constant pulses. This is done as the sample is assumed to be fully saturated with CO
at that point. Thus, for the constant pulse signals no CO should, theoretically, be lost to the sample.
The input pulse is 283 µL. The vm is then adjusted to be at SATP using the ideal gas law. The example
in Figure 16 visualizes how the calculations were done using the diﬀerent pulses.
34
==PAGE:45==
Figure 16: Example of a CO chemisorption analysis of a catalyst sample.
The pulses marked in red are used to calculate the adsorbed CO by subtracting
it from the average pulse while pulses indicated with green are used to calculate
the average pulse.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
A Scanning Electrion Microscope (SEM) can be used to study the morphology of surfaces and illustrate
particles down to 5 nm in size. This is done by aiming a focused electron beam at the surface of the
sample to scan it. The SEM then produces an image of the surface by distinguishing between atoms at
various depths within the sample. Diﬀerent procedures create diﬀerent images. High energy electron
beams are able to produce images from deeper within a sample, however, these images tend to be of lower
resolution. Contrary to the high energy beams, the low energy beams, called secondary electrons, can
generally only show the surface of the sample but will yield better image resolution[58].
All imaging was done using a benchtop SEM with a secondary electron detector and with a ﬁeld emission
gun at an acceleration voltage of 5-10 kV and a pressure of less than 6x 10−6 mbar.
Before the SEM was able to clearly show the surface, the samples had to be sputtered with a 10 nm silver
coating to allow for suﬃcient conductivity to avoid "charging", a phenomenon of electron build up on the
surface of the sample and that causes regions of white on the images. The silver coating is conductive
and thereby allows for the removal of the built up electrons[59].
Furthermore, energy dispersive spectroscopy(EDS) was used to investigate the chemical elemental
composition of the surface of the catalyst samples. EDS relies on each element having its own atomic
structure, leading to unique peaks on an electromagnetic emission spectrum when an X-ray beam is
focused onto a sample, thus given insight into the chemical element composition at the exact location
the beam is hitting. However, this is a qualitative analysis of the sample composition and many factors,
including topography of the sample, X-ray parameters, external ﬁeld noises, the atomic number of element,
and detector type, aﬀect the ﬁnal result[60, 61, 62, 63].
35
==PAGE:46==
Transmission Electron Microscopy
A Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) is an advanced electron microscope that can provide an
image of the chosen object in a very high resolution. It works by a beam of electrons that is transmitted
through an ultra thin layer of sample where it interacts with the sample. This interaction is transmitted
and an image is formed, which is then magniﬁed and recorded. Resolutions down to 1-2nm can be
obtained by this method and it can visualise a single row of atoms.
While the SEM can be used to study a surface, TEM can be used to study single particles on that given
surface, which can be used to determine particle sizes and dimensions [64].
Conversion, selectivity and yield deﬁnitions
The results of an experiment can be evaluated on several diﬀerent parameters. Conversion, selectivity or
yield are all ways to assess whether the hydrogenation of precursor was successful to an acceptable degree.
Conversion is deﬁned as the amount of precusor that has been converted as shown in Equation (14).
X = 1 −nprecursor, after hydrogenation
nprecursor, before hydrogenation
(14)
However, the conversion does not supply any information of the resulting products formed in the
hydrogenation process and as such, even a process with 100% conversion may not produce any desired
product. Thus, selectivity is introduced and is deﬁned as the amount of converted reactant, that has
been become desired product, which can be expressed as in Equation (15).
S =
nSertindole
nprecursor, before hydrogenation −nprecursor, after hydrogenation
(15)
Alternatively, the yield is a measure for how much desired product is produced based on the input of
reactant. It is calculated as the moles of active substance at end of the process per moles of precursor at
start of the process. Multiplying the conversion and the selectivity results in the yield.
Y =
nSertindole
nprecursor, before hydrogenation
= XS
(16)
36
==PAGE:47==
4.4
Initial experiments
When initialising the experimental part of the project, several sources of error were encountered, which
had to be quantiﬁed. These sources of error and complications with the POC that occurred during the
initial experiments are presented and discussed in this section and in Appendix B and C.
The ﬁrst experiment that was carried out on the POC as a part of this project was with the ﬁrst bed,
the 0.2 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed. A hydrogen ﬂow of 1000 NmL/min, a pressure of 90 bar, a liquid ﬂow of 1
mL/min, a precursor concentration of 0.03 M and a temperature of 70 ◦C.
The results of this experiment showed that none of the precursor had reacted and that no Sertindole
was produced. This was caused by too little catalytic activity. The weight percentage of platinum in the
catalyst was therefore increased for the following experiments.
The purpose of the next set of experiments was to investigate the eﬀect of changing the liquid ﬂow
rate, the temperature, and the pressure. The second bed shown in Table 7 was used, which is a 1 wt%
Pt/Al2O3 bed.
This experiment showed a high conversion in the ﬁrst sample, which could not be used due to an dilution
error when the HPLC sample was prepared, and little to no conversion in the rest of the samples. These
data can bee seen in Table B1 in Appendix B.
The reason behind the low conversion was unknown at this point. Another set of experiments where
the diﬀerent operating conditions were varied was carried out. The result can be seen in Table B2 in
Appendix B.
The results showed no conversion at low temperatures, but that Sertindole was produced at higher
temperatures. It was noticed that the conversion at 70 ◦C was higher after the temperature had reached
a 168 ◦C than it was the ﬁrst time the experiment was carried out at 70 ◦C.
Another experiment was therefore conducted to test when steady state was reached. This was carried
out at a pressure of 60 bar, a temperature of 100 ◦C. The liquid ﬂow rate was initially set to 1 mL/min
and decreased to 0.5 mL/min after one hour. The results of that experiment can be seen Table B3 in
Appendix B. These results indicated a higher conversion at a higher ﬂow, but the data was discarded as
some of the samples were green and cloudy in appearance. The reason for this sudden colour change was
unclear and the HPLC chromatograms of these samples did not show any formed impurities. Moreover,
it had been challenging to collect the samples from the POC during this experiment. This was caused by
a troubled liquid ﬂow and the fact that no pressure was lost when the magnetic valve (V38) and the back
pressure valve (V39) on the liquid down stream side were fully open.
The ﬁlters, F8, were taken apart and the reactor tube was removed from the pressure shell. It was
then discovered that a green, viscous substance had formed in the reactor and caused the plug and the
reactor tube to break. It is unknown when and why the green, viscous substance was formed but it is
assumed to be due to the high temperatures the experiment was run at as shown in Table B2 in Appendix B.
A further set of experiments were disregarded prior to this discovery due to what was considered an error
in the HPLC. The samples showed that precursor was lost, but no Sertindole was formed, which is now
known to have been caused by the precursor adsorbing to the green, viscous substance. This is explained
more thoroughly in Appendix C.
Subsequent to cleaning the POC, a 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 (bed 3 from Table 7) was packed and an experiment
was initiated where it was investigated when steady state would be reached after changing a single
37
==PAGE:48==
condition. However, the experiment was terminated immediately because of a severe pressure drop on
the down-stream side, indicating a plug in the reactor. This was caused by the alumina support of the 5
wt% Pt/Al2O3 being too brittle and unable to maintain the desired particle size. A picture of the bed
and a more thorough description can be found in Appendix C.
Another 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed (bed 4 in Table 7) was packed and was to be used in a steady state
experiment at 60 bar and 93 ◦C. A conversion close to 100% was reached, but it was discovered that
the catalyst deactivated fast and made this combination of parameters unfeasible. The results of this
experiment are shown in Figure 17.
A new 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed (bed 4 in Table 7) was packed with the purpose of testing the deactivation
at 70 ◦C instead. However, this experiment was never fully conducted due to plugging in the reactor
caused by the particle size distribution of the catalyst.
It was therefore decided to change the particle size range from 300-600 µm to 425-600 µm in order to
avoid future plugging.
38
==PAGE:49==
4.5
Experimental overview
The experiments that were carried out after the initial experiments are presented in this section in a
chronological order. This includes experiments that were conducted with a catalyst with a particle
size ranging from 425-600 µm. One of the overall purposes of the chosen experiments was to study
the deactivation of the catalyst, which was done for both alumina and carbon supported platinum
catalysts, and to be able to quantify the deactivation. In addition, it was desired to investigate what
eﬀect diﬀerent operating conditions had on the conversion. The values of the operating conditions are
given in the description of the speciﬁc experiments below, besides the hydrogen ﬂow rate that was set to
1000 NmL/min for all experiments and the precursor concentration is 0.03 M unless other is stated.
Exp 1: Deactivation experiment with 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3
The ﬁrst experiment after it was discovered that the catalyst deactivates was a deactivation experiment
with bed 6 from Table 7, which is synthesised 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalytic bed with a height of 18 cm. The
purpose of this experiment was to study the deactivation of the catalyst, since deactivation was noticed
during an experiment with a 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalytic bed. The liquid ﬂow was 0.5 mL/min with a
precursor concentration of 0.03 M, the pressure was set to 60 bar, the temperature was 70 ◦C and the
experiment ran for 17 hours whith a sample taken every 30 minutes.
Exp 2: Deactivation experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C
This experiment was conducted in order to determine if the catalyst support has an eﬀect on the deactiv-
ation. A 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst was synthesised and a 20 cm bed was packed, bed 7 from Table 7. An
18 hour experiment with a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min, a pressure of 60 bar and a temperature of 70 ◦C,
which are the same conditions as for the deactivation experiment with the 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed. Samples
were also taken every 30 minutes in this case.
Exp 3: Flow experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C
Based on the results from the prior deactivation experiment with the 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst (Exp 2) it was
decided to investigate the eﬀect of changing liquid ﬂow rates. This experiment was conducted with a 10
cm 5 wt% Pt/C bed, bed 8 from Table 7. The height of the bed was chosen to be 10 cm, since the 20 cm
bed showed a conversion close to 100% and no deactivation. It was carried out with a pressure of 60 bar
and a temperature of 70 ◦C. Liquid ﬂow rates of 0.25 mL/min, 0.5 mL/min, 1 mL/min, and 2 mL/min
were tried and each ﬂow was held constant for a period of time corresponding to 45 mL, and a sample
was taken after 15 mL had passed trough the reactor.
Exp 4: Steady state and pressure experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C
The results from the previous ﬂow experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C (Exp 3) indicated that the catalyst
was either deactivating or that the experiment had not been run at each condition long enough to reach
steady state. Another ﬂow experiment was therefore made with the same 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C, bed 8 from
Table 7, where the initial liquid ﬂow was 0.5 mL/min which was increased to 1 mL/min after 2 hours.
The pressure was 60 bar and the temperature was 70 ◦C.
An experiment where the eﬀect of the pressure was studied was done with the same bed, operational
conditions and with a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min. The chosen pressures were 10, 20, 30, 45, and 60 bar,
respectively, and each condition was maintained for two hours.
Exp 5: Reactivation of 5 wt% Pt/C bed with acetonitrile
Acetonitrile was used to ﬂush the HPLC column between each sample to remove all deposited precursor
and Sertindole. Therefore, an experiment where a used catalytic bed was ﬂushed with acetonitrile was
carried out in order to see if that could reactivate the catalyst. Bed 7 from Table 7, a 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C
39
==PAGE:50==
bed, was used. Initially, a precursor solution was used at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min, a temperature
of 70 ◦C, and a pressure of 60 bar for two hours in order to know what the conversion was prior to
ﬂushing the bed with acetonitrile. Subsequent, the gas supply was changed to nitrogen, and 800 mL
acetonitrile was passed trough the bed at a ﬂow rate of 2 mL/min.
Exp 6: Deactivation experiment at lower temperatures with 5 wt% Pt/C
The results from the steady state and pressure experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C (Exp 4) showed that the
catalyst was deactivating at the given conditions. The purpose of this experiment was to investigate the
deactivation of the catalyst at a lower temperature. A new 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C bed, bed 9 from Table
7, was packed and the experiment was initiated with a temperature of 50 ◦C. The pressure was 60 bar
and the liquid ﬂow rate was 0.5 mL/min. The experiment ran for 10 hours at 50 ◦C before the temper-
ature was increased to 60 ◦C for another 10 hours. A sample was taken for every 15 mL (every 30 minutes).
Exp 7: Flow, pressure and temperature experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C
Based on the results from the ﬁrst deactivation experiment with a 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C bed, it was
known that only little deactivation occurred during the ﬁrst 18 hours at 70 ◦C with a liquid ﬂow rate of
0.5 mL/min. Furthermore, it was known from the deactivation study at lower temperatures that the
deactivation was even slower at lower temperatures. It was therefore chosen to use a 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C
bed, bed 10 from Table 7, to test the eﬀects of diﬀerent liquid ﬂow rates, pressures and temperatures at a
lower temperature.
The temperature was set to 50 ◦C and the pressure was 60 bar. The experiment was initiated with a
liquid ﬂow of 1 mL/min, which was lowered to 0.5 mL/min after three hours. Three diﬀerent pressures;
10, 30, and 60 bar, were tested during the pressure experiment that was operated at a liquid ﬂow rate of
0.5 mL/min and a temperature of 50 ◦C.
Each pressure was held constant for 2.5 hours, since it was found that it took 90 minutes until steady
state was reached at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min in Experiment 6.
Finally, two additional temperatures were tested, 60 and 70 ◦C, at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min and a
pressure of 30 bar. The pressure was lowered to 30 bar due to challenges with the back pressure valve
V34A that could not maintain higher pressures at that time.
Exp 8: Deactivation experiment with 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3
The last one of the initial experiments was carried out at 93 ◦C with a 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed and showed
fast deactivation. Another deactivation experiment with a 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed, bed 11 from Table 7,
was carried out at 65 ◦C to study the eﬀect of a lower temperature on the deactivation. This experiment
was run for 12.5 hours at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min and a pressure of 30 bar. Ideally, the pressure
should have been 60 bar and the particle size of the catalyst should have been 300-600 µm in order for
the two experiments to be comparable, but this was not possible due to the challenges with the back
pressure vale V34A and reactor plugging.
Exp 9: Flow, pressure and temperature experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C
The ﬂow, pressure and temperature experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C, Experiment 7, resulted in very little
conversion and no diﬀerence in the conversion when the conditions were changed. It was discovered that
the applied 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C, bed 10 from Table 7, was not properly wetted during the experiments.
The ﬂow, pressure and temperature experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C was therefore carried out once more
with a new catalytic bed; bed 12 from Table 7. An attempt was made to wet the bed by starting with a
liquid ﬂow 10 mL/min 85 wt% acetic acid for 30 minutes at a hydrogen ﬂow of 200 mL/min before the
experiment was initialised.
For the ﬂow experiment, the temperature was set to 60 ◦C and the pressure was 30 bar, which was
40
==PAGE:51==
a pressure that could be maintained by the faulty back pressure valve, V34A. The ﬂows that were
investigates was 1 mL/min and 0.5 mL/min.
1 mL/min was the initial ﬂow, which was maintained for 3 hours in order to saturate the bed. The ﬂow
was then lowered to 0.5 mL/min, which was also maintained for 3 hours.
Only two diﬀerent pressures were tested; 10 and 30 bar due to the fact that higher pressures were
cumbersome to reach at that point. This was done by lowering the pressure to 10 bar immediately after
the ﬂow experiment. The pressure experiment was thereby conducted at a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min and
a temperature of 60 ◦C.
Finally, temperatures of 50, 60 and 70 ◦C were tested at a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min and a pressure of 30
bar. All conditions were kept constant for 2.5 hours, except for the ﬂow experiment, and a sample was
taken every 30 minutes.
The results from this experiment showed that no reaction had taken place. The bed was removed from
the POC and it was discovered that it had only been wetted in the top, meaning that very little catalyst
had been utilised. The bed was then wetted manually outside the POC, and an identical experiment was
carried out with the wetted bed, which did not lead to conversion either.
Another identical experiment was carried out where the ﬂow rate of hydrogen was reduced from 1000
NmL/min to 400 NmL/min and a new batch of 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst was used, bed 13 from Table 7.
Exp 10: Deactivation experiment with 5 wt% Pt/C
It was desired to study the deactivation of the 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst at a lower temperature than 70 ◦C,
which was the temperature used in the the previous deactivation study (Exp 2). The 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C,
bed 13 from Table 7, was used and had at this point already been used in Experiment 9. It was chosen not
to use a fresh bed to minimise the possibility of a masked deactivation due to a high activity of the catalyst.
This experiment was conducted at 60 ◦C, a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min, a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 400
NmL/min and 30 bar for 18 hours. A sample was taken every hour in order to compare it to Experiment 2.
Exp 11: Reactivation by washing with 85 wt% acetic acid
The results from Experiment 5 showed that it is not possible to reactivate the Pt/C catalyst with
acetonitrile and it was therefore tried to do so with a 85 wt% acetic acid solution, which is the solvent
used in the precursor solution. This would show whether the deactivation is caused by deposition of
precursor or Sertindole crystals on the catalyst surface since these would be stabilised and removed by
the 85 wt% acetic acid solution.
The bed that was applied in this experiment is the bed that was used in Experiment 9 and 10, bed 13 from
Table 7. The experiment was conducted at 60 ◦C, a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.75 mL/min 85 wt% acetic acid,
a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 400 NmL/min and 30 bar for 15 hours. A liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min precursor
solution was initiated to investigate whether the reactivation attempt had worked. The experiment was
then continued for four hours at 60 ◦C, a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min precursor solution, a hydrogen
ﬂow rate of 400 NmL/min and 30 bar.
Exp 12: Varying precursor solution concentration with 5 wt% Pt/C
An experiment where varying precursor solution concentrations were used was conducted in order to
determine the order of the reaction. A 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C bed was used, bed 14 from Table 7, and
the experiment was conducted at 60 ◦C, a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min, a hydrogen ﬂow rate of
400 NmL/min and 30 bar. The experiment was initiated with a 0.03 M precursor concentration which
was maintained for four hours in order to saturate the catalyst. The following used precursor solution
concentrations were 0.01 M, 0.1 M, and 0.3 M, which were all maintained for four hours each and with a
sample taken every 30 minutes.
41
==PAGE:52==
5
Experimental results
The conducted experiments, that were presented in Section 4.5, and the corresponding obtained results will
be described and discussed in this section. Initially, the three diﬀerent experiments that were conducted
in order to investigate the deactivation of the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst are presented. Subsequent, experiments
are presented where the deactivation and reactivation of a Pt/C catalyst is studied. This is followed by
an experiment where the impact of the liquid ﬂow rate, the pressure, the temperature, and the precursor
concentration is tested. Finally, the catalyst characterisation results from the CO adsorption, SEM and
TEM are presented.
5.1
Exp 1 and 8: Pt/Al2O3 deactivation study
An experiment was conducted to ﬁnd the required time before the system, and thus the conversion, could
be considered in steady state. However, this experiment showed that steady state was not reached due
to a considerable deactivation of the catalyst. The experiment was run using a 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3, bed 4
from Table 7, at 60 bar and 93 ◦C over 12.5 hours. The resulting plot of conversion and yield over time is
shown in Figure 17.
Figure 17: Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 14.5 cm 5.3533 g 1 wt%
Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 4) at 60 bar, 93 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min.
As evident from Figure 17, it was at the chosen conditions initially possible to obtain a conversion close
to 100%, but the fast deactivation of the catalyst makes it unviable for continuous production as it would
require a production stop far too frequently.
It was thus examined if increasing the amount of Pt in the catalyst bed would suﬃciently increase the
catalyst lifetime to make it viable for continuous production and to investigate whether the observed
decrease in conversion was actual catalyst deactivation.
It was found that on start-up of experiments with a fresh bed, the conversion and yield showed a signiﬁcant
discrepancy in the ﬁrst few hours of the experiment.
As the conversion is calculated based on the diﬀerence in precursor input and output but the yield is
calculated based on the Sertindole output, this suggests that in the time span of the conversion/yield
42
==PAGE:53==
discrepancy, there is a build-up of precursor and/or Sertindole in the reactor. As it was only observed for
fresh beds, it strongly suggests that precursor and Sertindole builds up in the reactor until the bed is
saturated, at which point the yield and conversion then starts to converge as no more API is accumulated
in the reactor.
The amount of precursor needed before the conversion and yield converges is dependent on the amount of
catalyst in the bed but on average was found to be 0.16 g precursor (49 mL)/g catalyst with a variance
of ±7 mL/g for a 0.03 M precursor solution and a 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst.
An experiment was run using 5.0055 g of a 18 cm 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst, bed 6 from Table 7, to see
the eﬀects of increased amount of active sites in the bed. Note that the temperature was also lowered
from 93 ◦C to 70 ◦C in an attempt to further decrease deactivation of the catalyst. The experiment
was run for 17.5 hours at a pressure of 60 bar and a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min and the results are
presented in Figure 18 below.
Figure 18: Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 14 cm 5.0055 g 5 wt%
Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 5) at 60 bar, 70 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min. Bed height was
18.5 cm. Where "New day" is marked, the ﬂow to the reactor was stopped overnight and restarted
again the next day.
The 5 w% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst shown in Figure 18 shows considerably slower deactivation. The conversion
only dropped 34%-points from 98% to 64% after 10 hours, whereas the conversion using a 1 wt%, shown
in Figure 17, had dropped by 88%-points from 96% to 8% after 10 hours. This is likely due to the
increased amount of total platinum in the bed compared to the 1 wt% bed.
The three major causes of deactivation are thermal damage, poisoning of the catalyst and mechan-
ical damage to the catalyst. Thermal damage can lead to sintering of the platinum particles and may
even cause the platinum and the support to react[65]. However, sintering is, in most cases, negligible at
temperatures of 40% or below of the catalyst metal’s melting point[22], which for Pt is 2041K·40% =
816K = 543 ◦C which is well below the applied temperatures in this project.
43
==PAGE:54==
Impurities in the precursor solution as well as potential side-products can poison the catalyst and thus
block access to the platinum surfaces. Furthermore, coking is a common mechanism of catalyst activity
decay in systems containing hydrocarbons as it results in a carbonaceous material being deposited on the
catalyst, also blocking access to the active sites[22].
Based on the fact that a decrease in temperature can decrease the deactivation of the catalyst it
was desired to investigate this with another 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed. A deactivation study of a 14 cm 1 wt%
Pt/Al2O3 bed, bed 11 from Table 7, carried out at 65 ◦C, 30 bar and a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min for
12.5 hours. It was not possible to conduct this experiment at the same pressure and catalyst particle size
as the 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 (bed 4) study presented in Figure 17 due to the faulty back pressure valve, V34A,
and potential plugging in the reactor. The results from this experiment are presented in Figure 19 below
where it shows that the decrease in temperature did not have an signiﬁcant eﬀect on the deactivation
compared to the results presented in Figure 17 when the changes in pressure and catalyst particle size
are not taken into consideration.
Figure 19: Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 14 cm 5.0010 g 1 wt%
Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 11) at 30 bar, 65 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min. Bed height
was 14 cm. Where the gab in the graph marks a new day.
A comparison between the conversions over time for both 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 are shown in Figure 20. The
comparison illustrates that lowering the temperature did not have an eﬀect on the deactivation.
44
==PAGE:55==
Figure 20: 93◦C (blue graph): Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 14.5 cm
5.3533 g 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 4) at 60 bar, 93 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min.
65◦C (green graph): Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 14 cm 5.0010 g 1 wt%
Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 11) at 30 bar, 65 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min. Bed height
was 14 cm. The gab in the graph marks a new day.
The conversions for both experiments follow a similar pattern where the conversion for the experiment
that was carried out at 65 ◦C has a slightly less steep deactivation but reaches total deactivation sooner
than the experiment that was carried out at 93 ◦C.
asd
45
==PAGE:56==
5.2
Exp 2: Initial Pt/C deactivation study
The support can inﬂuence the deactivation and thus, a carbon support was tested in place of the alumina.
A bed of 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C, bed 7 from Table 7, was investigated for deactivation over 18 hours at 60
bar and 70 ◦C with a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min. The resulting plot of conversion and yield over
time is shown in Figure 21.
Figure 21: Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 20 cm 3.5948 g 5 wt% Pt/C
catalyst (bed 7) at 60 bar, 70 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min.
As evident from Figure 21, the Pt/C catalyst shows little sign of deactivation and a conversion above
90%. The conversion dropped only 2%-points in the ﬁrst 10 hours, going from 96% to 94%. Hence, the
Pt/C catalyst is considerably more stable than the two Pt/Al2O3 catalysts tested in terms of deactivation
while still showing high conversion.
46
==PAGE:57==
5.3
Exp 3: Flow rate study with Pt/C
The impact of the liquid ﬂow rate on the conversion was investigated with a 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst,
bed 8 from Table 7, a pressure of 60 bar and a temperature of 70 ◦C. Liquid ﬂow rates of 0.25, 0.5, 1,
and 2 mL/min were tested in the order: 0.5, 0.25, 0.5, 1, and, lastly, 2 as marked on Figure 22. The
varying ﬂow rates are in units mL/min.
Figure 22: Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst
(bed 8) at 60 bar, 70 ◦C using varying 0.03 M liquid ﬂow rates. The diﬀerent ﬂow rates applied to
diﬀerent times are stamped on the chart in mL/min.
Figure 22 indicates that the conversion decreases with increasing liquid ﬂow rates at the given conditions.
The fact that neither of the conversion rates showed any sign of stabilisation during the experiment
indicates that steady state was not reached at any point. The drop after 6 hours can either be due to a
convergence towards steady state, or because the deactivation of the catalyst is accelerating.
47
==PAGE:58==
5.4
Exp 4: Steady state and pressure study with Pt/C
Another experiment was carried out where the liquid ﬂow rate was varied in order to determine whether or
not steady state had been reached between the changes in ﬂow rate. If this is not deemed the explanation,
the deactivation of the 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst, bed 8 from Table 7, is considered.
The pressure was set to 60 bar and the temperature to 70 ◦C as it was in experiment 3. Only two liquid
ﬂow rates were tested during this experiment, namely 0.5 and 1 mL/min. The ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min was
maintained for 2.5 hours and the ﬂow of 1 mL/min was maintained for 2 hours. The catalytic bed had
been running for 4 hours for another experiment with the purpose to test the impact of diﬀerent pressures.
This short experiment was discarded, however, since it was found more critical to examine the time it
takes to reach steady state. Therefore, the data for this experiment starts 4 hours after the initialisation
of the reactor.
The results from this experiment are shown in Figure 23 where a drop in conversion happens when
the liquid ﬂow rate is increased. It is also indicated that the catalyst is deactivating, since a drop in
conversion from 74% to 66% occurs before the ﬂow rate is changed.
Figure 23: Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation and change in conversion due to
change in liquid ﬂow rates of the 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst (bed 8) at 60 bar, 70 ◦C. This bed has
been used for 8 hours prior to this experiment.
Directly after the ﬂow experiment another experiment was conducted where the impact of varying
pressures was investigated. This was performed prior to obtaining and analysing the results shown in
Figure 23 and it was therefore not known at the time that the catalyst was deactivating. From Figure 24
it is evident that the catalyst was deactivating and that no increase in conversion in relation to increased
pressures are observed. A decrease in conversion is not expected for an increase in pressure without the
element of deactivation.
48
==PAGE:59==
Figure 24: Conversion and yield over time showing deactivation of the 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst
(bed 8) at 0.5 mL/min, 70 ◦C and pressures varying from 10 to 60 bar. This bed had been used for 15
hours prior to this experiment.
asd
49
==PAGE:60==
5.5
Exp 6: Deactivation at lower temperatures with Pt/C
It was now known that the catalyst was deactivating when the temperature was 70 ◦C, and it was
therefore desired to study the deactivation at lower temperatures. This was done to explore the possibility
of conducting the future experiments at a lower temperature in order to expand the life of the catalyst.
The experiment was carried out at 60 bar and a liquid ﬂow rate 0.5 mL/min at 50 ◦C and 60 ◦C with a
10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C, bed 9 from 7. A temperature of 50 ◦C was maintained for 10 hours where it was
increased to 60 ◦C, which was maintained for 15 hours. The results are shown in Figure 25 from which it
is evident that the reaction can take place under the given conditions, but resulting in a lower conversion.
Moreover, it can be seen that the catalyst is deactivating when the reaction is stabilised and steady state
is reached at both 50 ◦C and 60 ◦C.
Figure 25: Conversion and yield over time at 50 ◦C and 60 ◦C of the 10 cm 1.7822 g 5 wt% Pt/C
catalyst (bed 9) at liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min, and a pressure of 60 bar.
asd
50
==PAGE:61==
5.6
Exp 7 and 9: Flow, pressure and temperature experiment with Pt/C
Based on the results that were obtained from experiment 6, it was chosen to study the impact of changing
liquid ﬂow rates, pressures and temperatures at 50 ◦C in stead of 70 ◦C. This was due to the fact that it
was known that a 10 cm 5 wt% Pt/C bed would not deactivate signiﬁcantly during the experiment and
that it would make it possible to detect changes in conversion, since the point of reference would not be
close to total conversion. It was chosen to use a 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C bed, bed 10 from Table 7, to increase
the activity further.
An issue regarding the POC was encountered. The back pressure valve V34A could not maintain a
pressure of 60 bar, which made it diﬃcult to operate at such pressures. The valve was disassembled,
cleaned, calibrated and some spare parts were replaced. This did not solve the issue and the cause of it
was not found and time did not allow for proper maintenance of the valve.
During the ﬁrst part of the experiment the ﬂow was the only parameter that was changed, the pressure
was kept at 60 bar and the temperature was 50 ◦C. The initial ﬂow was 1 mL/min, which was maintained
for 2.5 hours and then decreased to 0.5 mL/min for 3.5 hours.
The impact of the pressure was investigated during the next part of the experiment at a liquid ﬂow rate
of 0.5 mL/min and 50 ◦C. The studied pressures were 10, 30 and 60 bar and they were each kept constant
for 2.5 hours each. The pressure was unstable at 60 bar and had to be manually controlled by opening
and closing the ball valve placed directly after the back pressure valve, V34A. The third and ﬁnal part of
the experiment was to study the impact of higher temperatures and the chosen ones were 60 ◦C and 70
◦C at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min and a pressure of 30 bar.
The pressure was for that part of the experiment decreased to 30 bar due to the faulty back pressure
valve. This should not have an eﬀect on the reaction at precursor concentration of 0.03 M at 30 bar and
a hydrogen ﬂow of 1000 NmL/min according to the values presented in Table 8. However, while the
stoichiometric excess of dissolved hydrogen in the liquid phase is still signiﬁcant. A decrease in pressure
will lower the reaction rate and can thereby cause a slower reaction and potentially lower conversion.
This will only be detectable in cases where the liquid ﬂow rates or the precursor concentrations are too
high for the reaction to take place due to a decrease on the residence time.
The results from this experiment are presented in Figure 26 below.
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 26: Conversion and yield over time of the 20 cm 3.6859 g 5 wt% Pt/C catalyst (bed 9) at 10,
30 and 60 bar, 50 ◦C, 60 ◦C and 70 ◦C
From Figure 26 it is evident that a decrease in ﬂow rate did not cause an increase in the conversion and
that increasing pressures did not impact the conversion either. The conversion was in fact lower than
expected for the given conditions compared to results that were obtained for similar conditions during
Experiment 6.
It was found that the increasing temperatures had an eﬀect on the conversion, but the conversion was
below 30% at 70 ◦C, which was not as expected for a 20 cm 5 wt% Pt/C and a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5
mL/min. At these conditions the conversion was expected to be close to 100%.
The bed was removed from the POC in order to ﬁnd out whether it had broken and thereby had led the
liquid around the catalyst instead of through it. This showed not to be the case as the quartz tube was
intact. It was instead discovered that the catalyst was dry in the middle section of the bed. Only the
ﬁrst and last few centimeters of the bed had been wetted, meaning that the whole bed had not been
utilized. The exact ﬂow path of the liquid could not be determined. The poor wetting, that had not been
the case with the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst, could be caused by the hydrophobic nature of the carbon support
that led the liquid to only ﬂow through a smaller canal inside the bed.
In a attempt to ﬁx the issue, the bed was wetted manually using 85 wt% acetic acid and reinserted into
the POC. The ﬂow, pressure and temperature tests were repeated using the wetted bed. However, little
to no Sertindole was found in the samples and when the bed was once again removed from the POC, it
was no longer wet. The conversion and yield are shown in Figure 27.
52
==PAGE:63==
Figure 27: Conversion and yield over time for bed 12 with 3.3563g wt% 20 cm Pt/C. 1000 NmL/min
hydrogen ﬂow.
While no indication of such issues were observed during the previous pressure test in Experiment 4,
attempts at running Experiments 7 and 9 at 30 bar failed due to insuﬃcient wetting, showing little to no
Sertindole in the samples.
The cause of the aforementioned wetting issue was found to be the gas ﬂow rate as it was originally
calculated to be used at 90 bar. At 60 ◦C and compressed to 90 bar, the 1000 NmL/min (at SATP) gas
ﬂow rate corresponds to 12.4 mL/min. However, reducing the pressure from 90 to 30 bar drastically
increases this volume to 37.2 mL/min, presumably causing the liquid precursor to be pushed through a
tiny tunnel in the bed at high speed rather than trickling down the full bed as desired. This results in two
changed factors: A signiﬁcantly lower eﬀectiveness factor caused by the poor wetting as well as a much
lower residence time. The result of this combination is a near-zero conversion as mentioned above. As
such, it was calculated that at 30 bar, the new hydrogen ﬂow rate should be be 333 NmL/min, however,
at such a low ﬂow rate it may not be possible to maintain the pressure of 30 bar and thus a ﬂow rate of
400 NmL/min was chosen. At 10 bar, the required hydrogen ﬂow was calculated to be 111 NmL/min,
but once again, in order to avoid pressure loss, a hydrogen ﬂow of 200 NmL/min was used instead.
Experiment 9 was carried out once more with the same operational conditions except for the hydrogen
ﬂow rate that was decreased to 400 NmL/min at 30 bar and 200 NmL/min at 10 bar. This results in an
actual hydrogen ﬂow of 15 mL/min at 30 bar and 60 ◦C and 22.3 mL/min at 10 bar and 60 ◦C. The
conversion and yield of the experiment can be seen in Figure 28.
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 28: Conversion and yield over time for bed 13 with 3.2313g 5 wt% 20 cm Pt/C (bed 13). Where 10
bar is indicated, the hydrogen gas ﬂow was 200 NmL/min, otherwise a hydrogen gas ﬂow of 400 NmL/min
was used. Where the conditions 50 and 70 ◦C are marked, a ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min and pressure of 30 bar
are applied. The gap in the graphs after 8 hours indicate a new day.
As the bed is fresh, the ﬁrst 120 minutes shows a conversion and yield gap. After that, the conversion
and yield converges and the change from a liquid ﬂow of 1 mL/min to 0.5 mL/min shows a signiﬁcant
increase in conversion from approximately 55% to just under 80%. The continued rise in conversion could
be that conversion has not yet reached steady state after the change in liquid ﬂow rate or it could be
due to the change in pressure and hydrogen ﬂow rate that caused an increase in the gas ﬂow inside the
reactor since it would be 22.3 mL/min at 10 bar and 200 NmL/min and only 15 mL/min at 30 bar and
400 NmL/min. An increased ﬂow rate inside the rector could lead to increased hydrogen mass transfer
and thereby cause a higher conversion although the pressure being lower.
The part of the experiment where the impact of the temperature was tested at a liquid ﬂow rate
of 0.5 ml/min, 30 bar, and a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 400 NmL/min is also displayed in Figure 28. The
experiment was initiated at 50 ◦C and increased to 70 ◦C after 2 hours and 45 min. It is from Figure 28
evident that steady state had not been reached at 50 ◦C after 2 hours and 45 min and it is therefore not
possible to conclude whether the conversion at the given conditions is ca. 50% or lower.
The conversion at 70 ◦C is above 90%, which aligns with the results obtained from Experiment 2 and 3
that were both run at the same conditions except for the pressure being 60 bar and the hydrogen ﬂow
rate 1000 NmL/min. These results indicate that the reaction is not limited by hydrogen mass transfer at
30 bar and that a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 400 NmL/min provides the liquid with an suﬃcient amount of
hydrogen at the given conditions.
asd
54
==PAGE:65==
5.7
Exp 12: Concentration study
An experiment where the concentration of the precursor solution was varied was carried out with a liquid
ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min, a pressure of 30 bar, a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 400 NmL/min, and a temperature
of 60 ◦C. The experiment was initiated with a precursor concentration of 0.03 M for 4 hours just for
the purpose of saturating the bed, since a fresh 20 cm 5wt% Pt/C bed, bed 14 from Table 7, was used.
Precursor solutions of 0.01 M, 0.1 M and 0.3 M were tested and run for 4 hours each and results are
shown in Figure 29.
Figure 29: Conversion and yield over time for bed 14 with 3.2405g 5wt% Pt/C catalyst. Liquid
ﬂow rate 0.5 mL/min, pressure 30 bar, hydrogen ﬂow rate 400 NmL/min, 60 ◦C, and precursor
concentrations of 0.01 M, 0.1 M, and 0.3 M. The gap in the graph indicates a new day.
It is evident from Figure 29 that steady state was not reached between the diﬀerent precursor solutions
as the conversion is not stable. The conversion and yield is determined based on the used precursor
solution, which means that the ﬁrst couple of samples after the precursor concentration is changed are
not correct. This is due to residual precursor from the previous concentration in the reactor, leading to a
higher conversion since the conversion calculation does not take this into account. The yield for the 0.01
M part of the experiment is not shown, since it was above 100% due to the prior precursor concentration
being 0.03 M.
It can be seen that the lowest concentration results in the highest conversion at the given conditions, but
the experiment is to be carried out for a longer time for each condition in order to reach steady state
and stability between the yield and the conversion. The data from this concentration study is used to
investigate the reaction order in Section 5.9.
asd
55
==PAGE:66==
5.8
Exp 5, 10 and 11: Deactivation and reactivation
In many cases, catalysts can be reactivated after deactivation has occurred. This is typically done via
calcination, where the coke or poison that is inhibiting the catalyst is burned oﬀ. However, catalysts
on carbon support cannot undergo calcination as the process would also burn the support itself. An
alternative to the calcination process is a chemical reactivation, wherein a diﬀerent substance is used to
remove the coke and/or other contaminants from the catalyst.
Acetonitrile was used in an attempt to reactivate the catalyst by removing adsorbed precursor and/or
Sertindole. 800 mL of acetonitrile was run through the system for at a ﬂow rate 3 mL/min, 70 ◦C, a
hydrogen ﬂow rate of 1000 NmL/min, and 60 bar. Bed 7 from Table 7 was used, which had also been used
in Experiment 2. The activity of the bed was therefore tested with 0.03 M precursor prior to washing
it with acetonitrile to investigate whether the bed had deactivated since Experiment 2 was carried out.
This was done for two hours at a ﬂow rate 0.5 mL/min, 70 ◦C, a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 1000 NmL/min,
and 60 bar. After the bed had been washed with acetonitrile it was once again operated with 0.03 M
precursor at the same conditions as before the wash in order to see the eﬀect of the wash. The results are
shown in Figure 30.
Figure 30: Conversion before and after bed 7, a 20 cm 3.5948 5 wt% Pt/C, was washed with 800 mL
acetonitrile at a ﬂow rate 3 mL/min, 70 ◦C, a hydrogen ﬂow rate of 1000 NmL/min, and 60 bar.
As is evident from Figure 30, the wash with acetonitrile deactivated the catalyst completely and is
therefore not a viable reactivation method for Pt/C catalysts.
56
==PAGE:67==
Since it was suspected that the deactivation was caused by adsorption of precursor and/or Sertindole
on the catalyst surface and thus it was attempted to reactivate the catalyst by washing the bed with
85% acetic acid. Before the reactivation attempt, the conversion was approximately 70%. Afterward the
washing with acetic acid, 0.03 M precursor was run over the bed at 0.5 mL/min, 60 ◦C and 30 bar for
four hours to see if the washing had any eﬀect on the deactivation. The bed was deactivated for 18 hours
on top of the 17 hours it was used to run ﬂow and temperature experiments, as described in Experiment
9, and the resulting conversion and yield is shown in Figure 31.
Figure 31: Plots of the conversion and yield during the deactivating study and subsequent attempt
to reactivate the Pt/C catalyst with 85 wt% acetic acid for four hours. Bed 13 was used for this
experiment.
The decrease in conversion and yield during the ﬁrst three hours of the experiment is not considered to be
a part of the deactivation. The bed has been used for a study at 70 ◦C (Exp 9) prior to this experiment
and this experiment is conducted on another day than Experiment 9. The conversion therefore takes a
few hours to reach its state at 60 ◦C before stabilising.
A new day was initiated at the 23 hour mark and the back pressure valve for the liquid inlet (V20)
malfunctioned just before the 27 hour mark. The liquid ﬂow was initiated approx. 1.5 hours after the
malfunction. This causes the yield and conversion to increase due to a longer residence time in the reactor
caused by a terminated liquid ﬂow.
Figure 31 shows that while the acetic acid did wash away some precursor and/or Sertindole, as evident
by the conversion and yield discrepancy from approximately 32 hours to 34 hours, it did not aﬀect the
overall conversion which was still approximately 70% after the attempted reactivation.
57
==PAGE:68==
5.9
Determining the reaction order
Throughout this project, the assumption of a ﬁrst order reaction has been employed. However, using the
data from the concentration study (Exp 12), it is theoretically possible to determine the actual reaction
order for the hydrogenation of precursor in a TBR. For the correct reaction order, calculated reaction
rate constants, k, will be identical for diﬀerent initial concentrations of precursor while it will diﬀer if
calculated using the wrong reaction order, n. As such, this can be used to determine the correct reaction
order by identifying an expression for k as a function of n.
The design equation for a PFR and an n’th order reaction is shown in Equation (17). It can be solved as
an initial value problem using the initial condition C(0)=CB0. Isolating for k in the solution results in
Equation (18).
dCB
dW = k
v0
Cn
B
(17)
k =
CB0v0

eln −
1
CB0(X−1)

nX + e−n ln(CB0) −eln −
1
CB0(X−1)

n

W (n −1)
(18)
Equation (18) is an expression for k as a function of n and thus, a plot can be made to get an overview of
the eﬀects of the reaction order on the reaction rate constants. Using the data from Exp 12 shown in
Table 10 as well as Equation (18), plots for the three data sets can be made.
Table 10: Conversion at steady state for the four initial precursor concentra-
tions tested in the concentration study (Exp 12).
Initial precursor
concentration
Conversion
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
0.01 M
88%
86%
87%
0.03 M
76%
77%
77%
0.1 M
23%
21%
19%
0.3 M
7%
12%
11%
Three data points were taken at steady state for each concentration. Data set 1 is the ﬁrst measurement
made at steady state for each concentration while data set 2 is the second measurement made and data
set 3 is the last measurement made. The graph detailing the full concentration experiment can be seen in
Figure 29.
Figure 32 shows a plot of the four reaction rate constants calculated for the diﬀerent initial concentrations
for data set 1 as a function of the reaction order in the range of 0th order to 2nd order.
58
==PAGE:69==
Figure 32: Plot of the reaction rate constant as a function of the reaction
order for data set 1.
As evident from Figure 32, the four values of k do not converge for any value of n, however, they are the
closest at approximately n = 0. The deviations may simply be due to the somewhat unreliable data that
was collected during the concentration study in Exp 12. For data set 2 and 3, the corresponding n vs k
plots are similar and are shown in Figures 33a and 33b.
(a) Data set 2.
(b) Data set 3.
Figure 33: Plots of the reaction rate constant as a function of the reaction
order.
Figures 32, 33a and 33b all show k values closest together at approximately n = 0 and thus a tentative
conclusion of a zeroth order reaction has been made, however, the poor data quality makes it diﬃcult
to make any conclusive claims on the subject of reaction order and it should therefore be investigated
further. However, due to time constraints, conducting another concentration study was not option.
59
==PAGE:70==
Table 11: k values for a zeroth order reaction calculated based on data from
Exp 12.
Initial precursor
concentration
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
0.01 M
-2.3E-08
-2.2E-08
-2.2E-08
0.03 M
-5.9E-08
-5.9E-08
-5.9E-08
0.1 M
-5.9E-08
-5.4E-08
-5.0E-08
0.3 M
-5.3E-08
-9.5E-08
-8.3E-08
The k values for a zeroth reaction order are shown in Table 11. The deviation in k value for the 0.01
M compared to the other initial concentrations can potentially be explained as the only concentration
that is not limited by mass transfer, therefore resulting in a diﬀerent reaction order than the other three
concentrations.
Note that the assumption of a ﬁrst order reaction will continue in the following sections despite the
ﬁndings in this section. This is, in part, due to time constraints as the concentration study was conducted
very late in the process but also, in part, because the data is considered somewhat unreliable as true
steady state may not have occurred at the time of the samplings.
60
==PAGE:71==
5.10
Determining the rate of deactivation
The deactivation of the catalysts used in the deactivation studies is quantiﬁed in this section. The decay
constant, kd, is determined for both Pt/Al2O3 and Pt/C beds at diﬀerent temperatures.
In order to incorporate the eﬀects of the catalytic bed into the reaction rate, catalytic activity is introduced.
The catalytic activity of the bed, a, can be calculated using Equation (19)[22].
a(t) = −r(t)
−r(t0)
(19)
r(t0) is the reaction rate of a fresh catalyst and r(t) is the reaction rate of the catalyst at time t as the
catalytic activity decreases over time. This decrease in catalytic activity, also called deactivation of the
catalyst, occurs as the number of accessible active sites is reduced, often by catalyst poisoning. The rate
of catalyst deactivation is deﬁned as the change in catalytic activity over time, shown in Equation (20).
−da
dt = a(t)kd(T)
(20)
For a packed bed reactor, a "wave front" of deactivation can be observed running through the bed over
time, as the deactivation starts at the beginning of the packed bed, adsorbing all the poison coming from
the inlet. As the active sites at the start of the packed bed becomes saturated, the poison moves farther
down the bed before encountering new active sites to adsorb to[22, 66]. However, in order to simplify the
calculations, a uniform poisoning of the catalyst is assumed. Furthermore, the rate of reaction as well as
the rate of deactivation is assumed to be of ﬁrst order.
The catalytic activity in Equation (20) can be combined with the ﬁrst order reaction rate for reactant
B, the precursor, for an expression that describes the reaction rate during catalyst deactivation. The
reaction rate with a catalyst present is shown in Equation (21) and the design equation for a packed bed
reactor is shown in Equation (22)[22].
rB = a(t)k(T)CB
(21)
v0
dCB
dW = rB
(22)
As the deactivation was assumed to be of ﬁrst order, the activity is found by separating the variables in
Equation (20) and integrating. The result is shown in Equation (23).
The reaction rate constant will from here on be denoted simply as k.
a(t) = e−kdt
(23)
Combining Equations (21)-(23) and solving the diﬀerential equation results in Equation (24).
CB = C0exp

−exp (−kdt) Wk
v0

(24)
Using the boundary condition that for W=0, BC = CB0, it is evident that C0 = CB0. Isolating −kdt
and inserting
CB
CB0 = 1 −X results in Equation (25).
−kdt = ln
−ln (1 −X) v0
Wk

= ln
 v0
Wk

+ ln (−ln (1 −X))
(25)
61
==PAGE:72==
From Equation (25), it can be seen that the logarithm rules were used to get it to resemble a linear
equation and that plotting the last term, ln (−ln (1 −X)) as a function of time will result in the an
intercept of ln
  v0
W k

and a slope of −kd.
The −kd value is found for the beds that were used in the deactivation studies. The ﬁrst used deactivation
study is Experiment 1 where a 20 cm 5wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed (bed 6) was deactivated.
The plot of
ln (−ln (1 −X)) as a function of time is shown in Figure 34. A linear trend line was added to the plot,
showing an R2 value of 0.92. While this is not a perfect linear ﬁt, the deviations could still be explained
as noise in the data. No deﬁnite conclusions can be drawn from this regarding the reaction order.
Figure 34: From Equation (25), a plot of ln (−ln (1 −X)) vs time reveals the
deactivation constant, kd = 0.001 s−1, for the 20 cm 5.0055 g 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3
catalyst (bed 6) at 60 bar, 70 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min.
A second deactivation study (Exp 2) was conducted using a Pt/C catalyst (bed 7). A plot of ln (−ln (1 −X))
as a function of time for a Pt/C catalyst (bed 7) is shown in Figure 35. A linear trend line is also shown
in the plot, showing a respectable R2 value at 0.98. The relatively accurate ﬁt of the linear trend line for
the plot in Figure 35 supports the assumption of a ﬁrst order deactivation.
Figure 35: From Equation (25), a plot of ln (−ln (1 −X)) vs time reveals the
deactivation constant, kd = 0.0001 s−1, for the 20 cm 3.5948 g 5 wt% Pt/C
catalyst (bed 7) at 60 bar, 70 ◦C using a 0.03 M liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min.
62
==PAGE:73==
A third deactivation study (Exp 10) was conducted, once again using a Pt/C catalyst (bed 13), and the
plot of ln (−ln (1 −X)) as a function of time is shown in Figure 36. The results from this deactivation
study is presented in Figure 31 where it is mentioned that the ﬂuctuations is not caused by deactivation.
The data points that were obtained during the periods where other phenomena than deactivation occurred
have therefore been removed. This resulted in a more linear ﬁt and eliminated some ﬂuctuation. The
R2 value is only 0.67, which can be due to the ﬂuctuations caused by the experiments and the fact that
only a few data points are usable for this plot. It is therefore not possible to draw a deﬁnite conclusion
regarding the reaction order for this case either.
Figure 36: From Equation (25), a plot of ln (−ln (1 −X)) vs time reveals the
deactivation constant, kd = 9 · 10−5 s−1, for the 20 cm 3.2313 g 5 wt% Pt/C
catalyst (bed 13) at 30 bar, 400 mL/min hydrogen ﬂow, 60 ◦C using a 0.03 M
liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min.
While deactivation has been observed during more experiments than the ones mentioned in this section,
there was either not enough data or too much noise in it to include them in this section. The found kd
values are presented in Table 12 from which it is evident that the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst deactivates faster
than the Pt/C catalyst. This complies with was qualitatively observed. The diﬀerence in kd between the
two Pt/C catalysts is not as signiﬁcant, which is why a more thorough study should be done in order to
determine whether the decrease in temperature causes a signiﬁcant decrease in deactivation.
Table 12: Comparison of deactivation constants calculated from experimental
deactivation data.
Bed ID
kd s[−1]
Bed 6 (Pt/Al2O3)
10−3
Bed 7 (Pt/C)
10−4
Bed 13 (Pt/C)
9·10−5
63
==PAGE:74==
5.11
Characterization of the Pt catalysts
In order to get a better understanding of the catalysts, analysis of the catalysts were conducted using
CO chemisorption as well as SEM and TEM analysis. The procedures are explained in Section 4.3. The
results are shown in the sections below.
SEM results
The surface of a deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst was investigated using a SEM. Figure 37 shows the surface
of the deactivated Pt/Al2O3 where crystals are protruding from the catalyst surface. These crystals are
assumed to be precursor and/or Sertindole as no crystals were observed on the fresh Pt/alumina catalyst
shown in Figure 38.
Figure 37: SEM image of a deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 6).
64
==PAGE:75==
Figure 38: SEM image of a fresh Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 6).
Figures 37 and 38 are shown at a magniﬁcation of 500. To get a better look at the formed crystals on the
surface of the deactivated catalyst, an image at 5000 magniﬁcation is shown in Figure 39, giving a better
look at the crystals on the surface. A bare spot without crystals in the lower, left quadrant of the image
allows to reader to see that the crystals are formed on the surface of the catalyst.
As such, this could potentially explain the deactivation of the catalyst as the crystals on the surface block
access to the active Pt sites. This suggests that the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst can potentially be reactivated
using a 85% acetic acid and water solution by dissolving the crystallised precursor and Sertindole and
thus renewing access to the active Pt sites.
Figure 39: SEM image of a deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 6).
SEM imaging of the Pt/C catalysts was also performed. The morphology of the Pt/C catalyst surface is
noticeably diﬀerent from the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst surface. A SEM image of a deactivated Pt/C is shown in
Figure 40. Comparing this image of the deactivated catalyst to one of the fresh catalyst, shown in Figure
65
==PAGE:76==
41, shows no perceptible diﬀerence in the two images. This suggests that the deactivation mechanisms of
the Pt/C and the Pt/Al2O3 are diﬀerent, as Pt/Al2O3 may have its entire surface blocked by organic
material while the Pt/C catalysts may only be deactivated by substances adsorbing to the Pt particles
and/or inside the pores of the carbon support.
Figure 40: SEM image of a deactivated Pt/C catalyst (bed 7).
Figure 41: SEM image of a fresh Pt/C catalyst (bed 7).
66
==PAGE:77==
EDS results
Using EDS, it was possible to get some insight into the chemical elemental composition of the catalysts.
Silver was hidden from the Table as it originated from the sputtering done on the Pt/C samples previous
to SEM imaging. Trace amounts of iron was found in some samples, however, this was disregarded as an
anomaly. The EDS results do not reﬂect the overall weight percentage of the given element, but rather it
provides a snapshot at the location the EDS X-ray is directed at. An overview of the weight percentage
of elements found in the samples are given in Table 13.
Table 13: The chemical average elemental composition of samples of Pt/C
and Pt/alumina catalysts found using EDS. The values are given in wt%. Beds
used are bed 7 and 6, respectively.
Chemical
element
Pt/C
fresh
Pt/C
deactivated
Pt/C deactivated,
acetonitrile
Pt/Al2O3
fresh
Pt/Al2O3
deactivated
C
67%
67%
69%
4%
22%
O
4%
8%
5%
38%
50%
Al
0%
0%
0%
46%
25%
S
1%
1%
0%
0%
0%
Cl
1%
5%
4%
2%
0%
Pt
21%
15%
17%
10%
2%
Table 13 also shows some Cl on most of the samples. This could originate from the synthesis, where
chloroplatinic acid was used as the Pt source. The Cl should be removed in the catalyst preparation,
however, it is possible that this is not always the case and thus trace amounts can still be found in the
catalyst. Furthermore, Cl has been known to be an contaminant in the precursor, although also in very
small amounts.
In addition to the weight percentages, EDS also provides elemental mapping of the distribution of the
elements on the surface of the samples.
(a) A fresh Pt/C catalyst (bed 7).
(b) A deactivated Pt/C catalyst (bed 7).
Figure 42: EDS elemental mapping of the Pt distribution.
As evident from Figures 42a and 42b, the Pt is homogeneously distributed both on the fresh and on the
deactivated Pt/C samples. Therefore, there is no indication that the deactivation is caused by a change
in the Pt distribution on the surface of the catalyst. Note that it is possible that the images were taken
at a too low magniﬁcation and images at larger magniﬁcation could potentially show. Unfortunately, due
to time constraints, no more EDS analysis could be conducted.
67
==PAGE:78==
However, unlike the Pt/C, the distribution of the Pt on the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst changes considerably
after deactivation as shown in Figures (43a) and (43b), which shows a fresh and a deactivated catalyst,
respectively.
(a) A fresh Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 6).
(b) A deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 6).
Figure 43: EDS elemental mapping of the Pt distribution.
Furthermore, from Table 13 the amount of carbon and oxygen on the Pt/C catalyst is constant for fresh
and deactivated catalysts but this is not the case for the Pt/Al2O3 catalysts. With the amount of carbon
and oxygen increasing, it is possible that this is caused by the adsorption of an organic substance like
the precursor or Sertindole. The increased amounts of carbon can be seen on the elemental mapping of
Pt/alumina when comparing the fresh and deactivated catalyst samples shown in Figures 44a and 44b. It
should be noted that carbon tape was used to adhere the samples to the sample pin in the SEM, which is
most likely the source of carbon in Figure 44a.
(a) A fresh Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 6).
(b) A deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (bed 6).
Figure 44: EDS elemental mapping of the C distribution.
68
==PAGE:79==
CO chemisorption results
The dispersion is the fraction of metal atoms present on the surface of the catalyst and thus inﬂuences
the catalytic properties of the catalyst[22]. The dispersion was examined using CO chemisorption and
the results of the analysis is shown in Table 14.
Table 14: Results from the CO chemisorption analysis conducted for diﬀerent samples of catalyst. SA
= Sigma-Aldrich, S = Synthesized. Calcination was done at 550 ◦C, washing was done with 85 wt%
acetic acid and water. Results with sample ID "-" was not used to run experiments but are included as
a benchmark. Bed ID references Table 7.
Bed ID
Catalyst
Condition
Source
Dispersion
[%]
Pt
surface area
[m2/g Pt]
Particle
Size
[nm]
-
0.5 wt%
Pt/Al2O3
Fresh
SA
57
142
1.8
6
5 wt%
Pt/Al2O3
Fresh
S
95
234
1.2
6
5 wt%
Pt/Al2O3
Deactivated
S
2
5
59.9
6
5 wt%
Pt/Al2O3
Deactivated,
washed,
calcined
S
37
91
3.1
7
5 wt%
Pt/C
Fresh
S
61
151
1.9
7
5 wt%
Pt/C
Deactivated
S
1
2
128.6
8
5 wt%
Pt/C
Deactivated
S
3
8
36.8
8
5wt%
Pt/C
Deactivated,
washed
S
4
11
22.5
13
5wt%
Pt/C
Deactivated
S
5
13
20.9
The 0.5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst was produced by Sigma-Aldrich and it was stated in the accompanying
documentation that the dispersion was 55.5% for this particular catalyst. From Table 14, it can be seen
that the dispersion was calculated to be 57%, meaning that the CO chemisorption data and subsequent
calculation results can be assumed to be within a reasonable error margin.
For the deactivated Pt/C beds, the particle sizes are calculated to be 12-68 times larger than for the
fresh Pt/C bed. While it is possible that the Pt atoms have agglomerated, it is also a possibility that a
considerable amount of the active sites have instead been obstructed by pollution. As the particle size
is a function of surface area and because the surface area is a function of the volume of the adsorbed
CO, the calculated particle sizes may be misleading. However, further investigation of the Pt particles is
required to conclude which of the two is the case.
The 5 wt% Pt/C described as "washed" was hand washed with 85% acetic acid after having been taking
out of the reactor in an attempt to remove loose residue to see if this would signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
dispersion. However, as evident in Table 14, the eﬀect was only a 1% diﬀerence in dispersion from 3% to
4% for the washed catalyst sample.
69
==PAGE:80==
TEM results
Further analysis of the Pt particles were done using TEM. The analysis was conducted for ﬁve samples of
catalysts. The particle sizes illustrated on the TEM images can be compared to the calculated particle
sizes found using the CO chemisorption analysis. The CO chemisorption analysis showed that far fewer
active Pt sites were available for CO adsorption on the deactivated catalysts compared to the fresh
catalysts and the particle size calculations assume that this reduction in active Pt sites is caused by
agglomeration. Images of the particles taken using TEM show the actual particle sizes of Pt on the
deactivated as well as on the fresh catalysts.
The Pt particle size calculations from the CO chemisorption analysis suggested that the Pt may agglomer-
ate, which is potentially the cause of the deactivation. The Pt particle sizes on the deactivated catalysts
were calculated to be in the range of 20.9-128.6 nm.
Figure 45: TEM image of a deactivated Pt/C catalyst showing Pt particles
to be of a diameter of approximately 10 nm or less. Bed 12.
Figure 45 shows a deactivated Pt/C catalyst (bed 12) and it is evident that particle sizes are not in the
range of 20.9-128.6 nm as shown in Table 14. Instead, the Pt particles appear to be less than 10 nm in
diameter and the average particle diameter is found to be approximately 3.6 nm. Note that the average
particle size was found by manually marking each dark spot on the TEM images and thus, the actual
70
==PAGE:81==
average particle size is likely to be even smaller as not all the smallest Pt particles could be marked.
The same analysis was conducted for a deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst. A TEM image of the aforementioned
catalyst is shown in Figure 46. Table 14 states that the Pt particle size of a deactivated Pt/Al2O3 was
calculated to be 59.9 nm, however, it is clear from looking at Figure 46 that no particles of that size are
present. Just as for the Pt/C, the Pt particles on the Pt/Al2O3 catalyst are approximately 10 nm or
smaller in diameter. The average diameter was found to be approximately 4.1 nm. Note that, again,
the average particle size was found by manually marking each dark spot on the TEM images and thus,
the actual average particle size is likely to be even smaller as not all the smallest Pt particles could be
marked.
Figure 46:
TEM image of a deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst showing Pt
particles to be of a diameter of approximately 10 nm or less. Bed 11.
The Figures 45 and 46 show no particles larger than approximately 10 nm and consequently, it is
reasonable to conclude that little to no agglomeration takes place during the deactivation of the catalysts
Pt/C and Pt/Al2O3 catalysts. As such, blockage of the active sites is the more likely explanation for the
deactivation of the catalysts.
71
==PAGE:82==
6
Transport modelling of a Trickle Bed Reactor
Mass and energy balances both aﬀect the hydrogenation of precursor to Sertindole, however, to keep
the model simple only the mass balance will be taken into account. The general mass transport and
subsequent reaction in a TBR has been described by Fogler’s Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering
[22] with a rate expression for each transport step between phases. Four expressions describe the hydrogen
transport from bulk gas phase to the catalyst surface and are shown in Equations (26)-(29) while two
equations show the precursor transport from the bulk liquid phase to the catalyst surface, are shown in
Equations (30) and (31). The reaction rate shown assumes a ﬁrst-order reaction with regards to dissolved
gas reactant A and liquid reactant, B. Furthermore, the system of diﬀerential equations in Equations
(26)-(31) illustrate concentrations only at steady state and with the assumption of constant reaction rate
and no deactivation of the catalyst. The equations were also shown in Equations (1)-(8) in Section 3.4,
but are repeated here for the sake of clarity.
vg
dCA
dW = kgai
1
(1 −ϵb) ρp
(CA(g) −CAiH)
(26)
vg
dCAi
dW
= klai
1
(1 −ϵb) ρp
(CAi −CAb)
(27)
vg
dCAb
dW
= kcac (CAb −CAs)
(28)
vg
dCAs
dW
= ηkCAsCBs
(29)
vl
dCB
dW = kcac (CB −CBs)
(30)
vl
dCBs
dW
= ηkCAsCBs
(31)
The mass transfer coeﬃcients, kg, kl and kc can be calculated using Equations (32)-(34)[22, 67]. The
mass transfer coeﬃcient is calculated together with the interfacial area as one constant, kia.
kga = 2 + 0.12E2/3
g
(32)
Where Eg is the energy dissipation in gas phase in bar/s.
kla = 1.11 · 104DAB
GL
µL
0.4  µL
ρLGL
0.5
(33)
kca = 1.8DABa2
s
GL
µL
0.5  µL
ρLGL
1/3
(34)
GL, µL, ρL and DAB are the superﬁcial mass velocity in kg/(m2s), acetic acid viscosity in kg/(ms),
density of acetic acid in kg/m3 and the hydrogen diﬀusion coeﬃcients in acetic acid in m2/s, respectively.
Six initial conditions are required to solve the six diﬀerential equations. The initial conditions for the
bulk gas and liquid phase are the concentration of hydrogen in the system calculated using the ideal
gas law based on the pressure, temperature and hydrogen feed ﬂow and the precursor concentration of
the liquid feed. The remaining four initial conditions are the hydrogen concentrations of the gas/liquid
interface, the hydrogen dissolved in the liquid and the hydrogen and precursor concentrations at the
72
==PAGE:83==
catalyst surface, respectively. As these four concentrations are unknown, they are instead calculated by
setting Equations (26) equal to Equation (27), Equation (28) equal to Equation (29) and setting Equation
(30) equal to Equation (31) and solving for the four unknown concentrations, CAi, CAb, CAs and CBs
using the system of six equations with four unknowns.
For an experiment done with bed 13 at 60 ◦C, 30 bar, a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min and a hydrogen ﬂow of
400 NmL/min, the model predicted the steady state concentration of hydrogen and precursor as shown in
Figures 47a and 47a, respectively.
(a) The concentration of hydrogen in the four transport
steps in the hydrogenation process predicted by the
model.The point marked on the plot is an experimentally
found concentration using a 3.2313 g Pt/C bed when
a sample was analysed using HPLC. Ttio the mnd in
the experiments are identical.
asdasd LAD DETTE
SLUDDER STÅ
(b) The concentration of precursor in the two trans-
port steps in the hydrogenation process predicted by
the model. The point marked on the plot is an exper-
imentally found concentration using a 3.2313 g Pt/C
bed when a sample was analysed using HPLC. The con-
ditions used for in the model and in the experiments are
identical.
Figure 47: Hydrogen and precursor concentrations as predicted by the model
for 60 ◦C, 30 bar, a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min and a hydrogen ﬂow of 400
NmL/min.
For bed 13 at 60 ◦C, 30 bar, a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min and a hydrogen ﬂow of 400 NmL/min, the
model predicts the concentration of precursor at steady state to be 0.0063 M. In comparison, the actual
concentration of a sample, also marked on Figure 47b as a circle, taken at these conditions was found to
be 0.0066 M, which is an error of only 4%, calculated as shown in Equation (35). The plot of hydrogen
concentrations in Figure 47a shows that for 0.03 M precursor, the system has hydrogen in excess. Table
15 shows a list of comparisons of the concentrations found in the samples using HPLC and the predicted
concentrations of these samples calculated by the model.
Error = abs
(Measured value) −(Predicted value)
(Measured value)

(35)
73
==PAGE:84==
Table 15:
Precursor concentrations found using HPLC and the predicted precursor
concentrations. The predictions were done using the model in Equations (26)-(31). Liquid
ﬂow was 0.5 mL/min, hydrogen ﬂow was 400 NmL/min, pressure was 30 bar, precursor
concentration was 0.03 M. Bed 13 was used.
T [◦C]
Measured
precursor
concentration [M]
Predicted
precursor
concentration [M]
Error
[%]
50
0.0051
0.0049
4%
50
0.0075
0.0072
5%
50
0.0109
0.0103
5%
50
0.0127
0.0120
6%
50
0.0137
0.0130
5%
70
0.0109
0.0103
5%
70
0.0047
0.0045
4%
70
0.0020
0.0020
1%
70
0.0014
0.0013
1%
70
0.0011
0.0011
1%
In order to get a better understanding of the values in Table 15, the data has been visualised in two
diﬀerent ways. First, a parity plot with error bars is shown in Figure 48a. Additionally, a plot with two
bar graphs showing the measured and predicted concentrations as well as a line graph showing the error
is shown in Figure 48b. Both plots features the same data shown in Table 15.
(a) A parity plot with error bars showing an uncertainty
of ± 2.8%, which is the standard deviation found in
Section 4.3. The black, dotted line shows x = y. asdasd
asd asdasd
(b) Visualization of the concentrations as well as the
error over time. The temperature was increased from 50
◦C to 70 ◦C after 645 minutes. asdadasd asd asd asasd
asd as dd
Figure 48: Visualization of the measured and the predicted concentrations
during the temperature experiment conducted using bed 13. The predictions
were done using the model in Equations (26)-(31). Liquid ﬂow was 0.5 mL/min,
hydrogen ﬂow was 400 NmL/min, pressure was 30 bar, precursor concentration
was 0.03 M.
Looking at Figure 48a, it is evident that the model predictions become less accurate for higher concentra-
tions. In addition, the model shows a tendency towards predicting concentrations that are below the
measured concentrations.
74
==PAGE:85==
The same kind of plots can be done for a deactivation study conducted also using bed 13.
(a) A parity plot with error bars showing an uncertainty
of ± 2.8%, which is the standard deviation found in
Section 4.3. The black, dotted line shows x = y.
(b) Visualization of the concentrations as well as the
error over time. At 1335 min, the experiment was shut
down overnight and restarted again the next morning.
Figure 49: Visualization of the measured and the predicted concentrations
during the deactivation experiment conducted using bed 13. The predictions
were done using the model in Equations (26)-(31). Liquid ﬂow was 0.5 mL/min,
hydrogen ﬂow was 400 mL/min, pressure was 30 bar, precursor concentration
was 0.03 M.
Figure 49a shows the same trends as Figure 48a, where predictions at lower concentrations are more
accurate as well as the tendency for predicted concentrations to be slightly lower than the measured ones.
Additionally, Figure 49b shows that the shutdown destabilises the system, which approximately doubles
the error.
Overall, the simple model displays very satisfying accuracy in predicting the amount of precursor remaining
in the liquid after having passed through the TBR. For low precursor concentrations in the outlet, which
is the same as high conversion given the constant 0.03 M inlet concentration, the model predictions are
the most accurate while the variation between measured and predicted precursor concentration increases
for low conversion.
A more accurate model could be created if a veriﬁed reaction order, the energy balance and the deactivation
was included. However, these factors joined together would make the model much more complex as it
would become a partial diﬀerential equation system rather than an ordinary diﬀerential system.
75
==PAGE:86==
7
Conclusion
It has been found possible to hydrogenate an API in a TBR. A conversion of more than 90% was reached
at 70 ◦C with packed catalytic beds of both Pt/Al2O3 and Pt/C catalysts. These results were seen for
precursor solution concentrations of 0.03 M at a liquid ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL/min and pressures down to 30
bar with a hydrogen ﬂow rate between 400 NmL/min and 1000 NmL/min.
In the batch production of Sertindole, by-products were formed at pressures above 9.8 bar, which has
not been the case when the hydrogenation is carried out in a TBR as no by-products were found to be
formed at high pressures.
All employed catalysts were found to deactivate which is most likely due to poisoning. The activity of the
used catalyst has been studied thoroughly by CO chemisorption analysis which showed signiﬁcantly fewer
available active sites on the catalyst after deactivation. This was the case for both the Pt/Al2O3 and
Pt/C catalysts. The deactivation constants for a Pt/Al2O3 was found to be 10−3 s−1 while it was an
order of magnitude smaller for the Pt/C catalyst at 10−4 s−1. Decreasing the temperature did not cause
a corresponding decrease in deactivation rate.
SEM and TEM analyses were made for both catalyst types in order to investigate the cause of deactivation.
These analyses showed that a crystalline structure had formed on the deactivated Pt/Al2O3 catalyst,
however, there were no visible changes to the surface of the Pt/C catalyst after deactivation. The TEM
images showed that no agglomeration of the Pt particles had occurred for either catalyst type and it was
therefore concluded that the loss in active sites is most likely due to poisoning.
It was investigated whether deposited precursor or Sertindole crystals on the active sites caused the
deactivation. This was done by washing a deactivated catalyst with the solvent, 85wt% acetic acid, which
did not show to have an eﬀect.
Reaction order and rate constants for both the reaction and the deactivation were determined. According
to the data from the concentration study, the most likely reaction order for the hydrogenation of precursor
to Sertindole in a TBR is of zeroth order, however, further investigation may be necessary in order to
verify this. The reaction rate was found to be in the range of -2E-8 to -9.5E-8 mole
L s .
Unlike the batch hydrogenation process carried out at Lundbeck, the hydrogenation in the POC was not
found to have any deﬁnitive hydrogen mass transfer limitations within the conditions that were examined.
The model is also in agreement with this, as the hydrogen concentrations in the gas/liquid interface, the
bulk liquid and at the catalyst surface are shown to be constant for increasing amounts of catalyst. This
means that there is potentially very fast transport of hydrogen across the transport steps. Additionally,
the model was found to predict the precursor concentration in the outlet of the TBR with an average
error of only 7%, which shows that the simple model can be used to reasonably predict the conversion in
a TBR under the examined conditions.
76
==PAGE:87==
8
Future work
While the hydrogenation of an API in a TBR has been studied thoroughly during this project by
studying the hydrogenation of the precursor to Sertindole experimentally, there is more knowledge to
acquire regarding this matter. The possible next steps in regards to this study are proposed in this section.
It was not possible to do more experiments during this project because of the malfunctioning back
pressure valve. Due to the fact that stability was not reached between the diﬀerent concentrations it
would have been preferable to redo Experiment 12. Moreover, since it was found that the ﬂow rate of the
hydrogen had a signiﬁcant impact, an experiment where the impact of a constant pressure and varying
hydrogen ﬂow rates on the conversion was tested would have been valuable, but was not possible to perform.
An important step would be to test the hydrogenation of other API’s in a TBR in order to verify
that a TBR is viable for hydrogenating API’s in general and not only the precursor that was tested during
this project. As a part of that study, it would be beneﬁcial to test reactions that utilize a catalyst that
does not deactivate as rapid as what has been seen in this project in order to do a long-term investigation
and to get a better estimate of the production capacity.
Furthermore, the hydrogenation reaction that was tested during this project has to be performed in
another reactor in order to determine if the TBR is the best choice for hydrogenation of API’s. The
recommended reactor would be a continuous slurry reactor, since multi-phase reactions can be performed
in reactors of that kind and it can be compared to the autoclave that is used in the current batch
process. Independently of the chosen kind of reactor, the chosen reactor has to be designed in a way that
can handle a wide range of reactants, solvents, pressures and temperatures as well as being ﬂexible in
regards to residence times and quantities of both reactants and catalysts. This is especially necessary in
pharmaceutical productions due to the fact that one unit has to be able to handle more than one speciﬁc
reaction. The optimum catalyst size was not found during this project, though it was found that too small
particles led to plugging in the reactor. It is therefore recommended to conduct a study where the op-
timal particle size is found for the chosen reactor in order to obtain the most favourable reaction conditions.
The results from the following studies could show that a TBR would be suited for some hydrogen-
ations whereas a slurry reactor would be suited for others. It could, as an example, be chosen to do the
hydrogenations with a rapidly deactivating catalyst in a slurry reactor and the hydrogenations with a
more stable catalyst in a TBR. This would ensure a optimal usage of the catalyst and would only add
the ﬁltration step, when it is necessary. In that case it could be feasible to choose to continue with both
units and construct those in a way that allow an easy exchange.
Another way to minimise the eﬀect of a deactivating catalyst without having to ﬁlter it oﬀthe li-
quid product, could be to install several TBRs in parallel. All the TBRs would be packed with a catalyst
at the same time but only one reactor will be utilised at a time. This prolongs the time between necessary
catalyst replacement because it allows several beds to be replaced at once. Having more than one unit to
fulﬁll the same purpose allows down time in a unit without creating downtime in the whole production
line.
This solution could also be relevant in cases where the challenge is not catalyst deactivation but limited
production capacity instead. Having more than one unit to perform the same task makes it possible to
obtain a larger throughput without having to change the ﬂow rates.
77
==PAGE:88==
References
[1] Michael Jønch Pedersen. Design of Continuous Reactor Systems for API Production. Number
October. 2014.
[2] FDA. Quality Considerations for Continuous Manufacturing Guidance for Industry. Food and Drug
Administration, (February):1–27, 2019.
[3] J.H.P Utley. Reductions in organic chemistry. Endeavour, 9(2):108, jan 1985.
[4] K.R. Westerterp, E.J. Molga, and K.B. van Gelder. Catalytic hydrogenation reactors for the ﬁne
chemicals industries. Their design and operation. Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process
Intensiﬁcation, 36(1):17–27, feb 1997.
[5] SSJ. Procesvalidering: Valideringsrapport nr. KP-VAL-04. Technical report, 1994.
[6] Food Administration and Drug. Guidance for Industry, PAT-A Framework for Innovative Pharma-
ceutical Development, Manufacturing and Quality Assurance. (September), 2004.
[7] FDA. Modernizing the Way Drugs Are Made: A Transition to Continuous Manufacturing | FDA.
[8] Vapourtec. Fixed Bed Reactor | Vapourtec Ltd, 2020.
[9] Vapourtec. Gas/Liquid reactor features - Vapourtec, 2020.
[10] ThalesNano. Expand Your Chemistry Capabilities with the Phoenix Flow Reactor Series P H O E
N I X F L O W R E A C T O R. Technical report, 2019.
[11] HEL. FlowCAT users include: Multiple Reactors. Technical report.
[12] Cambridge Reactor Design. Chameleon Adaptable Reactor Technology. Technical report.
[13] Cambridge Reactor Design. Salamander Electric Fixed Bed Reactors. Technical report.
[14] Fluitec. In-line Reaction Technology. Technical report, 2018.
[15] Corning. The future ﬂows through Corning R⃝advanced-Flow TM Reactors. Technical report, 2016.
[16] Chemtrix. Plantrix MR260 Brochure. Technical report, 2020.
[17] AM Technology. Coﬂore ATR | Flow Reactors | AM Technology, 2015.
[18] D&M - Continuous Solutions. PFR-High Pressure Liquid Gas Reactions. Technical report, 2019.
[19] Buss-SMS-Canzler. High Viscosity Technology Buss-SMS-Canzler. Technical report, 2012.
[20] Ilias Stamatiou and Frans L. Muller. Determination of mass transfer resistances in trickle bed
reactors. Chemical Engineering Journal, 377(September 2018):119808, dec 2019.
[21] Ilias K. Stamatiou and Frans L. Muller. Determination of mass transfer resistances of fast reactions
in three-phase mechanically agitated slurry reactors. AIChE Journal, 63(1):273–282, jan 2017.
[22] H Fogler. Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering. Pearson Education, Inc., 5th edition, 2016.
[23] Bertrand Buisson, Steve Donegan, Denis Wray, Ana Parracho, Jayne Gamble, Philippe Caze, Jeremy
Jorda, and Celine Guermeur. Slurry hydrogenation in a continuous ﬂow reactor for pharmaceutical
application. Chimica Oggi, 27(6):12–16, 2009.
[24] Shaofen Li. Reaction Engineering. Butterworth-Heinemann, 1st edition, 2017.
78
==PAGE:89==
[25] A. Avril, C. H. Hornung, A. Urban, D. Fraser, M. Horne, J.-P. Veder, J. Tsanaktsidis, T. Rodopoulos,
C. Henry, and D. R. Gunasegaram. Continuous ﬂow hydrogenations using novel catalytic static
mixers inside a tubular reactor. Reaction Chemistry & Engineering, 2(2):180–188, 2017.
[26] CSIRO. Flow Chemistry Catalysts - FloWorks, 2020.
[27] W. J. A. Wammes, J. Middelkamp, W. J. Huisman, C. M. DeBass, and K. R. Westerterp. Hydro-
dynamics in a cocurrent gas-liquid trickle bed at elevated pressures. AIChE Journal, 37(12):1849–1862,
dec 1991.
[28] G. S. Venkata Ratnam, D. Venkata Narasaiah, and Y. B.G. Varma. A correlation for interfacial area
in co-current gas-liquid downﬂow through packed beds. Bioprocess Engineering, 10(2):53–59, feb
1994.
[29] B. I. Morsi, A. Laurent, N. Midoux, G. Barthole-Delaunay, A. Storck, and J. C. Charpentier.
Hydrodynamics and gas-liquid-solid interfacial parameters of co-current downward two-phase ﬂow in
trickle-bed reactors. Chemical Engineering Communications, 25(1-6):267–293, 1984.
[30] Wino JA Wammes and K Roe. Hydrodynamics in a Pressurized Cocurrent Gas-liquid Trickle-bed
Reactor. Technical report, 1991.
[31] SUSUMU FUKUSHIMA and KATSUHIKO KUSAKA. INTERFACIAL AREA AND BOUND-
ARY OF HYDRODYNAMIC FLOW REGION IN PACKED COLUMN WITH COCURRENT
DOWNWARD FLOW. Journal of Chemical Engineering of Japan, 10(6):461–467, 1977.
[32] M. Cassanello, F. Larachi, A. Laurent, G. Wild, and N. Midoux. Gas-liquid mass transfer in high
pressure trickle-bed reactors: Experiments and modelling. volume 26, pages 493–498. 1996.
[33] F. Larachi, M. Cassanello, and A. Laurent. GasLiquid Interfacial Mass Transfer in Trickle-Bed
Reactors at Elevated Pressures. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 37(3):718–733, mar
1998.
[34] Hans-Jürgen Butt, Karlheinz Graf, and Michael Kappl. Physics and Chemistry of Interfaces. 2006.
[35] Bojana Borren, Olga Zeitler, Christine Schmaus, and David W. Agar. Gas-liquid mass transfer in
periodically operated trickle-bed reactors: Inﬂuence of the liquid-phase physical properties and ﬂow
modulation. Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensiﬁcation, 49(9):923–929, 2010.
[36] S Toppinen and T Salmi. INTERFACIAL MASS TRANSFER IN TRICKLE-BED REACTOR
MODELLING. Technical Report 18, 1996.
[37] Fritz Turek and Rüdiger Lange. Mass transfer in trickle-bed reactors at low reynolds number.
Chemical Engineering Science, 36(3):569–579, 1981.
[38] Konstantinos Metaxas and Nikolaos Papayannakos. Gas-Liquid Mass Transfer in a Bench-Scale Trickle
Bed Reactor used for Benzene Hydrogenation. Chemical Engineering & Technology, 31(10):1410–1417,
oct 2008.
[39] Debora L. Manuale, Lucía V. Santiago, Gerardo C. Torres, Jorge H. Sepúlveda, Pablo A. Torresi,
Carlos R. Vera, and Juan C. Yori. Hydrogenolysis of glycerol to 1,2-propanediol in a continuous ﬂow
trickle bed reactor. Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology, 93(4):1050–1064, apr 2018.
[40] Badie I. Morsi. Mass transfer coeﬃcients in a trickle-bed reactor with high and low viscosity organic
solutions. The Chemical Engineering Journal, 41(1):41–48, jun 1989.
79
==PAGE:90==
[41] M BAKOS. INTERFACIAL AREA IN PACKED-BED GAS-LIQUID REACTORS WITH CO-
CURRENT DOWNWARD FLOW. Hungarian Journal of Industrial Chemistry, 8(4), 1980.
[42] Shigeo Goto and J. M. Smith. Trickle-bed reactor performance. Part I. Holdup and mass transfer
eﬀects. AIChE Journal, 21(4):706–713, jul 1975.
[43] Mourad Ben Said, Todor Baramov, Tanja Herrmann, Michael Gottfried, Jorma Hassfeld, and Stefan
Roggan. Continuous Selective Hydrogenation of Refametinib Iodo-nitroaniline Key Intermediate
DIM-NA over Raney Cobalt Catalyst at kg/day Scale with Online UV–Visible Conversion Control.
Organic Process Research & Development, 21(5):705–714, may 2017.
[44] Mansour Al-Herz, Mark J. H. Simmons, and Joseph Wood. Selective Hydrogenation of 1-Heptyne in
a Mini Trickle Bed Reactor. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 51(26):8815–8825, jul
2012.
[45] Jorge Sepúlveda, Debora Manuale, Lucia Santiago, Nicolás Carrara, Gerardo Torres, Carlos Vera,
Maraisa Goncalves, Wagner Carvalho, Dalmo Mandelli, Chromite And, and Cu / Al. Selective
hydrogenolysis of glycerol to propylene glycol in a continuous ﬂow trickle bed reactor using copper
chromite and Cu/Al2O3 catalysts. Quim. Nova, 40(4):371–377, 2017.
[46] Antonella Carangio, Lee J. Edwards, Eneritz Fernandez-Puertas, Jerome F. Hayes, Maciej M.
Kucharski, Graham W. Rutherford, Katherine M. P. Wheelhouse, and Glynn D. Williams. Evaluation
of Sponge Metal Catalysts in a Trickle Bed Reactor for the Continuous Hydrogenation of an Aliphatic
Nitro Intermediate. Organic Process Research & Development, jan 2020.
[47] Nicolai Wörz, Jürgen Arras, and Peter Claus. Continuous selective hydrogenation of citral in a trickle-
bed reactor using ionic liquid modiﬁed catalysts. Applied Catalysis A: General, 391(1-2):319–324,
jan 2011.
[48] Yang Bai, Nikolay Cherkasov, Steven Huband, David Walker, Richard Walton, and Evgeny Rebrov.
Highly Selective Continuous Flow Hydrogenation of Cinnamaldehyde to Cinnamyl Alcohol in a
Pt/SiO2 Coated Tube Reactor. Catalysts, 8(2):58, feb 2018.
[49] Peter Clark, Martyn Poliakoﬀ, and Andy Wells. Continuous Flow Hydrogenation of a Pharmaceutical
Intermediate, [4-(3,4-Dichlorophenyl)-3,4-dihydro-2H-naphthalenyidene]methylamine, in Supercritical
Carbon Dioxide. Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis, 349(17-18):2655–2659, dec 2007.
[50] 1-Heptyne
NIST.
Date
accessed:
2020-10-21.
Retrieved
from
ht-
tps://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C628717&Mask=8.
[51] Glycerin
NIST.
Date
accessed:
2020-10-21.
Retrieved
from
https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=56-81-5.
[52] Peter Mølgaard Mortensen. Pyrolysis Oil Converter. Technical report, DTU, 2013.
[53] Thomas Klint Hansen, Martin Høj, Brian Brun Hansen, Ton V.W. Janssens, and Anker Degn Jensen.
The Eﬀect of Pt Particle Size on the Oxidation of CO, C3H6, and NO Over Pt/Al2O3 for Diesel
Exhaust Aftertreatment. Topics in Catalysis, 60(17-18):1333–1344, 2017.
[54] Milorad P. Dudukovic, Željko V. Kuzeljevic, and Daniel P. Combest. Three-Phase Trickle-Bed
Reactors. In Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, pages 1–40. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH
& Co. KGaA, feb 2014.
[55] Ari Jónasson, Ole Persson, Peter Rasmussen, and Giorgio S. Soave. Vapor–liquid equilibria of systems
containing acetic acid and gaseous components. Measurements and calculations by a cubic equation
of state. Fluid Phase Equilibria, 152(1):67–94, oct 1998.
80
==PAGE:91==
[56] Jaesung Lee, Jae Kwang Yoo, Jandee Kim, Youngku Sohn, and Choong Kyun Rhee. Conical multiple-
layered Pt deposits on Au and its adsorption stoichiometries of CO and hydrogen. Electrochimica
Acta, 290:244–254, nov 2018.
[57] Ayman D Allian, Kazuhiro Takanabe, Kyle L Fujdala, Xianghong Hao, Timothy J Truex, Juan Cai,
Corneliu Buda, Matthew Neurock, and Enrique Iglesia. Chemisorption of CO and Mechanism of CO
Oxidation on Supported Platinum Nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc, 133:4498–4517, 2011.
[58] NanoScience instruments. Scanning Electron Microscopy - Nanoscience Instruments, 2018.
[59] Erik Luyk. Sputter Coating - SEM - Sample Preparation - Accelerating Microscopy.
[60] John C. Russ. Fundamentals of Energy Dispersive X-ray Analysis. Elsevier, 1984.
[61] Joseph I. Goldstein, Dale E. Newbury, Joseph R. Michael, Nicholas W.M. Ritchie, John Henry J.
Scott, and David C. Joy. Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Microanalysis. Springer New
York, New York, NY, jan 2018.
[62] Dale E. Newbury and Nicholas W.M. Ritchie. Elemental mapping of microstructures by scanning
electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (SEM-EDS): Extraordinary advances with
the silicon drift detector (SDD). Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 28(7):973–988, jun 2013.
[63] Mauro Masiol, Daniele Ceccato, Stefania Squizzato, Sara Carturan, and Bruno Pavoni. An integrated
analytical approach using ion chromatography, PIXE and electron microscopy to point out the
diﬀerences in composition of PM10individual particles. In AIP Conference Proceedings, volume 1530,
pages 111–118, 2013.
[64] Georgios. Kontogeorgis and Søren. Kiil. Applied Colloid and Surface Chemistry. Wiley, 1 st edition,
2016.
[65] Mendel Sachs. Concepts of Modern Physics. 2007.
[66] Calvin H. Bartholomew and Robert J. Farrauto. Fundamentals of Industrial Catalytic Processes.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, oct 2005.
[67] Carlos Eduardo Ramirez Castelan. Mathematical Modelling and Simulation of a Trickle-Bed Reactor
for Petroleum Feedstocks Hydrotreating. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark., 2019.
81
==PAGE:92==
A
Appendix - Hydrogen solubility in acetic acid
The amount of dissolved hydrogen given in a molar ﬂow, ˙ndissolved,H2 in acetic acid for a speciﬁc pressure
is determined by:
˙ndissolved,H2 = ˙nH2 · xH2
(36)
Where ˙nH2 is the molar ﬂow of hydrogen in the bulk gas and xH2 is the liquid composition of hydrogen
in acetic acid at a speciﬁc pressure. The xH2 is from hydrogen in acetic acid VLE data at 75◦C, which
was plotted from 2.7 bar to 90 bar and displayed in Figure A1. The data was given up to 74.5 bar in the
article [55] and was extrapolated up to 90 bar in Figure A1.
Figure A1: VLE data for hydrogen and acetic acid at 75◦C [55].
The reaction between the precursor and hydrogen follows a 1:1 stoichiometry and the excess of hydrogen
can be calculated as follows:
ExcessH2 = ˙ndissolved,H2 −˙nP recursor
˙ndissolved,H2
(37)
Where ˙nP recursor is the molar ﬂow of precursor, which is dependent on the concentration of the precursor
and the ﬂow rate.
82
==PAGE:93==
B
Appendix - Initial experiments
The results and used conditions from the ﬁrst experiments with a 300-600m 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 bed is
shown in Table B1, B2 and B3
Table B1: Operation conditions and found conversion for the experiment run at diﬀerent liquid ﬂow
rates. Bed 2
Flow [mL/min]
Pressure [bar]
Temperature [◦C]
Conversion [%]
1
90
70
54
2
90
70
2
1
90
70
0
0.5
90
70
0
0.1
90
70
2
0.1
90
70
9
1
90
70
0
1
90
100
7
1
60
70
1
0.5
60
70
3
Table B2: Operation conditions and found conversion for the experiment run at diﬀerent liquid ﬂow
rates. Bed 2
Flow [mL/min]
Pressure [bar]
Temperature [◦C]
Conversion [%]
1
90
70
4
0.5
90
70
0
0.1
90
70
0
0.5
90
70
0
1
90
70
0
1
60
70
0
0.5
60
70
0
0.5
60
100
0
0.5
60
158
22
0.5
60
168
36
0.5
60
130
17
0.5
60
70
18
83
==PAGE:94==
Table B3: Operation conditions and found conversion for the experiment run at diﬀerent liquid ﬂow
rates. Bed 2
Flow [mL/min]
Pressure [bar]
Temperature [◦C]
Conversion [%]
1
60
100
34
1
60
100
30
0.5
60
100
18
0.5
60
100
14
C
Appendix - Troubleshooting
Steady state experiments
A source of potential error is not knowing how long it takes to reach a complete steady state concentration
of precursor and Sertindole in the down stream liquid line. This is, among other things, due to the large
liquid holdup in the separator, requiring a signiﬁcant amount of ﬂushing before a stable concentration
can be reached. To combat this, an experiment was run at 60 bar, 100 ◦C at a liquid ﬂow of 0.5 mL/min.
During the ﬁrst hour of the experiment, the separator was ﬂushed twice to get rid of potential leftover
cleaning liquid. Then, a sample was taken every 30 mL for 6-8 hours hours to ﬁnd the required amount of
liquid that needs to be run through the system before reliable samples can be taken. As a rule of thumb,
the amount of volume required should be 3-6 times the void volume of the system. This experiment
resulting in the discovering of the deactivation of the 1 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst.
Missing precursor
During the ﬁrst set of steady state experiments conducted as explained above, the samples showed
a signiﬁcant reduction in precursor concentration, however, no Sertindole was produced. While it is,
technically, possible that all the precursor can be converted to an undesired product that was not visible
at 220 nm on the HPLC, it is unlikely. Figure C2 shows the HPLC chromatography where the precursor
is missing but no Sertindole has been produced. As evident on Figure C2, upwards of 90% of the original
precursor is missing according to the HPLC. Thus, an error ﬁnding mission was necessary to ﬁgure out
where the precursor was disappearing to in the system.
As precursor and the Sertindole is dissolved in the acetic acid and water solution, it should be able to
pass through the ﬁlter with a 2 micron mesh that follows the separator on the down stream liquid line.
However, a considerable pressure drop before the back pressure valve, V39, was observed, suggesting that
the system was plugged somewhere. This was the case even when the pressure indicator, PI8, located
above the gas outlet of the separator, was indicating that the system was pressurized. A plug in the
liquid line was thus suspected to be located between the separator and the back pressure valve, V39. The
ﬁlterhouses of F8A and F8B were opened and a ﬁlter cake of thick, grey, oily sludge was found in both
ﬁlters. While no analysis of the ﬁlter cake was conducted, it was suspected that the ﬁlter cake originated
from one of two sources: Either from the decomposition of acetic acid to a mix of fatty residue and coke
due to temperatures of upwards of 170 ◦C during a temperature experiment or from previous use of the
POC involving pumping an unknown kind of bio-oil through the system. However, as good results have
previously been achieved using the same setup, the latter option is unlikely.
That leaves the option of decomposed acetic acid. The experiment conducted prior to the steady state
experiment that resulted in the chromatogram shown in Figure C2 went up to 170 ◦C in temperature
and thus, the reactor was opened to see if the bed was still operational. Opening of the reactor showed
that greenish coke had been formed and that the glass reactor had been shattered, allowing the precursor
liquid to ﬂow out of the reactor and get stuck in the steel tube that surrounds the reactor.
84
==PAGE:95==
Figure C2: Brown is the precursor standard, black, blue and pink are samples taken under uniform
conditions but at diﬀerent times. The experiments were run with 0.03 M precursor, 5.0019 g 1 wt%
catalyst, 60 bars, 0.5 mL/min liquid ﬂow and at 70-130 ◦C.
Catalyst particle size variance
Diﬀerences in properties for the 1 wt% and 5 wt% Pt catalyst on alumina support is potentially a
source of discrepancies when attempting to compare experiments run with two beds are diﬀerent weight
percentage. Speciﬁcally, the 5 wt% appears to be more brittle when being pelletized, causing the particle
size distribution to potentially change signiﬁcantly from bed to bed. One of the consequences of a diﬀerent
particle size distribution is the inconsistent bed height for two even masses of catalyst. For instance, the
bed packed with 5.0019 g of 300-600 micron 1 wt% Pt had a catalyst bed height of 14.5 cm, while a bed
packed with 5.0133g of 300-600 micron 5 wt% Pt had a catalyst bed height of 12.5 cm, meaning a bed
height reduction of approximately 15%, leading to diﬀerent residence times.
The particle size distribution on a particle surface area basis can be calculated as in Equation (38), where
mi is the mass of particles in size i, di is the average diameter of the particles within that size interval
and n is total number of particle size intervals.
Qsurface =
Pn
i
mi
di
P mi
di
(38)
A plot of Equation (38) would visualize the diﬀerence in distribution calculated on a surface area basis.
Catalyst support brittleness
The method used to prepare catalyst particles in the size range 300-600 microns require certain mechanical
properties for the catalyst support in order to produce catalyst particles ﬁt for use. Speciﬁcally, the
catalyst support material must be of suﬃcient mechanical strength to avoid the generation of ﬁne powder,
that will otherwise cause a blockage in the reactor when liquid is pumped through. It was attempted to
run an experiment with a bed packed with 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 from Sigma-Aldrich, however, in part due to
the particle size distribution generally leaning towards a much smaller average particle size and, in part,
85
==PAGE:96==
due to the amount of ﬁne dust created in the preparation process, the packed bed had to be discarded, as
no liquid could run through the bed, even at a pressure of 60 bars. The result is shown on Figures C3a
and C3b, where the bed before and after the attempted experiment is depicted.
(a) The packed bed before an experiment was attempted.
(b) The packed bed after an experiment was attempted.
Figure C3: The packed bed was ruined after an attempted experiment as the catalyst particles
collapsed. The black is the 300-600 microns Pt/Al2O3 catalyst (that was found to also contain ﬁne
dust) while the white is pure 300-600 microns Al2O3 support.
While not shown on Figures C3, no precursor was able to penetrate the black catalyst bed. As evident
from the pictures of the bed, the black catalyst bed was compressed, causing a gap inside the bed where
precursor solution could build up. The reason for this compression was assumed to be the brittleness of
the 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 catalyst, allowing for the particles to literally crumble under pressure. As a result,
the bed packed with 5 wt% Pt/Al2O3 from Sigma-Aldrich was discarded and the decision to synthesize a
new 5 wt% catalyst using a more resilient support was made.
86
==PAGE:97==
D
MATLAB scripts
The ODE system used in the model.
1
function dCdW = FuncDiff (W, x , par )
2
3
4 %Input
parameters
5
epsilon_b = par (1) ;
6
H = par (2) ;
7
k = par (3) ;
8
vg = par (4) ;
9
vl = par (5) ;
10
kg = par (6) ;
11
ai = par (7) ;
12
rho_C = par (8) ;
13
kc = par (9) ;
14
ac = par (10) ;
15
eta = par (11) ;
16
kl = par (12) ;
17
18
19 %CA
20
dCdW(1 ,1) = (−kg∗ai ∗1/((1−epsilon_b ) ∗rho_C) ∗(x (1 ,1) −x (2 ,1) ∗H)
)
/
vg ;
21 %CAi
22
dCdW(2 ,1) = (−kl ∗ai ∗1/((1−epsilon_b ) ∗rho_C) ∗(x (2 ,1) −x (3 ,1) )
)
/
vg ;
23 %CAb
24
dCdW(3 ,1) = (−kc∗ac ∗
(x (3 ,1) −x (4 ,1) )
)
/
vg ;
25 %CAs
26
dCdW(4 ,1) = (−eta
∗
k
∗
x (4 ,1) ∗
x (6 ,1)
)
/
vg ;
27 %CB
28
dCdW(5 ,1) = (−kc∗ac ∗
(x (5 ,1) −x (6 ,1) )
)
/
vl ;
29 %CBs
30
dCdW(6 ,1) = (−eta
∗
k
∗
x (4 ,1) ∗x (6 ,1)
)
/
vl ;
87
==PAGE:98==
The script for running the model.
1
c l e a r
a l l ;
c l o s e
a l l ;
c l c ;
2
f i g n = 1;
3
4
5 %% Define
parameters
6 %======================= Variables
to change ===========================
7
T = 60 + 273; %K
8
vl = 0.5 ∗10^(−6) /60; %Liquid
flow , m^3/ s
9
k = 3.7
∗10^(−6) ; %m6/g cat / s
10
W_exp = 0.0032;
11
P = 30; %Pressure ,
bar
12 % ====================== Constants ==============================
13
R = 8.314∗10^( −2) ; %Gas constant , m^3∗bar /(K∗kmol )
14
epsilon_b = 0 . 3 2 ;
15
H = 0 . 0 9 ;
16
vg = 1000 ∗10^(−6)/60
∗
1/P
∗(25+273) /(T) ; %Gas flow
adjusted
f o r
reactor
pressure , m^3/ s
17
kg = 2.0159; %m/ s
18
ai = 1;
19
rho_C = 500;
20
kc = 1 . 2 ;
21
ac = 1; %m2/kg
22
eta = 1;
23
kl = 8.8∗10^( −6) ;%1.19∗10^( −4) ;
24 %kl = 2.777838613∗10^( −7) ;
25
26
par = [ epsilon_b H k vg vl kg ai rho_C kc ac
eta
kl ] ;
27
28 %Define
i n i t i a l
conditions
( Find
these w. TBR model word document )
29
CA0 = P/(R∗T) ; %Concentration
of
hydrogen
in
bulk gas ,
i d e a l
gas law n/V =
P/(RT) , kmol/m^3
30
CB0 = 0.03 ∗10^(−3) ∗10^3; %Concentration
of
precursor
in
bulk
liquid ,
kmol
/m^3
31
CAb0 = 0.8116619124;
32
CAi0 = 0.8849538379;
33
CAs0 = 0.8073140863;
34
CBs0 = 0.02565217391;
35
x0 = [CA0 CAb0 CAi0 CAs0 CB0 CBs0 ] ;
36
37 %Define
simulation
s t a r t /end
c a t a l y s t
weight
38
t0 =0;
39
t i n t= 0.00001;
40
t f i n= 0 . 0 1 ;
41
42 %Solve
the model
43
[W,C]=ode15s ( @FuncDiff , [ t0 : t i n t : t f i n ] , x0 , [ ] , par ) ;
88
==PAGE:99==
44
45
i i = find ( round (W, 4 )==W_exp) ;
46
CC = C( i i (1) ,5)
47
48 %% ================== Plots ============================
49 % =========== Hydrogen
plots ===========================
50
f i g u r e ( f i g n )
51
hold on
52
plot (W∗10^3 ,C( : , 1 ) )
53
plot (W∗10^3 ,C( : , 2 ) )
54
plot (W∗10^3 ,C( : , 3 ) )
55
plot (W∗10^3 ,C( : , 4 ) )
56
xlabel ( ’W [ g ] ,
5 wt% Pt ,
includes
support ’ )
57
ylabel ( ’ Concentration
[M] ’ )
58
legend ( ’CA’ , ’CAi ’ , ’CAb ’ , ’CAs ’ , ’ l o ca ti o n ’ , ’ northeast ’ )
59
ylim ( [ 0
1 ] )
60 %xlim ( [ 0
1 ] )
61
hold
o f f
62
f i g n = f i g n + 1;
63
64 % =========== Precursor
plots ===========================
65
f i g u r e ( f i g n )
66
hold on
67
plot (W∗10^3 ,C( : , 5 ) , ’ g ’ )
68
plot (W∗10^3 ,C( : , 6 ) , ’k ’ )
69
plot (W_exp∗10^3 ,0.0066 , ’ o ’ ) ;
70
xlabel ( ’W [ g ] ,
5 wt% Pt ,
includes
support ’ )
71
ylabel ( ’ Concentration
[M] ’ )
72
legend ( ’CB’ , ’CBs ’ , ’ Sample concentration ’ , ’ lo c at io n ’ , ’ northeast ’ )
73 %ylim ( [ 0
0 . 0 3 ] )
74 %xlim ( [ 0
1 ] )
75
hold
o f f
76
f i g n = f i g n + 1;
89
