==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Optimal sizing of a hybrid wind power plant incorporating 
power to X technology 
 
 
Sam Nivin Deepa Rosaline 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0429 
March 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Sam Nivin Deepa Rosaline 
Title: Optimal sizing of a hybrid wind power plant incorporating power to 
X technology 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0429 
March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
September 2020 – March 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Katherine Dykes 
Kaushik Das 
Hans E. Jørgensen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
Peter Holtappels 
DTU Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Acknowledgements
The following Master Thesis was written in collaboration with the Department of Wind
Energy at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). I would like to express my deepest
thanks and gratitude to my supervisors, Katherine Dykes (Head of Section), Kaushik Das
(Researcher), Hans E. Jørgensen (Business Developer) and Peter Holtappels (Professor)
for their guidance and constant assitance during the tenure of the thesis. I want to thank
you for your patient support and various discussions that have enabled me to better my
work on this project.
In addition, I would like to thank my family members for their wise counsel and support at
all times. I deeply appreciate your constant care and concern throughout the whole tenure
of my Master degree. Finally, I could not have achieved this project without the support
of my friends, who have provided stimulating discussions as well as happy distractions to
rest my mind outside of my studies.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Abstract
The requirement for clean energy is of higher magnitude than ever in order to mitigate the
eﬀects of climate change. Renewable energy sources are now considered a valid alternative
to fossil fuels ad have seen various developments such as cost improvements, technological
advancement, and wide acceptance. Renewable energy technology has now advanced to
the stage of Hybrid Power Plants which combine diﬀerent renewable generating assets to
provide reliable power output. In addition to renewable generating technology, there is
also a need for adequate energy storage technology. Conventional storage systems such
as batteries are in common utilisation today, but there is a demand for a more ﬂexible
storage medium with a wider end-use application.
Hydrogen has a high gravimetric
energy density (MJ/kg) and can be stored in either liquid or gaseous form. It can be
burnt to release heat or used in fuel cells to produce electricity, thereby providing a broad
spectrum of applications. A Hybrid Power Plant with Power to Hydrogen capability is
developed and analysed in this thesis. The optimisation model is built to maximize the
NPV of the asset and hence determine the rated capacities of the technologies which yield
the maximum revenue while ensuring a feasible investment. Oﬀshore Wind, Solar PV,
Battery Energy Storage System and Alkaline Electrolyser are the technologies considered
in the HPP with PtH capability. The optimization model is then applied to a Case Study
Scenario which in this thesis is based on the Hollandse Kust Noord Oﬀshore Wind Farm.
Relevant data such as the wind and solar resources, electricity prices and hydrogen prices
for the selected case study are given as input to the optimisation model. Beneﬁts such as
a high capacity factor, increase in revenue, increase in NPV and IRR are observed as a
result of the optimization of the asset. A sensitivity analysis is then conducted to observe
which parameters the model is sensitive to.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
Nomenclature
AEC Alkaline Water Electrolysis
AEP Annual energy prodcution
BESS Battery Energy Storage System
CAPEX Capital Expenditures
HKN Hollandse Kust Noord
HPP Hybrind Power Plant
LCOE Levelised Cost of Electricity
LCOH Levelised Cost of Hydrogen
MILP Mixed Integer Linear Program
NPV Net Present Value
O&M Operations and Maintenance
PEM Proton-Exchange Membrane
PtH
Power to Hydrogen
PtX
Power to X
PV
Photo-Voltaic
RES
Renewable Energy Source
SOEC Solid Oxide Electrolyser Cell
v
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
List of Figures
1
Energy Densities of diﬀerent Fuels/Storage [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Schematic of an HPP with PtH conﬁguration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Schematic of an HPP with PtH conﬁguration [20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Comparison of PEM and Alkaline Electrolysis [27] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Market Prices for Electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Electricity Prices Duration Curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7
Wind and Solar Power Generation Time Series Data
. . . . . . . . . . . .
21
8
Electricity Market Prices vs. Hydrogen Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9
Total Power Produced by HPP vs. Power Dispatched to the Grid vs. Power
Consumed by Electrolyser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
10
Layout and Boundaries of HKN site [15]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
11
Boundary Co-Ordinates of HKN site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
vi
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
List of Tables
1
Parameters - Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Parameters - CAPEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Parameters - OPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Parameters - Other . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Capacity Factor & LCOE of generating technologies at HKN Site
. . . . .
22
6
Input Costs associated with Oﬀshore Wind Farm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Input Costs associated with Solar PV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8
Input Costs associated with BESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
9
Input Costs associated with AEC Electrolyser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
10
Summary of parameters taken into account for Base Case and Case Study
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
11
Optimal Installed Capacities of generation technologies in HPP for Base
Case Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
12
Economic parameters obtained for HPP in Base Case Scenario . . . . . . .
27
13
Annual generation and related statistics of the HPP corresponding to the
Base Case Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
14
Optimal Installed Capacities of generation technologies in HPP with PtH
for Case Study Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
15
Economic parameters obtained for HPP with PtH in Case Study Scenario .
29
16
Annual generation and related statistics of the HPP with PtH correspond-
ing to the Case Study Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
17
Output of Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
vii
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Deﬁnition, Assumptions and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contributions & Research Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Structure of the Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
6
3
Methodology
8
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Power Generation Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.2
Electricity & Hydrogen Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
HPP Cost Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.4
Operational Lifetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.5
Discount Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Mathematical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Assessment Parameters (Technical & Economical) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.1
Economic Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Technical Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Case Study
19
4.1
Electricity Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Hydrogen Selling Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Power Generation Time Series Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Cost Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Results
24
5.1
Scenarios for Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Base Case Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Case Study Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Sensitivity Analysis
31
7
Conclusion
33
7.1
Scope for Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8
Appendix
35
viii
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
8.1
Base Case Scenario Mathematical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8.2
HKN Site Location Co-Ordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
References
37
1
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The transition to clean energy is of utmost importance in order to mitigate the eﬀects of
climate change and achieve the target of being climate neutral. Renewable Energy Sources
(RES) are now the preferred source of power generation for various markets and there
have also been governmental policies framed to support the installation of RES. Renewable
energy power sources such as Wind Power and Solar Power have taken the forefront in
supporting this transition and are key technologies to achieve the decarbonizing of the
power sector[23]. Various studies have shown the beneﬁts of Hybrid Power Plants (HPP),
where wind and solar energy generating technologies can be combined with a Battery
Energy Storage System (BESS) to be able to provide reliable and uninterrupted power
generation [1] [2].
The complementary nature of solar and wind power play to the advantages of an HPP.
This helps reduce one of the primary issues in RES power generation which is, variability.
There are other beneﬁts that HPP possess, such as the presence of a common point of
coupling for all the generation technologies involved. This helps reduce the capital costs
involved in the connection to the grid (substations) from the HPP. In order to be able to
fully transition into a green energy system, RES need to be able to provide the reliability
and stable power production that is now available from the conventional fossil fuel-based
methods of power generation [28]. This can be attenuated through the integration of a
BESS to an HPP helps abate the intermittency and variability issues commonly associated
with wind and solar power [2]
Figure 1: Energy Densities of diﬀerent Fuels/Storage [8]
Although batteries are of widespread use at present, especially in the ﬁeld of mobility;
the low energy density [8] leading to the requirement of a larger sized component pose
disadvantages. As shown from Figure 4, it is evident that Hydrogen has a high gravimetric
energy density (MJ/kg) [8], and can be stored in either liquid or gaseous form. It can
be burnt to release heat or used in fuel cells to produce electricity, thereby providing a
broad spectrum of end-use applications [13]. Thus, it could propose an adequate solution
in the form of an energy storage medium. A synthetic fuel such as liquid hydrogen is
energy-dense and also ﬁnds a widespread application either as fuel or feedstock in various
industrial sectors [29] [26].
The European Commission has outlined a set of policy framework promoting the gen-
eration of Hydrogen in order to achieve the ’European Green Deal’, as stated in their
2
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
document [7]. The policy details the steps necessary to expedite the induction of hydro-
gen as feedstock and fuel. This is achieved by taking measures such as establishing a clear
understanding of the hydrogen production technologies needed in Europe and establish
hydrogen infrastructure, i.e. Trans-European Networks for Energy and Transport & refu-
elling infrastructure. Thus, the requirement for reliable clean energy and the generation
of Hydrogen, which has the potential to be one of the primary fuels for various sectors in
the future, form the primary motivation behind pursuing a thesis in this ﬁeld.
The Netherlands has set an ambitious goal of being able to generate about 49 TWh of
Oﬀshore Wind Energy annually by the year 2030. In accordance with the country’s Energy
Agreement for Sustainable Growth, the Hollandse Kust Noord (HKN) is an Oﬀshore Wind
Farm slated to be developed by the year 2023. The HKN site is located 18.5 km oﬀthe
coast of the North Holland province and encompasses an area of 125km2 [15]. It is under
development by a consortium of Shell and the Dutch utility Eneco that plans to install 69
Siemens Gamesa turbines of 11 MW each, thus achieving the rated capacity of 759MW
(proposed 3.3 TWh annual generation) [22]. The consortium has also announced that it
plans to build a ﬂoating solar park, short term battery storage and a hydrogen electrolyser
to produce green hydrogen, in the Port of Rotterdam. Shell intends to utilize the green
hydrogen produced to decarbonize ’hard to abate’ sectors such as reﬁneries [31]. The
optimisation model that this thesis aims to develop, is further implemented in this case
study and analysed.
1.2
Problem Deﬁnition, Assumptions and Limitations
This Master Thesis aims to develop and implement a mathematical model that can per-
form the optimal sizing of a Hybrid Power Plant with Power-to-X (PtX) capability. The
HPP consists of Oﬀshore Wind Farm, Solar PV and BESS, working in tandem to meet
the nominal grid requirement. The power generated by the HPP is also supplied to the
PtX technology available at the HPP. The PtX technology chosen for implementation, in
this case, is Power to Hydrogen (PtH). The green Hydrogen is generated by the process
of electrolysis, by an electrolyser which is supplied electricity by the HPP.
Figure 2: Schematic of an HPP with PtH conﬁguration
3
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
A mixed-integer linear program with the objective function of maximising the Net Present
Value (NPV) of the HPP with PtH asset is built as the optimisation model. As an output,
the model aims to determine the optimally installed capacities of Wind, Solar, Battery En-
ergy Capacity, Battery Power Rating and Electrolyser rated capacity. A general schematic
of the HPP is shown in Figure 2, illustrating the basis on which the optimisation model
is developed. The optimisation model is framed to take into consideration certain op-
erational constraints such as the grid connection capacity limit, overplanting of power
producers, power curtailment, battery charging/ discharging and maximum installable
capacity of hydrogen electrolyser etc. With the objective function and the associated
constraints are taken into consideration, the aim is to develop a simple optimization tool
that determines the optimal conditions that can ensure a feasible project. The outputs
obtained from this optimization model are then utilized to calculate various economical
and technical parameters that help analyse the beneﬁts of an HPP with PtH capability.
This can be achieved by comparing it with a scenario with a standalone HPP, for further
study.
The optimization model developed is then applied to a case study scenario in order to
analyse the performance of the model in a real-life scenario. The case study chosen for the
purposes of this thesis is the Hollandse Kust Noord (HKN) project in the Netherlands.
The tender for the HKN project was won by a Shell-Eneco consortium in the month
of July in 2020. The project, on completion in 2023, will comprise of an oﬀshore wind
farm (with a rated capacity of 759 MW) located 18.5 kilometres oﬀthe west coast of the
Netherlands near the town of Egmond aan Zee. There are also plans in place for the
construction of a ﬂoating Solar Farm with short-term battery storage and a Hydrogen
Electrolysis plant near the port of Rotterdam [22]. The technical speciﬁcations of the
HKN project thus make it very suitable to be studied in the form of a case study for the
optimisation model developed in this thesis.
The inputs to the optimization model consist of the production time series data and cost-
related data of the various generation technologies. In addition to the production time
series data for wind and solar, the Elspot market prices are also provided as inputs in an
hourly resolution. Other data points given as input to the model include the hydrogen
market price, the capital and operating cost for the various technologies. As the input
data provided to the model are deterministic in nature, it poses a certain limitation to
the real-world validity of the model. The eﬀect of eﬃciency of the hydrogen electrolyser
modules has not been taken into account, thereby posing a technical limitation on the
model. The various assumptions made are discussed in further detail in Section 4.
1.3
Contributions & Research Process
The primary contributions of this thesis are to:
• Perform a brief comparison of Alkaline Water Electrolysis (AEC), Proton-Exchange
Membrane (PEM) and Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell (SOEC) electrolysis methods
for Hydrogen production. Followed by a study of the policy framework needed to
support them.
• Build a comprehensive optimisation problem (mathematical model) with the objec-
tive function of maximising the NPV of the HPP asset. This is done to achieve
the optimal sizing parameter of the oﬀshore Wind, solar PV, BESS the electrolysis
units that are installed in the HPP with PtH capability.
4
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
• Integrate the model with a real-life scenario/project and thus develop a case study;
in order to compare a base case scenario with the case study scenario.
• Perform an analysis on the technical and economic performance of the HPP with
PtH.
• Conduct a sensitivity analysis of the model to determine which parameters the HPP
and electrolysis technology chosen, are sensitive to.
The research method followed in this project is as follows:
• Formulation of the problem statement and research objective.
• Literature review on HPP and the various and PtH technology options.
• Preliminary data collection of the various HPP and PtH parameters required for
the optimisation model.
• Deﬁnition of the Base Case (HPP with no PtH capability installed) and the Case
Study scenarios (HPP with PtH capability installed).
• Mathematical modelling and Linear Optimisation Model using Python.
The mathematical model used for the optimal sizing of the HPP with PtH is de-
veloped in an iterative process. The various data parameters considered and sizing
variables of the individual components of the HPP (i.e. Oﬀshore Wind, Solar, BESS
Electrolysis), are determined.
• Case Study - Hollandse Kust Noord
Available data and oﬃcial tender documents related to the Case Study of Hollandse
Kust Noord are studied in order to realistically simulate the case with the linear
optimisation model that has been built.
• Simulation of the model
Simulate the developed model for the base case and the case study scenarios, to
determine the technical and economic parameters. These parameters hence form
the basis of the discussions and sensitivity analysis.
• Sensitivity Analysis
A sensitivity analysis is performed on the model developed, by choosing various
parameters such as the Hydrogen Price and the Capacity of Hydrogen Installed.
• Discussion and Conclusion
1.4
Structure of the Report
This report has been framed in the following manner: Chapter 2 provides the Literature
Review on the various topics of interest under this thesis such as HPP, PtH, Policy
Framework for a Hydrogen Economy etc. Chapter 3 consists of the methodology followed
in order to develop and simulate the mixed-integer linear optimisation model, and also
states the various technological & economic parameters considered for evaluating the
model. Chapter 4 details the Case Study that has been considered for this project and
also provides details on the various data parameters pertaining to it. Chapters 5, 6 & 7
elaborate on the results obtained, conclusions arrived at, sensitivity analysis of the model
and scope for future work in this area.
5
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
2
Literature Review
Hybrid Power Plant with BESS
Hybrid Power Plants are formed by the combination of multiple power generating assets.
These assets can comprise of conventional and renewable generators.
They can even
include or not have the possibility of energy storage technologies. HPPs are developed
on a grid utility-scale, that help meets the power needs. The HPPs are connected to
the grid through a single point of common coupling for all the technologies installed
within them. With the context of this master thesis, it is of signiﬁcant interest to look
at HPPs comprising of wind, solar PV and energy storage. The reason for pursuing the
implementation of an HPP with the previously mentioned conﬁguration can be classiﬁed
as wanting to reduce LCOE by performing a more eﬃcient utilization of the wind &
solar resource and increase the proﬁtability of the asset [17]. The LCOE improvement is
based on the complementary character of wind and solar sources and the insulting the
optimal sizing of generation technologies in the HPP. The proﬁtability of the plant can
be improved by utilizing the storage option available in the HPP.
HPPs pose a wide array of beneﬁts that promote their installation in place of single
technology generating units. One of the most prominent economic beneﬁts is the reduction
in cost factors such as CAPEX and O&M costs. This can be achieved due to the sharing
of the Balance of system costs (BOS) such as hardware, interconnection, permitting,
engineering, labour, and land costs [14]. The improved capacity factor that is obtained
by coupling the various generating technologies also allows for more eﬃcient exploitation
of the electrical infrastructure compared to an independent solar or wind plant.
The
HPP can also be beneﬁcial during times of maintenance that require the shut down of
the plant.
The necessary power can be dispatched to the grid through an optimized
discharging strategy of the BESS [6].
As mentioned previously, the complementary nature of wind and solar increases the power
availability of the HPP. It helps reduce the intermittency of wind and solar power output,
thereby providing a relatively stable power output. An HPP with BESS installed can
also greatly help power ﬂuctuations caused due to the variable wind and solar sources.
Moreover, the power dispatch to the grid can be smoothened and made more controllable
schedule is more controllable through battery charging and discharging schedules.
There are various existing HPP projects such as the Kennedy energy park in Australia
(60 MW, 4 MWh of storage) which has the primary aim to use storage to ﬂatten output
and ease grid requirement fulﬁlment [24]. Other examples include Skeleton Creek Energy
Center (500 MW capacity, 200 MW battery power capacity and 800 MWh battery en-
ergy capacity), Hardin Wind Energy Center (620 MW power capacity, 60 MW battery
capacity) and Wheatridge Wind Energy Facility (600 MW total capacity, 30 MW battery
capacity) all located in the United States [18].
Power to Hydrogen
Various countries and industrial sectors worldwide are pursuing step towards decarboni-
sation strategies. It is anticipated that hydrogen will have a critical role to play to help
achieve this goal. The role of hydrogen is even more pronounced in hard-to-abate sectors,
such as steel, chemicals, long-haul transport, shipping and aviation. Therefore there is a
pressing need for hydrogen production, which is now being met by methods that are not
low carbon initiatives. Hydrogen produced from electrolysis is the sustainable alternative
that can alleviate the problem [20].
6
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
Figure 3: Schematic of an HPP with PtH conﬁguration [20]
With the goal clearly deﬁned that the desired methods to produce hydrogen is through
the process of electrolysis, we can now look at the various technological options that are
available to produce green hydrogen that matches the quality standards as per the end-
use application. As shown in Figure 3, the three primary types of electrolysis technology
available are Alkaline Water Electrolysis (AEC), Proton-Exchange Membrane (PEM) and
Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell (SOEC). It can be seen that the SOEC electrolysis technol-
ogy, although is most desirable due to its high eﬃciency and low power consumption rates
[13], is still in the prototyping stage. The SOEC technology has only seen application on
a laboratory scale and is yet to enter the mainstream production scale. Thus, the two
technology options for electrolysis that can be implemented in large scale application are
PEM and AEC, at the current state of technology maturity.
Figure 4: Comparison of PEM and Alkaline Electrolysis [27]
7
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
The lower operating temperatures and the ability to operate with high eﬃciency in mini-
mum loads make the PEM electrolysis technology, technically superior when compared to
eh AEC electrolysis. The PEM however suﬀers from very high CAPEX and O&M costs
that make it unfavourable for large scale application [13]. The PEM electrolysis also uses
Iridium as a catalyst to the reaction. Iridium is a metal that is found more in abundance
in meteorites than in the earth’s crust, thus making its procurement expensive. The PEM
technology also uses platinum catalysts which again add to the high CAPEX [27]. AEC
on the other hand is a mature technology that has already found wide scape application.
It is the cheapest electrolyser option with capacities as high as 150 MW in operation [13].
Although it is eﬃcient at high temperature, it ﬁnds the best case application in the given
analysis. Thus it is deemed the most favourable electrolysis technology in the view of this
master thesis.
3
Methodology
This section describes the data points required as input, the problem formulation, the
analysis parameters and the approaches taken to perform the optimal sizing of an HPP
with PtH.
3.1
Data Collection
This subsection speciﬁes the various data points that have been collected in order to
provide input data to the optimization model. Section 4 describes these data points in
further detail with reference to the Case Study taken up.
3.1.1
Power Generation Time Series
The wind and solar production time series are provided as input to the model in order to
simulate the power generation by the wind and solar units of the HPP asset. This input
is provided in the form of time series data in an hourly resolution, based on historical
wind and solar generation potential from the site of the case study selected. The power
generation time-series data has been normalized with a rated power of a plant for the
purposes of measurement and is provided to the optimization model. Therefore, these
values now represent the fraction of power that can be extracted by the wind turbines
and PV panels based on the resource availability at the HPP site.
The power extracted by the wind turbines from the wind resource is given by the following
equation:
PWind = 1
2 × ρAU 3Cp
(1)
where:
ρ = Density of Air (kg/m3)
A = Area swept by the Wind Turbine blade (m2)
U = Wind Speed (m/s)
Cp = Power Coeﬃcient
8
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
The wind power extracted by the turbine is highly dependent on the wind speed at the
height of the turbine blades. The non-dimensional coeﬃcient Cp denotes the power coeﬃ-
cient, and the amount of power that can be extracted by the wind turbine is constrained
by the Betz limit (0.59). This theoretically places an upper limit on annual energy that
can be extracted at a site. The power coeﬃcient is dependent on various factors such as
the blade proﬁle, pitch angle of the wind turbine blade and its rotational speed.
For the purposes of this thesis, the solar power time series data is calculated depending
on the solar irradiance at the site that is absorbed by the PV panels. Solar irradiance is
highly variant depending on the climatic conditions at the site. The wind and solar time-
series data that have been obtained for this case study have been illustrated in further
detail in Section 4.
Mass of Hydrogen Produced
The objective of the optimisation model is to determine the optimal conﬁguration of an
HPP with PtH such that the NPV of the asset is maximised. The output of this model will
provide the optimal installed capacity of the AEC electrolyser that helps maximise the
revenue, and also provide the electrolyser’s electricity consumption for hydrogen produc-
tion time-series data. The consumption time series data obtained will deﬁne the amount
of electricity that is consumed by the electrolyser at each time resolution.
As stated
previously the electricity that is consumed by the electrolyser will be provided by the
generation technologies in the HPP. It is essential to know the mass of liquid hydrogen
produced by the electrolyser for the purposes of further calculations and analysis. Thus,
it can be determined by the following expression:
P HY D
t
= P H
t × 1000
HHV
(2)
where:
P HY D
t
= Mass of Hydrogen generated at each time resolution (kg of Hydrogen)
P H
t A = Amount of energy consumed by the hydrogen electrolyser at each resolution
(MWh)
HHV = High Heating Value of Hydrogen (kWh/kg)
3.1.2
Electricity & Hydrogen Prices
One of the primary input parameters to the model is the electricity prices of the system. As
the aim is to develop an optimized HPP with PtH that reﬂects on the real life conditions,
the zonal day-ahead market prices are used in this case. In the day-ahead market, energy is
sold and bought for the next 24 hour period by producers and customers in the electricity
pool. The HPP with PtH is in this case is considered to be a price-taker; meaning that
the HPP is unable to inﬂuence the market prices with its energy production and is instead
subject to the electricity prices as dictated by the electricity market. As electricity prices
tend to reﬂect the demand for electricity in the system, it can be expected that the
electricity prices will be higher during hours of peak demand. The electricity prices taken
into consideration for the master thesis are further explained in detail under Section 4.
The optimal sizing of the HPP is done by deﬁning a nominal grid capacity, which the
HPP needs to meet, and then maximizing the production of this HPP to generate high
revenue.
9
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
The production of Hydrogen in the EU is currently dominated by large scale producers for
the purpose of industrial applications. The price of hydrogen is also dependant highly on
factors such as the required purity levels based in the end application and the location of
the end customer. The location of the customer is of high importance due to the transport,
distribution and storage facilities required for Hydrogen. The most common method for
used hydrogen production method is on-site steam methane reforming, from which the
hydrogen produced is not green hydrogen and has associated CO2 emissions. Since this
technology is mature, the selling price of hydrogen ranges from 2 to 3 €/kg. The FCH
JU (Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking) has set the goal to bring the hydrogen
prices generated from green methods to be between 4.5 to 7 €/kg by 2030 [12]. Thus
it would be interesting to observe the eﬀect of the Hydrogen prices on the optimization
model.
3.1.3
HPP Cost Factors
The cost related parameters have the primary say on how much capacity of a certain
technology is installed in the HPP. The two types of costs taken into consideration in the
optimisation model are as follows:
Capital Costs
Capital costs are one of the most important factors that inﬂuence the sizing of an HPP.
The CAPEX consists of the initial investment cost for each generating technology and
storage medium and the Balance of Plant costs associated with the plant. The capital costs
taken into consideration for this model are broken down technology-wise and speciﬁed in
Chapter 4.
Operational & Maintenance Costs
As the wind and solar resources do not require any fuel costs, the operation and main-
tenance costs of these generating technologies are quite low. The O&M costs for these
technologies have been steadily declining in recent years due to various technological ad-
vancements and improved manufacturing. As a result, newer technologies require less
maintenance thereby enabling us to consider only the ﬁxed O&M costs as the variable
O&M costs associated are negligible. The technology speciﬁc O&M costs are speciﬁed in
Chapter 4.
3.1.4
Operational Lifetime
The operational lifetime of an asset is deﬁned as the number of years of operation for which
it is able to operate with high-performance standards. It is also to be known that the
technology will need to be periodically serviced over the course of its operational lifetime.
Upon reaching the end of its operational lifetime, the asset can be decommissioned or
have its lifetime extended. Lifetime extension can be done through processes such as
repowering [30]. This can be implemented in a wind farm for example, by reusing the
existing site and installing newer technology after having dismantled the wind turbines
that are out of operation. In the scope of this master thesis, we do take into consideration
any extension to the lifetime of the plant. Therefore the lifetime of the various generating
and storage technologies in this plant is taken to be 25 years.
10
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
3.1.5
Discount Rate
The discount rate for a project can be deﬁned as the interest rate used to determine
the present values of future cash ﬂows. It is essential to evaluate whether the expected
revenues of the project are larger than the costs incurred by the project. This requires us
to estimate the value of future cash ﬂows of the project over its lifetime which is possible
with the discount rate. In the case of projects where there is a risk factor involved, it is
in often cases recommended to add a risk premium to the discount rate. The discount
rate including the risk premium is taken as 8% for this analysis as stated for European
renewable energy projects in [25].
3.2
Mathematical Model
The objective of optimising an HPP with PtH is done by building a mathematical model
based on a mixed-integer linear program.
The objective function of the model is to
maximise the Net Present Value of the HPP asset.
It does so by aiming to ﬁnd the
optimally installed capacities of the various power generating and storage technologies
available. Thus, the primary factors that we aim to determine are the rated installed
capacities of Oﬀshore Wind, Solar PV, Battery Energy Capacity, Battery Power and the
Electrolyser for hydrogen production. In addition to the aforementioned parameters, it
is also vital to be able to determine the HPP generation time-series and the Hydrogen
production time-series data in order to determine and analyse the output of the HPP
with PtH. These parameters can then assist with the further technical and economical
assessment of the HPP asset. It can also be interesting to observe the charging/discharging
behaviour of the BESS, if it is installed by the model. As the BESS is an energy storage
medium, the energy arbitrage demonstrated by this technology is also of potential interest.
Energy arbitrage means that the energy produced by the HPP would be rather stored
by the storage medium than be dispatched to the grid, and then discharged at a time
of higher electricity price in order to obtain a higher revenue. As stated previously, the
objective function of this mathematical model is to maximise the NPV of the HPP asset;
which is largely dependant on the optimal rated capacities of the technologies and their
associated costs. The mathematical model for the current case has been built based on
the work done in [3]. The NPV (see Section 3.3.1) is a commonly used tool to analyse the
ﬁnancial feasibility and proﬁtability of a project. It relies heavily on the discounted cash-
ﬂows over the lifetime of the project. The discounted cash-ﬂows in turn rely on the annual
revenue generated and the annual operational costs incurred by the project. In this case,
the revenue generated by the asset is primarily dictated by the installed capacities of the
power-producing technologies, installed capacity of the hydrogen electrolyser, the hourly
market price of electricity and the market price of hydrogen. The expenses incurred by the
asset are comprised of the annual operation and maintenance cost for the various energy
producers and the hydrogen electrolyser. These costs vary depending on the installed
capacities of these technologies; which is what we aim to determine through this model.
3.2.1
Problem Formulation
The mathematical model that is utilised to perform the optimisation of the HPP with
PtH is built in the form of a Mixed Integer Linear Optimisation problem. The objective
function and the constraints that form the model are explained in detail as follows:
11
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
Maximise:
NPV =
N
X
n=1
"PT
t=1(pt · P HPP
t
+ ph · P Hyd
t
) −(cHO · PHyd + cWO · PWin + cSO · PSol + cBO · EBat)
(1 + r)n
#
(3.3)
−(cHC · PHyd + (cWC + cGC) · PWin + cSC · PSol + cBOP · (PWin + PSol) + cBC1 · EBat+
(cBC2 + cBC3 + cBC4) · PBat + cGrid · PGrid)
s.t.
0 ≤PHyd ≤PHyL
(3.4)
PWin ≥0
(3.5)
PSol ≥0
(3.6)
PBat ≥0
(3.7)
EBat ≥0
(3.8)
PCur ≥0
(3.9)
0 ≤P HPP
t
≤PGrid
∀t ∈T (3.10)
0 ≤P H
t
≤PHyd
∀t ∈T (3.11)
P Hyd
t
= P H
t × 1000
HHV
∀t ∈T (3.12)
P HPP
t
= P Win
t
· PWin + P Sol
t
· PSol + P B
t −P H
t −P c
t
∀t ∈T (3.13)
−PBat ≤P B
t ≤PBat
∀t ∈T (3.14)
SOCt+1 = SOCt −P B
t · ∆t
∀t ∈T (3.15)
SOC0 = 0.5 × EBat
(3.16)
SOCT = SOC0
(3.17)
Sets
• T - denotes the number of hours that have been considered for the simulation of
the model. The number of hours taken into consideration here is 8760, which is the
total number of hours in a year.
• N - denotes the lifetime of the project.The life time of the HPP with Hydrogen
electrolyser asset taken into consideration here is 25 Years.
Parameters
Prices
pt
Hourly Electricity Price in
EUR/MWh
ph
Price of Hydrogen in
EUR/kg of Hydrogen
Table 1: Parameters - Prices
12
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
Capital Expenditures (CAPEX)
cHC
Total capital cost of
Hydrogen Electrolyser in
EUR/MWe
cSC
Total capital cost of
Solar PV asset in
EUR/MW
cWC
Total capital cost of
Oﬀshore Wind asset in
EUR/MW
cBOP
Total capital cost of
Balance of Plant of HPP in
EUR/MW
cGC
Total underwater
cabling capital costs for
Oﬀshore Wind asset in
EUR/MW
cBC1
Total capital cost of
BESS of HPP in
EUR/MWh
cBC2
Total capital cost of
power conservation system
of BESS in EUR/MW
cBC3
Total capital cost electric
BOP of BESS in EUR/MW
cBC4
Total capital cost of grid
management system of
BESS in EUR/MW
cGrid
Total capital cost of
connection of HPP to the
grid in EUR/MW
Table 2: Parameters - CAPEX
13
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
Operation & Maintenance Expenditures (OPEX)
cHO
Total annual O&M cost of
Hydogen Electrolyser
in EUR/MWe
cWO
Total annual O&M cost of
Oﬀshore Wind asset of HPP
in EUR/MW
cSO
Total annual O&M cost of
Solar PV asset of HPP in
EUR/MW
cBO
Total annual O&M cost of
BESS asset of HPP
in EUR/MWh
Table 3: Parameters - OPEX
Other
r
Discount Rate
PGrid
The Nominal Grid Connection
Capacity of the HPP in MW
P Win
t
Hourly, Normalised power
output of Oﬀshore Wind
asset
P Sol
t
Hourly, Normalised power
output of Solar PV asset
Table 4: Parameters - Other
In addition to the above mentioned parameters, the parameter PHyL was introduced in the
later stages of the mathematical model formulation in order to impose an upper bound
on the Electrolyser installed capacity. This was essential to the proper functioning of
the model in order to cap the installed hydrogen capacity to a realistic values and avoid
optimisation issues that arise due to an unbounded parameter. The value taken as the
upper limit is detailed upon in Section 4.
The parameter Emin is the minimum values of State of Charge (SOC) of the BESS (given
in unit MWh). This factor is based on the depth of discharge of the battery (DOD) and
can be given by the following equation:
Emin = (1 −DOD) · Emax
(3.18)
Decision Variables
• PHyd - Rated installed capacity of the Hydrogen electrolyser [MWe]
• PWin - Rated installed capacity of Wind Power [MW]
14
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
• PSol - Rated installed capacity of Solar Power [MW]
• EBat - Rated installed Battery Energy Capacity [MWh]
• PBat - Rated installed Battery Power [MW]
• P Hyd
t
- Amount of Hydrogen produced by the electrolyser [kg of hydrogen], at time
unit t.
• P H
t
- Amount of Power consumed by the Hydrogen electrolyser for the process of
electrolysis in order to produce hydrogen [MW], at time unit t.
• P HPP
t
- Amount of Power supplied by the HPP to the grid [MW], at time unit t.
• P B
t
- Amount of Power charged into or discharged from the battery [MW], at time
unit t. The amount of power charged or discharged depends on the sign of the value.
The variable takes a negative sign when power is used to charge the battery and is
positive when power is discharged into the grid from the battery.
• P C
t
- Amount of Power curtailed from the HPP [MW], at time unit t.
Power
curtailment occurs when the total produced by the HPP is higher than the grid
connection limit (PGrid).
• SOCt - denotes the State of Charge of the battery , at time unit t.
Equations
• Equation 3.3: the Objective Function of the MILP model, which is to maximise
the NPV of the HPP asset. The NPV is the diﬀerence between the current values
of cash inﬂow and outﬂow over the project lifetime (see Section 3.3.1). The cash
inﬂow here is represented by the revenue obtained from the sale of electricity and
hydrogen that is generated by the HPP with PtH. The cash outﬂow is comprised of
the annual O&M costs for the asset and the CAPEX incurred at the beginning of
the project lifetime. r is the discount rate is used here for calculation.
• Equation 3.4: this constraint sets the minimum and maximum boundary limits
for the rated capacity of hydrogen electrolyser installed (MWe). A maximum limit
is required to set in order to obtain a solution, as the model cannot run with an
unbounded variable.
• Equations 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 & 3.8: these constraints set the minimum boundary for
rated capacities of Wind, Solar, battery power rating & battery energy capacity
respectively.
• Equation 3.9: this constraint ensures that the power curtailed should only take
on positive values. The Power curtailed is equal to the diﬀerence between the total
power generated by the wind, solar & battery power discharged into the grid, and
the nominal grid connection capacity(PGrid). Thus, the value of PCur take on values
greater than zero only if there is overplanting done in the HPP.
• Equation 3.10: this constraint sets the minimum and maximum boundary limits
for the HPP output. The upper limit is set at PGrid as the HPP cannot supply more
power to the grid than the nominal grid capacity. It also cannot take on negative
values as power is not drawn from the grid to the HPP. The BESS and the Hydrogen
Electrolyser are only run on the power that is generated by the generating assets
within the HPP.
15
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
• Equation 3.11: this constraint sets the minimum and maximum boundary limits
for the power consumed by the electrolyser. The upper limit is set at PHyd as the
electrolyser cannot consume more power rated installed capacity.
• Equation 3.12: this equation calculates the amount of hydrogen produced P Hyd
t
(in kg) from the amount of energy consumed by the electrolyser P H
t
(in MWe) see
Section 3.3.2.
• Equation 8.8: this equation denotes the total power dispatched by the HPP to the
grid. It is the total power generated by the wind, solar and battery power discharged
minus the power supplied to the hydrogen electrolyser and power curtailment if
applicable.
• Equation 8.9: this equation limits the hourly charge/discharge of the battery to be
within the rated installed battery power value. The variable P B
t takes on a negative
value when the battery is discharging and a positive value it charges. The value is
zero when it is neither charging nor discharging.
• Equation 8.10: this equation sets the amount of energy stored in the battery for
the next time step based on the amount of charging/discharging that has happened
in the current time step.
The factor ∆t is equal to 1 hour to reﬂect the time
resolution.
• Equation 8.11: sets the initial State of Charge at 50% of the battery’s energy
capacity to allow for charging/discharging.
• Equation 8.12: enforces the State of Charge at the ﬁnal time step of the simulation
to be 50% of the battery’s energy capacity to ensure that the total energy charged
and the total energy discharged through the time period of simulation are the same.
Solver
The entirety of the above explained mathematical model was programmed in Python,
using the Spyder IDE. The model was then solved using the "IBM Decision Optimization
CPLEX" solver, which utilises the doclplex library in Python [9].
3.3
Assessment Parameters (Technical & Economical)
3.3.1
Economic Parameters
Net Present Value
The Net Present Value (NPV) is the primary tool used in investment analysis of a project.
NPV is the diﬀerence between the current values of cash inﬂow and outﬂow over the
lifetime of the project. When the NPV obtained for the project is positive, it indicates
that the revenue generated by the project is higher than the cash outﬂow (costs related
to the project) over its lifetime.
This means that the cash outﬂow will be repaid by
the discounted cash inﬂows and thus, the project will be proﬁtable. On the contrary, a
negative NPV indicates a net loss. The objective of this thesis is to maximise the NPV of
the HPP with Power to Hydrogen technology to obtain the highest proﬁt over its lifetime.
This will ensure that the optimal sizing of the HPP with Power to Hydrogen technology
is done y varying the installed capacities of the various technologies. The formula to
calculate the NPV of the project is given as follows:
16
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
NPV = −CF0 +
T
X
t=1

CFt
(1 + r)t

(3.19)
where:
NPV = Net Present Value
T = Project Lifetime (Years)
CF0 = Total Capital Cost of the Project (EUR)
CFt = Total Annual Cash Flow of the project. The Annual Cash Flow is the diﬀerece
between the Annual Revenue and the Total Annual Operation and Maintenance Costs
(EUR)
r = Discount Rate (%)
IRR
The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is deﬁned as the eﬀective annual rate of return that
is obtained by taking into consideration the discounted cash ﬂows of the project. At this
discount rate, the NPV of the project would be equal to zero. If the IRR obtained is
greater than the discount rate considered for the project, then the project deemed to be
favourable, as it implies a positive NPV.
0 = −CF0 +
T
X
t=1

CFt
(1 + IRR)t

(3.20)
The IRR of the project cannot be calculated analytically and is usually calculated by trial
and error method or by using the ’Goal Seek’ function in Excel. In this Master Thesis,
the IRR was calculated by the ’numpy_ﬁnancial’ python package.
LCOE
The Levelised Cost of Energy (LCOE) can be deﬁned as the average discounted cost of
generating one unit of energy over the lifetime of a generating technology or a powerplant.
It is a parameter that is used to compare the lifetime costs of generating electricity across
various generation technologies.
Capital Costs, OM Costs and Disposition Costs are
some of the cost factors that can come into eﬀect during the calculation of the LCOE of
a generating asset. It is also a useful tool that allows the comparison between various
generation technologies with diﬀerent associated cost factors [21].
LCOE =
I0 +
PT
t=1 Mt
(1+r)t
PT
t=1 Et
(1+r)t
(3.21)
where:
LCOE = Levelised Cost of Electricity (EUR/MWh)
I0 = Investment Cost (EUR)
Mt = Annual Operation and Maintenance Cost (EUR)
Et = Annual Energy production (MWh)
T = Eonomic Lifetime (Years)
17
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
r = Interest Rate (%)
LCOH
Similar to the previously explained concept of LCOE, the Levelised Cost of Hydrogen
(LCOH) can also be deﬁned as the average discounted cost of hydrogen generation over
the lifetime of the powerplant. While calculating the LCOH, some additional cost factors
such as hydrogen liquefaction costs, pipeline transmission costs and hydrogen storage
costs can come into eﬀect. For green hydrogen, as is considered in our case, the primary
dictating factor of the LCOH relative to other sources of hydrogen is the LCOE of the
power supplying technology.
LCOH =
I0 +
PT
t=1 Mt+(LCOE×P HA
t
)
(1+r)t
PT
t=1 Ht
(1+r)t
(3.22)
where:
LCOH = Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (EUR/kg of Hydrogen)
I0 = Investment Cost (EUR)
Mt = Annual Operation and Maintenance Cost of Hydrogen Electrolyser (EUR)
LCOE = Levelised Cost of Electricity (EUR/MWh)
P HA
t
= Annual power consumption by the Hydrogen electrolyser in order to produce hy-
drogen (MWh)
Ht = Annual Hydrogen production (kg of Hydrogen)
T = Eonomic Lifetime (Years)
r = Interest Rate (%)
3.3.2
Technical Parameters
Capacity Factor
The Capacity Factor is deﬁned as the ratio of the actual energy produced over a given
period of time to the maximum possible energy production over that period, for any
powerplant.
The capacity factor is commonly used to compare the diﬀerent types of
electricity producers. The maximum possible electricity production for a powerplant is
obtained by assuming that the producer operates continuously at full nameplate capacity
over the time period. It can be calculated as follows:
CapacityFactor =
PT
t=1 P HPP
t
PHPP × T
(3.23)
where:
P HPP
t
= Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (EUR/kg of Hydrogen)
PHPP = Rated installed capacity of the HPP. (MW)
T = Total number of hours in the time period considered which is ideally one year (Hours)
Overplanting
18
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
In order to obtain an optimal HPP conﬁguration, the model is allowed to implement over-
planting. Overplanting is a method for optimization of powerplants whereby the installed
capacity of the powerplant is made to be higher than the nominal grid connection capacity,
to utilize the renewable sources more eﬀectively by compensating for their intermittency.
Thus when overplanting is done, the lost capacity due to hours with low wind speeds can
be compensated by generating additional power during times of higher wind speeds. The
lost capacity can also be compensated by being able to generate more power through the
higher installed capacity during times of higher electricity prices. It would be desirable
to observe whether overplanting is implemented in the case scenario considered.
Total Curtailment
The concept of Power Curtailment is required in cases where there is an overplanting of
a generating resource. It is done to ensure that the power dispatched to the grid by the
HPP should not exceed the nominal capacity, thus avoiding transmission congestion. It is
equal to the diﬀerence between the nominal grid connection capacity and the total power
dispatch to the grid from HPP when the power generated by the HPP is greater than the
nominal grid connection capacity. Thus, the power curtailment values are either zero or
take on only positive values. It is described in the following equation. The total power
curtailment is the sum of power curtailment for every time resolution over the time frame
considered.
P c
t = (P Win
t
· PWin + P Sol
t
· PSol + P B
t ) −PGrid
(3.24)
where:
P c
t = Power curtailment at time unit t (MW)
P Win
t
· PWin = Total Wind power produced at time unit t (MW)
P Sol
t
· PSol = Total Solar power produced at time unit t (MW)
P B
t
= Battery power charged/discharged at time unit t (MWh)
PGrid = Nominal grid connection capacity (MW)
Full load Hours:
The Full Load Hours of a powerplant can be deﬁned as the total number of hours that
the plant can dispatch power at its full rated capacity. It can be calculated as follows:
FullLoadHours = CapacityFactor × T
(3.25)
Where:
T = No. of hours in a year
4
Case Study
The Hollandse Kust Noord (HKN) is an Oﬀshore Wind Farm is the case study that has
been chosen for implementation with the optimisation model that this thesis aims to
develop. The HKN site is located 18.5 km oﬀthe coast of the North Holland province
and encompasses an area of 125km2 and is slated to be developed by the year 2023. It has
19
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
been tendered to install 69 Siemens Gamesa turbines of 11 MW each, thus achieving the
rated capacity of 759MW with a proposed 3.3 TWh annual generation. The wind farm
can generate enough power to satisfy the needs of 1 million households with renewable
electricity. The electricity cable connecting the wind farm to the oﬀshore point of coupling
will be installed by the transmission system operator TenneT. In addition, to the oﬀshore
wind farm, there are plans to build a ﬂoating solar park, short term battery storage and
a hydrogen electrolyser to produce green hydrogen, in the Port of Rotterdam.
Thus,
the HKN project has the ideal HPP conﬁguration that the optimisation model can be
implemented on. the following chapter details the various data points that have been
taken into consideration and provided as input to the model.
4.1
Electricity Prices
The electricity prices are one of the primary input factors to the HPP optimisation model
as it largely inﬂuences the revenue generated by the HPP. The objective of the optimi-
sation model is to maximise the NPV of the asset, and thus the revenue generated by
the electricity produced tends to dictate the installed capacity of the various generating
technologies at our disposal. As stated previously in chapter 3 the day-ahead market
prices for the Netherlands have been utilised in this thesis. The historical prices of the
year 2017 have been taken and implemented to simulate the lifetime of the HPP. Thus
the data is deterministic in nature and the uncertainties associated with it are neglected.
The electricity prices and their duration curve are be plotted as shown below:
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Market Electricity Prices for Netherlands
Figure 5: Market Prices for Electricity
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Electricity Market Price Duration Curve
Figure 6:
Electricity Prices Duration
Curve
The electricity prices on an hourly resolution for the reference year taken are plotted as
shown in Figure 5. The seasonality in the electricity prices is quite evident from the prices
observed. A large spike in the electricity price reﬂects on the higher consumption load
which in this case can be seen to occur in the winter months ranging from November to
February. The average annual electricity price for the year is 42.71 Eur/MWh is shown
on the plot with the yellow line. The electricity price in the non-winter months is seen
to be relatively stable and close to the average electricity price. Figure 6 is the duration
curve for the electricity prices and it reinforces the fact that the electricity prices are quite
stable close to the average electricity price. It is also worthy to note that there are very
20
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
few hours with high peaks in the electricity prices. It is observed that only 6.6% of the
total hours have an electricity price of over 60 EUR/MWh, which does not provide a lot
of high electricity price hours for the HPP to capitalise on. The eﬀect of this low number
of hours with high electricity prices will have a negative eﬀect on the optimisation model’s
desirability to over-plant the generating resources. If overplanting is done, it will be of
interest to observe whether the cost of overplanting can be oﬀset by these few hours with
high electricity prices.
4.2
Hydrogen Selling Price
In addition to the electricity prices, the other source of revenue for the HPP with PtH asset
is by selling the green hydrogen generated by the AEC electrolyser unit that is installed
in it.
The current methods of large scale hydrogen generation are mature and cost-
competitive but involve the emissions of CO2 as they rely on Steam Methane Reforming.
The intention of this thesis is to be able to generate green hydrogen through electrolysis
and be able to obtain revenue from selling the hydrogen at market prices. As stated in
[12], a range of prices is taken for the sake of analysis here, the hydrogen prices are taken
from 2.5 to 4.5 EUR/kg of Hydrogen, at 0.5 EUR/kg increments. This range has how and
high hydrogen selling price values in order to analyse whether the green hydrogen can be
sold at a competitive price compared to the existing methods of generation.
The LCOH is also a major decisive factor behind the installed capacity of the electrolyser
by the optimisation model. This is because the LCOH indicates the average revenue per
unit of green hydrogen generated that would be required to recover the capital costs of
the electrolyser. Hence, it would make ﬁnancial sense to install electrolyser capacity only
in the case in which the hydrogen price is higher than the LCOH. It would be desirable
to observe whether this eﬀect is reﬂected in the optimisation model.
4.3
Power Generation Time Series Data
The power generation time series data for the wind and solar resource are generated for
the HKN site location (refer appendix for coordinates). The data is based on historical
generation data from the year 2017 and are normalised in order to be implemented in the
optimisation model. The power generation time series data is plotted as follows:
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Wind and Solar Time Series Data for HKN
Figure 7: Wind and Solar Power Generation Time Series Data
21
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
The HKN site has been chosen by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Aﬀairs and Climate
Policy to be tendered for an oﬀshore wind farm project due to its high wind potential and
it is immediately noticeable here in Figure 7. As the production data is based on historical
production data it might not reﬂect in actuality the immensely high wind energy potential
at the chosen site, but it is quite indicative of it. The oﬀshore site has high wind generation
potential year-round. On the contrary, the seasonality of solar power is quite distinctively
illustrated in ﬁgure 7. The solar resource only reaches a maximum generation potential
of 0.7 times the installed nominal capacity. It can also be seen that the higher generation
potential is only available through the months of May to August, thus illustrating the
seasonality of the summer months where the irradiance available is higher.
Capacity Factor
LCOE (EUR/MWh)
Wind Power
59.49%
41.42
Solar Power
8.08%
56.39
Table 5: Capacity Factor & LCOE of generating technologies at HKN Site
The inferences derived from the above plot are reﬂected on calculating the Capacity factors
of the Wind and Solar resource at the HKN as shown in table 5. It can be noticed that
the capacity factor of wind power is much higher than the global average and the capacity
factor of solar power is much lower. The high capacity factor of the wind resource leads
to an LCOE of 41.42 EUR/MWh which is quite lower than the average LCOE of Oﬀshore
Wind in the European scenario, as given in [16]. From the initial investigation, it can be
seen that the wind resource is the more lucrative resource amongst the two due to the
high capacity factor and lower LCOE. It is also to be noted that the wind resource has a
10.62% of No-Load hours over the entire range of data considered, and on the other hand
the solar resource has a 54.71% of No-Load hours over the same time period. This large
disparity between the generation potential that is made available to the power generators
is expected to be highly favourable toward the installation of larger capacities of oﬀshore
wind farm rather than the solar PV plant.
4.4
Cost Factors
The cost related data have been primarily obtained from the following two sources: [5]
and [4], in order to maintain consistency with the source of input data. The CAPEX and
O&M costs have been taken into consideration for the various technologies that have been
included in the HPP. As stated earlier, the variable O&M costs for these technologies have
been greatly reduced in the recent years and hence haven’t been taken into consideration
for this analysis.
22
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
Oﬀshore Wind Input Data
Wind Turbine Cost
1.1
M EUR/MW
Oﬀshore Wind Civil Works Cost
2.49
M EUR/MW
Oﬀshore Wind Grid Cost
0.36
M EUR/MW
Oﬀshore Wind Fixed O&M Cost
42500
EUR /MW/Year
Table 6: Input Costs associated with Oﬀshore Wind Farm
Solar PV Input Data
Solar PV Cost
0.21
M EUR/MW
Solar PV Hardware Installation Cost
0.09
M EUR/MW
Solar PV Fixed O&M Cost
7250
EUR /MW/Year
Table 7: Input Costs associated with Solar PV
BESS Input Data
Battery Energy Cost
0.5
M EUR/MW
Battery Power Cost
0.3
M EUR/MW
BESS BOP Installation & Commissioning Cost
73360
EUR/MW
BESS Control System Cost
18340
EUR/MW
BESS Fixed O&M Cost
10000
EUR /MW/Year
Table 8: Input Costs associated with BESS
The AEC electrolysis process has been chosen for implementation in this project due to
its mature development stage and widespread application in the current scenario.
23
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
AEC Electrolyser Input Data
Hydrogen Electrolyser Capex
1.24
M EUR/MW
Hydrogen Electrlyser Fixed O&M
49655
EUR /MW/Year
Hydrogen Higher Heating Value
41.43
kWh/kg of H2
Hydrogen Price Range
2.5 to 4.5
EUR/kg of H2
Table 9: Input Costs associated with AEC Electrolyser
4.5
Assumptions
Hydrogen Max Capacity
In order to obtain a valid solution for the hydrogen electrolyser installed capacity and not
obtain an unbounded solution, it is essential to provide an upper limit to the capacity of
the electrolyser that the optimisation model is permitted to install. The AEC electrolyser
solution has been chosen for application in this thesis due to the mature technology and
relatively lower costs of capital. From [13], it can be seen that the AEC technology has
matured to a stage such that there is 150 MWe capacity in operation. Thus, the upper
limit for the electrolyser installed capacity is speciﬁed as 150 MWe.
Calculation of Hydrogen produced in kg
In Section 3, Equation 2, the need and method for calculating the mass of hydrogen
produced by the electrolyser are given in detail. It is thus essential to verify if the relation
stated for the HHV as done in Equation 2 is valid.
On considering the HHV of Hydrogen to be around 3.3 Wh/l (3300 Wh/m3) at 1 bar and
25◦and comparing the hydrogen production rate from the Werlte AEC plant in Germany
[19]. The 6MW plant produces hydrogen at a rate of 1300 m3/h. Multiplying this rate
with the HHV value of hydrogen (3300 Wh/M3), we arrive at a hydrogen production rate
corresponding to 4.3 MW. This denotes an eﬃciency of 71.67% which is quite realistic
for an AEC electrolyser. Although we do not take into consideration the eﬃciency of
the electrolyser in this thesis, it can be seen that this method of calculating the mass of
hydrogen produced reﬂects real-world results. Thus it is valid to proceed with the method
as stated in Equation 2.
5
Results
5.1
Scenarios for Evaluation
The HKN site-related data as explained in Section 4 is now integrated with the math-
ematical optimisation model that has been built as detailed in Section 3 in order to be
able to simulate an optimised HPP with PtH capability. To better analyse the outcome
of an HPP with PtH capability (Case Study Scenario), it is required to initially establish
a Base Case Scenario such that they can be compared and studied. Therefore, the two
cases are framed and are detailed as follows:
24
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
Base Case Scenario
Case Study Scenario
Parameters:
Oﬀshore Wind + Solar PV
+ BESS
Oﬀshore Wind + Solar PV
+ BESS + Hydrogen Electrolyser
Electricity Price
Proﬁle:
Day-Ahead
Market Prices
Day-Ahead
Market Prices
Grid Connection
Capacity:
Contracted Capacity
(759 MW)
Contracted Capacity
(759 MW)
Input Data Points:
Oﬀshore Wind & Solar PV
Production Data for HKN Site
1. Oﬀshore Wind & Solar PV
Production Data for HKN Site
2. Hydrogen Price
(in EUR/kg of Hydrogen)
Table 10: Summary of parameters taken into account for Base Case and Case Study
Scenarios
Thus, with the two scenarios established the optimisation model can now be simulated
for the HKN site-speciﬁc data. The goal of the optimisation model is to determine the
optimal rate capacities of the diﬀerent generation technologies installed with the aim of
maximising the NPV of the HPP asset. The optimisation model allows for overplanting of
the various generation technologies if required by the system. The scope for overplanting
thus also introduces the concept of power curtailment whereby power generated by the
HPP asset is curtailed if it exceeds the nominal grid connection capacity. The model also
has the ability to install BESS systems that can enable energy arbitrage to the system.
This allows the BESS to store certain amounts of generated energy during hours of low
market prices and consequently discharge the energy during hours of higher electricity
prices in order to generate more revenue. The following subsections will discuss in further
detail, the outputs of optimisation of the two above stated case scenarios.
5.2
Base Case Scenario
The Base Case Scenario is initially simulated with only the HPP asset without the PtH
hydrogen electrolyser taken into consideration.
The optimisation model is run on an
hourly resolution for the time period of the lifetime of the HPP which is taken to be
25 years. The installed capacities of the power generating technologies and the BESS
obtained as the output of the model are given as follows:
25
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
Parameter
Installed Capacity
Oﬀshore Wind Capacity
759 MW
Solar PV Capacity
0 MW
Battery Storage Power Rating
0 MW
Battery Storage Energy Rating
0 MWh
Table 11: Optimal Installed Capacities of generation technologies in HPP for Base Case
Scenario
From the results obtained and shown in Table 11, it can be seen that the optimal solution
arrived at by the solver is to only install 759 MW of Oﬀshore Windpower. This can
be attributed to the large diﬀerence in the Capacity Factor between Wind and Solar
generation at the selected site. As mentioned in chapter 4, the capacity factor of wind
is about 60% whereas that of solar is about 8%.
The inability of the solar resource
to generate power to a high enough degree makes it unfavourable when the aim is to
maximise the NPV of the HPP asset. On the other hand, the high capacity factor of the
wind resource at the HKN site strongly favours the installation of Oﬀshore Wind asset
and thus the entirety of the nominal grid capacity of the project is allocated to the wind
asset.
Another interesting observation from the result obtained is that there has been no over-
planting of any resource. This is attributed to the very low number of hours that have
a high electricity price, which can be exploited to increase revenue by overplanting. The
capital cost of overplanting either wind or solar PV asset is not oﬀset by the hours of
high electricity price available to thereby generate larger revenue. Over planting can be
used to improve the power output of the oﬀshore wind farm when the wind farm operates
in regions where the wind speed has a higher probability of being below the rated wind
speed of the turbine [11]. Thus, overplanting can be done in order to compensate for
the lost capacity by generating additional power beyond the grid during times of higher
wind speeds. From Chapter 4, we can see that the wind turbines are unavailable for only
about 10% of the operating hours considered. Thus, in this case, the cost of overplanting
is not superseded by the additional revenue generated due to higher power production
during times of high generation capacity. As there is no overplanting done in the Base
Case Scenario, there is no requirement for power curtailment either.
26
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
Economic Parameter
Value
Levelised Cost of Energy (LCOE)
41.42 EUR/MWh
Net Present Value (NPV)
14.93 MEUR
Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
8.05%
HPP Investment Cost
3406 MEUR
HPP Maintenance Cost
806 MEUR
Table 12: Economic parameters obtained for HPP in Base Case Scenario
The Economic parameters of the Base Case Scenario obtained upon optimisation by the
model is obtained as given in Table 12. As the primary aim of the model is to optimise
the NPV of the HPP asset, the optimised NPV thus obtained is 14.93 M EUR. Obtaining
a positive NPV of the project upon evaluation over its lifetime denotes that an investment
in such a project is highly favourable. The IRR obtained is 8.05% which is the minimum
discount rate required to be able to achieve a proﬁt on the project. The discount rate
that has been utilised for the calculations is 8%, therefore as long as the discount rate
is below the obtained IRR, a positive NPV should be obtained. The LCOE obtained for
the HPP is 41.42 EUR/MWh which is lower than the current average LCOE of Oﬀshore
Windpower for European markets [10].
However, the same source estimates that the
LCOE of Oﬀshore Wind in Europe with zero subsidies is slated to reach the range of
40 to 72 EUR/MWh by the year 2030. Thus, the obtained LCOE is comparable to the
future LCOE value of Oﬀshore Wind.
Parameter
Value
HPP AEP
3956 GWh
HPP Capacity Factor
59.49%
HPP Annual Full Load Hours
5211 Hours
Total Curtailment
0 MWh
Table 13: Annual generation and related statistics of the HPP corresponding to the Base
Case Scenario
The annual generation by the HPP is provided in the above table, (Table 13). It can
be seen that the HPP has a high Annual Energy Production value of 3.9 TWh. This
far exceeds the proposed annual production of 3.3 TWh in the tender documents of the
HKN project. It is also t be noted that as there is no overplanting of the generating
resources, the power curtailment by the HPP is zero. Thus, it can be concluded hat the
Base Case Scenario established for the optimisation model reﬂects the real-life operating
and performance conditions.
27
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
5.3
Case Study Scenario
The Case Study Scenario is now simulated considering the HPP asset with PtH hydrogen
electrolyser taken into consideration. The optimisation model is again run with the same
time resolution and project lifetime. The Case Study Scenario was initially run with the
Hydrogen Sales price considered to be 2.5 EUR/kg of H2. This sales price was deemed to
be too low for installation of a hydrogen electrolyser. The optimisation model provided
the same result as that of the Base Case Scenario, with 0 MWe of hydrogen electrolyser
installed.
The price of Hydrogen was therefore increased to 3 EUR/kg of Hydrogen,
upon doing so the installed capacities of the power generating technologies, BESS and the
hydrogen electrolyser obtained as the output of the model are given as follows:
Parameter
Installed Capacity
Oﬀshore Wind Capacity
759 MW
Solar PV Capacity
0 MW
Battery Storage Power Rating
0 MW
Battery Storage Energy Rating
0 MWh
Hydrogen Electrolyser Capacity
68 MWe
Table 14: Optimal Installed Capacities of generation technologies in HPP with PtH for
Case Study Scenario
The optimal solution obtained consists of an HPP with PtH that has 759 MW rated
capacity of Oﬀshore Wind and 68 MWe of Alkaline Electrolyser for the prodcution of
green hydrogen. For the same reasons as explained in the previous section, it can be seen
that there is no installation of Solar PV or BESS in the solution. There has also not
been any overplanting done in this case either. This is because the additional revenue
generated from the generated hydrogen does not warrant the costs for overplanting of
wind power asset.
The primary factors for discussion in this scenario are the economic parameters as shown
in Table 15.
28
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
Economic Parameter
Value
Levelised Cost of Energy (LCOE)
47.28 EUR/MWh
Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH)
2.71 EUR/kg of H2
Net Present Value (NPV)
21.49 MEUR
Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
8.07%
HPP Investment Cost
3490 MEUR
HPP Maintenance Cost
891 MEUR
Table 15: Economic parameters obtained for HPP with PtH in Case Study Scenario
The primary observation from the above table is the fact that the NPV and the IRR of
the Case Study Scenario show an improvement due to the inclusion of the 68 MWe AEC
electrolyser. This results presents a desirable outcome and strongly favours the installation
of an electrolyser unit, albeit when the selling price of hydrogen is large enough to generate
revenue to the asset. The selling price that is taken into account here is 3 EUR/kg of
Hydrogen and is comparable to the selling price of non-green hydrogen. This presents a
favourable business case for the inclusion of PtH technology in RES.
Parameter
Value
HPP AEP
3956 GWh
Energy Consumption by
H2 Electrolyser
378 GWh
HPP Capacity Factor
59.49%
Hydrogen Electrolyser
Capacity Factor
63.45%
HPP Annual Full Load Hours
5211 Hours
Hydrogen Electrolsyer
Annual Full Load Hours
5558 hours
Total Curtailment
0 MWh
Table 16: Annual generation and related statistics of the HPP with PtH corresponding
to the Case Study Scenario
29
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
It can also be observed from the above table that the LCOE of the HPP has increased when
compared to the Base Case Scenario, this is due to the decrease in the power dispatched
to the grid. The HPP maintains the same AEP due to the same installed capacity of the
generating sources, but now instead diverts electricity to the 68 MWe installed electrolyser
in order to generate revenue from hydrogen production. This reduces the amount of power
dispatched to the grid, which in this case is the diﬀerence between the AEP and the energy
consumed by the electrolyser. The power dispatched to the grid is 3.5 TWh.
The AEC electrolyser unit has a high capacity factor indicating that the resource is
being utilised to a large degree. This means that the optimisation model prioritises the
utilisation of the electrolyser asset to a large extent as it has the potential to generate
revenue. The annual hydrogen production from this HPP with PtH conﬁguration is 6865
tonnes of Hydrogen.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Electricity Market Price vs. Hydrogen Production
Figure 8: Electricity Market Prices vs. Hydrogen Production
The market prices for electricity and the power consumed by the electrolyser and plotted
as shown in Figure 8. The plot in blue colour denotes the hourly electricity price and the
cyan line is the LCOE of the HPP which is 47.28 EUR/MWh. The power consumed by the
electrolyser as shown in the orange-coloured plot corresponds to the production level of
hydrogen at each time interval. The mass of hydrogen produced can be further calculated
from the power consumed by the electrolyser using the method described in Equation
2. This ﬁgure clearly illustrates the complementary nature of the electricity prices and
hydrogen production levels. When the electricity prices drop below the LCOE, it is not
proﬁtable to dispatch power to the grid as the potential t generate revenue is lower. The
revenue generation potential is lower in this case because the cost of producing energy is
higher than the selling price of energy. Therefore, from the ﬁgure, it is evident that the
optimisation program instead supplies the energy to the electrolyser during times of low
electricity prices. This enables the HPP with PtH asset to be able to generate revenue
from the sale of hydrogen. This behaviour can be observed for almost every hour where
the electricity price drops below the LCOE of the HPP. This is a form of energy arbitrage
demonstrated by the HPP asset.
30
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Total Power Produced vs. Power Dispatch to Grid vs Hydrogen Production
Figure 9: Total Power Produced by HPP vs. Power Dispatched to the Grid vs. Power
Consumed by Electrolyser
Figure 9 illustrates the total power produced by the HPP, the power dispatched to the grid
by the HPP and the power consumed by the electrolyser for the production of hydrogen.
It is evident that the total power dispatched to the grid by the HPP is, always oﬀset
from the total power produced by the HPP, by the exact amount that is consumed by
the electrolyser.
This indicates how the HPP and the PtH asset work in tandem to
generate revenue from the sales of electricity to the grid and the hydrogen produced. It
is also worthwhile to notice that for the hours 17 to 18, the total power produced by the
HPP and the power consumed by the electrolyser are the same indicating that the power
generated is fully sent to the electrolyser. The average electricity price at these hours
is 37.4 EU/MWh, which is much lower than the LCOE of the HPP. Thus it is deemed
more proﬁtable to utilise the power produced to generate hydrogen than to dispatch o
the grid. The opposite eﬀect can be noticed during hours 38 to 43 where the average
electricity price is 58.03 EUR/MWh. Here, all the power generated is dispatched to the
grid as it yields a higher revenue than producing hydrogen. This once again illustrates
the complementary nature of the electricity prices and hydrogen production.
6
Sensitivity Analysis
A sensitivity analysis is carried out in order to assess the robustness of the model devel-
oped. The sensitivity analysis is based on the variation of one of the parameters while
the others are kept as speciﬁed in the case study scenario. This is done to assess the
impact that it has on the output values. The parameter that is of signiﬁcant interest, in
this case, is the ability of the HPP with PtH to generate revenue at the various hydrogen
31
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
selling prices. The rated capacity of the electrolyser the model chooses to install largely
depends on the ability of the electrolyser to generate high enough revenue through the
sales of hydrogen produced. This revenue primarily depends on the hydrogen selling price.
Therefore, the model is simulated with the previously deﬁned range of hydrogen prices in
order to analyze the output values.
Hydrogen Price (EUR/kg)
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Oﬀ. Wind Capacity (MW)
759
759
759
909
909
Electrolyser Capacity (MWe)
0
68
150
150
150
Consumption by H2 Electrolyser (GWh)
0
378
901
1011
1035
Annual H2 Production (Tonnes)
0
6865
16377
18374
18816
HPP LCOE (EUR/MWh)
41.42
47.28
57.49
55.81
56.18
HPP LCOH (EUR/kg)
0
2.71
2.43
2.28
2.17
HPP NPV (M WUE)
14.93
21.49
180.88
370.34
569.17
HPP IRR (%)
8.05
8.07
8.58
9
9.53
Table 17: Output of Sensitivity Analysis
The vast eﬀect of the hydrogen prices can be seen evidently on the instilled capacity of
the electrolyser and the revenue generated from it. At a price of 2.5 EUR/kg, we can
observe that there is no electrolyser installed by the optimisation model as the revenue
generated does not oﬀset the costs involved in the installing the electrolyser in the ﬁrst
place. This eﬀect has been seen in the previous section as well. When the hydrogen price
is increased to 3 EUR/kg, we can see that the model deems it proﬁtable to install 68
MWe of electrolyser and the results obtained in this conﬁguration have been dealt with
in detail in the previous chapter.
It is of interest to observe the eﬀect of the higher hydrogen prices from 3.5 to 4.5 EUR/kg
on the optimisation model. The model deems these higher values of hydrogen prices as
quite proﬁtable to the asset and thus installs the maximum allowable amount of elec-
trolyser possible to capitalise on the higher prices. It can also be noted that as a direct
consequence of the larger installed capacity of the electrolyser, the power consumed by
the electrolyser has increased as well. The larger power availability to the electrolyser and
the higher installed capacity have also led to the decrease in the LCOH thus, generating
high revenue.
At a hydrogen price of 3.5 EUR/kg, the model does not deem it necessary to overplant
the wind capacity to meet the need for hydrogen production. This is because the revenue
generated y the hydrogen at this price does not oﬀset the capital costs involved in installing
a larger capacity of wind generation.
However, we can observe that with the higher
hydrogen prices of 4 and 4.5 EUR/kg, the model deems it feasible to overplant the wind
resource by the same capacity as that of the installed electrolyser capacity. This ensures
a large amount of power supplied to the electrolyser thereby increasing the output of
32
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
hydrogen produced. The eﬀect of the higher revenues can be seen with the higher hydrogen
prices by looking at the NPV and IRR values for these cases. The drastic increase in the
NPV and IRR indicates a highly proﬁtable investment when the hydrogen prices are high.
Thus, this output helps generate a highly favourable business case from the HPP with
PtH asset point of view.
7
Conclusion
The optimization of an HPP with PtH is done with the aim of ﬁnding the optimal installed
capacity of wind. Solar PV; BESS and electrolyser systems. Once the optimal assizes are
found, certain key technical and economic parameters are investigated. The optimization
model is implemented on a real-life case scenario which for this project is the Hollandse
Kust Noord Site in the Netherlands. It is found that the model chooses to install Oﬀshore
Wind energy for the full nominal grid capacity and does not install any solar PV or BESS.
This is observed due to the higher capacity factor of the wind resource in the selected site,
as opposed to the solar resource. A Base Case Scenario is developed initially for an HPP
with no PtH capability and is then compared with the Case Study Scenario which has an
HPP with PtH capability. The Case Study scenario has the same installed capacity of
Oﬀshore Wind but ﬁnds it proﬁtable to install an additional 68 MWe of AEC electrolyser.
The additional revenue generated by the hydrogen produced improves the NPV and IRR
of the Case Study Scenario in comparison to the Base Case Scenario. A more detailed
look into the hydrogen production patterns and the total power dispatch of the HPP
allows us to get an insight into the complementary nature between electricity prices and
hydrogen production. This shows that the system prefers to divert the power produced
by the HPP towards the electrolyser at hours when the electricity market price is lower
than the LCOE of the HPP. This helps the asset generate more revenue than in the
Base Case Scenario by being able to produce and sell more hydrogen during the hours of
lower electricity price. Thus demonstrating a form of energy arbitrage. On analysing the
total power generated by the HPP and the power dispatched by the HPP to the grid, it
is evident that the diﬀerence between the two values in most cases is equivalent to the
power sent to the electrolyser. This illustrates the ability of the HPP and the electrolyser
to work in tandem to allow the power produced toward the channel that will generate the
highest income. Thus, from the simple optimisation tools developed it is concluded that
the investment of PtH capability in an HPP is highly desirable. There is a requirement
for a strong policy framework and infrastructure development to support the growth of
the hydrogen economy.
A brief sensitivity analysis is performed on the model that has been developed with the
hydrogen selling prices. It is inferred that the model is highly dependent on the hydrogen
selling price as in the case of higher selling prices, the model overplants the extra capacity
of Oﬀshore wind to support the production of hydrogen. Thus, it would be desirable to
investigate this dependency in further detail.
7.1
Scope for Future Work
The optimisation model that has been developed in this thesis is greatly impacted by the
quality of the input data provided to it. Thus, the future work could include a more real-
istic forecast of the power generation time series data for the case study that is considered.
The production data can be forecasted from the entire lifetime of the project and could
33
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
thereby lead to a more realistic outcome. The same can be done for the market electricity
prices as well. The model can also be worked on in a more detailed manner where it is
made to include further technical constraints. The eﬃciency of the electrolyser depending
on its load can be taken into account. This would yield a much more realistic forecast
of the hydrogen production levels in the electrolyser. Diﬀerent electrolyser technologies
can be modelled into the tool to be able to compare the implementation of the various
electrolyser technologies in an HPP. It would also be of interest to be able to model
an electrolyser system without having to specify the upper limit of the rated capacity,
whereby the system determines the optimal installed capacity for maximum NPV.
In the current report, only the hydrogen prices have been taken into consideration in
the sensitivity analysis to investigate the eﬀects. It would also be extremely interesting
to perform a more comprehensive sensitivity analysis on the optimization model to look
further into detail at the parameters that inﬂuence the model.
34
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
8
Appendix
8.1
Base Case Scenario Mathematical Model
The following mathematical model was utilised to perform the optimisation of the Base
Case Scenario. The Base Case Scenario involves the optimisation of an HPP with no PtH
capability.
NPV =
N
X
n=1
"PT
t=1(pt · P HPP
t
) −(cWO · PWin + cSO · PSol + cBO · EBat)
(1 + r)n
#
(8.1)
−((cWC + cGC) · PWin + cSC · PSol + cBOP · (PWin + PSol) + cBC1 · EBat+
(cBC2 + cBC3 + cBC4) · PBat + cGrid · PGrid)
s.t.
PWin ≥0
(8.2)
PSol ≥0
(8.3)
PBat ≥0
(8.4)
EBat ≥0
(8.5)
PCur ≥0
(8.6)
0 ≤P HPP
t
≤PGrid
∀t ∈T (8.7)
P HPP
t
= P Win
t
· PWin + P Sol
t
· PSol + P B
t −P c
t
∀t ∈T (8.8)
−PBat ≤P B
t ≤PBat
∀t ∈T (8.9)
SOCt+1 = SOCt −P B
t · ∆t
∀t ∈T (8.10)
SOC0 = 0.5 × EBat
(8.11)
SOCT = SOC0
(8.12)
35
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
8.2
HKN Site Location Co-Ordinates
Figure 10: Layout and Boundaries of HKN site [15]
Figure 11: Boundary Co-Ordinates of HKN site
36
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
References
[1] Essam A Al-Ammar, Nazar H Malik, and Mohammad Usman. www.etasr.com Al-
Ammar: Application of Using Hybrid Renewable Energy in Saudi Arabia. Technical
Report 4, 2011.
[2] Ruben Bravo and Daniel Friedrich. Integration of energy storage with hybrid solar
power plants. In Energy Procedia, volume 151, pages 182–186. Elsevier Ltd, 10 2018.
[3] Alessandra Cossu. Optimal sizing of hybrid power plant. Technical report, 2020.
[4] Danish Energy Agency and Energinet. Technology Data-Energy Plants for Electricity
and District heating generation. Technical report, Energistyrelsen, 2017.
[5] Danish Energy Agency and Energinet. Technology Data for Renewable Fuels. Tech-
nical report, Energistyrelsen, 2017.
[6] Kaushik Das, Anca D Hansen, Divyanagalakshmi Vangari, Matti Koivisto, Poul E
Sørensen, and Müﬁt Altin. Enhanced Features of Wind-Based Hybrid Power Plants.
Technical report.
[7] European Commission. A hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe. Technical
report, Brussels, 7 2020.
[8] Michael Fischer, Mathew Werber, and Peter V. Schwartz. Batteries: Higher energy
density than gasoline? Energy Policy, 37(7):2639–2641, 2009.
[9] IBM. IBM® Decision Optimization CPLEX® Modeling for Python, 2016.
[10] Irena International Renewable Energy Agency. FUTURE OF WIND Deployment,
investment, technology, grid integration and socio-economic aspects A Global Energy
Transformation paper Citation About IRENA. 2019.
[11] Klinge Jacobsen, Nicolaos Antonio, Christoph Wolter, Henrik Klinge Jacobsen, Geor-
gios Rogdakis, Lorenzo Zeni, and Nicolaos Cutululis. General rights Overplanting in
oﬀshore wind power plants in diﬀerent regulatory regimes Overplanting in oﬀshore
wind power plants in diﬀerent regulatory regimes. Technical report, 2021.
[12] David Jure Jovan and Gregor Dolanc. Can Green Hydrogen Production Be Econom-
ically Viable under Current Market Conditions. Energies, 13(24):6599, 12 2020.
[13] Kearny Energy Transition Institute. Hydrogen applications and business models.
Technical report, 6 2020.
[14] Pragya Nema, R. K. Nema, and Saroj Rangnekar. A current and future state of art
development of hybrid energy system using wind and PV-solar: A review, 10 2009.
[15] Netherlands Enterprise Agency. Hollandse Kust (noord) Wind Farm Zone. Technical
report, 2019.
[16] Ørsted. Making green energy aﬀordable. Technical report, Gentofte, 5 2019.
[17] Józef Paska, Piotr Biczel, and Mariusz Kłos. Hybrid power systems - An eﬀective
way of utilising primary energy sources. Renewable Energy, 34(11):2414–2421, 11
2009.
37
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
[18] Portland General Electric. Wheatridge Fact Sheet. Technical report, Morrow County,
2019.
[19] Reinhard Otten. The ﬁrst industrial PtG plant –
}Audi e-gas as driver for the energy turnaround. AUDI AG, 5 2017.
[20] International Renewable Energy Agency.
GREEN HYDROGEN COST REDUC-
TION SCALING UP ELECTROLYSERS TO MEET THE 1.5◦C CLIMATE GOAL
H 2 O 2. 2020.
[21] Santosh Raikar and Seabron Adamson. Levelized Cost of Electricity. Applied Energy,
2018.
[22] Shell Eneco. CrossWind wins tender for Hollandse Kust (noord) wind farm _ Shell
Global. 7 2020.
[23] Simon R. Sinsel, Rhea L. Riemke, and Volker H. Hoﬀmann. Challenges and solution
technologies for the integration of variable renewable energy sources—a review, 1
2020.
[24] Clarke St, Nathan Steggel, Dave Osmond, and GeoﬀBurns. PROJECT: KENNEDY
ENERGY PARK LOCATION: QUEENSLAND REPORT PREPARED FOR:
ARENA (PUBLIC RELEASE) [Windlab] [Public Release] KEP Knowledge Shar-
ing (FinClose Report) 2 Document Approval Date Approved. Technical report.
[25] Grant UK Thornton LLP. Renewable energy discount rate survey results-2018. Tech-
nical report, 2019.
[26] Johannes Töpler. Hydrogen as energy-storage-medium and fuel. Renewable Energy
and Environmental Sustainability, 1:31, 2016.
[27] M P Vang Hendriksen, P Bjerg Mogensen, M Højgaard Jensen, and S Ebbesen.
Aalborg Universitet Technology data for high temperature solid oxide electrolyser cells,
alkali and PEM electrolysers. 2013.
[28] Barbara Widera. Renewable hydrogen as an energy storage solution. In E3S Web of
Conferences, volume 116. EDP Sciences, 9 2019.
[29] Barbara Widera. Renewable hydrogen implementations for combined energy stor-
age, transportation and stationary applications. Thermal Science and Engineering
Progress, 16, 5 2020.
[30] Wind Europe. Repowering and Lifetime Extension. 7 2017.
[31] Wind Europe. Combined oﬀshore wind/hydrogen project wins Dutch Hollandse Kust
Noord tender, 7 2020.
38
