==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Department of Energy science and conversion
Development and characterization of
composite membranes for fuel cells above
200￿
Submitted by:
Shikder Mohamad Shafiquzzaman (s182681)
———————————
==PAGE:2==
March 29, 2021
Acknowledgements
During the whole project I have been getting support and assistance to the greatest extent
from all around me related to my project. From the very beginning I have to thank Prof.
Lars Nilausen Cleemann, Head of the Section of electrochemistry, DTU energy for giving
me an opportunity to write my MSc. theses in this department.
My sincere gratitude to my supervisors, Prof. Qingfeng Li, Department of Energy Con-
version and Storage and Dr.
David Aili, Senior Researcher at Energy Conversion and
Storage, DTU, for their precious suggestions, continuous support, and patience during
project. Their enormous knowledge and unlimited experience encouraged me to work on
the ﬁeld of Fuel cell. Their insightful feedback pushed me to rethink lot of topics to de-
liver high level of work. Specially I would like to thank Li for his frequent meeting and
cooperation and interest on the updates and prompt comments on the research issues.
I would also like to thank Yongfang Chen who is currently doing Phd in DTU energy.
Chao Pan and Larisa Seerup for their technical support on my work. They acquainted me
with instruments that I had to use to accomplish the project.
I would like to thank all the members in the section of electrochemistry, DTU energy. It
is their kind help and support that have made the work possible. Finally, I would like to
express my gratitude to my family, my wife and my children. Without their tremendous
understanding and encouragement in the past few years, it would be impossible for me to
complete my study.
i
==PAGE:3==
March 29, 2021
Abstract
Polybenzimidazole Composite membranes are used in PEMFC to improve fuel cell per-
formance. The present project aims at new membranes operational at above 200￿. At
a elevated temperature higher proton conductivity and reaction kinetics inﬂuences better
fuel cell performance. Toward this goal we investigated lanthanum chloride-PBI composite
with high inorganic content. We have achieved the homogeneous composite membranes
containing 10-80 wt.% LaCl3. The preformed phosphates of some metal chlorides and ox-
ides show that the loading higher ﬁller material is not possible because of agglomerates
formation due to the lack of dispersion. The RE metal chlorides are highly soluble in
DMAc and can be casted with PBI-DMAc solution.With the common solvent the compos-
ite membrane containing 80 wt% RE metal chloride can be acieved. It shows that doping
is not so straightforward and 59-93% of the LaPO4 was lost and higher solid content mem-
brane was not achieved. New strategies of doping is preliminarily explored showing very
encouraging results. To prevent LaPO4 loss two step doping is applied via KOH solution
which saves 5-22% more LaPO4. It was also measured that the membrane showing higher
conductivity of 0.229(S/cm) contains only 20% LaPO4 at 160￿which is considered to
be optimum and above and below which the conductivity decreases. In fuel cell test the
membrane shows higher proton conductivity of (0.035(S/cm) compared to pure PBI(0.011)
at 180￿. Homogeneous membrane prepared from LaCl3 can easily converted to La(OH)3
composite membrane and the loss of lanthanum can be stopped. The La(OH)3 membrane
prepared in this way has a conductivity of 0.017 S/cm at 100￿and 0.024 S/cm at 120￿in
50% RH. The conductivity of the hydroxide membrane open another possibility for further
use of the membrane in alkaline fuel cell application.
ii
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
March 29, 2021
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Fuel cells in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Energy storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Fuel cell is the practical alternative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Diﬃdent fuel cell and comparative discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.4
Importance of polarization curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.5
Membrane electorde assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
HT-PEMFC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
PEMFC a type of FC with high power output . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
PBI membrane based PEMFC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
Eﬀect of temperature on PEM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.4
Advantages and challenges high temperature on PEMFC . . . . . . .
9
1.3
PBI based membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.1
Present status and challenges of PBI membrane . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.2
Aicd doping level(ADL) and its inﬂuence on PBI membrane . . . . .
10
1.3.3
Dimensional stability of PBI on acid retention
. . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.4
Crosslinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.5
Composite membrane
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.1
Multielement oxide based Composites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4.2
Carbon and clays as inert material composites . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.4.3
Dispersion of solid inorganic material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.4.4
insitu composite formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.4.5
Rare earth metal salts as inorganic ﬁllers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.4.6
Rare earth(RE) metal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.4.7
RE metal price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.4.8
Metal phosphates in fuel cell application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.4.9
Rare earth metal phosphate from diﬀerent routes . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.5
Scope and aim of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Experimental
19
2.1
Pre formation of phosphate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Nomenclature of the prepared membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Membrane prepared with Preformed Phosphates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Dissolution of chloride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6
Doping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.7
Membrane characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.8
Four point probe conductivity measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.9
Fuel cell assembling and testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
March 29, 2021
3
Results and discussion
27
3.1
Solubility of ﬁller material and preparation of preformed phosphate . . . . .
27
3.2
Comparative discussion and dehydration of Ce,Gd and La chloride
. . . . .
30
3.3
Membrane with Preformed phosphates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Morphology of the membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Chemistry of acid doping (phosphate formation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
XRD of the membranes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.7
TGA of the composite membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.8
Two step doping via hydroxide formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.8.1
TGA of two step doping membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.9
Swelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.10 Verifying Phosphate formation by titration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.11 Tensile test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.12 Conducitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.13 Polarization curve and membrane’s proton conductivity
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.14 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.14.1 Use of La(OH)3 membrane as OH- conductive membrane
. . . . . .
49
4
Conclusion
49
Appendices
i
iv
==PAGE:6==
March 29, 2021
1
Introduction
1.1
Fuel cells in general
World’s energy sources can be classiﬁed as nonrenewable and renewable based on the origin
and geological formation period.
Coal, nuclear, oil, and natural gas are nonrenewable
because they need considerably long time to restore.
The other sources such as solar,
wind, hydro, ocean energy and biomass replenish naturally either continuous or within a
short time span. Therefore they are considered to be renewable source of energy(Andrea,
2014).
Driving forces of Green energy Fossil fuel(Coal,oil, and natural gas) based steam power
plants, natural gas processing plants produce a substantial part of green house gases. For
example in US 90% of the nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide comes from electric utilities
that consume coal and are responsible for major air pollution. Scientists predicted that the
adverse eﬀect of GHG emissions may lead to a warmer world as a consequence of splitting
up the ozone layer and building up in the atmosphere. In recent years people are more
concerned about global warming, which is forcing consumers to choose environmentally
friendly alternatives for energy sources. Beside it, the Scarcity of fossil fuels due to excessive
use, the higher prices and geopolitical factors related to secured and steady supply of energy
sources act as the driving forces to utilise the more sustainable energy resources. World’s
ever growing energy demand for the the growing population and the recent consciousness
on environmental pollution led the energy technology ﬁnd an eﬃcient means of energy.
1.1.1
Energy storage
The vibrant fuel market make worlds energy supply unstable. Therefore it becomes im-
portant to store energy which means conversion of energy to suitable forms for after use.
Energy can be stored chemically, electrochemically, electrically, mechanically, and ther-
mally. Chemical energy storage system employs hydrogen and synthetic natural gas as
secondary energy carriers for large-scale electrical energy storage. From very old history of
energy utilization internal combustion engines are used to convert chemical energy stored
in a fuel to transform in useful mechanical or electrical energy. The combustion engines
has drawbacks in eﬃciency and incomplete energy utilization. Incomplete combustion of
the fuel produce ﬂue gas with unconverted hydrocarbon and cause severe air pollution. In
electrochemical storage, chemical energy is converted into electrical energy. Two or more
reactant react to from product and deliver energy in the form of electrical current. The
example of electrochemical storage includes batteries, capacitors, fuel cells. Battery ran
vehicles could have a bright future in terms of Green Transportation. However the limited
energy storage capacity, relatively higher weight, long recharging time made the battery
uses inappropriate for long range transportation. In this sense, in many applications Fuel
cells are becoming a more and more attractive option. In case of eco-friendly transporta-
tion system, use of fuel cell is already proven. Among the all energy conversion devices fuel
cell is till now the most promising alternative and is expected to satisfy the future energy
1
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Fuel cells in general
March 29, 2021
demand.
1.1.2
Fuel cell is the practical alternative
Both in battery and fuel cell electrochemical conversion takes place in order to produce
electricity but unlike battery, fuel cell produces electricity as long as the fuel is supplied
to it, resembling to a energy factory. There are diﬀerent kind of fuel sources for fuel cell
application such as methanol, ethanol, ammonia, dimethylether, sodium borohydride and
most commonly hydrogen. In case of hydrogen fuel hydrogen is reacted with oxygen and
thus bond between individual hydrogen atoms and individual oxygen atom breaks to form
hydrogen oxygen bonds. The process can be explained more generally as the oxidation of
hydrogen and reduction of oxygen which involve the electron transfer. By separating the
reactants and some how controlling the electrons pathway fuel cell principally utilizing the
energy which is involved in bond reconﬁguration.
Figure 1: Schematic representation of PEMFC adopted form Fuel Cells by Klaus-Dieter Kreuer
1.1.3
Diﬃdent fuel cell and comparative discussion
The classiﬁcation of Fuel cell is made mainly depending on the fuel that has been used and
the type of electrolyte involved in the main electrochemical reaction. Proton exchange or
polymer electrolyte fuel cell (PEMFC), solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC), alkaline fuel cell (AFC)
and molten carbonate fuel cells (MCFC) are the example hydrogen fueled fuel cells.There
are also other fuel cells of diﬀerent sort of fuel attracts research interest. For example direct
methanol fuel cell (DMFC) is well known and expected to be commercialized with in a
short time span. Fuel cells are of diﬀerent kind has widely been used some for practical
implication and some up to the state of art research and innovation purposes[1]. Solid
2
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Fuel cells in general
March 29, 2021
oxide fuel cells and polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) has been widely used
in automotive, stationary, and portable power sources because of their high conversion
eﬃciency and low emission criteria.
1.1.4
Importance of polarization curves
Polarization curves are the characteristic curve for the fuel cells and are easily comparable
with the existing curves to see the relative development a fuel cell system. It displays the
cell voltage against the current which is directly related to the power density of the cell.
It also gives an idea about the eﬃciency of the cell by comparing the actual cell voltage to
the theoretical maximum voltage.
Figure 2: Typical polarization curve
Polarization is the consequence of combined eﬀect of several chemical and physical factors
of the elements of fuel cell such as pressure, temperature, fuel properties, gas composition,
fuel properties intrinsic properties of electrolyte membrane as well as catalyst. The po-
larization curve is explained for convenience in three diﬀerent regions based on the power
density starting from low, intermediate and higher power density region. At a low power
density region the potential drop happen only due to the activation polarization. In this
region a signiﬁcant amount of energy is used to provide activation energy for the redox
reactions and utilized it for achieving equilibrium. The second part is linear region which
the is ohmic loss of the cell. It can be explained as the potential loss due to the electrical
resistance of the electrolyte membrane, catalytic layers, the gas diﬀusion layer, the bipolar
plates, wire and connections. As the voltage drop caused by ohmic losses is linearly relate
to the current density the value of the resistance can be calculated by the slope polar-
ization curve in the moderate potential region. The last part of the polarization curve is
Concentration Polarization. The part is responsible for the Voltage loss because of mass
transport. To maintain steady operation fuel cell must be supplied with the fuel uninter-
ruptedly. Hence the transport of fuel to the catalyst and removal of the product from the
catalyst is diﬀusion dominant and are relatively slow process.Still by managing optimum
mass transport throughout the fuel cell components the concentration polarization can
be minimized. Figure:2 shows an example of a typical polarization curve for a fuel cell.
3
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Fuel cells in general
March 29, 2021
Performance of a fuel cell is dependent on the operating conditions such as temperature,
applied load, and ﬂow rates of fuel and oxidant . Thus measured polarization curve is a
standard means to compare the performance for fuel cell systems checking the change in
cell voltage at diﬀerent operating current density for diﬀerent operating conditions.
1.1.5
Membrane electorde assembly
The membrane electrode assembly(MEA) is basic unit of any fuel cell which consist of
mainly Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM,5), two catalyst layers(CL,4), and two Gas
Diﬀusion Layers (GDL,3), Gaskets(2) and bypolar plates(BP,1). The mentioned layers are
compacted and pressed on both sides with the bipolar plates. MEA is the core part of the a
fuel cell as it helps to proceed the electrochemical reaction by means of electron transport.
Figure 3: Schematic representation of MEA
The fuel cell consists of several stack of MEA sandwiched together and thats why the elec-
trochemistry of the whole cell can summerized in a MEA. The schematic diagram show
that the solid electrolyte(PEM) is attached with anode and cathode on either side and an
external connection joins the electrodes facilitating electron transport.
Anodic reaction:
H2 −! 2H+ + 2e−
Cathodic reaction:
1
2O2 + 2e−+ 2H+ −! H2O
Overall reaction:
H2 + 1
2O2 −! H2O
PEM is the central component of a fuel cell and is the focal part of this project. PEM
permits the proton produced in anode towards the cathode where it neutralizes by reacting
4
==PAGE:10==
1.2
HT-PEMFC
March 29, 2021
with oxygen. Hence a wide variety of polymer materials that show higher proton conduc-
tivity in presence of moist environment few of them are conductive even at low or no moist
environment.
The catalytic layers are the thin layer of platium supported on a carbon sheet. While
designing the CLs higher rate of both the oxizene reduction reaction and the hydrozen
oxidation reaction is expected.
However aﬀordable CL with a higher power output is
ensured by optimum amount of catalyst usage. A standard CL should provide a higher
active surface area, will be easy accessibility for the reactants and easy removal of the
products.
GDL’s mainly responsible for distributing gases towards CL. The exothermic reaction in
the CL must produce water and heat. GDL also ensure the proper management of the
water and waste heat. Most of the case MEA undergoes some thermal expansion during
operation and the swelling of the membranes as a result of water absorption. Because of
these phenomena and to prevent leakage GDL must be capable of withstanding additional
mechanical stress. As the GDL also works as an electrical conductor between the catalyst
layer and the bipolar plates, less electrical resistance is expected. Still GDL is made porous
by sacriﬁcing slightly electrical conductivity and enhancing ﬂow of the reactant gases. An
optimal thickness is also guaranteed to achieve good electrical contact between the current
collecting plates.
Bipolar plates are the signiﬁcant part of a PEMFC fuel cell because it has multiple task of
distributing reactants uniformly over the active areas, remove heat from the active areas,
carry current and prevent leakage of reactants and coolants.
1.2
HT-PEMFC
1.2.1
PEMFC a type of FC with high power output
In a conventional elector-chemical cell electrodes are separated by immersing them in
electrolytes usually acids. While in PEMFC a proton conducting solid electrolyte made
up of polymer material separates the anode and cathode layer. The responsibility of the
polymer membrane in PEMFC is vital as it conduct proton and let the electorchemical
reaction to be completed. A membrane thus satisfy following property can be considered
as a good candidate for PEMFC application.
• Capable withstand the relatively rough oxidative and reductive environment of Fuel
cell.
• Good mechanical strength at the operating temperature and pressure.
• Higher proton conductivity and low electrical conductivity.
• A signiﬁcant obstacle for the reactants species and subsequent reduction of diﬀusion
of underacted reactants.
In PEMFC thickness of the membranes are in micron level(>40 micron)[2]which make the
5
==PAGE:11==
1.2
HT-PEMFC
March 29, 2021
system more compact provide portability. Therefore the power density (the power per
unit weight, volume or area) is higher. The operating temperature of PEMFC is relatively
low to intermediate(80-100￿). The low temperature can be achieved within a short time
so start up delay in PEMFC is very low. The fuel used in PEMFC is H2 gas and the
product is water which does not have any environmentally adverse impact. Moreover the
electrolyte being solid prevent spilling of electrolyte out of the FC system.
One of the main disadvantages, of PEMFC is requirement of expensive Pt catalyst. As it
operates at low operating temperature, there are very few rare and precious metal which
can be used as catalyst for elctrochemical reaction. Additionally higer catalyst loading
requirement at both the electrodes make the FC expensive. However the ongoing research
on the catlyst utilization minimises the requirement of platinum metal signiﬁcantly[3].
There also have been eﬀorts to develop mixtures of platinum and other metals or to ﬁnd
substitute metals. Another disadvantage of the PEMFC is CO poising of the catalyst.
If the fuel is contaminated with CO even with very minor level the performance of the
PEMFC will seriously degraded. Platinum catalyst at the anode adsorb CO molecule and
thus reduce the active surface area for the reactant[4]. To avoid CO poisoning fuel cells
are operate with highly puriﬁed hydrogen gas which demands additional cost.
1.2.2
PBI membrane based PEMFC
Polybenzimidazole (PBI), widely studied polymer material used as electrolyte for fuel cell
purposes, refers to a large family of aromatic heterocylic polymers containing benzimida-
zole units. PBI have a wide range derivatives based on the repeat unit in backbone chain
such as AB-PBI, m-PBI p-PBI elc.There are intensive research done past decades on the
diﬀerent kind of PBI base polymers. PBI is synthesised by polycondensation reaction of
the tetraaminodiphenyl with dicarbonyl derivatives. There are diﬀerent kind of PBI based
on the monomer and the reaction condition that has been used in polymerization reaction.
The mPBI is found to be most studied as it has long been used for mechanical and ther-
mal resistant material applications[5]. Glass transition temperature(Tg) is characteristic
property of any polymer above which the molecular motion increases resulting a soft and
amorphous matrix from a highly crystalline glassy material. PBI has a higher Tg and
therefore it has very good thermal and chemical stability[6].The higher Tg is because of
intermolecular hydrogen bonding and noncovalent attraction between aromatic rings as Li
reported[7]. That is why PBI is not easily soluble in most of the organic solvent.
Enhancement of ionic conductivity of PBI The use of PBI as solid electrolyte is more than
few decades. The key criteria for preliminary selection of the electrolyte membrane is ionic
conductivity. The backbone chain of the PBI is modiﬁed by adding nitrogen containing
hetero-cycle or by attaching other functional groups that favours ionic conductivity and
acid absorption. The reaction in generally nucleophilic substitution reaction and a various
functional group can be added to the backbone chain following this mechanism. Pyridine
group can be introduced in PBI backbone chain by reacting with pyridine dicarboxiclic
6
==PAGE:12==
1.2
HT-PEMFC
March 29, 2021
acid which shows improved conductivity[8]. Another attempt to get substituted PBI is
prepare sulphonated-PBI found in Xu et al’s work[9]. This is multi step process which
includes the reaction PBI with alkali metal hydrides followed by a reaction with sodium(4-
bromomethyl)benzenesulphonate.
The sulphonated-PBI shows condutivity 10−2Scm−1
at 25￿, with a relative humidty approximately 16%. But the most convenient way of
increasing conductivity is to dope PBI with H3PO4. The more the doping level the higher
conductivity can be achieved. H3PO4 is a medium strength proton donator like other acids
for example H2SO4 and some other organic acids. However it has few advantages over the
others. It has low vapour pressure which helps fuel cell operates at higher temperature and
prevent H3PO4 to be leached out. Orthophosphoric acid (H3PO4) forms polyphosphate as
high as 200￿giving mostly pirophosphoric acid.
Figure 4: Proton transport in H3PO4 doped PBI[10]
Pyrophosphoric acid is storg proton donator compared to orthophosphoric acid as the acid
dissocation constant, Ka is much higheer than orthophosphoric acid(pKa of orthophospho-
ric acid=2.16 and pKa of Pyrophosphoric acid=0.9)[11].
Acid–base interaction in the BPI-PA system helps to carry protonic charges. Proton trans-
fer depends on the acidity diﬀerence (∆pKa) between the conjugate acid of the base and
the free acid[11]. In PA doped PBI, benzimidazole is the conjugate acid having pKa 6.6
and the H3PO4 have pKa 2.12. so the ∆pKa is 3:48. While ∆pKa for hydronium ion and
H3PO4 is -3:86[11]page:40. So polybenzimidazole is stronger proton acceptor than water
and PA dissociate more readily in PBI than in water. The imidazole group attached to
the backbone of PBI provide the bacicity and responsible for up-taking acid molecule. The
absorbed acid will form hydrogen bonding network along with the hydrogen molecule of
the imidazole group. As a result of simultaneous forming and breaking of this hydrogen
bond proton transports happens.
Ionoc transport follow two diﬀerent mechanism Grotthuss(free proton) and vehicle mech-
anism. In grotthuss mechanism proton jumps from one ion to another ion while in vehicle
mechanism proton transported through liquid like aqueous media[12]. Grotthuss mech-
anism deserve relatively higher activation energy than the other as the process involves
7
==PAGE:13==
1.2
HT-PEMFC
March 29, 2021
breaking and reforming bonds.
Vehicle mechanism dominates at low temperature and
relatively higher relatively higher relative humidity. When the temperature reaches high
and humidity becomes low the Grotthuss mechanism become prominent. Based on the
discussion the conductivity of any speciﬁc polymer electrolyte is dependent on the type of
monomer, acid concentration, temperature and relative humidity as well as the moisture
content. Conductivity of some of the PEM are so much dependant on the humidity that
there will be a rapid decrease in conductivity if the operating temperature exceeds due
point temperature.
Figure 5: Conductivity gap where appropriate membrane is not available [13]
PBI based acid doped membrane can operate in a very low humid condition but to achieve
considerable conductivity membrane must be heated at a higher temperature. Hence there
is an range of temperature where no usable membrane available having good conductivity
at low RH[13]. But the so called conductivity gap can be overcome signiﬁcantly by using
benzimedazole derived other polymer an its composites.
1.2.3
Eﬀect of temperature on PEM
The overall performance of the fuel cell is inﬂuenced by the operating temperature signif-
icantly. This improvement of performance at higher temperature is due to higher proton
conductivity, oxygen reduction and hydrogen oxidation reaction kinetics enhancement and
also higher mass transport. In a PEM stability of proton carrier is important and in case of
PA/PBI membrane PA stability is relatively higher(175￿). But increasing the operational
temperature of the PEMFC dehydration and evaporation of PA increases. This will also
increase the degradation of polymer material. As a consequence longevity of a PA-PBI fuel
cell decreases 18 times at a constant current density of 0.2A/cm2 by increasing temperature
from only 150￿to 190￿[14]. Even though the chemically and thermally stable polymer
can be found but the compatible proton carrier still in progress. However PA/phosphosil-
icate nanocluster is proven to transfer proton at elevated temperature. Insitu formed PBI
8
==PAGE:14==
1.3
PBI based membranes
March 29, 2021
composite membrane of such PA/phosphosilicate can operate up to 260￿even with con-
taminated fuel[15]. In phosphosilicate nanocluster proton transfer happen in immobilized
phosphate phase via combined hopping through inter and intra nanoclusters.
1.2.4
Advantages and challenges high temperature on PEMFC
In HT-PEMFC PA is integrated in the polymer matrix and inﬂuences proton conductivity
by holding phosphoric acid physically and chemically. PEM membrane gives FC porta-
bility and favors higher pressure diﬀerence between the cathode and anode. Phosphoric
acid doped PBI membranes are capable to operate as high as 120￿to 200￿. PBI while
doped with H3PO4 achieves high proton conductivity retaining the thermal and mechani-
cal stability. High temperature helps to enhance fuel cell performance. Platinum catalyst
is poisoned by Carbon Monoxide sorption and therefore decreases the hydrogen oxidation
process. This absorption process is exothermic and principally at high temperature adsor-
bet is get removed from the platinum surface and at the end leading to a high fuel cell
performance.
Water management is not obvious in HT-PEMFC as the operating temperature is above
boiling point of water and the evolved water present in vapor state. There is no need of
extra system to remove the liquid water. PA doped PBI membrane able to conduct proton
even in anhydrous conditions. Additional water management can be excluded to design
the PEMFC. As there is no liquid water available in the system the transport of gases
through the ﬂow plates will happen without any hindrance.
Low temperature PEM fuel cells heat dissipated by the system is lost because at lower
temperature rejcted heat is not so much and cannot be recovered for eﬃcient use. However
at >100￿heat rejection is relatively higher and can be reused.
On the other hand, increased temperature has some drawbacks as well.
The degrada-
tion rates of the components is higher for higher operating temperatures. It needs longer
startup time, as the temperature need to be raised higher than the boiling point of water
to avoid the washing away of phosphoric acid from the membrane. At higher temperature
dehydration of the membrane may beneﬁts acid loss but it will lead to increases ohmic
losses which ﬁnally gives bad performance of the fuel cell [16]. Usually the thin membrane
have lower resistance and therefore the loss of generated heat is also reduced.
But at
higher temperature the thin membranes are not capable to withstand the thermal degra-
dation and gas crossover. Therefore it is very important of high temperature fuel cell to
ﬁnd a composite membranes (organic-inorganic) which can work at high temperatures like
200-300￿without degradation.
1.3
PBI based membranes
1.3.1
Present status and challenges of PBI membrane
The PBI based PEM start ﬂourishing right after Winnairight et al’s work and there is a
comprehensive development on PBI mem-branes fuel cell unitl the successfull commercial-
9
==PAGE:15==
1.3
PBI based membranes
March 29, 2021
ization. The nuecleophilic polybenzimidazole groups make the easy ground to substitute
diﬀerent functional group in the backbone. Santosh et al.[17] shows the N-substitution of
the 4-tert-butylbenzyl and some alkyl group in PBI backbone. The group works mainly on
the solubility and the gas permeability of the resulting polymer. However they shows that
the introduction of functional group reduces possibility of hydrogen bond formation and
reduces thermal stability signiﬁcantly. The success of both mechanical strength as well as
acid uptake can be seen by grafting with benzimidazole pendant groups[18].
1.3.2
Aicd doping level(ADL) and its inﬂuence on PBI membrane
Acid doping is quantitative measure of the amount of acid absorbed by the membrane.
Usually acid doping level (ADL) is as the molar ratio of acid molecules to the membrane’s
polymer molecule. Polymer molecules consist of large molecular weight molecules having
same repeating units therefore the weight of membrane is divided by the molecular weight
of a single repeating units.
ADL =
Wt. of Acid
MW of Acid
Wt. of PBI
MW of PBI
(1)
The membrane samples were dipped in PA solution at room temperature for several days.
Weight gain is measured after some time intervals.
The excess acid on the membrane
surface is carefully removed to ensure accurate weight variation. After a few days the
membrane achieves relatively stable weight gain. This weight at the saturation level is
used to calculate ADL of the membrane following the equation above.
A membrane consist of a large number of coordination sites where the PA molecules get
accommodated forming several layers. PA doping mechanism inside the PBI membrane can
be explained by the BET multi-layer adsorption isotherm where the dominant attraction
force is Vander Waal’s force.
In case of PBI if the ADL is less than 2 acid molecules attache to the imino nitrogen groups
of the adjacent polymer chains. In such cases the conductivity is relatively low which is
because of the higher distance experienced by the proton to be transferred from N atoms of
the repeat units of PBI. While in case of higher doping level the acid molecules are bound
to the all possible imino nitrogen. Therefore a fraction of adsorbed acid molecules show
lower aﬃnity to PBI sites and readily dissociates and show higher conductivity. In some
cases of composite membranes the absorption of acid is enhanced by the ﬁller material.
The combined eﬀect of the ﬁller and the polymer material on acid absorption is evaluated
by the total acid uptake(AU). The AU in such a membrane is calculated dividing the total
change in membrane weight after doping by the initial weight of the membrane.
AU = 100 ⇥
Wt. of Acid
Wt. of membrane
(2)
1.3.3
Dimensional stability of PBI on acid retention
Although higher proton conductivity is one of the main objective to satisfy the requirement
for a fuel cells solid electrolytes membrane. Mechanical durability, thermal and dimensional
10
==PAGE:16==
1.3
PBI based membranes
March 29, 2021
stability has also the same importance to be a promising candidate. As discussed in the
other section two phase composite membrane in many cases show higher mechanical and
thermal stability. Tensile strength measurement of the composite membrane is the com-
monly practised way to check the mechanical properties of the membrane. The membranes
which are prone to break or tear are not easy to handle during installation of fuel cell. Ad-
ditionally diﬀerent membranes increase their volume at diﬀerent proportion while doping.
It is important to know the swelling behaviour as the increased swelling ratio in most cases
give the membrane an additional thickness and inﬂuence the proton conductivity, water
management largely. The cell with the thinner membrane perform better because of low
ohmic resistance. However Brian Kienitz showed that the thinner membranes were less hy-
drated than the thicker membranes and due to the fact thin membrane have larger speciﬁc
resistivity. He also claims that the reason might be due to the electroosmotic drag and the
generated heat by the electrochemical reaction eﬀect promptly in a thin membrane[2].
Swelling ratio is the measure of the volume change of the membrane after water or acid
absorption. The initial thickness, length and width of the membrane at dry condition is
measured after complete removal of the solvent and moisture. Similarly the dimensions
are measured after doping and the swelling ratio(SR) is measured following the simple
equation below.
SR = 100 ⇥Volume after Doping −initial volume
initial volume
(3)
Thermal stability is still a vital issue for PEMFC because the polymer material have glass
transition temperature(Tg) above which the membrane become soft.TGA gives an overview
of the membrane’s feasibility at higher temperature.
The peaks of weight loss of the
membrane because of the gradual increase in temperature can be compared to a standard
membrane and comment can be made on the new composite membrane’s durability.
1.3.4
Crosslinking
Another way to increase the mechanical strength of the linear m-PBI is to make threed-
imentional crosslinked structure. This can be done by adding polymer blend with either
small or comparatively big molecules having several active functional groups followed by
heat treatment. Xue et al prepare a cross-linked PBI emebrane with a grafetd benzim-
idazole groups and make a crosslinked structure with 3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane.
They achieve a proton conductivity 0.092 S cm1 at 180 °C which is higher than pure
PBI[19]. Thermal stability and mechanical property was found to be increased compared
to the pure PBI both in doped and undoped condition. Dibromoparaxiline(DBpX) is a
small molecule consisting of two bromine atom wich are prone to form bond with PBI at
the -N-H removing two molecule of H-Br form the system. The resulting membrane shows a
conductivity up to 0.151 S/cm 180￿[20]. The cross linked polymer is mechanically durable
even at higher acid doping level. Another way to add ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether, a
diepoxide which will cross link the polymer almost the similar manner.
11
==PAGE:17==
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
March 29, 2021
In generally the crosslinked polymer reduce the capacity of water absorption and acid
uptake notably due to the reduced number of hydrophilic sites which has been occupied
by the croosslinker. In most cases there is a trade-oﬀbetween the level of croosslinking
and the property of crosslinker over the ADL of the crosslinked membrane. In the same
study it is shown that the ADL increases with an addition of crossliker until 5 wt.% but
further increase decreases the ADL. Similar strategy was used in crosslinking of PBI with
of benzoxazine which provide a pathway for proton conduction in PBI backbone. The
resulting prolymer membrane showsed higher acid uptake, good mechanical property and
higher proton conductivity(14.7 mS/cm at 160 ￿under anhydrous conditions)[20].
1.3.5
Composite membrane
In a composite membrane diﬀerent kind of ﬁller material is used and based on their physico
chemical behaviour these ﬁller material impart hygrogoscopicity to the resulting membrane
which will help the membrane to retain water inside the membrane. The presence of the
secondary phase will help to reduce the gas crossover[21]. In a composite membrane as a
consequence of the additional phase in the matrix the proton conductivity in the interfaces
may also increased because functionalized ﬁller material prevent the disruption of the
proton transport channels[22].
Another important aspect of PEM is thermal stability of the membrane. For example
perﬂuro sulfonic acid polymer while dispersed with ceramic material will give temporarily
mechanical and thermal stability but increases brittleness of the polymer. This will increase
the membrane inadequate freedom of handling[23]. There are intensive research on the
composite membrane focusing the proton conductivity, restricting mass diﬀusion, acid and
water retention capability, thermal stability as well as mechanical durability. Based on
the property of the ﬁller material composite membranes are grouped as in the following
section. In this project discussion will be limited only for PBI composite membrane.
Thre are some membranes nafolin [24]and its composite found to be superior than PBI,
but the requirements of external humidiﬁcation low operating temperature leave them still
behind.
PBI repeat unit contains N as a hetero atom and that’s why it can form strong hydrogen
bonding between N and -NH- groups in PBI membrane. This overridden molecular force
that helps to form a close chain packing and provide a better mechanical strength to the
membranes. At high acid doping level the mechanical strength is reported to decrease to
some extent but the use of additional cross linker or ﬁller material overcome the drawback
relatively easier.
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
Hygroscopic oxieds such as SiO2, TiO2 and ZrO2 and clay was found to be used as ﬁller
material. Three kind of SiO2 acidic silica, mesoporous silica imidazole-fuctiolazed silica
12
==PAGE:18==
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
March 29, 2021
was used to prepare the PBI composite membrane[25]. An increase in conductivity was
observed at relatively lower content of ﬁller material from 2 to 8%. This increasing con-
ductivity was explained as the increase in acid base interaction and formation space charge
layer. However further increase in ﬁller material will lead to a decrease in conductivity
due to the dilution eﬀect as the additioal ﬁller material adsorb even more phosphoric acid
followed an increased plastising eﬀect. Due to plasticization membranes swells followed by
an increase in the fractional free volume which can led to a risk of diﬀusion of gas molecules
through the composite membrane resulting a decreasing membrane performance.In an an-
other study the MEA performance was found to be higher(.083W/cm2 power density at
0.3A/cm2 current density) at ﬁler content of 20 wt% of imidazole ﬁctionalised SiO2[26].
Additially an increase charge transfer was also shown in electrochemical impedance spec-
troscopy. Another eﬀort was found in Yılser et al., where they use the 5 wt% of SiO2
to get a maximum proton conductivity of 102.7 mS/cm at a temperature of 180￿. MEA
result summarises as 0.24 A/cm2 at 165￿,cell voltage 0.6V power density 0.158W/cm2.
PBI functionalized SiO2 found to be even better power density of 0.65A/cm2 while the
pure PBI gives 18.5% less power density. TiO2 composite membrane of 2 wt% gives maxi-
mum acid uptake and better proton conductivity(0.10 S/cm).It also proves to reduce acid
leaching property signiﬁcantly[27].
1.4.1
Multielement oxide based Composites
There are few studies on PBI composite membrane using multielemntal nano materials.The
groups prepared PBI-Fe2TiO5 nanocomposite membrane dispersing the noanomaterial in
the PBI solution prior casting. The resulting membrane shows higher acid doping level
as well as higher proton conductivity(0.078 S/cm) at a wt% of Fe2TiO5 nanoparticles.
For catalyst layer Pt loading of 0.5 mg/cm2 was used for both the anode and cathode.
The membrane shows higher mechanical stability ( young’s modulus 1.8 GPa and tensile
strenth of 120 MPa) compared to pure PBI. The additional stability is due to the robust
inorganic material which form better interaction with the polymer matrix.
Pervoskite oxides having simple structure like LaYO3 or SrZrO3 and complex structure
Sr(GaNa)O6 and Ba3CaNb2O9 show higher proton conductivity. Hydrogen works as a
electron donor and ionized to proton. The location of the proton is in electron cloud of the
oxide ion and the free proton may diﬀuse to the neighboring oxide ions. They have rotation,
thermal and stretching vibration which is responsible for short length and complete migra-
tion of protons. Some simple peroxide structure like BaZrO3 nanoparticle was prepared
reacting Barium stearate with tetrabutyl zirconate at an acidic environment. Diﬀerent
weight percent of BaZrO3 were dispersed in the 2 wt% PBI solution in DMAc to pre-
pare composite membrane. Highest conductivity 0.125 S/cm was noticed at 180￿by using
membrane 4% BaZrO3[28].The Pt loading for both the anode and cathode was 0.5mg/cm2.
Pervoskite SrCeO3 also shows similer improvement in proton conductivity with a relatively
higher wt%. The proton conductivity of 0.105 S/cm was reported using the nanocom-
13
==PAGE:19==
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
March 29, 2021
posite membranes containing 8 wt.% of SrCeO3 nanoparticles[29]. The electrode have the
same level of Pt loading(0.5mg/cm2). The 15% CaTiO3-PBI[30] composite membrane give
higher proton conductivity of 0.0327 S/cm however the elcetrode Pt loading was 50% lower
than the earlier work. Solid acid composites Solid acids usually consist of some cations
whose corodination state is incomplete and can accept electrons. Therefore most of oxides
in period three elements shows properties as Lewis acids (electron acceptors). Solids that
are mixtures of two or more metal oxides, contain acidic sites even stronger than the pure
oxides. At the beginning phosphotungstic acid,PWA silicotungstic acid,SWA was studied
as a ﬁller in composite membrane for fuel cell application and the proton conductivity
found to be increased to a small extant. Later phosphotungstic acid, PWA functionalized
mesoporous silica shows high proton conductivity even at 200￿. PWA was immobilized
in the mesopouros silica by forming hydrogen bond with the silica molecules leaving an
ordered structure which inﬂuences proton conductivity. There are several work done on the
composite membrane using Zirconium hydrogen phosphate and Cesium phosphomolibdic
acid. The highest proton conductivity was reported was 0.12 S/cm at 150￿. However the
mechanical strength for the membranes was relatively low compared to the standard PBI
membrane.
1.4.2
Carbon and clays as inert material composites
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and Multi-walled carbon nanotbes (MWCNTs)
has already used in composite membrane to improve mechanical, thermal and electronic
properties. However the use of this kind of composite membrane in PEMFC is diﬃcult
because of the conductive property of CNT, it may short circuit the fuel cell. Threfore
higher solid content composite membrane using CNT is not possible. Kannan et al.[31],
prepared PBI composite of phosphonated multiwall carbon nanotube with 0.05-2.5 wt.%.
The doped CNT-coposite prepared with 1% pMWCNT gives the proton conductivity 110
mS/cm. Composite membrane prepared from graphene oxide (GO) and PBI showed higher
proton conductivity, mechanical durability and higher acid retention. Üregen et al. pre-
pared a compsite membrane with a GO content of 2 wt.% showing a conductivity of 129.7
mS/cm at 165￿[32].
Diﬀerent kind of organically modifeid laponite clay and montmorillonite and kaolinite
clays was was found in use of PBI compsite membrane preparation for fuel cell application.
The highest proton conductivity was reported for 12 wt.% Napoline clay modiﬁed with
dequalinium chloride salt with acid doping level of 12 is 120 mS/cm at 150 ◦C and 12%
RH[33]. At a higher PA doping level the conductivity increases with increasing ﬁller content
upto 7wt% was reported for montmorillonite and kaolinite clays. Highest conductivity
achieved is 72 mS/cm for montmorillonite and 92 mS/cm kaolinite at 160 ◦C[34].
14
==PAGE:20==
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
March 29, 2021
1.4.3
Dispersion of solid inorganic material
Dispersity of ﬁller material in the composite plays a pivotal role in electrochemical me-
chanical and thermal properties of the composite membrane. Composite membranes of
thermoplastic polymers with solid nanoparticles usulally prepared using high share mix-
ing. The mechanical force helps abrupt splitting of the agglomerates or by continuous
detachment of small fragments resulting the good dispersion. The use of ultratsonication
is a common procedure in nanoparticle dispersion. However complete dispersion is highly
dependent on the size, shape and concentration of the material to be dispersed. Some
nanoparticle have small crystals structures and form a ﬁrm agglomerates which is diﬃcult
to disperse because of presence of Van der Waals attractive forces. In order to overcome
the diﬃculties nanoparticles undergoes functionalization with the help of a surfactants
material having lower inertaction force with polymer matrix[35]. Most of the cases the
surfactants are small molecules and can be removed after dispersion. In ionic functional-
ization where the surface ions of the nanoparticles are exchanged with surfactant molecuels
having oppositely charged ions. There are also covalent functionalization which is done
by attaching functional group covalently to the nanomaterila. For example single walled
CNT is reacted with strong acids to form carboxilic acid followed by a reaction with any
aliphatic base compound to increase the dispersibility in nonpolar solvent[36]. The process
of dispersion is cartactrized most commonly by electron microscopy and XRD.
1.4.4
insitu composite formation
Based on the membrane casting techniques Insitu composite formation has several ad-
vantages over the conevtional casting technique. Unlike the preformed ﬁller composite
membrane in a insitu composite membrane a desired ﬁller material is formed locally af-
ter casting. The solution of PBI(in case of PBI composite) is dispersed with a precursor
material prior casting. The precursor material can react during casting,drying and doping
process and form inorganic ﬁller. Ii is the ﬁrst and foremost advantage of this technique
that the process ensures the uniform dispersion of the ﬁller material. Moreover higher
interaction between inorganic and organic phase lead to a formation of dense membrane
having higher mechanical property.
The process has already been used in several ap-
proaches. N-phosphorylated polybenzimidazole and 2% to 20% SiO2 composite membrane
was prepared by adding tetramethoxysilane precursor during casting. The membrane was
homogeneous and was hydrolyzed in 10%HCl follwed by doping with PA. The ﬁnal compos-
ite membrane absorb less PA molecules per repeat units. This is a proof of bond formation
of acidic silica groups with the nitrogen atom in backbone of the polybenzimidazole. The
composite membranes have high proton conductivity 9.7 mS/cm at 130°C with SO2 con-
tent of 2-10 wt.%[37]. Chiang et al[38] prepared composite membrane of metal phosphate
casting the membrane of AB-PBI along with PA and methanesulfonic acid solution and
the metal chlorieds of Sb, Sn and Fe. The resulting membrane was then undergoes a long
heating cycle for about 5 days at 160￿to convert the chloride int phosphate. The Sb con-
15
==PAGE:21==
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
March 29, 2021
taining composite membrane found to be mechanically durable and having higher proton
conductivity of 0.067 S/cm at 160￿.
1.4.5
Rare earth metal salts as inorganic ﬁllers
Screening of the ﬁller material: PBI is widely studied polymer membrane having consid-
erable thermal, mechanical and electrical properties. It shows higher proton conductivity
in presence of phosphoric acid(PA) as a dopant. Still there is ongoing research PBI/PA
compsosite membrane in order to ﬁnd practically applicable membrane for commercially
applicable FCs.There are numbers of research papers available dealing with PBI compos-
ite membrane where they use(Oxides of Si,phosphate of Zr, organo metalic compounds).
Hence ﬁnding the right ﬁller is practically very important. Until now the percentage of
the solid content in composite membrane, polymer material is relatively low. Above this
lower weight percentage PEM does not show expected proton conductivity. This is due
to the lower contribution of the polymer material in proton conduction. But if the ﬁller
material itself is contributing in proton conduction then the ﬁller material supersede the
polymer material and overall conductivity can be even higher than the pure polymer. For
the present work the availability of the familiar oxides and salts was initially the main
concern. There are plenty of works on solid proton conductive trivalent metal phosphate
including RE metal phosphates but there achievable conductivity does not allow for fuel
cell application. There are some pyrophosphate proton conductors shows improved con-
ductivty by dopin with trivalent metal ions (e.g. Al3+, Ga3+, Gd3+, or In3+) forming
point defects in the crystals which interacts with water and increases proton conductivity.
Encouraged by the phosphates proton conduction possibility initial starting point for the
project is decided to use rare earth metals oxides and chlorides, some multi element ox-
ides of In,Sn and Sb(p-block metals) and Sr. Possibility of formation of phosphate of the
mentioned oxides and chlorides was checked at diﬀerent temperature starting form room
temperature to the operation temperatute of low/or medium temperature fule cell(upto
200￿), regardless of their crystal morphology.
1.4.6
Rare earth(RE) metal
The lanthanides or lanthanoid series is a group of transition metals located on the peri-
odic table seperated below. The lanthanides are f-block element having similar chemical
properties.
Thre are 17 rare earth elements (REEs), 15 within the chemical group called lanthanides
and also includes yttrium and scandium.
The lanthanides contain lanthanum, cerium,
praseodymium, neodymium, promethium, samarium, europium, gadolinium, terbium, dys-
prosium, holmium, erbium, thulium, ytterbium, and lutetium. Rare earth elements are
available in earth’s crust. Based on the atomic number the lanthnides are subdivided into
two groups light rare earth elements, lanthanum to europium having atomic number of 57-
63 and heavier rare earth elements, gadolinium through lutetium having atomic number of
16
==PAGE:22==
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
March 29, 2021
64-71. Although they were named as rare, some of them are more abundant than copper,
lead, gold, and platinum. However the ores of the RE metals are not easily exploitable
and demands higher processing costs. RE metals are used numbers of electrical and elec-
trochemical usages such as computer memory, DVDs, rechargeable batteries, cell phones,
catalytic converters, magnets, ﬂuorescent lighting and much more.There are also impor-
tant use of RE metals in defense applications, such as jet ﬁghter engines, missile guidance
systems, antimissile defense etc. The United States, the largest consumer of RE metals
was once self-reliant in domestically produced REEs but due to increasing demand and
production cost china become the main supplier followed by Australia, India, Singapore
and Malaysia.
1.4.7
RE metal price
Prices of REM metal oxide is practically important to become potentially useful for fuel cell
application. Among all the RE metals oxides La and Ce oxides is less expensive compared
to the other heavy RE metals and therefore are attractive for composite PEM considering
the overall production cost.
Figure 6: RE metal oxide prices.Taken form reuters.com
1.4.8
Metal phosphates in fuel cell application
There are some metal phosphate has already bee used for fuel cell application and exhibit
higher proton conductivity. Among them Titanium phosphate(TiP)(0,06 S.cm-1 at 92%
RH)[39],PA doped Zirconium phosphate(ZrP)( 0.1 S/cm ,at 0% RH and 180￿)[40],cesium
dihydrogen phosphate (CsH2PO4)(1.8 × 102 S/cm at 233￿)[41].RE metal phosphate,
Cerium phosphate(CePO4) composite membrane with 10 wt.% CePO4 demonstrate good
17
==PAGE:23==
1.4
Metal Oxide based composites
March 29, 2021
proton conductivity of 0.242 S/cm at 80￿[42].
Several lanthanum phosphates in pure
form exhibit relatively high proton conductivity when doped with alkaline earth metals[43].
lanthanum orthophosphate (LaPO4) doped ceramic material has a proton conductivity of
7.00⇥10−6 S/cm at 600￿. The conductivity found to be increased when Sr+2 was added
with lanthanum ultraphosphate (LaP5O14) and reached 1.01⇥10−4 S/cm at 600￿.
1.4.9
Rare earth metal phosphate from diﬀerent routes
It is hypothesized that if the metal oxides and salts form phosphates at a lower temperature
in presence of concentrated phosphoric acid they are supposed to form phosphate in Situ
in the polymer matrix while the system is doped with PA.
It is studied that the rare earth oxides form mainly four kind of phosphates including two
kind of orthophosphates, catena polyphosphates and ultraphosphate. Exceptionally Ce
form two kind of catena polyphosphates. In the same study earth oxide (La2O3, CeO2,
Pr6O11, and Sm2O3) was mixed with 85% orthoPhosphoricacid with an phosphoras to
earth metal metal(P/M) ration of 1 to 40. At the ration of 1-3 all oxides other than CeO2
react with phosphoric acid while La2O3 reacts most vigorously. The resulting solution was
heated at about 300-800￿for about 20 hours to obtain the phosphates. X-ray diﬀraction
mesurement shows the presence of diﬀerent form of phosphates at diﬀerent temperature
ranges and the inﬂuence of atomic ration(P/M) on the phosphate formation[44].
Specially CeO2-H3PO4 system polyphosphate of Ce(PO4)3 this form was found even at
lower temperature(250-800￿). According to the study all form of phosphate is found to be
formed at a temperature higher than 200￿which is not desirable for the FC application[44].
Another study shows rare earth (La, Pr, Nd, and Sm) Rhabdophane-type orthophosphates
was formed heating the mixture of oxide and H3PO4 at 150￿for 20 hours. Weinschenkite-
type rare earth (Y and Yb) orthophosphates were obtained as low as 80 ￿[45]. These two
temperatures might be attractive for the composite membrane ﬁllers in FC application but
Y and Yb are comparatively rare and are expensive among the RE metals.
A comparatively recent study show the preparation of Rare Earth Orthophosphates from
earth metal oxides with Phosphoric Acid Solutions in presence of Hydrogen Peroxide at a
lower temperature of 80￿[46]. However the presence of H2O2 in the membrane may have
strong possibility of oxydative degradation of the polymer matrix and must be removed
completely [47].
It can be concluded preliminary that La, Pr, Nd, and Sm oxides can be used as inorganic
ﬁller as it can react with PA at lower temperature(150￿).
The prepared RE metal phosphate is insoluble in H3PO4. In an study it was seen that the
higher concentration of H3P04 has big inﬂuence on the solubility of the RE metal phos-
phate. At higher concentration of H3PO4(43%) the phosphates precipitates are almost
18
==PAGE:24==
1.5
Scope and aim of the thesis
March 29, 2021
insoluble[48].
Another work done by Colmer and Mosa diplayed the way of synthesising hexagonal rhab-
dophanetype LaPO4.nH2O using aqueous solutions of La(NO3)3.6H2O and (NH4)2HPO4
and drying at 100°C[49]. CeCO3.8H20 can be used to prepare Rhabdophane-type CePO4
reacting with H3PO4 starting from 100-700￿, but at the lower temperature mostly the
amorphous phosphate is formed. However increasing the ratio of Phosphorous by adding
Urea in the system stable Rhabdophane-type CePO4 can be produced even as low as
100￿[50].
1.5
Scope and aim of the thesis
The range of project work encompasses initially to prepare composite membrane which is
workable at low temperature(<200￿). Next step is to ﬁnd high temperature implication
of the composites(> 200￿). Initial part of the work include,s ﬁnding a right ﬁller material,
membrane preparation, acid doping and checking conductivity. Finding inorganic ﬁller
among the wide variety of inorganic materials is a huge task. Fortunately there has been a
lot of work dictates the usability of metal phosphates. Due to low dispersion of phosphate in
the polymer solution make composite membrane processing diﬃcult. The insitu formation
of inorganic ﬁller develop a new way to resolve the diﬃculty. Luckily the DMAc is working
as a common solvent in which both the PBI and the RE metal chloride is easily dissolved.
This will give a big advantage to form RE metal phosphate insitu during the process
of doping. Another broad aspect of this thesis is to investigate the possibility of higher
loading of inorganic content of the material. According to the literature most of the work
based on the composite membrane use the lower ﬁller content. Some example of them are
SiO2 around 2-10%(wt) TiO2 2-20%(wt) ZrO2 0-21%(wt) Sulfonated sepiolite1-5%(wt) -
ZrP 1-20%(wt). They claim that above an optimum amount of ﬁller content conductivity
start decreasing but the very high solid content like 80wt.% or more, was not focused yet.
The project targeted for maximum solid loading is based on the assumption that when
the polymer electrolyte is over loaded with conductive solids conductivity of the solid may
overrule. Upon successful initial membrane characterization the best conductive composite
membranes must be used in MEA at >200￿to see the thermal stability of the membrane.
2
Experimental
2.1
Pre formation of phosphate
Among the RE metal chlorides considering availability and easy membrane processibility
LaPO4 is studied more intensively. But some other metal phosphate was also checked from
the oxide precursor. The fast screening method is a three step sorting technique depending
on the solubility of the metal chloride or oxides in DMAc, their water solubility and reaction
19
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Nomenclature of the prepared membrane
March 29, 2021
at diﬀerent temperature.La-chloride, Ce-chloride, Ce-Bromide, Gd-Chloride, La-Oxide, Ce-
Oxide, Gd-Oxide Ce-zirconium(IV)oxide, Strontium titanium oxide, Antimony Tin oxide,
Indium Tin oxide was taken and tried to dissolve them in 20 ml of water and DMAc
separately. The undissolved oxides are centrifuged, dried and weighed.
To check the reactivity with H3PO4 all the selected oxides and chlorides were mixed with
85% H3PO4 in bickers ﬁrst at room temperature and gradually increase the temperature
upto 100￿with continuous agitation. If the solution give precipitate a part of it was taken
out, washed with water, centrifuged and dried.
The resulting solution was further heated in oven at 250￿over night. If any precipitate or
thick liquid remain at the bottom of the bicker was washed with water, centrifuged and
dried.
2.2
Nomenclature of the prepared membrane
The prepared membranes are named according to the ﬁller’s element and it’s wt.%. The
table below is the list of the name of prepared membranes, material used and prepara-
tion method.
PBI(I) and PBI(II) stand for the commercial PBI and PBI supplied by
Danish Power System(DPS).PBI(I), commercial name S-26 has average molecular weight
10000(g/mol) and PBI(II) has average molecular weight 48000(g/mol). PBI(I) is a 26%
DMAc solution of PBI having dispersing agent 2-2.5% LiCl. PBI(II) was supplied as dry
PBI sheet which was later dissolved in DMAc.
20
==PAGE:26==
2.2
Nomenclature of the prepared membrane
March 29, 2021
Name
Composite composition
Preparation method
PRE-PBI80La20
80wt%PBI(I)-20%LaPO4
PRE-PBI70La30
70wt%PBI(I)-30%LaPO4
PRE-PBI60La40
60wt%PBI(I)-40%LaPO4
PRE-PBI50La50
50wt%PBI(I)-50%LaPO4
PRE-PBI80Sb20
80wt%PBI(I)-20wt%SnP2O7/SbP2O7
PRE-PBI70Sb30
70wt%PBI(I)-30wt%SnP2O7/SbP2O7
PRE-PBI60Sb40
60wt%PBI(I)-40wt%SnP2O7/SbP2O7
PRE-PBI50Sb50
50wt%PBI(I)-50wt%SnP2O7/SbP2O7
PRE-PBI80Zr20
80wt%PBI(I)-20%Zr2P2O7
PRE-PBI70Zr30
70wt%PBI(I)-30%Zr2P2O7
PRE-PBI60Zr40
60wt%PBI(I)-40%Zr2P2O7
PRE-PBI50Zr50
50wt%PBI(I)-50%Zr2P2O7
Using Preformed
phosphate and
commercial PBI,
dispersion using
sonication bath for 6 hrs.
PB(I)I50Gd50
50wt%PBI(I)-50%GdCl3
PB(I)I40Gd60
40wt%PBI(I)-60%GdCl3
PBI(I)30Gd70
30wt%PBI(I)-70%GdCl3
PBI(I)20Gd80
20wt%PBI(I)-80%GdCl3
PBI(I)50Ce50
50wt%PBI(I)-50%CeCl3
PBI(I)40Ce60
40wt%PBI(I)-60%CeCl3
PBI(I)30Ce70
30wt%PBI(I)-70%CeCl3
PBI(I)20Ce80
20wt%PBI(I)-80%CeCl3
PBI(I)50La50
50wt%PBI(I)-50%LaCl3
PBI(I)40La60
40wt%PBI(I)-60%LaCl3
PBI(I)30La70
30wt%PBI(I)-70%LaCl3
PBI(I)20La80
20wt%PBI(I)-80%LaCl3
Solution prepared
with dehydrated
rare earth metal
chlorides and
commercial PBI
additional DMAc
to help dissolution
if needed.
PBI(I)50La50-CrL
50wt%PBI(I)-50%LaCl3+Crl(15%)
PBI(I)40La60-CrL
40wt%PBI(I)-60%LaCl3+ Crl(15% )
PBI(I)30La70-CrL
30wt%PBI(I)-70%LaCl3+ Crl(15% )
PBI(I)20La80-CrL
20wt%PBI(I)-80%LaCl3+ Crl(15% )
Using dehydrated
LaCl3 commercial
PBI and DBpX
so that 15% of the
–N-H group
is crosslinked.
PBI(II)50La50
50wt%PBI(II)-50%LaCl3
PBI(II)40La60
40wt%PBI(II)-60%LaCl3
PBI(II)30La70
30wt%PBI(II)-70%LaCl3
PBI(II)20La80
20wt%PBI(II)-80%LaCl3
Using dehydrated
LaCl3 and PBI
supplied by DPS.
21
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Membrane prepared with Preformed Phosphates
March 29, 2021
2.3
Membrane prepared with Preformed Phosphates
The prepared phosphate during the reactivity test of metal oxides/chlorides with H3PO4
was saved and used at this stage. The Phosphate was mixed in 3% PBI-DMAc solution. To
check the possibility of making homogeneous mixture by taking maximum 80% by weight
of the phosphate and left in hot plate with continuous agitation at 40￿. As the solution
is not homogeneous ultrasonic bath was used for several hours. Let alone higher weight
percent, even 50 wt.% LaPO4 cannot make a uniform dispersion. Most of the phosphate
separates out of the mixture. The solution was kept on hot plate over night on agitation
to check dispersibility. However the signiﬁcant dispersibility cannot be observed. After
sonication the solution was left without agitation most of the phosphate was precipitated
forming a separate layer at the bottom of the bottle. Same thing was done with prepared
phosphates of CeO4Zr,Sb2O3/SnO2 with wt% 20,30,40 and 50.
2.4
Dissolution of chloride
Initially dilute solution of PBI-DMAc(2.5%) was made from the commercial 26%PBI solu-
tion. Diﬀerent amount of anhydrous RE metal chloride was measure which is necessary to
get from 80wt.% , 70 wt.% and 60wt.% of PBI composite. The amount of PBI-DMAc(2.5%)
was also calculated before so that after complete removal of DMAc the expected 80 wt.% ,
70 wt.% and 60wt.% composite can be achieved. The measured nine amounts of salts was
then added to respective PBI-DMAc solution in diﬀerent blue cap bottles. In all the cases
PBI solution precipitated resulting a highly viscous solution which is impossible to cast
or further processing. This is due to the precipitation of PBI but leaving the thick mix-
ture in continuous agitation and adding additional DMAc will made the uniform solution.
Membrane prepared with this solution are relatively opaque and for wt.70% and wt.%80
show layer formation.To avoid the processing diﬃculty the bonded water must be removed
beforehand. Complete removal of water led to a formation of mixture of anhydrous chlo-
ride and oxichlorieds. Additinally diﬀerent RE metal chloride has diﬀerent temperature
at which they release their bonded water. That’s why all RE metal chlorides(La and Ce)
was heated at 105￿. In result and discussion section the reason of choosing temperatures
is discussed in detail.
2.5
Casting
Solvent evaporation technique was used to cast the membrane and long slow heating cycle
of 24 hours was used to achieve dense membrane. The casting was done in several batches.
First batch using the Low molecular PBI with Ce Gd an La. In case of Ce and Gd specially
for 70wt.% and 80wt% the membrane was not uniform and visually there was layer of salts
on the top of the membrane.
As the project is targeted to get a higher solid content
and for Ce and Gd achieving this target is relatively diﬃcult from the next batches only
LaCl3.7H2O was used. As the LaCl3 content increases the casting solution become viscous
and minimum amount of liquid to prepare the membrane thinner than 40 micron cannot
22
==PAGE:28==
2.6
Doping
March 29, 2021
cover the whole 11cm petri glass. After several trial and error it was found that casting
solution of 6g for 80% and 70% and 7g for 60% and 50% is enough to cast membranes
ranging from 40-60 micron. After casting the membrane was removed from the glass by
spray very small water. But this was led to a loss of LaCl3 form 19-32%. Due to the
inconsistency of solid content no further work was done with those membranes. There was
another problem noticed for this kind of membranes. The weight of the membrane was
higher than it was expected after evaporation step due to the incomplete evaporation. In
the second batch of casting weight and thickness of all the petri glass was recorded before
casting . This time casting and evaporation step is done successively in a single heating
cycle without any break. At this higher temperature PBI(II)50La50 membrane survives
all other membranes breaks in the oven.
In the third batch cross-linker dibromo para
xyline(DBpX) was added but cross linker works as high as 300￿.For the commercial PBI
composite at this higher temperature no membrane can survive except PBI(I)50La50-CrL.
Commercial PBI might contain unknown impurities and the stabilizer(LiCl) content may
not be trusted. Due to crack and unknown impurities no further work was done with
the membrane. However the problem was overcome by selecting high molecular weight
PBI sheet supplied by Danish Powed System(DPS). The casted sheet was dissolved in
DMAc and solution was used for casting composite membrane. The advantage is that
there was no stabilizer and the average molecular weight was higher than the commercial
one(Commercial MW= 10000 and PBI-DPS MW =48000)
The membrane cracking during casing was completely overcome by replacing the PBI(I)
with PBI(II). This batch was casted at 120￿followed by a 2 hours separate evaporation
step. Like the other batches along with all the composite membrane a membrane of pure
PBI was casted parallely. The measured weight of the pure PBI membrane signiﬁes the
completeness of solvent evaporation. The reference membrane’s weight is same to the PBI
content of the solution used for casting it and the composite membrane is very close to
their PBI-LaCl3 content symbolizes the completeness of evaporation.
2.6
Doping
The conventional membrane processing involve a distinct step which involves boiling the
membrane with water and the prepared membrane detached from the petri glass naturally.
DMAc has a boiling point of 165￿so at 200￿most of the DMAc is removed form the
membrane. However if there remain a minor fraction of DMAc eventually can be removed
at this stage. Moreover, the commercial PBI- solution contains about 2-3% LiCl as the
stabilizer which is diﬀuses out of the membrane with boiling water. In contrast to the
most familiar way the composite LaCl3-PBI membrane was not washed with water. All
membrane ﬁrmly attached to the glass until the doping stage. As the solvent evaporation
step is signiﬁcantly longer and dry weight of membrane was consistent it is considered as
the sign of complete removal traped solvent. LiCl content was very low and was overlooked.
After drying PBI(II)50La50, PBI(II)40La60, PBI(II)30La70 and PBI(II)20La80 was kept
23
==PAGE:29==
2.7
Membrane characterization
March 29, 2021
in a desiccator along with the petri glasses so that the membrane cannot absorb moisture
form the ambient air. When the membrane is cooled at room temperature 85% H3PO4
was poured on top of the membrane and was kept for several hours.
After few hours
all membranes was separated from the glass easily.
The weight gain of the membrane
was measured after diﬀerent time intervals. As long as there was no signiﬁcant change of
weight the membranes is considered to be at saturation point. After that all membranes
are kept with 85% H3PO4 acid in blue cup bottles for further characterization. As the
84%H3PO4 contains 15wt% of water which can dissolve the LaCl3 and the fraction of
LaCl3 can diﬀuse out of the membrane. To avoid the confusion membrane was doped in
even more concentrated H3PO4( 100%) for about 3 days. All the membrane dissolve in
the acid solution. Higher solubility in case of higher LaCl3 wt.% was also noticed. The
loss of LaCl3 can be prevented by converting LaCl3 to La(OH)3 which is not soluble in
water. The La(OH)3 afterwards can be converted to LaPO4. This was done by dipping
the membrane with a 50% KOH solution for one hour.The membrane is then cleaned and
dried in oven for 30 minutes and the dried membrane is then further doped in 85% H3PO4.
This a two step process and follow the following reactions.
LaCl3 + 3KOH = La(OH)3 + 3KCl
(4)
La(OH)3 + H3PO4 = LaPO4 + H2O
(5)
To check the stability of LaPO4 PBI(II)40La60, PBI(II)30La70 and PBI(II)20La80 mem-
brane was used. At ﬁrst 0.69g of PBI(II)20La80, 0.48g of PBI(II)30La70 and 0.306g of
PBI(II)40La60 membrane was dipped in 50wt.% KOH solution for about 2 hours. The
membranes are then washed thoroughly several times and dipped in distilled water over
night without any agitation.
The excess potassium hydroxide must dissolve in water
and remove from the membrane. The membranes were then dried in oven for about 1
hour at 100￿. The dried weight of the membrane became 0.46g, 0.27g and 0.15g where
0.138g,0.0142g and 0.12g are PBI(known beofore casting)0.306g,0.243g and 0.019g are
La(OH)3. After that the membranes were doped in phosphoric acid for three days. The
the membrane weight was 1.3g, 1.08g and 0.8g respectively giving AU 88,125 and 162 re-
spectively. The membrane were cleaned and washed in known volume demineralized water
and boiled in bluecap bottles so that no water evaporates. When the water cooled down
at room temperature the membranes were taken out of the bottles and the water with
diﬀused PA were saved for titration. After removing moisture the membranes weighted
0.24g,0.14g and 0.21g respectively.
Direct doped membrane of 1.35g, 1.47g and 1.25g of PBI(II)20La80, PBI(II)30La70 and
PBI(II)40La60 was washed and dried similarly.
2.7
Membrane characterization
The RE metal phosphate is crystalline and the insitu formation of this crystals can qualita-
tively checked by XRD, The main goal of the project is to prepare high proton conductive,
24
==PAGE:30==
2.7
Membrane characterization
March 29, 2021
thermally resistant, mechanically stable composite membrane that can be used in fuel cell
for better power output. This is done by a systematic membrane characterization using
XRD,TGA, tensile test and the volumetric analysis of the doped acid using acid base
titration and MEA.
• Swelling: Thickness of all the dried membranes with glass was measured directly and
subtracting the glass thickness form that, actual membrane thickness was measured.
Initially the area of the membrane is assumed to be same as the petri glass’s inside
area. Volume of the dry membrane is measured multiplying the inside area with the
measured thickness of the glass. After doping the membrane is separated form the
glass so change in thickness and area of the membrane can be measured directly.
The change in volume is recorded at every time intervals simultaneously as in case
of doping.
• Conductivity: For the comparative measurement and validation all the membrane’s
conductivity in the longitudinal direction are measured with a four point probe con-
ductivity measurement instrument. The instrument is combined with a setup which
will pump water according to the need and make water vapour. There was also mois-
ture analyser which reads the actual temperature and the relative humidity at the
vicinity of the membrane. For every membrane a constant current is introduced and
the corresponding potential was measured for all temperatures ranging from 50￿to
200￿and for diﬀerent RH. Using Ohmic relationship the resistivity of the membranes
was measured.Using calculated resistvity and membrane dimension(length,width and
thickness) is used to conductivity of the membrane. To check the conductivity of the
membrane at the ambient atmosphere the same procedure was done without addi-
tional stem generation. The conductivity was measured in several cycles both during
heating up and cooling down. However actual conductivity in the direction of mass
diﬀusion is the lateral direction which was measured in actual MEA setup. Only
PBI(II)50La50 and PBI(II)20La80 membrane is used for this measurement.
• TGA: Thermogravimetric analysis was done for only PBI(II)20La80 membrane both
doped and undoped condition. TGA of a pure PBI sample was also done as reference.
The temperature range was 20￿to 1000￿and the heating rate was 5￿/hour in air
atmosphere.
• XRD: 80% LaCl3-PBI membrane used for XRD both doped and undoped codition.
The doped membrane was heated at 220￿to check the possible lanthanum phosphate
formation at higher operating temperature. As a common practice XRD of a pure
PBI membrane is also done to compare them with the reference membrane.
• Titration:H3PO4 is a triprotic weak acid and can be titrated with strong base NaOH.
The actual acid that has been doped can be checked by acid base titration. The doped
membrane is boiled in a known amount of distilled water in a blue cup bottle over
night. All the doped acid is diﬀused out of the membrane leaving a dilute solution of
25
==PAGE:31==
2.8
Four point probe conductivity measurement
March 29, 2021
H3PO4. The acid solution is mixed with a solution of NaOH of known concentration.
At every point of base addition the pH was noted. During the base addition ﬁrst
sharp increase of pH indicates the 1st equivalence point. Corresponding volume of
base at the midpoint of the sharp pH increase was noted. From the measured volume
of the base, concentration of H3PO4 in the solution is calculated. This is done only
for PBI(II)40La60, PBI(II)30La70 and PBI(II)20La80 both by direct doping and two
step doping.
• Tensile test: In order to evaluate the mechanical property of the composite membrane
universal tensile test instrument was used. The dog bone shape membrane of 2mm
width and 5 cm length was cut and clumped in tensile tester. Mechanically the clumps
pulled apart. Applied force as the tensile stress and resulting elongation as the strain
was measured until the sample tears. Tensile test was done of PBI(II)50La50 and
PBI(II)20La80.
2.8
Four point probe conductivity measurement
The fastest way to measure the conductivity of any thin ﬁlm material is the four point
probe conductivity measurement. The instrument mainly consists of four platinum metal
tips places linearly keeping equally space(s) between each other. During operation the
membrane is placed under the probes ensuring close contact with all the probes.
The
outer probes force current into the ﬁlm or membrane inducing a voltage which is measured
by the inner probes.
Membranes have a very low thickness compared to the distance
between the probes.
Using Ohms Law resistance,R of the membrane can measured as follows
V
I = R
(6)
where V and I refer to voltage and current.
As the conductivity(σ) is reverse of the
resistivity and is related to the dimension of the membrane.
For a small rectangular sample conductivity is calculated based on the following Equation
σ(S/cm) =
L(cm)
R(⌦) ⇥W(cm) ⇥t(cm)
(7)
where = conductivity; L = length of the membrane and t = thickness of the membrane;
W = width of the membrane. To check the conductivity and the inﬂuence on dry ambient
air PBI(I)50La50,PBI(I)40La60,PBI(I)0La70 was used. Finally the quantitative conduc-
tivity was measured for PBI(II)50La50, PBI(II)40La60, PBI(II)30La70 and PBI(II)20La80
membranes.
2.9
Fuel cell assembling and testing
Fuel cell was assembled following the order described in membrane electrode assembly
section. Bipolar plates were placed on either end of the MEA. The teﬂone gaskets were
26
==PAGE:32==
March 29, 2021
placed such a way the rectangular eﬀective area of the membrane remain open in the middle
of it. An additional PBI membarne is used to rap the composite membrane having similar
opening like the gasket. The open rectangular (1cm⇥1cm) eﬀective are of the membrane
is covered by the integrated platinum electrode with carbon paper served as gas diﬀusion
layer. After adding the end plates the MEA is bolted perfectly to avoid leakage. MEA was
operated with hydrogen at the anode and with air at the cathode. The ﬂow of air and H2
gas was maintained 100 ml/min and 30 ml/min respectively. A potentiostat was used to
generate the polarization curve at each working condition. The fuel cell was heated with
external heater and the temperature was maintained as the targeted temperature from 180
to 220￿.
3
Results and discussion
3.1
Solubility of ﬁller material and preparation of preformed phosphate
The solubility of some RE metal chloride, their oxides and some multielement oxides was
checked by dissolving them in DMAc.
Soluble in water
Soluble in DMAc
La-chloride
yes
yes
Ce-chloride
yes
yes
Gd-Chloride
yes
yes
Ce-Bromide
yes
yes
La-Oxide
not
not
Ce-Oxide
not
-
Gd-Oxide
not
not
Ce-zirconium(IV)oxide
Very little(cannot notice)
Cannot notice
Strontium titanium oxide
not
not
Antimony Tin oxide
Very little(cannot notice)
Very little
Indium Tin oxide
not
not
Table 1
27
==PAGE:33==
3.1
Solubility of ﬁller material and preparation of preformed phosphate March 29, 2021
Oxides
Reactivity at 30-100￿
Reactivity at 250￿10 hr
La2O3
Disappears
viscous liquid, precipitate during washing
LaCl3
White precipitate
White precipitate become hard solid.
Gd2O3
Not completely
viscous liquid, no precipitate
CeO4Zr
Not completely, separated in two phases
Precipitate is centrifuged and
Washed with water
SrTiO3
Disappears forming a viscous liquid
viscous liquid, no precipitate
Sb2O3/SnO2
Partially , a phase separation noticed
Precipitate is centrifuged and
Washed with water
In2O3.SnO2
Disappears and gives clear viscous liquid
viscous liquid, no precipitate
Table 2
All halides show good solubility in DMAc however most oxides are insoluble except Anti-
mony Tin oxide. Antimony Tin oxide is physical blend of Antimony oxide and Tin oxide it
was not clear whether antimony oxide or tin oxide is soluble in the solvent. The obtained
results were listed in Table-1 and Table-2. Reaction of LaCl3.7H2O form LaPO4 at room
temperature. By adding 80wt% H3PO4 solution in a dilute LaCl3.7H20 solution the result-
ing solution become gradually milky white. The Precipitate was centrifuged and washer
several times to remove H3PO4 completely. The XRD of dried white powder named as
chloride route. Chloride route follows the following reaction
LaCl3.7H2O + H3PO4 = LaPO4 + HCl + 7H20
(8)
According to the literature in presence of excess H3PO4 nearly 300￿there are possibility
of formation both polyphosphate and pyrophosphate. The process will follow both the
reactions
La2O3 + 6H3PO4 = 2La(PO3)3 + 9H2O
(9)
La2O3 + 10H3PO4 = 2LaP5O14 + 15}H2O
(10)
In case of lanthanum oxide the excess H3PO4 does not form precipitate all the oxide
disappears in the solution. At higher temperature(250￿) a thick liquid was formed because
of formation Lanthanum polyphosphate.
However the thick polyphsphate react with water at room temperature to form similer
powder like the chloride route.
The powder is processed similarly and send for XRD
naming oxide route. with the prepared phosphate Both the phosphates give same peaks
28
==PAGE:34==
3.1
Solubility of ﬁller material and preparation of preformed phosphate March 29, 2021
which superimpose with the monoclinic structure of Monazite, a LaPO4 which conﬁrms
the formation LaPO4.
CeZrO4 is a light brown powder wich react with H3PO4 partially. In ﬁgure:8 is the XRD
pattern of the precipitate obtained from CeZrO4 and PA reacted at 200￿. Both the Zir-
conium(Zr) and Cerium(Ce) phosphate are monoclinic crystals and the peaks of ICDS
databse have similar peaks but in case of Ce peak appears earlier than prepared phosphate
it conﬁrms the presence of ZrP2O7 and the Ce remain underacted in the oxide form.
H3PO4 react with Sb2O5/SnO2 and visually a precipitate was observed.
The sample
was a physical blend of the two oxides.The mixture make two diﬀerent phases at room
temperature but a dark precipitate forms at 250￿. In Figure:9 black line is the XRD spectra
of the precipitate shows that the peak around 20 theta may correspond to the presence
of both the phosphates. However there is still slight shifting of peaks due to specimen
displacement. If the shifting is overlooked comparing to the other possible phosphates
the precipitate has big similarity with both the SnP2O7 SbP2O7. There are some lower
intensity peaks possibly shows low crystal size and the noise due the error coming from
sample handling.
Figure 7: XRD pattern from oxide oxide and chlo-
ride route
Figure 8: XRD Patteren of Ceriumzirconate and the
residue after reaction woth H3PO4
29
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Comparative discussion and dehydration of Ce,Gd and La chloride
March 29, 2021
Figure 9: XRD pattern of reaction precipitate SnO2/SbO2 and H3PO4
The prepared RE metal phosphates, SnP2O7/SbP2O7 and ZrP22O7 is ﬁne powders and
phosphates of SrTiO3 and In2O3-SnO2 did not give any solid residues. The preformed
phosphate residues are diﬃcult to disperse in 2.5% PBI-DMAc solution.
3.2
Comparative discussion and dehydration of Ce,Gd and La chloride
Solubility of the salt is measured by weighing the amount of solute required to prepare a
saturated solution at the speciﬁc temperature .The amount of solute dissolve in the solvent
highly depend on the temperature of the solvent. Solubility of some hygroscopic materiel
that posses several H2O molecules stay diﬀerent crystallographic stages. The bonded water
can be released form the crystal and the actual solubility can be mislead.The high solubility
of RE metal chloride(LaCl3.7H2,CeCl3.7H2,GdCl3.6H2) made DMAc the common solvent
for both the PBI and LaCl3. However the process of dissolution is hampered by the presence
of bonded water. In the solution crystal water molecules released from the crystal structures
and remain in the solution. PBI is soluble in DMAc and some other organic solvent but
not soluble in H2O. The presence of minor amount of water in PBI-DMAc solution leads to
a precipitation of PBI. Hence removing the bonded water prior solution preparation is very
important. Although PBI is sensitive to water and easily precipitate in presence of excess
water but on the other hand removing all bonded water is not beneﬁcial as anhydrous
chlorides are not completely dissolve in PBI-DMAc solution. Therefore dehydration was
done in such a temperature where no anhydrous was noticed.
The thermal dehydration of CeCl3.7H2O in air atmosphere happen four steps(7-4-3-1-
0)[51]. CeCl3.7H2O forms diﬀerent hydrated cerium chloride with reduced number of H2O
molecule at 105,170, 185, and 224 ￿. It is obvious that to remove all possible water it
must be heated at 224￿for longer period. At higher than 390￿the oxidative degradation
started to happen so heating the salt 200￿is relatively safe from degradation.
Besides it CeCl3 comparatively diﬃcult to remove because CeCl3 TGA peak also shows
30
==PAGE:36==
3.3
Membrane with Preformed phosphates
March 29, 2021
that the formation of mono hydrate occur relatively higher temperature as high as 170￿. At
this higher temperature a fraction of CeCl3 is converted to anhydrous and which is highly
insoluble in PBI-DMAc solution. Therefore the CeCl3 was heated as low as 105￿. At this
temperature the mono-hydrate might not be possible but at least anhydrous formation was
prevented.
Similarly GdCl3.6H2O dehydration pattern is 6-3-2-1-0 at 133, 152, 170 and 200￿. It start
decomposing below 200￿[52] produces HCl vapour that’s why GdCl3.6H2O was heated at
even lower than 152￿in a glass beaker in a regular oven to avoid decomposition.
The steps of dehydration of LaCl3.7H20 can be summarised as follows 7-4-2-1-0 at 75,105
140 and 180￿considering highest temperature of each range.
As it readily decompose
to form LaOCl even at 140￿and a fraction of LaOCl alnog with anhydrous LaCl3 was
reported[53]. Considering this property into account LaCl3 was heated at 105￿.
The dehydrated salts are added to the PBI-DMAc(2.5%) solution and kept in continuous
stirring at room temperature. In case of LaCl3 50,60 and 70wt.% dissolved after several
hours but 80% need longer time. For 80 wt.% there was small remaining part of undissolved
LaCl3 even after over night stirring.To get a completely clear homogeneous solution the
solution was left on a hot plate for simultaneous heating and stirring few hours.
During membrane casting the heating and the air ﬂow initially remove the evaporated
solvent from the glass plate. Because of the gradual evaporation the solution gets even
more concentrated and chloride crystals was formed. Due to the density diﬀerence they
form separate layer in the solution. In case of Cerium the crystals are so obvious because
of the presence of higher amount of bonded water.
It is worth mentioning here that when the solution was left undisturbed at room tem-
perature for a longer time salt crystals appears again at the bottom of the bottle. The
recrystallization happen for all higher contents. In case of LaCl3 it is was notices only for
80% but for Ce and Gd this phenomena starts from 70%. The more the wt% the bigger
the crystal size was observed.
3.3
Membrane with Preformed phosphates
In all cases agglomerates were noticed even at lower than 30wt.%. As the higher solid
content membrane having homogeneous dispersion was not possible by physical blending
the insitu formation of the phosphate is a good alternative. Form the screening section
RE metal chloride dissolve in DMAc and the rest of the work was decided to do only RE
metal chlorides.
31
==PAGE:37==
3.4
Morphology of the membrane
March 29, 2021
Figure 10: First and Second pictures are for PRE-PBI60Sb40 PRE-PBI50Sb50 and Third and Fourth is
for PRE-PBI60Zr40 PRE-PBI50Zr50
3.4
Morphology of the membrane
Initial diﬃculty of the RE metal chloride composite membrane casting is cracking. There
was phase separation during slow evaporation which make the membrane opaque. As the
transparency of the membrane expresses the uniform dispersion of the ﬁller material a
transparent membrane is highly expected.
Figure 11: PBI(I)30Gd70 and PBI(I)20Gd80 composite.
For higher content of Ce and Gd membranes are not transparent and the white spots were
everywhere on the top of the surfaces. Due to the gradual evaporation of the PBI viscosity
of the solution increases. A time reaches when the residual DMAc was not enough to keep
both the BPI and the salts in solution form.This is the time when crystallization start initi-
ating.When more DMAc is evaporated from the solution it become even thicker and Ce/Gd
salts make two separate layer.However This was not noticed in case of LaCl3-PBI mem-
branes. Another reason could be the content of bonded water remain with the dehydrated
Ce salt is more than LaCl3. The salt was also heated relatively lower temperature to avoid
anhydrous formation. To remove most of the bonded water it need to be heated nearly
200￿. Presence of more water recrystalization happen more readily in casting solution.
32
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Morphology of the membrane
March 29, 2021
Figure 12: 60%,70%,80% LaCl3-PBI compsite membrane
The above pictures are the membrane for LaCl3-PBI composite of diﬀerent wt.% start-
ing from 60 to 80% heated at 200￿for about two hours in a same heating cycle. This
is interesting that for the lower solid content membrane breaks while for higher content
membranes looks relatively better. But this is also because of nonuniform dispersion of
the salts which can visually identiﬁed due to decreasing transparency. For higher solid
composite membranes there are low polymer content hence the intermolecular attraction
within the polymer matrix is low which keep the polymer molecules together. The most
of the space in the membrane matrix is occupied by the inorganic material therefore in-
teraction between the two phases are low. Beside this over drying of the membrane make
them brittle. Casted membrane stick at the inner periphery of the petri dish more tightly
because usually membranes thickness is more at the periphery. Over dried membrane stick
to the dish only along the periphery leaving the whole membrane in a highly stressed con-
dition.That’s why a small punch of needle reduce the whole membrane to several small
pieces.
Figure 13: An example of membrane breaking during thickness measurement
Above ﬁgure is the composite membrane prepared from commercial PBI and heated at
200￿. Aftre dryig the membrane was not broken but it breaks when membrane was un-
der thickness gauges. Average molecular weight of the commercial PBI is around 10000.
AS the mechanical strength of any particulars polymer is dependent on the molecular
weight[54][Principles of Polymerization, 4th Edition, willey] such a small molecule PBI
are not able to hold such a high stress. PBI-DPS is the PBI with an avegare molecular
weight 48000 . Because of the higher molecular weight the composite membrane casted
with wt.80% to wt.10% are stonger than the previous membranes.
33
==PAGE:39==
3.5
Chemistry of acid doping (phosphate formation)
March 29, 2021
Figure 14: Composite membrane prepared with PBI-DPS and 80% to 50%LaCl3 content
There was no crack noticed and all the membrane was unbroken after heating them
200￿over two hours.The all new membranes are transparent and bright compared to the
membrane made from commercial PBI.
3.5
Chemistry of acid doping (phosphate formation)
Acid doping level is the most important for pure PBI membrane as H3PO4 contributes
proton conduction. When acid is added to the composite membrane the following reaction
between LaCl3 and H3PO4 is anticipated as it happen in preformed LaPO4.
LaCl3 + H3PO4 = LaPO4 + 3HCl
(11)
In inorganic ﬁller selection and screening section it was seen that both the LaCl3 and La2O3
form similar structured monozite type LaPO4. LaCl3 and LaPO4 have molecular weight
245.2645 g/mol and 233.8768. After complete conversion when all the LaCl3 is converted
to Phosphate overall weight of the membrane is expected to decrease.This reaction is likely
to happen short time after doping. For this kind of membrane it was not possible to check
weight change so frequently specially for the ﬁrst few hours. Because it needs few hours
to remove the membrane from petri glass.
Figure 15: Acid Uptake of the composite membrane of LaCl3 and PBI supplied from DPS
0.779 g of composite membrane of PBI(II)20La80 was doped for six days and ﬁnal weight
of the membrane was found 1.499 g. The calculation of acid uptake is done considering
two assumption one is no LaCl3 is lost and the second is all LaCl3 is converted to LaPO4.
Although total weight gain is (1.499-0.779)g = 0.42g but the actual acid uptake is little
34
==PAGE:40==
3.6
XRD of the membranes
March 29, 2021
higher. 0.779g membrane contain 0.151g PBI and 0.629g LaCl3. When all chloride convert
to phosphate it will give 0.629 g⇥233.8768g/mol
245.2645g/mol =0.5998g of phosphate. So the ﬁnal weight
of the composite membrane will be (0.5996g phosphate+0.151g PBI)=0.75g. The acid
content in the doped membrane is (1.499g-0.75g)=0.749g which is slightly higher than
before and AU will be 4% higher than before. The deviation for the lower ﬁller content
membranes are also calculated accordingly and is given in the ﬁgure. Figure shows that
the complete conversion of chloride to phosphate will not change the weight of membrane
signiﬁcantly and the deviation is even lower for lower LaCl3 content membranes.
Figure 16: Deviation Between measured and actual
AU
Figure 17: Measured actual acid uptake of the mem-
brane
But LaCl3 loss is a big dilemma for the composite membrane and actual solid ﬁller content
cannot be represented by the actual wt% which they were prepared from. The TGA proﬁle
supportes that in the composite membrane has only minor amount of LaCl3 remain after
washing. If in any case all the LaCl3 is diﬀuse out of the membrane during doping, there
will be no LaPO4. All LaCl3 is substituted by PA and the weight gain is only due to
H3PO4. In this case AU will be the ratio of acid content to the PBI content present in the
composite membrane. The calculated AU for 80%LaCl3 membrane in this way is 895%
almost double than the AU of the pure PBI(498%). The red line in the ﬁgure show the
AU considering complete loss of LaCl3.
3.6
XRD of the membranes
XRD pattern of the composite membrane does not show any sharp peak for LaPO4. Prob-
ably most of the phosphate formed remain amorphous state. The amorphous behavior of
the membrane promotes the electrical conductivity as the organized crystalline structure
restrain electron migration through the polymer matrix.
35
==PAGE:41==
3.6
XRD of the membranes
March 29, 2021
Figure 18: XRD pattern of membranes at diﬀerent conditions
The pure PBI has a relative peak intensity approximately 0.1 while LaCl3-PBI composite
in undoped condition shows an intensity nearly 0.9 at diﬀraction angle 2⇥=(16-30)°.
Comparing the intensities it is clear that the presence of inorganic material,LaCl3 decrees
the crystalinity of the PBI approximately 11% which is also supprted by similar work of
Hemanth Maddali et al on poly(3-hexylthiophene) and Tetrabutylammonium perchlorate
salt[55]. After doping there will appear another peak indicating diﬀerent phases in the
membrane.
The decreased intensity of the ﬁrst peak is due to the presence of H3PO4
acid which inhibit the long chain polymers to be organized giving even more amorphous
structur in PBI. The intensity diﬀerence in the successive peaks is due to combined eﬀect
of LaPO4 both in amorphous and crystalline form and also H3PO4. In the top most graph
of the stack the small sharp peaks after 2⇥=21°are due to the poplyphosphate formation
and deydration of the membrane at higher temperature. However the presence of LaPO4
in crystalline form is still ambiguous.
36
==PAGE:42==
3.7
TGA of the composite membrane
March 29, 2021
3.7
TGA of the composite membrane
Figure 19: TGA of composite membrane and Pure
PBI supplied from DPS
Figure 20: TGA of 80%LaCl3-PBI composite mem-
brane
Figure 21: TGA Pure PBI from literature
TGA explains the thermal decomposition process of the composite membranes. The pure
PBI membrane has well documented TGA proﬁle in diﬀerent literatures.The weight loss
proﬁle that is found in TGA is comparable with cited literatures. There is weight regain
after the maximum weight loss appear for all kind of membranes. In case of pure PBI in
such a higher temperature of 1000￿complete combustion is expected but the weight regain
after main weight loss peak at 650￿indicates the instrumental error.
The drastic weight loss of PBI begins at 450￿which matches with the literature[56]. There-
fore it is also fair to speculate that the peak of main weight loss for other membranes also
in accurate temperature. The endothermic peak appearing very beginning is due to the
moisture content of the membrane. The exothermic peak explains the decompostion of the
PBI material.
37
==PAGE:43==
3.8
Two step doping via hydroxide formation
March 29, 2021
For pure PBI maximum weight is about 15% at 650￿and for PBI(II)20La80 membrane
which is at 645￿nearly 49%. In case of PBI(II)20La80 membrane the gradually decrease
its weight after the initial moisture loss. The 7mg sample contain 10-15% moisture and/or
bonded water so the dry membrane contain 1.218mg PBI and 4.872mg LaCl3. 4.827mg
LaCl3 reduces to 3.24mg oxide after complete combustion. 1.218mg PBI gives 15% residue
like the pure PBI which is 0.18mg. The total residue will remain 3.42mg which is 49%.
DTA of the ﬁgure show two successive exothermic peaks implies the conversion of oxides
and decomposition of PBI.
The blue colour line in the graph presents the TGA proﬁle for H3PO4 doped composite
membrane which was washed before TGA for safty purposes.The ﬁnal weight loss is for
this membrane is close to pure PBI. But if the LaCl3 react to form LaPO4 and stay in
the membrane the weight loss suppose to be far less than PBI. Because LaPO4 thermally
stable compound having melting point of nearly 2000￿. This can be another indication of
major LaCl3 loss either during doping or membrane washing.
3.8
Two step doping via hydroxide formation
The XRD and TGA shows the indication of LaCl3 loss therefore a process was followed
by using KOH to convert insoluble lanthanum hydroxide and then convert it to LaPO4
in the second step. Still the loss of LaPO4 is remains as an big issue. The process of
crystallization start with nucleus formation and then followed by crystal growth. The well
dispersed LaCl3 deﬁnitely form tiny crystals of LaPO4 but their growth need to be high
enough to retain by the polymer molecules.As the LaCl3 doped membrane is dipped in
50wt.% KOH it react with LaCl3 and form insoluble La(OH)3. The transparent composite
membrane become opaque and detached from the petri glass. The longitudinal shrinkage
of the was also noticed is 5% for 80wt.% membrane and the 2% for wt.50% membrane.
Formation of hydroxide is clearly noticed in XRD done after KOH dipping. The resulting
membrane which was further doped in acid was reactive with H3PO4 and the small bubbles
noticed during doping symbolizes the exothermic reaction of La(OH)3 with H3PO4. The
XRD pattern shows the peak of Lanthanum phosphate.
38
==PAGE:44==
3.8
Two step doping via hydroxide formation
March 29, 2021
Figure 22:
Left:
XRD of the membrane dipped in KOH Right:
XRD after two step doping of
PBI(II)20La80 membrane
The left hand side the formation of La(OH)3 is clearly noticed in the membrane due to the
sharp peaks. On the right hand side for two step doped membrane very sharp peaks are
not visible but the peaks appearing at 2⇥=28.2, 31.1 and 48 are the high intensity peaks
like the preformed LaPO4.
3.8.1
TGA of two step doping membranes
Figure 23: TGA of composite membrane and Pure
PBI supplied from DPS
Figure 24: TGA Pure PBI from literature
TGA of the 80% LaCl3 membrane dipped in KOH is shown in ﬁgure 24. Maximum weight
loss reaches up to 69% at 700￿which is much higher than the pure PBI. DTA of the
same ﬁgure gives an exothermic peak near 450￿which is seen in pure PBI membranes
also because of the decomposition of PBI. The conversion of La(OH)3 to La2O3 start from
590￿and the dehydration reaction is endothermic[57] therefore there appears another sharp
fall in DTA near 600￿.
La(OH)3 −! LaOOH + H2O
(12)
39
==PAGE:45==
3.9
Swelling
March 29, 2021
2LaOOH −! La2O3 + H2O
(13)
This indicates the presence of LaOH3 in the membrane. During dipping in KOH all LaCl3
is converted to La(OH)3 so the overall weight will decrease.14mg sample contains 10.5mg
of La(OH)3 suppose to give 9mg of Lanthanum oxide and 0.52 mg PBI residue.
The
calculated residue become 68% which is very close to the residue shown in TGA(69%).
The La(OH)3 membrane is dipped in H3PO4 for two days and then washed so there is
no additional H3PO4 present in the membrane. If the mass loss of two diﬀerent ways of
doped membrane is compared, the loss of LaPO4 is about 11% less in case of 2 step doped
membrane. Still a major loss of LaPO4 is noticed for both the cases. However it can be
conclude here that the loss of LaCl3 is not noticed during dipping in KOH. La(OH)3 is
insoluble in water easily react with H3PO4 therefore they converted to LaPO4. So loss of
LaPO4 is during doping and washing as like as the direct doping system. But ﬁgure 25
indicates that the two stage doping the residual mass is 22% which is 11% less than the
direct doping system. Although the higher solid loading is not achieved but in this way at
least complete drainage of LaCl3 can be prevented.
3.9
Swelling
Figure 25: Swelling ration of the composite membrane of LaCl3 and PBI supplied from DPS
The membranes prepared in direct doping show extremely low swelling ratios specially
for the membrane PBI(II)40La60 PBI(II)30La70, and PBI(II)20La80 . For lower LaCl3
content swelling slightly higher than the pure PBI. Swelling of the membrane happen due
to the diﬀusion of H3PO4 molecule inside the membrane which stay within the membrane
either by forming hydrogen bonding or by physical adsorption. For higher solid content
lower number of benzimidazole group available and the possibility of hydrogen bond forma-
tion is relatively low. Furthermore the LaCl3 which is expected to form phosphate occupies
intermolecular spacing of the polymer molecules leaving less places to accommodate addi-
tional H3PO4 molecule. But in case of the LaCl3 composite membrane LaPO4 diﬀuses out
of the membrane so the ﬁnal volume of the membrane does not change so much. However
the lower content of LaCl3 increases the swelling ration of the membrane slightly. The two
step doping membrane has to under go a chemical reactions during hydroxide formation
40
==PAGE:46==
3.10
Verifying Phosphate formation by titration
March 29, 2021
where the membrane shrinks.The next step is acid doping where the membrane undergoes
swelling.
When the membranes are dipped in KOH membrane become highly crystalline both in
inorganic and organic phase. The XRD(Figure-22) shows that the membrane show almost
no amorphous phase for PBI(II)20La80 membrane. Beacuse of the increased crystallinity
composite membrane shrinks longitudinally. But overall volume of increase was observed
in case of higher solid contents.
Figure 26: Swelling and shrinkage in two step doping
3.10
Verifying Phosphate formation by titration
The doped composite membranes contain both H3PO4 and LaPO4. Boiling the doped
membrane in distilled water dissolve H3PO4 and a fraction of LaPO4 diﬀuse out of the
membrane. After boiling the membrane weight is higher than the PBI content in those
membrane. The additional weight of the membrane is due to some LaPO4 that could not
diﬀuse out of the membrane during boiling.
Membrane
wt.1
wt.2
AU
wt.3
wt.4
LaPO4(%)
PBI(II)20La80
0.69
1.3
88
0.24
0.138
15
Two step Doping
PBI(II)30La70
0.48
1.08
125
0.14
0.01428
26
PBI(II)40La60
0.306
0.8
161
0.21
0.1224
29
PBI(II)20La80
0.7
1.35
93
0.17
0.14
4
PBI(II)30La70
0.608
1.47
142
0.275
0.23814
6
Direct Doping
PBI(II)40La60
0.45
1.25
178
0.24
0.19
11
Table 3: wt.1= Dry weight of membrane(g), wt.2=weight of membrane after H33PO4 doping(g), Wt.3=
Dry weight of membrane after boiling(g), wt.4=weight of PBI in the membrane
It is clear form the table that the two step doping can save the phosphate more than
the direct doping technique. Titration of the dissolved H3PO4 solution form the doped
membrane give the exact amount of acid present in the membrane. The acid content is
41
==PAGE:47==
3.11
Tensile test
March 29, 2021
much higher than the acid measured by weight gain due to doping. The weight diﬀerence
proves that a signiﬁcant amount of LaPO4 diﬀuse out of the membrane and replaced by
H3PO4. However the LaPO4 obtained by titration is not following consistency.
In direct doping PBI(II)20La80 has 20%, PBI(II)30La70 has 7% and PBI(II)40La60 contain
41%LaPO4. In 2 step doping PBI(II)20La80 contain 26%, PBI(II)30La70 contain 29% and
PBI(II)20La80 contain 46% LaPO4. Two step doping can save more LaPO4 but majority
of LaCl3 is lost during doping.
Membrane
NaOH(M)
base used(ml)
actual acid (g)
wt. gain in doping
LaPO4(%)
Two step
PBI(II)20La80
0.30
37
1.09
0.61
26
Doping
PBI(II)30La70
0.30
35.75
1.05
0.6
29
PBI(II)40La60
0.22
29
0.63
0.494
46
Direct
PBI(II)20La80
0.40
28
1.10
0.65
20
PBI(II)30La70
0.35
35.75
1.23
0.862
7
Doping
PBI(II)40La60
0.31
30.5
0.93
0.8
41
Considering the amount of acid measuring by titration the actual AU is higher than the
AU measured conventional way.
Figure 27: Actual AU measured by titration
3.11
Tensile test
Young’s modulus measures stiﬀness of the membrane. It also measures the resistance shown
by the membrane against the elastic deformation due to the applied stress. Principally at
the region of elastic deformation material will return to its original shape when the load
is removed.
Young’s modulus is the slope of the initial linear part of the curve.
The
42
==PAGE:48==
3.12
Conducitivity
March 29, 2021
composite membranes prepared from two step doping are less stiﬀer than the doped pure
PBI.The stiﬀness decreases because of the presence of LaPO4. The slope of the linear
parts, the young’s modulus calculated are 0.63 MPa, 0.46 MPa and 0.40 MPa are for pure
PBI,PBI(II)50La50 and PBI(II)20La80 membranes respectively.
Yield stress is the stress after which the membrane’s stress to strain curve lost its linearity
and the membrane’s strain changes from elastic deformation to permanent deformation.
As the composite membranes contains higher content of solid, plasticizing eﬀect is not so
prominent, the stress after the yield point does not increases so much as in the case of
pure PBI.Tensile strength of the composite membranes are also lower compared to the
reference pure PBI. But still the membranes are workable for the fuel cell and can be
handled without any problem.
Figure 28: Tensile test measurement
3.12
Conducitivity
Conductivity the PBI membrane is dependent on the moisture content in the membrane.
Relative humidity(RH) is the ratio of the actual moisture content to the maximum pos-
sible moisture that can be in saturation condition in air at any speciﬁc temperature. At
highly humid environment PBI will absorb moisture and the conductivity will be inﬂuenced
signiﬁcantly.
43
==PAGE:49==
3.12
Conducitivity
March 29, 2021
Figure 29: Water saturation Pressure against tem-
perature collected from Engineering toolbox.
Figure 30: Measured relative Humidity against tem-
perature
Fighure:29 shows that the saturation pressure of water increases exponentially at higher
temperature.
From the Relationship of relative humidity with the partial pressure of
water and the water saturation pressure it can be seen the RH decreases with increasing
temperature if the water partial pressure remain constant. However the partial pressure
in a conﬁned place does not change so much, Therefore at higher temperature achieving
higher RH is diﬃcult.
RH% = PH2O
P0
H2O
(14)
In case of composite membrane moisture dependent conductivity enhancement impair with
the ﬁller material’s property. However for high ﬁller content membranes, it is very inter-
esting to check the electrical conductivity of the membrane in absence of moisture so that
the best conductive membrane can be screened out without actual fuel cell test. At a
higher temperature RH is very low which is clear from the graph. During the start of the
experiment RH of the oven was around 40% but it decreases with increasing temperature
and from 100￿it reduces to zero.To ensure dry ambient environment as well as a very dry
membrane the fast screening conductivity test is realistic to do in several heating cycles.
Therefor all the membrane was heated from room temperature to 200￿to remove possible
moisture two times.
Figure 31: Conductivity of PBI at diﬀerent temper-
ature
Figure 32:
Conductivity of 70% composite mem-
brane
44
==PAGE:50==
3.12
Conducitivity
March 29, 2021
Figure 33:
Conductivity of 60% composite mem-
brane
Figure 34:
Conductivity of 50% composite mem-
brane
The above conductivity measurements was done with the composite membranes prepared
from commercial PBI. Due to the diﬃculty in membrane casting the membranes were not
heated at 200￿rather 180￿for only one hour. Due to that the membrane may contain a
trace amount of DMAc which will be removed during heating of the ﬁrst cycle. Additionally
the surface of the membrane was moist at the starting of the ﬁrst cycle. So the quantitative
value of the conductivity for the ﬁrst cycle is not reliable. In case of all the membranes
second cycle is done just after the ﬁrst cycle so there was not enough time to absorb
moisture by the membranes. The trend of decreasing conductivity in second cycle is noticed
in every case.
As the AU measured before does not represent the real acid uptake AU mesured by titri-
metric analysis is more reliable.
Membrane Type
AU%(Commercial PBI)
AU%(DPS-PBI)
AU% (Measured by titration)
Pure PBI
385
498
498
50%LaCl3+PBI
180
242
-
60%LaCl3+PBI
105
177
206
70%LaCl3+PBI
141
46
202
80%LaCl3+PBI
-
92
157
The conductivity of the composite membrane prepared from the PBI(II) in direct dop-
ing is impressive.
The maximum conductivity achieved was 0.229(S/cm) at 160￿for
PBI(II)20La80 membrane which is double of the conductivity for PBI. Actual acid uptake
of the membrane is still lower than the pure PBI. This higher conductivity is due to the
presence of LaPO4(20% in direct doping) and H3PO4(actual AU 157). 20%LaPO4 is the op-
timum amount of amorphous phosphate present in the membrane imparting highly conduc-
tive property above/below which conductivity start decreasing. For PBI(II)30La70 contain
7%LaPO4 and its actual AU is 206 but the conductivity is lower than the PBI(II)20La80.
PBI(II)40La60 has maximum 41%LaPO4 and actual AU 202 having the lowest conductivity
among these three membranes.
45
==PAGE:51==
3.13
Polarization curve and membrane’s proton conductivity
March 29, 2021
Figure 35: Conductivity Vs Temperature for the composite membrane of PBI-DPS
From the graph the conductivity of the composite membrane increase with increasing
temperature until 160￿and below this temperature conductivity decreases.Like the other
membrane it’s conductivity also start decreasing at 160￿and decreases to 0.183(S/cm)
which is still higher than the maximum conductivity of for the PBI membrane. Decresed
conductivity is due to the formation of pyrophosphate by dehydration of orthophophate
at higher temperature.
At higher temperature LaPO4 is less conductive.
In the work
of Tatiana Anﬁmova in 2014 on Metal Phosphates as Proton Conducting Materials, she
shows that by decreasing water partial pressure from 0.3 to 0.15 atm conductivity of
LaPO4nH20 decreases from 5⇥10−7 to 3⇥10−7 S/cm at the 227￿and this decreasing trend
continue even for lower temperatures[56]. Additionally the RH of ambient air decreases
with increasing temperature(205￿). The sharp decrease of conductivity in PBI(II)30La70
and PBI(II)20La80 membrane is due to the combined eﬀect of pyrophosphoric acid and
LaPO4 after 160￿.
3.13
Polarization curve and membrane’s proton conductivity
As the PBI(II)20La80 composite membrane shows higher conductivity it is more inter-
esting to do fuel cell test as a systematic membrane characterization.
But for com-
parative discussion PBI(II)50La50 and Pure PBI membranes was also analyzed.
Fig-
ure:39 is the polarization curves for all three membranes at 160￿which indicates that
PBI(II)20La80(20%LaPO4) membrane still shows better performance compared to the
other two membrane. Figures:36-38 also show the polarization curves for all membranes
at three diﬀerent temperatures. It is noticed that in case of PBI and PBI(II)50La50 mem-
brane the potential increase with increasing temperature. This is reasonable because at
higher temperature the rate of mass diﬀusion and rate of reaction is increased[58]. The
same incident happen for PBI(II)20La80 membrane as well. However at 200￿instead of
increasing the potential decrease slightly. PBI(II)50La50, PBI(II)20La80 and pure PBI are
63,60 and 65 micron. From ﬁgure:39 conductivity of the membranes are measured as
46
==PAGE:52==
3.13
Polarization curve and membrane’s proton conductivity
March 29, 2021
0.011(S/cm), 0.036(S/cm) and 0.031(S/cm).For PBI(II)50La50 the temperature inﬂuences
positively on conductivity which was calculated as 0.0108(S/cm), 0.0113(S/cm) and 0.0136(S/cm)
at 160￿,180￿and 200￿respectively. Although PBI(II)20La80 shows still higher conduc-
tivity at 160￿at 200￿conductivity remain unchanged(0.035(S/cm). It means at higher
temperatures the electrochemical reaction slows down and the production of water will be
limited and the conductivity cannot increase so much.
Titration conﬁrms that the (PBI(II)20La80 membrane in two step doping contains 26%
LaPO4 but in direct doped of the same membrane achieve maximum conductivity so the
membrane in two step doped condition was also undergoes fuel cell test. The ﬁgure:40
shows the polarization curve for the two step doped PBI(II)20La80 membrane. The resis-
tance of the membrane is much higher and the conductivity is less than the pue PBI. The
membrane has a thickness of 130 micron higher than the other two membranes(65,60,63
for pure PBI,PBI(II)20La80 and PBI(II)50La50 by direct doping) The additional thickness
is due the shrinkage of the membrane two step doping procedure. The less conductivity is
due to the high thickness and higher LaPO4 .
Figure 36: Polarization curves of Pure PBI at dif-
ferent temperature
Figure 37: Polarization curves of 50%LaCl3 com-
posite at diﬀerent temperature
47
==PAGE:53==
3.13
Polarization curve and membrane’s proton conductivity
March 29, 2021
Figure 38: Polarization curves of 80%LaCl3 com-
posite at diﬀerent temperature
Figure 39:
Polarization curves of all three mem-
branes at 160￿
Open circuit voltage(OCV) is another indicator employed in accelerated testing method for
fuel cell[59]. OCV is the potential that cell experiences when there is no current is passed
through the circuit.It is an indication of reactant crossover through the membrane. Open
circuit voltage for pure PBI membrane was 931 mV, for the PBI(II)50La50 it was 888mV
while for the PBI(II)20La80 membrane was as low as 828 mV. When lanthanum salt is dif-
fuse out of the membrane the membrane become less dense and increases reactants(H2/O2)
crossover. The membrane used two step doping shows 922mV at the same condition which
is higher than the direct doped membrane. It also indicates that the two step doping retain
the LaPO4 better than direct doping.
Figure 40: Polarization curves of 2 step doped membrane
48
==PAGE:54==
3.14
Future work
March 29, 2021
3.14
Future work
3.14.1
Use of La(OH)3 membrane as OH- conductive membrane
The homogeneous membrane prepared from LaCl3 easily converted to La(OH)3 composite
membrane and the loss of lanthanum is not noticed. The conductivity of the membrane is
highly moisture dependent.
Figure 41: Conductivity La(OH)3 composite membrane at diﬀerent RH
The prepared membrane has conductivity of 0.017 S/cm at 100￿and 0.024 S/cm at 120￿in
50% RH. The conductivity of the hydroxide membrane might be interesting for alkaline
fuel cell application. However the electrical conductivity does not reﬂect the conductivity
of the OH- ions. Therefore further work can be done on the La(OH)3 membrane to check
the actual OH−ion conductivity and the usability in real alkaline fuel cell.
4
Conclusion
The project was targeted for a higher ﬁller content composite membrane having better
proton conductivity and mechanical and thermal stability for high temperature fuel cell
application. To achieve the goal RE metal chlorides of La, Ce and Gd was checked. All
RE metal chlorides contain 6-7 molecules of water due to which PBI precipitates out.
Removing the bonded water from RE metal chloride was found to be diﬃcult because
complete removal of water will led to anhydrous chloride which is not completely dissolved
in PBI-DMAc solution.
It was also noticed in case of LaCl3 monohydrates was easily
prepared by heating 1 hr at 105￿at ambient atmosphere. In case of Ce monohydrate is
not possible because the anhydrous chloride formation start at lower temperature. The
process of dissolution of LaCl3 in PBI-DMAc solution was successfully done to prepare as
high as 80%LaCl3-PBI membrane. However loss of lanthanum phosphate during doping in
PA was noticed. However the loss of lanthanum chloride is not quantiﬁed at the beginning.
The conductivity test was done without considering any loss. The membrane prepared
with higher LaCl3 shows higher conductivity. Those membrane was stable event higher
temperature.
Later titration and stability cheque conﬁrms that the loss of lanthanum
chloride is extremely high during doping.
49
==PAGE:55==
March 29, 2021
To avoid the loss 2 step doping was done via hydroxide formation reacting with KOH.
The process saved the phosphate higher than the direct doping technique. The actual
acid content of the membrane was checked by titration and the to total LaPO4 present
in the PBI(II)20La80 membrane is 20% in direct doping and 26% in two step doping,
for PBI(II)30La70 membrane 7% and 29% respectively and for PBI(II)40La60 membrane
retained LaPO4 found 41% for direct doping and 46% by two step doping. Therefore the
higher content is not achieved in the project however the residual lanthanum phosphate
is inﬂuencing the conductivity of the membrane. For 20% LaPO4(PBI(II)20La80) shows
maximum conductivity is 0.229(S/cm) considered to be optimum LaPO4 above and below
which conductivity decreases in four point probe conductivity measurement. The MEA was
prepared with the composite membranes and the polarization curve shows the better con-
ductivity for low LaPO4 membranes. PBI(II)20La80 shows highest conductivity at 160￿at
200°C conductivity remain unchanged(0.035(S/cm). The two step doped PBI(II)20La80
membrane containing higher LaPO4(26%) also used for Fuel cell test. The polarization
curve shows worst performance giving higher ohmic resistance. Mechanical property of the
membrane is signiﬁcantly low however the membrane can be handled without any prob-
lem. The project is not completely successful but it can open an window for alkaline fuel
cell application. There is a possibility of the membrane to use uniform dispersed LaCl3
membrane which was dipped in KOH. The La content was not lost any more. The higher
La(OH)3 membrane prepared as an intermediate product of the two step doping shows
conductivity of 0.024 S/cm at 120% with 50%RH. Further work can be done on on the
La(OH)3 to check the actual alkaline fuel cell application.
50
==PAGE:56==
REFERENCES
March 29, 2021
References
[1]
A T T Tran, M Duke, and J C Diniz Costa. “Titanium phosphate for Fuel Cell
Proton Conduction Membranes”. In: Proceedings of the ARCCFN Annual Conference
Solartron 1260 (2004), pp. 1–3.
[2]
Brian Kienitz. “Optimizing polymer electrolyte membrane thickness to maximize
fuel cell vehicle range”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy xxxx (2020).
issn: 03603199. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.03.126. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.03.126.
[3]
Aristatil Ganesan and Mani Narayanasamy. “Ultra-low loading of platinum in proton
exchange membrane-based fuel cells: a brief review”. In: Materials for Renewable and
Sustainable Energy 8.4 (2019), pp. 1–14. issn: 21941467. doi: 10.1007/s40243-
019-0156-x. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40243-019-0156-x.
[4]
Qingfeng Li et al. “The CO Poisoning Eﬀect in PEMFCs Operational at Tempera-
tures up to 200°C”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society 150.12 (2003), A1599.
issn: 00134651. doi: 10.1149/1.1619984.
[5]
Juan Antonio Asensio, Eduardo M. Sánchez, and Pedro Gómez Romero. “Proton-
conducting membranes based on benzimidazole polymers for high-temperature PEM
fuel cells. A chemical quest”. In: Chemical Society Reviews 39.8 (2010), pp. 3210–
3239. issn: 14604744. doi: 10.1039/b922650h.
[6]
Jorge Escorihuela et al. “Recent progress in the development of composite membranes
based on polybenzimidazole for high temperature proton exchange membrane (PEM)
fuel cell applications”. In: Polymers 12.9 (2020). issn: 20734360. doi: 10.3390/
POLYM12091861.
[7]
“Fuel cell system me 436 literature review”. In: (2012), pp. 1–9.
[8]
Zhengping Zhou et al. “Polybenzimidazole-Based Polymer Electrolyte Membranes
for High-Temperature Fuel Cells: Current Status and Prospects”. In: Energies 14.1
(2020), p. 135. issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en14010135.
[9]
Hongjie Xu et al. “Synthesis of novel sulfonated polybenzimidazole and preparation of
cross-linked membranes for fuel cell application”. In: Polymer 48.19 (2007), pp. 5556–
5564. issn: 00323861. doi: 10.1016/j.polymer.2007.07.029. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2007.07.029.
[10]
Roswitha Zeis. “Materials and characterization techniques for high-temperature poly-
mer electrolyte membrane fuel cells”. In: Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 6.1
(2015), pp. 68–83. issn: 21904286. doi: 10.3762/bjnano.6.8.
[11]
Hans Aage Hjuler Qingfeng Li David Aili. High Temperature Polymer Electrolyte
Membrane Fuel Cells. Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[12]
Takeo Miyake and Marco Rolandi. “Grotthuss mechanisms: From proton transport in
proton wires to bioprotonic devices”. In: Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 28.2
(2016), pp. 0–18. issn: 1361648X. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/28/2/023001.
51
==PAGE:57==
REFERENCES
March 29, 2021
[13]
C. Wieser. “Novel polymer electrolyte membranes for automotive applications - Re-
quirements and beneﬁts”. In: Fuel Cells 4.4 (2004), pp. 245–250. issn: 16156846. doi:
10.1002/fuce.200400038.
[14]
S. Yu, L. Xiao, and B. C. Benicewicz. “Durability studies of PBI-based high tem-
perature PEMFCs”. In: Fuel Cells 8.3-4 (2008), pp. 165–174. issn: 16156846. doi:
10.1002/fuce.200800024.
[15]
Jin Zhang et al. “Advancement toward Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells at
Elevated Temperatures”. In: Research 2020 (2020), pp. 1–15. issn: 26395274. doi:
10.34133/2020/9089405.
[16]
R. E. Rosli et al. “A review of high-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cell
(HT-PEMFC) system”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 42.14 (2017),
pp. 9293–9314. issn: 03603199. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.06.211. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.06.211.
[17]
Santosh C. Kumbharkar and Ulhas K. Kharul. “Investigation of gas permeation prop-
erties of systematically modiﬁed polybenzimidazoles by N-substitution”. In: Journal
of Membrane Science 357.1-2 (2010), pp. 134–142. issn: 03767388. doi: 10.1016/
j.memsci.2010.04.014. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.
2010.04.014.
[18]
Jingshuai Yang et al. “Benzimidazole grafted polybenzimidazoles for proton ex-
change membrane fuel cells”. In: Polymer Chemistry 4.17 (2013), pp. 4768–4775.
issn: 17599962. doi: 10.1039/c3py00408b.
[19]
Xue Tian et al. “Benzimidazole grafted polybenzimidazole cross-linked membranes
with excellent PA stability for high-temperature proton exchange membrane ap-
plications”. In: Applied Surface Science 465.April 2018 (2019), pp. 332–339. issn:
01694332. doi: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.09.170. url: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.09.170.
[20]
Yağmur Özdemir, Necati Özkan, and Yılser Devrim. “Fabrication and Characteri-
zation of Cross-linked Polybenzimidazole Based Membranes for High Temperature
PEM Fuel Cells”. In: Electrochimica Acta 245 (2017), pp. 1–13. issn: 00134686. doi:
10.1016/j.electacta.2017.05.111.
[21]
Antonino S. Aricò et al. “Selectivity of direct methanol fuel cell membranes”. In: Mem-
branes 5.4 (2015), pp. 793–809. issn: 20770375. doi: 10.3390/membranes5040793.
[22]
Gabriele G. Gagliardi et al. “Composite polymers development and application for
polymer electrolyte membrane technologies-a review”. In: Molecules 25.7 (2020). issn:
14203049. doi: 10.3390/molecules25071712.
[23]
Qiong Li et al. “Nanocomposite membranes based on perﬂuorosulfonic acid/ceramic
for proton exchange membrane fuel cells”. In: Journal Wuhan University of Tech-
nology, Materials Science Edition 30.6 (2015), pp. 1125–1129. issn: 10002413. doi:
10.1007/s11595-015-1282-7.
[24]
Ki Tae Park et al. “ZrO2-SiO2/Naﬁon® composite membrane for polymer electrolyte
membrane fuel cells operation at high temperature and low humidity”. In: Journal
52
==PAGE:58==
REFERENCES
March 29, 2021
of Power Sources 177.2 (2008), pp. 247–253. issn: 03787753. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2007.11.081.
[25]
E. Quartarone et al. “PBI composite and nanocomposite membranes for PEMFCs:
The role of the ﬁller”. In: Fuel Cells 9.3 (2009), pp. 231–236. issn: 16156846. doi:
10.1002/fuce.200800145.
[26]
V. Kurdakova et al. “PBI-based composite membranes for polymer fuel cells”. In:
Journal of Power Sources 195.23 (2010), pp. 7765–7769. issn: 03787753. doi: 10.
1016/j.jpowsour.2009.09.064. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2009.09.064.
[27]
Justo Lobato et al. “A novel titanium PBI-based composite membrane for high tem-
perature PEMFCs”. In: Journal of Membrane Science 369.1-2 (2011), pp. 105–111.
issn: 03767388. doi: 10.1016/j.memsci.2010.11.051.
[28]
Khadijeh Hooshyari et al. “Fabrication BaZrO3/PBI-based nanocomposite as a new
proton conducting membrane for high temperature proton exchange membrane fuel
cells”. In: Journal of Power Sources 276 (2015), pp. 62–72. issn: 03787753. doi:
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.11.083. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jpowsour.2014.11.083.
[29]
Akbar Shabanikia et al. “Polybenzimidazole/strontium cerate nanocomposites with
enhanced proton conductivity for proton exchange membrane fuel cells operating at
high temperature”. In: Electrochimica Acta 154 (2015), pp. 370–378. issn: 00134686.
doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2014.12.025. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.electacta.2014.12.025.
[30]
Alfonsina Abat Amelenan Torimtubun et al. “Aﬀordable and sustainable new gen-
eration of solar cells: Calcium titanate (CaTiO 3 ) - Based perovskite solar cells”.
In: E3S Web of Conferences 67.November (2018). issn: 22671242. doi: 10.1051/
e3sconf/20186701010.
[31]
P.P.; Palaniselvam T.; Kurungot S.; Kharul U.K.; Pillai V.K. Kannan R.; Aher. In:
().
[32]
K.; Özdemir Y.; Devrim Y. Üregen N.; Pehlivano ￿glu. In: ().
[33]
Sandip Ghosh et al. “Role of clays structures on the polybenzimidazole nanocompos-
ites: Potential membranes for the use in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell”. In:
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 115.23 (2011), pp. 11474–11483. issn: 19327447.
doi: 10.1021/jp202672s.
[34]
David Plackett et al. “High-temperature proton exchange membranes based on poly-
benzimidazole and clay composites for fuel cells”. In: Journal of Membrane Science
383.1-2 (2011), pp. 78–87. issn: 03767388. doi: 10.1016/j.memsci.2011.08.
038. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2011.08.038.
[35]
Ramanan Krishnamoorti. “S trategies for Nanopar ticles”. In: MRS Bulletin 32.April
(2007).
53
==PAGE:59==
REFERENCES
March 29, 2021
[36]
Yan Yan Huang and Eugene M. Terentjev. “Dispersion of carbon nanotubes: Mixing,
sonication, stabilization, and composite properties”. In: Polymers 4.1 (2012), pp. 275–
295. issn: 20734360. doi: 10.3390/polym4010275.
[37]
A. A. Lysova and A. B. Yaroslavtsev. “New Proton-Conducting Membranes Based on
Phosphorylated Polybenzimidazole and Silica”. In: Inorganic Materials 55.5 (2019),
pp. 470–476. issn: 16083172. doi: 10.1134/S0020168519050121.
[38]
Yi Cheng Chiang et al. “PEM fuel cells of poly(2,5-benzimidazole) ABPBI mem-
brane electrolytes doped with phosphoric acid and metal phosphates”. In: Mate-
rials Chemistry and Physics 216.June (2018), pp. 485–490. issn: 02540584. doi:
10.1016/j.matchemphys.2018.06.035. url: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.matchemphys.2018.06.035.
[39]
A T T Tran, M Duke, and J C Diniz Costa. “Titanium phosphate for Fuel Cell
Proton Conduction Membranes”. In: Proceedings of the ARCCFN Annual Conference
Solartron 1260 (2004), pp. 1–3.
[40]
Mingqiang Li and Keith Scott. “A polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell based
on zirconium phosphate and phosphoric acid”. In: Electrochemical and Solid-State
Letters 12.12 (2009). issn: 10990062. doi: 10.1149/1.3242214.
[41]
Sossina M. Haile et al. “Solid acid proton conductors: From laboratory curiosities to
fuel cell electrolytes”. In: Faraday Discussions 134 (2007), pp. 17–39. issn: 13596640.
doi: 10.1039/b604311a.
[42]
Alpay Sahin, H. Mehmet Tasdemir, and İrfan Ar. “Improved performance and dura-
bility of sulfonated polyether ether ketone/cerium phosphate composite membrane
for proton exchange membrane fuel cells”. In: Ionics 25.11 (2019), pp. 5163–5175.
issn: 18620760. doi: 10.1007/s11581-019-03109-y.
[43]
Truls Norby and Niels Christiansen. “Proton conduction in Ca- and Sr-substituted
LaPO4”. In: Solid State Ionics 77.C (1995), pp. 240–243. issn: 01672738. doi: 10.
1016/0167-2738(94)00274-V.
[44]
Mitsutomo Tsuhako et al. Conditions of the Formation of Rare Earth Phosphates
and the Colors of Their Powders. 1979. doi: 10.1246/bcsj.52.1034.
[45]
Hiroaki Onoda et al. “Formation and catalytic characterization of various rare earth
phosphates”. In: Journal of Materials Chemistry 12.6 (2002), pp. 1754–1760. issn:
09599428. doi: 10.1039/b110121h.
[46]
L. S. Skogareva et al. “Selective precipitation of rare earth orthophosphates with
hydrogen peroxide from phosphoric acid solutions”. In: Russian Journal of Inorganic
Chemistry 62.9 (2017), pp. 1141–1146. issn: 00360236. doi: 10.1134/S0036023617090157.
[47]
Zhihong Chang et al. “The eﬀect of electric ﬁeld on the oxidative degradation of poly-
benzimidazole membranes using electro-Fenton test”. In: Polymer Degradation and
Stability 138 (2017), pp. 98–105. issn: 01413910. doi: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.
2017.02.014. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.
2017.02.014.
54
==PAGE:60==
REFERENCES
March 29, 2021
[48]
Anvar Asrorov et al. “A research on the extraction of ree from a ﬂotation concentrate”.
In: May (2019).
[49]
M. T. Colomer and J. Mosa. “Thermal evolution, second phases, and sintering behav-
ior of LaPO4·nH2O nanorods prepared by two diﬀerent chemical synthesis routes”.
In: Ceramics International 41.6 (2015), pp. 8080–8092. issn: 02728842. doi: 10.
1016/j.ceramint.2015.03.006. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ceramint.2015.03.006.
[50]
Hiroaki OnoDa et al. “Additional eﬀect of Urea on formation of Diﬀerent Cerium
Phosphate ”. In: 41 (2015). doi: 10.1016/j.ceramint.2015.03.006. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2015.03.006.
[51]
Shoufeng Xue et al. “Dehydration, hydrolysis and oxidation of cerium chloride hep-
tahydrate in air atmosphere”. In: Journal of Rare Earths 35.11 (2017), pp. 1156–
1163. issn: 10020721. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . jre . 2017 . 06 . 001. url: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jre.2017.06.001.
[52]
I. V. Korzun, I. D. Zakir’yanova, and E. V. Nikolaeva. “Mechanism and Caloric Ef-
fects of the Thermal Dehydration of GdCl3 6H2O Crystalline Hydrate”. In: Russian
Metallurgy (Metally) 2018.8 (2018), pp. 722–727. issn: 15556255. doi: 10.1134/
S0036029518080104.
[53]
Deepak Kumar Sahoo et al. “Determination of thermodynamic stability of lanthanum
chloride hydrates (LaCl3×xH2O) by dynamic transpiration method”. In: Journal of
Alloys and Compounds 588 (2014), pp. 578–584. issn: 09258388. doi: 10.1016/j.
jallcom.2013.11.115. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.
2013.11.115.
[54]
Principles of Polymerization Fourth Edition by George Odian. In: ().
[55]
Hemanth Maddali et al. “Identiﬁcation of the local electrical properties of crystalline
and amorphous domains in electrochemically doped conjugated polymer thin ﬁlms”.
In: RSC Advances 10.36 (2020), pp. 21454–21463. issn: 20462069. doi: 10.1039/
d0ra02796k.
[56]
Nimali C. Abeykoon et al. “Novel binder-free electrode materials for supercapacitors
utilizing high surface area carbon nanoﬁbers derived from immiscible polymer blends
of PBI/6FDA-DAM:DABA”. In: RSC Advances 7.34 (2017), pp. 20947–20959. issn:
20462069. doi: 10.1039/C7RA01727H.
[57]
A. Neumann and D. Walter. “The thermal transformation from lanthanum hydroxide
to lanthanum hydroxide oxide”. In: Thermochimica Acta 445.2 (2006), pp. 200–204.
issn: 00406031. doi: 10.1016/j.tca.2005.06.013.
[58]
Z Belkhiri et al. “Eﬀect of temperature and water content on the performance of
PEM fuel cell”. In: Revue des Energies Renouvelables 14.January (2011), pp. 1–
121. url: http : / / www . webreview . dz / IMG / pdf / Effect{\ _ }of{\ _
}temperature{\_}and{\_}water{\_}content{\_}on.pdf.
[59]
Shengsheng Zhang et al. “Eﬀect of open circuit voltage on degradation of a short
proton exchange membrane fuel cell stack with bilayer membrane conﬁgurations”.
55
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
March 29, 2021
In: Journal of Power Sources 205 (2012), pp. 290–300. issn: 03787753. doi: 10.
1016/j.jpowsour.2012.01.031. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2012.01.031.
56
==PAGE:62==
March 29, 2021
Appendices
i
==PAGE:63==
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
Swelling ration of direct doped membrane
LaCl3%
glass thick(mm)
glass+mem_thickness
thickness of mem(mm)
Volume of mem(mm^3)
80
2.138
2.198
0.06
569.91
70
1.852
1.922
0.07
664.895
60
1.862
1.904
0.042
398.937
50
2.276
2.34
0.064
607.904
0
1.9188
1.97
0.0512
486.3232
LaCl3%
Volume after_doping
          Swelling Ratio
80
598.6465578
5.042297521
70
711.7475994
7.046616293
60
438.9656258
10.03382133
50
687.2583029
13.05375568
0
544.7293568
12.00974101
Shrinkage and Swelling ration of 2 step doped membrane
LaCl3%
glass thick
glass+mem_thickness
thickness of membrane
thickness_KOH
80
2.138
2.198
0.06
0.08375
70
1.852
1.922
0.07
0.079714286
60
1.862
1.904
0.042
0.042571429
50
2.276
2.34
0.064
0.0525
0
1.9188
1.95
0.0312
0.022125
LaCl3%
volume 1
           volume 2
              volume3
SR_1
80
569.91
711.0844
573.5374065
24.77134986
70
664.895
689.89725
546.7260343
3.760330579
60
398.937
371.9570546
541.8756875
-6.762958903
50
607.904
480.7026
5024
-20.92458678
0
296.3532
210.1543125
455.928
-29.08653846
==PAGE:66==
Dia_PA
thickness_PA_doping
10.59
0.068
10.58
0.081
10.37
0.052
10.74
0.0759
10.845
0.059
Thikness_PA
Dia_KOH
Dia_PA
0.09
10.4
9.01
0.082285714
10.5
9.2
0.071875
10.55
9.8
0.64
10.8
10
0.048
11
11
SR_2
12.09138285
10.06375443
7.8
5.969400432
1.300205296
==PAGE:67==
Pure PBI
Heating
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
30
400
0.4
0.132
420 3181.818 0.048352
50
50
390
0.39
0.1287
1000 7770.008
0.0198
60
60
390
0.39
0.1287
800 6216.006
0.02475
70
70
390
0.39
0.1287
720 5594.406
0.0275
80
80
390
0.39
0.1287
500 3885.004
0.0396
90
90
390
0.39
0.1287
420 3263.403 0.047143
100
100
390
0.39
0.1287
350 2719.503 0.056571
110
110
390
0.39
0.1287
290 2253.302 0.068276
120
120
390
0.39
0.1287
250 1942.502
0.0792
130
130
390
0.39
0.1287
200 1554.002
0.099
140
140
390
0.39
0.1287
176 1367.521
0.1125
150
150
390
0.39
0.1287
172 1336.441 0.115116
160
160
390
0.39
0.1287
168 1305.361 0.117857
170
170
390
0.39
0.1287
176 1367.521
0.1125
180
180
390
0.39
0.1287
188 1460.761 0.105319
200
200
390
0.39
0.1287
212 1647.242 0.093396
==PAGE:68==
80%Lacl3
Heating
70%Lacl3
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(mv)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
400
0.4
0.132
336 2545.455 0.065476
30
400
400
0.4
0.132
296 2242.424 0.074324
50
400
400
0.4
0.132
240 1818.182 0.091667
60
400
400
0.4
0.132
212 1606.061 0.103774
70
400
400
0.4
0.132
176 1333.333
0.125
80
400
400
0.4
0.132
156 1181.818 0.141026
90
400
400
0.4
0.132
132
1000 0.166667
100
400
400
0.4
0.132
120 909.0909 0.183333
110
400
400
0.4
0.132
112 848.4848 0.196429
120
400
400
0.4
0.132
104 787.8788 0.211538
130
400
400
0.4
0.132
100 757.5758
0.22
140
400
400
0.4
0.132
96 727.2727 0.229167
150
400
400
0.4
0.132
100 757.5758
0.22
160
400
400
0.4
0.132
104 787.8788 0.211538
170
400
400
0.4
0.132
120 909.0909 0.183333
180
400
200
400
==PAGE:69==
Heating
60%Lacl3
Heating
iV
i(mA)
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
0.4
0.132
170 1287.879 0.189383
40
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
720 5454.545 0.044715
50
#DIV/0!
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
600 4545.455 0.053659
60
#DIV/0!
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
470 3560.606
0.0685
70
0.058
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
420 3181.818 0.076655
80 0.060526
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
350 2651.515 0.091986
90 0.072368
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
300 2272.727 0.107317
100 0.079855
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
260 1969.697 0.123827
110
0.08577
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
230 1742.424 0.139979
120
0.1
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
210 1590.909
0.15331
130
0.119
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
180 1363.636 0.178862
140
0.12
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
160 1212.121
0.20122
150
0.125
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
156 1181.818 0.206379
160
0.13
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
168 1272.727 0.191638
170
0.14
400
0.4
0.132
0.4
0.132
176 1333.333 0.182927
0.4
0.132
210 1590.909
0.15331
==PAGE:70==
52(2nd)
50%Lacl3
Heating
v(mv)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(mV)
R(ohm)
660
5000 0.035088
40
400
0.4
0.132
680 5151.515
410 3106.061 0.056483
50
400
0.4
0.132
660
5000
360 2727.273 0.064327
60
400
0.4
0.132
620
4696.97
340 2575.758 0.068111
70
400
0.4
0.132
600 4545.455
320 2424.242 0.072368
80
400
0.4
0.132
580 4393.939
320 2424.242 0.072368
90
400
0.4
0.132
460 3484.848
290
2196.97 0.079855
100
400
0.4
0.132
380 2878.788
270 2045.455
0.08577
110
400
0.4
0.132
320 2424.242
260 1969.697 0.089069
120
400
0.4
0.132
280 2121.212
260 1969.697 0.089069
130
400
0.4
0.132
260 1969.697
260 1969.697 0.089069
140
400
0.4
0.132
220 1666.667
228 1727.273
0.10157
150
400
0.4
0.132
220 1666.667
200 1515.152 0.129412
160
400
0.4
0.132
220 1666.667
208 1575.758 0.111336
170
400
0.4
0.132
220 1666.667
==PAGE:71==
10%Lacl3
Heating
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(mV)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
0.030812
0.031746
60
530
0.53
0.1749
2300 13150.37 0.018106
0.033794
70
530
0.53
0.1749
2200 12578.62 0.018929
0.034921
80
530
0.53
0.1749
2180 12464.27 0.019102
0.036125
90
530
0.53
0.1749
2160 12349.91 0.019279
0.045549
100
530
0.53
0.1749
1800
10291.6 0.023135
0.055138
110
530
0.53
0.1749
1400 8004.574 0.029745
0.065476
120
530
0.53
0.1749
1080 6174.957 0.038558
0.07483
130
530
0.53
0.1749
1000 5717.553 0.041643
0.080586
140
530
0.53
0.1749
700 4002.287
0.05949
0.095238
150
530
0.53
0.1749
600 3430.532 0.069405
0.095238
160
530
0.53
0.1749
540 3087.479 0.077116
0.095238
170
530
0.53
0.1749
500 2858.776 0.083286
0.095238
180
530
0.53
0.1749
460 2630.074 0.090528
200
530
0.53
0.1749
500 2858.776 0.083286
==PAGE:72==
Pure PBI
Heating
70%Lacl3
Heating
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(v)
30
19.5
630
0.63
0.2079
1000 4810.005 0.043313
30
26.8
470
0.47
0.1551
400
35
11
600
0.6
0.198
990
5000 0.041667
40
7
600
0.6
0.198
1040 5252.525 0.039663
40
19
820
0.82
0.2706
600
50
4
610
0.61
0.2013
1160 5762.543 0.036153
50
14
820
0.82
0.2706
640
60
3
610
0.61
0.2013
1080 5365.127 0.038831
60
10
820
0.82
0.2706
680
70
2.5
600
0.6
0.198
950
4797.98 0.043421
70
7
820
0.82
0.2706
680
80
2
600
0.6
0.198
900 4545.455 0.045833
80
5
820
0.82
0.2706
680
90
0.2
600
0.6
0.198
800 4040.404 0.051563
90
3
820
0.82
0.2706
640
100
0
600
0.6
0.198
680 3434.343 0.060662
100
1
820
0.82
0.2706
640
110
0
600
0.6
0.198
580 2929.293 0.071121
110
0.7
820
0.82
0.2706
560
120
0
600
0.6
0.198
540 2727.273 0.076389
120
0.3
820
0.82
0.2706
560
130
0
600
0.6
0.198
460 2323.232 0.089674
130
0.2
820
0.82
0.2706
560
140
0
600
0.6
0.198
440 2222.222
0.09375
140
0
820
0.82
0.2706
520
150
0
600
0.6
0.198
420 2121.212 0.098214
150
0
820
0.82
0.2706
480
160
0
600
0.6
0.198
460 2323.232 0.089674
160
0
820
0.82
0.2706
480
170
1.8
670
0.67
0.2211
330 1492.537 0.139583
170
0.9
820
0.82
0.2706
520
180
1.5
670
0.67
0.2211
380 1718.679 0.121217
180
0.8
820
0.82
0.2706
560
cooling
cooling
170
0.3
670
0.67
0.2211
720 3256.445 0.063976
170
0.3
800
0.8
0.264
160
0
660
0.66
0.2178
800 3673.095 0.056719
160
0
800
0.8
0.264
150
0
660
0.66
0.2178
920 4224.059 0.049321
150
0
800
0.8
0.264
140
0
660
0.66
0.2178
960 4407.713 0.047266
140
0
800
0.8
0.264
130
0
660
0.66
0.2178
990 4545.455 0.045833
130
0
800
0.8
0.264
120
0
660
0.66
0.2178
1140
5234.16 0.039803
120
0
800
0.8
0.264
110
0
660
0.66
0.2178
1220 5601.469 0.037193
110
0
800
0.8
0.264
100
0
660
0.66
0.2178
1380 6336.088
0.03288
100
0
800
0.8
0.264
90
0.3
660
0.66
0.2178
1540 7070.707 0.029464
90
0
800
0.8
0.264
80
0.9
660
0.66
0.2178
1760 8080.808 0.025781
80
0.1
800
0.8
0.264
==PAGE:73==
2nd cycle
2nd cycle
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
i(V)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
80
0.9
660
0.66
0.2178
1540 7070.707 0.029464
370
90
0.3
660
0.66
0.2178
1260 5785.124 0.036012
90
0.2
790
0.79
0.2607
100
0
660
0.66
0.2178
1060
4866.85 0.042807
100
0
790
0.79
0.2607
110
0
660
0.66
0.2178
940 4315.886 0.048271
110
0
790
0.79
0.2607
120
0
660
0.66
0.2178
820 3764.922 0.055335
120
0
790
0.79
0.2607
130
0
660
0.66
0.2178
780 3581.267 0.058173
130
0
790
0.79
0.2607
140
0
660
0.66
0.2178
700 3213.958 0.064821
140
0
800
0.8
0.264
150
0
660
0.66
0.2178
700 3213.958 0.064821
150
0
800
0.8
0.264
160
0
660
0.66
0.2178
780 3581.267 0.058173
160
0.1
790
0.79
0.2607
170
0.3
660
0.66
0.2178
820 3764.922 0.055335
170
0
790
0.79
0.2607
180
0.9
660
0.66
0.2178
800 3673.095 0.056719
180
0.9
790
0.79
0.2607
cooling
cooling
70
1.2
720
0.72
0.2376
2720 11447.81 0.018199
70
1
780
0.78
0.2574
80
0.6
720
0.72
0.2376
2340 9848.485 0.021154
80
0.3
790
0.79
0.2607
90
0.1
720
0.72
0.2376
2020 8501.684 0.024505
90
0
790
0.79
0.2607
100
0
720
0.72
0.2376
1760 7407.407 0.028125
100
0
790
0.79
0.2607
110
0
720
0.72
0.2376
1580 6649.832 0.031329
110
0
790
0.79
0.2607
130
0
720
0.72
0.2376
1320 5555.556
0.0375
130
0
790
0.79
0.2607
140
0
720
0.72
0.2376
1240 5218.855 0.039919
140
0
790
0.79
0.2607
150
0
670
0.67
0.2211
980 4432.384 0.047003
150
0
790
0.79
0.2607
160
0
670
0.67
0.2211
800 3618.272 0.057578
160
0
790
0.79
0.2607
170
0.3
670
0.67
0.2211
790 3573.044 0.058307
170
0.3
790
0.79
0.2607
==PAGE:74==
60%Lacl3
Heating
50%Lacl3
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
2578.981 0.065168
30
20
460
0.46
0.1518
620 4084.321 0.062779
2217.295 0.075798
40
11
460
0.46
0.1518
580 3820.817 0.067109
40
9.5
600
0.6
2365.115 0.071061
50
9.5
460
0.46
0.1518
560 3689.065 0.069505
50
5.8
600
0.6
2512.934 0.066881
60
7
460
0.46
0.1518
540 3557.312
0.07208
60
3.5
600
0.6
2512.934 0.066881
70
5
460
0.46
0.1518
520
3425.56 0.074852
70
2.3
600
0.6
2512.934 0.066881
80
3
460
0.46
0.1518
500 3293.808 0.077846
80
1.3
600
0.6
2365.115 0.071061
90
2
460
0.46
0.1518
460 3030.303 0.084615
90
0.6
600
0.6
2365.115 0.071061
100
1
460
0.46
0.1518
440 2898.551 0.088462
100
0.1
600
0.6
2069.475 0.081212
110
0.5
460
0.46
0.1518
400 2635.046 0.097308
110
0
600
0.6
2069.475 0.081212
120
0.2
450
0.45
0.1485
360 2424.242 0.105769
120
0
600
0.6
2069.475 0.081212
130
0
450
0.45
0.1485
320 2154.882
0.11899
130
0
600
0.6
1921.656
0.08746
140
0
450
0.45
0.1485
300 2020.202 0.126923
140
0
600
0.6
1773.836 0.094748
150
0.2
450
0.45
0.1485
320 2154.882
0.11899
150
0
600
0.6
1773.836 0.094748
160
0.5
450
0.45
0.1485
320 2154.882
0.11899
160
0.1
600
0.6
1921.656
0.08746
170
0.9
450
0.45
0.1485
360 2424.242 0.105769
170
0.8
600
0.6
2069.475 0.081212
180
1.2
450
0.45
0.1485
380 2558.923 0.100202
180
1.2
600
0.6
cooling
720 2727.273 0.061625
170
0.5
460
0.46
0.1518
500 3293.808 0.077846
170
0.3
600
720 2727.273 0.061625
160
0.1
460
0.46
0.1518
560 3689.065 0.069505
160
0
600
800 3030.303 0.055462
150
0
460
0.46
0.1518
600 3952.569 0.064872
150
0
600
840 3181.818 0.052821
140
0
460
0.46
0.1518
620 4084.321 0.062779
140
0
600
960 3636.364 0.046218
130
0
460
0.46
0.1518
680 4479.578
0.05724
130
0
600
1040 3939.394 0.042663
120
0
460
0.46
0.1518
720 4743.083
0.05406
120
0
600
1200 4545.455 0.036975
110
0
460
0.46
0.1518
800 5270.092 0.048654
110
0
600
1360 5151.515 0.032625
100
0
460
0.46
0.1518
940 6192.358 0.041408
100
0
600
1520 5757.576 0.029191
90
0.1
460
0.46
0.1518
1080 7114.625
0.03604
90
0
600
1760 6666.667
0.02521
80
0.5
460
0.46
0.1518
1260 8300.395 0.030891
80
0.2
600
==PAGE:75==
2nd cycle
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
iV
i(mA)
R(ohm)
#VALUE! T
1280 4909.858 0.034231
90
0.2
460
0.46
0.1518
900 5928.854 0.043248
90
0.3
600
1040
3989.26
0.04213
100
0
460
0.46
0.1518
740 4874.835 0.052599
100
0
600
840 3222.094 0.052161
110
0
460
0.46
0.1518
620 4084.321 0.062779
110
0
600
760 2915.228 0.057651
120
0
460
0.46
0.1518
500 3293.808 0.077846
120
0
600
680 2608.362 0.064434
130
0
460
0.46
0.1518
480 3162.055
0.08109
130
0
600
640 2424.242 0.069328
140
0
460
0.46
0.1518
400 2635.046 0.097308
140
0
600
600 2272.727
0.07395
150
0
460
0.46
0.1518
420 2766.798 0.092674
150
0
600
640 2454.929 0.068461
160
0.1
460
0.46
0.1518
420 2766.798 0.092674
160
0.1
600
640 2454.929 0.068461
170
0.6
460
0.46
0.1518
420 2766.798 0.092674
170
0.6
600
640 2454.929 0.068461
180
1
460
0.46
0.1518
420 2766.798 0.092674
180
1
600
cooling
2240 8702.409 0.019313
70
0.9
450
0.45
0.1485
1420
9562.29 0.026815
70
0.9
600
1960
7518.22 0.022355
80
0.4
450
0.45
0.1485
1260 8484.848
0.03022
80
0.5
600
1680 6444.189
0.02608
90
0
450
0.45
0.1485
1060 7138.047 0.035922
90
0.1
600
1440
5523.59 0.030427
100
0
450
0.45
0.1485
960 6464.646 0.039663
100
0
600
1280 4909.858 0.034231
110
0
450
0.45
0.1485
860 5791.246 0.044275
110
0
600
1080 4142.693
0.04057
130
0
460
0.46
0.1518
740 4874.835 0.052599
130
0
600
1000 3835.827 0.043815
140
0
460
0.46
0.1518
660 4347.826 0.058974
140
0
600
960 3682.394 0.045641
150
0
460
0.46
0.1518
640 4216.074 0.060817
150
0
600
880 3375.527
0.04979
160
0
460
0.46
0.1518
580 3820.817 0.067109
160
0
600
800 3068.661 0.054769
170
0
460
0.46
0.1518
520
3425.56 0.074852
170
0.3
600
==PAGE:76==
Heating
70%Lacl3_repit
Heating
i(mA)
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
T
RH
i(mV)
iV
i(mA)
v(v)
R(ohm)
C(S/cm)
0.198
2600 13131.31
0.03311
40
10
600
0.6
0.198
1360 6868.687 0.053922
0.198
2520 12727.27 0.034161
50
7
600
0.6
0.198
1280 6464.646 0.057292
0.198
2280 11515.15 0.037757
60
4
600
0.6
0.198
1240 6262.626
0.05914
0.198
1960
9898.99 0.043922
70
2.8
600
0.6
0.198
1200 6060.606 0.061111
0.198
1680 8484.848 0.051242
80
1.5
600
0.6
0.198
1120 5656.566 0.065476
0.198
1480 7474.747 0.058167
90
0.6
600
0.6
0.198
1040 5252.525 0.070513
0.198
1240 6262.626 0.069425
100
0
600
0.6
0.198
880 4444.444 0.083333
0.198
1000 5050.505 0.086087
110
0
600
0.6
0.198
840 4242.424 0.087302
0.198
800 4040.404 0.107609
120
0
600
0.6
0.198
760 3838.384 0.096491
0.198
760 3838.384 0.113272
130
0
600
0.6
0.198
680 3434.343 0.107843
0.198
800 4040.404 0.107609
140
0
600
0.6
0.198
640 3232.323 0.114583
0.198
800 4040.404 0.107609
150
0
600
0.6
0.198
680 3434.343 0.107843
0.198
840 4242.424 0.102484
160
0
600
0.6
0.198
680 3434.343 0.107843
0.198
1000 5050.505 0.086087
170
0.5
600
0.6
0.198
720 3636.364 0.101852
0.198
1080 5454.545
0.07971
180
1.2
600
0.6
0.198
800 4040.404 0.091667
cooling
cooling
0.6
0.198
1520 7676.768 0.056636
170
0.3
600
0.6
0.198
1200 6060.606 0.061111
0.6
0.198
1680 8484.848 0.051242
160
0
600
0.6
0.198
1320 6666.667 0.055556
0.6
0.198
1800 9090.909 0.047826
150
0
600
0.6
0.198
1440 7272.727 0.050926
0.6
0.198
1920
9696.97 0.044837
140
0
600
0.6
0.198
1480 7474.747
0.04955
0.6
0.198
2040 10303.03 0.042199
130
0
600
0.6
0.198
1560 7878.788 0.047009
0.6
0.198
2200 11111.11
0.03913
120
0
600
0.6
0.198
1640 8282.828 0.044715
0.6
0.198
2480 12525.25 0.034712
110
0
600
0.6
0.198
1800 9090.909 0.040741
0.6
0.198
2720 13737.37
0.03165
100
0
600
0.6
0.198
1960
9898.99 0.037415
0.6
0.198
3200 16161.62 0.026902
90
0
600
0.6
0.198
2300 11616.16 0.031884
0.6
0.198
3800 19191.92 0.022654
80
0.2
600
0.6
0.198
2480 12525.25
0.02957
==PAGE:77==
2nd cycle
2nd cycle
iV
i(mA)
R(ohm)
C
T
iV
i(mA)
R(ohm)
0.6
0.198
2720 13737.37
0.03165
90
0.1
600
0.6
0.198
1640 8282.828 0.044715
0.6
0.198
2080 10505.05 0.041388
100
0
600
0.6
0.198
1400 7070.707 0.052381
0.6
0.198
1640 8282.828 0.052492
110
0
600
0.6
0.198
1200 6060.606 0.061111
0.6
0.198
1400 7070.707 0.061491
120
0
600
0.6
0.198
1040 5252.525 0.070513
0.6
0.198
1120 5656.566 0.076863
130
0
600
0.6
0.198
960 4848.485 0.076389
0.6
0.198
1080 5454.545
0.07971
140
0
600
0.6
0.198
920 4646.465
0.07971
0.6
0.198
1040 5252.525 0.082776
150
0
600
0.6
0.198
920 4646.465
0.07971
0.6
0.198
1040 5252.525 0.082776
160
0.1
600
0.6
0.198
920 4646.465
0.07971
0.6
0.198
1120 5656.566 0.076863
170
0.6
600
0.6
0.198
960 4848.485 0.076389
0.6
0.198
1200 6060.606 0.071739
180
1
600
0.6
0.198
1000 5050.505 0.073333
70
0.6
0.198
0
#DIV/0!
80
0.4
600
0.6
0.198
2600
0.6
0.198
3800 19191.92 0.022654
90
0
600
0.6
0.198
2360 11919.19 0.031073
0.6
0.198
3320 16767.68
0.02593
100
0
600
0.6
0.198
2040 10303.03 0.035948
0.6
0.198
2840 14343.43 0.030312
110
0
600
0.6
0.198
1800 9090.909 0.040741
0.6
0.198
2560 12929.29 0.033628
120
0
600
0.6
0.198
1720 8686.869 0.042636
0.6
0.198
2080 10505.05 0.041388
130
0
600
0.6
0.198
1560 7878.788 0.047009
0.6
0.198
1960
9898.99 0.043922
140
0
600
0.6
0.198
1520 7676.768 0.048246
0.6
0.198
1800 9090.909 0.047826
150
0
600
0.6
0.198
1480 7474.747
0.04955
0.6
0.198
1640 8282.828 0.052492
160
0
600
0.6
0.198
1360 6868.687 0.053922
0.6
0.198
1560 7878.788 0.055184
170
0.3
600
0.6
0.198
1280 6464.646 0.057292
==PAGE:78==
pH
base_ml
pH
base_ml
pH
base_ml
pH
base_ml
pH
base_ml
pH
base_ml
0
1.44
0
1.46
0
1.47
0
1.56
1.43
0
1.56
0
0.25
1.32
1
1.48
2
1.48
2
1.46
1.45
2
1.46
2
0.5
1.3
4
1.56
5
1.54
4.5
1.5
1.45
3
1.5
4.5
1
1.3
6
1.61
10
1.68
8
1.62
1.5
4
1.62
8
1.75
1.31
8
1.69
12
1.73
10
1.69
1.5
6.5
1.69
10
3
1.34
10
1.76
14
1.8
12
1.76
1.75
13.75
1.76
12
4.25
1.38
12
1.84
16
1.86
14
1.85
1.9
17.5
1.85
14
5
1.4
14
1.9
18
1.94
16
1.93
2
20
1.93
16
7
1.47
16
2.04
20
2.02
18
2.03
2.1
23
2.25
20
8
1.49
18
2.14
22
2.1
19
2.09
2.2
25
2.45
22
9
1.53
19
2.19
24
2.21
21
2.19
2.4
29
2.8
24
10.5
1.58
20
2.35
26
2.3
22
2.27
2.55
31.5
3
25
12
1.64
21
2.38
27
2.36
24
2.4
2.8
33.5
3.1
25.5
13
1.67
22
2.43
28
2.43
25
2.48
3
34.5
3.3
26
14
1.71
24
2.57
28.5
2.46
25.5
2.53
3.5
36
3.5
26.5
15
1.75
27
2.99
29
2.49
26
2.53
4.1
37
4
27
16
1.79
27.5
3.16
30
2.57
26.5
2.64
4.5
37.5
4.9
27.5
17
1.82
28
3.35
31
2.61
27
2.71
5
38.1
5.5
28.1
18
1.86
28.5
3.69
32
2.77
27.5
2.79
5.35
39
5.7
29
19
1.91
29
4.47
33
2.91
28
2.86
5.6
40
5.75
30
20
1.95
29.5
4.96
33.5
3.02
28.5
2.98
5.75
41
5.8
30.5
21
1.99
30
5.22
34
3.12
29
3.12
5.79
42
5.85
31
23
2.08
30.5
5.42
35
3.47
29.5
3.31
25
2.24
31
5.56
35.5
3.91
30
3.63
27
2.33
32
5.75
36
4.6
30.5
4.24
29
2.45
34
6.03
36.5
4.96
31
4.83
31
2.62
37
5.17
31.5
5.15
31.5
2.69
37.5
5.37
32
5.34
32
2.74
38
5.49
32.5
5.5
32.5
2.81
33
5.62
33
2.9
34
5.78
2 step doping 
Direct doping
PBI(II)40La60
PBI(II)40La60
PBI(II)40La60
PBI(II)40La60
PBI(II)40La60
PBI(II)40La60
==PAGE:79==
33.5
3
34
3.11
34.5
3.24
35
3.47
35.5
3.89
36
4.5
36.5
4.92
37
5.17
37.5
5.34
38
5.49
38.5
5.58
39
5.69
39.5
5.78
40
5.85
41
6.01
42
6.1
==PAGE:80==
LaPO4 in dry membrane
Membranemem dry wwt.(g) befoAU
dry wt.(g) aPBI in the mebrane(g)
LaPO4(%)
80%LaCl3
0.69
1.3
88
0.24
0.138
0.102 14.78261
Two step D70%LaCl3
0.48
1.08
125
0.14
0.01428
0.12572 26.19167
60%LaCl3
0.306
0.8 161.4379
0.21
0.1224
0.0876 28.62745
80%LaCl3
0.7
1.35 92.85714
0.17
0.14
0.03 4.285714
Direct Dop70%LaCl3
0.608
1.47 141.7763
0.275
0.23814
0.03686
6.0625
60%LaCl3
0.45
1.25 177.7778
0.24
0.19
0.05 11.11111
LaPO4 in acid solution
Membranemolarity ofvolme of base used(mactual acidwt.change after doLaPO4(g)
LaPO4(%) Total
80%LaCl3
0.3
37
1.0878
0.61
0.0742 10.75362 25.53623
Two step D70%LaCl3
0.3
35.75
1.05105
0.6
0.01467
3.05625 29.24792
60%LaCl3
0.22
29
0.62524
0.494
0.05236 17.11111 45.73856
80%LaCl3
0.4
28
1.0976
0.65
0.1124 16.05714 20.34286
Direct Dop70%LaCl3
0.35
35.75
1.226225
0.862
0.005635 0.926809 6.989309
60%LaCl3
0.31
30.5
0.92659
0.8
0.13341 29.64667 40.75778
ml(NaOH)
Acid(g)
ml(NaOH)
Acid(g)
80%
37
0.3
0.222
1.0878
28
0.4
0.224
1.0976
70%
35.75
0.3
0.2145
1.05105
35.75
0.35
0.25025 1.226225
60%
29
0.22
0.1276
0.62524
30.5
0.31
0.1891
0.92659
two step doping
Direct doping
==PAGE:81==
==PAGE:82==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46
Chart Title
Feb-60
Feb-70
la_80
Feb-60
Feb-70
la_80
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Chart Title
d_60
D_70
d-80
==PAGE:83==
==PAGE:84==
