==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Master Thesis
Student:
Victoria Mercedes Hachmann
s182628
Supervisors:
Jens Honore Walther
Allan Larsen
Maja Rønne
==PAGE:2==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Master Thesis
March, 2021
Author
Victoria Mercedes Hachmann
Supervisors
Jens Honore Walther, Professor at the Mechanical Engineering Department of DTU
Allan Larsen, Research Engineer at COWI
Maja Rønne, PhD Student at the Mechanical Engineering Department of DTU
Copyright:
@Victoria Mercedes Hachmann, 2021
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
PREFACE
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulﬁlment of the requirements for achieving
a Master of Science (MSc) degree in Civil Engineering. It is credited with 30 ECTS points
and was prepared from October 2020 to March 2021.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the area of ﬂuid dynamics.
The author would like to thank Jens H. Walther, Allan Larsen and Maja Rønne for their
guidance throughout this thesis and Andreas Langager for his excellent start of the project
that this thesis is a continuation of. A great thank you also goes to Guy Larose for his advice
on the damping installed into the model.
Victoria Mercedes Hachmann
Signature
Date
==PAGE:4==
PREFACE
'I'his thesis has been preparecl over six months at the Department of Mechanical Engineering.
at the Technical University of Deuurark (DTU) in fulfilment of the requilements for achieving
a Nlaster of Science (L,{Sc) degree in Civil Engineering. It is credited rvitir 30 ECTS points
and was prepared from October 2020 to N'Iarch 2021.
It is assulred that thc rcader has basic knowledge in the area of fluicl dynamics.
The author u,oulcl likc to thank Jt:ns H. Waitiier, Allarr Larserr arid Maja Rrznnc for thcir
guidance thn'oughout this thesis and Andreas Langager for his excellent start of the project
that this thesis is a continuation of. A great ttrank 1,ou also goes to Guy Larose for his advice
on the clamping installed into the model.
Victoria N{ercedes Hachntamr
VI
S'ig'nature
l/i
/4.o5.?e?,(
lu
Date
==PAGE:5==
ABSTRACT
As technology progresses, structures become ever more slender and span greater distances;
suspension bridges can span distances of more than a kilometre between their supports. To
ensure the structural integrity of such vital infrastructure, regular inspections of the load-
bearing main cables are crucial.
Hand ropes are taught cables that are installed as secondary structures above the main sus-
pension cables and are used as handhold and safety equipment attachment points for the
inspection staﬀ. They are taught cables of about 4cm diameter, ﬁxed to the main cable by
vertical wire straps or poles at the hanger cable clamps. Due to wind excitation, these hand
ropes often experience fatigue damage at the ﬁxture points or in the vertical supports that
could be mitigated by the installation of dampers.
This thesis investigates the vortex shedding behaviour of cables, both for a smooth cylinder
model and a stranded surface model at both normal and 45° yawed ﬂow for diﬀerent damping
levels to determine the required damping for vibration mitigation.
For this, a spring-suspended cylinder was placed in front of an open wind tunnel and the
response amplitudes measured via the suspension spring extension with force gauges ﬁxed to
the frame. Multiple damping levels were introduced with diﬀerent conﬁgurations of elastic
bands added in parallel to the suspension springs on either side of the model.
It was found that in comparison to the values prescribed in the Eurocode for the damping
of vortex-induced vibrations, only signiﬁcantly smaller damping was necessary to achive the
required vibration mitigation on the smooth cylinder, which also correlates well with research
done by Rawlins [44]. For the stranded model, the surface roughness was found to reduce
the response amplitudes and therefore require even lower damping. For the smooth model
placed at an angle of 45° to the wind, the response was found to be largely the same as for
0° when normalised for the exposure length as the independence principle suggests, while for
the stranded model at 45°, the independence principle was found to have a reduced inﬂuence
by about 10 −15%.
It is proposed that for the second method of calculating vortex-induced vibrations presented
in the Eurocode EN1991 Appendix E the values of Ka = 0.35 Cc = 0.015 are used for the
aerodynamic parameters, to resemble the realistic requirements on damping.
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the Art
2
2.1
Flow around Cylinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Static vs Oscillating Cylinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
The Eﬀect of Stranded Cables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
The Eﬀect of Skew Angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Damping of Cables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Eurocode VIV Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Variation of Scruton Number - Experiments with Varied Damping using Rubber
Bands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.8
Eﬀect of Stranded Surface on Flow Patterns - Experimental Investigations . . .
19
2.9
Flow visualisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Experimental Setup
23
3.1
Structural Damping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Wind Tunnel Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Vibration Mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Challenges during the Testing Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Analysis Method: Python Script
34
4.1
Structure of the Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.1
Measurement ﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.2
Log ﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.3
Folder Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Structure of the Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.1
Scripts 1 and 2 - Measurement Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.2
Script 3 - Correlation and Visualisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Experimental Results
42
5.1
Scruton Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Wind Tunnel Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.1
Response for normal ﬂow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:7==
5.2.2
Response for Yawed Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.3
Damping Levels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.4
Inﬂuence of Yaw Angle and Strandedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Comparison of the measurements to the Eurocode values . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion and Outlook
52
Appendices
i
A Figures
i
B Pictures of the Model
iv
C Scripts
x
==PAGE:8==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
1
INTRODUCTION
As technology progresses it is possible to engineer ever more slender and both higher and longer
structures. Historically, structures relied on structural stiﬀness and massive construction for
safety, while nowadays thanks to advanced computational power it is possible to model their
dynamic behaviour precisely to guarantee safety. For ﬂuid dynamic problems, it is possible to
simulate the ﬂuid behaviour and its interaction with structures within it in great detail and
good correlation to experimental results.
However, for the engineering practice of designing a structure, it is necessary to condense
the eﬀects of phenomena such as vortex induced-vibration into a simple formula instead of
running a complicated simulation each time. For structures built in Europe, the EUROCODE
deﬁnes such formulas and calculation procedures.
The present investigation is focused on the case of taught cables as they are used in the design
of bridges. As bridges become longer and more slender, the cables become longer and more
susceptible to aerodynamic excitation, while the bridge structure becomes more sensitive to
dynamic disturbances. The inspection safety cables above suspension bridge main cables are
crucial to the bridge operation (Fig. 1) but often experience fatigue failure at the ﬁxture
points [33]. This inspired an investigation into how the stranded surface of cables inﬂuences
the ﬂow compared to a smooth cylinder both in normal ﬂow as well as at diﬀerent yaw angles.
This thesis is a part of that research project.
Figure 1: Safety hand robes above suspension bridge main cables - on the H˚alogaland Bridge and in
use during an inspection [9][8]
DTU Mechanical Engineering
1
==PAGE:9==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
2
STATE OF THE ART
A short introduction to the relevant aerodynamic mechanisms for ﬂow around cylinders shall
be given to form the basis of the later discussion of aerodynamic eﬀects. This is followed by
a closer discussion of research on points that are relevant to the experimental investigations
of this thesis.
2.1
Flow around Cylinders
The ﬂow patterns around a circular cylinder depend on the viscosity of the ﬂuid, the speed of
the ﬂow and the diameter of the cylinder. That relation is called the Reynolds number:
Re = UD
ν
(1)
with the kinematic viscosity of ν = 1.470 × 10−5 m2/s for air at 15° C, the ﬂuid speed U and
the cylinder diameter D.
For low Reynolds numbers, the ﬂow is laminar around a cylinder and grows more turbulent
for higher Reynolds numbers. Within the region of a turbulent wake there is a progression
from a laminar boundary layer for Re < 3 × 105 towards a completely turbulent boundary
layer for Re > 4 · 104. For Reynolds numbers 300 < Re < 3 × 105 the ﬂow regime is called
sub-critical and characterized by regular vortex shedding at a Strouhal number of St ≈0.18.
For higher Reynolds numbers at 3 × 105 < Re < 3.5 × 105 the ﬂow regime is called critical, as
the separation point moves signiﬁcantly downstream of the main body, leading to a strongly
reduced drag coeﬃcient, also called the drag crisis. Above 3.5 × 105 < Re in super-critical
regime the boundary layer is turbulent and the drag is generally higher than in the sub-critical
regime.
Bridge cables generally experience ﬂow of the sub-critical regime where the wake is completely
turbulent while the boundary layer is laminar to the separation point.
In ﬂow regimes of Re > 40 vortices are shed from alternating sides of the cylinder, introducing
a cross-ﬂow force onto it.
This can induce signiﬁcant cross-ﬂow vibrations if the vortex
shedding frequency is close to the eigenfrequency of the structure, called Vortex induced
Vibrations (“VIV”). To be able to compare the frequency dependency of diﬀerent structures,
Strouhal [51] coined the normalisation of the vortex shedding frequency fv, Diameter D and
ﬂow velocity U, now called the Strouhal number:
DTU Mechanical Engineering
2
==PAGE:10==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
St = fv D
U
(2)
For Reynolds number in the subcritical regime (300 < Re < 3 × 105) the Strouhal number is
constant at St = 0.18 [46], [52].
Vortex induced vibrations are caused by the vortexes forming and disconnecting from the
cylinder on alternating sides. When a vortex detaches on one side of the cylinder a low-
pressure area is created that both pulls the cylinder into that direction and the ﬂuid in,
creating a new vortex on the other side. These vortices form regularly with a frequency based
on the relative ﬂuid speed [52]. When the vortex shedding occurs at a frequency close to the
eigenfrequency of the structure, the structure will respond by vibrating in synchrony with the
vortices. This in turn inﬂuences the vortex formation, so that vortices will also form at the
eigenfrequency even for ﬂuid speeds slightly outside the critical wind speed. This range of
wind speeds is called the lock-in range.
3D Flow Patterns
The above basic parameters were investigated based on a 2D conceptualisation of ﬂow and
are useful to describe the general behaviour of structures in ﬂuid ﬂow. However, to better
understand the processes of ﬂuid motion that lead to the observed behaviour, the 3D ﬂow
processes around a cylinder must be understood. A 2D model assumes that the ﬂuid behaves
evenly and simultaneously along the length of the cylinder as it does for very slow laminar
ﬂow, i.e., Reynolds numbers below Re = 180, but for higher Reynolds numbers the vortex
structures are three dimensional, as the vortices break up into sections along the cylinder axis
and even form vortices that rotate at angles to the cylinder axis or along the ﬂow direction.
For Re = 180 and up to about Re = 200 (Re < 230 [55], Re < 220 [3], Re < 190 [23]) vortices
start to break up into 3D structures of about three cylinder diameter lengths, called shedding
in the Type A mode. For these low Reynolds numbers, the spanwise part of the vorticity is
strong and forms beautiful patterns even in the far wake, where the waves can combine into
oblique resonant waves, as shown by Williamson [61].
DTU Mechanical Engineering
3
==PAGE:11==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 2: Oblique wave resonance in the far wake.
(a) A smoke wire at x/D = 50 distance from the cylinder illustrates the initial oblique shedding of
the waves. Through interaction with the 2D waves in the centre of the picture the large-angle oblique
resonance waves to the right are produced.
(b) With the smoke wire further downstream at x/D = 100, only strong secondary oblique waves
remain. [61]
DTU Mechanical Engineering
4
==PAGE:12==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 3: Flow visualization of the two modes of vortex shedding behind an inclined cylinder at
Re = 160, cf. [43]. The inﬂuence of end conditions on the vortex shedding at low Reynolds numbers
is visible by the diﬀerent angles of the waves.
Above Re = 300 in the subcritical regime, vortices are shed in the Type B mode, with spanwise
lengths of about one cylinder diameter, so streamwise vorticity structures are more prevalent
and with a wavelength of a quarter that of Type A. [55] The spanwise length of the vortex
structures is called correlation length and plays an important part in the inﬂuence of ViV on
a structure; the greater the correlation length, the greater the cross-ﬂow force on the cylinder.
A smaller correlation length means both smaller vortices with less energy that are shed at
any one time, as well as that some energy is dissipated by the streamwise circulatory motion,
as shown by the reduction in lift force compared to a 2D ﬂow by Aleksyk and Shkadov Fig. 4
cf. [3].
This shows the relevance of investigating the inﬂuence of strandedness on the correlation
length and vortex pattern formation for the study of the behaviour of stranded cables.
Depending on the Reynolds number but also on ﬁnite cylinder length conditions and yaw
angle, those vortex structures will form diﬀerently and with diﬀerent correlation lengths,
where some sections of the wake can form vortices rolling oﬀat diﬀerent angles relative to the
ﬂow direction and cylinder axis in case of a cylinder yaw angle Fig. 3 cf. [43]
For higher yaw angles Wang et al. have also found that an axial ﬂow component appears [58],
[59] - see Section 2.4.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
5
==PAGE:13==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 4: The ﬂow regimes considered by Aleksyk and Shkadov [3]:
on the left — mode A for Re = 220, L = 2;
on the right — mode B for Re = 300, L = 0.4.
(a), (b) - The dependence of the lift coeﬃcient on time for a three-dimensional (solid lines) and
two-dimensional ﬂow (dashed lines). The initial (c–f) and late (g–j) stages of three-dimensional ﬂow
development are shown. Depicted isolines and isosurfaces correspond to constant values of u3 (black
and gray colors) and ω3 (red color): u3 = ±0.008 (c–d), u3 = ±0.002 (e–f), u3 = ±0.1 (g–h),
u3 = ±0.02 (i–j); ω3 = ±1 (c–j). The data in the x1x3-plane (d, f, h, j) are duplicated along x3-axis,
in fact, the calculated domain is |x3| ≤L/2.
2.2
Static vs Oscillating Cylinders
The vortex formation behind a static and a freely moving object is diﬀerent, as the freely
moving object can move in response to the vortex formation.
When the vortex shedding
frequency is at or close to the eigenfrequency of the cylinder it will respond to the cross-
ﬂow forces from the vortex shedding with resonance behaviour and oscillate in the cross-ﬂow
direction with an amplitude big enough to inﬂuence the formation of the vortices. This leads to
the so-called “lock-in”, where the vortices are shed at the eigenfrequency of the cylinder even
for wind speeds that would lead to a diﬀerent vortex shedding frequency for static cylinders,
as illustrated in Fig. 5. Here, the relation of vortex shedding frequency f in relation to the
DTU Mechanical Engineering
6
==PAGE:14==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
cylinders natural frequency fn is shown vs. the reduced velocity Vr, which relates the wind
speed to the structure in terms of Diameter D and natural frequency fn so that diﬀerent
structures can be compared.
Vr
U
fn D
(3)
Figure 5: Relative cross-ﬂow oscillatory response frequency of a spring-mounted circular cylinder in
air at diﬀerent reduced velocities [52]
2.3
The Eﬀect of Stranded Cables
Stranded cables have a structured surface with diﬀerent directionality on either side of the
cable. For winds perpendicular to the cable or in case of vertical cables, this acts as an even
roughness and disturbs the wake formation symmetrically, thereby reducing the overall ViV
response amplitudes [65]. However, the diﬀerent directionality becomes relevant in the case
of a non-normal angle between the cable axis and the wind direction.
For stranded cables, skew angles that are similar to the angle of the strands present the
airﬂow with very diﬀerent roughness conditions at either side of the cable; on one side the
strands are aligned with the airﬂow and present a smooth surface (more or less depending
on the angle) while on the other side they are correspondingly crossing the ﬂow and creating
signiﬁcant roughness. The diﬀerent relative roughnesses lead to a diﬀerence in the boundary
layer separation point location, giving a diﬀerent total pressure on either side of the cable
and hence results in a constant lift force [41]. This leads to galloping of slack cables, where
the cable is lifted to its limit lift, falls and is lifted again [37]. In those cases, the galloping
DTU Mechanical Engineering
7
==PAGE:15==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
could be mitigated by wrapping the cable such that its surface is smooth and both sides of
the cable present the same roughness to the wind [7].
This eﬀect is illustrated by ﬂow visualisations created by Nebres et al. [41] who also found
the same constant lift force for skewed stranded cables. In part A of Fig. 6 the ﬂow at the
smoother side is shown, while part B shows the opposite, rougher side. On the smoother side,
distinct wake vortex structures form for each cable strand, while on the rough side the wake
is fully turbulent without apparent structure. For context, these are compared with a smooth
cylinder at the same Reynolds number in part C.
Figure 6: A and B: ﬂow around a 7 × 7 stranded cable, at 60° cable angle and Re = 6000
C: Flow around a yawed circular cylinder, at 60° cable angle and Re = 6000 [41]
A case that exhibits similar eﬀects as stranded cables at yaw angles is rotating cylinders, where
the roughness conditions at either side of the cylinder are diﬀerent as well. This has been
investigated e.g. by Dol et al. [11] and Lam [28] who found a vortex suppression for rotating
cylinders compared to a stationary cylinder. Similarly, the constant lift force that leads to
cable galloping relates to the so-called Magnus eﬀect of rotating objects that is the mechanism
behind curve balls and has even been used to move ships with tall rotating cylinders instead
of sails or propellers in the water.
2.4
The Eﬀect of Skew Angles
Skew angles are relevant for cables that are installed non-vertically, as most wind conditions
are horizontal ﬂow. For cables installed at an angle that is neither 0° or 90° to vertical the
yaw angle is a combination of the cable inclination and wind direction.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
8
==PAGE:16==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Independence Principle
Figure 7: Flow around a cylinder skewed relative to ﬂow direction. U denotes the free stream velocity,
UN the normal components and θ the angle between U and UN. [52]
As an approximation, it can be assumed that air ﬂows around a cylinder in the shortest path,
i.e., normal to the cylinder axis and also that vortices will roll oﬀnormal to the cylinder axis,
according to the independence principle [52]. In that case, the part of the ﬂow normal to the
cylinder UN becomes relevant for all ﬂow phenomena (see Fig. 7.
Ramberg [43] tested the inﬂuence of the independence principle for Reynolds numbers up
to Re = 1100 and angles up to 60°. He tested the eﬀects on the base pressure around the
cylinder, the vortex formation length and the wake width for diﬀerent Reynolds numbers and
yaw angles. He found that the independence principle does indeed hold true and that for a
vibrating cylinder the lock-in frequency range corresponds well with the cosine law as predicted
by the independence principle. However, parallel vortex shedding could not be observed for
higher Reynolds numbers where the wake ﬂow becomes strongly three-dimensional. Also, the
vortex formation length, base pressure, shedding angle and wake width were observed lower
than expected.
Three-dimensional ﬂow patterns
More recently, Wang et al. [58] used modern computational modelling to investigate the ﬂow
patterns in the wake of higher turbulent ﬂows with a Reynolds number of Re = 1.4 × 104. In
the model results shown in Fig. 9, the formation of vortices parallel to the cylinder axis in
the near wake is apparent for high yaw angles, as is suggested by the independence principle.
It is also visible that for normal ﬂow, vortices can roll oﬀin oblique angles due to slight
irregularities in the ﬂow, as also found by [61].
Wang et al.
ﬁnd in [58], [59] that for yawed cylinders there is an axial ﬂow behind the
cylinder acting as a splitter plate and inﬂuencing the vortex formation - Fig. 10. This axial
DTU Mechanical Engineering
9
==PAGE:17==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
ﬂow component upholds the general ﬂow direction, as the near-surface ﬂow is redirected
perpendicular to the cylinder in accordance with the independence principle.
In [58] Wang also presents the time history of lift force progression along a cylinder for
diﬀerent yaw angles Fig. 8. As also visible in Fig. 9, the vortices form with shorter correlation
lengths at yaw angles compared to a more uniform behaviour at 0° (top graph). Over time,
a sideways progression of the vortex formation areas for yawed wind is visible but does not
seem to correlate with the speciﬁc yaw angle (cf.: 30° in second from top graph, 45° in third
from top graph).
Figure 8: The sectional lift coeﬃcient contours (right) and span-wise averaged lif force coeﬃcient
(left) over time for Re = 1.4 × 104 and angles of 0°, 30°, 45°, 60° (top to bottom) [58]
DTU Mechanical Engineering
10
==PAGE:18==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 9: Iso-surface of Q = 0.01s2 ωz, representing the near wake vortex structure of the ﬂow over
a circular cylinder at Re = 1.4 × 104 with the yaw angles: (a) α = 0°, (b) α = 30°, (c) α = 45°, and
(d) α = 60° for a cylinder in wind [58]
Figure 10: Evolution process of the axial ﬂow in cylinder wake ﬂow with φ decreasing, where φ is
the angle between ﬂow direction and cylinder axis [59]
DTU Mechanical Engineering
11
==PAGE:19==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Drag
Drag is the force an object experiences along the direction of the ﬂuid ﬂow.
This force
stems from two mechanisms, namely a pressure at the upstream side, and suction due to
underpressure at the leeward side. Around a circular cylinder, the pressure distribution is as
shown in Fig. 11
The change of the drag force due to skew wind attack angles has been investigated by Poulin
and Larsen [42] who showed for the case of long cable-stayed bridges that a high skew angle
can lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in the drag force. This is because a lesser part of the wind
ﬂows around the cable, while a part of the attacking wind will be deﬂected into an axial ﬂow,
as also explained above for the independence principle. They present a way of including this
variation in drag force in the calculations for long-span cable-stayed bridges.
Figure 11: Pressure around a circular cylinder in steady ﬂow at sub- and supercritical ﬂows [2]. For
the present case the subcritical regime is relevant.
2.5
Damping of Cables
The aerodynamic behaviour of cables is inﬂuenced by diﬀerent damping types. Aerodynamic
damping depends on the relative cable to wind velocity, inherent structural damping on the
friction between internal elements of the cable, and external dampers can be added for response
optimization.
Aerodynamic Damping
The aerodynamic damping is described by the ratio of the aerodynamic force Fx to the cylinder
mass m, circular natural frequency of the structure ωn and the cylinder speed ˙x. This is
evaluated at ˙x = 0 due to the non-linearity of Fx, giving the equivalent linear aerodynamic
damping ratio ζa (for full derivation, compare Appendix D in [29]).
DTU Mechanical Engineering
12
==PAGE:20==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
ζa =

−1
2mωn
dFx
˙dx

˙x=0
(4)
Figure 12: Velocities and forces (a) in the plane normal to the cylinder axis, (b) in the plane of the
cylinder axis and the ﬂow velocity vector (“cable-wind plane”) [1]
With the deﬁnitions of the angles of wind incident velocity and wind force deﬁned as in Fig. 12
the aerodynamic force is found by:
Fx = ρU 2
RD
2
(CD cos (αR) −CL sin (αR))
(5)
In which ρ is the ﬂuid density, UR is the magnitude of relative velocity, D is the diameter,
CD and CL are the drag and lift coeﬃcients, and αR is the relative angle of attack between
the wind and the moving cylinder.
The relative velocity is calculated by:
UR =
p
U 2 −2Uv sin (φ)cos(α) + v2
(6)
Mcdonald [36] considers the inﬂuences of both aerodynamic and structural damping on in-
clined bridge cables to determine the inﬂuence the aerodynamic damping has on the overall
damping. For the cable-stayed bridge he investigates, he concludes that except for the shortest
cables and for wind speeds above approximately U = 5 m/s the aerodynamic damping is the
dominant damping mechanism; the longer the cable the higher the aerodynamic damping and
lower the structural damping, so that the aerodynamic damping is also dominant for even
lower wind speeds.
Also, he shows the aerodynamic damping depends on the wind attack angle and shows that
the aerodynamic damping is reduced with increasing yaw angle.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
13
==PAGE:21==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Structural Damping
The structural damping is often described in terms of the Scruton number [47]. This number
relates the mass m of the cylinder and its damping δs to the density of the air ρ and the
square of the cylinder diameter D:
Sc = 2δsm
ρD2
(7)
This is an important factor, as it allows for the comparison of structures along with their
relative damping. The mass m is the modal mass, meaning that for a stretched cable that
oscillates in a sinusoidal shape the mass must be taken times two to be comparable to a stiﬀ
cylinder that oscillates linearly along its entire length.
In this, the structural damping consists of both the intrinsic damping of the structure and
any added damping elements.
Intrinsic damping or self-damping of the cable stems from two mechanisms: the hysteresis of
the strands as they bend during the vibrations and the slip between the individual strands
and tendons. The latter has been investigated for aeolian (or vortex-induced) vibrations by
Foti and Marinelli [14], [15], who propose a comprehensive model for the calculation of the
cable self-damping in such vibrations. As explained above in Section 2.5, this is relevant for
shorter span cables and low wind speeds.
On the topic of optimizing the self-damping of cables, Wang and Wu [60] have investigated
a cable conﬁguration that includes a layer of viscoelastic material between the core and the
outside strands to dissipate energy, as visualised in Fig. 13. However, this cable would be
signiﬁcantly more expensive to produce than a classical stranded cable and therefore not
reasonable for the handrail cables that the present report is focused on.
Figure 13: Conﬁguration of the hybrid cable proposed by Wang and Wu [60]
DTU Mechanical Engineering
14
==PAGE:22==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
External Dampers
External dampers are installed on the cables to dissipate energy and reduce vibration amp-
litudes; a common type of external damper are counter oscillating tuned mass dampers
(TMD). An example of those is the Stockbridge Damper, also called Dogbone damper due to
its shape, that consists of a piece of cable with weights at the end that is ﬁxed to the bridge
cable as shown in Fig. 14a, cf. [10], [22].
Tuned mass dampers add a degree of freedom to the system and hence change the frequency
response of the whole system so that - ideally - no resonance will occur at the relevant wind
speeds [49]. The oscillation frequency of a Stockbridge damper can easily be adjusted by the
choice of cable section length and size of the masses.
Figure 14: Two damper types described by Den Hartog [10]
The eﬀectiveness of a TMD can be inﬂuenced by the stiﬀness of the cable, which would be
relevant for shorter tensioned cables, as shown by Hijmissen et al. [20], and therefore the eﬀect
of tension on the stiﬀness needs to be considered when calculating the optimal TMD.
According to Krenk [25], the optimal placement for a damper on a cable is at a distance of
≤5% the cable length from the end of the cable, as the main fatigue impact is at the ﬁxture
and a damper placed at a greater distance would need to be notably stronger to minimise the
fatigue load there. Together with Høgsberg, he presents a calculation method for optimizing
the damper mass of tuned mass dampers within that positional range by including not only
idealised mode shape displacements but also background contribution from motions outside
of resonant modes into the calculation [27].
For very shallow cables with dampers close to either end of the cable Sun [53] presents a
calculation model for the optimization of the dampers, that considers the change in mode
DTU Mechanical Engineering
15
==PAGE:23==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
shapes due to the presence of the two dampers.
Other types of dampers are energy dissipation devices, as shown in Fig. 14b. Energy dissip-
ation is often introduced by including viscous-elastic materials such as rubber [40] in their
structure. Researchers have investigated innovative materials for such dampers over the years,
such as Helbert et al. [19] who suggests a damper consisting of Nickel-Titanium alloy that
dissipates energy by phase transition within the material.
These are ﬁxed between the cable and a ﬁxpoint, either as the cable ﬁxture to minimise
axial movement or at some distance from the ﬁxture to dissipate lateral movement like the
TMD.
Another type of damper that relies on energy dissipation are dashpot dampers, where the
energy is dissipated through heat, through a ﬂuid that has to pass through a narrow passage,
eg. around a piston. For this, diﬀerent ﬂuids can be used, most commonly oil or air. Lin
et al. [34] investigate a viscous damper based on a shear thickening ﬂuid and found a more
distinctive amplitude decrease for the shear thickening damper compared to a regular viscous
damper. Xu and Zhou [62] take another approach at improving viscous dampers; intending
to simplify bridge construction processes they developed a shape adjustable piston for regular
viscous dampers.
This allows the installation of one type of damper across many cables
requiring diﬀerent damping levels, like in the case of a stay-cable bridge, while providing
individual damping levels.
Figure 15: Two implementation versions of the inerter damper principle, with diﬀerent orientations
of the ﬂywheel to the direction of the movement that is dissipated [57]
Others have investigated mechanical systems that will introduce energy dissipation and vi-
bration damping to the general system without relying on the deformation of materials; one
of such is the inerter damper that relies on translating translational energy into the rotation
of a ﬂywheel - see Fig. 15, cf. [26], [48], [50].
Another approach to the damping of cable vibrations in parallel cables such as stay cables
on bridges is the installation of cross ties.
Such stay cables have individual lengths and
eigenfrequencies so that at any time only one or few would be in resonance so that the
DTU Mechanical Engineering
16
==PAGE:24==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
majority would serve as anchor points against excess amplitudes. This type of damping is
especially eﬀective when slightly elastic, damping cross ties are used [63], [64].
2.6
Eurocode VIV Calculations
To guide the practical design of structures in engineering practice, the Eurocode provides two
calculation methods for the cross-wind amplitude in Appendix E to the Eurocode EN1991
[12]. The relevance of each is based on the type of structure as well as the local climate, so
the National Annexes deﬁne which of the two to use.
The ﬁrst method “includes turbulence and roughness eﬀects and it may be used for normal
climatic conditions” [12] and is described in E.1.5.2.
The second method is described in
E.1.5.3 and is to be used for slender structures with regular cross-sections along the main axis
and is calculated based on the ﬁrst mode deformation of cantilevered structures. It allows for
variation in turbulence intensity and weather conditions and is recommended for regions with
cold weather conditions where stratiﬁed ﬂow conditions may occur.
Stratiﬁed ﬂow occurs when there is a vertical density distribution in a ﬂuid. A stable strati-
ﬁcation occurs when the density decreases with height, as downstreams would need to carry
lighter ﬂuid down and upstreams heavier ﬂuid up, which inhibits vertical motion.
In the
atmosphere, the air is usually warmed up by the ground, hence rising, expanding, cooling and
ﬂowing down again. In cold climates, no heat-induced free convection occurs and allows the
air to stratify. [56]
In Denmark, cold and stratiﬁed airﬂow conditions occur and therefore the Danish National
Annex [13] deﬁnes the second method as applicable. In that, the characteristic maximum
displacement ymax is given by Expression E.13:
ymax = σy · kp
(8)
wherein σy is the standard deviation of the displacement and kp the peak factor. The standard
deviation is found with Eq. (9) and the peak factor with Eq. (10). The latter is the corrected
version as presented by Larsen [31].
σy
b
2
= a2
L
2 ·

1 −
Sc
4πKa

+
sa2
L
2 ·

1 −
Sc
4πKa
2
+ ρb2
me
a2
L
Ka
C2c
St4
(9)
kp =
√
2
"
1 + 1.2 · arctan
 
0.75 ·

Sc
4πKa
4!#
(10)
DTU Mechanical Engineering
17
==PAGE:25==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
The constants used are:
– CC is the aerodynamic constant and dependent on Reynolds number for circular cross-
sections
– Ka is the aerodynamic damping parameter
– aL is the normalised limiting amplitude
– St is the Strouhal number
– me is the eﬀective mass per unit length and
– h, b are the height and width of the structure.
This second method has been criticised in its applicability to the wide range of structures
the Eurocode suggests it for. For example, Hansen [18] conducted tests on sharp-edged cross-
sections, as the Eurocode is mainly aimed at circular cross-sections. He ﬁnds that while this
method is able to include rare events in its prediction, it is not able to predict the vortex-
induced vibrations of sharp-edged cross-sections.
Larsen and Larose [30] focus on the EUROCODE’s applicability to slender structures such as
hanger cables and compare measured acceleration data from a suspension bridge to the pre-
dictions from both calculation methods. For these slender structures, both methods correlate
well with the measured data for high Scruton numbers, but for low Scruton numbers there are
signiﬁcant diﬀerences and the values are very sensitive to the Scruton number. They suggest
that the aerodynamic damping term in the second method describes the measurements for
stranded cables better, as it has a cubed amplitude response limiting term similar to the van
der Pol equation, compared to the linear damping that is assumed in the ﬁrst method. See
also [31], [32]. They also ﬁnd that experimental results generally are signiﬁcantly smaller than
the EUROCODE predicts, about 2-6 times lower.
The values resulting from the Eurocode calculation do not ﬁt together with the results found
by Rawlins [44] either, who precisely investigated the response amplitude of smooth cylinders
across a wide range of Scruton numbers.
2.7
Variation of Scruton Number - Experiments with Varied Damping us-
ing Rubber Bands
As described in more detail in the section about the experimental setup, it was chosen to
dampen the experimental model with elastic bands. Therefore, some papers using the same
method shall be presented here.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
18
==PAGE:26==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Cheng et al [6] investigate the separate inﬂuence of mass and damping on the Scruton number,
as that is the dimensionless product of these two parameters.
To isolate the inﬂuence of
damping, they add damping to the suspension rig of the model, without changing the model
itself - i.e., the mass stays constant. To compare diﬀerent damping levels within the same
setup, diﬀerent techniques are used to achieve four diﬀerent damping levels:
Damping level
Method of damping
Low
No damper added
Intermediate
16 elastic bands per sway spring
High
28 elastic bands per spring for both directions
Very high
Airpot damper with 1 1/4 dial turn
Table 1: Damping levels and methods used by Cheng et al. [6]
They ﬁnd a signiﬁcant decrease in amplitude response for the damped models.
Jing et al. [24] also use rubber bands to vary the damping in their investigation of rain-
wind-induced cable vibrations, adding three more rubber bands per spring for each level - see
Fig. 16. They investigate 18 levels of damping, allowing for a detailed graph of amplitude over
damping ratio. The damping ratio for each level is found by analysing the free decay amplitude
time history after a single excitation (release from a high displacement). They calculate the
damping ratio as an average across the damped springs, as the individual sets of rubber
bands do not necessarily yield the exact same damping due to production imperfections.
They identify the fundamental frequency from the Power Spectral Density for each of the
damping levels.
Figure 16: Rubber bands on spring as used by Jing et al. [24]
2.8
Eﬀect of Stranded Surface on Flow Patterns - Experimental Investig-
ations
The inﬂuence of the stranded surface of cables on the ﬂow around them and hence the forces
on the cable induced by the wind is an important factor to understand, as many cables are
shaped thus due to production practicalities and are not circular cylinders like the models in
many aerodynamic investigations.
To quantify the diﬀerence in behaviour, the same tests as for smooth cylinders are conducted
on stranded ones on an otherwise same setup and their response compared. For the case of
DTU Mechanical Engineering
19
==PAGE:27==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
vortex-induced vibrations, the model with a stranded surface generally exhibits a reduction
in wind response amplitude, as the structures on the surface introduce a higher level of
turbulence in the boundary layer. This causes the separation point of the boundary layer
to move backwards, leading to the formation of smaller vertices and hence smaller cross-ﬂow
forces.
In the case of ﬂow that is yawed in respect to the cylinder axis, the ﬂow is met with diﬀerent
apparent roughnesses at the top and bottom of the cylinder, where the spiral structure will be
somewhat aligned with the yawed wind direction on one side, while it crosses it at the other
side, leading to diﬀerent separation points. This exerts a steady lift force on the cylinder and
can lead to galloping like in the case of the relatively long span Conductors across the river
Severn [37].
In such investigations of diﬀerent surface types, it is important to take care in the experimental
setup, as small irregularities in the inﬂow can lead to an asymmetry in the forces on the surface
of the cylinder, as found by Achenbach [2]. It is further important to considerately choose the
dimensions of the model and how the ends are shaped/ whether end plates are used, as this
can lead to eﬀects such as oblique shedding on cylinders normal to the ﬂow (compare Fig. 3),
even for higher Reynolds numbers [61].
Furthermore, it must be decided whether to observe the ﬂow phenomena around a static or a
moving model. A static model is easier to install, observe and take pictures of, as the camera
can be installed at exactly the axis height and the cylinder is always still in the picture.
However, the mechanisms of ﬂow around a cylinder are diﬀerent whether the cylinder is still
or moving in response to the ﬂow [39], so the results from observing a moving cylinder would
be more relevant to vibration problems (cf. Section 2.2). Also, it is possible to achieve good
photographic observations of a moving cylinder with high-speed cameras, as e.g. seen in [16],
[35].
The observation of the ﬂow around the stranded cylinder is important to gain a deeper un-
derstanding of the aerodynamic mechanisms responsible for the changed behaviour compared
to a smooth cylinder. For more on ﬂow visualisation see the following Section 2.9.
An interesting investigation is the comparison of the inﬂuence of stranded surfaces in skew
ﬂows and rotating cylinders. In both cases the ﬂow is met with diﬀerent roughness conditions
at either side of the cylinder; only that in the case of strands these irregularities also have an
axial component.
Studies that have investigated rotating cylinders are among others Lam [28] who investigates
the inﬂuence of a slow rotation speed of a stationary cylinder on the vortex shedding at
subcritical Reynolds numbers and ﬁnd a sideways deﬂection of the vortex street, Dol et al. [11]
DTU Mechanical Engineering
20
==PAGE:28==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
who investigate a similar setup but at higher rotational speeds and higher Reynolds number
and ﬁnd that for higher rotational speeds the vortex formation is completely suppressed.
Both papers describe a change in Strouhal number due to the rotation. Zhuang et al. [66]
investigate the aerodynamics of a wavy shaped rotating cylinder and ﬁnd that streamwise
vorticity prevails over the axial vortex formation found for a stationary cylinder of the same
shape.
2.9
Flow visualisation
To visualise the ﬂow around the cylinder, some medium is introduced into the ﬂow upstream
of the cylinder, which is then illuminated so that pictures can be taken of its distribution. In
air, this is usually done with smoke.
A smoke wire can be used to create a sheet of smoke that illuminates the behaviour of one
slice of airﬂow; the smoke is created by heating a wire through electrical resistance and
evaporating an oil-based mixture oﬀits surface [16], [17]. Another option to introduce smoke
is with a separate smoke machine that produces a bulk of smoke through chemical processes
and delivers it to the model setup through one or several tubes; this can for example be used
to illuminate speciﬁc three-dimensional ﬂow paths [45]. This is useful e.g. in the investigation
of such phenomena as the independence principle, where the three-dimensional ﬂow path of a
ﬂuid particle around the cylinder is concerned. Airﬂow can also be illuminated with neutrally
buoyant helium bubbles, that are visible as streaks of light in long exposure photographs by
reﬂecting the light towards the camera [4].
To fully understand the visualised ﬂow, pictures can be taken at diﬀerent angles and with the
smoke/ bubbles introduced diﬀerently. A picture along the axis of the cylinder as in Fig. 17a
combined with either a sheet of smoke from a smoke wire or a stream of smoke or bubbles
from a point source shows the vortex formation and boundary layer behaviour.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
21
==PAGE:29==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 17: Flow visualisation methods for investigating aerodynamic eﬀects:
17a: Moving Cylinder - clearly photographed vortices for an oscillating square cylinder [35]
17b: Helium bubbles - wingtip vortex from an airfoil at 10m/s [4]
17c: Smoke Wire - visualisation of the wake behind stranded/ smooth cylinders [41]
17d: 3D Flow Trace - independence principle visualisation around a circular cylinder at 45° [4]
A picture taken from above like Fig. 17c, with a horizontal sheet of smoke introduced upstream
of the cylinder shows the correlation length and orientation of the three-dimensional vortex
structures; a thin stream like in Fig. 17d seen from that angle can illuminate mechanisms
such as the independence principle and axial ﬂow around yawed cylinders, as found by Wang
et al. [58], [59]. Examples of such depictions can among others be found in [35], [41], [43].
In some cases it can also be fruitful to observe from an upstream position, with a laser
sheet illuminating a vertical cut along the axis of the cylinder, to visualise the formation of
streamwise vortices, as seen in [54].
DTU Mechanical Engineering
22
==PAGE:30==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
3
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The experimental model used in this thesis has been build by Andreas Langager as part of
his Master thesis [29]. It was build based on the setup used by Hjort-Hansen [21] and with
the dimensions as presented in Table 2; for the excitation of ViV an open wind tunnel was
used, as shown in Fig. 18.
Model length
2
m
Stranded model weight
6.04
kg
Smooth model weight
6.10
kg
Model Diameter
0.1
m
WT opening width
0.8
m
WT opening height
0.8
m
Reynolds number
1.3 × 104
Table 2: Dimensions of the Model and Wind Tunnel and median Reynolds number for the conducted
tests described in this thesis.
Figure 18: The model in front of the green open wind tunnel at DTU
DTU Mechanical Engineering
23
==PAGE:31==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
The model itself is suspended between four springs on each side, so that movement in all
degrees of freedom is allowed. The present springs were chosen over stiﬀer or softer springs,
as stiﬀer springs would have allowed for too little amplitude when damping was applied to the
system, while softer springs changed the systems resonance frequency thus that the critical
wind speeds were very low and too sensitive to general air movement in the room.
Spring constant
160
N/m
Unloaded length
220
mm
Maximum loaded length
507
mm
Installed top springs length
405
mm
Installed bottoms springs length
315
mm
Table 3: Spring properties and installed lengths at rest
The wind speed was measured with a Pitot tube mounted at the opening of the wind tunnel
and a furnace control, read oﬀand manually noted for every measurement. The wind speed
was controlled through a variable frequency device. The foot positions for various angles were
marked on the ﬂoor in tape and marker with a line around each foot to ensure easy and precise
placement every time the model is moved.
For more pictures of the experimental setup, please see Appendix B.
3.1
Structural Damping
To introduce diﬀerent damping levels into the system several methods were considered, namely
– Dashpot dampers in the shape of a container ﬁlled with oil, that a rod connected to
the model is lowered into, creating diﬀerent damping levels through diﬀerent shapes of
endplates on the rod that are moved through the oil.
– Aerodynamic damping through diﬀerently sized horizontal plates at the side of the
model, that dampen just like the end plated in the oil.
– installing diﬀerently strong commercial dampers between the frame and model
– installing viscoelastic bands on either side between the model and frame.
Since the model needs to be moved between angles and can exhibit relatively large amplitudes,
an oil-ﬁlled container seemed unpractical; the aerodynamic damping plates were disregarded
as they would have introduced additional disturbances in the airﬂow close to the model and
the commercial dampers were more expensive than the last option.
Thus it was chosen to use elastic bands as dampers, based on practicality and as they have also
DTU Mechanical Engineering
24
==PAGE:32==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
been used successfully by other researchers (cf. Section 2.7). This choice was also conﬁrmed
through communications with Guy Larose, an experienced experimental researcher in the
ﬁeld of bridge aerodynamics who himself has successfully employed rubber bands as dampers
in previous wind tunnel experiments, see [6] and further [30], [32], [38]. During preliminary
tests to establish the validity of the method, rubber bands were found to show good damping
behaviour (compare Fig. 20) and low amplitude dependency (cf. Fig. 21), hence proving to
be a valid method to use. The low amplitude dependency is evident from the linear shape of
the amplitude decay on a logarithmic plot.
Figure 19: Preliminary setup for the testing of damping options. Rubber bands are applied to the
left set of springs, none to the right set.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
25
==PAGE:33==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 20: Amplitude time series for the undamped system (red) and damped with rubber bands
(yellow) for the preliminary setup shown in Fig. 19
Figure 21: Free decay response of the system plotted over time linearly (top) and on a logarithmic
scale (bottom). Shown for no rubber bands (right), 1,5 clear rubber loops (centre) and 1 green elastic
(left).
The next decision to be determined was the mode of installation on the model. The diﬀer-
ent levels of damping would have to be changed frequently and reproducibly to be applied
to diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the model, so a secure but non-permanent setup had to be
found.
Other researchers [6], [24] had installed their rubber bands directly on the spring but for the
present setup it was decided against that. Placing the elastic bands directly on the spring
introduces an aspect of friction, which seemed harder to reproduce evenly across several
installations. Also, as the displacement of the model is measured through the extension of
the top springs, that measurement would have been distorted non-linearly by the presence of
DTU Mechanical Engineering
26
==PAGE:34==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
rubber bands on said spring.
Therefore, eye-bolts were installed at the model frame that the elastic bands were perman-
ently knotted to, and hooks at the model suspension arms that the elastics are hooked into,
presenting an easily changeable as well as friction-less setup – Fig. 22. The bands were cut
slightly shorter than the spring would compress to at the maximum expected amplitudes,
to ensure constant tension and prevent the bands from slipping oﬀthe hooks. To minimise
friction for the “2 clear” setup, which consists of two loops of clear elastic band, one of the
bands was twisted once before putting on the hook so that it would not rub along the ﬁrst
loop, as illustrated in Fig. 22d. To achieve a more detailed graph of amplitude over Scruton
number, the setups in Fig. 22b and Fig. 22c were combined to form the damping level of “1.5
clear” and Fig. 22b and Fig. 22d to form “2.5 clear”.
(a) “1 green”
(b) “0.5 clear”
(c) “1 clear”
Loop 1
Loop 2
(d) “2 clear”
Figure 22: Naming of elastic band conﬁgurations. For better visibility, a white drawing of the clear
elastic was added next to it.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
27
==PAGE:35==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
After testing the elastic bands commonly available for household purposes and ﬁnding those
to produce a too high damping level, diﬀerent elastic bands sold for textile crafting were found
to give the desired levels of damping.
As these elastics are not produced to facilitate scientiﬁc testing they cannot be expected to
maintain their behaviour unchanged across the whole testing regime. Therefore, the damping
for every set of wind response tests was measured on the day and directly associated with
those wind response amplitudes, as explained in Fig. 23.
Due to this, there is no precise Scruton number associated with the elastics setups, but
the mean Scruton number across all usage cases can be shown, see Table 4. This is only
presented to give the reader a general overview of the achieved damping levels; in the plot of
the maximum amplitudes vs. Scruton number the respective daily Scruton number is used
(Fig. 35).
To ensure consistent behaviour, the rubber bands were replaced with fresh ones for the
second set of measurements (the ﬁrst was conducted in December, the second in February/-
March).
Elastic
none
0.5 clear
1 clear
1.5 clear
2 clear
2.5 clear
1 green
Avg. Scruton
2.1
2.3
2.8
3.2
3.6
3.9
6
Table 4: Average Scruton numbers for the diﬀerent elastic setups
3.2
Wind Tunnel Tests
The Wind tunnel tests were conducted in the manner visualized in the diagram in Fig. 23.
For every speciﬁc setup, three free decay tests were conducted and the response to several
wind speeds was measured until the maximum response had been found. The three free decay
tests were conducted by releasing the model from a displacement of about 50mm — a higher
displacement than reached by the wind response — and recording the amplitude time series of
the free vibration response of the model until the amplitude had decayed to about 5mm.
For the wind response tests, the respective new wind speed was set and any previous vibra-
tions manually dampened to signiﬁcantly below the expected amplitude level, to prevent any
hysteresis inﬂuence on the results. A slight vibration was allowed to remain, to save time,
as for a completely still model it took impractically long to initiate the vortex shedding and
resonance eﬀects that are responsible for the ﬁnal steady response amplitude. A measurement
was started when the model had exhibited a steady amplitude for some minutes, which it took
a varying time to reach.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
28
==PAGE:36==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
For wind speeds close to the critical wind speed it would take about 15 minutes before a steady
amplitude was reached. For wind speeds at the edge of the lock-in range it would often take
up to an hour of incremental amplitude increases before a steady amplitude was reached; to
ensure the validity of the result the wind tunnel was left running at the same speed for just
a few minutes after the measurement to be sure that no further increase was occurring. This
slow progression towards the ﬁnal resonance state has also been found by Brika and Laneville
[5], who found that the build-up time of a dynamic model increases exponentially during
lock-in for lightly damped systems.
For wind speeds outside of the lock-in range, the model was exposed to the wind for about
20 minutes before the measurement even when there was no apparent response amplitude to
ensure that no amplitude was developing slowly. The wind response was measured for ﬁve
minutes.
The order that the setups were measured in was determined based on how easy diﬀerent
aspects were to change. The hardest to change was the model surface type - requiring the
removal/ reapplication of a 2m long piece of paper that was prone to crinkling during handling.
Therefore, ﬁrst all damping and angles setups for the smooth model were measured, then the
paper removed and then all setups for the stranded surface tested. The easiest change to the
model is the hooking on and oﬀof elastic bands; hence for each surface type, all elastic bands
were ﬁrst measured for the model placed at 0° yaw angle and then all elastic bands at 45° yaw
angle.
After the wind response tests for one speciﬁc setup were completed, another set of free decay
tests was conducted to ensure that any change in the bands would be regarded, in case there
might be a relaxation of the rubber during use. To further ensure consistency, each set of
free decay/ wind response/ free decay tests was always completed on the same day, to pre-
vent inconsistencies from the relaxation of the elastic bands overnight or due to temperature
diﬀerences.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
29
==PAGE:37==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Yes
No
All angles
tested?
Choose 
surface type
No
Yes
All surfaces
tested?
All
measurements
completed
Start
Choose wind speed
Conduct 3 free
decay tests
Conduct wind
tunnel tests:
Choose angle
Set new
damping level
Yes
No
All 
damping levels
tested?
Conduct 3 free
decay tests
No
Yes
Max amplitude
deteremined?
Rund wind tunnel
until steady state
response is reached
Measure response
for 5 minutes
Figure 23: Schedule of wind tunnel tests
3.3
Vibration Mitigation
There are many ways to mitigate vibrations on cables and cylinders; one of them is the
application of helical strakes around the outside along the cable.
Researchers at FORCE
Technology have been investigating the optimal setup for such helical strakes and in the
course of this thesis, a validation of their results and a test of the applicability to a 45° yaw
angle was attempted.
The setup that was found to be optimal in the tests at FORCE was three strakes of d = 0.1D,
where D is the cable Diameter and d the strake diameter, wrapped at a slope of L = 12D
(i.e. one full rotation per L).
For these tests, lightweight ropes of 1cm diameter were wrapped around the smooth surface
model and tightly ﬁxed to the model at either end. As the section of the model that is exposed
to the wind tunnel is only the central half of the model, the ropes could be chosen slightly
DTU Mechanical Engineering
30
==PAGE:38==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
shorter than the model itself. That way, the ropes could be ﬁxed tightly at their very ends
and any loose ends could be avoided that might impact the measurements.
However, the complete mitigation as found at FORCE Technology could not be replicated,
presumably due to the shorter exposure length of this model, which was less than one whole
rotation of the strakes.
Figure 24: Strakes installed on the smooth model.
(right) the ends of the strakes ﬁxed to the model (left) the model at 45° in front of the wind tunnel
3.4
Challenges during the Testing Process
There were several points during the conduction of the experiments that are laid out here to
inform and aid future investigations and serve as an explanation for some inconsistencies in
the results.
The green open wind tunnel at DTU proved itself to not be recommendable for further
experiments of the same sort as conducted for this thesis. The wind tunnel had been chosen
due to access restrictions due to the Corona pandemic and has yielded usable results, but an
open-loop wind tunnel or especially one with a closed test section would yield more reliable
and precise results.
The challenges with the green wind tunnel and model setup were the following:
– The limited air stream size exposed only a small section of the model to the airﬂow –
of the 2m long model 80cm were exposed for 0° and 113cm for 45°.
– With the width of the model frame of 75cm, the distance between the opening and the
model at 45° was 126cm of airﬂow through open air, creating higher turbulence levels
at the model than a looped wind tunnel would.
– The model was designed with a diﬀerent wind tunnel in mind and therefore does not
DTU Mechanical Engineering
31
==PAGE:39==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
include end plates, which would have greatly improved the representativeness of the
vortex shedding compared to a real cable fully immersed in wind along the cable length.
The distance between the model and the wind tunnel opening where the wind speed is meas-
ured was investigated by measuring the same wind speed both at the wind tunnel and at the
centre of the model and at either side of the exposed length, namely at ca 38cm distance
from the centerline of the airﬂow. From the variability in the measured wind speeds at the
model (cf. Table 5) it is evident that the measurement position at the wind tunnel opening
is better suited to a pitot tube, which is very sensitive to the directionality of the ﬂow. With
turbulence present, there will be some velocity pressure on the side holes of the pitot tube that
are supposed to measure the ambient air pressure and therefore the diﬀerence to the velocity
pressure at the forward hole will be lower, resulting in a lower measured wind speed.
To obtain the correct factor for wind speed correction the Strouhal number of the wind re-
sponse tests was calculated and a factor found that would place all Strouhal numbers around
the theoretically correct St = 0.18. For the wind response tests at 45°, the factor was mul-
tiplied with the normalised wind speed UN = U ∗cos(45) to allow for the independence
principle. The correction factor was hence found to be ∆U = 0.86, which corresponds well
with the measured diﬀerence in wind speed if considering the inﬂuence from turbulence onto
the measured values.
Damping
0° yaw angle
45° yaw angle
U [m/s]
∆U
U [m/s]
∆U
WT opening
1.95
-
1.95
-
Left
1.61
0.82
1.75
0.89
Center
1.48
0.76
1.67
0.86
Right
1.67
0.86
1.76
0.90
Average
0.81
0.88
Table 5: Wind speeds at the model and wind tunnel opening. At 45° the right side is turned further
away from the wind tunnel.
The distance between the model and opening at 45° as well as the lack of endplates led to
inconsistent results between measurements. The whole set of measurements for the diﬀerent
damping levels was redone for the smooth model at 45°, as that was relevant to the investiga-
tion of the applicability of the Eurocode calculation methods to non-vertical cables in yawed
ﬂow. These two sets of results do not correlate well in terms of maximum amplitude, as
seen in Fig. 25. As the second set was conducted as validation of the ﬁrst, each wind speed
was allowed to run for very long to ensure that the real ﬁnal resonance amplitude had been
reached, which presumably is the reason for the higher amplitudes.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
32
==PAGE:40==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
As the method is thought to have been more thorough for the second set and the results also
correlate very well with the expected results based on the ﬁndings by A. Langager [29] who
build the model and tested it at a wide range of angles, those were chosen for the ﬁnal result
as plotted in Fig. 35 and Fig. 37.
Such a validation was also planned for the stranded model at 45°, but that was unfortunately
not possible, as a roof leak in the laboratory in the last month of the thesis together with the
ensuing construction work reduced the remaining planned testing time. For the same reason
no ﬂow visualisations were conducted.
Also, due to the higher turbulence, the development of amplitude was in some cases not as
smooth as expected for a resonance eﬀect, as shown by the amplitude time series in Fig. 26.
The vast majority of cases was as shown on the right in Fig. 26, but sometimes it would behave
like in the left graph, seemingly unable to settle on a steady vortex shedding system.
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
p
g
y
g
Sc= 1.8
Sc= 2.1
Sc= 2.6
Sc= 3.1
Sc= 3.3
Sc= 5.9
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Sc= 1.6
Sc= 2.1
Sc= 2.7
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.6
Sc= 5.7
Figure 25: Amplitude responses of the smooth model at 45°. In the second run (left) wind speeds
outside the lock-in range were not tested due to time constraints and therefore yield unﬁnished curves.
For larger renderings please see Appendix A
Figure 26: The response of the smooth model for exposure at U = 2.05 m/s at 45° on diﬀerent days,
showing 80 min (left) and 60 min (right). For larger renderings please see Appendix A
DTU Mechanical Engineering
33
==PAGE:41==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
4
ANALYSIS METHOD: PYTHON SCRIPT
The analysis of the experiments was conducted within Python; the ﬁnal scripts can be found
in Appendix C. A description of the analysis that is coded into the script is given here.
To explain the structure of the code Section 4.1 introduces the structure that the measurement
data is stored in, followed by a description of the processes in the code in Section 4.2.
4.1
Structure of the Data
4.1.1
Measurement ﬁles
The displacement time series were measured with the application Flex Logger from National
Instruments.
Every measurement was saved with a name containing the date and time of the measurement,
e.g.: "LogFile 2020-12-06-13-46.csv". The measurement ﬁles contain ﬁve columns: the
time stamp and the respective measured values of the four force gauges. Since channel 3 had
some inconsistencies including a higher base noise level than the others, I decided to disregard
the data from that force gauge and only use the other three.
4.1.2
Log ﬁles
For every day, during the tests, I created a log ﬁle where the setup details were recorded
together with the measurement ﬁle name, as demonstrated in an example in Table 6.
Name
Use?
Comment
Type
Band
Amount
Yaw
Wind
[y/n]
[deg]
[m/s]
LogFile 2020-12-04-11-15
y
log dec
smooth
0
0
45
0
LogFile 2020-12-09-18-40
y
-
smooth
clear
1.5
45
1.95
Table 6: Example of daily Log ﬁle contents (example lines taken from diﬀerent days)
The “Use?” column documents whether the measurement was good to use or not. During
some measurements there was a further change in amplitude, even though before starting
the measurement the amplitude had seemed steady for a few minutes. Also, if there was
any disturbance or other reason to not use a measurement this would be documented in this
column.
The main purpose of the “Comment” column is to diﬀerentiate between wind tunnel meas-
urements and free decay measurements, the latter of which were done to ﬁnd the logarithmic
DTU Mechanical Engineering
34
==PAGE:42==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
decrement and with that the damping of that setup. Those are indicated by “log dec” in this
column. Also, reasons for the “not to be used” measurements were documented here.
In the “Type” column the surface type is logged (either smooth or stranded).
The “Band” and “Amount” columns describe the damping. There are three options for
the “band” column: 0, green, and clear. 0 denotes no damping was added to the model, and
the other two describe the type of elastic bands that were used. In the “Amount” column it
is noted how many of those were used respectively.
“Yaw” describes whether the model was placed with an angle of either 0° or 45° to the wind
direction and “Wind” is a log of what wind speed that measurement was taken at.
4.1.3
Folder Structure
The folder structure that the measurements and daily log ﬁles are saved in is as illustrated in
Fig. 27. For each level, only the contents for one folder are shown representatively, as they
are all organised the same within the respective levels.
Main Folder
smooth
stranded
Python Scripts
Day 1
Day 2
Log File Day n
Log File Day 2
Log File Day 1
Day n
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
Measurement 1 Measurement 2
Measurement n
Figure 27: Folder structure that the measurement data is organised in
DTU Mechanical Engineering
35
==PAGE:43==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
4.2
Structure of the Script
The Python Script is organised in several sub-scripts that are responsible for diﬀerent parts
of the analysis and can be run separately but can also be run in sequence through a main
script. These sub-scripts are the following:
1. Analyse the free decay tests for the logarithmic decrement and calculate the Scruton
number per model setup
2. Calculate the mean response amplitude per model setup and wind speed
3. Correlate the amplitude response and Scruton numbers per setup and visualise the
results in graphs
4. Main script that runs the other scripts in the right sequence and with just one click
4.2.1
Scripts 1 and 2 - Measurement Analysis
Scripts 1 and 2 are similar in their structure, as they are both split into two parts: in the ﬁrst
part, a list of relevant measurement ﬁles is created, while in the second part those relevant
measurements are analysed. Therefore, both scripts are described in parallel here.
To ﬁnd the relevant ﬁles, the code in script 1 and 2 ﬁrst opens the “smooth” (later the
“stranded”) folder and then each of the excel ﬁles within it - those are the daily log ﬁles as
described in Table 6. From these, it copies all lines with “y” in the “use?” and with “log
dec” for script 1/ without “log dec” for script 2 into a dataframe. That way, all ﬁlenames
are collected that contain the relevant measurements for the respective case that the scripts
are analysing.
I.e., script 1 will create a dataframe that contains a list of all free decay
measurements, Script 2 has the same for all wind tunnel measurements.
Both the ﬁlenames as well as the connected setup details are saved.
Next, in each of those two scripts, the program opens the sub-folders within the “smooth”/
“stranded” folders (i.e., “Day 1”) and compares the ﬁle names within that folder with those
in the list of relevant measurements that it has created above. If the ﬁlename is within the
folder, that path is added to the ﬁlename. This would, for example, give
"smooth/04-12-20/LogFile 2020-12-04-11-15.csv".
With this, the script will later be
able to open the ﬁle directly from the location where the python script is saved, without
having to cycle through the folders.
After this list of relevant ﬁles has been created, their contents are analysed in the second part
of each script.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
36
==PAGE:44==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
With a for loop, the script opens each of the measurement ﬁles and separately analyses the
columns for each of the force gauges.
Script 1 will take each of the time series from the force gauges and uses the Hilbert transform-
ation to calculate an envelope function. For this envelope, it uses a “curve ﬁt” function that
ﬁnds the best values to make a target function ﬁt the envelope within the relevant amplitude
range with the least-squares method. This target function was deﬁned as the following:
y = e−b·x + c
(11)
From the ﬁt of the target function, the logarithmic decay parameter b is found for every
force gauge, and the average of those is then used for the calculation of the Scruton number.
The Scruton number is then added into the same line in an additional column in the main
dataframe and thereby associated with the respective model setup for that day.
In Script 2 the Hilbert transformation is also used to ﬁnd the envelope, but then the average
of that is calculated. The average of the three force gauges is again calculated and also added
in the same line in the main dataframe.
Both Scripts ﬁnish by saving their respective dataframes as .txt ﬁles for later use. That way,
they do not need to be run again unless there was a change to the base data, saving on overall
computation time when eg only a changed plot of the ﬁgures is required. Also, that way the
creation of the scripts was less time consuming, as only one task had to be run upon every
try until it worked smoothly.
4.2.2
Script 3 - Correlation and Visualisation
The purpose of the third script is to correlate the previous calculation results and visualise
them in a sensible manner. To achieve this, it opens the two previously created .txt ﬁles and
combines them, so that for every setup and wind speed both the Scruton number and wind
response amplitude are saved in the same line of the dataframe (together with the setup data
from Table 6).
There are two types of plot that are relevant for the present investigation: A plot of the
amplitude responses per wind speed for each of the setups, and a plot of the maximum
responses per Scruton numbers (ie. per applied damping level).
First, the response amplitudes for wind speed are plotted. To give a better overview, these
results are split up into four plots, for 0° and 45°, and for smooth or stranded surfaces. Within
each of those, there will be several curves representing the diﬀerent damping levels.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
37
==PAGE:45==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
To deﬁne the same line colour per damping level throughout all wind response plots, a separate
ﬁle that contains the unique setup combinations together with a colour deﬁnition is also read
into the script and correlated in the main data frame.
To create these separate plots, a temporary copy of the main dataframe is created that only
contains the relevant lines through several nested for-loops, as is visualised in Fig. 28 and
Fig. 30.
The naming of the Plots and curves therein is created automatically within the loops so that
it is adaptable to future additions or changes in setup or naming.
This code results in the following four graphs for the current setup (Fig. 28). If another angle
or surface type was added, that would automatically be read as a further option by the code
and further plots would be produced.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
38
==PAGE:46==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
For each
surface
Yes
All damping
levels plotted?
No
Yes
All surfaces
plotted?
For each angle
No
Yes
All angles
plotted?
All Plots
completed
Strart new figure
Start with the
full dataframe
For each
damping level
No
Plot a line with the
amplitude
responses over the
wind speeds
Show the figure
Create a sub data
file containing only
the lines with the
relevant angle
Create a sub data
file containing only
the lines with the
relevant surface
Create a sub data
file containing 
only the lines 
with the relevant 
damping level
Figure 28: Structure of the script for printing the graphs with the amplitude response per wind speed
DTU Mechanical Engineering
39
==PAGE:47==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Amplitudes for smooth surface at 0 degree yaw angle
Sc= 1.8
Sc= 1.9
Sc= 2.6
Sc= 3.0
Sc= 3.7
Sc= 6.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Amplitudes for smooth surface at 45 degree yaw angle
Sc= 1.6
Sc= 2.1
Sc= 2.7
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.6
Sc= 5.7
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Amplitudes for stranded surface at 0 degree yaw angle
Sc= 2.3
Sc= 2.9
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.6
Sc= 4.1
Sc= 5.9
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Amplitudes for stranded surface at 45 degree yaw angle
Sc= 2.3
Sc= 2.4
Sc= 2.9
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.5
Sc= 3.9
Sc= 5.9
Figure 29: Figures that are plotted by the for-loops visualised in Fig. 28. For a discussion of the
results and a larger rendering of these ﬁgures see Section 5.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
40
==PAGE:48==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
A similar principle is applied to print the one ﬁgure that contains the maximum amplitudes
for each setup, shown per Scruton number. As only the maximum wind response amplitudes
are needed, this script starts by grouping the setups, which is an in-build function for python
dataframes. For each group that is deﬁned by containing the same setup details, only the
maximum value from the amplitude response column is retained. See the resulting ﬁgure in
Fig. 35.
For each
surface
No
Yes
All surfaces
plotted?
For each angle
No
All angles
ploted?
Plot finished
Strart new figure
Start with the full
dataframe
Plot a line with the
max amplitude
responses per
damping/ Scruton
number
Create a sub data
file containing only
the lines with the
relevant angle
Create a sub data
file containing only
the lines with the
relevant surface
Group dataframe by
setup, 
keeping only the
maximum amplitude
response per group
Setup types:
Unique combinations of
- Yaw angle
- Surface type
- Damping level
Show the figure
Yes
Figure 30: Structure of the script for printing the max amplitude response per Scruton number
DTU Mechanical Engineering
41
==PAGE:49==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
5.1
Scruton Numbers
As described in Section 4.2.1, the Scruton number is determined as the average of all force
gauges for every free decay test and the average of all associated free decay tests taken to
determine the Scruton number for the respective suit of wind tunnel tests.
The Scruton
numbers for the diﬀerent setups measured are presented in Table 7 with the values measured
on days of testing the model at 0°. For repeated measurements of the same setup on diﬀerent
days there was some slight variation in Scruton number but for reasons of conciseness those
values are not all shown here.
There is a diﬀerence in Scruton number between the smooth and stranded model, as the
smooth surface is obtained by wrapping the stranded model and the model is therefore slightly
heavier (cf. Table 2).
Setup
Scruton Numbers
Elastic
Amount
Smooth
Stranded
none
-
1.89
2.31
clear
0.5
2.16
-
clear
1.0
2.65
2.91
clear
1.5
3.03
3.25
clear
2.0
-
3.66
clear
2.5
4.05
4.13
green
1
6.02
5.91
Table 7: Scruton numbers found for diﬀerent setups and used for the 0° graphs in Fig. 35
5.2
Wind Tunnel Tests
The results from the wind tunnel tests have already been shown in the above chapter in a
small format to illustrate the workings of the scripts, but shall here be discussed and shown
again for better visibility. For each of the model conﬁgurations, a plot is given of normalised
relative amplitude vs. normalised reduced velocity. The relative amplitude A/D is normalised
with the cosine of the the yaw angle to allow for the change in exposure length with yaw angle.
The reduced velocity Vr is normalised to reﬂect the change in ﬂow direction according to the
independence principle (cf. Fig. 7).
DTU Mechanical Engineering
42
==PAGE:50==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
5.2.1
Response for normal ﬂow
For the wind tunnel tests with the model placed at 0° yaw angle, the lock-in range was found to
be clearly deﬁned with the response amplitude peaking sharply at the critical wind speed. The
diﬀerence between the smooth and stranded surface models was mainly found in the height
of the response amplitude, where the stranded cable exhibits a signiﬁcantly lower amplitude
(close to half), while the critical wind speed is largely the same - compare Table 8.
There is a slight tendency for the peak wind speed to be lower for the stranded cable as the
slight extra weight of the wrapping on the smooth cylinder changes the natural frequency
slightly. There is a greater diﬀerence for the highest damped case with the green elastic but
might be a measuring mistake, as the amplitude is nearly completely damped and no proper
lock-in behaviour can occur.
There is a progression in the peak wind speeds of the smooth model around V r = 5.5, with a
higher reduced velocity for lower damping levels and a lower relative amplitude for the higher
damping levels. This would suggest that the higher amplitude at lower damping levels allows
for a stronger lock-in phenomenon.
Damping
Smooth
Stranded
U [m/s]
VrN
A/D
U [m/s]
VrN
A/D
none
1.55
5.81
0.36
1.45
5.41
0.21
1 clear
1.5
5.61
0.27
1.45
5.39
0.17
2 clear
1.47
5.47
0.21
1.45
5.37
0.14
green
1.48
5.39
0.08
1.56
5.72
0.03
Table 8: Peak values for the model at 0°, with wind speed U, normalised reduced amplitude VrN and
relative amplitude A/D
DTU Mechanical Engineering
43
==PAGE:51==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
p
g
y
g
Sc= 1.8
Sc= 1.9
Sc= 2.6
Sc= 3.0
Sc= 3.7
Sc= 6.0
Figure 31: Relative response amplitude for a smooth cylinder at 0° yaw angle
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
p
g
y
g
Sc= 2.3
Sc= 2.9
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.6
Sc= 4.1
Sc= 5.9
Figure 32: Relative response amplitude for a stranded cylinder at 0° yaw angle
DTU Mechanical Engineering
44
==PAGE:52==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
5.2.2
Response for Yawed Flow
For the model placed at 45°, a strong response is found across a wider range of wind speeds
without a pronounced peak response. As described in Section 3.4, the measurements for the
smooth cylinder at 45° were repeated but only for the critical wind speed range and therefore
did not yield full curves for the plot.
For the smooth and stranded surfaces, the response spectrum is found for the same range
of wind speeds, but with the peak in diﬀerent parts. For the smooth surface cylinder, the
response peaks at the upper end of the lock-in range and drops oﬀsteeply, while for the
stranded cylinder the peak response is in the middle of the response range, with more even
slopes on either side of the lock-in range. Due to this, there is a more notable diﬀerence in
the critical wind speed, as seen in Table 9.
Damping
Smooth
Stranded
U [m/s]
VrN
A/D
U [m/s]
VrN
A/D
none
1.42
6.12
0.36
1.22
5.22
0.22
1 clear
1.35
5.77
0.26
1.17
5.01
0.16
2 clear
1.27
5.42
0.22
1.17
4.96
0.09
green
1.47
6.22
0.02
1.26
5.31
0.01
Table 9: Peak values for the model at 45°, with wind speed U, normalised reduced amplitude VrN
and relative amplitude A/D
DTU Mechanical Engineering
45
==PAGE:53==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
p
g
y
g
Sc= 1.6
Sc= 2.1
Sc= 2.7
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.6
Sc= 5.7
Figure 33: Relative response amplitude for a smooth cylinder at 45° yaw angle
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
p
g
y
g
Sc= 2.3
Sc= 2.4
Sc= 2.9
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.5
Sc= 3.9
Sc= 5.9
Figure 34: Relative response amplitude for a stranded cylinder at 45° yaw angle
DTU Mechanical Engineering
46
==PAGE:54==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
5.2.3
Damping Levels
The eﬀect of damping is best visualised in a plot of maximum amplitudes vs Scruton numbers.
There is a clear mostly linear relationship between the damping and reduction of amplitude.
The amplitudes for the diﬀerent angles, when normalised for exposure length, correlate well
for the diﬀerent surfaces. There is a diﬀerence in the amplitudes for the stranded cable at the
diﬀerent angles at around Sc = 4. However, as the measurement for the stranded cylinder at
45° is in a range where the movement might have not been big enough to initiate lock-in and,
therefore, the real resonant steady amplitude response might not have been reached.
2
3
4
5
6
Scruton Number
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Rawlins
smooth at 45 degree
stranded at 45 degree
smooth at 0 degree
stranded at 0 degree
Figure 35: Relative response amplitudes vs Scruton numbers with error bars from the respective
measurements
DTU Mechanical Engineering
47
==PAGE:55==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
5.2.4
Inﬂuence of Yaw Angle and Strandedness
In comparing the undamped response of the four setup conﬁgurations with either smooth or
stranded surface and at either 0° or 45°, the applicability of the independence principle to
these cases can be seen.
From Fig. 36 it is visible that the independence principle does apply, as the response curves
for the smooth model at 0° and 45° correlate well and their peak amplitude response falls
within the expected range of reduced velocities (i.e.: 5 ≤Vr ≤7 [52], cf.: Fig. 5).
The peak amplitude of the stranded model at 0° is right at the lower edge of the range
of reduced velocities where lock-in can occur, where the vortex shedding frequency is equal
to the structural frequency. However, strong lock-in behaviour where the vortex shedding
frequency is forced towards the cylinders eigenfrequency for higher wind speeds does not
seem to occur.
The diﬀerence in Vr at which the peak amplitudes appear for the smooth models at diﬀerent
angles which might suggest a reduced applicability of the independence principle is instead put
down to the eﬀects of using an open wind tunnel, where parts of the model are at signiﬁcant
distances to the opening when placed at 45°.
For the stranded model at 45°, the peak amplitude occurs at a normalised reduced velocity
signiﬁcantly lower than for 0° and lower than the lock-in range, which shows that the independ-
ence principle does not fully apply for this case and the normalisation by VrN = Vr · cos(45)
does not yield the correct reduced velocity and Strouhal number. Compared to the plot of
amplitudes vs. not-normalised reduced velocity, the independence principle is still applicable
and required to ﬁnd the correct Strouhal number, but reduced in inﬂuence by about 10%
compared to the smooth model.
This suggests that for a stranded cable, due to the added turbulence in the boundary layer
and/ or the directionality of the surface protrusions the surface ﬂow is not perpendicular to the
cylinder axis as it is for the smooth cylinder – to understand the ﬂuid dynamical mechanisms
behind this eﬀect this will need to be investigated in future studies.
Comparing to the results of A. Langager [29] who found the independence principle applicable
to cables at angles up to 45° and therein the explanation for the higher than expected fatigue
loads through the broader range of critical wind speeds, these results show that the installation
of stranded cables is doubly beneﬁcial: the resonant amplitudes are reduced as well as the
range of critical wind speeds, resulting in overall lower fatigue loads.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
48
==PAGE:56==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Sc=1.8, St=0.17, 0° smooth
Sc=2.3, St=0.18, 0° stranded
Sc=1.6, St=0.17, 45° smooth
Sc=2.3, St=0.21, 45° stranded
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
Reduced Velocity Vr
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Sc=1.8, St=0.17, 0° smooth
Sc=2.3, St=0.18, 0° stranded
Sc=1.6, St=0.12, 45° smooth
Sc=2.3, St=0.14, 45° stranded
Figure 36: Comparison of the undamped response of the four setups over normalised and not norm-
alised reduced velocity
DTU Mechanical Engineering
49
==PAGE:57==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
5.3
Comparison of the measurements to the Eurocode values
This thesis aimed to investigate experimentally how the theoretical calculation methods as
laid out in the EUROCODE [12] and by Rawlins [44] are applicable for both a smooth
cylinder in normal ﬂow, as well as stranded cables and in yawed ﬂows. The Eurocode oﬀers
a calculation method for the incorporation of ViV eﬀects in the design of structures, while
Rawlins developed an expression describing the behaviour of a smooth cylinder.
A comparison of the theoretical and measured maximum response amplitudes over the Scruton
number is shown in Fig. 37. It can clearly be seen that for the smooth cylinder in normal
ﬂow the present measurements ﬁt very well with the data found by Rawlins but not with the
calculation based on values deﬁned by the Eurocode EN1991 (grey line), which overestimates
the critical Scruton number. However, if the aerodynamic parameters Ka and Cc are adapted
to diﬀerent values as shown in Table 10, then the graph does reﬂect the measured behaviour
of a cable in air (black line).
The stranded cylinder in normal ﬂow shows the expected reduction in amplitude response for
Vortex induced vibrations but is not diﬀerent enough from the smooth cylinder to warrant
the deﬁnition of a separate set of constants. The calculations are also applicable to yawed
cylinders, when the change in wind speed due to the independence principle is included.
Case
EN1991
EN1991
EN1991
proposed
Re ≤105
Re = 105
Re ≥105
values
CC
0.02
0.005
0.01
0.015
Ka
2
0.5
1
0.35
aL
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
Table 10: The values to be used in the calculation according to Table E.6 in [12] and the proposed
optimized values.
DTU Mechanical Engineering
50
==PAGE:58==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Scruton Number
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Maximum response amplitudes vs. Scruton number
Rawlins
EN1991, Ka=2 Cc=0.02
EN1991, Ka=0.5 Cc=0.005
EN1991, Ka=1 Cc=0.01
EN1991, Ka=0.35 Cc=0.015
smooth at 45 degree
smooth at 0 degree
stranded at 0 degree
Figure 37: Measured relative response amplitudes vs Scruton number and Reference lines, based on
Data from Rawlins [44] and the Eurocode [12], comparing the calculation with the codes values (grey
lines) and the proposed optimized values (black line)
DTU Mechanical Engineering
51
==PAGE:59==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
6
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
It has been shown that to achieve mitigation of vortex-induced vibrations less damping is
necessary than prescribed in the Eurocode EN1991 [12]. Based on the present measurements
and data from literature [44] alternative values are given to be used for the aerodynamic
parameters in the Eurocodes method of calculation No. 2 (cf. Appendix E, E.1.5.3), namely
as CC = 0.35 and Ka = 0.015. These values have been shown to be valid for both circular
and stranded cylinders as well as in yawed ﬂow.
The applicability of the independence principle to both smooth and stranded cylinders up
to yaw angles of 45° as proposed by Langager [29] could not be wholly conﬁrmed; instead,
for stranded cylinders the independence principle can only be applied to a reduced amount.
This tendency is also present in Langagers results.
For the practical application of these
ﬁndings, this means that compared to smooth cables, stranded cables reduce the fatigue load
on safety hand ropes doubly - the response amplitude is lower due to higher boundary layer
turbulence and the range of critical wind speeds is smaller due to the reduced applicability of
the independence principle. Encasing the cables in a smooth envelope as can be done for the
mitigation of galloping is therefore not recommended.
An explanation of the mechanisms leading to the reduced applicability of the independence
principle might be found through a future thesis on the CFD analysis and experimental
visualization of the ﬂow around a yawed stranded cylinder.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Scruton Number
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
p
p
Rawlins TN31, 1998
EN1991
En1991, proposed constants
smooth at 45 degree
smooth at 0 degree
stranded at 0 degree
Figure 38: The Eurocode EN1991, E.1.5.3. calculation method with the prescribed and new proposed
constants plotted with experimental results and results from literature
DTU Mechanical Engineering
52
==PAGE:60==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Appendices
A
FIGURES
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Amplitudes for old smooth surface at 45 degree yaw angle
Sc= 1.8
Sc= 2.1
Sc= 2.6
Sc= 3.1
Sc= 3.3
Sc= 5.9
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Normalised Reduced Velocity Vr *cos( )
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Normalised Relative Amplitude  A/D *cos( )
Amplitudes for smooth surface at 45 degree yaw angle
Sc= 1.6
Sc= 2.1
Sc= 2.7
Sc= 3.2
Sc= 3.6
Sc= 5.7
Figure 39: Old and new measurements of the response at 45°
DTU Mechanical Engineering
i
==PAGE:61==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 40: The response of the smooth model for exposure at U = 2.05 m/s at 45° on diﬀerent days,
showing 80 min (top) and 60 min (bottom).
DTU Mechanical Engineering
ii
==PAGE:62==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
DTU Mechanical Engineering
iii
==PAGE:63==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
B
PICTURES OF THE MODEL
Figure 41: The model at 0° in front of the wind tunnel
DTU Mechanical Engineering
iv
==PAGE:64==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 42: The model at 45° in front of the wind tunnel
DTU Mechanical Engineering
v
==PAGE:65==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 43: The opening of the wind tunnel with Pitot tube mount
DTU Mechanical Engineering
vi
==PAGE:66==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 44: The model suspension system with disengaged elastic bands
DTU Mechanical Engineering
vii
==PAGE:67==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 45: Cable management for the force gauges
DTU Mechanical Engineering
viii
==PAGE:68==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Figure 46: Cable management for the force gauges
DTU Mechanical Engineering
ix
==PAGE:69==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
C
SCRIPTS
Main Script
1
# -*- coding: utf -8
-*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Jan 12 11:41:41
2021
4
5
@author: s182628
6
7
Main
script to run the other
script in sequence
8
to read , analyse
and plot the data with one click
9
"""
10
11
from
datetime
import
datetime
12
start_time = datetime.now()
13
14
import
A_LogDecFileFinder_3
15
import
B_Wt_Amp_analysis_3
16
import
C_Wt_Amp_Sc_analysis_3
17
18
19
print ("all done ")
20
end_time = datetime.now()
21
print('Duration: {}'. format(end_time - start_time ))
DTU Mechanical Engineering
x
==PAGE:70==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Logarithmic Decrement Analysis
Name of the Script: A LogDecFileFinder final.py
1
# -*- coding: utf -8
-*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Jan
5 10:57:18
2021
4
5
@author: merce
6
7
find all the log dec files and
analyse
them for
Scruton
number
8
9
"""
10
11
12
import
pandas as pd
13
import
numpy as np
14
import os
15
from
scipy.fft import fft , fftfreq
16
from
scipy.signal
import
hilbert2
17
from
scipy.optimize
import
curve_fit
18
from
datetime
import
datetime
19
20
import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
21
22
23
#-----------------------------------------------
24
#define
constants
25
#-----------------------------------------------
26
27
LogDecNamesCsv =[]
28
LogDecNamesXc =[]
29
LogDecFiles =[]
30
Folders =[]
31
32
Scruton=pd.DataFrame(columns =['Date ','name ','band ','amount ','type ',
33
'ca amplitude [mm]','yaw angle ','Scruton ','Guess '])
34
35
m=6.04/0.8
#kg/m
Mass per
exposed
lengths
36
rho =1.225
#kg/m^3 Air
37
D=0.1
#m
Diameter of the model
38
39
#-----------------------------------------------
40
#predefine
functions
41
#-----------------------------------------------
42
43
#function
that will be fit to the data
44
def
dec_func(x,a,b,c):
45
return a*np.exp(-b*x)+c
46
47
#function
that will line fit the
envelope of the time
series
48
#and returns
the
logarithmic
decrement
49
def
LogDecrement(Time ,Amp ,Guess ):
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xi
==PAGE:71==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
50
#expect two single
column
dataframes
plus a single
value
51
#first df is the time stamps , second the
amplitudes
and the value
52
# expects a guess for the
logarithmic
decrement
53
54
#calculate
lengths and cut -off lengths
55
N=len(Amp)
56
n=int(N/10)
57
Nn=N-n
58
59
#turn the input
into the
correct
format
60
Fx=Amp.to_numpy ()
61
T=Time.to_numpy ()
62
63
#find the
envelope
64
envelope_t=np.abs(hilbert2(Fx)).T #.T to transform
into
vector
65
66
#cut off spikes at beginning & end from
hilbert
transform
67
env1=envelope_t[n:Nn]. flatten ()
68
69
#disregard
the higher
amplitudes
70
index=np.argmin(env1 >35) #put
highest
relevant
amplitude
value
here
71
env=env1[index :]. flatten ()
72
73
#have the time
stamps
start at 0, so cut all off the end
74
T=T[:len(env )]. flatten ()
75
76
#curve fit
77
#popt are the
optimized
parameters , pcov is the
covariance
thereof
78
guess =[40, Guess ,3] #put your
guess
values
here. can be made adaptive ,
79
#like I have a different
log dec
parameter
80
# guess per input
81
popt ,pcov=curve_fit(dec_func ,T,env ,guess)
82
83
return(popt)
84
85
86
#function to calculate
the
frequencies
87
#to check
whether it is relevant to filter
against
higher
mode
contributions
88
def
frequencies(Amp ,SampleSpacing ):
89
90
N=int(len(Amp))
91
T=SampleSpacing
#1/ sampling
frequency
92
#1000/N
93
94
#turn the input
into the
correct
format
95
y=Amp.to_numpy ()
96
yf=2/N*np.abs(fft(y))[:N//2]
97
98
#xf=np.linspace (0,N,N+1, endpoint=False )*1000/N
99
#xf=np.linspace (0 ,500/ len(yf) ,1000//2 , endpoint=False )#[:N//2]
100
xf=fftfreq(N,T)[:N//2]
101
102
#find peak
frequency
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xii
==PAGE:72==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
103
index=np.where(yf==np.amax(yf)) #put
highest
relevant
amplitude
value
here
104
max_freq=xf[index]
105
106
#return the result
also
107
result =[yf ,xf ,max_freq [0]]
108
109
return(result)
110
111
#function to plot the
frequencies
112
#to check
whether it is relevant to filter
against
higher
mode
contributions
113
def
print_fft(Amp ,SampleSpacing ,Title ):
114
115
N=len(Amp)
116
T=SampleSpacing
117
118
#turn the input
into the
correct
format
119
y=Amp.to_numpy ()
120
121
yf=2/N*np.abs(fft(y))
122
xf=fftfreq(N,T)
123
124
plt.title(Title)
125
plt.plot(xf ,yf)
126
plt.show ()
127
result =[yf ,xf]
128
129
return(result)
130
131
#return
only
common
elements of two lists as new list
132
def
common_elements (list1 ,list2 ):
133
return [element
for
element in list1 if element in list2]
134
135
#return
only
common
elements of two lists as new list
136
def
uncommon_elements (list1 ,list2 ):
137
return [element
for
element in list1 if element
not in list2]
138
139
140
141
#-----------------------------------------------
142
#start of actual
scipt
143
#-----------------------------------------------
144
start_time = datetime.now()
145
146
#-----------------------------------------------
147
#find the
relevant
files
148
#-----------------------------------------------
149
#the
folders
that
contain
the
relevant
files
150
Type_Folders =['1 ___smooth ','2_stranded ','3__strakes ']
151
152
rootdir=os.getcwd ()
153
for subdir ,dirs ,files in os.walk(rootdir ):
154
for
Folder1 in dirs:
155
if Folder1 in Type_Folders:
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xiii
==PAGE:73==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
156
157
#find all the daily log files
that have the test
specifications
158
for file in os.listdir(Folder1 ):
159
if file.endswith (". xlsx "):
160
path=Folder1+os.sep+file
161
df = pd.read_excel(path ,header =1)
162
logdec=df[df['comment ']==" log dec"]
163
#create
result
dataframe
164
# that the scuton
numbers
will go into
165
Scruton=Scruton.append(logdec [['name ','band ',
166
'amount ','type ','ca amplitude [mm]','yaw angle ']],
167
sort=False ,ignore_index=True)
168
logdeclist=logdec['name ']. tolist ()
169
logdeclistcsv =[s+'.csv 'for s in logdeclist]
170
logdeclistxc =[s+'.xlsx 'for s in logdeclist]
171
LogDecNamesCsv =[* LogDecNamesCsv ,* logdeclistcsv]
172
LogDecNamesXc =[* LogDecNamesXc ,* logdeclistxc]
173
174
#create a guess
value so the curve fit runs
faster
175
Scruton['Guess ']=np.where(Scruton['band ']==0 ,0.0075 ,0.02)
176
Scruton['Guess ']=np.where(Scruton['band ']==" clear",
177
0.01, Scruton['Guess '])
178
179
#go through
folders , find the files in the folders ,
180
# incl
folders in file name
181
#this also
makes
sure that the logged
files are
actually
there
182
current_dir=rootdir +'/'+ Folder1
183
for subdir ,dirs ,files in os.walk(current_dir ):
184
for Folder2 in dirs:
185
path=Folder1+os.sep+Folder2
186
Folders.append(path)
187
AllFiles=os.listdir(path)
188
ThisLogDecList= common_elements (LogDecNamesCsv ,AllFiles)
189
ThisLogDecList =[ path+os.sep+s for s in ThisLogDecList ]
190
LogDecFiles =[* LogDecFiles ,* ThisLogDecList]
191
192
193
#-----------------------------------------------
194
#analyse
the files
195
#-----------------------------------------------
196
197
ScrutonList=np.empty(len(LogDecFiles ))
198
FreqList=np.empty(len(LogDecFiles ))
199
FilteredScrutonList =np.empty(len(LogDecFiles ))
200
x=10
201
y=2.3
202
203
# open the
relevant
files and
analyse
them for the Scuton
number
204
for i in range(len(LogDecFiles )):
205
"""
206
#to know
where in the
process
the
program is , not
necessary
but nice
207
print(i)
208
"""
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xiv
==PAGE:74==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
209
210
#open the file
211
df=pd.read_csv(LogDecFiles[i])
212
sampleSpacing =(max(df['F1_Time *'])-min(df['F1_Time * ']))/( len(df[
213
'F1_Time *'])-1)
214
sampleFrequency =1/ sampleSpacing
215
#calculate
the log dec for the three
time series , average
216
#and
calculate
the
Scruton
number
from that
217
218
Log1=LogDecrement(df['F1_Time *'],df['F1 '], Scruton.loc[i,'Guess '])
219
Log2=LogDecrement(df['F1_Time *'],df['F2 '], Scruton.loc[i,'Guess '])
220
Log4=LogDecrement(df['F1_Time *'],df['F4 '], Scruton.loc[i,'Guess '])
221
222
#/3 for the 3 measurements ,
223
#/4 for the point
reduction in the
Hilbert
Transform
224
ThisLog =( Log1 [1]+ Log2 [1]+ Log4 [1])/12
Sc=2* ThisLog*m/(rho*D**2)
225
ScrutonList[i]=Sc
226
227
228
Freq1=frequencies(df['F1 '], sampleSpacing)
229
Freq2=frequencies(df['F2 '], sampleSpacing)
230
Freq4=frequencies(df['F4 '], sampleSpacing)
231
232
FreqList[i]=( Freq1 [2]+ Freq2 [2]+ Freq4 [2])/3
233
234
235
Dates =[s[11:19]
for s in LogDecFiles]
236
Scruton['Date ']= Dates
237
238
Scruton['Frequencies ']= FreqList
239
240
#add
scruton
numbers to the result
data
frame
241
Scruton['Scruton ']= ScrutonList
242
ScrutonNumbers=Scruton.groupby (['Date ','band ','amount ','type ',
243
'yaw angle '], as_index=False ).agg({'Scruton ':['mean ','std '],
244
'Frequencies ':['mean ','std ']})
245
246
247
#save
results as text
files
248
#so they can easily be used
without
rerunning
this
script
249
Scruton.to_csv(path_or_buf =" Scruton_from_log_dec_runs_all .txt",index=False)
250
251
#will be used by
C_Wt_Amp_Sc_analysis
252
ScrutonNumbers.to_csv (" Scruton_from_log_dec_runs .txt",index=False)
253
#to know what is going on when
several
scripts run in series
254
end_time = datetime.now()
255
print ("Log Dec
analysis
done ")
256
print('Duration: {}'. format(end_time - start_time ))
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xv
==PAGE:75==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Wind Response Amplitude Analysis
Name of the Script: B Wt Amp analysis final.py
1
# -*- coding: utf -8
-*-
2
"""
3
Created on Fri Jan
8 10:14:33
2021
4
5
@author: s182628
6
7
Analyse
the wind
tunnel
tests
8
"""
9
10
11
import
pandas as pd
12
import
numpy as np
13
import os
14
from
scipy.signal
import
hilbert2
15
from
scipy.fft import fft , fftfreq
16
from
datetime
import
datetime
17
18
19
20
#-----------------------------------------------
21
#define
constants
22
#-----------------------------------------------
23
24
m=6.04/0.8
#kg/m
Mass per
exposed
lengths
25
rho =1.225
#kg/m^3 Air
26
Dm =0.1
#m
Diameter of the model
27
28
nu =1.516*10**( -5)
#air
density
29
30
31
WtNamesCsv =[]
32
WtNamesXc =[]
33
wtNames =[]
34
WtFiles =[]
35
Folders =[]
36
Amplitudes=pd.DataFrame(columns =['Date ','name ','band ','amount ','type ',
37
'yaw angle ','ca amplitude [mm]','wind
speed [m/s]'])
38
39
40
41
#-----------------------------------------------
42
#predefine
functions
43
#-----------------------------------------------
44
45
#function
that will find the
average of the
envelope of the time
series
46
def
average(Amp):
47
#expect the time
series of amplitudes as a single
column
dataframe
48
49
#calculate
lengths and cut -off lengths
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xvi
==PAGE:76==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
50
N=len(Amp)
51
n=int(N/10)
52
Nn=N-n
53
54
#turn the input
into the
correct
format
55
Fx=Amp.to_numpy ()
56
Fx=Fx -Fx.mean ()
57
envelope_t=np.abs(hilbert2(Fx)).T #.T to transform
into
vector
58
#cut off spikes
from
hilbert at beginning & end
59
env=envelope_t[n:Nn]. flatten ()
60
61
#get the
average and
standard
deviation
62
result =[env.mean(),env.std ()]
63
64
return(result)
65
66
67
68
#function to plot the
frequencies
69
#to check
whether it is relevant to filter
against
higher
mode
contributions
70
def
frequencies(Amp ,SampleSpacing ):
71
72
N=int(len(Amp))
73
T=SampleSpacing
#1/ sampling
frequency
74
75
#turn the input
into the
correct
format
76
y=Amp.to_numpy ()
77
yf=2/N*np.abs(fft(y))[:N//2]
78
79
xf=fftfreq(N,T)[:N//2]
80
81
#find peak
frequency
82
index=np.where(yf==np.amax(yf))# put max
relevant
amplitude
value in
83
max_freq=xf[index]
84
85
#return the result
also
86
result =[yf ,xf ,max_freq [0]]
87
88
return(result)
89
90
#return
only
common
elements of two lists as new list
91
def
common_elements (list1 ,list2 ):
92
return [element
for
element in list1 if element in list2]
93
94
#-----------------------------------------------
95
#start of actual
scipt
96
#-----------------------------------------------
97
start_time = datetime.now()
98
99
#-----------------------------------------------
100
#find the
relevant
files
101
#-----------------------------------------------
102
#the
folders
that
contain
the
relevant
files
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xvii
==PAGE:77==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
103
Type_Folders =['1 ___smooth ','2_stranded ','3__strakes ']
104
rootdir=os.getcwd ()
105
for subdir ,dirs ,files in os.walk(rootdir ):
106
for
Folder1 in dirs:
107
if Folder1 in Type_Folders:
108
109
110
#find all the daily log files
that have the test
specifications
111
for file in os.listdir(Folder1 ):
112
if file.endswith (". xlsx "):
113
path=Folder1+os.sep+file
114
df = pd.read_excel(path ,header =1)
115
wt=df[df['comment ']!=" log dec"]
116
wt=wt[wt['use ? ']=="y"]
117
118
#create
result
dataframe
that the scuton nrs will go into
119
Amplitudes=Amplitudes.append(wt[['name ','band ','amount ',
120
'type ','yaw angle ','ca amplitude [mm]','comment ',
121
'wind
speed [m/s]']],sort=False ,ignore_index=True)
122
wtList=wt['name ']. tolist ()
123
wtListcsv =[s+'.csv 'for s in wtList]
124
wtListxc =[s+'.xlsx 'for s in wtList]
125
WtNamesCsv =[* WtNamesCsv ,* wtListcsv]
126
WtNamesXc =[* WtNamesXc ,* wtListxc]
127
128
129
130
#go through
folders , find the files in the folders ,
131
# incl
folders in file name
132
#this also
makes
sure that the logged
files are
actually
there
133
current_dir=rootdir+os.sep+Folder1
134
for subdir ,dirs ,files in os.walk(current_dir ):
135
for Folder2 in dirs:
136
path=Folder1+os.sep+Folder2
137
Folders.append(path)
138
AllFiles=os.listdir(path)
139
ThisWtList= common_elements (WtNamesCsv ,AllFiles)
140
wtNames =[* wtNames ,* ThisWtList]
141
ThisWtList =[ path+os.sep+s for s in ThisWtList]
142
WtFiles =[* WtFiles ,* ThisWtList]
143
144
145
#-----------------------------------------------
146
#analyse
the time
series
files for the mean
amplitudes
per setup and wind
speed
147
#-----------------------------------------------
148
MeanList=np.empty(len(WtFiles ))
149
StdList=np.empty(len(WtFiles ))
150
151
MeanList_filt=np.empty(len(WtFiles ))
152
StdList_filt=np.empty(len(WtFiles ))
153
154
Reynolds=np.empty(len(WtFiles ))
155
Strouhal=np.empty(len(WtFiles ))
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xviii
==PAGE:78==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
156
Freq=np.empty(len(WtFiles ))
157
158
# open the
relevant
files and
analyse
them for the Scuton
number
159
for i in range(len(WtFiles )):
160
161
"""
162
#to know
where in the
process
the
program is , not
necessary
but nice
163
print(i)
164
"""
165
166
df=pd.read_csv(WtFiles[i])
167
sampleSpacing =(max(df['F1_Time *'])-min(df['F1_Time * ']))/( len(df[
168
'F1_Time *'])-1)
169
sampleFrequency =1/ sampleSpacing
170
171
172
#calculate
the mean
value of the peaks as well as the
standard
deviation
173
174
Amp1=average(df['F1 '])
175
Amp2=average(df['F2 '])
176
Amp4=average(df['F4 '])
177
#take
average of the three
relevant
gauges (no 3 was
behaving
strange)
178
Amp=( Amp1 [0]+ Amp2 [0]+ Amp4 [0])/3
179
Std=( Amp1 [1]+ Amp2 [1]+ Amp4 [1])/3
180
181
MeanList[i]=Amp
182
StdList[i]=Std
183
184
Freq1=frequencies(df['F1 '], sampleSpacing)
185
Freq2=frequencies(df['F2 '], sampleSpacing)
186
Freq4=frequencies(df['F4 '], sampleSpacing)
187
188
Freq[i]=( Freq1 [2]+ Freq2 [2]+ Freq4 [2])/3
189
190
Wind=Amplitudes.loc[i,'wind
speed [m/s]']
191
Reynolds[i]=Dm*Wind/nu
192
Strouhal[i]= Freq[i]*Dm/Wind
193
194
195
#collect
all
results in one
dataframe
196
if FilterChoice:
197
Amplitudes['Filt Amp Mean ']= MeanList_filt
198
Amplitudes['Filt Amp Std ']= StdList_filt
199
else:
200
Amplitudes['Amp Mean ']= MeanList
201
Amplitudes['Amp Std ']= StdList
202
203
204
Dates =[s[11:19]
for s in WtFiles]
205
Amplitudes['Date ']= Dates
206
207
Amplitudes['Reynolds ']= Reynolds
208
Amplitudes['Strouhal ']= Strouhal
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xix
==PAGE:79==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
209
Amplitudes['Freq Wind ']= Freq
210
211
#save
results as text files ,
212
#so they can easily be used
without
rerunning
this
script
213
Amplitudes.to_csv (" Amp_per_setup_and_Ws .txt",index=False)
214
215
#to know what is going on when
several
scripts run in series
216
end_time = datetime.now()
217
print (" Wind
response
analysis
done ")
218
print('Duration: {}'. format(end_time - start_time ))
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xx
==PAGE:80==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
Script to print the Plots
Name of the Script: C Wt Amp Sc analysis final.py
1
# -*- coding: utf -8
-*-
2
"""
3
Created on Fri Jan
8 10:14:33
2021
4
5
@author: s182628
6
7
Analyse
the wind
tunnel
tests
8
"""
9
10
11
import
pandas as pd
12
import
numpy as np
13
import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
14
from
datetime
import
datetime
15
import
math
16
17
18
#-----------------------------------------------
19
#define
constants
20
#-----------------------------------------------
21
22
#choose how to plot
23
reducedVelocity =True
#y/n measured
wind
speed or reduced
velocity
24
EurocodeLines=False
#y/n to plot the
EUROCODE
lines
25
NormaliseAngleAmp =True
#y/n to normalise
exposure
length for the 45deg
26
NormalisedAngleWS =True
27
WindSpeedCorrection =True
#y/n to correct
the wind
speed
towards St =0.18
28
29
#choose
which
plots to plot
30
PlotPerSetup=True
31
PlotAmpPerSc=True
32
PlotNoneComparison =True
33
34
WtNamesCsv =[]
35
WtNamesXc =[]
36
wtNames =[]
37
WtFiles =[]
38
Folders =[]
39
Amplitudes=pd.DataFrame(columns =['Date ','name ','band ','amount ','type ',
40
'yaw angle ','ca amplitude [mm]','wind
speed [m/s]','Mean Amp ','St Dev '])
41
42
m=6.04/0.8
#kg/m
Mass per
exposed
lengths
43
rho =1.22
#kg/m^3
Air
44
D=100
#mm
Diameter of the model
45
Dm =0.1
#m
diameter of the model
46
47
#for Eurocode , [EN1991 , EN1991 , EN1991 , smooth
cylinder]
48
Cc =[0.02 , 0.005 , 0.01, 0.015 , 0.015]
#aerodynamic
constant
49
Ka=[2, 0.5, 1, 0.35]
#aerodynamic
damping
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxi
==PAGE:81==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
50
al=[0.4 , 0.4, 0.4, 0.4, 0.25]
#normalised
limiting
amplitude
51
St =0.18
#Strouhal
see E162
52
h=0.8
#exposed
length
53
b=Dm
54
nu =1.516*10**( -5)
#air
density
55
56
57
#-----------------------------------------------
58
#predefine
functions
59
#-----------------------------------------------
60
61
#return
only
common
elements of two lists as new list
62
def
common_elements (list1 ,list2 ):
63
return [element
for
element in list1 if element in list2]
64
65
66
#return
only
elements
not in the second
list
67
def
uncommon_elements (list1 ,list2 ):
68
return [element
for
element in list1 if element
not in list2]
69
70
71
#-----------------------------------------------
72
#start of actual
scipt
73
#-----------------------------------------------
74
start_time = datetime.now()
75
76
#import the
results
from the other
scripts
77
78
#Wind
speeds per setup (averages
per
measurement)
79
#from
B_Wt_Amp_analysis .py
80
Amps=pd.read_csv (" Amp_per_setup_and_Ws .txt")
81
Amps['band ']=np.where(Amps['amount ']==0 ,"0" , Amps['band '])
82
83
#list of setups
with the
respective
Scruton
numbers
84
#from
A_LogDecFileFinder .py
85
Sc=pd.read_csv(' Scruton_from_log_dec_runs .txt ',skiprows =[1])
86
Sc['band ']=np.where(Sc['amount ']==0 ,"0" , Sc['band '])
87
Sc.columns =['Date ','band ','amount ','type ','yaw angle ','Sc mean ',
88
'Sc std ','Freq mean ','Freq std ']
89
90
#predefined
colour for the plots
91
colors=pd.read_csv('colors.txt ')
92
93
#import the
measurements
from the tests
with
andreas
94
Andreas=pd.read_csv(' Andreas_DTU_Data .txt ',skiprows =[1])
95
Rawlins=pd.read_csv('Rawlins.csv ')
96
97
98
#-----------------------------------------------
99
#sort into
relevant sub -dataframes
100
#-----------------------------------------------
101
102
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxii
==PAGE:82==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
103
#combine
the input , then
group for later use
104
Combi=pd.merge(left=Sc ,right=Amps ,how='outer ',on=['band ','amount ',
105
'type ','yaw angle '])
106
Combi=pd.merge(left=Combi ,right=colors ,how='outer ',on=['band ','amount '])
107
108
if NormalisedAngleWS :
109
norm =1/( math.sqrt (2)*1)#*0.9
for the
stranded at 45 degree
110
else:
111
norm =1
112
113
if WindSpeedCorrection :
114
#correcting
for wrong
wind
speed
measurements
115
Combi['Ws correction ']=np.where(Combi['yaw angle ']==0 ,
0.86, 1)
116
Combi['Ws correction ']=np.where(Combi['yaw angle ']==45 , 0.86* norm ,
117
Combi['Ws correction '])
118
Combi['Ws correction ']=np.where(Combi['type ']==" strakes", Combi[
119
'Ws correction ']*0.8 , Combi['Ws correction '])
120
Combi['Ws correction ']=np.where(Combi['band ']==" new clear", Combi[
121
'Ws correction ']*0.98 ,
Combi['Ws correction '])
122
Combi['Strouhal ']= Combi['Strouhal ']/ Combi['Ws correction ']
123
Combi['wind
speed [m/s]']= Combi['wind
speed [m/s]']* Combi[
124
'Ws correction ']
125
126
if NormaliseAngleAmp :
127
#correcting
the
amplitude
for
different
exposure
lengths
128
Combi['Amp Mean ']=np.where(Combi['yaw angle ']==45 ,
129
Combi['Amp Mean ']/ math.sqrt (2), Combi['Amp Mean '])
130
131
132
Combi['Vr ']= Combi['wind
speed [m/s] ']/( Combi['Freq mean ']*Dm)
133
134
#sort by Amp mean values , drop
dublicates
keeping
only
first
line
135
Combi_Sc=Combi.sort_values('Amp Mean ',ascending=False ). groupby (['band ',
136
'amount ','type ','yaw angle '], as_index=False ). first ()
137
138
Combi_Sc=Combi_Sc [['type ','band ','amount ','yaw angle ','Amp Mean ','Amp Std ',
139
'Sc mean ','Sc std ','wind
speed [m/s]','Strouhal ','Reynolds ','Vr ']]
140
Combi_Sc=Combi_Sc.sort_values(by='Sc mean ')
141
142
#print(Combi_Sc.groupby('yaw angle '). agg({'Strouhal ':['mean ']}))
143
144
#combined
list
where the setups are
correlated
with the line
color
145
#so they plot
consistantly
146
Types=Combi [['band ','amount ','type ','yaw angle ','color ','marker ',
147
'Freq mean ','Sc mean ']]
148
Types=Types. drop_duplicates (subset =['band ','amount ','type ',
149
'yaw angle ']). reset_index(drop=True)
150
Types=Types.sort_values(by=['band ','amount '])
151
152
153
#create
list of measured
yaw angles and
surface
types
154
Angles=Sc['yaw angle ']
155
Angles=Angles.drop_duplicates (). reset_index(drop=True)
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxiii
==PAGE:83==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
156
Surfaces=Sc['type ']
157
Surfaces=Surfaces. drop_duplicates (). reset_index(drop=True)
158
159
#-----------------------------------------------
160
#create the axis
labels and axis
limits for
161
#all the plots for the chosen
case
162
#-----------------------------------------------
163
164
#vertical
axis
165
if NormaliseAngleAmp :
166
YLabel =(r'Normalised
Relative
Amplitude
A/D *cos($\alpha$ )')
167
YLim =(0 ,0.4)
168
else:
169
YLabel =(" Relative
Amplitude
A/D")
170
YLim =(0 ,0.55)
171
172
#horizontal
axis
173
if reducedVelocity :
174
XLabel =(" Reduced
Velocity
$V_r$ ")
175
if WindSpeedCorrection :
176
XLim =(4 ,8.5)
177
if NormalisedAngleWS :
178
XLim =(3.5 ,7)
179
XLabel =(r'Normalised
Reduced
Velocity
$V_r$ *cos($\alpha$ )')
180
else:
181
XLim =(5 ,10)
182
else:
183
XLabel =(" Wind
Speed [m/s]")
184
if WindSpeedCorrection :
185
XLim =(0.9 ,2)
186
if NormalisedAngleWS :
187
XLim =(0.9 ,1.6)
188
XLabel =(r'Normalised
Wind
Speed U*cos($\alpha$) [m/s]')
189
else:
190
XLim =(1.2 ,2.4)
191
192
#-----------------------------------------------
193
#analyse
the
calculated
mean
values and print
overviews
per setup
194
#-----------------------------------------------
195
196
#set font for all the plots
197
plt.rc('font ',**{'family ':'serif '})
198
199
if PlotPerSetup:
200
#plot four
plots (per angles/surfaces) and within
them
multiple
lines
201
#for the
different
Scruton
numbers
202
for i in range(len(Angles )):
203
f=Combi[Combi['yaw angle ']== Angles[i]]
204
typ_1=Types[Types['yaw angle ']== Angles[i]]. reset_index(drop=True)
205
206
for j in range (3):# len(Surfaces )):
207
d=f[f['type ']== Surfaces[j]]
208
typ=typ_1[typ_1['type ']== Surfaces[j]]. reset_index(drop=True)
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxiv
==PAGE:84==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
209
typ=typ.sort_values(by='Sc mean '). reset_index(drop=True)
210
211
fig , ax=plt.subplots ()
212
213
214
for k in range(len(typ )):
215
#select one
specific
setup to plot
amplitudes
over wind
speeds
216
217
g=d[d['band ']== typ.loc[k,'band ']]
218
g=g[g['amount ']== typ.loc[k,'amount ']]
219
g=g[['wind
speed [m/s]','Amp Mean ','Amp Std ','Sc mean ','Vr ']]
220
g=g.dropna ()
221
g=g.sort_values(by='wind
speed [m/s]')
222
sc=typ.loc[k,'Sc mean '] #first
mode
frequency of the system
223
224
#plot one line of the mean
amplitudes
with
error
bars
225
#over the wind
speed
226
227
ThisWind=g['wind
speed [m/s]']
228
Vr=g['Vr ']
#Reduced
velocity
229
ThisAmp=g['Amp Mean ']/D
230
ThisStd=g['Amp Std ']/D
231
232
#give the right
labels to the
different
lines in the graph
233
if typ.loc[k,'amount ']==0:
234
Label ="Sc= "+str(sc )[:3]#+" (no elastics )"
235
elif typ.loc[k,'amount ']==3:
236
Label ="Sc= "+str(sc )[:3]+" - Wrapped
with 3 Ropes"
237
elif typ.loc[k,'amount ']>1:
238
Label ="Sc= "+str(sc )[:3]#+"
("+ str(typ.loc[k,'amount '])+
239
#"x "+str(typ.loc[k,'band '])+"
elastics )"
240
else:
241
Label ="Sc= "+str(sc )[:3]#+"
("+ str(typ.loc[k,'amount '])+
242
#"x "+str(typ.loc[k,'band '])+"
elastic )"
243
244
""" plot with
errorbars
245
#plot the
response
amplitude
over
either the wind
speed
246
#or reduced
velocity
247
if reducedVelocity :
248
plt.errorbar(Vr , ThisAmp , yerr=ThisStd ,
249
color=typ.loc[k,'color '], marker='.',
250
ecolor='black ', barsabove=True , label=Label)
251
else:
252
plt.errorbar(ThisWind , ThisAmp , yerr=ThisStd ,
253
color=typ.loc[k,'color '], marker='.',
254
ecolor='black ', barsabove=True , label=Label)
255
"""
256
#plot the
response
amplitude
over wind
speed/Vr
257
#with
different
markers
for b-w printing
258
if reducedVelocity :
259
plt.plot(Vr ,ThisAmp ,color=typ.loc[k,'color '],
260
marker=typ.loc[k,'marker '], label=Label ,
261
markeredgecolor ='k')
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxv
==PAGE:85==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
262
else:
263
plt.plot(ThisWind ,ThisAmp ,color=typ.loc[k,'color '],
264
marker=typ.loc[k,'marker '], label=Label ,
265
markeredgecolor ='k')
266
267
268
#plot
Eurocode
value
269
if EurocodeLines:
270
Scr=typ.loc[k,'Sc mean ']
271
kp1=math.sqrt (2)*(1+1.2/( math.tan (0.75* Scr/
272
(4* math.pi*Ka ))))
273
kp2=math.sqrt (2)*(1+1.2* math.atan (0.75*
274
(Scr /4*Ka*math.pi )**4))
275
276
c1=al **2/2*(1 - Scr /(4* Ka*math.pi))
277
c2=rho*b*b*(al **2)*( Cc **2)*b/(m*Ka*(St **4)*h)
278
279
sigma=math.sqrt(b*(c1+math.sqrt(c1*c1+c2)))
280
281
EUy=sigma*kp2
282
plt.axhline(y=EUy ,ls='--',color=typ.loc[k,'color '])
283
284
285
Name =" Amplitudes
for "+str(Surfaces[j])+"
surface at "+
286
(str(Angles[i])[: -2])+"
degree yaw angle"
287
Name2=str(Surfaces[j])+" -"+( str(Angles[i])[: -2])+". pdf"
288
289
plt.grid(linestyle ='--')
290
plt.legend ()
291
plt.title(Name)
292
293
plt.ylabel(YLabel)
294
plt.xlabel(XLabel)
295
plt.ylim(YLim)
296
plt.xlim(XLim)
297
298
plt.savefig(Name2 ,format='pdf ')
299
plt.show ()
300
301
#-----------------------------------------------
302
#plot four
lines (per angles/surfaces) with max
amplitudes
303
#per
Scruton
numbers
304
#-----------------------------------------------
305
306
if PlotAmpPerSc:
307
fig1=plt.figure ()
308
fig2=plt.figure ()
309
for i in [1 ,0]:
310
Sc1=Combi_Sc[Combi_Sc['yaw angle ']== Angles[i]]. reset_index(drop=True)
311
312
if Angles[i]==0:
313
line='red '
314
else:
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxvi
==PAGE:86==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
315
line='blue '
316
317
for j in range (1 ,3):
318
Sc2=Sc1[Sc1['type ']== Surfaces[j]]. reset_index(drop=True)
319
320
if Surfaces[j]=='smooth ':
321
mark='-'
322
if Angles[i]==0:
323
dot='^'
324
else:
325
dot='x'
326
else:
327
mark='--'
328
dot='.'
329
330
Label=str(Surfaces[j])+" at "+( str(Angles[i])[: -2])+"
degree"
331
332
#plot in the figure
with the
reference
curves
333
plt.figure (1)
334
335
if Angles[i]==0:
336
plt.scatter(Sc2['Sc mean '], Sc2['Amp Mean ']/D, marker=dot ,
337
color=line , label=Label)
338
elif
Surfaces[j]==" smooth ":
339
plt.scatter(Sc2['Sc mean '], Sc2['Amp Mean ']/D, marker=dot ,
340
color=line , label=Label)
341
342
#plot in the figure
with just the
measurements
343
plt.figure (2)
344
plt.errorbar(Sc2['Sc mean '], Sc2['Amp Mean ']/D,
345
xerr=Sc2['Sc std '],yerr=Sc2['Amp Std ']/100 ,
346
color=line , marker='.', ls=mark , ecolor='black ',
347
barsabove=True , label=Label)
348
349
350
351
352
#Rawlins
data
353
Raw_b =[34.162 , -406.028 ,2741.457 , -9899.726 ,20488.414 , -25119.433 ,
354
18000.492 , -6955.235 ,1118.049]
355
Raw_y=np.linspace (0.001 ,0.5 ,20)
356
Raw_2=Raw_y *2
357
358
this=np.empty(len(Raw_b ))
359
ScRa=np.empty(len(Raw_y ))
360
for j in range(len(Raw_y )):
361
for i in range(len(Raw_b )):
362
this[i]= Raw_b[i]* Raw_2[j]**i
363
ScRa[j]=np.sum(this)
364
365
plt.figure (1)
366
plt.ylim (0 ,0.6)
367
plt.xlim (0 ,30)
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxvii
==PAGE:87==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
368
plt.plot(ScRa/2,Raw_y ,label='Rawlins ', color='orange ')
369
370
371
372
plt.figure (2)
373
374
plt.ylim (0 ,0.4)
375
plt.xlim (1.5 ,6.5)
376
plt.plot(ScRa/2,Raw_y ,label='Rawlins ', color='orange ', ls='-.')
377
378
379
#plot
Eurocode
value
380
381
line=['--','-.',':','-','-']
382
Colors =['k','grey ','grey ','k','b']
383
Scr=np.linspace (1 ,40 ,100)
384
for j in range(len(Ka)):
385
386
kp1=np.empty(len(Scr))
387
kp2=np.empty(len(Scr))
388
c1=np.empty(len(Scr))
389
c11=np.empty(len(Scr))
390
c2=np.empty(len(Scr))
391
sigma_b=np.empty(len(Scr))
392
for i in range(len(Scr )):
393
kp1[i]= math.sqrt (2)*(1+1.2/( math.tan (0.75* Scr[i]/
394
(4* math.pi*Ka[j]))))
395
kp2[i]= math.sqrt (2)*(1+1.2* math.atan (0.75*(( Scr[i]/
396
(4*Ka[j]* math.pi ))**4)))
397
398
c1[i]=al[j]**2/2*(1 - Scr[i]/(4* Ka[j]* math.pi))
399
c11[i]=al[j]**2/2* np.abs((1-Scr[i]/(4* Ka[j]* math.pi)))
400
c2[i]=rho*b*b*(al[j]**2)*( Cc[j]**2)*b/(m*Ka[j]*(St **4)*h)
401
402
#non
dimensional
response
sigma/b
403
sigma_b[i]= math.sqrt ((c1[i]+ math.sqrt(c11[i]**2+ c2[i])))
404
405
EU1y=sigma_b*kp1
406
EU2y=sigma_b*kp2
407
408
Labels ="EN1991 , Ka="+ str(Ka[j])+" Cc="+ str(Cc[j])
409
410
plt.figure (1)
411
plt.plot(Scr ,EU2y , label=Labels , color=Colors[j], linestyle=line[j])
412
413
414
NameSc =[" Amp_Sc_code.pdf"," Amp_Sc_measurements .pdf"]
415
416
for i in range (2):
417
plt.figure(i+1)
418
plt.xlabel (" Scruton
Number ")
419
plt.ylabel(YLabel)
420
plt.title (" Maximum
response
amplitudes vs. Scruton
number ")
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxviii
==PAGE:88==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
421
plt.legend ()
422
plt.grid(linestyle ='--')
423
plt.savefig(NameSc[i],format='pdf ')
424
425
426
plt.show ()
427
428
429
#-----------------------------------------------
430
#plot four
lines (per angles/surfaces) with the
response
431
#from the
undamped
system
432
#to check
whether
the
independence
principle
applies
and stuff
433
#-----------------------------------------------
434
435
if PlotNoneComparison :
436
437
Surfaces =['stranded ','smooth ']
438
DampingLevels =['0']
439
440
Combi_0=Combi[Combi.amount.isin(DampingLevels )]. reset_index(drop=True)
441
Combi_Sc_0=Combi_Sc[Combi_Sc.amount.isin(DampingLevels )]
442
.reset_index(drop=True)
443
444
typ0=Types[Types.amount.isin(DampingLevels )]
445
typ_0=typ0[typ0.type.isin(Surfaces )]
446
typ_0=typ_0.sort_values(by='type ')
447
typ_0=typ_0.sort_values(by='yaw angle '). reset_index(drop=True)
448
449
for k in range(len(typ_0 )):
450
g=Combi_0[Combi_0['yaw angle ']== typ_0.loc[k,'yaw angle ']]
451
g=g[g['type ']== typ_0.loc[k,'type ']]
452
g=g[g['amount ']== typ_0.loc[k,'amount ']]
453
g=g[['wind
speed [m/s]','Amp Mean ','Amp Std ','Sc mean ','Vr ',
454
'yaw angle ','type ','Strouhal ']]
455
g=g.dropna ()
456
g=g.sort_values(by='wind
speed [m/s]')
457
458
459
c=Combi_Sc_0[Combi_Sc_0['yaw angle ']== typ_0.loc[k,'yaw angle ']]
460
c=c[c['amount ']== typ_0.loc[k,'amount ']]
461
c=c[c['type ']== typ_0.loc[k,'type ']]. reset_index(drop=True)
462
sc=c.loc[0,'Sc mean '] #first
mode
frequency of the system
463
St=c.loc[0,'Strouhal ']
464
465
#plot one line of the mean
amplitudes
with
error
bars over wind
speed
466
467
ThisWind=g['wind
speed [m/s]']
468
Vr=g['Vr ']
#Reduced
velocity
469
ThisAmp=g['Amp Mean ']/D
470
ThisStd=g['Amp Std ']/D
471
472
Label ="Sc="+ str(sc )[:3]+" , "+"St="+ str(St )[:4]+" , "
473
+str(typ_0.loc[k,'yaw angle '])[: -2]+"
"
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxix
==PAGE:89==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
474
+str(typ_0.loc[k,'type '])
475
476
#set color and
linestyle
477
if typ_0.loc[k,'type ']==" stranded ":
478
line='--'
479
else:
480
line='-'
481
if typ_0.loc[k,'yaw angle ']==0:
482
Color='red '
483
marker='^'
484
else:
485
Color='blue '
486
marker='x'
487
488
489
""" plot with
errorbars
490
#plot the
response
amplitude
over
either the wind
speed
491
#or reduced
velocity
492
if reducedVelocity :
493
plt.errorbar(Vr , ThisAmp , yerr=ThisStd , ls=line , color=Color ,
494
marker='.', ecolor='black ', barsabove=True , label=Label)
495
else:
496
plt.errorbar(ThisWind , ThisAmp , yerr=ThisStd , ls=line ,
497
color=Color , marker='.', ecolor='black ', barsabove=True ,
498
label=Label)
499
"""
500
501
#plot with
printfriendly
symbols
502
if reducedVelocity :
503
plt.plot(Vr ,ThisAmp ,ls=line , color=Color , marker=marker ,
504
label=Label , markeredgecolor ='k')
505
else:
506
plt.plot(ThisWind ,ThisAmp ,ls=line , color=Color , marker=marker ,
507
label=Label , markeredgecolor ='k')
508
509
510
511
Title =" Amplitudes
for the
undamped
systems"
512
if NormalisedAngleWS :
513
Name =" Amp_undamp_systems .pdf"
514
else:
515
Name =" Amp_undamp_systems_no_norm .pdf"
516
517
plt.grid(linestyle ='--')
518
plt.legend(loc='lower right ')
519
plt.title(Title)
520
521
plt.ylabel(YLabel)
522
plt.xlabel(XLabel)
523
524
plt.savefig(Name ,format='pdf ')
525
plt.show ()
526
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxx
==PAGE:90==
Aerodynamics of Stranded Cables
527
end_time = datetime.now()
528
print (" Plots are done ")
529
print('Duration: {}'. format(end_time - start_time ))
DTU Mechanical Engineering
xxxi
